blazon or coat of arms of Sir Thomas Fairfax FARE FAC


Anglia Rediviva; Englands Recovery: BEING THE HISTORY Of the Motions, Actions,
and Successes of the Army under the Immediate Conduct of His Excellency Sr.
Thomas Fairfax, Knight. CAPTAIN GENERAL Of all the PARLIAMENTS Forces IN ENGLAND.

Compiled for the Public good BY JOSHUA SPRIGGE. M. A.

(...)
LONDON, Printed by R. W. for John Partridge, and are to be sold at the Parot
in Paul's Churchyard, and the Cock in Ludgate-streete. 1647.

To the Honorable, William Lenthal, Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
IF my own Genius had not prompted me, the Nature of this Discourse would have
led me to You; being of the Actions of that ARMY, which (as it received the
complete actuation of its Form, by the concurrence of the Right honorable the
House of PEERS; so it) received its first rise from that Honorable House
where you sit, and have sat as Speaker, (after an unparalled instance) for
six continued Years together; deriving in the mean time, not so much wonder,
as benefit to the Kingdom thereby: having, all along, by the same Public
Organ asserted the English freedom, whereby once (since the beginning of this
Parliament) You answered His Majesty, (who had then after an unusual manner
entered your House:) That you had neither eyes to see, nor tongue to speak, but
what that Honorable House gave you. In all the warm Influences and Motions
whereby this Army has been cherished, You have been One in the Constellation,
yea, a chief and leading One.

SIR, I mention not these things to lay a stumbling block of Pride before you;
But to mind you of that which I know you acknowledge, That One greater then
States, gave you this faithfulness. Now as for this Story Sir, what is wanting
in it of Elegancie of Phrase, has been endeavored to be supplied in the truth
of the Relation: And next to that, a good proportion of my care has been to
carry it without such distatefull reflection, as might render it unfit for your
Candor to patronize; I make no question but you will easily discern a thread of
Divinity running through the whole proceeding of this Army, and that their
Actions have been nothing else, but a Copy of the Wisdom, Power, Providence,
and love of God put forth in men.

My Prayers for you, and the Honorable Senate are, That God who has made all
your Enemies without, appear but flesh, and that flesh grass, would save you
from the power of flesh within, that you may act all things in the strength and
excellency of that Spirit that has wrought these things for ye, that ye may be
partakers of as much of God as of Victory; whereby ye shall be sure, not only
to arrive your selves laden with Honor, and all the sweet fruits of your
unwearied Labors at the Port of glory, but shall also direct the tossed Bark
of this Commonwealth toward the Haven of Rest and Righteousness.

SIR, In your public merit many thousands are no less then I am, who am
professedly,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, I^

To his EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax, etc.
AN APOLOGY.
SIR,
IT may be thought neither Justice nor Gratitude, That this Book is not
dedicated to your Name, for your great merit and interest in the subject of it.

Sir, As your worth, and name, qualifies you for the Patronage of the best
Subject or Discourse whatsoever; and your Martial fame and Prowess, for the
best Story of that sort: so your interest in, and relation to the contents
hereof, is, and without controversy must be acknowledged so great, as renders
you altogether incapable of receiving any accession of Title thereto by a
Dedication.

The truth is, This being but the Picture of that Wisdom, and Courage, and
what more of GOD did appear in You; I dare not present it to you, being not
drawn to the life. But when moreover I consider of the Kingdoms interest in
these things done, and more particularly the Parliament's, who set you on work;
I am fully satisfied and resolved, That if the right of Dedication be yours,
yet the debt of Patronage which is Onus, as well as Honos; a Care, as well as a
Courtesy) I am sure is theirs: For though You are the Person by whom; yet it
is the Public, it is the Parliament, for whom these Things have been done; And
therefore the justice seems to be on that side, that They should take these
Services off Your hands, and own and avouch them as having been done in Their
name, and by their authority.

And as Your services have been of that consideration and merit, as to engage
Kingdoms and Parliaments; So the consideration of Gratitude is not fit for the
adventure of a private man, it is worthy the advice of a Parliament. And as
both Houses have with much Nobleness, and in high Honor to You in that
relation, acknowledged as much by a solemn congratulatory Visit, at your
coming to London; so They will, I am confident, proceed in all suitable
expressions of real thankfulness; and least of all think their gratitude at
an end, now that your services are come to so good an end. Though I may say
without dishonor to them, when they have done all, They must die your Debtors:
And he is not an Englishman, that does not acknowledge, That as the Honor of
these Actions, under GOD, is Yours; so all that they enjoy by these successes,
is also Yours: And that when this Generation have exhausted themselves, and
done their part, they must commend it to their Posterity, to pay the Remainder
to your Name.

SIR, I speak not these things to lift you up, for that were to ensnare you,
and bring you down in that wherein you have as much exceeded the most of the
sons of men, as in any thing; I mean in the carrying of so much Honor as GOD
has put upon you, in greatest humility; but to lift up GOD in you. My only
prayer for you is, That as you have seen much of GOD in the action, so you may
live to see proportionably of GOD in Us, in the improvement of them; And that
you may taste as much of GOD in the Kingdoms Peace, as you have done in the
Kingdoms Wars.

Your Excellencies most humble, and most affectionately devoted Servant, Joshua
Sprigge.

To all True ENGLISHMEN.
MY dear Countrymen; (For to you I direct this Story: for it is yours; In your
Land were these Battles fought; these Actions done, for your sakes, (the
vindication and defense of your Parliament, Laws and Liberties;) and by your
hands.) You, that have with bleeding hearts, and distilling eyes, been
Spectators of, and common Sufferers under the insulting paces of Arbitrary
power, and unlimited Prerogative; and have felt the twinging convulsions, and
violent concussions of the same: And at last (to accomplish your misery, and
your Exactors sins) have had a Cup of Blood prepared for you, (by Divine
ordination, indeed, (and so righteously;) but immediately put upon you by the
lusts of those, whom GOD, for your sins, had given up to these things:) And
have been drinking thereof these three years and more, (I pray God it has
passed from you.) Only, at present, God has taken it out of your hands,
(though we see not, yet, he has made your Enemies drink the dregs of it.) I
cannot but hope and expect, That as those Feet have been beautiful that brought
you the Retail-tidings of your expiring Warfare; so that Hand that shall
transmit the Series of them to your view, shall not want his due proportion of
benevolous acceptance.

You may not expect here an History, beginning with our late unhappy Wars; but
(that which is better) it ends with them, (For, better is the latter end of a
thing, says Solomon, then the beginning.) And therefore this Piece (though
last acted, yet) being first intended in Providence, may well be first
committed to History, as containing that Point, whereinto, as into its Center,
all the former Actions did thrust; If any have a story of them to bring forth,
this does not at all prevent, but prepare for it. It is pleasant discoursing of
the Wracks of War, in the Harbor of Peace; As once Aeneas to his Men: Vos
and Scyllaeam rabiem, penitusque sonanteis
Accestis scopulos; Vos and Cyclopea saxa
Experti, revocate animos, moestumque timorem
Mittite; forsan and haec olim meminisse juvabit.
Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in Latium, seeds ubi Fata quietas
Ostendunt, illic fas regna resurgere Trojae:
Durate, and rebus vosmet servate secundis.


Into this Harbor has GOD now brought our English Bark; Of this Peace, and
the immediate Action that wrought it out, does this History give you a
prospect, wherein I hope GOD is drawn through all, and Providence in the
fairest color, and the greatest letter in the Book.

The Olive branch I bring, might discharge me from owing any Excuse; yet there
are two things (whatever more may be) for which I shall tender a short
Apology, viz. That this Olive branch is no fairer; That it is no fresher.

For the first, I may say of the Actions of this Army, in a good proportion of
truth, what was said in another case: If they had been all largely expressed,
such a Volume could not have contained them: For as in populous Cities,
especially if of great wealth and trading, Houses are thwackt together without
those liberties of Gardens and Orchards, which Country villages are
accommodated with: Even so, in the Story of this ARMY, into which so many great
and glorious actions, and births of Providence have thronged, to make it rich
and glorious by the mutual projections of their Lights; you cannot expect to
have such Elbow-room of Expression, and Accommodation of Words, as in more
single stories. Or as lesser Lights shining in an Orb by themselves, seem fair
and specious, and of greater magnitude then bigger stars in Constellations:
Even so, How many of these Actions, were each of them improved and extended by
the Art of Speech, spread in their just breadth, the Folds of their particular
Circumstances, opened, would make so many competent Stories by themselves.

For the latter; Should this Story have been adorned with such Artificial
stuff of feigned speeches, Prosopepeia's, and Epistrophe's, etc. it might find
better access to some ears: But whether it be not the glory of the Story, Not
to need the Trappings of Words, I make no question at all. Truth is that, which
is the commendation of History; and the greatness of an action (which makes it
great in Wisemens eyes) is native, not adventitious. I should count my self
unhappy, to detain the Reader in the Artifice of the Style, from the Greatness
of the Matter; Lofty language, is but to Mount Pigmee actions, and to please a
lower Sense. I dare not be too sollicitous of arraying the works of GOD, le^t
while I seek to honor them with a gorgeous Habit, I hide the true Glory and
Majesty of them: Besides that, the humbler the Phrase is, the more suitable to
the Persons by whom these things were done, and the manner of doing; For, not
by Might, nor by Power, etc. And I write them not for men to pick Phrases out
of, but to gather matter of Praises to GOD: And if this be the fruit, I have my
end in relation thereto, and furtherance thereof.

I shall add but two or three words more: And the first is, concerning the
Action; the second, concerning the Instruments; and lastly, concerning the
Author, GOD.

1. For the Action: You that have traveled in all Stories both ancient and
modern; whose Minds are so greatned, as that you will look upon no small
things; Tell me, ( I will be bold to put the question, and venture the shame of
the worst answer that truth and ingenuity can make) Did you ever read such a
Story as this? ( I relate to the matter of it) Did you ever read (setting
Isreal's wars in Canaan aside) of so many Actions, so considerable, done in so
short a time? Such Unanimity in Councels, such Concord in Leaders, such
Success upon Endeavors, such Fear upon Enemies? It was the admiration of a
The Prince of Orange.
Great man, and Soldier, in Foraign parts, upon the former Services: What, two
Battles in a Summer! I know not what he may say of these; perhaps nothing:
Admirationes leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. But as the height of Mercy
cannot well be taken but from the depth of the precedent Misery; so neither can
the transcendencie of this Army's Merit be estimated, but by the greatness and
compass of their Work. You shall find therefore in a Table prefixed to the
Story, the state of the Kingdom set in your view, as it stood when this
New-Model was raised and sent forth. For as it usually falls out, that
sicknesses and distempers in men's bodies, appearing in the greatest height and
threatening, is the very Crisis and forerunner of Recovery; so fared it in this
matter: The Enemy never had a fairer day for his purpose; and on the other
hand, the Parliaments affairs was never since these Wars more low and
declining; As by referring to the ensuing Table, may appear.

2. Concerning the Instruments, The goodness of GOD has appeared to us (in
furnishing us with such Instruments out of our selves, in a Parallel way to that
Success he has given out by them; in making the ENGLISH Root again to bud
with Honor, after the disadvantage of a longcontinued Peace for 80. years,
wherein Rest had been conveyed in our Blood, from Father to Son. And now to
make the Gallantry, Valor, and Prowess of our Forefathers to rise up in their
Children, in such a Cause, and not only to bud, but to bear ripe Almonds; is
that, which, (abstracting from the ^eat of the Wars within our own bowels)
would have made a delectable story, although it had been without success.

3. But we would least of all be thought, by this History of things done, to
fix unconquerablenesse, and unvariable success upon this Army; That were to
dare Providence to undo us: We know, we are as soon broken, as made up; as soon
flying, as conquering: We desire therefore Friends, not to believe this Army
shall do more, because it has done so much; and that it cannot be conquered,
because it has conquered: But, that it shall be still victorious while GOD is
in it, and no longer.

Accept these Mercies, and with them the Instruments, in the undeniable
demonstration of their Love and Loyalty to their Country, in so free an expense
of their Blood, and so cheerful undergoing all hardships of War, for your
sakes.

J. S.

The state of the Kingdom, when His Excellency Sir THO. FAJRFAX marched
forth, May. 1645. Exhibited in Two TABLES.
The one showing, into what Counties, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Places of
strength, the KING reached, and Garrisoned: As also the Field-force His
Majesty had to maintain the same, and to enlarge his Quarters. The other
showing all along, what Force, Garrisons, or Places of strength the PARLIAMENT
had, to check or balance the Enemy.
In two DIVISIONS. The one containing the Western Counties; The other, the
Midland Parts.
THE FIRST DIVISION.
IN The KING had, The Parliament had, Cornwall. The whole County entire to
himself, with these places of strength therein well fortified, and manned: Viz.
The Mount, the strong Castle of Pendennis, Dennis-Fort, and Helford-fort, which
commanded the commodious Harbor of Falmouth. The Garrisons of Foy, Salt-Ash,
Mount-Edgcombe, and Lanceston: Besides, His Majesty kept some Forces at
Padstow, and St. Ives. Neither Field-Force, Port-Town, nor Inland-Garrison; and
besides, the People were generally disaffected to the Parliament. Devon. All
Devon entire to himself (except Plymouth only) and therein these considerable
Garrisons well fortified and manned, viz. Excester, Barnstaple, and Dartmouth,
the Fort at Exmouth, Pouldram-Castle, Fort- Charles at Salcombe, Ilfordcombe,
Hoptons Fort, and the other Forts before Plymouth; St. Budeax, the garrison at
Sir Francis Drakes house, Peymouth-house, Barley-House, and Inch-Garrison.
Plymouth only; and that besieged. Somerset. All in his power (except Taunton
only, which was then straightly besieged by him) And in that County the strong
Garrisons of Bristol and Bridgewater, Bath, Lamport, Borough, Nunny-Castle,
Portshead-Point, Ilchester, Chidiak-House, and Farley-Castle. The garrison of
Taunton (close besieged at that time.) Dorset. Portland-Castle and Island,
Corf-Castle, and Sherborn-Castle. The Port-Townes of Poole, Lyme, and
Waymouth. Wilts. The Garrisons of the Devizes, Laicock-House, Langford-House,
and Highworth. Malmesbury -- Garrison only. Hants. The strong Garrisons of
Basing and Winchester. The Garrisons of Portsmouth, Southampton, and
Christ-Church, (Port-Towns.) Berks. Farringdon, Wallingford, Dennington, and
Radcot. Abbingdon, Reading, and Windsor. Oxford. The City of Oxford, (the
Kings Head-garrison) Banbury, Woodstock, Gaunt-House, Blechingdon-House, and
Godstowe. Henley-Garrison. Bucks. Borstall-house Garrison. Alisbury.

The KINGS Field-Force for the WEST. The PARLIAMENTS Field-Force for the WEST.
The King's Field-Forces for the securing of these Western Counties and
Garrisons, even from Oxford to the Mount in Cornwall, under the Command of the
Lord Goring, the Lord Hopton, Sir Richard Grenvile, and Major General Sir John
Digby, Brother to the Lord Digby: May modestly be computed to be, in all,
14000. Horse and Foot, besides their several Garrisons secured with Horse and
Foot; as may easily be credited, if it be considered, the great Force they had
before Taunton, during the two strait Sieges thereof, and the many men they
lost in both those services; And yet with what a considerable Army they were at
Lamport, when they were beaten there, and at the same time also maintaining the
Siege before Plymouth with a considerable Force, (besides those 14000.) His
Highness Prince Charles was then in person in the West, raising new Forces,
whose Presence had such influence on those Parts, especially on the Club-men
(who were thereby made bold in their Meetings, and received Commissions under
his Highness hand and seal, to form themselves into Regiments) that it was no
little addition of Reputation to that Army. The Parliament (not thinking it
safe to spare the new raised Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to
attend the great business of the West, and leave the Parliament, City, and
Association without a Guard, and the Royal Army about Oxford, unattended:)
Designed only the remaining Regiments of the Earl of Essex's, and Sir William
Wallers Horse, which were not reduced into the New-Model, to busy the Enemy
in the West; viz. Of Sir VVil. Wallers, Colonel Cooks, Colonel Fitz-James,
Colonel Popham, and the Plymouth Regiment. Of the Earl of Essex's, the Relicts
of Colonel Beer's, and Colonel D Albiers Regiments under Lieu. Colonel Buller,
assigned over to Major-Gen. Massey: which Regiments were formed into a Brigade,
and designed under the Command of Major-Gen. Massey for the Western parts, but
a little before the Battle of Naseby.

THE SECOND DIVISION.
In the County of The KING had, The Parliament had, Hereford. That County
entirely to himself, with the Garrisons of Hereford, Gotheridge, and
Cannon-Froom. No Garrison, Place of Strength, nor Field-Force. Worcester. The
City of Worcester, Evesham-Garrison, and Hartlebury-Castle. Hawksworth Castle
only. Salop. The Garrisons of Ludlow, Bridge-North, Dawly, Shrawarden-Castle,
Caes-Castle, Morton-Corbet-House, Stockley-Castle, Rowton-Castle,
Linsel-Manour, Apley-House, High-Archal, Carew-Castle, Embleden-Castle.
Shrewsbury, VVem-Garrison, and Oswestree. Stafford The strong Garrisons of
Lichfield and Dudley, and Burton and Trent. The Garrison of Stafford. Chester.
The City of VVestchester, Beeston-Castle, Hawarden-Castle. Namptwich.
Leicester. The Garrison of Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Leicester town, (shortly after
lost.) Lincoln. Belvoir-Castle. Lincoln-City, Crowland Garrison, Hougham
Garrison, Burleigh. Nottingh. On this side Trent, the strong Garrison of
Newark, Shelford-House, and VViverton. The town and castle of Nottingham.

Errata.
Page 17.. 7. A whole line left out that should begin the Section, viz. [But
the commands given with public and unfeigned ends were not disputed, but
obeyed] Accordingly, etc. p. 30. l. 1. for part read partee p. 68. l. last but
one f. framing r. freeing p. 90. l. 11. f. Kenisome r. Keinsome l. 15. f.
rather r. would rather l. 18^ f. setting r. settling p. 95. l. 25. f. in whom r.
then in whom l. 30, 31. f. and which r. which p. 119. l. 11. f. Priors fort r.
Priors hill fort l. penult. f. Town r. Line p. 131. l. 4. f. Bennet r. Sir
Humphrey Bennet l. 4. f. prisoners r. hostages p. 136.. 7. Marg. l. 6. f. the
mood r. that mood p. 140. l. 22. f. in all these r. in these p. 145. l. 6^
after the word Justice supply [an Irish Rebel was taken and executed] p. 161.
f. Dec. 32. r. Dec. 23. p. 163. l. penult. f. set forward r. advanced p. 165.
l. 7. f. three r. two p. 171.. 7. l. 4. f. ^own r. Fort p. 177. l. 15. f. S.
Edmund r. Sir Edmund p. 179. l. 8 f. William r. Will p. 181. l. 31, 32 f. in
order to the Oxford horse r. in order to the checking of the Oxford, etc. p.
182. l. 10. f. Reymouth r. Peymouth p. 185. l. last but two f. advisable it
might engage r. advisable being night to engage p. 195. l. 25. f. Holsworth r.
Holsworthy [so p. 197. l. 27.] l 30. who all dele who p. 196 l. 7. this last
defeat dele last l. 14. f. Sir George Digby r. Sir John l. ^d. f. Governor r.
Commander p. 197. l last but one f. Tomerton r. Tamerton l 25. f. Taverstock r.
Tawstock p. 198. l. 14. f. by the r. but by the p. 199. l. 9. f. Lime Regiment
r. Plymouth Regiment p. 252. l. 7. f. the end r. therein p. 253. l. 16. f. old
through time r. old and decayed through, etc. p. 281 l. 8. f. divine r. dimm p.
284. l. 11. f presumptory r. peremptory p. 313. l. 4. f. last r. cast p. 315.
l. last but four f. the r. that l. last but two f. Victory, sweld r.
Victory-sweld p. 317. l. 14. f. possimus r. poscimus l. 23. f. commonalty r.
commodity p. 320. l. penult. after acceptance of r. God.

ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
Containing by way of Proeme and Introduction, a general account of the
miserable condition of this Kingdom, before this present Parliament; The
occasion and Instruments of calling it; The snare laid for us in a former
Parliament. The quarrel between the Royal party, and the Parliament, stated:
And showing how the Command of the Parliaments Forces came to be devolved to
Sir Thomas Fairfax, their present General.

Englands misery to be reckoned from a longer date then this late discovery.
PRRINCIPLES of Misery, and seeds of Diseases in the Body politic;
strengthening themselves through a long tract of time, and at length
discovering themselves more and more in outward symptoms; afforded an happy
rise and advantage of seeking out the means of cure. Of which God had not left
this Kingdom destitute, in so sufficient a proportion, as that few States or
Commonwealths in the world enjoy the like: The constitution of Englands
Government, highly to be approved.
Being of it self of a sound and healthy constitution and temper, able (if not
obstructed) to conflict with, and expel all burthensom humors, and correct
all vicious dispositions to Tyranny; There being no Government better tempered
in the world, if true to themselves, in a timely application of Remedies at
hand.

The Peers at York petition the King for this Parliment.
Accordingly therefore, so soon as the Body, by the Nobler senses, began to
take notice of, and be seriously affected with her sicknesses, and to be
sensible of the means at hand; Recollecting their resolution, they urge the
calling of this second PARLIAMENT.

The snare that was laid for us in the former Parliament.
There was a former Parliament called by the KING; (And never was the Kingdom
in greater danger: For never more danger, then when good means are tampered
with to bad ends; when Ahab calls a Fast to accuse Naboth; and Satan
transformeth himself into an Angel of light.) The snare broken.
And this first act and putting forth of the Politic nature, though not
perfective of the Cure, nor having any thing in it again so eminently
remarkable, as the National justice and affection expressed to the Scots,
declining upon ever so fair proffers and conditions, to assist the King in his
engagements against them, (an act that should ever make the English of precious
remembrance with that Nation.) Yea, though this first Essay of Nature was
seemingly overcome by the prevalency of the malignant matter, to the breaking
up of that Parliament; yet was it not in vain: For notwithstanding that for the
present the Disease took its turn, and did appear in a higher way of opposition
and contest to strengthen it self, and to overcome its antidote; yet this did
but put Nature upon more vigorous and industrious actings to defend it self,
(as was need) and so was subservient unto the calling of this second Parliament.

The utmost endeavors of the Malignant party.
Wherein both Interests conflicting, and the Malignant party seeing it self so
eminently threatened and endangered, and redacted to that extreme necessity, as
to use the utmost means for its preservation; and being no longer able to
endure at so near a distance, those strong motions and workings of the Heart,
betakes it self from the vital parts to some remoter members of the Body,
gathers and settles there, causing an inflammation of those parts, and hopes to
derive the same from part to part through the whole body; at last choosing to
sacrifice all, rather then to be corrected at all. Hereupon the Heart of this
Kingdom (I mean the Parliament) which had performed its own defense so well,
endeavors its office for the Body; The Parliaments Arms defensive.
and being necessitated to meet with the distemper in the way it had put it
self, opposes fire to fire, force to force, sword to sword; hoping by this
means, as by the opening of a Vein, to breath out the Distemper, though with
the loss of some Blood.

The quarrel between the King and Parliament stated
The King, with his unhappy Counselors and Courtiers, who had promised
themselves to be petty Tyrants under him, had driven on far, and well near
accomplished the great design of an Absolute, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical
Government; The Popish and Prelatical party fall in for their Interest, hopeing
by this means to usher in the long-wished for Alteration of Religion within
this, and the neighbour-Kingdomes. The troubles of Scotland, and the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms ensuing thereupon; The Execution of Strafford,
and Prosecution of his Companions and Partisans, unexpectedly cross and
interrupt this grand design. The King offered the Scots four Counties, to be
annexed to the Crown of Scotland, viz. Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland,
and the Bp. of Durham, to come up to London, and serve him against the
Parliament; and moreover the ransacking of the City of London, which was
reckoned to them at a greater value then the 300000. l. the Parliament granted
them.
Many ways are attempted, many practices are set on foot, Every stone is
turned, the Armies of both Nations, English and Scottish, are tampered with, to
overthrow the proceedings and power of the Parliament. And when all these ways
proved successelesse, secret practices and bands are set on foot in Scotland, a
Rebellion is raised in Ireland; and in the end the King attempts to seize the
persons of some eminent Members of both Houses; and by an example not to be
paralleled in the story of any Age, comes himself in person accompanied with a
band of Ruffians, to take five of the Members of Commons by force out of that
House.

As diverse Soldiers and other loose people flocked to Court; so, many
well-affected Citizens and others testified their affection, in a voluntary
way, to the Parliament, the preservation of their persons and privileges.
These called the other Cavaliers, and they termed these Roundheads; whence
arose those two Names, whereby in common talk the two parties in this War were
by way of nickname distinguished.

The Parliament, upon the attempt of violence on their Members sitting in
Parliament; having for the present in an orderly way, by the assistance of the
Trained Bands of the City of London, procured for the security of their
Members, that they might sit and consult safely in Parliament, considering the
many practices of force that had been attempted against Them and their
Authority, in order to the subversion of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties;
Desire the King, that the Militia might be in such hands as both Houses of
Parliament should name and appoint. Hereupon the King withdrawes himself,
refuses to settle the Militia according to the desire of his Parliament,
endeavors to seize upon Hull, and the Magazine there, but is prevented; sends
into the Low Countries for Cannon, Arms and Ammunition, which after arrived and
was landed not far from Hull; Began the body of an Army, under the name of a
Guard for his person, at York; Protected by force, Offenders from the Justice
of Parliament; sends forth Commissions of Array in opposition to the Ordinance
of the Militia established by the Parliament, upon the Kings refusal to join
therein; sets up his Standard at Nottingham, and declared open war against his
Parliament.

-- Blood had already died
The King's stained sword, and God did well provide
That there the mischief should begin, and we
First suffer wrong. -- Let no man call our Arms
Offensive wars; but for received harms
Our Countries just revenging ire. Jam tetigit sanguis pollutos Caesaris enses:
Dii melius, belli tulimus quod damna priores:
Caeperit inde nefas --
-- Nec dicier arma Senatus
Bella superba decet, Patriae sed vindicis iram.
Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 2.

The Parliaments cause.
The Parliament on the other side Arm in their own defense, and in defense of
their Privileges and Authority, and therein of their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; and particularly, to cause obedience to the Summons of Parliament,
and to bring Delinquents to Justice, and to maintain their Ordinance of the
Militia, and the Fundamental right seated in them in the ordering the same for
the preservation of Religion, Justice, and the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, either with the Kings concurrence, or without the same, in case he
either cannot, or being seduced by evil Counselors, will not join with his
Parliament therein.

No spoil seek these Arms, nor self-soveraignty:
But t'help the Land against imminent slavery. Nec praeda hisce Armis, nec
Regnum quaeritur ipsis:
Tantum afferre vires populo servire parato.
fere Lucan.

A brief account of the former Armies.
Forces being raised on both sides; Those of the Parliament were at first put
entirely under the Command of the Earl of ESSEX; but after they took several
forms, and were divided into several bodies, by Commissions granted unto diverse
persons, as Major-Generals; Each diversity and alteration taking its rise from
an inacquiescency and dissatisfaction with the success of the present: which
moved to turn every stone; and try if by this, or that means, the desired End
might be obtained. Yet several good services were performed by those Forces,
and very notable ones under the first and original conduct of the Earl of
Essex; as besides Edgehill and diverse others, that famous and never to be
forgotten relief of Gloucester, skirmishing the Enemy a good part of the way
both going and coming, and at last upon their return giving the Enemy battle
in a pitched field at Newbury; whereof the story of these times, wherever they
shall come, will ring deservedly. (In the mention of this particular, might I be
secure from moving envy, or detracting from others (who might also deserve
extremely well in the action) I should at least glance at the singular and
extraordinary service of Colonel Harvey with his Horse, and the gallant Foot of
the City of London, who stood so stoutly to it that day.) These being not
within the line of my story; and being recorded by other pens, I must thus
pass over: As also all the considerable actions of the Earl of Manchester,
and Sir William Waller, performed for this Kingdom by them, and their
deserving Officers and Soldiers; The extent of their service.
amounting at least to so much, as that thereby many a Gap was stopped, the
Kingdom saved from being totally overrun, the success of the Enemies
affairs still brought to a reasonable composition, the balance kept pretty
even, and sometimes we were sent before God with songs in our mouths, and
occasion was afforded for greater hopes, and more blessed expectations. Their
unhappiness.
But, whatever was the matter, two Summers past over, and we were not saved:
The Parliaments tenderness of them.
our Victories so gallantly gotten, and (which was more pity) so graciously
bestowed, were put into a bag with holes; what we won one time, we lost
another; the Treasure was exhausted, the Countries wasted, A Summers victory
proved but a Winters story; the Game, however set up at Winter, was to be new
played again the next Spring, and men's hearts failed them with the observation
of these things. The cause hereof the Parliament was tender of ravelling into,
only men could not be hindered from venting their opinions privately, and their
fears; which were various, and variously expressed, whereof I determine
nothing: but this I would only say, Gods time to deliver England was not yet
come. And this was apparent, That the Forces being under several great
Commanders, want of good correspondency among the Chieftains, oftentimes
hindered the Public service.

The Parliament conscientiously advising the Remedy.
The Parliament in prudence waving a strict enquiry into the Cause of these
things, applied themselves to seek out the Remedy, which was most necessary:
This Army was conceived and brought forth by a New-Model.
And there being not only no other comparable, but scare any other means at
all that presented it self to them, This New-Model was propunded, The danger of
this device.
a design that carried danger enough in the front of it, both in respect of
disobliging those at home, and giving advantage to the Enemy abroad, while we
were without an Army, or at least whilst our Army was all to pieces. But if it
were here seasonable to open the grounds thereof, it would appear to have been
no less necessary, then hazardous. And as desperate cures require desperate
remedies, so do they often prove very successful, as this has done beyond all
expectation, God having in most fair and great characters written upon it, That
it was His Design, and thereby owned both the Counsel and the Counselors.
This experience applied to the Parliament.
And now let all men, especially the Parliament of England, trust GOD
hereafter, and venture upon whatsoever is just, and necessary, by this
experience; It being as much beyond the belief of man, as any thing can be,
that such an Enterprise as this, should be effected so quietly amongst our
selves, and without any affront from our enemies.

The New-Model thus resolved on, is gone in hand withal; and now where to find
a General, puts them all to a stand: Providence strangly designing the General.
Till by a strange providence, without any premeditation or design, Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX was nominated. The motion took, was Voted, and carried presently: And
to be brief, the old Commissions being laid down, and those that were waved in
this New-Model being dismissed from the employment; the Command of the rest, to
be recruited to Twenty one thousand, is devolved to Sir Thomas Fairfax. Of
whom, and whose success, since he served the Parliament as General of their
Forces, is this story instituted: which I cannot better begin, then with a
brief account or description of him.

CHAP. II.
Wherein a brief Character of the General, and Lieutenant General; The framing
of the New-Model; The beginning of their Action at Islip-bridge,
Blechington-house, Bampton-bush, etc. And the effect these things had on His
Majesty at Oxford.

SIr THOMAS FAIRFAX, eldest Son of the Lord FAIRFAX, of Denton in the County of
York: Martially disposed from his youth; Not finding action suitable to him in
his own Country, (for through the great goodness and long suffering of God,
England has been a quiet habitation these 80 years) And there being employment
in Holland, he went over thither to enable himself in military experience: And
upon his return into England, he matched into a most Noble and Martial family,
taking to Wife one of the Daughters of that ever Renowned General, the Lord
VERE. And thus the Reader may take notice, how not only his Extraction,
Disposition, and Education bespake him for a Soldier, but his Contract also
portended nothing less. Albeit, so far was he from congratulating such a
condition of his Country, when he saw it like to need the exercise of his
faculty; that he most sincerely offered the first attempts of his resolved
Mind at the Altar of Peace. When at the King's first endeavors to raise a
Guard for his own person, at York; apprehended then by those parts, and found
quickly after to be the beginning of an Army: He was entrusted by his Country
to prefer a Petition to His Majesty; the scope whereof was, to beseech him to
hearken to his Parliament, and not to take that course of raising Forces, he
was then engaging in: which Petition the King refusing, he pressed with that
instance and intention, following the King so close therewith in the field,
called Heyworth Moor, in the presence of 80. if not 100000. people of the
County (the like appearance was hardly ever seen in Yorkshire) so close, I say,
til at last he tendered the same upon the pomel of his saddle. But finding no
Propitiatory here, and seeing a War could not be avoided, he early paid the
vows of his Martial dedication; And so soon as these unhappy troubles brake
forth, took a Commission under his Father, Ferdinando L. Fairfax, (whose timely
appearance and gallant performances for his country in the North, deserves a
story by it self;) And served the Parliament in lower Commands, then what
Providence since has adjudged his capacity and merit unto, making him now
General of the Parliaments forces; to which trust and honor he was preferred
upon no other grounds, than the observation of his Valor, and all answerable
abilities for the same, testified in many notable services done by him in the
North, whilst he was yet in a lower sphere. And now how delightfully
remarkable is it (as a most apt cadency of providence) if God shall make him,
who was by the King rejected in his mild endeavors to prevent the troubles of
the Land by a Petition, (then which he sought nothing more) a most powerful
Instrument of restoring Peace thereunto by the sword!

The General personally assisting the framing of the New-Model.
Sir Thomas Fairfax, having with much modesty accepted this command,
immediately applies himself to the discharge of it: it was the first of April
ere his Commission was granted; and the third of April he went from London to
Windsor, to see, and personally to assist in the frameing of a new Army: He
went in a private manner, purposely avoiding that pomp, which usually
accompanies a General into the field.

His Excellency continued at Windsor, from the third to the last of April, in
that work: The difficulty of the work.
The difficulty whereof (to say nothing of the danger, through the discontents
of them that were reduced under new Commanders, and of those that went off the
employment; which rendered it a business requiring much wisdom and tenderness,
as well as resolution) might well account for this time, if it had bin a longer
space: considering, that besides the fitting the Train for the field, and the
attendance of the Recruits from London, which with the old that continued, were
to make up the designed number; an entire new form was to be introduced into
the whole Army, the Forces that remained of the old Army being not only to be
recruited, but to be reduced into new Companies and Regiments, as if they had
been new raised.

A digression in due commendation of Major Genesis Skippon, for his free and
faithful assistance therein.
In the mention of this particular, the great pains, care, and diligence of
that valiant and discreet Commander, Major General Skippon, whose prudent
carriage added much life and expedition to the business, is not to be omitted:
of whose singular and extraordinary service therein, the House of Commons
taking notice, by Letters that were sent to them, Ordered and sent a Letter,
returning him the hearty thanks of the House, for this and all his former
faithful services.

Whilst the Army lay about Windsor, thus forming and fitting for the field;
Prince Rupert with the Kings main force for the midland, lay about Worcester
and the frontiers of Wales, preparing from thence to take the field: but the
Kings person, with most part of the Train, and some of their Foot, intended for
the field, being then in Oxford, A Convoy of horse, reputed about 2000. was
ordered from Worcester to fetch them off from Oxford; upon advertisement
whereof, the Committee of both Kingdoms wrote to the General, to send some
horse to march beyond Oxford, and lie on the further side thereof toward
Worcester, to intercept that Convoy, and keep the King and his train from
passing out. The charge of this service they recommended particularly to
Lieutenant General Cromwell; who looking on himself now as discharged of
military employment, by the new Ordinance, which was to take effect within few
days, and to have no longer opportunity to serve his country in that way;
was, the night before, come to Windsor from his service in the West, to kiss
the Generals hand, and to take his leave of him; when in the morning, ere he
was come forth his chamber, those Commands, then which he thought of nothing
less in all the world, came to him from the Committee of both Kingdoms. The
General then immediately commanded a party of Horse and Dragoons, then upon the
field, to be mustered and recruited, as of the New-Model, to march under his
Command into Oxfordshire forthwith, not staying at all either for Pay, or
Recruits. And here also being the first mention of this worthy Commander, I
must crave leave to digress a little, to present the world with some more
particular notion of him, whose name they will so often meet with throughout
this story, and whose actions will best represent him, as in other stories, so
in the sequel of this.

A digression upon occasion of the first mention of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell.
This Gentleman, a Member of the House of Commons, long famous for godliness,
and zeal to his country, of great note for his service in the House; accepted
of a Commission at the very beginning of this War; wherein he served his
Country faithfully, and it was observed GOD was with him, and he began to be
renowned: insomuch that men found, that the narrow room whereunto his first
employments had confined their thoughts, must be enlarged to an expectation of
greater things, and higher employments, whereunto divine providence had
designed him for the good of this Kingdom. When the time therefore drew near,
that He, as the rest had done, should lay down his Commission, upon a new
Ordinance; The House considering how God had blessed their affairs under his
hand, thought fit to dispense with his absence from the House. And therefore as
they were in the first place happy in a General, they resolved in the next
place to make themselves and their General further happy, in a
Lieutenant-Generall.

Lieut. Genesis Cromwell in action at Islip-bridge.
To return therefore from whence I digrest. Lieutenant General Cromwell having
received the fore-specified commands from the General, marched immediately,
found the Enemy, and engaged them near Islip-bridge; the Enemies Brigade
consisted of the Queen's, Colonel Wilmot's, the Earl of Northampton's, and
Colonel Palmer's Regiments of horse: routed them, slew many, took about 500
horse, 200 prisoners, whereof many Officers and Gentlemen of quality; and as an
ill Omen of her Majesty's designs against this Army, the Queens Standard.

Improving his success there, to the reduceing of Blechingdon house.
The Lieutenant General not resting satisfied with this victory, pursued the
enemy, lodged most of the remains of the rout in Blechingdon-house, where
Colonel Windebank kept garrison for the King; he faced the house with Horse and
Dragoons, summoned the Governor with a sharp Message, (our Soldiers casting
out words for the Foot to fall on, as if there had been Foot in readiness) the
answer was required to be instantly given, or else he must expect the greatest
severity that the soldiers could use toward him. The Governor having no
intelligence of, or else doubting relief from Oxford, rendered the house, with
all the arms and ammunition therein. Thus God was with out New-Model, or rather
a branch of it, and declared himself so to be, betimes. The King himself
confesses in his letter to H. Iermyn, April 30. 1645. that this blow did much
change the face of his affairs.
Which was by the Enemy esteemed of such evil consequence to their affairs, and
so great an affront, (in regard it was done by the New-Nodel; as they
scornfully termed this Army) that they could not tell which way to redeem their
honors, but by calling the Governor to a Council of war, whom, for delivering
the house, they condemned to be shot to death. Much means was used for the
sparing his life; but notwithstanding the great interest Secretary Windebank
his Father had at Court, for the great service he had done the Church of Rome,
they could not prevail for a pardon (so high they accounted his offense) only
a reprieve for a few days; and shortly after the Governor was shot to death:
and his brother, a Lieutenant Colonel, laid down his Commission thereupon.

The former successes improved to a further advantage, at Bampton Bush.
No sooner was the Lieutenant-Generall possessed of the house, but he sent away
the Arms and Ammunition to Alisbury, and quit the house, as not advantageious
to our affairs, nor indeed having Foot with him to put into the house, only a
few Dragoons, which he could not spare from his other designs. The Enemy, a
few days after this, sent from Oxford about 350 Foot, under the command of Sir
William Vaughan, toward Radcot-bridge: The Lieutenant-Generall marching
privately toward Witney, and having intelligence thereof, pursued them, forced
them into Bampton-bush; where Sir William Vaughan, Lieut. Colonel Littleton,
diverse Officers, and about 200 prisoners, with their arms and ammunition, were
taken.

A piece of good service done by Col. John Fiennes.
Moreover, the Lieutenant-Generall having in his March notice of some of the
Enemies horse, which had a few hours before crossed his way, he sent Colonel
John Fiennes with a party after them, who fell upon them, and took about 150
Horse, 3 Colors, 40 Prisoners, and 50 Arms. The Lieutenant-Generall in the
mean time marched over the river toward Faringdon, having dispatched his
prisoners away with a Convoy to Abingdon, consulting with the Officers of what
advantage it would be to reduce that Garrison of Faringdon; wherein they did
readily concur: but having no Foot to effect the same, he sent to Abingdon to
Major General Brown, for the assistance of some Foot, who (according to his
wonted readiness to promote the public service) very readily sent about 5 or
600. wherewith the place was attempted, but without success; and after the
expense of about 14 men upon it, the design was given over. Rupert and Maurice
sent for.
The losses the King sustained, whilst these Forces hovered thus up and down,
and affronted them under their walls, so perplexed them at Oxford, that His
Majesty sent for Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, with all the Forces they
had, to come to Oxford, the better to enable His Majesty to march out into the
field: and, for more security, Genesis Goring was also sent to for that purpose,
out of the West.

CHAP. III.
The General with the Army marching into the West; Upon afteradvice recalled,
and a Party only sent to Taunton; Their good success in the relief of Taunton.
Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell defending his Quarters against Goring.

The Army now raised, where to be disposed, is controverted.
AND now by this time the Army was well nigh raised: Whither they should first
bend, was taken into consideration. Oxford and the West are put into the scales
of competition. Oxford, besides that it was the head-quarter and garrison, and
lodged all the Kings Ordnance and Artillery, that he was to draw forth into the
field; (which now to surprise, or at least to prevent the drawing of them
forth, was held very councellable, as that, that was likeliest to hinder the
Kings taking the field) Represents it self also in other respects to be first
considered, as being a Midland garrison in the heart of the Kingdom, where to
suffer an Enemy is most mischievous: besides that, that County had longest
suffered of any place in the Kingdom, being the constant seat of the War from
the beginning. But the consequence of the West, and the commiseration of
Taunton in particular, then greatly distressed by a close siege, whereinto also
most of the best affected in those parts had drawn themselves for safety;
Prevails, and swayes to decline the design upon Oxford at that time, though
otherwise needful enough: And so the first fruits of this Army are devoted to
the West.

His Excellency undertakes the Western expedition.
According to this result, the General, though under an indisposition of body,
by reason of an Ague that had exercised him for some time, yet undertakes this
Western expedition with a great deal of cheerfulness, though the whole fruit
of that Years service was in great hazard to have been thereby blasted in the
bud; the King being then in a condition ready to take the field, having made
several Dispatches for that purpose to imbody all his Forces, and we having no
balancing Force to attend his motion, Lieut. General Cromwell being far too
weak to engage him, and the Scots at too remote a distance. And though it was
urged to be most necessary to relieve our friends; yet the slight retrenching
and garisoning of many Towns of no great strength by nature and situation,
though it may serve for the present securing of particular Counties, and
particular men's Estates from plundering Parties, yet are they prejudicial to
the Public, and to the main of the wars: For such places are not able to hold
out long; and then either there must be a loss of charge, arms, or of our
friends, which would be a discouragement to our whole Party; or else an Army
must be diverted from their principal designs, and besides the danger other
places by its absence may be exposed to, expose it self also to the certtain
toil, inconveniences, and hazardous chances of a long March, which is likely
also to end in a Fight. And therefore it has been held great wisdom by
ancient and well experienced Soldiers, to have but few Garrisons, and those
very strong, which may hold out long without relief; which is the more
necessary, if they shall be in the corners of a country, and remote from
relief.

A party left with L. Genesis Cromwell, to straiten Oxford.
But to return. The first of May his Excellency began his march with the
whole Army (except the forementioned Party of horse and Dragoons, which were
with Lieut. General Cromwell, and four Regiments of Foot besides, who were
ordered, when their recruits were come up, to join with him to busy the Enemy
about Oxford) And by the seventh of May they reached Blanford in Dorset-shire,
marching the whole seven days, and some of them very long marches, without any
intermission: so willing were the Soldiers to come timely to the relief of
distressed Taunton. To Salisbury were they come, before the Enemy was aware; as
was discovered by letters of Sir Ralph Hopton to the Governors of Winchester
and Basing, wherein he desired them to send him word, when they thought Fairfax
would be able to take the field.

New-Model, the General, to lay an early foundation of good success, in the
punishment of former disorders, and prevention of future misdemeanors; caused
a Council of War to be called, that morning that they marched from Andover, a
mile from the Town; where the several Regiments were drawn up, and stayed two
or three hours: at which Council several Offenders were tried for their
lives: A Renegado, and four more Authors of the Mutiny in Kent, were cast, one
of which (whose lot it was) with the Renegado, were executed upon a Tree, at
Wallop, in the way of the Armies march, in terrorem. And the next day was
Proclamation made through the Army, That it should be death for any man to
plunder.

Newbury, good Scouts, and parties of horse were sent out toward Hungerford
and Marlborough, whereabouts General Goring was, with a great body of Horse and
Dragoons, coming out of the West; our Parties met with some of the Enemies
horse, and took Lieut. colonel Hacket, and some other prisoners: upon
examination of whom, and by other intelligence, which came in the nick of time,
Goring intending to beat up the L. Genesis quarters near Faringdon, prevented.
we understood Gorings design was, that night, or the next morning early, to
beat up Lieut. General Cromwels quarters near Faringdon, and to relieve that
place. The Lieutenant General being newly come to the General at Newbury, and
present at this Intelligence, immediately repaired to his charge, and was drawn
into a Body betimes. General Goring marched with what speed he could, on the
West of Faringdon, and recovered Radcot-bridge. The Lieutenant General sent a
party of horse over the river, to discover his motion: where Major Bethel
engaging too far, in the dark, was taken prisoner, and about four men more
lost, and two Colors, several wounded. The Enemy kept his advantage of the
River, and quartered his horse as far back as Latchlade, whilst the
Lieutenant-Gen. was making a passage over New-bridge, and having gained the
same, Genesis Goring either declining an engagement, or desiring to prevent the
raising of the siege at Taunton, marched back with all speed after the Army
into the West. This is the total routing of Cromwels forces, as the King, in
his Letter to the Queen of this engagement near Newbridge, relates it to be. A
poor cause, and a condition far from envy, that is pensioner to such Royal
mistakes, to support its reputation!

His Majesty taking the field.
The King, taking the opportunity of the army's marching westward, draws forth
his artillery out of Oxford, to embody himself in the field. L. Genesis Cromwell,
and Major-Gen. Brown, were ordered to attend his motion; and moreover, it was
held necessary to recall his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax from the service of
the West, and to allot only a portion of his Army for Taunton. Two Expresses to
this purpose were sent from the Committee of both Kingdoms to his Excellency,
who was marched as far as Blandford. And now comes the trial of this new Army,
which God had designed for some more then ordinary service; whohad scarce
warmed their heads with glorious designments, nay, ere they could reflect upon
the strength and content of their united March, were by this means to be
divided three several ways, ere ever the Army came to perfection or This,
like a black cloud, for the time, intercepted those prospects of glorious
achievements and success, which themselves and others saw before to this Army;
and like a fierce storm, threatened to dash all.

A Brigade appointed for Taunton: the rest march back.
Accordingly, a Brigade is appointed for Taunton, of four Regiments of Foot,
viz. Colonel Welden's, Colonel Fortescue's, Colonel Floyd's, and Colonel
Inglesby's, commanded by Colonel Welden as eldest Colonel; unto whom six
Companies of Foot, belonging to the garrison of Chichester, joined themselves
about Dorchester, and as many Colors from Lime, after that; in all, 4 or 5000
Foot, besides a body of Horse of 1800 or 2000, consisting of Colonel Graves his
Regiment, Colonel Cooks, Colonel Pophams, Colonel Fitz-Iames, and the Plymouth
Regiment. All which Horse and Foot were well combined in mutual love to each
other, and common resolution against the Enemy. They marched without any stop
or stay, till they came within a days march of Taunton, near enough to raise
the siege, The Enemy mistaking that Brigade, by a happy Synecdoch of a part for
the whole.
as it proved (by the good providence of God) giving that Brigade the repute of
the whole Army, as appeared after by a Letter from Colonel John Digby, wherein
he much laments his unhappiness, in being informed that Fairfax, with his whole
Army, was advanced from Blandford, to the relief of Taunton; when it proved but
a part; there being double the strength before the Town, sufficient, in his
opinion, to fight our party, and make good the siege. Neither was this
intelligence of his altogether without ground, or appearance at least; For the
General with his whole Army did advance out of Blandford toward Dorchester, as
if the whole had been for Taunton. But after some stay at the Rendezvous, the
General wheeled about Eastward, and parted with that Brigade, who marched on
toward Taunton. But whether this were a fegined excuse of Digby, or a real
truth, this we are sure, the Enemy drew off the siege, upon their advance so
near, and that in great disorder, leaving many arms behind them, and cut down
many trees to barracado the ways, lest we should fall upon their rear. And so
Colonel Welden had a fair passage to the town, which he entered, May 14. to no
less joy to the Besieged, then discomfort to the Enemy.

Some remarkable passages of the relief of Taunton.
The main passages of, and particulars, relating to this expedition and action,
are briefly these. When the Brigade came within ten miles of Taunton, having
the advantage of the hills, they gave them a Peale of their Artillery, ten
Pieces being discharged, to give them notice of their being advanced within
that number of miles, having before by their Spies prepared them with the
meaning of that signal. Notwithstanding they were frustrated in their end: By
reason that some few days before, the Enemy divided themselves; one party of
their horse and foot, with some pieces of cannon, skirmishing with the other in
sight of the town, but, only with powder; to make the Town believe (as they
gave out) that the Parliaments forces, who were coming to relieve them, were
there encountered and beaten; hoping by this stratagem to have drawn a Party out
of the Town to their friends succor, and so to have cut them off by an
ambuscado. But God turned this wisdom of the enemy into foolishness; the
besieged kept close to their works; the Enemies returning from their
mock-chase, fell to firing the Town with their grenades and mortar-peeces,
whereby two long streets of the town, of fair buildings, were burnt to the
ground; and withal they stormed most furiously. But they met with a gallant
Commander in chief, Col. Blake, and as valiant Soldiers, that gave them such
showers of Lead, as filled the Trenches with their dead carkases: And that
which adds to the mercy, the Town, in all, from the beginning to the raising of
the siege, had not lost 200 men. Toward evening a party of horse were sent,
who approached to the very works, (for the Enemy had drawn off their guns, and
their Rear was upon their march) And the Town thereupon being confirmed of the
approach of their friends to their relief, sallied out and fell upon the rear
of the Enemy, killed some, and took others prisoners. The whole Body marched to
Pitminster, within two miles of the town, took up their quarters in the fields;
and on Monday morning, Col. Welden with the Officers went to Taunton (where
they found a sad spectacle of a flourishing town almost ruined by fire, and the
people nigh famished for want of food.) And gave order for the whole Brigade to
retreat back to Chard, where they quartered on Saturday; and the 14. was the
first days rest they had, from their first motion Westward. Thus, Taunton
happily and seasonably relieved, is a good Earnest of the prosperous success
of this Army in afteractions.

CHAP. IV.
The Army employed to besiege Oxford: How far they proceeded therein. Several
Garrisons thereabouts besieged, and some taken. The loss of Leicester, and the
Discontents and Discouragements that ensued thereon. With a modest enquiry
into the cause of our low condition at that time.

THe General in the mean while was a good part of his way back, marching
through enclosures, avoiding the Champion-way, in regard he had not many Horse,
if he should meet with Gorings Horse, who were upon their retreat from Oxford
into the West. By the 14. of May they attained Newbury. In their march, besides
exemplary justice done upon a rude Soldier, (as upon two before, in their
march toward the West) and other things of particular note; there was one
passage of great wisdom and condiscension in the General, very remarkable: A
pattern for Generals.
viz. That when the duty became so hard to some of the Regiments, as each other
day to bring up the Rear; the Generals own Regiment claiming a privilege to
march always in the Van, which was convenient now to be waved for the relief
of the rest; but they being unwilling thereunto, the Genesis in stead of severe
discipline, alighted himself, and marched on foot in the head of his Regiment,
about two miles, and so brought up the Rear: and to this day, his own Regiment
takes the turn upon all duties: A thing, if rightly considered, nothing to
their dishonor, (if it were to outvie others to do service) and redounding
much to the good, and good success of an Army; there being not any one thing
that more frequently and certainly breeds distempers, and causes mutinies in an
Army, then claiming of privileges, and insisting thereon in time of service.

His Excellency returned, employed to block up Oxford.
The Army thus arrived at Newbury, rested there a day or two, which was a great
refreshment to the Foot, sore gauled with a hard and tedious march to and fro,
(having had but one days rest in fourteen days march.) What was the design
of calling them back, or which way they should now be employed, they were yet
ignorant, till the second day, when the General received an Express from the
Committee of both Kingdoms, to advance to Oxford, to lay close siege to it:
which was no more disputed, then the former commands at Blandford; but
forthwith obeyed, how much soever it was against his own opinion. Lieut.
General Cromwell, and Major General Brown, called from attending the Kings
motions, to assist against Oxford.
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Major General Brown, who followed the King,
and attended his motions with a party of Horse and Foot, were recalled to join
with the Forces his Excellency had brought back with him from the West; wherein
it was conceived that they might do better service, for that they alone were
too weak by far to engage with the Kings forces, (as by their Letter they
signified to the Committee of both Kingdoms, and as was obvious to every man)
the Kings army being grown to that strength, as that they thought themselves
enough (as indeed they were, especially for Horse, wherein we fell short of
them) to fight his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax his whole Army. Only a party
of 2500 Horse and Dragoons (being part of the force with Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and belonging to this Army) were sent, under the command of Colonel
Vermuden, to join with the Scots, (Lieutenant genesis Cromwell being, for I know
not what reason, not so acceptable to their Army) to enable them the better to
attend the Kings motions, and check his enterprises, to which they were
designed. His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, according to his Orders, marches
toward Oxford, and in order to a siege sends for so much of the Train and
Ammunition as was left at Windsor, at their first marching forth, and called a
Council of War, to consider what other provision was necessary; which they sent
to the Parliament to speed down. Lieut. general Cromwell was come back to them,
their quarters settled, a bridge made over the river: they lay 15 days before
the town, but the requisites to a close siege were not come up to them, nor
near them, till June 3. the day before they received Orders to rise from before
the Town; which Orders were well received by the Army, who did not conceive
themselves secure, nor sufficient for such an undertaking, while that the King
was unattended in the field, as was at large represented by the General to the
Committee of both Kingdoms. And in that respect (because they looked upon this
design against Oxford, as unlikely to prove successful) they thought not
good to summon the Town, during their lying before it; by which means they were
secured, that they might rise from before it with the indemnity of their
reputation.

The action of our Army, while they lay before Oxford.
Nor did any great action, in relation to that place, happen all the while they
lay there; save that at their first drawing near it from Newnham, a party of
horse were sent forth toward Oxford, under the command of Adjutant-General
Fleming, who met a party of the Enemies horse and foot, routed their horse,
being commanded by Capt. Gardener, and took prisoners about 200 Foot: which
served as a good means and provision for the release of a Footguard, consisting
of 100 men; who afterward, near their rising from before Oxford, (much through
their own negligence timely to retreat to a place of security, as they might)
were by a sally of the Enemy early in the morning surprised, twelve of them
slain, the rest taken, but the next day released upon exchange of the like
number of those whom we had taken (as before) and sent to Abingdon. Moreover,
upon the General's viewing the Works on the North-east side of Oxford, the
Enemy set a Mill on fire, and also quit the garrison of Godstow near Wolvercot,
and set it on fire: but some of Colonel Sheffields horse came in seasonably,
quenched the fire, and preserved the Powder and Ammunition in the house, and
took the Governor and some others, in their flight toward Oxford, prisoners.

Bostol-house besieged.
May 24. The General rode to view Bostol garrison, and some few days after sent
a Party to besiege it. Adjutant Genesis Fleming was there engaged in a single
encounter, shot his enemy, yet received a wound himself, conceived then to be
mortal, but of which he afterward recovered.

Gaunt-house besieged.
May 31. The General viewed the garrison of Gaunt-house, sent Col. Rainsborow,
with a party of Foot, and some Horse, to besiege it, who battered it sore all
that day; but by reason of the Moat, the access was ill to it. The Governor
was summoned to deliver it: but he returned a positive denial, adding further,
That he liked not Windebanks law. til the next day, June 1. when Col.
Rainsborow being prepared, and ready to fall on to storm, having provided
carts, and all things necessary, the Governor perceiving the same, sounded a
parley, waving the consideration he insisted on the day before; and surrendered
the house, with all the arms and ammunition therein, upon quarter for himself
and his soldiers Here we received the news of the taking of Evesham by Col.
Massey. A seasonable and good service.
.

About this time came news of a remarkable passage in Genesis Gorings army in the
West; which, as will afterward appear, has been their lot to happen among
them more then once: Namely, a hot skirmish, which one party of his horse had
with another party of his own horse, near Crookhorn, thinking they had been
ours, (For indeed a party of horse of Col. Weldens Brigade were then within a
mile of them, at Hinton St. George:) in which skirmish many of the Enemy were
slain, both Officers and Soldiers, by one another; and that party of their
horse that was routed, fled as far as Bath, giving a hot alarm as they went,
which for the present put them in some distraction. Providence had ordained
this accident, as an advantage for that party of our Horse, who otherwise might
have been endangered (by the sudden advance of the Enemies forces) in their
retreat from Pederton to Taunton. The Inhabitants thereabouts confirmed the
truth of this accident, when the Army marched the second time to relieve
Taunton, and had a rendezvous on the same place where this skirmish was;
besides, many of the enemy have since confessed the same.

And upon the heels of this good News, viz. May 29. came two parcels of less
pleasing Intelligence. The one, of the Kings advance from the relieving of
Chester, toward Leicester and the Association; and of the Scots army being
gone toward Westmerland, who we had thought had attended the motions of the
King. The other, out of the West, viz. That General Goring, Sir Ralph Hopton,
and Sir Richard Grenvile had joined all their Forces together, and distressed
Col. Weldens Brigade, in a manner besieging them close in Taunton. And on the
first of June, a third, and more sad piece then either, viz. Of the Kings
taking of Leicester by storm, and of the cruel usage of many of the
Inhabitants: the particulars whereof are too tedious here to mention; only thus
in brief.

A brief account of the loss of Leicester.
On Tuesday at noon, a Summons was sent by Prince Rupert, to the Soldiers,
Townsmen, and Contrymen, wherein Quarter was offered to the whole Town.
Whereupon the Committee called together all the Commanders, and read the
Summons unto them; and upon debate, it was resolved to take the next morning to
give an Answer. But the Trumpeter was no sooner arrived at the Kings army with
this desire, but the a Drum was presently dispatched to demand a resolution of
the Summons within a quarter of an hour; which while they were debating at a
Commonhall, before any could express themselves, the Kings cannon from the
Battery played, and all were commanded to repair to their charge, which was
done with much courage and resolution. And now both sides plied each other with
Cannon and Musket shot, as fast as they could charge and discharge, and so
continued all day, and all night: at which time the Enemy prepared to storm at
six or seven places. At the Newark breach was the fiercest assault, the Enemy
there coming to push of pike: amongst the rest, Colonel St. George, in a
bravery, came up to the cannon, and was by it shattered into small pieces, and
with him many more; for after the manner of the Turks, the Horse forced on the
Foot to fight, who being played upon by the Musquetires, were many of them
slaughtered. About three of the clock on Saturday, was the Town entered, the
Enemy put many to the sword at their first entrance, and dealt also extreme
cruelly with the Town, plundering all they had, and putting many to great
ransomes, when they had taken away all their moneys and g^ods. There was buried
of the Enemy in Leicester, 709. as has been collected by the burials there,
besides those that have died of hurts since: there was above 100. of the Town
soldiers slain.

The sad posture of our affairs at that time when Leicester was l^st, discourst
upon.
Upon the loss of Leicester many discourses were raised, each one venting his
discontent according as passion biased his affections. Great was the
discouragement of the Parliaments friends, and as great was the confidence of
the Enemy; in so much, that soon after, viz June 8. the King himself, in his
Letter to the Queen, used this expression: I may, without being too much
sanguine, affirm, That since this Rebellion my affairs were never in so
hopeful away. But what is the matrer? Was there no Balm in Gilead? Was there
no Physician there? Had England no Army then? Nay, had they not two armies to
the Enemies one? had they not an army of our Brethren the Scots, that had
Wintred then in the Kingdom, consisting of 21000. Had they not a New Model
newly raised? How fell we then into this low condition? I shall endeavor to
give a brief account of that business, in its relation to this army.

As it often falls out, that the Sun at its first rising is clouded with some
small Mist, which after it has once broken through, ensues a most fair and
glorious day. So this new army, at its first going out, seemed to be a little
darkened by the sitting down, and after rising from before Oxford; the Kings
increasing his forces and strength in the field; and the loss of Leicester.
And these Vapors gathered into such a Cloud, as that they did not a little
obscure the first motions of that Army, at least the Counsels and Counselors
whereby it was conducted: and not so only, but portended to its enemies, a
joyful; to its friends and favorers, a sad prognostic of a sore storm ready
to pour down upon them, which they could not have avoided, but that through
the merciful disposition of the all-seeing GOD, (privy to the integrity of
good men's hearts and actions) the victorious Beams of this Rising Sun brake
forth so gloriously at Naseby field; and ithath run its course ever since with
such a constant luster and brightness, (not so much as one Cloud passing over
it) that it has dazeled the eyes of all the beholders, and turned the scorn of
its enemies into bitter envy, and their choler into deep and inveterate
hatred. But how, and from whence this Mist arose in the morning of this new
Army, I now come to show.

Excellency, with the greater part of his Army, being recalled and returned
out of the West; the question then was, Whether he should pursue the first
design of besieging Oxford, or whether he should follow the King, who seemed
to bend Northwards? On the one side it was considered, that the Parliament had
in their pay a great Army in the North, of 21000 horse and foot, of our
brethren of Scotland; That there were considerable Forces in Lancashire and
Cheshire, under Sir Will. Brereton, which held Chester straightly besieged; That
in Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolnshire,
there were also very considerable Forces, which might join with the Scottish
army, if there were need; and were commanded so to do, in case the King marched
Northwards: besides the party of 2500 Horse and Dragoons under Col. Vermuden,
which were appointed to join with the Scottish army, because they seemed only to
want a due proportion of horse to engage with the Kings army: and upon the
appointment of them to that service, the Commissioners of Scotland wrote to his
Excellency the Earl of Leven, to advance; and the Committee of both Kingdoms
ordered Col. Vermuden with his party to march into Derbyshire, to join with
them, which accordingly he did, and came to the rendezvous at the time
appointed. This provision was held sufficient, and more then sufficient, in
case the King should move Northward; not only to check him in any enterprise
upon the Towns of the Parliament, or relief of Chester, Pomfract, or
Scarborough, which were then besieged, but also to fight with him to the best
advantage, if need so required. On the other side, in case the King should have
moved Southward or Westward, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax lying before
Oxford, was in the most convenient Post to fight with him, and to hinder his
designs: whereby it may appear to him that considers it, that our Forces were
so disposed by providence at this time, that the King had a sufficient Army
both before and behind him, to fight with him; and as great, if not greater
then those that after beat and wholly overthrew his Army at Naseby: So that a
design could hardly have been laid to greater advantage: yet it took not
effect; for that the Army designed to attend the Kings motions, did not advance
according to order, but instead of marching Southward, returned back into
Westmerland. Sir William Brereton, fearing the approach of the Kings Army, and
seeing no Army ready at hand to balance it, raised the siege of Westchester;
whereupon the King; seeing the work done to his hand, marched to Leicester, and
took it also, there being no Army to check or control him.

CHAP. V.
The Army commanded to rise from before Oxford; Their several Marches till the
Battle at Naseby, with all the particulars thereof, fully related.

Upon the sad news of the loss of Leicester, and the danger thereupon of the
Kings breaking into the Associated Counties; Lieutenant General Cromwell was
ordered by the Committee of both Kingdoms, to march only with three Troops of
horse to secure the Isle of Ely; which commands, he, in greater tenderness of
the public service, then his own honor, in such a time of extremity as that
was, disputed not, but fulfilled. And his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax was
commanded to rise from before Oxford, and to march to defend the Association;
accordingly Orders were immediately given for the Forces on the other side the
river to march to Islip, and Major General Brown was desired to put a garrison
into Gaunt-house, being a place that was conceived would much conduce to the
straitning of Oxford; which accordingly was done, and the bridge lately made,
pulled up: and the next day, being June 5. the Army rose from before Oxford,
and marched that day to Marsh-Gibeon, ten miles. The General in his march
turned out of the way, to see the siege before Bostol-house, where
Major General Skippon, according to order, had that morning made some attempt,
but the success was not according to our desires (the Moat being much deeper
then we expected.) This night, at the Head quarter, intelligence came that the
King was marching from Leicester toward Daventry, with intention to raise the
siege at Oxford, as was conceived; which was by order before done to his hand.

Friday, June 6. the Army marched to great Brickhill, twelve miles, where the
head-quarter was that night, which was once intended to be at Stony-Stratford,
but that the intelligence which came that night to us of the Kings horse facing
Northhampton that day, rendered it not safe so to adventure: whilst the
greatest body of our Horse, sent into Derbyshire, were not as yet returned.

This night a great fire happened at the Generals quarters at Brickhil, which
was so sudden and violent for the time, that a man and a boy, and three or four
horses were burnt in the Barn where the fire began, before the Guard could get
to preserve them. It happened most remarkably, in the house of one who
expressed no good affection to this Army, and denied to furnish those
conveniences for quarter, (affirming that he had them not,) which afterward by
occasion of the fire, he was enforced to bring out. The next day, June 7. the
Army marched to Sherrington, a mile East of Newport-Pagnel, to the end the
Forces with Colonel Vermuden (who upon the Scots retreat to Westmerland were
recalled, and upon their march back) might more conveniently join, but
especially to be on that side the River, the better to secure the Association,
in case the King, who the day before had faced Northhampton, and seemed to
intend that way, should attempt to break into it; wherein it appeared they did
not consult their safety and quarter on the back of a garrison, as without
incurring any great censure they might have done; but rather consulted their
honor and the public service. Expresses were sent to Lieutenant General
Cromwell into the Association, to inform him whereabout our Army was, that in
case the Association were in danger, he might know how to join with us. Lords
day, June 8. the Army resting in their quarters, several parties of horse were
sent out as far as Tocester, to gain intelligence of the motions of the Kings
Army, who brought in some prisoners of Sir Marmaduke Langdales Brigade, from
whom information was gathered that the Kings Army continued still about
Daventry: Whereupon the General called a Council of War, to consider of the
best way to engage the Enemy. Where taking into consideration of what use
Lieutenant General Cromwell would be to them in a time of so great action: The
General propounded to the Council of War, and it was by them unanimously
consented unto, that a Letter should be writ to the Parliament, to desire that
they would please for a time to dispense with L. Genesis Cromwels absence from the
House; and to give way he might command their Horse, there being like to be
very speedily an engagement. Which Letter was sent by Colonel Hamond, who went
Post the same day to the Parliament, and was instantly returned with an answer
according as was desired, to the great content of the General, and the whole
Army.

This day, Colonel Vermuden, who the day before was with his party of Horse
returned, and come near to the quarters of the army, himself came to the
General, desiring (in regard of some special occasions which he said he had to
draw him beyond seas) that he might have leave to lay down his Commission,
which was yielded unto, and accordingly he received his discharge. At this
days debate, Major General Skippon was desired to draw the form of a battle:
and at the same time the Army was divided into several Brigades of Horse and
Foot, in order to their being better disposed for an engagement. The General,
though not depending upon multitudes, yet serving Providence in the use of all
good means; sent one Post after another to Sir John Gel, Colonel Rossiter, to
the Governors of Coventry, Warwick, Northhampton, and Nottingham, To march
with all speed with their Forces to the Army, for that there was likely to be
speedily an engagement with the Enemy. In the mean, the Army neglected no time,
but on Wednesday, June 11, though a rainy day, marched from Stony-Stratford to
Wootton, within three miles of Northampton, where intelligence still confirmed
the Kings continuance at Daventry, quartering all his Foot and Carriages upon
Burrough-hill; a place of great advantage (having formerly been an ancient
fortification) and making show, as if he had chosen that place to fight upon,
in case we durst advance to him. But afterward it appeared, that his stay
there, was only till a part of 1200 horse were returned, which he had sent from
his Army to Oxford, as a convoy with the plundered cattle and sheep of
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, etc. the better to enable Oxford to endure a
siege, in case it should be attempted again in his absence, himself being
intent upon a march for the relief of Pomfract and Scarborough; which he then
apprehended to have small difficulty in it, understanding the removal of the
Scottish army.

The Army being come to Wotton, they found there none of the best accommodation
for quarter; only, what was wanting that way, was kindly and respectively
endeavored to be supplied by the Major and Magistrates of Northhampton, who
the same night came to the General at the head quarter, upon the errand of a
congratulatory visit and present. The next day, the Army marched to
Gilsborough, (four miles on the west of Northampton, and within five miles of
Burrough-hill, where the Enemy still continued) Marching in very good order;
for that they did advance directly upon the place where the enemy had pitched
himself. A commanded party of horse gave the Enemy an alarm, and took some
prisoners, by whom they understood the King was a hunting, the Soldiers in no
order, and their horses all at grass, having not the least knowledge of our
advance, and being in the greatest security that could be; but the alarm was
so quickly taken through all their quarters, that our Foot being somewhat
behind, and night approaching, it was not thought wisdom to make any further
attempt. About twelve that night, the General took horse, and rode about both
the Horse and Foot guards, till four in the morning (expecting the Enemy would
have shown some gallantry that night, and fallen upon some of his quarters, as
he had hindered them in their sport at hunting the day before.) In the very
entrance whereof this hard condition befell the General himself; That having
forgot the Word, he was stopped at the first Guard; and requiring the Soldier
that stood Sentinel, to give it him, he refused to do it, telling him, he was
to demand the Word from all that past him, but to give it to none; and so made
the General stand in the wet, till he sent for the Captain of the guard to
receive his commission to give the General the word, (In such subjection are
the Highest, to those laws that ^rst derived their sanction and authority in
great part from themselves) and in the end the Soldier was rewarded for his
duty and carfulness, (as it was interpreted.) As the General was riding in
the morning about three of the clock, within a mile and half of Flower, where
the Enemy kept an horse-guard; He could discern the Enemy riding fast over
Burrough-hill, to make fires in abundance, as if they were firing their Huts;
which gave some cause to believe they were about to march, as indeed it proved
afterward. For,

About five in the morning, June 13. the General being returned to the
head-quarter, the Scoutmaster genesis Watson (whose continued diligence in getting
timely intelligence of the Enemies motion, then, and always, redounded not a
little to the enablement of the Army) brought him certain notice, that the
Enemy was drawing off from Burrough-hill; had stood in arms all night, and were
all amazed that our Army was so near; it being spread abroad in their army we
were gone for security into the Association; And four or five more of the Spies
came one after another, confirming the same intelligence, adding further, that
most of their carriages were drawn from Burrough-hill toward Harborough. And
indeed, the Convoy of horse being returned from Oxford the night before, and
this unexpected march of the Army close up to them, being in a manner a
surprise of them; caused them speedily to resolve upon their forementioned
march toward Pomfract; either judging, the Army would not follow them, or if
they did, they should be able to fight us at more advantage, after they had
drawn us further Northward.

About six of the clock in the morning, a Council of War was called, to
consider what attempt to make upon he Enemy. In the midst of the debate, came
in Lieutenant General Cromwell, out of the Association, with 600 Horse and
Dragoons, who was with the greatest joy received by the General and the whole
army. Instantly orders were given for Drums to beat, Trumpets to sound to
horse, and all our army to draw to a rendezvous; from whence a good party of
Horse were sent toward Daventry, under the command of Major Harrison, (of
whose continued fidelity the Public has had sufficient testimony) to bring
further intelligence of the Enemies motion: and another strong party of Horse
was sent under under the command of Colonel Ireton, to fall upon the flank of
the Enemy, if he saw cause: and the main body of our Army marched to flank the
Enemy in the way to Harborough, and came that night to Gilling; the Country
much rejoicing at our coming, having been miserably plundered by the Enemy;
and some having had their children taken from them, and sold before their faces
to the Irish of that Army, whom the parents were enforced to redeem with the
price of money. That evening we understood that the Van of the Enemies army was
at Harborough, the Rear within two miles of Naseby: and no sooner was the
General got to his quarters, but tidings was brought him of the good service
done by Colonel Ireton, in falling into the Enemies quarters, which they had
newly taken up in Naseby Town; where he took many prisoners, some of the
Princes Lifeguard, and Langdales Brigade, and gave a sound alarm throughout
the Enemies army (the confidence of the Enemy in possessing these quarters,
grounded upon their slight esteem of this Army, and want of intelligence, was
very remarkable.) Upon this alarm, the King (not having notice of it till
eleven at night, as he had little imagined the nearness of our Army, or that
they durst bear up to him) much amazed, left his own quarters at that
unseasonable time; and for security went to Harborough, where Prince Rupert
quartered; and so soon as he came thither, sent to call up his Nephew, (resting
himself in a chair, in a low-room, in the mean time) who presently arose; a
Council of War was called: the question was put, What was best to be done
seeing our Army was so near, and as they then perceived fully intended to
engage them. It was considered by them, that should they march on to Leicester,
if the Rear were engaged, the whole Army might be put in hazard; and there was
no marching with the Van unless they could bring the Rear clear off, which
they discerned to be very difficult. Whereupon it was resolved to give battle,
taking themselves (as indeed they were) for a more considerable force then we,
especially in Horse, on which they chiefly depended; being also as confident,
they might rely upon their Infantry for valiant resolute men; and they
resolved (as appeared) not to abide in that place till we marched up to them,
but in a gallant bravery to seek us out. Herein the Kings Counsel prevailed
against the mind of the most of his great Officers, who were of opinion, that
it was best to avoid fighting.

Saturday June 14. The General with the Army advanced by three of the clock in
the morning, from Gilling toward Naseby, with an intention to follow close
upon the Enemy, and (if possible) retard their march with our Horse, till our
foot could draw up to them, in case they should have marched on to Leicester
(the intelligence being, that they had drawn some of their Carriages in the
night through Harborough) that way. By five in the morning, the Army was at a
Rendezvous near Naseby, where his Excellency received intelligence by our
Spies, that the Enemy was at Harborough; with this further, that it was still
doubtful, whether he meant to march away, or to stand us. But immediately the
doubt was resolved: great Bodies of the Enemies horse were discerned on the top
of the hill on this side Harborough, which increasing more and more in our
view, begat a confidence in the General, and the residue of the Officers that
he meant not to draw away, as some imagined, but that he was putting his Army
in order, either there to receive us, or to come to us, to engage us upon the
ground we stood: whilst the General was thus observing the countenance of the
Enemy, directions were given to put the Army into such a posture, as that if
the Enemy came on, we might take the advantage of our ground, and be in
readiness to receive him; or if not, that we might advance toward him. And
whilst these things were in consultation and action, the Enemies Army, which
before was the greatest part of it out of our view, by reason of the Hill that
interposed, we saw plainly advancing in order toward us: and the wind blowing
somewhat Westwardly, by the Enemies advance so much on their right hand, it was
evident, that he designed to get the wind of us: which occasioned the General
to draw down into a large fallow field on the Northwest side of Naseby, flanked
on the left hand with a hedge, which was a convenient place for us to fight the
Enemy in. And indeed seeing his resolution to advance upon us, we took the best
advantage we could of the ground, possessing the ledge of a Hill, running from
East to West; upon which our Army being drawn up, fronted toward the Enemy.
But considering it might be of advantage to us to draw up our Army out of sight
of the Enemy; who marched upon a plain ground toward us: we retreated about an
100 paces from the ledge of the Hill, that so the Enemy might not perceive in
what form our battle was drawn, nor see any confusion therein, and yet we to
see the form of their battle; to which we could conform our selves for
advantages, and recover the advantage of the Hill when we pleased, which
accordingly we did. The Enemy perceiving this retreat, thought (as since they
have confessed) we were drawing off to avoid fighting (and just then it was
brought to the King, that our Army was flying to Northhampton) which did
occasion them the more to precipitate; for they made so much haste, that they
left many of their Ordnance behind them.

The General, together with the Major General, put the several Brigades of
Foot into order: having committed the Ordering of the Horse to
Lieutenant General Cromwell, who did obtain from the General, That seeing the
Horse were near 6000. and were to be fought in two wings; His Excellency
would please to make Col. Ireton Commissary genesis of horse, and appoint him to
command the Left wing, that day; the command of the Right wing being as much as
the Lieutenant General could apply himself unto. Which being granted by the
General, the Lieutenant General assigned him five Regiments of Horse, a
Division of 200 Horse of the Association, for that Wing; and the Dragoons to
line the forementioned hedge, to prevent the enemy from annoying the Left flank
of the Army. In the mean time the Lieutenant General having six Regiments of
Horse with him for the Right wing, disposed them according as the place gave
leave. And the form of the whole Battle you have here inserted.

Upon the Enemies approach, the Parliaments army marched up to the brow of the
hill, having placed a Forlorn of Foot (musketeers) consisting of about 300.
down the steep of the hill toward the enemy, somewhat more then Carbine shot
from the Main battle, who were ordered to retreat to the battle, whenever
they should be hard pressed upon by the Enemy. The Enemy this while marched up
in good order, a swift march, with a great deal of gallantry and resolution,
according to the form here inserted. It is hard to say, whether Wing of our
Horse charged first: But the Lieutenant General not thinking it fit to stand
and receive the Enemies charge, advanced forward with the Right wing of the
Horse, in the same order wherein it was placed. Our Word that day was, God our
strength; Their Word was, Queen Mary. Colonel Whaley being the left hand on the
right wing, charged first two Divisions of Langdales Horse, who made a very
gallant resistance, and firing at a very close charge, they came to the sword:
wherein Col. Whaley's Divisions routed those two Divisions of Langdales,
driving them back to Prince Ruperts Regiment, being the Reserve of the enemies
Foot, whither indeed they fled for shelter, and rallied: the Reserves to
Colonel Whaley were ordered to second him, which they performed with a great
deal of resolution. In the mean time, the rest of the Divisions of the Right
wing, being straightned by Furzes on the right hand, advanced with great
difficulty, as also by reason of the uneavennesse of the ground, and a
Cony-warren over which they were to march, which put them somewhat out of their
order, in their advance. Notwithstanding which difficulty, they came up to the
engaging the residue of the Enemies horse on the left wing, whom they routed,
and put into great confusion, not one body of the enemies horse which they
charged, but they routed, and forced to fly beyond all their Foot, except some
that were for a time sheltred by the Brigade of Foot before mentioned.

Colonel Rossiter, who with his Regiment was just come into the field as the
Armies were ready to close; was edged in upon the right flank of the right wing
of horse, time not permitting a more fitting and equal disposal of him: whose
timely coming (according to his Orders) gave him opportunity of such gallant
performance in the battle, as deserves an honorable mentioning.

The Horse of the enemies Left wing being thus beaten from their Foot,
retreated back about a quarter of a mile beyond the place where the battle was
fought. The success of our Main battle was not answerably; The right hand of
the Foot, being the Generals Regiment, stood, not being much pressed upon:
Almost all the rest of the main Battle being overpressed, gave ground and went
off in some disorder, falling behind the Reserves; But the Colonels and
Officers, doing the duty of very gallant Men, in endeavoring to keep their men
from disorder, and finding their attempt fruitless therein, fell into the
Reserves with their Colors, choosing rather there to fight and die, then to
quit the ground they stood on. The Reserves advancing, commanded by Col.
Rainsborough, Col. Hammond, and Lieut. col. Pride, repelled the Enemy, forcing
them to a disorderly retreat. Thus much being said of the Right wing and the
main battle, it comes next in order, that an account be given of the Left wing
of our Horse.

Upon the approach of the Enemies Right wing of Horse, our Left wing drawing
down the brow of the hill to meet them, the Enemy coming on fast, suddenly
made a stand, as if they had not expected us in so ready a posture: Ours seeing
them stand, made a little stand also, partly by reason of some disadvantage of
the ground, and until the rest of the Divisions of Horse might recover their
stations. Upon that the Enemy advanced again, whereupon our Left wing sounded a
Charge, and fell upon them: The three right hand Divisions of our Left wing
made the first onset, and those Divisions of the enemy opposite to them,
received the Charge; thetwo left hand Divisions of the Left wing did not
advance equally, but being more backward, the opposite Divisions of the Enemy
advanced upon them. Of the three right hand Divisions (before mentioned) which
advanced, the middlemost charged not home, the other two co^ing to a close
Charge, routed the two opposite Divisions of the Enemy, (And the Commissary
General seeing one of the enemies Brigades of Foot on his right hand, pressing
sore upon our Foot, commanded the Division that was with him, to charge that
Body of Foot, and for their better encouragement, he himself with great
resolution fell in amongst the Musketeers, where his horse being shot under
him, and himself run through the thigh with a Pike, and into the face with an
Halbert, was taken prisoner by the enemy, until afterward, when the battle
turning, and the enemy in great distraction, he had an happy opportunity to
offer his Keeper his liberty, if he would carry him off, which was performed on
both parts accordingly.) That Division of the enemies which was between, which
the other Division of ours should have charged, was carried away in the
disorder of the other two; the one of those right hand Divisions of our Left
wing that did rout the front of the enemy, charged the Reserve too, and broke
them, the other Reserves of the enemy came on, and broke those Divisions of
ours that charged them; the Divisions of the left hand of the right wing were
likewise overborn, having much disadvantage, by reason of pits of water, and
other pieces of ditches that they expected not, which hindered them in their
order to Charge.

The enemy having thus worsted our left wing, pursued their advantage, and
Prince Rupert himself having prosecuted his success upon the left wing, almost
to Naseby town, in his return summoned the Train, offering them quarter, which
being well defended with the Firelocks, and a Rear-guard left for that
purpose, who fired with admirable courage on the Princes horse, refusing to
hearken to his offer, and the Prince probably perceiving by that time the
success of our Right wing of Horse, he retreated in great haste to the rescue
of the Kings Army, which he found in such a general distress, that instead of
attempting any thing in the rescue of them (being close followed in the Rear by
some of Commissary Generals, Col. Riches, Col. Fleetwoods, Major Huntingtons,
and Col. Butlers horse) he made up further, until he came to the ground where
the King was rallying the broken horse of his Left wing, and there joined with
them, and made a stand.

To return again to our right wing, which prosecuting their success, by this
time had beaten all the enemies horse quite behind their foot, which when they
had accomplished, the remaining business was with part to keep the enemies
horse from coming to the rescue of their foot, which were now all at mercy,
except one Tertia, which with the other part of the horse we endeavored to
break, but could not, they standing with incredible courage and resolution,
although we attempted them in the Flanks, Front and Rear, until such time as
the General called up his own Regiment of foot (the Lieut. General being
likewise hastening of them) which immediately fell in with them, with But-end
of Muskets (the General charging them at the same time with horse) and so broke
them. The enemy had now nothing left in the Field, but his horse, (with whom
was the King himself) which they had put again into as good order as the
shortness of their time, and our near pressing upon them would permit.

Charging in person the Blew Regimt. which kept to their Arms so stoutly.
The General (whom God preserved in many hazardous engagements of his person
that day) seeing them in that order, and our whole Army (saving some Bodies of
horse which faced the enemy) being busied in the execution upon the foot, and
taking, and securing prisoners, endeavored to put the Army again into as good
order as they could receive, to the perfecting of the work that remained: Our
foot were somewhat more then a quarter of a mile behind the horse, and
although there wanted no courage nor resolution in the horse themselves alone
to have charged the enemy, yet forasmuch as it was not judged fit to put any
thing to hazard, the business being brought (through the goodness of God) to
so hopeful an issue, It was ordered our horse should not charge the enemy
until the foot were come up; for by this time our foot that were disordered
upon the first Charge, being in shorter time then is well imaginable, rallyed
again, were coming up upon a fast march to join with our horse, who were again
put into two wings, within Carbine shot of the enemy, leaving a wide space for
the battle of foot to fall in, whereby there was framed, as it were in a
trice, a second good Batalia at the latter end of the day; which the enemy
perceiving, and that if they stood, they must expect a second Charge from our
Horse, Foot, and Artillery (they having lost all their Foot and Guns before)
and our Dragoons having already begun to fire upon their horse, they not
willing to abide a second shock upon so great disadvantage as this was like to
be, immediately ran away, both Fronts, and Reserves, without standing one stroke
more: Our horse had the Chase of them from that place, within two miles of
Leicester (being the space of fourteen miles) took many prisoners, and had the
execution of them all that way: The number of the slain we had not a certain
account of, by reason of the prosecution of our Victory, and speedy advance to
the reducing of Leicester: the prisoners taken in the field were about five
thousand, whereof were six Colonels, eight Lieut. Colonels, eighteen Majors,
seventy Captains, eighty Leiutenants, eighty Ensigns, two hundred other
inferior Officers, besides the Kings Footmen, and household servants, the rest
common Soldiers, four thousand five hundred. The enemy lost very gallant men,
and indeed their foot, commanded by the Lord Astley, were not wanting in
courage; the whole booty of the Field fell to the Soldier, which was very rich
and considerable, there being amongst it, besides the riches of the Court, and
Officers, the rich plunder of Leicester.

Their Train of Artillery was taken, all their Ordnance, (being brass Guns)
whereof two were Demi-Canon, besides two Morter-pieces, (the enemy got away not
one Carriage) eight thousand Arms and more, forty Barrels of powder, two
hundred horse, with their riders, the Kings Colors, the Duke of Yorks
Standard, and six of his Colors, four of the Queens white Colors, with double
Crosses on each of them, and near one hundred other Colors both of horse and
foot, the Kings Cabinet, the Kings Sumpter, many Coaches, with store of wealth
in them: It was not the least mercy in this Victory, that the Cabinet Letters,
which discover so much to satisfy all honest men of the intention of the
adverse party, fell likewise into our hands, and have been since published by
the Authority of the Parliament, to the view of the whole Kingdom.

The Field was about a mile broad where the battle was fought, and from the
outmost Flank of the right, to the left Wing, took up the whole ground.

Thus you have a true and exact relation of the work of this happy day.

1. The battle was fought much upon equal advantage, whether you respect the
numbers on each side, there being in that not 500. odds, or the ground it was
fought upon being on both sides Champaign, and in that respect equal, and the
wind at length favoring neither side more then other. But in this the enemy
had much the odds of us, that they had on their side not so few as fifteen
hundred Officers, that were old soldiers, of great experience through long
experience in foreign parts; when on the other hand, we had not ten Officers
that could pretend to any such thing, as the experience of a soldier, save
what this war had given them, being for the most part such, whose Religion,
Valor, and present Reason was their best Conduct; and herein God went beyond
our Enemies in their pride, and seeming friends, in their contempt of this Army.

2. Of how great consequence this Victory was to the whole Kingdom: That it may
the better appear, let us take a view of it, and suppose we beheld it through
the counter-prospective of the contrary event, as if the Enemy had had the
victory, and we been beaten; and then me thinks I see, not only this Army, the
only guardion of the Kingdom, lying on a heap, furnishing the enemy with
insulting Trophies, but also our party in the West ruined, and the enemy there
like a violent Torrent, carrying all before him. Me thinks I see the King and
Goring united, making a formidable Army, and marching up to the Walls of
London, encouraging their soldiers, as formerly, with the promise of the
spoil of that famous City. And if this success had been indulged them, and
London not denied, (as who should such an Army have asked it of) what could
have ensued worse or more! When once that City by such a fate had restored an
Emblem of undone Rome, when Caesar came against it, That The Senate shook,
the affrighted Fathers leave
Their Seats, and flying, to the Consuls give
Directions for the War; where safe to live,
What place to avoid they know not, whether ere
A blest-ripe wit could guide their steps, they bear,
The Amazed people forth in Troops, whom naught
So long had stird. -- Ingenti nec modo vulgus
Perculsum terrore pavet, sed curia, and ipsi
Sedibus exiliere Patres, invisaque Belli.
Consulibus fugiens mandat decreta Senatus.
Tunc quae tuta petant, and quae metuenda relinquant
Incerti, quocunque fugae tulit impetus, urgent
Praecipitem populum, serieque haerentia longa
Agmina prorumpunt.




And who needs any interpretation of this to have been, a being cast in our
Cause, and a loosing of our Charges. All this did God mercifully prevent by the
success of that battle, and turned over this condition to the enemy, and
thereby laid the happy foundation of all the blessed success we have had since.

He that shall not in this victory look beyond the instrument, will injuriously
withhold from God his due: he that does not behold God in the instruments, will
not know how to give him his due; for when he does actions by instruments, his
glory is to be seen in instruments: now had I only to deal with actions, I
might possibly by a competent expression give on account of them; but who may
undertake to represent the lively frame of an heightened soul, and the working
of the affections in such Heroic actions. The General, a man subject to the
like infirmities of body, as well as passions of mind with other men,
especially to some infirmities (contracted by former wounds) which however at
other times they may hinder that puissant and illustrious soul that dwells
within, from giving a character of its self in his countenance; yet when he
has come upon action, or been near an engagement, it has been observed,
another spirit has come upon him, another soul has looked out at his eyes; I
mean he has been so raised, elevated, and transported, as that he has been
not only unlike himself at other times, but indeed more like an Angel, then a
man. And this was observed of him at this time: now with what triumphs of
faith, with what exultation of spirit, and with what a joint shout of all the
affections God is received into that heart, whose eyes he uses as an Optic to
look through, and trouble a proud enemy, it self only is privy to? what high
transactions, what deep and endearing engagements pass mutually between God
and such a soul? (for certainly the most immediate worship gives not a greater
advantage) is better felt experimentally, then described historically; but such
a discovery of these things was made in his outward man at this Battle as
highly animated his Soldiers.

Lieutenant General Cromwell uses these expressions concerning Him, in his
Letter to the House of Commons:

The General served you with all faithfulness and honor; and the best
commendations I can give of him, is, That I dare say he attributes all to God,
and would rather perish, then assume any thing to himself, which is an honest
and thriving way; and yet as much for bravery may be given to him in this
action, as to a man.

I shall enlarge no further in this particular, but conclude, it was none of
the least pledges, none of the lowest speaking Providence betokening good
success to this Army, and promising much happiness to this Nation; GOD's
giving us such a General, and so giving out himself to our General.

The great share Lieutenant General Cromwell had in this action, who commanded
the Right wing of Horse, (which did such service, carrying the field before
them, as they did at Marston-moor) is so known and acknowledged, that envy it
self can neither detract, nor deny. One passage relating to his service in this
Battle, which I have received from those that well knew it, I shall commend to
this History: That he being come not above two days before out of the
Association, and (that day the battle was) attending the General in the field,
who was going to draw up for an engagement; He had the charge and ordering of
all the Horse cast upon him by the General unexpectedly, but a little before
the Battle; which he had no sooner received, but it was high time to apply
himself to the discharge of it: for before the Field-Officers could give a
tolerable account of the drawing up of the Army, the Enemy came on amain in
passing good order, while our Army was yet in disorder, or the order of it but
an Embrio: which the Lieut. General perceiving, was so far from being dismayed
at it, that it was the rise and occasion of a most triumphant faith, and joy in
him, expecting that GOD would do great things, by small means; and by the
things that are not, bring to naught things that are. A happy time, when the
Lord of hosts shall make his Tabernacle in the hearts and countenances of our
chief Commanders; from thence to laugh his enemies to destruction, and have
them in derision to confusion!

Had not Major genesis Skippon done gallantly, he had not received such an early
wound in his side; and had he not had a Spring of Resolution, he had not stayed
in the field, as he did, till the battle was ended; (for being desired by his
Excellency to go off the field, he answered, He would not stir, so long as a
man would stand.) That I mention not all those Officers and Soldiers
particularly, who behaved themselves so gallantly in this Action, is to avoid
emulation and partiality: I shall satisfy my self, to add concerning them,
and the whole business, the words of the General, and Lieutenant General, in
their several Letters to the Speaker of the house of Commons, with which I
shall conclude. Lieut. Genesis Cromwels close of his Letter to the Speaker of the
house of Commons.
Honest men served you faithfully in this action; Sir, they are trusty; I
beseech you in the name of God, not to discourage them: (which they have not
done, blessed be God, and I hope never will.) He proceeds, and wishes, This
action may beget thankfulness and humility in all that are concerned in it;
And concludes thus modestly himself, He that ventures his life for the liberty
of his Country, I wish he trust GOD for the liberty of his Conscience, and You
for the Liberty he fights for, etc. The close of the Generals Letter to the
Speaker.
All that I desire, says the General, is, That the honor of this great, never
to be forgotten mercy, may be given to GOD, in an extraordinary day of
Thanksgiving, and that it may be improved to the good of his Church, which
shall be faithfully endeavored by, Sir, Your most humble Servant, Thomas
Fairfax.

After the Battle was ended, and the Horse gone in pursuit; the Army marched (5
miles) that night, to Harborough, (the head-querter) Most of the Prisoners that
were taken in the fight, were that night brought into Harborough church, except
those that were wounded and sent to Northampton.

Among other Writings taken in the Battle, there was a Manuscript presented to
the General, (written by one Sir Edward Walker Herald of Arms) of the Kings
great Victories in this War; wherein there was one passage very observable:
That whereas he, taking occasion to speak of the Irish, calls them Rebels; the
King having perused the Book, among the alterations he had made therein in
diverse places with his own hand, in that place puts out Rebels, and writes over
the head, Irish, with his own hand, (so much care was there to correct and
qualify any Expression that might reflect on those blood-thirsty Rebels.)
There was also brought to the head-quarter, at wooden Image, in the shape of a
man, and in such a form, as they blasphemously called it the God of the
Roundheads; and this they carried in scorn and contempt of our Army, in a
public manner, a little before the Battle begun.

The next day, Colonel John Fiennes, with his Regiment, was sent up to London
by the General, with the Prisoners and Colors taken in the Fight; His Regiment
took 11. Colors in the Battle.
Who had a great share in the performance of that Day, (being placed with his
Regiment in the Right wing of Horse) carried himself gallantly, and was very
happy in his success.

CHAP. VI.
The Victory at Naseby improved, by pursuing the Enemy, who fled into Wales.
Leicester (not long before taken by the Enemy) summoned, and after preparations
for Storm, surrendered upon Articles. Some clamours of the Enemy for breach of
Articles, found to be unjust, and the charge retorted on them. A^ instance of
the Enemies desperate Profaneness, joined with barbarous and inhumane Cruelty.

THe Enemy thus driven out of the field, his Excellency gave Orders for the
Army, Horse, Foot, and Train, to march after them the next day, which was Lords
day, without any more intermission; the pursuing of the Victory, being of
parallel consequence with the getting it: In obeying of which Orders, the
readiness and cheerfulness of the Soldiers was admirable, and worthy our
observation and remembrance, That when in respect of their long and hard March
for many days together before the Battle, and the vehement and sharp battle
they had fought, they might well have pleaded for some time of refreshment; yet
no sooner was the Generals order given for marching, but they repaired all to
their Colors, and that very next day after the battle, marched to great Glyn,
the head-quarter, four miles short of Leicester. The Horse marched within a
mile of Leicester that night, and kept Guards, which so alarmed the Nobles and
Gentry that had fled thither for security, that they departed thence in much
haste, leaving the Lord Hastings to defend that place.

This day his Excellency received intelligence, that Sir John Gell, with about
2000 Horse, was on his march toward the Army, according to Orders formerly
sent him; as also that the King, with one part of the Routed horse, not judging
himself safe in Leicester, went thence that evening to Ashby-de-la-Zouch, where
he reposed himself some few hours: but understanding that our Army advanced,
and that our Horse pursued the chase; Mounted on horseback in the night, and
fled to Liechfield, and from thence into Wales, without any considerable stay,
(so great was the affright) the other part of the Rout being the Northern
horse, under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, fled the same night near Newark; both
passing so, that it was the wonder of all men how they (being in such a tired
and distracted condition) could escape Sir John Gels horse, who the same day
were on their march from Nottingham toward Leicester.

This day furnished his Excellency with a full intelligence of the state both
of our friends, and our enemies affairs in the West, by means of the
contrivement of Scout-Master-generall, the manner thus: A Spy of his, formerly
employed by him to Secretary Nicholas in Oxford, was the day that the Army rose
from before it, sent to him again, (yet as one coming of his own accord) to
give him intelligence, that the Army would that morning march away (a thing
they in Oxford knew well enough) it being conceived that either the Secretary
would send him, or he might find some opportunity to go into the West, where
General Goring then lay with his Army about Taunton, and bring us the
intelligence we desired; accordingly it fell out; Into the West he was sent,
first to Bath, where the Prince of Wales then was, to whom he brought the first
news of the Parliaments Army rising from before Oxford, from thence (bearing
the reward of ten pieces from the Prince) to General Goring about Taunton, who
received him and the news very gladly, and looking upon him as a fit instrument
to be employed to the King, then about Leicester, and as they supposed,
intending Northward; deal with him (as about a business of great concernment)
to carry a Packet of Letters from him, the Prince, and his Council, to the
King; He with some seeming difficulty suffered himself to be persuaded,
received the Packet, brought them to his Excellency fair sealed up,
discovering to him the true state of the Enemies Armies and affairs in the
West: The Letters from the Lord Goring to the King signifying, how that in
three weeks time (nine days whereof was then expired) he was confident to
master our Forces at Taunton, and by consequence, to settle the West of England
in an absolute posture for his Majesty's service, and march up with a
considerable Army to his assistance; advising the King by all means in the mean
time to stand upon a defensive posture, and not to engage till his forces were
joined with his Majesty; Had these Letters bin delivered to the King (as they
might have bin but for this defeatment) in all probability he had declined
fighting with us for the present, and staid for those additionals, which would
have been a far greater hazard: this intelligence, did withal much quicken us
to make speed to relieve Taunton; yet being so near Leicester, and Leicester in
all probability being easily to be made ours, (considering the fear that they
within were possessed withal by the loss of the day at Naseby, besides the want
of men thereby (in all likelihood) to make good their Works, it was resolved
first to assay that, accordingly Monday June 16. about noon the whole Army came
before the Town: The General sent a Summons to the Lord Hastings, to surrender
the Garrison, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein, who returned
a peremptory answer, as if he meant to defend it to the last man; whereupon a
Council of War being called, it was resolved to storm the place: warrants were
sent to the hundreds to bring in ladders, carts, hay, straw, and other things
fitting for a storm; wherein the country was very forward to give assistance.

Tuesday June 17. great store of ladders were brought in, a battery was raised,
upon which two Demy-Cannon and a whole Culverine taken at Naseby were planted,
which played upon an old work called the Newark; being the very same Guns which
the King not many days before had used against the same place: The Lord
Hastings now beginning to perceive his condition was like to be desperate, sent
a Trumpeter with a Letter to the General, desiring a parley concerning the
surrender of the town, which his Excellency desirous to save blood, hearkened
unto: Commissioners were appointed to treat (on our side Colonel Pickering,
and Colonel Rainsborough) Hostages on both sides were given; the Treaty begun
that evening, and held debate till twelve a clock that night, and was concluded
upon these Articles:

1. TThat the Lord Loughborough shall have quarter granted him, and have
protection for his Person to be safely conveyed to the Garrison of
Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 2. That all Field Officers, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels,
Sergeants, Majors, and Captains, and Lieutenants of Horse, (but not of Foot)
shall march away with their own particular single Horse and Arms, with
protections for their own Persons. 3. That all the rest of the Officers shall
be conveyed safely to the Garrison of Lichfield with Staves only, and no other
weapons in their hand. 4. That all common Soldiers have quarter only for their
lives, and be conveyed to Lichfield without any other weapons, save only staves
in their hands. 5. That before 10 of the clock the said morning June the 18.
the Governor of the Town, and the Lord Loughborough and all the rest of the
Officers, and Soldiers march out of the Garrison according to the agreement
aforesaid. 6. That Sir Thomas Fairfax be permitted to enter in at 10 of the
clock the said Wednesday morning aforesaid, with his Forces, and take
possession of the Garrison. 7. That all the Pieces of Canon, great and small
now in the Garrison of Leicester, be left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 8. That all
the Arms, and Ammunition now in Leicester be left to Sir Thomas Fairfax, save
only what is agreed to for the Officers of Horse aforesaid. 9. That all the
Provisions, Colors, Bag and Baggage be also left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 10
That all the Horse (save only those excepted for the Officers aforesaid) that
are in the Garrison of Leicester be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the
service of the Parliament. 11. That all the officers and soldiers have quarter
for their lives. 12. That all the Prisoners of War that are in Leicester at the
same time, be released and set free to serve the Parliament.
The Guards and Sentinels of the gate house prison in the Newarke, hearing of
the conclusion of the Articles, about four a clock on Wednesday morning went
away from their duty, and left their Arms behind them, and the prison door
open, whereupon the prisoners went out, and finding the Enemy a plundering,
they fell a plundering too. About seven a clock all their guards were drawn
off, the soldiers on the Line threw down their Arms, quit their Posts, and
the gates were opened, which gave invitation to diverse of our straggling
soldiers to get into the Town at the Ports, and over the works: Complaint
hereof being made to his Excellency, by some from the Lord Hastings (or
Loughborow) of the violation of the Articles by our soldiers: His Excellency
sent to the Lord Loughborow to keep all his men upon their guards, and if any
offered violently to enter the Town before the time, to fire upon them, and
immediately issued out a Proclamation, commanding the punctual observance of
the Articles by his own soldiers, under pain of death. But the Lord Hastings
instead of standing upon his guard (according to the Articles, till ten of the
clock that morning, which he ought to have done, whereby he might have
prevented that inconveniency which fell out, and have performed his Articles in
delivering the Town to his Excellency with the Arms and Ammunition:) mounted
on horseback in the morning with diverse Gentlemen (officers and others) and
left the town some hours before the time appointed for his marching forth; so
that when our Commissioners came according to appointment to see the Articles
punctually performed, they found the Lord Hastings was gone, and all the town
in a confusion; but the soldiers were commanded off, and things were presently
settled in good order, and about eleven a clock that day, the Army entered the
town, where we found diverse Commanders of note, viz. Serjeant-Major-Generall
Eyres, Colonel Lisle, Lieutenant Colonel Mouldsworth, Lieutenant Colonel
Pemberton, Major Naylor, Major Trollop, besides diverse persons of quallity, all
wounded in the battle.

There were taken in the town, fourteen piece of Ordnance, thirty Colors, two
thousand Arms, five hundred horse, fifty barrels of Powder, and other
Ammunition, in a good proportion: The poor Inhabitants were overjoyed at their
deliverance, though in a sad Condition, being so plundered by the Enemy at
first taking the town, that many had nothing left but the bare walls, who
before had their shops and houses well furnished: the Mayors house only escaped
at that time, which now suffered for it: There is one piece of eminent
wickedness, fit to be transmitted to the notice of the world, not only for its
relation to this story, but to rectify their consciences, who have been led
with too good an opinion of the Enemy; and it is attested by persons of good
credit and quality; It is concerning Colonel Thomas a Welch-man, a Papist, who
was slain at the battle of Naseby: There were two brothers of them; the other
was a Lieutenant Colonel taken prisoner in the battle, the former was
conceived to be the man, by the description of some of the inhabitants of
Leicester who have under their hands given this information. That the next day
after the King had taken Leicester by storm, this Colonel Thomas came to the
Jail, where the prisoners they had taken at the entering the Town were put, and
called for the prisoners, and commanded such as were willing to serve the King,
to come to one side of the room, diverse of them coming accordingly, he
commands them one by one to kneel down, and swear by Jesus I Will serve the King,
which some of them accordingly did: He not satisfied therewith, required them
to swear God-dammee I Will serve the King, affirming publicly, he was not fit to
serve the King, that refused that Oath, which they refusing, he drew his Sword,
cut them in the Head, in the Head, in the Arms, and other parts of the Body,
wounding them in a most cruel manner; some of the Town of Leicester (amongst
others) were the persons on whom this cruelty was exercised, and remain still
to this day maimed by these wounds.

Wednesday June 18. The Treasure being come down, the Army was mustered, and
the Town was settled in some order, and an Express sent up unto the Parliament,
with the Conditions upon which Leicester was surrendered. Intelligence came this
day, that the King was gone toward Hereford; it was taken into consideration
to send horse after him, but the thoughts of the West occasioned the deferring
the debate thereof for the present.

Thursday June 19. Complaint being made to his Excellency by some of the Kings
party, that they had been pillaged by our soldiers, his Excellency declared,
whosoever should be found guilty thereof, they should suffer the extremity of
that punishment that belonged to the violators and betrayers of the justice and
honor of the Army, and therefore willed they might be informed against to the
Judge Advocate of the Army. But upon examination of diverse witnesses, his
Excellency saw cause to charge the breach of Articles on the Lord Loughborough,
and the injuries he complained of to his own failour, and therefore to demand
reparation of Him; and the carriage on the enemies part appearing so foul in
many particulars, which were here too tedious to mention, the General thought
fit to detain the Hostages; offering notwithstanding an examination of the
business by Commissioners, and engaging himself to make good whatsoever could
be demanded of him in Justice and Honor, as he should expect the like from
them. But they, loath to trust to the issue, answered not the meeting of our
Commissioners; his Excellency therefore for a time detained the Hostages, till
afterward, upon noble considerations, the indemnity of his own, and the
Armies honor being sufficiently cautioned, he was pleased to release them.

ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY.
PART. II.
CHAP. I.
His Excellency with the Army, marching Westward to relieve Taunton the second
time; taking in Hiworth Garrison by the way: Curbing the Clubmen, the retaking
of Ilchester, and the brave Fight at Langport.

NO sooner had the Army done the work that God had for them thereabouts, but
they marched toward Warwick, solicitous in nothing so much, as which way they
might best advance the public service; and although (being very doubtful
whether it were better to follow the King, and hinder his recruiting, and
raising a new Army in Wales, or go down to the West to relieve the other part
of our Army, who had deserved no other at our hands, and stood in great need of
it;) who should they by any unhappy blow be ruined, as they were certainly in
great straits (the enemy being, in common report, twelve thousand, and Major
General Massey, who was sent to their relief, hardly three thousand; whereby
it was thought that Goring might both keep off him, and keep up our men about
Taunton) it would have been of sad consequence to the whole Kingdom; for then
would the enemy have possessed the whole West (except the Garrisons of Lime,
Poole, and Weymouth) entire to themselves: The consequence of which, in respect
of the Trade and Riches of those counties, the considerable Towns and Ports of
both sides, both toward France and Ireland, seemed with a great deal of reason
to persuade our present march thither; and being desirous, in a business of
that importance, not to determine themselves, they had sent to the Parliament,
and Co^mittee of both Kingdoms, to have their resolution upon it, declaring
their willingness to be swayed by their advice, and counsel: Yet that they
might not lose any time, they marched on to Marlborough (with a disposition,
either to go over Severn at Gloucester, toward the King in Herefordshire, or
to move Westward, as they should be ordered) where they receiving notice from
the Committee of both Kingdoms, that Letters were sent to the Scotch Army to
march toward Worcester, and that they had their consent, and the Houses also,
to march Westward; the Army bent their course that way, having yet so tender a
consideration of Gloucestershire, that they sent Colonel Butlers Regiment of
horse to lie before Barkley-Castle, to keep in Sir Charles Lucas (an active
enemy, and good soldier) whilst the Gloucestershire Troops might look to the
security of that part of their Country beyond Severn. This Regiment was sent
under quarter Master General Fincher, a stout man, and a good soldier, and
one that knew the Country well, (Colonel Butler and his Major, Major Horton
being then under cure of their wounds received at Naseby.) In five days march,
viz. by Thursday June 26. the Army reached as far as Lechlade, where some of
the enemies Garrisons were gathering Contribution. Our forlorn hope fell upon
them, shot Lieutenant Colonel Not, took four prisoners of Radcot Garrison, and
rescued some Country people whom they were carrying away prisoners.

Hiworth taken.
Friday June 27. The Army marched to Wanburrow, and in the way made an halt,
and drew up before Hiworth garrison, (being a Church fortified by a Line and
Bulwarks) summoned the place, Major Hen the Governor refused to yield, they
planted their Ordnance, men were designed to storm, who beaing ready to fall
on, he took took down his bloody Colors, and sounded a Parley, and yielded
upon quarter. The soldiers had good booty in the Church, took seventy
prisoners, and eighty arms. This place standing convenient in a Line for the
garrison of Malmsbury, the General appointed the Governor of Malmsbury to
continue the place a garrison, for the better in larging the Parliaments
quarters.

From Wanburrow the Army marched to Burchalk in Wiltshire, by three stages,
without any considerable action, save that on the Lords day (June 29 while they
rested at Marlburrow) Spies were sent from thence to Taunton, to give them
notice of the Armies advance for their relief.

Marlburrow to Almsbury 14 miles; that day being a day for a Fair to be kept
at Marlburrow; some straglers stayed behind the Army, whom Deuteronomy from the
Devizes surprised. Thence on Tuesday July 1. they marched to Burchalke 12
miles, and being drawn up that morning to a Randezvouz at a place called
Stonage, marched in Battalia upon Salisbury plain: some Officers and others of
the Army who went-out of the way through Salisbury, found the townsmen very
peremptory, being confident of their own strength, by their association with
other counties, in their meetings of Club-men, wearing white Ribbonds in their
hatts, (as it were in affront of the Army) not sparing to declare themselves
absolute Neuters (or rather friends to the enemy) moreover news came this night
that the Club-men had risen upon some of Major-Generall Massies forces; that
his men had done some execution upon them, and that they with much confidence
required reparation.

Wednesday July 2. the Army marched to Blandford twelve miles, and in their
march took Mr. Penruddock, and one Fussell, two Captains of the Club-men, who
being examined and convinced of their error, in causing such unlawful
assemblies without authority, promised never to appear any more in that
business, and thereupon were released.

In a narrow lane in this days march was a soldier executed, (one of the
forementioned straglers) being by the country apprehended and accused, for
plundering of a Gentleman passing on the way near Marlburrow.

That night Intelligence met the General at Blanford, that Goring had drawn
off to Black-downe and burnt his hutts; that some of our Spies sent to give
them Intelligence, were got into Taunton, and gave them notice of our coming.

Thursday July 3. the Army marched from Blanford to Dorchester 12 miles, a very
hot day, where Colonel Sidenham governor of Weymouth (whose parts and
resolution showed in the defense and recovery of that place, deserves not to be
forgotten) met the General, and gave him information of the condition of those
parts, and of the great danger of the Club-risers, who would not suffer (so
high were they grown) either Contribution or victuals to be carried to the
Parliaments Garrisons. That night Mr. Hollis, the chief leader of the Clubmen,
with some others of their leaders, desired a Let-passe from the General, to
present a Petition to the King and Parliament; the Petition being read, and
found to be of a strange nature, the matter was debated, their design appeared
to be desperately evil against the Parliament: Hollis peremptory in his
opinion, not to be convinced, affirming himself to be one of their leaders,
and that it was fit the people should show their strength: they were promised
they should have an answer in writing the next morning; They were so strong,
and withal so confident of their strength at that time, that it was held a
point of prudence to be fair in demeanor toward them for a while, for if in
case we should engage with Goring, and some of our men be put to the Rout,
these Club-men would be more cruel then the Enemy, and knock our men on the
heads as they should fly for safety; and some of them did not stick to say, we
know our own strength to be such, that we are able both against King and
Parliament to defend our selves, and to do more if need require; and indeed if
this had not been crushed in the Egg, it had on an instant run all over the
Kingdom, and might have been destructive to the Parliament. The King being
assured, if this third Party had so prevailed, as to be in a condition to give
a Law to either side, it would have been no disadvantage to his affairs, being
indeed raised, many of them by Commission from him, and countenanced by a
neutrall party within our selves.

This night more certain and particular Intelligence came, that Goring had
drawn off his men to Black-Downe, to invite them in Taunton to sally out, that
he might take advantage to surprise them; but failing of his expectation,
returned back again to his former quarters about Taunton, and made some slight
attempt upon our Party there, but to little purpose. Our Foot hearing that
Goring was fallen on again, were eager to march all that night, after 12 miles
march that day, which was also but the moity of 62. miles march in five days
before, so far did their compassion to Taunton, and our party there carry them
beyond consideration of themselves.

This day Intelligence was, that the Club-men were risen against the Lyme
forces, and were engaged, and many of them slain, and taken the Governors
brother, (Major Ceeley, a stout man, hardly escaping.) Friday July 4. Hollis
the Club-man received his answer in writing, which with the Petitions were
transmitted to the Parliament, which for the Readers satisfaction, but
especially, that we may be affected with this great mercy of God, in checking
this great mischeife, and Royal design, I shall insert the extract of their
Petitions, with the Generals answer to them, that in the dangerousnesse of
their positions, as in a glass, and by the help of the Generals answer, you
may see the greatness of the deliverance. In the Armies passage from Blanford
to Dorchester came four Agents of the Club-men of Dorsetshire and Wiltshire;
the chief Speaker was Mr. Hollis of Dorsetshire, brother to him of Salisbury:
their business was to procure a pass from the General, for these persons to go
to the King and Parliament with petitions; to the King were to go Docter Henry
Goche of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Mr. Thomas Bromwell Divines, John
St. Lo, Peter Hoskins, Esquiers, Mr. Thomas Young an Attorney, and Mr. Robert
Pawlet Gentleman. To the Parliament, Mr. Melchizadeck Waltham, Mr. Richard Hook
Club-divines, Thomas Trenchard, Robert Calliford, Esquires, George Hawles,
Richard Newman, Gentlemen. Mr. Hollis tendered to the General the Petitions,
so to be conveyed; as also the Articles of Association: the brief account of
both is this; the Articles were, That the Associates provide Arms, set
watches, be quiet with them that are so, lay hold on disorderly soldiers,
bring them to the next garrisons, not to refuse quarter and contribution to
their ability, till their Petitions be delivered, not to favor either party,
nor to protect any not associated. The heads of the Petitions were, to desire a
renewed treaty, with a Cessation, as also that the Garrisons of Dorset and
Wiltshire be put into their hands, till the King and Parliament agree about
their disposal; that they be free from all charge, but the maintenance of
those garrisons; that all laws not repealed, be in force and executed by the
ordinary Officers; that all men who desire it, may lay down Arms; that others
that have absented themselves from their dwellings, may have free liberty to
return and live at home.

After speech had with them, and some consultation what to do in the business:
It pleased the General to return his answer in writing, to this purpose.

Although the Paper brought to me, being not subscribed, cannot challenge any
answer, yet to clear my self from any averseness, to the satisfaction of the
Country, who are pretended to be interested in these Petitions, I return this:

That my affections, and the affections of this Army are as much inclined to
peace, as any men's whatsoever; and we undertake the War for no other end, but
the establishing of a firm and happy peace, by opposing the enemies thereof;
and that I shall be ready, so far as concerns me, to further all lawful and
fit means to procure it: But having seen the Petitions, upon which a Let-passe
is desired, I must profess my self not so well satisfied with some things
contained in them, as to concur to their delivering by any act of mine: In
particular, in that a Cessation is desired; whilst by Letters written by the
King and Queen, taken at the late battle of Naseby, it evidently appears, that
contracts are already made for the bringing in ten thousand French, and six
thousand Irish. It is further desired, that the Garrisons in these parts,
whereof three are Seaports, should be delivered up to the Petitioners; which
to grant, were for the Parliament to acquit part of the trust reposed in them
by the Kingdom; and considering these foreign preparations, to run very great
hazard to those Ports themselves, and to the whole Kingdom. Thirdly, it is
propounded, that liberty be given to all soldiers to disband, and to return to
their home, if they desire it; which may with equal Justice be desired by all
parts of the Kingdom, and so the Parliament made unable to manage the War,
before peace settled.

These considerations, with some other yet to be debated, will not allow me to
grant the desire of the Letter: But as for that part of the Petition which
declares the grievances of the Country by plunder and violence, committed
either by Garrisons or Armies: I do hereby promise and undertake for the
Garrisons and Armies under the command of the Parliament, that whatsoever
disorders are committed by them, upon complaint making known the offenses, and
persons, justice shall be done, and satisfaction given: As also, I shall
endeavor that the Parliaments Garrisons may be regulated according to any
reasonable agreement with the Country; and without doubt the Parliament will
cause them to be slighted, so soon as the condition of those parts, and the
public good shall permit: And that the Army under my command shall be ordered
as may be most for the good and advantage of these Counties, and of the whole
Kingdom; of which some reasonable testimony is already given, in their quiet
and orderly passage through these, and other Counties, without many of those
complaints which usually follow Armies.

I further desire, that in the publishing this my answer to your request, all
assembling the people to public Rendezvo^z may be forborne, and that Copies
hereof may be dispersed to the several Parishes, that the Country may be
acquainted therewith.

THO: FAIRFAX.

If this would not satisfy these men, their own Clubs would in time have
beaten reason into them: But to leave them, and proceed with my Story.

The Army marched that day from Dorchester to Beauminster, the Train and most
of the Foot quartered on the top of an hill, some few in Beauminster town, a
place of the pittifullest spectacle that man can behold, hardly an house left
not consumed with fire; the town being fired by some of the enemy in five
places at once, when Prince Maurice was there, by reason of a falling out
between the French and Cornish. Intelligence was positive that night, that
Goring had quite drawn off the siege from Taunton, and was come to Ilmister,
and as that night his quarter would be Summerton: Whereupon his Excellency sent
a party of horse to Crookhorn, who took some of his soldiers prisoners, and
brought them away to the General at Beauminster, who confessed no less then
what we had heard, that the siege was raised, and that Goring was marched
toward Langport. Thus is Taunton the second time relieved, and our party there
delivered from an eminent danger, which they feared, if we had not come thus
seasonably to them (being greatly distressed both for Ammunition and Victuals.)
In maintaining the place this siege, we lost Colonel Floyd, and Colonel
Richbell, both of them faithful experienced soldiers; and some officers more:
In exchange of whom the Enemy lost many Officers, and persons of quality; one
of them of more note, viz. Sir John Digby, brother to Sir Kenelm Digby,
received there his Mortal wound, of which he afterward dyed.

But the Enemy flying, what was the Army to do but follow? And so they did on
the morrow, a very hot reason, the foot weary with their long and tedious
march; the carriage-horses tired out, the way ill and narrow; (being all
enclosure) they marched that day but to Crookhorn, some six miles; but here
Intelligence came that made them pull up their stumps, (as weary as they were)
after that the Army was come into Crookhorn, they heard that our horse sent
under the command of Colonel Fleetwood, had fallen on their Rear, taken some
Prisoners, and the great bodies were like to engage; whereupon three Regiments
more were commanded to march up and assist them, if there should be cause; two
Regiments of foot also being ordered for that service, notwithstanding their
weary march, leapt for joy; that they were like to be engaged, and according to
orders marched from Crookhorne (after they had rested an hour) to Pederton
that night; the Enemy having pulled down Pederton Bridge, and made breast-works
on the other side, upon our first approach with the party under Colonel
Fleetwood, deserted the pass: We instantly made up the Bridge, and marched over
it till we came nere Ilchester, and another party to Load-bridge where the
Enemy kept the pass with a strong guard: the General and Leiutenant-Generall
mounted instantly, and rode from Crookhorne after the forces, to order them, if
an engagement; but the enemy standing upon the advantage of the pass, avoided
it; the General having appointed strong guards at Pederton, and Martock,
returned back to Crookhorn, where some of the Commanders of Taunton met the
General, and mutual congratulations passed betwixt them and the Army by
occasion of this timely relief of Taunton the second time: The valor,
diligence, and fidelity of Colonel Welden, with the rest of those Commanders
engaged with him in the defense of that besieged place, deserves to be
expressed at large; but for want of a relation of their proceedings during that
siege, I must content my self only to mention their service with honor: As
also the good service of the Horse commanded by Colonel Graves, who in several
Sallies upon the enemy were very successful.

Lords day, July 6. the Army resting at Crookhorn, and the rest of their
quarters; about four in the afternoon, (six in the evening, twelve at night,
and two in the morning) the General had certain intelligence by his Spies,
confirmed by several hands, that the enemy continued still at Long- Sutton,
keeping a guard at Load-bridge, and making good the garrison at Ilchester and
Langport, the two passes upon the River, and had broken down the Bridge toward
the town of Evil, higher up the River; whereupon orders were given for Drums
to beat by four in the morning. And accordingly, Monday July 7. the Foot were
drawn out by six of the clock to a Rendezvous, in a field about a mile from
Crookhorn, in the way to Pederton. The General, and Lieutenant General went
with a Party, and viewed the Pass at Load-bridge: Our horse appearing in great
numbers, gave the enemy an Alarm, whereupon they drew up their Foot, and marched
some Regiments from Load-bridge, along the River side to Ilchester, fearing we
should storm that place, our horse and theirs skirmishing upon the Meadows near
the River by parties all that day. A Council of war was called in the Field,
to consider what course to take to engage the enemy, who keeping himself beyond
the River, and having the Garrisons of Ilchester, Langport, Borough, and
Bridgewater, there was no possible coming over upon that side; to force our
passage in that place where the enemy stood in good order on the other side the
River to receive us, was a business of exceeding difficulty, it being also a
Moorish ground. Upon the right hand the enemy had broken down the Bridge at
Evil, keeping a guard of horse upon it, and all the Bridges upon that side, so
that there seemed to be no passage convenient for us, till we came to the head
of the river about Sherborn, which would prove a difficult, and long march;
upon which it was resolved to march the greatest part of the Army to Evil, and
there to force our passage, leaving still a convenient number both of horse and
foot, over against Ilchester and Load-Bridge, to engage the enemy, in case he
should attempt to advance on this side; accordingly our foot marched to Evil,
the head-quarter for that night; we were no sooner come there, but the enemies
horse retreated to Ilchester; Orders were given to make up the bridge, which
was speedily done: July the 8. early in the morning certain Intelligence was
brought to the Army, by one of their spies (sent for that purpose into the
Enemies Army) that the enemy (hearing the pass at Evil was gained by our
forces,) retreated toward Langport with the Army, quit Load-Bridge, burnt
diverse fair houses there. Colonel Phillips the Governor of Ilchester in the
night time, quit the town, leaving the works standing undemolished, only the
Bridewell, a place the enemy had fortified, they set on fire, which was quickly
quenched by the Inhabitants.

This day the Army declining to march over the pass at Evil, hearing
Ilchester was quit, marched back toward Ilchester, upon the same side the
river, and quartered there that night, where no provisions were left for our
soldiers. Intelligence also came, that whilst we went on the other s^de,
Goring being drawn down to Langport, had drawn a great part of his Army
toward Taunton, as if he intended to surprise the Town, thinking to find them
in security: whereupon the General sent Major-Generall Massey after Goring
with his own brigade of horse, and a considerable strength of Horse and
Dragoons of his own Army; and moreover the General took care that a
considerable party of horse more should be sent after those horse, as a reserve
if need were.

This day Colonel Butlers Regiment commanded by Major Fincher,
quarter-master-Gen. of our horse, came up to the Army, and in their march from
Barkly Castle, did very good service; first at Dursly, they entertained Sir
Charles Lucas, coming to beat up their quarters, killed the Captain of the
forlorn hope, after that charged the party with two troops, killed ten (whereof
two Captains) took 39 prisoners, hurt Sir Charles Lucas himself; from thence
they came to Hyworth, where the enemy from Farringdon had entered the town,
whom they beat out, and delivered to the Governor the quiet possession of his
garrison; from thence to the Devizes, where they took some horse, and so to
Dorchester, where they took some of Sherborn horse, and so came to the Army
very seasonably, the Army being nearer an engagement then they expected.

Wednesday July 9. The Army marched to Long-Sutton, news came there that
Major-Gen. Massey was near upon an engagement; the General immediately gave
command that Colonel Montague should march with 2000 musketeers to his
assistance, (being in an enclosed country) who marched accordingly, but the
engagement was over before he could come up, and the welcome news was brought
that Gorings party which the Major-Gen. had there engaged, was beaten, many
slain, nine Colors and 300 horse taken, Colonel Cook a Gentleman of much
temper and resolution, carried himself gallantly in that service, and received
a shot through both cheeks: this afternoon ours had continual skirmishing with
the enemies horse at a pass, a mile on this side Langport, took a French
Cornet and his Colors, a Dutchman and a Spaniard prisoners.

Thursday July 10. A council of War was held, what course we should take to
force the enemy to fight, seeing he stood upon his advantage, having the passes
upon the River, and might fight or fly at pleasure; whilst the counsel of
War were in debate thereof, not knowing what to do (the enemy being still at
his election, whether to fight or not) Intelligence came that the enemy was
advanced with his foot from Langport to the pass, and had lined the hedges
thick with musketeers, and drawn up his Ordnance; this resolved ved the
question at the council of War, without putting it; whereupon the General and
Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell, and all the Officers instantly mounted, rode up
to the field, perceived the enemy to put himself in a posture for an
engagement; instantly the Army was ordered to be put in Battalia, the forlorn
hope of horse and foot drew out, Ordnance were drawn down to places of
advantage, messengers were sent to recall most of the horse and foot, lately
sent to assist Major-Gen. Massey, but before they could come up, our Ordnance
began to play (a good while before the foot engaged) doing great execution upon
the body of the enemies Army, both horse and foot, who stood in good order upon
the hill, (about musket shot from the pass) and forcing them to draw off
their Ordnance, and their horse to remove their ground; Our foot advanced down
the hill to the pass, and with admirable resolution chargeed the enemy from
hedge to hedge, till they got the pass; the enemies horse upon this drew down
toward us, whereupon our horse advanced over the pass up the hill to the
enemy; the Forlorne-hope of horse commanded by Major Bethell, gave a valiant
and brave charge indeed, broke that body that charged him, and the next
reserve: our reserve of horse that was commanded by Major Desborough, very
resolutely charged the next standing bodies of the enemy so home, that
instantly they put them to a disorderly retreat, and our musketeers came close
up to our horse, firing upon the enemy, whereupon their Regiments of white
Colors; and black Colors of foot, before ever they engaged, marched away
apace; the Forlorn under Major Bethell, and those under Major Desborough, were
going in pursuit of the chase, but receiving orders to stay till more bodies of
horse were come up, that the pursuit might be orderly, and with good reserves,
in case the enemy should face about, and charge again, (which was not
impossible) they obeyed their orders, as good soldiers will, though it check
their sweetest pleasure (as to pursue a flying enemy was no less:) when the
enemy had fled about two miles they made a stand in a plain green field,
(where the passage out was narrow) called Aller Drove, but received only a
piece of a charge, and then seeing our bodies comeing on orderly and fast,
faced about, and never stood after: the passes being narrow in many places, and
the ditches being deep and wide, especially at that place where they first
faced about, many horses of the Enemies were lost in the ditches, whereof our
soldiers recovered store, and the riders got into the meadows, hoping to
escape, but could not. We pursued the Enemy within two miles of Bridgewater,
(whither the enemy fled,) doing execution upon them all the way (being eight
miles in length) took about 1400 prisoners, about 1200 horse, and diverse
Officers of quality, Colonel Henningham, Colonel Slingsby (the General of
Gorings Ordnance) were also taken; about thirty Colors of Horse and Foot: and
on the other hand, it was a victory as cheap to us, as dear to them; we lost no
Officer, not twenty common soldiers; some fourteen or sixteen of Major Bethels
troop were hurt, and himself shot in the right hand. No sooner was the Enemy
put to a retreat, but in great confusion they quitted Langport, into which many
of them had fled (a strong garrison, naturally well fortified, being about half
a mile from the place of the fight) and set it on fire, but by the industry of
the soldiers and Townsmen it was quenched. The Enemy with a body of Foot
drawing along with them two pieces of Ordnance by the way of Langport, were
pursued by Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the Ordnance and most of the Foot
taken. And thus you have in a very short space an account of a very great
action.

CHAP. II.
The particulars of that gallant service, The storming of Bridgewater.

AFter this battle the army marched five miles to Middlesay in the way to
Bridgewater; the bold carriage of Hollis the Club-man, was very notorious, who
the morning (an hour) before the fight began, came with a Petition to the
General, from his fellows and followers: withal telling the General in plain
terms, that if he did not give them better satisfaction then what he had yet
given them, they must take another course. His Petition, upon reading, was
found of that nature, and his impudent carriage so insufferable withal, that
the General committed him to the Marshal; but he made a shift to get away, so
soon as he saw the day was lost. The next day, the whole Army, horse and foot,
with the Train, were drawn up in Westonmoor, otherwise called Pensy pound, two
miles from Bridgewater. The Countrymen thereabouts, that had been vexed with
the Cavaliers, hearing of the defeat given unto them, and fearing to taste of
their former cruelties, rose in great numbers, and with their colors, clubs
and arms, appeared upon Knol-hill; which being made known to the General, he
with the Lieutenant genesis and other Officers, marched up to them, who seemingly
received him with joy, and in token thereof gave a volley of shot: whence after
^ome conference with them, and their Leader, who made a Neutral speech, the
General returned, and the Army that night went to quarter, the head-quarter
that night being appointed at Chedsay, within two miles of Bridgewater.

Friday, July 11. Colonel Weldens Brigade was commanded on the North side of
the Town toward Devonshire, and the rest of the Army on this side toward
Chedsay; the guards being set, the General, with the Lieutenant genesis went to
view the Town, which they found to be very strong, standing in a valley, yet
glorying in the equality of its level with the ground about it, there being not
a clod that could afford any advantage against that place; the Fortifications
very regular and strong, the Ditch about it very deep, and about thirty foot
wide, which for a great part about the town, was every Tide filled up to the
brim with water, the compass of ground within the line and works not great,
very well manned, having in it about 1800 Soldiers to defend it; within the
town was a castle of indifferent strength, there was planted on the several
Batteries about 40 piece of Ordnance; well stored with ammunition and victuals,
being a magazine for all the petty garrisons thereabouts.

Saturday, July 12. The Army continued in quarters, and new places for guards
were appointed.

Burrough-garrison, taken by Col. Okey.
Lords day, July 13. We rested at Chedsay; and Colonel Okey having, from that
day the battle was at Langport, besieged Burrough-garrison with his Dragoons,
had the same surrendered unto him upon quarter, wherein were 140 prisoners, the
Officers being promised fair usage.

Monday, July 14. a Council of war was called, great debate whether to storm
the town, or not: Some inclination to it, but no positive resolution;
Notwithstanding preparations were made in order to a storm, the Soldiers
cheerfully made their faggots, and were drawn in readiness for a storm, but upon
further consideration were for that time drwn back to their quarters; and more
time being taken, there were 8 long Bridges, betwixt 30 and 40 foot length,
devised to be made by Lieutenant General Hamond, the Lieutenant General of the
Ordnance (a Gentleman of approved fidelity, and of a most dexterous and ripe
invention for all such things) which were approved of by the Commanders and
Officers, and accordingly Ordered to be made, and were of very great use to the
Soldier in the storm.

This day, the General going over the river to view the posts on the other
side, was graciously delivered from a great danger he was near unto by a sudden
surprisal of the Tide called the Eager, where he very narrowly escaped drowning.

Tuesday, July 15. the General went to Glastenbury, and returned that night to
the head quarter.

Wednesday July 16. a Counsel of war was again called, and several propositions
were made for the framing of our Army, and reduction of the town, both being of
great consequence, and vehemently desired by us. To rise with our whole Army
and leave the town unattempted, was conceived to be very prejudicial to our
future progress; To sit down before it (being a place of that strength, and we
not sure to carry it) leaving the Enemy at liberty to rally his broken forces,
seemed very hazardous.

The blocking of it up by Forts on both sides with a part of our Army was
propounded; but the difficulty of laying a Bridge over the River through the
violence of the current, (which yet was necessary for the maintaining a
communication between our quarters on both sides) hindered that design.

It was propounded to attempt it by approaches; But it was considered, that if
we should have gone that way, it would have proved very tedious; and if during
our stay about it any great glut of rain should have fallen, it would have laid
us wet in our trenches, and disabled us from effecting the business.

At last, a resolution to storm it was agreed upon, though it carried the
greatest danger with it: yet the desire which the Army had to be speedily free
for the further service of the Kingdom, surmounted all difficulties: the
storming being thus happily resolved on, to the great and general satisfaction
of all that Army, both Officers and Soldiers; Lots were drawn for every one to
take their posts, some to storm, some to be reserves, others to alarm, but the
time of falling on not yet determined.

Friday July 19. it was resolved at a Counsel of War, that the time of the
storm should be on Monday morning toward dawning of the day. The Brigade
appointed to storm on that side toward Devon was commanded by Major General
Massey, being the Regiments of Col. Welden, Col. Inglesby, Col. Fortescue, Col.
Herbert, Col. Birch, and Major General Massies own Regiment: the Regiments
designed on this side, were the Generals, Major-generals, Col. Pickerings, Col.
Montagues, Sir Hardresse Wallers, the Regiment commanded by Lieut. Colonel
Pride, Colonel Rainsboroughs, and Colonel Hamonds. The General rode round about
the town this day, to see if all things were in readiness for the storm, that
both sides might fall on together. On the Lords day, July 20. Mr. Peter's in the
forenoon preached a Preparation Sermon, to encourage the Soldiers to go on:
Mr. Bowls likewise did his part in the afternoon. After both Sermons, the
Drums beat, the Army was drawn out into the field: The Commanders of the
forlorn hope who were to begin the storm, and the Soldiers, being drawn
together in the field, were there also afresh exhorted to do their duties (with
undaunted courage and resolution) by Mr. Peter's, who did it (as one says of
him) tam Mart, quam Mercurio. As soon as it grew dark, the Soldiers drew
every one to their several Posts allotted them to storm; the sign when the
storm was to begin, was, the shooting off three pieces of Ordnance on this
side, which the Forces on the other side were to take notice of, and to fall on
at the instant: and on Monday, July 22. about two of the clock in the morning,
the storm began accordingly on this side of the town, (the Forces on the other
side only alarming the Enemy, which kept them upon the Line, expecting a storm)
Our Forlorn hope was manfully led on by Lieut. colonel Hewson; and as valiantly
seconded by the Generals Regiment, commanded by Lieut. colonel Iackson; and the
Major-generals, commanded by Lieut. colonel Ashfield. The Bridges prepared to
pass over the Moat, were quickly brought to the Ditch, and thrown in, on which
the Soldiers with little loss got over the deep ditch, and with undaunted
courage mounted the Enemies works (notwithstanding the great and small shot
which showred about them) beat them from their Ordnance, turned them upon the
enemy, and let down their drawbridg; which made many of their Foot instantly
cry, Quarter, Quarter. The Bridge being let down, Captain Rainolds, who
commanded the forlorn hope of horse, immediately entered, and scoured the streets
of that part of the Town so gained, called Eastover, with much gallantry and
resolution, even up to the Drawbridge over the main Ditch, leading to the
second Town: whereupon the rest of the Officers and Soldiers that were in a
body, and yet annoyed us in that part of the town which we had won, threw down
their arms, and had fair quarter given them: (there were about 600. taken
prisoners, Officers and Soldiers) The Enemy instantly made barracadoes at the
gate upon the bridge, and drew up the bridge that divided one part of the town
from the other. Our forces had not been two hours in the first town, but the
Enemy shot grenades, and slugs of hot iron, and fired it on both sides, which
by the next morning burnt that part of the town (of goodly buildings) down to
the ground, except three or four houses, Major Cowel, who had a good share in
that service, standing all that while in the midst of the street, which was
both sides on fire, keeping guards to prevent the Enemies sallying upon them:
Captain Sampson, in that remarkable action, received a shot.

The General, hoping that the Storm might have wrought upon the Soldiers, and
the Fire upon the Townsmen, so far, that they would have hearkened to a
treaty; renewed his Summons, which the Governor peremptorily refused,
according to his allegiance (as he said) whereupon, Tuesday, July 22. it was
resolved to alarm the town by our forces on this side, and to storm it by the
other forces on the other side, at two of the clock the next morning; for which
purpose the General was there in person to see it done, though it was held fit
on after considerations, only to alarm on both sides, which much amazed the
Enemy, and kept him waking that night: Also about two of the clock in the
afternoon, the General sent to the Governor a Trumpet with a message to this
purpose, that his denial of fair terms had wrought in him no other thoughts,
but of compassion toward those that were innocent, who otherwise might suffer
through the Governors obstinacy: Wherefore he signified his noble pleasure,
that all women and children that would accept of this liberty, should come
forth of the town by four of the clock in the afternoon, which being made known
to them, the Governors Lady and diverse others came out. They were no sooner
come forth, but our Cannon played fiercely into the town, Grenades were shot,
and slugs of hot iron in abundance, whereby several houses in the town were
fired, and the wind being high increast the flame, the townsmen within were in
great distraction, every man employed how to save his house and goods, the
Enemy in a great amazement, and the Governor so far melted, as to send forth
Tom Elliot in haste, to desire to know the Generals terms; the General refused
to admit of any treaty at all, resolved that the Governor and they within that
had destroyed so fine a town, should have no conditions, but should submit to
mercy; which being signified to the Enemy, they yet would try the General with
these three particulars. First, that the Governor with all the Officers and
Gentlemen that were in the Town, with their servants, horses, swords, pistols
and cloak-bags, might march with a safe Convoy to Exeter. Secondly, that all
the soldiers might likewise march to Exeter leaving their arms. Thirdly, that
all Clergymen in the town, and Townsmen might have liberty to march with
them, or abide at home.
Edmund Windham.



Whereto the General returned these. 1. To all their lives. 2. To the
inhabitants, their liberty and freedom from plunder. 3. Neither Officers nor
Soldiers to be plundered of the clothes they had upon them. 4. The Gentlemen to
be disposed of as the Parliament should appoint, and in the mean time to have
civil usage. Six Hostages to be sent, and an answer in a quarter of an hour.
Tho. Fairfax.



The Governor returned answer, that he found those Propositions so ill
resented, both by the Gentlemen and Soldiers, that he could not accept of
them. The General thereupon gave order to the soldiers to stand upon their
guard, and go to their duties; Tom Elliot desired nothing might be done till he
returned, leaving Sir John Heal as caution, which was agreed to; and he
presently returned with an answer of submission to the Generals Articles, only
slipped in a motion for himself, that he might have liberty to carry the news to
the King upon his Parol. May he have more such employment till peace be settled!

Thereupon the Hostages were sent, Sir John Heal, Sir Hugh Windham, Mr.
Waldron, Mr. War, Mr. Siddingham, Mr. Speak. And we sent some into the Town
to them.

They were to deliver the Town and yield themselves prisoners the next morning
by eight of the clock, and all that night they employed themselves to quench
the fire in the town. The loss of men in this storm was not many, Mr. Martin
an Officer in the train had his leg shot, and afterward cut off, whereof he
died, he behaved himself valiantly.

Wednesday July 23. the town was surrendered, about 1000 Officers and Soldiers,
besides Gentlemen and malignant Clergy, marched out as prisoners. There were
taken in the town about 44 barrels of powder, 1500 arms, 44 piece of ordnance,
400 weight of match, Enemies goods of great value, that had been carried for
security into that place, and were seized by the Commissioners of the
Parliament, and sold; and 5. s. a man raised upon the sale, to be bestowed as
a reward upon the common soldiers for their good service in the storming of
the place.

That which may seem to allay the happiness of the success was, that the town
was fired; but truly though in strictness of soldiery this might be very well
justified, yet God in his providence concurred to the justice of it, and our
acquittance: They refused treaty after part taken, they fired the part we had
taken, and rang the bells for joy when they saw it blaze: and as we are credibly
informed, they fired the town themselves in many places where fireworks could
do no hurt, the soldiers saying, The Town did it to be rid of them; the town
said, the soldiers did it, when they were in little hopes to hold it. But God
be thanked, we found much more of it standing then we expected. Some things
there are which made the business considerable. As first, that by it a line of
garrisons was drawn over that Ihstmus of ground between the South Sea and
Severne, by Bridgewater, Taunton, Lime, and Langport, it being from Bridgewater
to Lime little above twenty miles, by which the Counties of Devon and Cornwall
then wholly in the Enemies possession, except Plymouth, were in a manner blockt
up from all intercourse with the Eastern parts, a business of no small
consequence, if we had proceeded no further. Likewise this being taken, our
Army was at liberty for further work, which was a great mercy at that time of
the year. It was a great gain with little loss: and that which adds as much
to the commendation of the action, as any thing, we kept our Articles exactly,
which is not only honorable in the eyes of men, but acceptable in the sight of
God, and that which this war has scarce formerly attained; and it was not done
without some difficulty now, in regard our soldiers had suffered so much, and
Cornwall was so near.

Thursday July 24. All the day was spent in ordering the manner of sending away
the prisoners, and securing Malignants goods in the town. And thus you have
that gallant fight at Langport crowned with an easy recovery of that
considerable strength of Brigdewater, whose natural fortification by water,
they that knew, must needs conclude, God was the Bridge by which our Army got
over.

CHAP. III.
The taking of Bath. The Club-mens reply, and his Excellencies rejoinder, in
two considerable Actions defeating them. The impregnable Castle of Sherborn
taken by storm.

FRiday, July 25. A Council of war was called, to advise how, and which way
next, the Army might lay out themselves to the most advantage and best service
of the Commonwealth; whether to make up further West to Goring, or to stay in
the Eastern parts to curb the Club-men. And in favor of this latter, it was
considered, that the Army wanted Ammunition, to march far West, to undertake
any considerable action: and that this was a needful work, there being also
several Garrisons of the Enemy, by which the Club-men took great boldness to
show themselves. It was therefore inclined unto by the Council of war, that
the Army should first make it their business to reduce the Club-men to better
manners, and to that end, to attempt the taking in, at least, to keep in that
Garrison, which countenanced and encouraged them, viz. Sherborn Castle, where
Sir Lewis Dives, an active Enemy, and resolute Soldier, was Commander in
chief: But the determination of the Council of war was, notwithstanding, to
advance rather more West, to prosecute our victory at Lamport and Bridgewater,
and hinder Goring for rallying his shattered force, or raising any considerable
body, leaving some force to attend P. Ruperts motion about Bristoll, and to
disturb the Clubmen if they frequented meetings as formerly. A march being thus
resolved on; it was accordingly undertaken on the morrow, whence the Army
marched to Martock, ten miles, in order to a more Westerly march: where resting
the Lords day, there was a thanksgiving for the success in the taking of
Bridgewater. The General, who ever accounted it his greatest safety, to act
according to the advice of his Council of war (whom God had so often blessed in
their resolutions) was at this time much troubled in his thoughts, concerning
his march further West, before Bath and Sherborn were absolutely reduced, and
the disaffected Club-men brought to more obedience: Reckoning it also a
service of importance to take in Bath, in order to the straitening of Bristoll,
and hindering P. Rupert for raising any considerable force in those parts:
Whereupon his Excellency took a resolution to march back, and accordingly came
to Wells that night with part of the Army and Train, being 14. long miles, and
a hot day, and sent a Brigade of horse and foot unto Sherborn under the command
of that pious and deserving Commander, Col. Pickering, to face that garrison,
and to view the same; and if there were hopes to reduce it, to sit down before
it, in order to a siege. The Horsequarters this night were nearer unto Bath,
and more force was sent to get between Bath and Bristol; having intelligence
that their distractions were such in Bath, that they would easily be driven to
quit it: But the General stayed at Wells, expecting to hear from the party of
Horse and Dragoons under the command of Col. Rich, which he had sent toward
Bath.

Tuesday the 29. Colonel Rich facing the town with horse and dragoons, summoned
the town, but the Governor refused to surrender. Toward evening, our
Dragoons, commanded by Colonel Okey, were drawn near the bridge, and crept on
their bellies over it, to the Gate, seized on the small end of the enemies
Muskets, which they put through the loop-holes of the Gate, and cried to the
enemy to take quarter, which so affrighted the enemy, that they ^an to their
Work which flankered the bridge, and left their Muskets behind them, as of no
use to them, so of as little to us: Our men instantly fired the Gate, and
became Masters of the bridge; upon which the Deputygovernour sent for a Parley,
and upon the Treaty the town was yielded upon Articles, making the common
soldiers, who were about 140. prisoners, and having conditions for the
Officers to march away to what garrison they pleased. We found in the town six
pieces of Ordnance, 400. Arms, 12. barrels of Powder, the Works, besides the
Wall of the City, strong and tenable. It was yielded in a good time, for Prince
Rupert was advanced with a Party of 1500 horse and foot from Bristol, within
four miles, to relieve the town, but coming too late, retreated.

Wednesday July 30. The Army was drawn up to Mendeep hills, with intention to
march to Bath, but upon intelligence the horse and dragoons alone had taken the
town, His Excellency sent back the Army to Wells, marching only with two
Regiments of foot to Bath (which he intended to leave there for the security of
that place, and parts thereabouts.) The General quartered there that night,
stayed there next morning, and settled things for the safety of that place, and
in the afternoon returned to Wells, leaving the two Regiments at Bath.

August 1. the Army marched from Wels to Queen-Camel, where the Head-quarter
was that night, but the General himself went with a few Horse to Sherborn,
viewed the Works and Castle, and quartered there that night. And on Saturday
August 2. the General and Lieut-General rode again to the Lodge, and upon a
second view and observation, conceived the place might shortly be reduced;
guards were therefore appointed nearer to it, and orders were given for all
things in reference to a close siege.

This day Intelligence came that the Club-men of three Counties viz. Dorcet,
Wilts, and Summerset, were to meet at Shaftsbury, and that a fair opportunity
would be offered for the surprisall of them, who were so disaffected to the
Parliament; whereupon Col. Fleetwood was commanded forth with a good party of
horse, to see if he could surprise them; who accordingly came seasonably,
encompassed them in the town with about 1000 horse, and took about 50 of the
Ringleaders, whereof Mr. Hollis, Carey, Young, Cradock, and Doctor Goche were
the chief, who being brought prisoners by a guard of horse, were presently
dismounted, and disarmed, and sent to prison, until leisure were afforded to
examine them, and to consider how to dispose of them, which was done by a
Committee chosen on purpose four or five days after; and after the reducement
of Sherborne, they were sent to London with other prisoners; but we have not so
done with the Club-men, or rather they with us.

Lords day August 3. News came this day that all the Country of Wilts, and
Dorcet, and part of Summerset, were up in Arms, and would have a Rendezvous of
10000. men at least, pretending they did it to fetch off their Leaders; (but
privately we understood it was to interrupt our siege, and to hinder provisions
from coming to the Leaguer; giving out withal, that Goring with his Army was
coming out of the West to raise the siege.

On Monday August 4. Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell having Intelligence of some
of their places of Rendezvous for their several divisions, went forth with a
party of horse to meet with them; (being well satisfied of the danger of their
design.) As he was marching toward Shaftsbury with the party, they discovered
some colors upon the top of a high hill, full of wood, and almost
inaccessible; a Lieutenant with a small party was sent to them to know their
meaning, and to acquaint them that the Lieutenant-Generall of the Army was
there; whereupon Mr. Newman, one of their leaders, thought fit to come down,
and told us the intent was to desire to know why the Gentlemen were taken at
Shaftsbury on Saturday; the Lieutenant-Gen. returned him this answer; that he
held himself not bound to give him, or them an account; what was done was by
authority, and they that did it were not acresponsible to them that had none:
but not to leave them wholly unsatisfied, he told him that those persons so
met, had been the occasions and stirrers of many tumultuous and unlawful
meetings, for which they were to be tried by law, which trial ought not by
them to be questioned, or interrupted: Mr. Newman desired to go up to return
the answer; the Lieutenant-Generall with a small party went with him, and had
some conference with the people, to this purpose: that whereas they pretended
to meet there to save their goods, they took a very ill course for that: to
leave their houses was the way to loose their goods; and it was offered them,
that Justice should be done upon any who offered them violence; and as for the
Gentlemen taken at Shaftsbury; it was only to answer some things they were
accused of, which they had done contrary to Law, and the peace of the Kingdom:
These men were well satisfied, and promised to return to their houses, and
accordingly did so.

These being thus quietly sent home, the Lieutenant general advanced further,
to a meeting of a greater number, of about 4000. who betook themselves to
Hambleton Hill, near Shrawton; at the bottom of the hill we met a man with a
Musket, and asked whither he was going, he said, to the Club-Army; we asked
what he meant to do, he asked what we had to do with that: Being required to
lay down his Arms, he said he would first lose his life, but was not so good as
his word, for though he cockt, and presented his Musket, he was prevented,
disarmed, and wounded, but not killed. Then we marched up the hill, which had
been an old Romane-work, deeply trenched: The Lieutenant-generall sent before a
Lieutenant with a party of horse, to require an account of their meeting; he
was answered with half a dozen shot, and could get no other answer; thereupon
one Mr. Lee, who upon our approach came from them, was sent in, requiring them
to submit to the power and protection of the Parliament, and lay down their
Arms; they refused to leave their Arms, and gave us a shot as we were drawing
up, the Lieutenant General unwilling to bloodshed, sent Mr. Lee again, to tell
them, that if they would not lay down their Arms, he would fall upon them; they
refused this third message also, through the instigation of Mr. Branell,
Minister of Compton, who told them they must stand to it now, rather then lose
their Arms, and that he would Pistol them that gave back.

Thereupon Order was given to the Generals Troop to fall on, who did so, and
received a repulse, and some loss through the disadvantage of the place, for
the Club-men shot from the bank of the old Work, and kept the passage with
Muskets, and other weapons, which was no broader then for three horse to march
a breast; upon this attempt we lost a man or two, had eight or nine wounded, six
or seven horses killed: upon this, Major Desborough with the Generals Regiment,
went round about a ledge of the hill, and made a hard shift to climb up and
enter on their rear; which they no sooner discerned, but after a short dispute
they ran, and the passage formerly assaulted was opened, and all the Club-men
dispersed, and disarmed, some slain, many wounded, the rest slid and tumbled
down that great steep hill, to the hazard of their necks; there were brought
away 400. of them to Shrawton, of which near 200. were wounded in this
skirmish, Capt. Paltison was sore hurt on our side, of which afterward he
dyed, and about twelve more; we found among them about 16. of our men whom they
had disarmed, and taken prisoners, and threatened to hang some of them, but the
Tables were then turned; we quartered that night at Shrawton, and kept the
Club-men in the church, and with them, four Vicars and Curats which were taken
with them, upon the Hill; whereof Mr. Talbot of Milton was one, and Lawford of
Auckford, the worst, another. There was taken about 12 Colors, the Motto of
one of them was thus: (If you offer to plunder or take our cattle, Be assured
we will bid you battle.) In others of them they had sentences of Scripture,
profanely applied by their Malignant Priests, who were the principal stirrers
up of the people to these tumultuous assemblies.

The next day, Aug. 5. we took their names and examinations, who were their
Leaders, and what the grounds of their meeting were; which they freely
discovered, and confessed that Mr. Bravel the Minister of Compton, sent out the
Warrants; and the intent was (as appears by a Warrant from Mr. Rogers of
Langton) gallantly to demand their Countrymen, or to take so many prisoners as
should release them, as the Warrant ran. And that they had laid down their arms
and submitted, had it not been for Bravel, and White, and Lawford; and that
they sent to Wiltshire to come and join with them, whose journey is now stopped.
After the examination, the Lieutenant-Gen. spoke to them, giving them liberty
to defend themselves against plunderings; only forbidding any such meetings,
which they protested against, and freely consented, that if any of them (whose
names were in the paper) were taken again opposing the Parliament, or in any
such assembly, they deserved to be hanged, whereupon they were dismissed, to
their very good satisfaction, and confessed they saw themselves misled by their
leaders, who by a pretense to save their goods, endangered both their goods and
lives, and so ours parted with them, hoping never to meet them again upon such
terms; but their leaders were extremely partial on the Kings side,
notwithstanding their pretended indifferencies, as appeared in Bravels
activity, since he was at Court with their Petition, and their calling men
Roundheads that refused to join with them; thratening no less then loss of
goods and danger of life, to them that would not come in to them. This work,
though unhappy, was very necessary, for that the Army could send neither
messengers nor parties before; whereas this done, a man might ride very quietly
between Sherborne and Salisbury. The influence the King had upon them was very
palpable and notorious, and that they acted his very design; Commissions were
found under the Princes own hand, for raising Regiments of Club-men, which
commissions were sent up to the Parliament; and that this design was to have
been set on foot in other parts, yea in the Associated counties, and all the
parts of the Kingdom, to raise a third party (as that that the King did much
rely upon, if other aid did fail) there is but too much reason to believe; and
that Letters of the Club-men were found among Sir Lewis Dives his papers,
declaring their intention to serve the King, is no temerity to affirm, and
such was the sense of the danger the kingdom and the Parliaments cause was in
by this third party, had it gone on as it was beginning, that to repeat it is
sufficient (I need not enlarge upon it) to provoke thankfulness to God for the
seasonable laying of this spirit, which never afterward appeared.

On Tuesday at night August 5. The Lieutenant-Generall with the party returned
to Sherborne, where they found the General and the rest of the Army very busy
at the siege; a storm was intended, but upon second thoughts diverted; the
Army seeing recruits come so far below expectation, both in time and number, it
behoved them to take more then ordinary care of their men, though after all
their tedious marches, and desperate services, to that time the Army was not
much abated; that day a commanded party crept underneath the stone wall close
by Sherborne Castle, and gained the hay-stack within a stones cast of their
Works.

Wednesday August 6. The Enemy making a new work to plant Ordnance to beat our
men from the hay-stack, we beat them off that work, and dismounted their Canon,
but had four Captains wounded, and one slain; all things were in a
preparation to storm; this day the soldiers had every one his faggot
prepared, another Summons was sent unto the Castle to surrender the same, but a
denial was returned, whereupon a council of War was called, and it was
resolved, that since an whole Canon was upon the way from Portsmouth, and that
from Mendeep hills we might have excellent Miners, that therefore we should
proceed in approaches and Batteries for the reducing of the Castle, being well
informed that the ground whereon it stood was mineable: This day toward
evening, Capt. Horsey another of Colonel Rainsboroughs Officers was shot dead
in the place with a birding piece from one of the Towers: who with
Captain-Lieutenant Flemming of Col. Rainsboroughs Regiment, (who was shot
before) were the next day buried after a martial manner in the Church at
Sherborne, being the place where Captain Horseys Ancestors were intombed.

On Friday August 8. The General going to see the working of the Mine, (as
afterward both Saturday and Lords day he did several times,) and the making
of the Gallery, escaped another great danger by his own soldiers, who
encompassing some Dear, shot round, and killed one of their fellows, and missed
the General (as he was passing by) narrowly.

Very freely did the soldiers work in the Mines and Galleries, and making of
Batteries, every man being rewarded twelve pence a piece for the day, and as
much for the night, for the service was hot and hazardous.

By Monday August 11. The whole Canon, and the Treasure for the Army formerly
mentioned, and then long expected by the Army, came to the head quarter. This
day his Excellency had intelligence, that Major General Massies horse, who
were quartered near Taunton, to interrupt Gorings forces in case they advanced
this way, had fallen on some of Gorings horse, and taken several prisoners.

Tuesday August 12. The Mendeep Miners came, and were set to work; the enemy
threw fiery Faggots over those parts of the Wall where the Miners were, and
where a Bridge likewise was making (over a little Rivolet,) which was in part
burnt thereby, but the soldiers presently quenched it, and it was put over
that night. The General according to his wonted nobleness sent to Sir Lewis
Dives, That if he pleased to send out his Lady, or any other women, he would
give way to it; Sir Lewis thankfully acknowledged the favor, seemed to incline
to accept of it, but gave no positive answer, expressing withal his resolution
(souldier-like) to hold out to the last; but under favor, it was a madness
rather then valor, seeing he despaired of relief, and since that he has felt
the misery of it by a long imprisonment in the Tower.

Wednesday August 13. The Canon and Demi-Canon were planted on the new Battery,
where another chief Gunner of ours was slain, besides one Ienkins, another
Gunner was shot from the Tower. The Miners wrought within two yards of the
Wall, where the Rock appearing, we feared it would have given more interruption
then it did, but it proving but a soft stone, was easily wrought through. The
General and Lieutenant General were twice again this day at the Works and
Mines, so much did they still engage their persons in the care and oversight of
every such work.

Thursday August 14. The great Guns began to play about eleven of the clock,
and before six had made a breach in the middle of the Wall, that ten a breast
might enter, and had beaten down one of the Towers, which much disheartened
the enemy. On this occasion the great adventurousness of many of the soldiers
comes fitly to be remembered, who (vvhilest our Canon played hard upon the
Castle, and vvanted shot) fetched off the Bullets (that we had shot) from under
the enemies Walls, and had six pence a piece for every Bullet they so brought
off, which were vvorth as much to the service at that time. After the breach
so made, such was the noble and merciful disposition of the General, that he
sent a third Summons to surrender the Castle, or to expect extremity, which
drove the Governor into a great passion (which is not hard to do) in so much
as he said, he would hang the Drum; and when the Drum, delivering his message
stoutly, was as he thought, saucy, he told him he must have more manners in
his presence, and sent an answer to this purpose; That the language was so far
differing from what he had formerly received, that he could not believe that
it came from the same hand, but said, that he would not lose his honor to
save his life (it may be (as one says of him) because his Cause and carriage
had already lost it) if the last were, he should think it well bestowed in
the service. This day another of our Gunners was shot with a birding piece.
By this time our approaches were so near, that they could have no use of their
Muskets, only threw down stones: And this day our soldiers upon the guard,
(commanded then by Colonel Inglesby, a gallant and vveldeserving Gentleman)
happily gained the Tower in the corner of the Castle, out of which our
Musketeers playing into the Castle, recompensed with a fatal shot one of the
enemies chief marksmen, that had so often shot out of the Tower with the
birding piece, and killed our men: Impatient were our men to fall on, but in
regard the Mine was not ready to spring, that night it was resolved to put off
the storm till the next day, but in the mean time so near did our soldiers
venture to the Walls from the Gallery, that they pulled the Wool out of the
Wooll-sacks that lay on the enemies Works, which caused that strong guards
were set by the enemy: this night great fires were made in the Castle all
night long, to discover our approaches and mines.

Friday August 15. Two in the morning, the Governor having cooled his brain
with a little sleep, (without any other provocation) sent out a Drummer with a
message, that he was willing to surrender upon honorable terms; answer was
returned, no terms but Quarter, seeing he had slipped and slighted the
opportunity, and he was not to expect that, except he rendered speedily.
Immediately the General went in person to the Works, and viewed the Castle
within, over the Wall, not without great hazard, gave Orders for all things to
be prepared for a storm, every soldier to cut his fresh Faggot, whereby in two
hours they had above 6000 Faggots, with which they were to fill the Trenches,
and to throw stones and rubbish upon them; whilst this was in doing, our
soldiers that had before gained one Tower, recovered also another of their
Towers, and from thence proved as good marksmen as theirs were; and out of the
same Towers where they shot so many of our men, did good execution upon the
enemy within: (Sir Lewis Dives his Secretary was slain by a shot from thence;)
and being so happily possessed of this Tower, we improved it further, to the
enforcing them from their Guns within, which they had planted to oppose our
entrance at the breach; the Miners had by this time wrought quite through the
foundation of the Wall, and our foot played so hard from the breach, that they
were forced to quit the great Court within the Castle; this much disheartened
the enemy, and especially seeing our soldiers coming forwards so merrily with
Faggots on their backs to fall on, some of them before their time appointed
leaping over the Works, all which concurring, so daunted the enemy, that they
fled out of one Work into another, and so into the Castle; which being
discerned by the rest of our Army, they all went over without any more ado,
which so ripened the amazement of the enemy, that instantly they pulled down
their bloody Colors, hung out a white Flag, had no power to make opposition,
sent a Drum for to crave Quarter, but before he could get out, and return, a
great part of our foot were entered, they within had thrown down their Arms, and
cried for Quarter to our soldiers, which our soldiers (inclining rather to
booty then revenge) gave them, but stripped they were to the purpose, all except
Sir Lewis Dives, and his Lady, and some few more, and so we became Masters of
the Castle, and all within it; the soldiers finding plunder of great value,
the taking of which in a disorderly manner could not then be prevented: There
was taken about 400 prisoners in the Castle, besides Sir Lewis Dives the
Governor, Col. Giles Strangewayes, formerly a member of Parliament, Sir John
Walcot, Col. Thornhill, and others of quality, and 18. pieces of Ordnance, and
a Mortar-piece. The reducing of this place was of the greater co^cernment, in
regard of the influence it had upon the disaffected Clubmen in those parts,
who having the countenance of this garrison, were made so much the more bold in
their attempts and meetings.

The soldiers spoil lasted all that day, and most part of the night, whose
fair demeanor in the town of Sherborne during the siege, deserves
commendation, when notwithstanding that about sixty townsmen who had families
in the town, were in the Castle, and fought against them, yet not one of their
houses were plundered.

On Saturday August 16. Being market day, our soldiers, with the booty they
had got, kept a great market to the Country, who bought the goods of them; and
all this day and the next was necessarily spent in ordering the disposal of
prisoners, and in considering what to do with the garrison, which not above two
or three days after was ordered to be slighted: And thus has God led us into
another strong hold of equal difficulty and consequence. In the reduction of
which place, as elsewhere, the dexterity, industry and resolution of Captain
Dean, Comptroller of the Ordnance, deserves to be had in memory.

CHAP. IV.
The siege of Bristol, the taking of it, with the actions that intervened, viz.
The taking of Nunny-Castle, etc.

SHerborne being now by Gods blessing reduced, a council of war was called,
where the subject of the debate was, what should be the next design of the
Army, the West, or Bristoll; the reasons upon which it was endeavored to
persuade the West, were, The pursuing of our Victory at Langport, the hindering
of Goring from re-inforcing his shattered Army in Devon and Cornwall,
(whereunto he might probably find the Cornish, being generally disaffected to
the Parliament, easily drawn, the Prince being in person with them, and acting
to that purpose) the miseries of the people in the West, and the necessities of
Plymouth crying for present relief: besides, it was urged on the negative of
Bristol, that to go thither, was to hazard the whole Army, the Plague being
sore in the City, an hundred dying weekly, and that it was in most of the
Villages about the Town. But on the other side, it was considered, That Prince
Rupert being in Bristol, and able to draw into the field 3000 Horse and Foot
(leaving also sufficient to defend that garrison) Might, with the assistance of
the illaffected Club-men (of whose disaffection to the Parliament there was
sufficient proof) and having the advantage of sending Forces and Recruits out
of Wales, (which were easily to be transported over Severn) raise a
considerable Army in the Midland parts, which might interrupt the proceedings
of our Army, by marching on their Rear, when they were far advanced West,
whereby Goring being in the Front, they might come to be enclosed between two
Armies, and so all intercourse with London, and the Eastern parts would be
thereby cut off; besides, the great importance of the place, as to the enemy,
Bristol being the only considerable Port the King had in the whole kingdom, for
shipping, and trade, and riches; being withal his magazine for all sort of
Ammunition: which should it please God to make us masters of, must needs prove
sadly fatal to his affairs, and would so be judged in this and foreign
Kingdoms. What advantage it would be to the Parliament, both in reputation and
real improvements (it being justly reckoned in the first rank of populous and
rich Cities in this Kingdom) was very clearly evident.

These and other like considerations being offered, for the present reducing of
Bristol; After long consultation and debate, it was resolved to march thither
in order to the reducing of that place. After once this resolution was taken,
it was said by the General: Seeing our Judgments lead us to make Bristol our
next design, as the greatest service we can do for the Public; As for the
Sickness, let us trust God with the Army, who will be as ready to protect us,
in the Siege, from Infection, as in the Field, from the Bullet.

Hereupon orders were given for the Army to march toward Bristol. The General
resting all the next day at Sherborne to settle the business of the County. And
on Monday (after Sir Lewis Dives and the prisoners, together with the
Club-leaders before mentioned, who were had in hold, were sent away with a
guard to London) the Army marched to Castle-Carew (save that Colonel
Rainsborough with his own, and Colonel Hamonds Regiments, and two pieces of
Ordnance, was sent to Nunney castle, for the reducing thereof) the rest of the
Army marched that night to Castle-Carew: the next day the General himself went
to view Nunney castle, and found it to be a very strong piece. The Head quarter
was that night at Shepton-Mallet, but 5 miles from Carew, far enough for the
Train, which was 4 miles behind from the quarters the night before: but to
expedite, what might be, this design against Bristol, and the relief of the
country thereabouts, in the mean time, two thousand Horse and Dragoons were
sent under the command of Commissary General Ireton, to preserve the towns
adjacent to Bristol from plunder and firing, for the better accommodation of
our quarters* the next day the Army marched to Chue, 9 miles, and ill way; and
in relation to the straiter siege, Messengers were sent to the Vice Admiral,
Captain Moulton, riding about Milford Haven, to send ships into King-roade to
block up Bristol by sea, as this Army intended to do by land. Some prisoners
were taken by our Horse near Bristol, others came in voluntarily unto us; all
agreeing, said, the Enemy did not imagine our forces to be so near, or that we
had any design upon Bristol. And by a Trumpeter that came with a Message from
thence, they seemed to be so far from a belief thereof, that he said he did not
expect to find us on that side Sherborne, and when he met our Horse, he took
them to be the Kings (not offering to sound his trumpet as he ought to have
done) that night there was a strong party of Horse and one Regiment of Foot
disposed at Hanham, within three miles of Bristol, on Gloucestershire side, by
whom the Enemy was alarmed. Upon this approach of ours, the Enemy fired
Benminster on Somersetshire side, and burnt it down to the ground, as also
diverse houses on Gloucestershire side. It was but the day before, when Prince
Rupert was sending out a party to relieve Barkley-castle, which was much
straightened by the Gloucester forces; but the approach of our Horse under
Commissary Ireton diverted that design.

Thursday, 21. in the morning, to encourage us in our engagements, we received
intelligence of the surrender of Nunny castle to Colonel Rainsborough, upon
condition to have liberty to go to their own houses. By reason of the Train
coming in so late; the Army rested that day at Chue, save that another party of
Horse and Foot advanced toward Benminster, upon intelligence that the Prince
intended to break through with his Horse, and join with Goring; with which
party the General and Lieutenant General went, viewed the Town, and appointed
guards and quarters on the West side the River, and quartered himself at
Kenisome that night; where diverse Lords sent for Passes to come out of the City
and go beyond sea, but upon good reason were denied; it being a received
opinion, that persons of quality and great estate, in a besieged town, rather
incline to a timely yielding, then hazardous defending thereof, when no relief
is at hand.

Friday the 22. there was a general rendezyouz of Horse, and all that day was
spent in setting of guards on Somersetshire side, where the Countrymen
maintained a passage at Clifton, the Head-quarter that night being removed to
Hanham.

Saturday 23. the General and Lieutenant General employed the whole day, in the
settling of quarters and guards on the other side of Bristol. This day the
Enemies Canon played from the great Fort, and Pryors Fort, but hurt none but
one Dragoon, who had his thigh shot off. The Enemy sallied out also with a
party of Horse, but were beaten in again, where Sir Richard Crane was mortally
wounded, who presently after dyed of his wounds. The Head-quarter this night
was removed to Stapleton.

Lords day, Aug. 24. the Enemy about noon sallied out again, at the Sally-port
near Prior-hill Fort, in a full career, and were upon our Dragoons on the
sudden; yet by our Horse coming on, were beaten back again, as also their Foot
were, by the Foot of Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, made to retreat in
disorder, and worse then they came forth, by the loss of a Major and some
others.

Monday, 25. Warrants were issued out by the General, to Sir John Horner, High
Sheriff of the County of Somerset, to raise the power of the County, which was
much promoted by the interest and endeavors of Mr. Ash and Mr. Moore, two
worthy Members of the House of Commons. This day the army had intelligence,
that Goring, then about Collumpton in Devon, did seem to draw to a Rendezvous,
as if he intended a march to interrupt our siege. But Major-Gen. Massies
Brigade of Horse were quartered not far from Taunton, in such an advantageous
posture, that the Enemy could not move, but he might flank them, and interrupt
their motion, whilst our Horse might draw off to meet them, in case they
should attempt the forementioned design.

Tuesday, 26. four in the morning, the Enemy made a third sally on
Somersetshire side, on a post of Colonel Weldens Brigade at Bedminster; and
through the negligence of the Officer that had then the command there, they
took 10. and killed as many: toward a recompense of which affront, the same
day, Captain Molleneux, a very valiant man (Captain Lieutenant to Colonel
Butler) and with him another stout soldier, perceiving three gallant Cavaliers
under their Works (whom afterward they found to be Sir Bernard Ashley, Colonel
Daniel, and a third man) rode up to them, asked them who they were for, they
swore, God dam them, for the King, and shot at ours: whereupon, our men
discharged their Pistols at them, wounded them, and after some bickering took
Sir Bernard Ashley, who dyed within few days of his wounds: But Colonel
Daniel, though dangerously wounded, escaped from them.

Wednesday 27. the Enemy drew out the fourth time, about the close of the
evening, with intention to fall on our guards; which ours perceiving (and they
understanding that they were privy to their intention) they drew back to their
Works. All this night, the General and Lieutenant General were abroad upon the
field, to be in readiness if any alarm should happen.

Thursday 28. Rupert sent out those foot of ours, which were taken prisoners on
Somersetshire side, being in number ten, with a Trumpet, propounding also an
exchange for Sir Bernard Ashley, but the exchange was not hearkened to. This day
we had intelligence of the Kings plundring of Huntingdon, and the cruel usage
of the people by his forces in those parts, having unhappily escaped the Scotch
and Northern horse, out of Nottinghamshire. Mean while, as an earnest of the
whole, the Fort at Portshead point that had bin four days besieged by
Lieutenant Colonel Kempson, of Colonel Weldens Regiment, with a party of Foot,
was with six pieces of Ordnance this day surrendered unto him; who managed that
business with much judgment and resolution; by the taking whereof the passage
into King-road with our ships was made open.

Friday 29. A Fast was kept through the Army, to seek God for a blessing upon
the designs against Bristol: Mr. Del and Mr. Peter's kept the day at the Head
quarter. The Enemy endeavored to interrupt us by a sally about noon time, upon
our quarters near Lawfords-gate, where he took three or four soldiers. After
the public exercises a Counsel of War was called; and it being agreed in the
first place, to punish the vices of the Army, it was propounded, whether to
storm Bristol or not; the debate was long, opinions various; however it was
agreed, that all things should be prepared in order to a storm, and afterward
to take into further consideration, whether to storm or to entrench the
Leaguer. In the midst of these thoughts and resolutions, tidings were brought
the Army of the defeat given by Montrosse to our Brethren the Scots, and that
he was marched to Edenbrough in pursuit thereof; and that the King was now
advanced to Bedford unfollowed, and was expected speedily to raise the siege at
Bristol: and this day toward evening, the intelligence was confirmed by
Letters from the Committee of both Kingdoms, of the Kings speedy march toward
Oxford, and probably to these parts. At the same time, his Excellency had
intelligence that Goring in the West advanced his quarters nearer Chard, and as
it was verily thought, intended a conjunction with the King.

And now was the Army in a great straight, the whole strength thereof being but
sufficient, and scarce that, for its present undertaking before Bristol,
utterly unable to check the Enemies conjunction, or attend their motions at any
distance from the Leaguer: and though the further proceeding with the siege of
Bristol in this conjuncture of affairs seemed very hazardous, yet resolving to
abide the utmost, and not to give it over upon great looks, we put our selves
into the best condition we could to receive them, in case either or both should
attempt us.

Lords day August 31. Captain Moulton, Admiral for the Irish coasts (who was
now come into Severne) came from aboard his ship to the General: expressed much
readiness to assist in the storming of the City (if it were so determined) with
his Seamen. A debate was then had concerning the storming of Bristol, and what
might be done by water with the assistance of the Seamen. Gorings Letters from
Exeter to Secretary Nicholas bearing date August 25. were this day intercepted:
Wherein he writes, that in three weeks time he will be ready to interrupt
Fairfax in his siege before Bristol.

September 1. the weather wet and misty, about 12 at noon, Prince Rupert with
1000 Horse and 600 Foot sallied out the sixth time, in a full carere, and came
upon our Horse guards with much fierceness; but the Horse instantly came up,
and with the assistance of the Foot of Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, forced
them to as hasty a retreat. We lost in that skirmish Captain Guilliams, a
captain of Horse, a valiant, faithful, and religious man; besides that,
Colonel Okey, colonel of Dragoons, (it being in the mist) fell amongst the
Enemy unawares, and by that accident was taken prisoner. At that time, further
advertisements confirmed our former hints, of the Kings advance from Oxford
toward Bristol: Orders were given for all the colonels to view the Line and
Works; and for our soldiers to make Faggots, and all fitting preparations for
a storm.

Tuesday, September 2. A Council of War being called, and all the Colonels
present; after a long debate, whether to storm Bristol or no, it was put to the
question, and resolved in the affirmative; and for the manner of the storm, it
was referred to a Committee of the Colonels of the Army, to present in writing
to the General the next morning, to be debated at a general Counsel of War:
Accordingly, Wednesday September 3. the manner of the storm was presented in
writing to the General, which was to be after this manner. Colonel Welden with
his Brigade, consisting of the four Regiments that were at Taunton, (viz. his
own, colonel Inglesbies, colonel Fortescues, and colonel Herberts Regiments,
whose posts were to make good Somersetshire side,) was ordered to storm in
three places, viz. 200 men in the middle, 200 on each side, as forlorn hopes to
begin the storm; 20 Ladders to each place, two men to carry each Ladder, and to
have 5 s. a piece; two Sergeants that attended the service of the ladder, to
have 20 s. a man; each musquetire that followed the ladder, to carry a faggot, a
Sergeant to command them, and to have the same reward: 12 files of men with
firearms and Pikes to follow the ladders to each place where the storm was to
be: those to be commanded, each by a Captain and a Lieutenant; the Lieutenant
to go before with five files, the Captain to second him with the other seven
files; the 200 men that were appointed to second the storm, to furnish each
party of them twenty Pioners, who were to march in their Rear; the 200 men,
each to be commanded by a Field-Officer, and the Pioners each by a Sergeant:
(those Pioners were to throw down the Line, and make way for the horse;) the
Party that was to make good the Line, to possess the guns, and turn them; A
Gentleman of the Ordnance, Gunners and Matrosses, to enter with the Parties;
the Drawbridge to be let down; two Regiments and a half to storm in after the
Foot, if way were made. Much after this manner was the Generals Brigade, under
Colonel Montague's command, consisting of the Generals, Col. Montagues, Col.
Pickerings, and Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiments, to storm on both sides of
Lawfords gate, both to the river Avon, and the lesser river Froom; the bridge
over Froom to be made good against horse with Pikes, or to break it down.
Colonel Rainsboroughs brigade, consisting of his own, Major General Skippons,
Col. Hammonds, Col. Birches, and Lieu. colonel Prides Regiments, to storm on
this side the river Froom, beginning on the right hand of the Sally-port up to
Pryors-hill Fort, and to storm the Fort it self, as the main business: 200. of
this brigade to go up in Boats with the Seamen to storm Waterfort (if it were
to be attempted) One regiment of horse, and a regiment of foot, to be moving up
and down in the closes before the Royal fort, and to ply hard upon it, to alarm
it, with a Field-Officer to command them. The regiment of Dragoons, with two
regiments of Horse, to carry ladders with them, and to attempt the Line and
Works by Clifton and Washingtons breach.

The manner of the storm being thus agreed on (though its probable, some more
certain information might change the attempts from one place to another) the
Soldiers were drawn out to try their inclination, in whom more courage, joy,
and resolution, could not appear in men. The General, to make good his promise
to reward them for the service of Bridgewater, Ordered them immediately to
receive 6. s. a man, which by the care of the Commissioners of Parliament was
forthwith paid unto them, and which put a great obligation upon the Soldiers.

At this council of war it was also agrr^ed, that a Letter should be written,
and subscribed by the General, and all the Officers, to General Leven, to
express how sensible they were of the losses their Forces had received in
Scotland by Montrose; and their willingness to serve them, if need were, for the
settling of their Nation in peace, so soon as the condition of this Kingdom
could spare them. The copy of which Letter follows in these words.

May it please your Excellency, and the rest, honored Friends, and beloved
Brethren,
WE have, not without much grief, received the sad report of your affairs in
Scotland; how far God, for his best and secret ends, has been pleased to
suffer the Enemy to prevail there: And are (we speak unfainedly) not less
sensible of your evils, then you have been and are of ours, nor then we are of
our own. And the greater cause of sympathy have we with you, and the more do
our bowels earn toward you, because whatever you now suffer your selves in
your own Kingdom, are chiefly occasioned by your assisting us in ours, against
the power that was risen up against the Lord himself, and his Anointed ones.
Wherefore we cannot forget your labor of love, but thought good at this
season, even amongst our many occasions, to let you know, that when the affairs
of this Kingdom will possibly dispense with us, the Parliament allowing, and
you accepting of our assistance; We shall be most willing, if need so require,
to help and serve you faithfully in your own Kingdom, and to engage our selves
to suppress the Enemy there, and to establish you again in peace. In the mean
time we shall endeavor to help you by our prayers, and to wrestle with God for
one blessing of God upon both Nations; between whom, besides many other strong
relations and engagements, We hope the Unity of Spirit shall be the surest Bond
of Peace. And this, whatever suggestions or jealousies may have been to the
contrary, we desire you would believe, as you shall ever really find to proceed
from integrity of heart, a sense of your sufferings, and a full purpose to
answer any call of God to your assistance; as become

Your Christian friends, and servants in the Lord, Thomas Fairfax. Oliver
Cromwell. Thomas Hamond. Henry Ireton. Edward Montague. Richard Fortescue.
Richard Inglesby. John Pickering. Hardresse Waller. William Herbert. Robert
Hamond. James Gray. Thomas Pride. Robert Pie. Thomas Rainsborough. Thomas
Sheffield. Charles Fleetwood. Ralph Welden. John Raymond. Leon Wattson. Arthur
Evelin. Richard Dean. Thomas Iackson. John Desborough. Christopher Bethel.


The report concerning the storm being made unto the Counsel of War, and fully
agreed unto: the Canon baskets were ordered to be filled, Seamen and boats sent
for.

Thursday September 4. The weather that had been so extreme wet before, that
many Soldiers and Horses dyed thereby (and with extreme hard duty) in that wet
season, began to alter, to the great reviving of the drooping soldier. Our
great guns played this day from off the new battery against Pryors fort.
Summons was also prepared to be sent to Prince Rupert; and being agreed unto,
was sent in accordingly, which runs in these words;

For his Highness Prince Rupert.
Sir, for the service of the Parliament, I have brought their Army before the
City of Bristol, and do summon you in their names to render it, with all the
Forts belonging to the same, into my hands for their use.

Having used this plain language, as the business requires; I wish it may be as
effectual unto you, as it is satisfactory to my self; that I do a little
expostulate with you about the surrender of the same, which I confess is a way
not common, and which I should not have used, but in respect to such a person,
and to such a place. I take into consideration your royal birth, and relation
to the Crown of England, your honor, courage, the virtues of your person, and
the strength of that place, which you may think your self bound and able to
maintain.

Sir, the Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be; we fight to
maintain it there. But the King misled by evil Counselors, or through a
seduced heart, has left his Parliament, under God, the best assurance of his
Crown and Family: the maintaining of this Schism is the ground of this unhappy
war on your part: and what sad effects it has produced in the three Kingdoms,
is visible to all men. To maintain the rights of the Crown and Kingdom jointly;
a principal part whereof is, that the King in supreme acts is not to be advised
by men of whom the Law takes no notice, but by his Parliament, the great
Counsel of the Kingdom, in whom (as much as man is capable of) he hears all his
people as it were at once advising him; and in which multitude of Councillors
lies his safety, and his peoples interest: and to see him right in this, has
been the constant and faithful endeavor of the Parliament, and to bring these
wicked instruments to justice that have misled him, is a principal ground of
our fighting.

Sir, if God makes this clear to you, as he has to us, I doubt not but he will
give you a heart to deliver this place, notwithstanding all the other
considerations of honor, courage, fidelity, etc. because of their constancy
and use in the present business, depends upon the right or wrongfulness of this
that has been said. And if upon such condition you shall surrender it, and
save the loss of blood, or hazard the spoiling of such a City; it would be an
occasion glorious in it self, and joyful to us, for restoring of you to the
endeared affection to the Parliament, and people of England, the truest friend
to your Family it has in this World.

But if this be hid from your eyes; and through your wilfulness, this so great,
so famous, and ancient a City, and so full of people, be by your putting us to
force the same, exposed to ruin and the extremities of war (which we yet shall
in that case, as much as possible, endeavor to prevent) then I appeal to the
righteous God to be judge between you and us, and to require the wrong. And let
all England judge whether the burning of its Towns, ruining its Cities, and
destroying its people, be a good requital from a person of your Family, which
has had the prayers, tears, purses, and blood of its Parliament and people.
And (if you look on either as now divided) has ever had that same party both
in Parliaments and amongst the People, most zealous for their assistance and
restitution, which you now oppose and seek to destroy, and whose constant grief
has been their desires to serve your Family, have been ever hindered or made
fruitless by that same party about his Majesty, whose counsel you act, and
whose interest you pursue in this unnatural war.

I expect your speedy answer to this Summons, with the return of the Bearer
this evening, and remain

Your Highness humble Servant, Thomas Fairfax.

This day, about 2000 well affected countrymen, who with many more, upon
treaty with the Lieutenant General at the beginning of the siege, had engaged
their assistance to make good the same; marched with some 36 Colors in the
face of Bristol, had quarters assigned them, and kept guards. Two pieces of
Ordnance also were sent unto them for their encouragement; it not a little
grieving the Enemy within to see the forwardness of the country to come to our
assistance; for which reason (and to lay an effectual caution against their
revolt) it was held fit to make use of those force^ from the country, rather
then for any considerable service could be expected from them.

The Trumpeter that went in with the Summons was detained all night, during
which space no sally was made by the Enemy, nor no alarm given by us. Only the
Seamen and their boats coming up the river to St. Vincents Rock, was all the
motion this day produced. Neither upon Friday, September 5. was there any
sallying out, but all was quiet on both sides; and the Trumpeter returned from
Prince Rupert with an answer to the Generals Summons, in these words.

Sir, I received yours by your Trumpeter, I desire to know, whether you will
give me leave to send a Messenger to the King to know his pleasure in it. I
rest,

Your servant, Rupert.

Saturday, September 6. A Trumpeter was sent in with a reply to Prince Ruperts
answer, in these words.

Sir, your Overture of sending to the King, to know his pleasure, I cannot give
way to, because of delay. I confess your answer does intimate your intention,
not to surrender without his Majesty's consent: yet because it is but
implicit, I send again to know a more positive answer from your self, which I
desire may be such as may render me capable of approving my self

Your Highness humble servant, Tho. Fairfax.

This day came 12 Colors more of the well-affected Countrymen, as an addition
to the former Forces.

The Trumpeter was detained all that day and night: Every thing was prepared
for a storm; the General was in the field to that end; the Soldiers had their
faggots on their backs, and leaped for joy they might go on; yet about ten at
night, for several reasons it was held fit to give orders to put off the
business till Monday morning two of the clock: and only to alarm the Enemy for
that time, as we did often, to amuse them, and keep them waking.

Lords day, September. 7. in the forenoon, the Trumpet returned with these
Propositions from Prince Rupert.

Sir, Whereas I received your Letter for the delivery of the City, Forts, and
Castle of Bristol; and being willing to join with you for the sparing of blood,
and the preserving of his Majesty's subjects: I have upon those grounds, and
none other, sent you these following propositions.

First, that my self, all Noblemen, Commanders and Soldiers of Horse and Foot,
that have served either his Majesty, or Parliament, in England or elsewhere; as
likewise all persons whatsoever, men or women, now resident in this City of
Bristol, Castle and Forts thereof, shall have free liberty to march away out of
the said city, castle and forts, with their Arms, flying Colors, Drums
beating, Trumpets sounding, Pistols cockt, Swords drawn, Matches lighted at
both ends, and as much Powder and Match as they can carry about them, with all
their bag and baggage, horses, arms, and other furniture, ten pieces of canon,
50 barrels of powder, Match and Bullet proportionable. 2. That neither mine own
person, nor the person of any Nobleman, Commander, Officer, Gentleman, or
Soldier, or any other of mine or their Retinues, be searched, molested, or
troubled upon what pretense soever; but left to their liberties, to depart, or
stay, as it shall be most convenient for them. 3. That none of your Army
whatsoever, shall entice or persuade any Officer or Soldier of mine from their
Regiments or Colors, with any promise of preferment or reward. 4. That all
such Officers and Soldiers that are hurt and sick, and cannot now march out of
this city, castle, and fort, shall have liberty to stay till they be recovered,
and then have safe-conducts to go wheresoever they please, either to any of his
Majesty's armies or garrisons, or their own houses, where they may live quiet;
and that in the interim, those being sick and hurt, may be protected by you,
and have civil usage. 5. All prisoners taken on both sides since the beginning
of this siege, be forthwith set at liberty. 6. That my self, and all those
above mentioned, may not be required to march further in a day, then what
conveniently we may; and that a day or two of rest be allowed upon our march,
if we shall find it requisite; and that we be accommodated with free quarter
during our march, and a sufficient convoy to any of the Kings armies or
garrisons which I shall name, to secure us in our march from all injury or
incivility that shall any ways be offered to us. And likewise that there be one
hundred and fifty carriage-horses, and forty Wains, with sufficient teams
provided for carriages of all sorts. 7. That no person here in these Articles
mentioned, shall be in their march, ^endezvouz or quarters, searched or
plundered, upon any pretense whatsoever: And that two Officers be appointed by
you, the one for accommodation for free-quarters for Officers, Soldiers, and
others, and the other for providing of horses and carriages for our baggage and
train. 8. All Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Citizens, Resiants, or any other
person within this city, suburbs, and liberties thereof, shall at any time when
they please, have free liberty to remove themselves, their goods and families,
and to dispose of them at their pleasures, according to the known and enacted
laws of the land, either to live at their own houses or elsewhere; and to enjoy
their houses, lands, goods and estates, without any molestation, and to have
protection for that purpose; and this article to extend to all those whose
estates are sequestered, or not sequestered, and that they may rest quiet at
their abodes, and travel freely and safely upon their occasions. And for their
better removal, they may have Letters of safe conduct, with horses and
carriages at reasonable rates, upon demand. 9. That all persons above
mentioned, may have free liberty to pass to any part beyond the seas, any time
within three months, as their occasions shall require. 10. That the Lines,
Forts, Castle, and other Fortifications about, or in the city of Bristol, be
forthwith slighted, and the City stated in the same condition it was before the
beginning of this unnatural war: And that hereafter the Parliament during
this war, place no garrison in it. 11. That no Churches be defaced: that the
several members of the foundation of this Cathedral, shall quietly enjoy their
houses, and revenues belonging to their places, and that the Ministers of this
city may likewise enjoy their benefices without trouble. 12. That no Oaths be
imposed upon any person now in this city, suburbs and liberties, other then are
required by the ancient and enacted laws of the land. 13. That the Major,
Sheriffs, Aldermen and Citizens within this Corporation of the City of Bristol,
shall be free in their persons and estates, and enjoy all their privileges,
liberties and immunities in as full and ample manner as formerly at any time
they did before the beginning of this war, and that they shall have freedom of
trade both by land and sea, paying such duties and customs as formerly they
have done to his Majesty: and that no mulct of fine be imposed upon any person
mentioned in this article, upon any pretense whatsoever, or questioned for any
act, or thing done, or committed before the day of our marching forth. That no
free-quarters shall be put upon them without their own consents. 14. That all
other persons, whose dwellings are in this city, and now absent, may have the
full benefit of these articles, as if they were present. 15. That all Noblemen,
Gentlemen and others, that have goods in this city, and are now present, or
absent, may have liberty at any time within three months to dispose of their
goods as they please. 16. That there be no plundering or taking away of any
man's person, or any part of his estate, under what pretense soever; and that
Justice, according to the known laws of the land, be administered to all
persons within this City by the Civil Magistrate.
And for the performance of these articles, I expect such hostages to be given
as I shall accept of, and hereunto I desire your speedy Answer.

Sir, By this you may evidently perceive my inclination to peace, and you may
be assured that I shall never desire any thing more then the honor of the
King, and safety of the Kingdom; and that I may become, Sir

Your Servant, Rupert.

To which Propositions the General returned this Answer.

Sir, I have perused your Propositions, wherein some things are doubtfully
expressed; other things inconsistent with the duty I owe to them I serve.
Notwithstanding, to the end I may give assurance, that I earnestly desire to
save effusion of blood, and the ruin of a City and people, that may in time be
so serviceable to the Crown and Kingdom. If it please your Highness, that
Commissioners may treat between us, concerning the accommodating of things: I
hope to make it evident to the world, that what shall respect the honor of a
soldier, due civility to all men, the good and welfare of the people of that
City, both in passing by what is past, and restoring them to the privileges of
all other subjects, and to the immunities of their City, will readily be
condiscended unto by me: and to the end no time may be lost, I have here
enclosed sent you the names of Commissioners, who upon the return of Hostages
of equal condition, unto me, shall attend your Highness, sufficiently
instructed to conclude on my part: Provided the said treaty be ended by nine of
the clock this night. And to this I desire your answer within the space of an
hour, and remain

Your Highness humble servant, Tho. Fairfax.

This answer being returned presently after Dinner by the same Trumpeter, he
was detained till eight at night; and then he brought this answer from the
Prince, or to this effect in writing.

That he hoped his Propositions had been such as needed no explanation: yet
because some doubts were made, he was willing to have the exceptions set down
in writing, and his Highness would return answer.

Monday, September 8. The General returned a particular Answer to every
Article: which as to the soldiery was very honorable, and could not but be
very acceptable to the Citizens: for the offer was most fair to the Citizens to
oblige them to us, in case the conditions offered them were but known to them,
as we hoped they would. However we had used means by our Spies to convey the
same to them.

In the interim all things were prepared for the storm, every Commander viewing
his Posts: the Trumpet was detained beyond the time appointed, yet afterward
returned with a denial, but not positive. That night was appointed for the
Army to fall on, but upon better consideration it was held fit to put it off to
another day, and only to alarm the Enemy.

Tuesday, September 9. the Trumpet was sent in again to let the Prince know,
that if he did not immediately except what was offered, all that had passed
should be as no treaty, requiring the Trumpet to return by 12 of the clock, but
notwithstanding he was detained till 10 at night, and then returned with an
unsatisfactory answer. Whereupon all things on our part were put in readiness
for a storm. At 12 of the clock in the night the General went into the field to
give order about the drawing out of our men, and managing the storm for the
next morning.

The Enemy being left inexcusable for refusing such honorable conditions as
were offered; the whole Army Horse and Foot being set in a posture round the
City, to fall on about two in the morning, September 10. the signal was given
to fall on at one instant round the City and Works, which was by setting on
fire a great heap of straw and Faggots on the top of an hill, and the shooting
off four great guns against Pryors-fort, from the place where the General was
to recide all the time of the storm, which being accordingly given, immediately
the storm began round the City, and was terrible to the beholders. Colonel
Montague and Colonel Pickering with their Regiments at Lawfords-gate entered
speedily, and recovered 22. great guns, and took many prisoners in the Works,
Major Desborough advancing with the Horse after them, having the command of the
Generals Regiment, and part of Colonel Graves's. Sir Hardresse Wallers and the
Generals Regiments, commanded by Lieut. Colonel ^ackson, entered between
Lawfords-gate and the river Froom: Colonel Rainsborough and Colonel Hamonds
Regiments entered near Pryors-fort: Major General Skippons, and Colonel Birches
entered nearer to the river Froom: and the Regiment commanded by Lieut. Colonel
Pride was divided; part assigned to the service of Pryors-fort, and the rest to
alarm the great Fort, and afterward they took a little Fort of Welchmen. The
Seamen that were at first designed to storm by water (the tide failing)
assisted in storming the Line and Works. The Horse that entered here, (besides
the Forlorn-hope) so valiantly led on by Captain Ireton, were in several
parties commanded by Major Bethel, Major Alford, and Adjutant-general Flemming,
being of Colonel Whalyes, Colonel Riches, and part of Colonel Graves his
Regiments. And after the Line was broke down with the Pioneers, and a gap made
in the same, our Horse with undaunted courage entered, and within the Line met
with a party of the Enemies Horse, put them to a retreat, mortally wounded
Colonel Tailor (formerly a Member of the House of Commons) of which wounds he
died, and took diverse prisoners. This so disheartened their Horse, (perceiving
withal our Foot to be master of the Line, and their men beaten off) that they
never came on again to give one charge; but retreated and stood in a body,
under the favor of the great-fort, and Coulstons-fort. In the mean while
Pryors-hill-fort very obstinately held out, playing fiercely with great and
small shot upon our men for two hours after the Line was entered; our men all
that time in like manner plying them hard with musket shot in at the
port-holes, until they brought up Ladders to the Fort; but it being an high
Work, many of the Ladders proved too short, through which fault, some that got
up were beaten down again. Notwithstanding, this disheartened them not, but up
they went again upon greatest danger and disadvantage; some at last creeping in
at the port-holes, and others got on the top of the Works, Captain Lagoe, of
Lieutenant Colonel Prides Regiment, being the first man that laid hold on the
Colors; and in the end we forced the Enemy within to run below into the inner
rooms of the Work, hoping to receive quarter; but our soldiers were so little
prepared for to show mercy, by the opposition that they met withal in the
storm, and the refusal of quarter when it was offered, that they put to the
sword the Commander (one Major Price a Welchman) and almost all the Officers,
Soldiers, and others in the Fort, except a very few, which at the entreaty of
some of our Officers had their lives spared. By that time the Fort was gained
the day began to break. And most happy it was that the storm began so timely,
for otherwise had the Enemy had daylight when we first entered, we could not
havestood upon any ground to have attempted Pryors-hillfort; in regard the
Great-fort, and Coulstons-fort on the one side, and the Castle on the
otherside, might have cut off our men as fast as they had been drawn up, but
being in the dark, they durst not shoot for fear of killing their own men;
their Horse (during the storm) being drawn in a body, between the Great-fort
and Coulstons-fort. But in the mean time the success on Somersetshire side was
not answerable unto this, on this side, our forces there being put to a
retreat, though they went on with much courage: the Works on that side were so
high, that the Ladders could not near reach them, and the approach unto the
Line of great disadvantage. The Horse designed to enter the line, in case it
had pleased God to give us here also success, were, Lieut. General Cromwels
Regiment, commanded by Major Huntington, Colonel Sir Robert Pyes, and Colonel
Sheffields, both which Colonels in person attended the storm, being impatient
they had not fair opportunity of entering the Line, such was their zeal to the
service. And lest during the storm, the Prince (in case he see the Town like to
be lost) should endeavor to escape with his Horse; to prevent the same,
Commissary General Iretons, Colonel Butlers, and Colonel Fleetwoods Regiments
of Horse, were appointed to be in a moving body upon Durdam-Down; that place
being the most open way, and most likely for the Prince to escape by: besides
part of those Horse did alarm that side of the Line and great-fort, toward
Durdam-Down, and Clifton, during the storm, as likewise to secure the Foot;
Colonel Okeyes Dragoons alarming Brandolhill-fort, and the Line toward Clifton.

About 4 hours after the taking Pryors-hill-fort, a Trumpeter came from the
Prince to desire a Parley, which there was reason enough to refuse: but
considering the Enemy had fired the City in several places, in so much as it
was probable the whole City would have been consumed, if the fire had gone on;
The General sent the Prince word that he would embrace a Parley, provided he
caused the fire to be quenched immediately, which was done accordingly, and so
the treaty proceeded on, and by seven at night it was concluded of according to
these Articles:

That his Highness Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Officers, Gentlemen, and
Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever, now residing in the City of
Bristol, and Castle, and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said City,
Castle, and Forts thereof, with Colors, Pikes, and Drums, bag and baggage. The
Prince his Highness, all Noblemen, Gentlemen and Officers in commission, with
their horse and arms, and their Servants with their horses and swords, and
common soldiers with their swords; the Prince his Lifeguard of horse, with
their horse and arms, and two hundred and fifty horse besides to be disposed by
the Prince, and his lifeguard of Firelocks with their arms, and each of them
one pound of powder, and a proportion of bullet; and that none of the persons
who are to march out on this article, shall be plundered, searched or molested.
That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick or wounded in the city,
castle or forts, shall have liberty to stay till their recovery, and then have
safe-conducts to go to his Majesty, and in the interim to be protected. That
the persons above mentioned, who are to march away, shall have a sufficient
Convoy provided for them to any such garrison of the Kings as the Prince shall
name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristol; and shall have eight days
allowed for their march thither, and shall have free quarter by the way, and
shall have two Officers to attend them for their accommodation, and 20 wagons
for their baggage, if they shall have occasion to use the same. That all the
Citizens of Bristol, and all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and all other
persons residing in the said city and suburbs of the same, shall be saved from
all plunder and violence, and be secured in their persons and estates from the
violence of the Soldier, and shall enjoy those rights and privileges which
other Subjects enjoy under protection and obedience to the Parliament. That in
consideration thereof, the city of Bristol, with the castle, and all other
forts and fortifications thereof, and all the ordnance, arms, ammunition, and
all other furniture and provisions of war, excepting what is before allowed,
shall be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, to morrow, being Thursday the 11.
day of this instant September, by one of the clock in the afternoon, without
any diminution or imbezlement; His Highness Prince Rupert then nameing to what
army or garrison of the Kings he will march. That none of the persons who are
to march out on this agreement, shall plunder, hurt, or spoil the Town, or any
person in it, or carry any thing but what is properly their own. That upon
signing these Articles, Colonel Okey, and all persons now in prison in the city
of Bristol, the castle or forts of the same, shall immediately be set at
liberty. That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Tho. Fairfax, such as he
shall approve, this night, who are to remain with him until the City be
delivered. That neither the Convoy nor Officers sent with the Prince, shall
receive any injury in their going or coming back, and shall have seven days
allowance for their return. That upon the delivering of the Town, sufficient
Hostages be given for the performance of the articles on both parts.
Signed by us the Commissioners on the behalf of his Highness, Prince Rupert;
John Mynne. W. Tillyer. W. Valvasour.

Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of his Excellency Sir
Tho: Fairfax. Edw. Montague. Tho. Rainsborough. John Pickering.


That which moved the General to give such favorable conditions, was merely
the preservation of the City, which otherwise would have been consumed by fire,
if the Enemy had been driven to a desperate condition.

God, to show the watchfulness of his Providence over the General, and
Lieutenant General, brought them into some danger, and delivered them out of
the same graciously, during the time of the Parley: For while they were both
sitting on the top of Pryors-hill-Fort, a piece of Ordnance was shot thither
from the castle, and the bullet grazed upon the Fort within two hands breadth
of them, but did them no hurt at all.

This day, the well-affected Countrymen of Gloucestershire, to the number of
about 3000. with some 30 Colors, appeared, expressing great forwardness to
serve the Parliament; but the service being over, they returned to their own
homes.

In this Storm we lost several Officers, both of Horse and Foot, and had many
wounded; Major Bethel was shot at entering the Line, whom I have never occasion
to mention, but greatly to his honor: Of this wound he shortly after dyed.
Captain Ireton, who led on the Forlorn hope at the storm, was shot with a brace
of bullets in the arm (and it broken thereby) but after enduring great torture
and pain for many months, he is through Gods blessing happily recovered. Major
Cromwell, a valiant and discreet Gentleman, (Major to Colonel Inglesby) was
wounded in the Storm, whereof he afterward dyed. Lieutenant Colonel Purefoy,
of col. Fortescues regiment, a very stout man, was slain upon the place.
Captain Hill, of Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiment, slain at the storm. Major
Read, Colonel Inglesbies Brother, and diverse other Officers wounded.

Thursday, September. 11. The Prince, according to the Articles, marched out of
the great Fort, as also many Ladies and persons of quality, who had convoyes
appointed them according to agreement. In the Prince his marching out, the
General himself attended him about two miles. The Prince, after he was out of
the Fort, declared which way he intended to go, and propounded Oxford; whither,
accordingly, he, and all his company were safely convoyed: And because he
feared the rising of the Club-men upon him, and not being secure enough in his
Convoy, as he conceived; he desired the General to let him have 1000 Arms for
his Foot, engaging himself upon his honor, they should injure no man
therewith, only to make use of them (if need were) to keep themselves from the
violence of the people, and to return them back again: which accordingly was
allowed him, and so many as kept their arms, restored them again; but the
greatest part of them in their march running away, many of the arms were lost.
Diverse persons of quality that were in the town, desired liberty to stay a
while longer, till they could provide themselves with Horses and necessaries to
march away, which civility the General did not deny them.

A great appearance there was of the Country to see the marching away of the
Prince, and extremely cried they out against the Prince, Give him no Quarter,
Give him no Quarter.

The goodness of God to the Army during this siege, in preserving them from the
sickness was very remarkable: For when the Army was resolved to march from
Sherborne to Bristol, one main objection there against it at that time was,
least the plague should be thereby brought into the Army, but every man's
conscience and judgment being satisfied that the design was good, and most
for the advantage of the public, and feazable in their opinion; they resolved
to trust God what he would do with them, as to the sickness that was much
spread in those parts. And whereas when the Army came before Bristol, as
likewise for many weeks before there dyed within the City above an hundred a
week of the sickness: nor could we quarter our forces in any town or village
but the sickness was in it: Yet during all this time not one Officer or
Soldier in our Army dyed of the plague, that we could hear of, but one.

What ordnance, arms, ammunition, and provisions we found in the Forts, City,
and Castle, I shall give you in the words of Lieutenant General Cromwels Letter
to the Speaker of the House of Commons: wherein also the Reader may find, not
only a confirmation, but an amplification of this Story, by some other
particulars not yet mentioned; which Letter follows.

It has pleased the General to give me in charge to represent unto you, a
particular account of the taking of Bristol, the which I gladly undertake.
After the finishing of that service at Sherborne, it was disputed at a
counsel of war, whether we should march into the West, or to Bristol. Amongst
other arguments, the leaving so considerable an Enemy at our backs, to march
into the heart of the Kingdom; the undoing of the country about Bristol, which
was exceedingly harassed by the Prince his being but a fortnight thereabouts;
the correspondency he might hold in Wales, the possibility of uniting the
enemies forces where they pleased, and especially the drawing to an head the
disaffected Club-men of Somerset, Wilts, and Dorset, when once our backs were
toward them.

These considerations, together with the taking so important a place, so
advantageous for the opening of Trade to London, did sway the balance, and
beget that conclusion. When we came within four miles of the City, we had a new
debate, Whether we should endeavor to block it up, or make a regular Siege?
The latter being overruled, Colonel Welden with his Brigade marched to
Pile-hill, on the south side of the city, being within musket shot thereof,
where in a few days they made a good Quarter, overlooking the city. Upon our
advance, the Enemy fired Bedminster, Clifton, and some other Which they did
purposely to disaccommodate the Army in point of quarter.
villages lying near to the city, and would have fired more, if our unexpected
coming had not hindered. The General caused some Horse and Dragoons under
Commissary Genesis Ireton, to advance over Avon, to keep in the Enemy on the North
side of the town, until the Foot could come up; And after a day, the General,
with Col. Montagues, and Col. Rainsboroughs Brigades, marched over at Kensham
to Stapleton, where he quartered that night: The next day, Colonel Montague
(having his Post assigned) with his Brigade, was to secure all between the
rivers From and Avon, he came up to Lawfords Gate within musket shot thereof:
Col. Rainsboroughs Post was near to Durdam Down, where the Dragooneers and
three Regiments of horse made good a Post upon the Down, between him and the
river Avon, on his right hand, and from Colonel Rainsboroughs quarters to From
river, on his left. A part of Col. Birch, and Major genesis Skippons regiment were
to maintain that Post. These Posts thus settled, our horse were forced to be
upon exceeding great duty, to stand by the Foot, lest the Foot being so weak in
all their posts, might receive an affront. And truly herein we were very happy,
that we should receive so little loss by Sallies, considering the paucity of
our men to make good the posts, and the strength of the Enemy within: By
sallies (which were three or four) I know not that we lost thirty men in all
the time of our siege. Of Officers of quality, only Colonel Okey was taken, by
mistake, going to the Enemy, thinking they had been friends; and Captain
Guilliams slain in a charge. We took Sir Bernard Astley, and killed Sir Richard
Crane (one very considerable with the Prince.) We had a Council of war,
concerning the storming of the town, about eight days before we took it; and
in that there appeared great unwillingnes to the work, through the
unseasonablenes of the weather, and other apparent difficulties. Some
inducements to bring us thither, was the report of the good affection of the
Townsmen to us, but that did not answer expectation. Upon a second
consideration, it was overruled for a Storm; which no sooner concluded, but
difficulties were removed, and all things seemed to favor the design: And
truly, there has been seldom the like cheerfulness to any work like to this,
after it was once resolved on. The day and hour of our storm was appointed to
be, Wednesday morning the 10th. about one of the clock: We chose to act it so
early, because we hoped thereby to surprise the Enemy; with this resolution
also, to avoid confusion, and falling foul one upon another; that when we had
recovered the Line, and Forts upon it, we could not advance further until day.
The Generals signal unto storm, was, the firing of straw, and discharging four
piece of canon at Priors-hill-fort: the signal was very well perceived of all,
and truly the men went on with great resolution, and very presently recovered
the Line, making way for the Horse to enter. Colonel Montague, and Colonel
Pickering, who stormed at Lawfords-gate, where was a Double-work, well filled
with men and canon, presently entered, and with great resolution beat the Enemy
from their works, and possessed their canon: their expedition was such, that
they forced the Enemy from their advantages, without any considerable loss to
themselves: They laid down the bridges for the horse to enter, Major Desborough
commanding the horse, who very gallantly seconded the Foot: then, our Foot
advanced to the city walls, where they possessed the Gate against the
castlestreet, whereinto were put an hundred men, who made it good. Sir
Hardresse Waller, with his, and the Generals Regiment, with no less resolution
entered on the other side of Lawfords-gate, toward Avon river, and put
themselves into an immediate conjunction with the rest of the Brigade. During
this, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Hamond attempted Priors-hill-fort, and
the Line downward toward Froom; and the Major-Generals Regiment being to storm
toward Froom river, Colonel Hamond possessed the Line immediately, and beating
the Enemy from it, made way for the horse to enter. Colonel Rainsborough, who
had the hardest task of all at Priors-hill-fort, attempted it, and fought near
three hours for it, and indeed there was great despair of carrying the place,
it being exceeding high, a ladder of thirty rounds scarce reaching the top
thereof; but his resolution was such, that notwithstanding the
inaccessiblenesse and difficulty, he would not give it over. The Enemy had four
piece of canon upon it, which they plied with round, and case-shot upon our
men: his Lieut. colonel Bowen, and others, were two hours at Push of pike,
standing upon the Palizadoes, but could not enter. Colonel Hamond being entered
the Line, and captain Ireton with a Forlorn of col. Rich his Regiment,
interposing with his horse, between the Enemies horse, and col. Hamond,
received a shot with two Pistol bullets, which brake his arm: by which means,
the entrance of col. Hamond did storm the Fort on that part which was inward;
by which means, col. Rainsborough and col. Hamonds men entered the Fort, and
immediately put almost all the men in it to the sword. And as this was the
place of most difficulty, so of most loss to us on that side, and of very
great honor to the undertaker. The Horse did second them with great
resolution. Both these Colonels do acknowledge, that their interposition
between the enemies Horse, and their Foot, was a great means of obtaining of
this strong Fort, without which all the rest of the Line to Froom river would
have done us little good: And indeed, neither Horse nor Foot would have stood
in all that way in any manner of security, had not the Fort been taken.

Major Bethels were the first horse that entered the Line, who did behave
himself gallantly, and was shot in the thigh, had one or two shot more, and had
his horse shot under him. Colonel Birch with his men, and the Major-Generals
Regiment, entered with very good resolution where their Post was; possessing the
Enemies guns, and turning them upon them.

By this, all the Line from Priors-hill-fort to Avon (which was a full mile)
with all the Forts, Ordnance and Bulwarks, were possessed by us, but one,
wherein there were about an hundred and twenty men of the Enemy, which the
General summoned, and all the men submitted.

The success on Colonel Weldens side did not answer with this. And although the
Colonels, and other the Officers and Soldiers, both horse and foot, testified
much resolution as could be expected; Col. Welden, Col. Inglesby, Col. Herbert,
and the rest of the Colonels and Officers both of horse and foot, doing what
could be well looked for from men of honor; Yet what by reason of the height
of the Works, which proved higher then report made them, and the shortness of
the Ladders, they were repulsed with the loss of about an hundred men: Col.
Fortescue's Lieutenant col. was killed, Major Cromwell dangerously shot, and two
of Col. Inglesbies brothers hurt, with some Officers.

Being possessed of thus much as has been related, the Town was fired in three
places by the Enemy, which we could not put out; which begat a great trouble in
the General, and us all, fearing to see so famous a City burnt to ashes before
our faces. Whilst we were viewing so sad a spectacle, and consulting which way
to make further advantage of our success; the Prince sent a Trumpet to the
General, to desire a Treaty for the surrender of the town: to which the General
agreed, and deputed Col. Montague, Col. Rainsborough, and Col. Pickering for
that service, authorizing them with instructions to treat and conclude the
Articles, which are these enclosed; for performance whereof, Hostages were
mutually given. On Thursday, about two of the clock in the afternoon, the
Prince marched out, having a convoy of two Regiments of horse from us, and
making election of Oxford for the place he would go to, which he had liberty to
do by his Articles.

The Canon which we have taken, are about 140. mounted, about 100 barrels of
Powder already come to our hands, with a good quantity of Shot, Ammunition and
Arms; we have found already between two and three thousand Muskets. The Royal
Fort had Victuals in it for one hundred and fifty men, for 320 days, the
Castle victualled for near half so long. The Prince had Foot of the garrison,
as the Major of the city informed me, 2500. and about 1000 Horse, besides the
Trained bands of the town, and Auxiliaries, 1000. some say 1500. I hear but of
one man that has died of the Plague in all our army, although we have
quartered amongst, and in the midst of infected persons and places: We had not
killed of ours in this storm, nor all this siege, two hundred men.

Thus I have given you a true, but not a full account of this great business;
wherein he that runs, may read, that all this is none other than the work of
GOD: he must be a very Atheist that does not acknowledge it.

It may be thought that some praises are due to these gallant Men, of whose
valor so much mention is made: Their humble suit to you, and all that have an
interest in this blessing, is, That in the remembrance of Gods praises, they
may be forgotten. It is their joy, that they are Instruments of Gods glory, and
their Countries good; It is their honor, that God vouchsafes to use them. Sir,
they that have been employed in this service, know, that Faith and Prayer
obtained this City for you: I do not say ours only, but of the people of God
with you, and all England over, who have wrastled with God for a blessing in
this very thing. Our desires are, that God may be glorified by the same spirit
of faith by which we ask all our sufficiency, and have received it; It is meet
that He have all the praise. Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the
same spirit of faith and prayer, the same presence and answer; they agree here,
have no names of difference; pity it is it should be otherwise any where. All
that believe, have the real Unity, which is most glorious, because inward and
spiritual, in the body, and to the head. For being united in Forms, commonly
called Uniformity, every Christian will, for peace sake, study and do as far as
Conscience will permit. And for Brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no
compulsion, but that of Light and Reason; in other things God has put the
sword in the Parliaments hands, for the terror of evil do^rs, and the praise of
them that do well. If any plead exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel: If
any would wring it out of your hands, or steal it from you under what pretense
soever, I hope they shall do it without effect. That God will maintain it in
your hands, and direct you in the use thereof, is the prayer of

Your humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
Bristol, Sept. 14. 1645.
This night the General removed from his quarter at the Farm-house, where he
had been all the time of the siege extremely ill accommodated by reason of the
littlenes of the house, which yet he contented himself withal, in regard it
lay so conveniently upon any Alarm. But this night, He, and the
Lieutenant General removed, and went to Bristol; which they found so unlike
what it had been formerly, in its flourishing condition, that it looked now
more like a Prison then a City, and the people more like Prisoners then
Citizens; being brought so low with Taxations, so poor in Habit, and so
dejected in countenance; the Streets so noisome, and the Houses so nasty, as
that they were unfit to receive Friends, or Freemen, till they were cleansed.

Besides the public mercy to the Kingdom, in the Recovery of Bristol; The
Vindication of Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES (once Governor thereof) seems to have
been also particularly designed by Providence. The General, with the
Lieutenant General (sitting upon Priors-hill-Fort after the Storm) and most of
the chief Officers of the Army, upon a view of the place; comparing the present
strength of it, with what it was when he delivered it, and other circumstances;
freely expressed themselves, as men abundantly satisfied, concerning the hard
misfortune that befell that Noble Gentleman. And indeed, whosoever shall
compare both the Defenses together, according to this ensuing Parallel, must
needs confess, That if Prince Rupert deserved to be acquitted, (as he was by
the King, and a Council of war, at Newark) the former Defense deserves to be
commended: For; Prince Rupert, in this latter, had the advantage of the former,
1. In the Line, which was so much stronger (then the former) by the addition of
a Fort-Royall, and many other Works. 2. In the numbers of Men for defense,
which were Prince Rupert had between 4 and 5000 horse and foot; Col. Fiennes;
but 1700. of all sorts.
more then double, and 1200 of them Horse, (which number of horse was a thing of
great consideration in so large a line) 3. In a place of great strength for
Viz. the Fort-Royal: which though it be twice reckoned in this Parallel, yet it
is in a different respect; viz. here, as a place of retreat; but above, as it
did flanker the Line, and so strengthen it much.
Retreat. And lastly (which is as considerable as any thing) in a probability
of Relief, the This appears in Pr. Ruperts Apology; and that the design of
his Relief, was laid very probably to have succeeded.
King having promised it, and being resolved to have performed it in his own
person, with all the force he could have drawn together. Yet he, in the
defense, slew not 200. (in all) of our Men; Embraced a Parley, so soon as ever
the Town was entered; and concluded the Surrender, upon no better Articles than
the former Governor had. On the other hand, Col. Fiennes (in the former) tho
he had a Prince Rupert, in his printed Declaration and Apology, alleges,
That the Line he had to defend (being about 4 miles in compaise) was generally
but 3 foot thick, and 5 foot high; the Graft commonly but 6 foot broad, and
where it was widest but 7. But 4 footdeep, and where it was de^pest, but 5. And
that in the opinion of all his Colonels and Officers, it was not tenable upon a
brisk and vigorous assault.
Line (full as large,) less strong and tenable, and in that part where the
enemy entered, his Works not finished, nor half so many to defend the^; tho the
Royal fort was not then built, nor any thing but a weak and rotten Castle to
retreat unto, which by the judgment of the The Officers expressed themselves so.
Officers of this army, could not hold out 48 hours against a strong Battery,
much less till Relief could reach it, whereof there was no likelihood; nay, the
Col. Fie^nes sending to the Earl of Essex for relief, his Excellency wrote to
the Lord ^ay, That the Army was not in case to relieve him, nor (He thought)
ever would.
Governor having sent several times, received no answer; but by intelligence
which he had, he understood He could expect no relief. Yet (to the utmost
improving the means he had) 1. He slew 1200. of the Enemy (among whom diverse
prime Officers and Commanders.) 2. Disputed the Suburbs a long while after the
Line was entered. 3. Entertained no Parley, till all endeavors that could be
used (by promise of money, or otherwise) were not able to get 120 men together.
And at length purchased as good Conditions as the latter, and (in some As may
appear by comparing the Articles together.
substantial points) better.

However all wise men would have saved me this pains; (The sense of the
Honorable House of Commons, immediately upon the reduction of Bristol, calling
Col. Fiennes to his former state of Honor and employment; being beyond all
that can be said.) Yet these Considerations are not in vain; for that they
serve as well to the commendation of the goodness of God, in the assisting and
bearing forth this Army through this undertaking; Which, by how much the ods
between the means and preparations for this latter defense were beyond the
former, carried so much the greater demonstration of the more immediate
presence of GOD, and his power with our Army (in this Reduction of Bristol)
than the Enemy could boast of, when He took it.

ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY.
PART. III.
CHAP. I.
The Devizes and Laicock- house surrendered: Berkley- Castle, after in part
stormed, surrendered: With an account of the Counsels that did lead these
actions.

THE face of GOD now shining again upon Bristol, and the General having
through the improvement of a short stay there, viewed the several Forts about
the City, and given order concerning the settling thereof in a safe condition: A
council of war called.
On Saturday, September 13. A Council of War was called, to advise what was
fit next to be done (so agreeable was action to this Army) whether to pursue
the motion made after the taking of Sherborne, to march presently for the
relief of Plymouth, and further parts of the West, or to clear those garrisons
that did interpose between the West and London; which latter was very
necessary, for that if those garrisons were not reduced, The obstructing
garrisons between the West and London resolved to be attempted.
they would hinder correspondency between London and the Army, except at high
rates, of very excessive trouble and charge to the Army, by convoyes upon every
occasion. This was a business of great undertaking, yet (after all things
weighed) it was resolved for the present to attempt the taking in of Berkley,
and the Devizes, as those that were the nearest; deferring further resolution,
as to the rest, to the opportunities providence should administer. Colonel
Rainsborough, for that purpose, was commanded to march with a Brigade
(consisting of Major Genesis Skippons, Colonel Herberts, and Lieut. Col. Prides
Regiments) for the taking in of Berkley-Castle (already blocked up by Horse)
the only garrison considerable left in the County of Gloucester, interrupting
the passage between Bristol and Gloucester. About this time was the Castle of
Cardiffe (with 16. pieces of ordnance, and 400 arms) reduced.
Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell was designed by the General with another Brigade
(consisting of Col. Montagues, Col. Pickerings, Sir Hardresse, Wallers, and
Col. Hamonds Regiments) for the taking in of the Devizes, and Laicock-House.

On Tuesday following, the General having but the overnight newly finished the
whole business for the setlement of Bristol, and dismissing of those of the
enemy that were to be then gone (except some few persons of quality, who had
leave to stay a while in the Town) removed his quarters that night to a friends
house, whilst the Army marched according to former orders.

Wednesday, September 17. His Excellency marched to Bath, and rested there some
four or five days, for the better recovery of his health (as was need) having
been much wearied out, and spent with that great business of Bristol.

Lieut. general Cromwell set down before the D^vizes.
During which time, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell sat down before the Castle of the
Devizes, which commanded the County of Wilts, and was placed in the road of
traffic between the West and London: It was a place of great strength, having
been an old fortification, raised on a huge Mount of earth; the Governor Sir
Charles Llyod: a good Ingineer had added to the strength of its natural
situation, what Art could do, having cut out of the main Earth several Works
commanding one another, and so strong, that no Canon could pierce them;
besides, that being pallizadoed, and stockadoed in most places, it was a matter
of extreme difficulty to storm it: Notwithstanding, the Lieutenant General (not
discouraged thereat) sat down close to it, and having conveniently planted his
Canon and Mortar-pieces; on Sunday at one of the clock he sent in to summon the
castle.

The Governor sent forth word, That the King his Master put him in trust, and
he desired ten days time to send to him, in the mean time he would keep it for
the King. The Lieutenant General wished him not to let slip such an
opportunity: or if he were otherwise resolved, in much civility, he gave leave
to send forth his Lady and such other Gentlewomen that were in the Castle; and
further let him know, that none were more fitting to keep strong holds, Forts,
and Castles, then the Parliament for the use of the King: whereupon the
Governor returned, Win it and wear it. Upon receipt of this answer, the
Lieutenant General having put all things in readiness for a storm, gave command
to the Canoneers presently to give fire, and also to play the Mortar-pieces,
which was accordingly done, and some of the Grenades breaking in the midst of
the castle (being open above) killed several of their men, and much endangered
the blowing up of the Magazine; which so startled the Enemy, that on Monday
about eight of the clock in the morning, the Governor sent forth for a Parley,
and sent out two of his Captains, Captain Challinor, and Captain Garroway. The
Lieutenant General sent two Captains into them, and about eleven of the clock
the Lieutenant General sent them in these Propositions following, viz. 1. That
all Commanders and Gentlemen should march to any garrison the King had within
thirty miles, with their horse and arms; and that all private soldiers should
march away leaving their arms behind them, but not to go to the same
garrisons the Commanders marched to. 2. That all Gentlemen in the Castle should
have liberty to go to their own homes or beyond the seas. 3. That all soldiers
that have been formerly in the Parliament service, should be delivered up to
the Lieutenant General; and all soldiers that would take up arms in the
Parliament service should be entertained.


To these Propositions the Lieutenant General desired his speedy answer, that
so they might march away by four of the clock in the afternoon, to which the
Governor agreed (saving in point of time) and delivered up the castle on the
morrow at ten of the clock, at which time they marched out. The Devizes
surrendered.
The Governor and his Officers with their arms, and his foot without arms,
having the liberty of three carriages, and a safe Convoy to Worcester. The
number of soldiers that marched out were about 400. In the castle was found a
very plentiful Magazine of victuals, and good store of ammunition, and two
piece of ordnance.

Devizes thus happily reduced, the General marched thither Tuesday 23. from
Bath, and the Enemy marched out the same day toward Worcester, according to
the Articles. And as the wheels of gracious Providence were now upon a nimble
motion, so God was pleased to carry forth the Army to a most full compliance
with the same. Col Pickering sent to reduce Laicock-house.
No sooner was the Devizes gained, but the same day colonel Pickering, with his
own and two Regiments more, was commanded to Laicock-house, a garrison of the
Enemies, kept by col. Bovile; who considering, that neither Bristol nor the
Devizes were able to hold out against our force, did easily resolve, that a
Poor house was much less able; (though in truth there were good works about
it) accordingly therefore upon the first Summons, he came to conditions of
surrender, and had honorable terms granted him; upon which he marched out the
next day toward Excester, viz. himself, his Officers, and Soldiers, with
their arms and baggage; the General himself adding to the solemnity by his own
presence, who went from the Devizes on purpose to view the garrison, and see
the Enemy march forth.

Barkley-Castle stormed by col. Rainsborough.
The same day col. Rainsborough with his forces before Barkley-castle stormed
the outworks and the Church, which were the main strength of the castle, with
Scaling-ladders, performing the service with so much resolution and gallantry
(both Officers and Soldiers) as quickly made them masters of the place;
wherein were taken 90 prisoners, besides 40 put to the sword, amongst whom were
a Major and a Captain. This was such a terror and discouragement unto the Enemy
within the castle, to see the resolution of our soldiers, and the execution
done upon theirs in the Church and outworks, that the Governor, Sir Charles
Lucas (who returned answer to the first Summons, That he would eat horseflesh
before he would yield, and man's flesh when that was done: and upon a second
Summons sent as peremptory an answer;) yet now perceiving the planting of our
ordnance against him upon his own Works (which we had newly gained) whereby we
had a great advantage to play into the castle; and sensible what he was to
expect if he came not to present terms, was glad to sound a Parley, which was
yielded to, and Commissioners sent out to treat, and the Castle was surrendered
upon these Articles. Barkley-castle surrendered.
The soldiers to march out without arms; the Governor, Sir Charler Lucas,
with three horses and arms, and not above 50. l. in money; every Field-officer
with two horses, and but 5. l. in money; Foot-captains with swords, but no
horse; the soldiers with not above 5 s. a piece.

This Castle was a place of great strength, well victualled and manned; the
Governor thereof Sir Charles Lucas, a soldier of reputation and valor,
confident to hold it out against any force should appear before it that Winter.

There were taken in it eleven pieces of Ordnance, provision of victuals for
six months (afterward sold for a good value, for the use of the soldiery:)
In this service we lost only one Captain, not many common soldiers (though
many wounded:) colonel Herbert, as he valiantly led on his men to storm, was
shot through the Hat (narrowly escaping a greater danger:) there marched out of
the castle above 500 Horse and Foot: the County of Gloucester not a little
satisfied with the reducing of this Castle, being a total clearing of their
County.

How this high hand of God lifted up, and stretched forth against the Enemy,
wrought upon them, I shall give you in some instances. A Lieut. col. of Sir
Charles Lucas's, when he saw the garrison was surrended, could not hold, but
brake forth and swore to col. Rainsborough, He could be content to go to Hell,
and be a Major there to plague the Roundheads; advancing in his hellish Dialect
in this latter speech, but proportionable to his Essay in a former speech after
the first Summons, when he said, God dam him he would go quick into hell,
rather then yield the Castle to the Roundheads. Another of their Officers in
the same castle said to a captain of Horse in our Army, He thought God was
turned Roundhead, the Kings forces prospered so ill.

These ought to be the greater engagements upon us, to sanctify that name of
God which he proclaims amongst us in these successes: from whom else shall God
have his glory?

CHAP. II.
The counsels whereby the Army steered their course imparted. The Reduction of
Winchester.

A counsel of war (the forementioned garrisons reduced) advising of the next
action.
AND now came into consideration, in what way for the advantage of the kingdoms
service, the Army should be disposed of, as to the ensuing Winter (it being
then the latter end of September) the taking in of some of these garrisons of
the Enemies, viz. Winchester, Basing, Dennington, Farrington, and Wallingford,
which together with Oxford, like Vipers in the bowels infested the midland
parts, seemed with much reason to invite the Army (especially being so near
them) to attempt them; which if, by Gods blessing, they should happily succeed
in, they might (to the best advantage) make their winter quarters about Oxford,
whereby that garrison being straightened, would probably fall into their hands by
the Spring, for want of provisions. On the other hand, many a sad look toward
the West (where the most considerable visible strength of the Enemy then was;
which if let alone all winter, might possibly prove very formidable in the
Spring, and in the mean while overpowering Major genesis Massies forces then about
Taunton, might advance their quarters into the midland parts, and make all our
new conquests unserviceable to the Kingdom) did strongly incline the Army that
way; but that which most of all distracted them, was, that they were not able
at once to grasp both the West and Midland parts (as was their great ambition)
yet resolving to assay what they were able to both; Their resolution.
Lieutenant General Cromwell was sent with the forementioned Brigade, and three
Regiments of horse, for the taking in of the garrisons of Winchester and Basing,
which was the rather attempted, because it conduced much to the absolute
freeing of a passage from London into the West, whither the General with the
rest of the army, according to a resolution then taken, was immediately
marching.

About this time was Farleigh castle in Somersetshire surrendered to the
Parliament. And about the same time, Sandal castle in Yorkshire was surrendered
to col. Overton.
Col. Rainsborough his work at Berkley-castle being done, was commanded to
advance to the General, who resolved to halt with his Forces about Warminster,
till he came up to him. Accordingly, Saturday, 27. the General marched to
Warminster with the Army, and there continued till Tuesday the 30. On which day
the Army marched toward Shaftsbury, and were mustered in their march; the
General continuing still at Warminster, choosing so to do, not only for the
forementioned reason, but also till he might hear that the treasure for the
Army was at least on the way from London, the Soldiers being so out of money,
that they were all enforced to take free quarter, which they had not done till
then. During his Excellencies abode at Warminster, the good news of the Kings
forc^s being routed at Routon-Heath near West-Chester, by Major General Pointz,
was brought to the Army.

Wednesday, October. 1. the Army marched to Middleton, and thence the next day to
Dorchester, and thence, Saturday October. 4. to Beauminster, where they rested
the Lords day, (only the Train that was in the Rear, marched that day up to the
Van of the Army) and thence on Monday to Chard; About this time was Chepflow
town and castle in Monmouthshire reduced by Col. Morgan governor of Gloucester.
And on Wednesday the 8. the General went to Lyme, where he was honorably
entertained by the Governor, Col. C^ely, and stayed there that night. It was
wonderful to think, considering the situation of the place, and the meannesse
of the Works about it, that it should possibly hold out as it did, against such
a force as laid siege unto it.

Winchester was agreed to be surrendered to Lieutenant General Cromwell: the
Terms whereupon, and other particulars concerning the same, I shall present you
withal in the words of the Lieut. Generals Letter, and Mr. Peter's his Relation
made to the House of Commons. The Letter follows:

SIR,
Lieutenant-gen Cromwels Letter of the taking of Winchester.
I came to Winchester on the Lords day, being the 28. of September, with
Cololonel Pickering, commanding his own, Colonel Montagues, and Sir Hardresse
Wallers regiments. After some dispute with the Governor, we entered the Town; I
summoned the Castle, was denied, whereupon we fell to prepare our Batteries,
which we could not perfect (some of our Guns being out of order) until Friday
following. Our Battery was six guns, which being finished, after once firing of
them round, I sent him a second Summons for a Treaty, which they refused,
whereupon we went on with our work, and made a breach in the wall near the
Black tower, which after about 200 shot, we thought stormable, and purposed on
Monday morning to attempt it. On Sunday night about ten of the clock, the
Governor beat a Parley, desiring to treat: I agreed unto it, and sent Col.
Hamond, and Major Harrison in to him, who agreed unto these enclosed Articles.

Sir, This is the addition of another mercy; You see, God is not weary in doing
you good; I confess, Sir, his favor to you is as visible, when he comes by
his power upon the hearts of his enemies, making them quit places of strength
to you, as when he gives courage to your Soldiers to attempt hard things. His
goodness is, in this, much to be acknowledged; for the Castle was well manned,
with 680 Horse and Foot, there being near 200 Gentlemen, Officers and their
servants; Well victualled, with 1500 weight of Cheese, very great store of
Wheat and Beer, near 20 Barrels of Powder, 7 Pieces of Canon, the Works were
exceeding good and strong. It is very likely it would have cost much blood to
have gained it by storm; we have not lost 12 men. This is repeated to you, that
God may have all the praise, for it is all his due.

Sir, I rest, Your most humble servant, Oliver Cromwell.

Mr. Peter's his Report made to the House of Commons, containing some other
particulars concerning Winchester.

Mr. Peter's his relation of the taking of Winchester.
My commands (from the Lieutenant General) are to give this honorable House a
further Narrative of the Castle of Winchester, being upon the place, and a
spectator of Gods good hand in the whole work; as also to present his humble
request to the House in some particulars. And before I speak to either of them,
if Gratitude it self were not sometimes unseasonable, I would in my own name,
and in the name of many thousands, return this honorable House most humble
thanks for our Lieutenant General, in that you suffer with patience the
vacancie of his place in this House: My wish is, that his spirit, and that
public English spirit of Hampden, Pym, and Strowd, may be doubled upon your
new elected Members.

For our Lieutenant General, this I may say: That Judgment and Affections are
in him striving for the mastery: I have rarely seen such heights, and depths
concent in one man, That when I look upon the two Chiefs of our Army, I
remember Gustavus Adolphus, and Oxenstern, and I wish that our hopes in these
may not be so shortlived, as the Germans hopes in them were. More I might say
concerning him that sent me, who is so far above the world, and lives so little
upon the States pay, and minds himself so little; but that he has enjoined
silence to all his friends, in any thing that might turn to his own praise.

For the Castle of Winchester, we begun our Batteries upon Saturday morning,
which wrought so effectually, that a breach, wherein 30 men might go abrest,
was made; the Enemy sallied out, and beat our men from our guns, which were
soon recovered again: We played then with our grenades from our Mortar-peeces,
with the best effect that I have seen, which brake down the Mansion house in
many places, cut off a Commissioner of theirs by the thighs, the most austere
and wretched Instrument in that country, and at last blew up their Flag of
defiance into the air, and tore the Pinnacle in pieces upon which it stood.

Summons being sent as we entered upon this work, was refused by the Lord Ogle
their Governor: And another Summons God sent them, in the middle of their
Battery; his Lady, to whom our Lieutenant genesis had given leave to come forth,
and had gone some miles out of the town, died, by whom the Governor had during
her life 1000. l. a year, now lost by her death.

The chiefest street of the Town the Enemy played upon, whereby diverse
passenge^s were wounded, and some killed, in which street my quart^rs were, I
have that cause to bless God for my preservation.

The Lords day we spent in preaching and prayer, whilst our gunners were
battering, and at 8 a clock at night we received a Letter from the Governor
for a treaty, which I have brought with me. Colonel Hammond, and Major Harrison
were sent into the Castle on our party. Sir Edward Ford, and a Major of theirs
were sent to us; The whole night was spent about it, our men standing upon some
special terms with them, and very desirous were we to accept Sir Edward Ford,
and Bennet, to be our prisoners. By eight of the clock on Monday morning, it
was agreed they should depart out of the Castle at five of the clock, according
to these Articles.

Articles agreed upon, the 5. of October 1645. Between the Right honorable
William Viscount Ogle, governor of the garrison of the Castle of Winton, of
the one part; and Col. Robert Hammond, and Major Thomas Harrison, on the behalf
of Lieutenant genesis Oliver Cromwell, of the other party, for the surrender of the
said Castle.
1. That the Lord Ogle shall deliver up the Castle of Winchester, with all the
arms, ordnance, ammunition, provision, and all function of war whatsoever,
without any imbezelment, waste or spoil, unto that Officer or Officers as
shall be thereunto appointed by the said Lieutenant genesis to morrow, being
Monday the 6. of October, by three of the clock after Noon. 2. That the said
Lord Ogle shall have his own Colors, and one hundred fixed Arms for his guard,
and one hundred men to carry them. 3. That the Lord Ogle, and all the Officers
in commission, shall march out of the said castle with their own horse and
arms, and their own proper goods unto Woodstock, whither they shall be safely
conveyed. 4.That there shall be allowed to the Lord Ogle and his Officers six
carriages for the transporting of their goods aforesaid. 5. That all Officers,
Gentlemen, Clergymen, and inhabitants of the city of Winchester, and all
Officers within the guards (desiring it) may be at their own time, free from
all violence and injury of the Parliaments forces. 6. That the Lord Ogle shall
give sufficient hostages for the performance of the Articles here constituted
on their part to be performed, also for the safe return of the Convoy.
These Articles being concluded on, I was forth with sent into the Castle to
take a view of it before my departure, where I found a piece of ground improved
to the best advantage; for when we were entered by battery, we had 6. distinct
works, and a Drawbridge to pass through, so that it was doubtless a very
strong piece, and well appointed, as may appear by this ensuing note of the
ammunition and provisions we found there.

Viz.

7 Pieces of Ordnance. 17 Barrels of Powder. 2000 Weight of Musket bullet. 800
Weight of Match. 38 Hogsheads of Beef and Pork. 15000 Weight of Cheese. 800
Pound of Butter. 140 Quarters of Wheat and Meal. 3 Hogsheads of French wine.
10 Quarters of Salt. 20 Bushel of Oatmeale. 70 Dosen of Candles. 30 Load of
Wood. 40 Quarters of Charcoale. 30 Bushels of Seacoale. 14 Sheep. 4 Quarters of
Fresh beef. 7000 Weight of Biskets. 112 hogsheads of strong beer.
The Castle was manned with 700 men, diverse of them Reformadoes; the chief men
I saw there, were, Viscount Ogle their governor, Sir John Pawlet an old
soldier, Sir William Courtney, and Colonel Bennet, also Doctor Curle the
Bishop of Winchester, who came forth to our quarters in the morning, with whom
I spent an hour or two, who with tears and much importunity desired the Lieut.
Generals favor to excuse his not accepting the offer that he made unto him in
his first entering the town; He desired of me a guard to his lodging, lest the
Soldiers should use violence to him and his Chaplain, who were in their long
Gowns and Cassocks, and he was accordingly safely conveyed home. I do verily
believe that they will hardly bring to Woodstock 200 men. It did much affect
us to see what an enemy we had to deal with, who themselves being Judges, could
not choose but say, that our God is not as their God. And this is the
nineteenth garrison son has been taken this summer, through Gods goodness;
and he that will not take his share in this common joy, is either stupid, or
envious.

The fruits of what is already done, are great; amongst the rest, what I saw
upon the way, all sorts traveling upon their occasions freely to their own
homes, with Carriages and Wains, many Innes filled with guests, the former face
of things returning upon us in several kinds; yea, now we may ride with safety
from Dover to the middle of Devonshire.

Lieutenant genesis Cromwell stayed but one day, after Sir William Ogle the
governor of Winchester, and the rest of the garrison were marched out to
Oxford, to settle that place; but immediately took his march toward Basing,
for the reducing thereof.

A remarkable piece of justice by way of satisfaction to the Enemy.
Thus far Mr. Peter's. But before I leave Winchester, I cannot but observe a
remarkable piece of Justice done in satisfaction to the Enemy, for some injury
they had sustained at their marching forth of Winchester, by Plunder, contrary
to the Articles, which was done by some Troopers; who being apprehended, were
afterward tried by a Council of war, and condemned to die; and after lots cast
for their lives (being six of them) he whose lot it was to die, was brought to
the place of execution, where with a demonstration of great penitence (so far
as the beholders did judge) he suffered death for his offense; which exemplary
justice made a good impression upon the Soldiery: The other five were sent
with a Convoy to Oxford, (together with a full account of this proceeding, to
the Governor there, Sir Tho. Glemham) to be delivered over as prisoners, and
to be put to death, or otherwise punished as he should think fit: Which was so
well received by the Enemy (to see so much right was done them) that Sir Thomas
Glemham returned the prisoners back again, with an acknowledgement of the
Lieutenant-Generals Nobleness, in being so tender in breach of Articles.

CHAP. III.
The several Motions and Actions of the Army unto Tiverton. The storming and
taking of Bazing-house fully related.

BUt now to return to his Excellency, who on Thursday the ninth, came back from
Lyme to Chard, where he received intelligence, that Goring intended to break
through with his Horse: whereupon a Letter was sent to the Committees of the
county of Somerset, to have the country in a readiness to rise (if occasion
should be) for the making good of the Passes.

Chard, till the treasure (so long expected) was come up thither, which was on
Saturday the 11. and the Army was paid that night, having been ever since the
taking of Bristol without pay.

Axminster, on which day a Captain of the Lord Gorings came in to us with a
Troop of Horse, as also one Colonel Connocke, late Governor of Tiverton. But
for this latter, the General understanding of his cruel carriage to the
country (whilst he was Governor of that place) in torturing people, by
burning them with matches, and otherwise cruelly using both men and women (in
such manner as is not fit to be mentioned) he was required to depart the
quarters of the Parliament, or to be proceeded against as a Spy.

Goring intending to break through, expected by our horse.
This day his Excellency had further intelligence by his Spies, That the Lord
Goring intended to break through with the Horse, or beat up our quarters that
night; and that he had advanced most of them on this side the River Ex, for
that end, (being himself at Poltimore with about 1500 horse) whereupon
Commissary-General Ireton gave strict orders for the keeping of the guards, and
also that all the horsemen that were in quarters should have their horses ready
sadled, in case there should be an alarm: and our caution in this point was no
more then needed; for this night, the Lord Goring, Lord Wentworth, Lord Miller,
and most of their bravest Cavalrie, came from their quarters near Excester, and
passed through Hunniton about 12 at night. and so came on to Black-Down, Goring
by some advantage surprising our guards.
and knowing the country well, by an obscure and unusual way passed our
Out-guards (the extreme darkness of the night favoring them) and got between
the Main guard and our Quarters, and falling into some of the Dragoon and Foot
quarters, took about 40 Foot, and 20 Dragoons, and returned immediately,
fearing lest the Army should have taken the alarm; but so nimble were they in
that action, that they were gone before the alarm was received.

Our Army lying in the field, to prevent the Enemy breaking through.
Tuesday, the 14. The General and the Army marched from Chard to Hunniton, by
the way of Axminster; and that night, our Horse, and much of the Foot lay in
the field about Hunniton, lest the Enemy should break through (we pressing so
hard upon them) to join with the King, which was (in the opinion of the
General, and all understanding men) the best game they had to play, and most
disadvantagious to our proceedings; as that, that would have enabled the King
to make incursions into the Eastern Association, and divert a great part of
this Army, who desired to complete the service of reducing the West, before
they returned. But the Enemy attempted it not that night; and had they not
(upon advertisement that our Forces were come to Hunniton) removed their
quarters from St. Mary Autree, Poultimour (and those parts) beyond the river
Ex, (as they did) they had certainly been beaten up, (Parties being sent out
for that purpose.)

Our army advancing, and the Enemy giving way.
Wednesday, 15. The General and the Army marched from Hunniton to Colampton,
where the Lord Miller was with 300 Dragoons, and some Horse, who upon our
approach quit their Barracadoes and the Town, left their Turn-pikes standing;
strong Parties pursued them, and took some prisoners, who confessed their Party
were gone toward Tiverton. Whereupon a Council of war was that night called,
Major genesis Massey sent to besiege Triverton-castle.
and Major General Massey was desired to go with his Horse, and the Brigade of
Foot under the command of Colonel Welden, to possess the Town of Tiverton, and
besiege the Castle, which accordingly he did.

About this time, Pr. Rupert and Maurice, as they were going from Banbury and
those parts (with a convoy of Banbury horse) to the King at Newark (in the
mood) to take their leave of him, were set upon by Col. Rossiter, and sore put
to it.
Thursday, October. 16. There came in some Officers from the Enemy; a
Lieutenant Colonel, and two Captains, who declared their unhappiness to be
engaged on that side, desiring a Pass to go to the Lord Inchequine, to serve
in Ireland against the Rebels.

The enemy quitting Broadnix, upon the approach of our army.
The General went this day to Broadnix, where the Enemy kept a guard with a
Commanded party of foot, and some horse; but upon the approach of our forces,
they quit the town, and the General returned back to Columpton, The enemies
notorious brags to keep up their reputation, coming to nothing.
where information was given by the Inhabitants of good repute, that the Enemy
had boasted the day before our coming into the town, That Goring had cut
Fairfax in pieces near Chard, and routed his whole Army; took drink upon it,
and wished it might be their poison, if it were not true. This course the Enemy
took, to make their party believe they were great conquerours; whereas indeed
what they did was very inconsiderable, and as to the reducing their affairs
into any tolerable condition, scarce worth the mentioning. And on this occasion
may be noted (though it might be mentioned in a more fit place afterward) that
this small business near Chard was the only affront the Enemy put upon us
during the Armies being in the West of England; But with what iterated affronts
our Forces have recompensed them in their quarters, the action at Bovy-Tracy,
and diverse other places hereafter mentioned, will manifest.

Friday, October. 17. A Council of war was called for advise, whether to march
toward Excester, and so toward Plymouth, or to take in Tiverton, in regard it
lay upon a Pass, and might much annoy the Army to leave it behind them
unreduced, or at least unblockt up; and if once taken, might be a Magazine, and
place of strength and convenience, encie, either to secure any thing in, or to
retreat unto upon occasion: Tiverton resolved (upon a Council of war) to be
attempted. Memorand. That Col. Fryes regiment was (before this) sent to secure
Tiverton whilst the Genesis marched Westward.
whereupon it was resolved to make it their work to take in that place, and the
rather, to enforce Gorings horse to keep to the other side of Ex; for the Army
being once possessed of that Pass, would be the better able to keep the Enemy
before them, from breaking through. The General with some forces marching to
Tiverton
Whereupon this day toward noon, the General marched toward Tiverton with a
great part of the Army, leaving some Horse and Foot at Broadnix, Silverton, and
Columb-Iohn, within 4 miles of Excester, and accordingly as was desired, it
succeeded, in that the Enemy was enforced to draw all over Ex.

The relation of the storming and taking of (...) house by Lieut. genesis Cromwell.
But before I proceed in this story, I must give you a Relation of the taking
of Basing, a place of great concernment, and which had been a great annoyance
unto the Country, and the City of London, in hindering Trade.

This business, as it was managed by Lieutenant genesis Cromwell, who in person
Commanded in the reducing of that place, and Winchester, and managed the same
with much prudence and resolution; so I shall give you the particulars of the
action, in the words of his own Letter, and Mr. Peter's his Relation.

Lieutenant General Cromwels Letter, to the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire
Speaker to the honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
The Lieut. generals letter of that business.
I thank God I can give you a good account of Basing. After our Batteries
placed, we settled the several Posts for the Storm: Colonel Dalbier was to be
on the North side of the House next the Grange, Colonel Pickering on his left
hand, and Sir Hardresse Waller's, and Colonel Montague's Regiments, next him.
We stormed this morning, after six of the clock; the signal for falling on,
was, the firing four of our canon, which being done, our men fell on with great
resolution and cheerfulness; we took the two Houses without any considerable
loss to our selves; Col. Pickering stormed the New house, passed through, and
got the Gate of the Old House; whereupon they summoned a Parley, which our men
would not hear. In the mean time, Col. Montague's, and Sir Hardresse Wallers
Regiments assaulted the strongest Works, where the Enemy kept his Court of
guard, which with great resolution they recovered, beating the Enemy from a
Whole-Culverin, and from that Work; which having done, they drew their Ladders
after them, and got over another Work, and the House-wall, before they could
enter: In this, Sir Hardresse Waller performing his duty with honor and
diligence, was shot on the Arm, but not dangerous; We have had little loss;
Many of the Enemy our men put to the sword, and some Officers of quality, most
of the rest we have prisoners, among which the Marquisse, and Sir Robert Peak,
with diverse other Officers, whom I have ordered to be sent to you: we have
taken about ten Piece of Ordnance, much Ammunition, and our Soldiers a good
encouragement.

I humbly offer to have this Place slighted, for these reasons: It will ask 800
men to man it, It is no Frontier, The Country is poor about it, The place
exceedingly ruined by our Batteries and Mortar-peeces, and a Fire which fell
upon the place since our taking it. If you please to take the garrison of
Farnham, some out of Chichester, and a good part of the Foot which were here
under D'Albier, and make a strong Quarter at Newbury, with three or four Troops
of Horse; I dare be confident, it would not only be a curb to Dennington, but a
Security and Frontier to all these parts, and by lying there will make the
Trade most secure between Bristol and London, for all Carriages: And I believe,
the Gentlemen of Sussex and Hantshire will with more cheerfulnes contribute to
maintain a Garrison on the Frontier, then in their bowels, which will have
less safety in it. Sir, I hope not to delay, but march toward the West to
morrow, and to be as diligent as I may in my Expedition thither. I must speak
my judgment to you, That if you intend to have your work carried on, Recruits
of Foot must be had, and a course taken to pay your Army; else believe me, Sir,
it may not be able to answer the work you have for it to do.

I entreated Col. Hamond to wait upon you, who was taken by a mistake, whilst
we lay before this garrison; whom God safely delivered to us, to our great joy,
but to his loss of almost all he had, which the Enemy took from him.

The Lord grant that these mercies may be acknowledged with all thankfulness;
God exceedingly abounds in his goodness to us, and will not be weary, until
Righteousness and Peace meet, and that He has brought forth a glorious work
for the happiness of this poor Kingdom. Wherein desires to serve GOD, and
You, with a faithful heart,

Your most humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
Basingstoak, October. 14. 1645.
Peter's Relation to the House of Commons, was as follows.

Mr. Peter's relation, supplying diverse particulars.
That he came into Basing-house some time after the Storm, on Tuesday the 14.
of October, 1645. and took a view first of the Works, which were many, the
circumvallation being above a mile compass; the old house had stood (as it is
reported) 2 or 300 years, a nest of Idolatry, the New house surpassing that in
beauty and stateliness, and either of them fit to make an Emperors court.

The Rooms, before the storm (it seems) in both houses, were all completely
furnished, Provisions for some years, rather then months; 400 quarters of
Wheat, Bacon diverse rooms full (containing hundreds of flitches) Cheese
proportionable, with Oatmeal, Beef, Pork, Beer diverse cellars full, and that
very good.

A Bed in one room, furnished, that cost 1300. l. Popish books many, with
Copes, and such Utensils, that in truth the House stood in its full pride, and
the Enemy was persuaded that it would be the last piece of ground that would be
taken by the Parliament, because they had so often foiled our Forces that had
formerly appeared before it. In the several rooms, and about the house, there
were slain 74. and only one woman, the daughter of Doctor Griffith, who by her
railing provoked our Soldiers (then in heat) into a further passion. There lay
dead upon the ground, Major Cuffle (a man of great account amongst them, and a
notorious Papist) slain by the hands of Major Harrison; (that godly and gallant
Gentleman) and Robinson the Player, who a little before the Storm, was known to
be mocking and scorning the Parliament, and our Army. Eight or nine Gentlewomen
of rank, running forth together, were entertained by the Common soldiers
somewhat coursly, yet not uncivilly, considering the action in hand; the
plunder of the soldier continued till Tuesday night: one Soldier had 120
pieces in Gold for his share, others Plate, others Jewels; amongst the rest,
one got 3 bags of silver, which (he being not able to keep his own counsel)
grew to be common pillage amongst the rest, and the fellow had but one half
crown left for himself at last.

Also the Soldiers sold the Wheat to Country people, which they held up at
good rates a while, but afterward the Market fell, and there was some
abatements for haste. After that they sold the household stuff, whereof there
was good store; and the Country loaded away many Carts, and continued a great
while fetching out all manner of household stuff, till they had fetched out all
the Stools, Chairs, and other Lumber, all which they sold to the Country people
by peece-meale. In all these great houses there was not one Iron bar left in all
the windows (save only what was in the fire) before night. And the last work of
all was the Lead, and by Thursday morning they had hardly left one Gutter about
the house. And what the Soldiers left, the Fire took hold on; which made more
then ordinary haste; leaving nothing but bare walls and chimnies in less then 20
hours, being occasioned by the neglect of the Enemy, in quenching a Fire-ball
of ours at first.

We know not how to give a just account of the number of persons that were
within; for we have not three hundred prisoners, and it may be an hundred
slain, whose bodies (some being covered with rubbish) came not to our view;
only riding to the house on Tuesday night, we heard diverse crying in Vaults for
quarter, but our men could neither come to them, nor they to us. But amongst
those that we saw slain, one of their Officers lying on the ground, seeming so
exceeding tall, was measured, and from his great toe to his crown was 9 foot in
length.

The Marquis being pressed by Mr. Peter's arguing with him, broke out, and said.
That if the King had no more ground in England but Bazing-house, he would
adventure as he did, and so maintain it to his uttermost, meaning with these
Papists: comforting himself in this disaster, That Bazing-house was called
Loyalty. But he was soon silenced in the question concerning the King and
Parliament, only hoping that the King might have a day again. And thus the Lord
was pleased in a few hours to show us what mortal seed all earthly glory grows
upon, and how just and righteous the ways of God are, who takes sinners in
their own snares, and lifts up the heads of his despised people.

This is now the 20. garrison that has been taken in this Summer by this Army;
and I believe most of them, the answer of the prayers and trophies of the faith
of some of Gods servants. The Commander of this Brigade having spent much time
with God in prayer the night before the storm, and seldom fighting without
some text of Scripture to support him. This time he rested upon that blessed
Word of God, written in the 115 Psalm. v. 8. They that make them are like unto
them, so is every one that trusts in them; which, with some verses going
before was now accomplished.

Whereas the House had ordered that the country people should carry away those
buildings, God Almighty had decreed touching that beforehand, nothing remained
but a blast of wind to blow down the tottering walls and chimnies: Doubtless
this providence of God has a double voice, the one unto the Enemy, and the
other unto us; the Lord help us with skill to improve it. I hope by this time
the State has a pennyworth for a penny, and I hope they will have full
measure and running over. I wish that the payment and recruiting of this Army
may not be slighted: It is an easy matter to grieve God, in our neglects
toward him; and not hard to weary one another. What if the poor Soldier had
some remembrance, though small, to leave as the acceptance of this service,
which is already begun by a Mr. Maynard.
worthy Member of this House, who has appointed some Medals to be made of gold
to be bestowed upon those that ventured on the greatest difficulties.

Mr. Peter's presented the Marquisses own Colors, which he brought from Basing,
the Motto of which was, Donec pax reddit terris; The very same, King Charles
gave upon his Coronation money, when he came to the Crown.

But our only GOD does usually temper such pleasant Cups unto us; for in the
close of this glorious victory, the Death of Major Bethel was brought unto us,
shot at Bristol; and tired through want of sleep, he is gone into the bosom of
the Lord Jesus, whom he loved so deerly whilst he lived. I wish he may not go
unlamented to his grave, who was so full of God, and the fairest flower of the
City amongst us; Lived without Pride, and dyed full of Faith.

The ARMIES Tears over Major BETHEL.
A copy of Verses on the loss of Major Bethel.
Thou gallant Charger, do thou wheel about
To sable shades? Or do thou rather post
To Bethel, (Bethel) there to make a shout
Of the great Triumphs of a scorned Host?
Or (blessed Soul) was it unworthy We,
That made thee weary with such Dust to be?
Or, tired with our New reforming pace,
Tasting some sips of Heaven, do therefore haste
To fuller draughts of that Eternal grace,
Fearing thy Spirit might be here embraced?
Farewell, dear Soul; thy great deserved Arrears
We'll pay in others Blood, or our own Tears.
Only let all Ages, when they tell
The unexampled tale of Forty five;
Yea, when these Records to their glory swell,
And be completed by the Saints alive:
When Naseby, Langport, Bristol named they hear,
Let them all say, Sweet Bethel, he was there.
B ear a part in these Laments,
E very Soul that longs for Peace;
T ruly, who with GOD indents
H ere to have thereof a Lease,
E nters with himself a war:
L ean on things that truly are.
CHAP. IV.
The cheap reduction of Tiverton-Castle, by a strange Providence. The surrender
of Langford-House.

BUt to return to my Story. The work of reducing Tiverton, close followed.
Saturday, October. 18. Much of the time was spent in raising of Batteries
against Tiverton Church and Castle: The General, with Major genesis Massey,
oftentimes that day viewed the Works, Castle and Church, for the ordering of
the Batteries and Approaches. A Spy out of Tiverton castle taken.
A Spy was this day from the castle let down in a rope; and being taken by our
Guards, threw his Letter by the water side; but being threatened, discovered
where the letter was; which being found (where he had thrown it) was read; it
was directed to Sir John Berkley Governor of Excester; it discovered the
resolution of Sir Gilbert Talbot, to hold out, but yet he desired relief of Sir
John Berkley.

The storming of Tiv^rton resolved on by a council of war
Lords day, October. 19. The General went early to see to the batteries, and the
Ordinance being ready planted, a Council of war was called, wherein it was
agreed to storm the Church, Castle and Works; The Storm prevented, and Tiverton
gained by a wonderful providence.
and being in debate of the manner of the storm (which was that afternoon to be
put in execution) our Ordinance playing hard against the works and castle, the
Chain of the Drawbridge with a Round shot was broken in two, whereupon the
bridge fell down, and our men immediately without staying for Orders, possessed
themselves of the bridge, and entered the works, and possessed the Churchyard,
which so terrified the Enemy, that it made them quit their Ordinance, and some
of their Posts and Line, and instantly fled into the church and castle; our men
got over the rest of the bulwarks and line, and pursued the enemy into the
church and castle, where they cried out in a lamentable manner for quarter, our
Soldiers crept in at the Churchwindows (they having made fast the doors) and
made all within prisoners, plundered them, and stripped most of them to their
shirts, yet gave them their lives. The Governor, who had formerly received a
Summons, but peremptorily refused to hearken to any treaty of surrender (though
he despaired of any relief) shut himself up into his chamber in the castle, and
hung out a white flag for a Parley; but being now too late, it would not be
hearkened to (such was the fury of the Soldier) yet when they got into the
castle, and came to the place where he was, they gave him fair quarter.

A notable instance of a righteous hand upon a false man.
There was much Plunder found in the Castle (besides provisions) There was
taken one Major Sadler, who formerly served the Parliament, and ran to the
Enemy, and had privately sent and made overtures, what service he would do, if
he might be pardoned: but his offers were rejected, and he falling into our
hands, was called to a Council of war, and condemned to suffer death for his
former treachery; who, to save his life, broke prison (after he was condemned)
and escaped to Excester, where he was (by his own side) called to a Council of
war, for endeavoring to betray their cause, after he had undertaken it; and
was therefore adjudged to die, and suffered death accordingly: it being
alleged against him, that he treacherously quit his Posts in the late service
of Tiverton. Besides him, who escaped us, (but not Justice) there was taken
prisoners in this place, Sir Gilbert Talbot (the Governor) 4 Majors, and about
200 more Officers and Soldiers.

Langford-house surrendered to Lieut. general Cromwell.
This day intelligence came, That after Lieut. general Cromwell had taken
Basing, he immediately marched toward Langford-house (near Salisbury) faced
the same with part of his Brigade, sent in a Summons; and that the Governor,
upon the experience that Basing and Winchester were not able to resist the
Force that was come against that place, (conceiving his condition desperate)
hearkened to a Treaty, and surrendered the place upon these ensuing Articles.

The Articles of Langford.
1. The Commanders in chief of the said garrison, to surrender the said house
and garrison to the said Lieutenant genesis Cromwell, on the morrow by twelve of the
clock, being the 18. of October then instant. 2. All arms and ammunition in the
said garrison, to be delivered to the use of the Parliament, without any
imbezelling of them. 3. The Commanders in chief, to march away with horse and
arms, and the private Soldiers without arms to Oxford, within ten days, and
to have a Troop of horse for their guard the first day, and a Trumpet with a
Pass the rest of the way. 5. The rest of the Gentlemen, not exceeding 14 more,
to march with their swords and pistols, and horses, if they should lawfully
procure them. 6. The Commanders in chief, to have a Cart or Wagon allowed
them, to carry their goods to Oxford. 7. If any Gentlemen of the said garrison
had a desire to go to any other garrison or army of the Kings, to have Passes
to that purpose. 8. The goods remaining in the said garrison, to be delivered
to the several Owners thereof, upon demand, within two days next following
the date hereof. 9. Lieut. col. Bowls and Major Frye to be left Hostages,
until these Articles should be performed.
CHAP. V.
Excester straightened in order to a Siege; with several Debates and Resolutions
thereabout.

THese 6 Garrisons, of the Devizes, Laicock-house, Basing, Winchester,
Langford, and Tiverton, (besides Berkley-castle) being reduced since the taking
of Bristol, there was no garrison in the way between Excester and London, to
interrupt the passage, so that a single man might travel without any fear of
the Enemy, (all the obstructing garrisons being cleared) except Corf-castle
near the Seacoasts, (which yet was securely blockt up by the Governor of
Poole, and Col. Pickerings Regiment, sent thither for that purpose.)

A Council of war called.
Monday, October. 20. The General and the whole Army marched to Silverton and the
parts thereabouts (within five or six miles of Excester) where a Council of war
was called to consult what was fit next to be done, whether to advance further
West (before Excester was reduced) or to march up to the Enemy, and relieve
Plymouth. After a long and serious debate, it was held fit, in regard of the
season of the year (winter being coming on) and the Soldier already very
sickly, and much wearied out by their continual marches and hard duties;
Excester resolved to be straightened.
rather to make it their work to straiten Excester, then to march further West
for the present, and to leave so considerable a garrison upon their backs,
wherein were 1000. horse at that instant, besides 4000. Foot, that might annoy
the Eastern parts of the Country, as well as the Army in the Rear, if they
advanced further. This resolution was not so acceptable to the Gentlemen of
those parts, (who would fain have had the Army advance further into the West)
and desirous enough was the General to comply with them; but his judgment did
not lead him to it at this time, for the reasons before mentioned. Wherefore
Tuesday 21 October. the General went in person with a small party to Stoake, and
so on toward Excester, till he came within less then a mile of the town,
viewed that part of the city, and returned back that night to Silverton. A
counsel of war was again called, wherein it was concluded, that one part of
the Army should march over Ex, by the way of Tharverton, and the other to
Stoake-bridge, and parts thereabouts.

October 22. the General with a great part of the Army marched to Newton Siers,
with an intention to have gone that night to Affington; but the ways being
narrow, and the days short; was enforced to take up their quarter that night
at Newton Siers, where his Excellency received intelligence that Goring went
the night before from Excester toward Okehampton, with the greatest part of
the thousand horse before mentioned.

October 23. the Army marched early from Newton Siers to a Rendezvous, at the
Beacon, within three miles of Excester, with intention to go to Affington that
night: but such was the extremity of wet and unseasonable weather (which it
pleased God to send) that in a few hours rain the ways proved unpassable for
our carriages; besides that, the narrowness of the ways (however represented
by some Gentlemen of the country with the Army) was found upon conferring with
others, to be such, as was altogether incomplyant with the Armies march, and
would necessitate them to go many miles about; whereby it was not possible in
any seasonable time to get to Affington that night. Whereupon unexpectedly the
Headquarters were appointed that night to be at Crediton, some six miles from
Excester, where several of the Enemies horse came in to his Excellency;
informing him that Goring was gone from Okehampton toward Tavestock.

October 24. the Army rested at Crediton (horse and man being much wearied out
with the extreme wet weather, and their carriages broken) a counsel of war was
called, whether it was fit to pursue the former resolution of straitning
Excester on both sides. Whilst the business was in debate, Lieutenant General
Cromwell happily came in; and the forces that were sent under his command to
Basing and Winchester, were by that time come to Hunniton.

The good news of Digby and Langdale routed at Sherborn.
This night the Army received the good news of the Lord Digbies and Langdales
being routed at Sherborne. The sum whereof was, that the Lord Digby and Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, marching from Newark, by the Kings appointment, with some
1600 horse, to join with Montrosse in Yorkshire: As they passed by Doncaster,
and so onwards, they beat up our quarters in several places, and near Sherborn
took 800 of our men (that drew out there to oppose them) laying their Arms on a
great heap in the street of Sherborn, till they could get carriages to carry
them away: but before they were so provided, Colonel Copley, Col. Lilborne, and
other Commanders of Yorkshire, marching with all speed, came upon them, and
routed them; recovered all our arms and men, took 400 of their men, 600 horse,
many Commanders and persons of quality; slew 40. amongst whom were Sir Francis
Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton; took Digbies Coach, and therein many Letters
and papers of great consequence, diverse colors, with much rich pillage.

A council of war called. The subject of the debate.
Saturday, October 25. the business that was in debate the day before at a
counsel of war, was reassumed, and after much dispute, it was resolved, to
march back with all our forces, on the East of Ex, to possess Topsham, and
settle strong quarters on that side, before they advanced any further West to
relieve Plymouth. Not, but that the General and his Officers had that place
much in their thoughts, but conceived it not fit to attempt it at this season.

The Reasons of the resolution.
The reasons inducing to this resolution, were chiefly these, That nothing
could be of that concernment, nor so conducing to the advantage of the Kingdom,
as the preserving of this Army in an entire and healthful state, for the future
service thereof. And such was the sickly state of the Army at this time, as
called rather for some relaxation, then such extreme hard duty, as the relief
of Plymouth would have put them upon, especially if they should have staid by
it to make it good when they had done. Only to march thither and relieve the
Town which (the Enemy had blockt up by diverse regular and strong forts, well
manned and furnished) was such an enterprise, as certainly required a more
strong and healthy state of the Army. And when the Army had done this, should
they have come back again for winter quarters? The Enemy so easily raised,
might as quickly have sat down again, and so the relief of Plymouth would not
have been one jot advanced. Or should the Army have taken up their
winter quarters in an Enemies country? (surrounded with strong garrisons both
before and behind them, besides a potent Enemy in the field, judged (upon the
best intelligence) to be equal, if not superior to them in number of horse)
it is equally evident to what an eminent hazard the Army must have been exposed
thereby. And what need was there to put that toil upon the Army? when his
Excellency and the counsel of war well understood (though much was suggested to
the contrary) that such was the condition of Plymouth, that they wanted not
either men, ammunition or victuals, (having received plentiful provisions sent
them by sea) only were impatient to be set at liberty for trade.

This day a party of horse was sent out toward Okehampton, to discover where
the Enemy was gone, who returned with intelligence, that Tavestock was their
headquarters.

Lord's Day October. 26. the General in pursuance of the resolution for Topsham
(after the forenoon Sermon at Crediton) marched with the Army back to
Silverton; Some Regiments advancing to Topsham.
two Regiments went to Stoake, and those two Regiments that were at Stoake
advanced that day to Topsham, and three Regiments of horse with them. This day
intelligence came of the taking of Carmarthen by Major General Laughorne; the
gaining of which town proved the reducing of that County; and that
Major General Laughorne had treaty concerning the associating of three Counties
more, and had brought the same to good perfection.

October 27. the General and Army reached Topsham; and that night the Enemy
fired the houses in the Suburbs of Excester, to the number of about 80. which
sent many out of the city, complaining of the cruelty of the Enemy: guards were
kept that night within two miles of the city.

A counsel of war called. The subject of the debate.
Tuesday October 28. a counsel of war was called to advise whether to put over
forces (on the other side the river Ex) to Affington, and to make a bridge over
at Topsham, the better to hold a mutual correspondency between both sides, and
what forces should be sent thither: The resolution and reasons of it.
great dispute was about the same, but at last it was resolved (though much
against the mind of those Gentlemen, whose sufferings made them earnestly
desire a siege on both sides) to wave the putting over of forces to the other
side, and the making of a bridge, which (as appeared) would be extremely
difficult; and first to secure all on the East of Ex, before such time as they
possessed any quarters on the other side; for to divide the Army at that season
of the year (to lie near so great a garrison upon duty when already a sickness
was amongst our soldiers) was in the opinion of the General and the rest of
the Commanders apprehended likely to ruin the Army; Toward the latter end of
this month of October. was Shelford-house, (not far from Newark) stormed and
taken by Major Genesis Pointz.
and therefore it was resolved to make several garrisons, first on the East
side of Ex (along the Clysses river within three miles of Excester) which being
once finished, a few men might keep them, and hinder provisions from going into
the city, and the whole Army might thereby be at liberty to go on the other
side to do the like afterward: neither could the Bridge have been defended,
had it been made, with less then 2000 men that must have quartered at Topsham,
and gone near a mile to do duty at both ends of the Bridge (besides those other
little bridges that must have been made upon the watery places beyond the
river) which would have been such a duty in the winter time (especially where the
Enemy could not be hindered of his choice, with a great force to fall upon the
one side, or the other, which he pleased) as might have hazarded our forces.
Accordingly, Bishops-clysse, Poultimore, and Stoak were pitched upon to be made
garrisons. Sir John Bampfield, a worthy Member of the House of Commons, first
giving his consent that his house in Poultimore might be made a garrison, in
regard it was so much for the service in hand, in the reducing of Excester. An
Engineer was sent to Bishops-clisse to draw a Line for fortifications about
Bedford-house. The Lyme-Regiment had the charge of these two garrisons, and
Col. Hamonds Regiment was to secure and fortify Stoake.

Wednesday, 29. It was debated where the head-quarter should be this winter,
whilst the Army stayed on the East side, whether at Topsham, or not? and upon
debate, it was held fit to wave making Topsham a quarter at all, and that upon
the same reason that moved the General to decline the making a Bridge, and
putting over Forces on the other side: therefore upon this resolution (waving
Topsham) the General having viewed the Fort at Exmouth, (which stands upon the
sands, and commands the passage at the mouth of the River) sends away the Train
of Artillery toward St. Mary Autree, and follows after himself, resolving to
refresh his Army, who never stood in more need of it, by laying them in the
best and most convenient quarters he could.

This day his Excellency heard from Captain Moulton, of the taking of Monmouth
(a considerable garrison) and toward evening, received intelligence by our
Spies, that Gorings horse, being near 5000. were come into the South-Hams,
quartering at Totnesse, Newton-bushel, and as near as Chidley, (the Hams being
the only plentiful and unharassed part of Devonshire.) As also, that Greenvile
was come with some fresh Foot out of Cornwall, to Okehampton.

A letter to his Excellency, from the Pr. of Wales his Highness.
At Autree, a Trumpeter came to his Excellency from his Highness Prince
Charles, with a Letter, desiring a Pass for the Lord Hopton, and Lord
Culpepper to go to the King, upon a design of a mediation of Peace between the
King and both Houses of Parliament; The scope of it.
which being a matter of great concernment, the consideration thereof was put
off to the next day, when the Trumpeter was returned with a Letter from the
General to the Prince; intimating, The sum of his Excellencies answer.
That it was no ways proper for the General to intermeddle with any
Propositions touching an accommodation between His Majesty and the Parliament.
And therefore had sent his Letter to the Parliament, from whom his Highness
must expect an answer.

The Parliament acknowledging their General.
In the interim, a fair Jewel, set with rich Diamonds of very great value, was
presented unto the General, by Mr. Ash, and some other Members of Parliament,
in the name of both Houses, as a signal of that great honor which God had done
him, in the great service which by Gods assistance he performed for this
Kingdom at Naseby-Battel; and according to the commands of the Parliament,
they tied it in a blue Ribband, and put it about his neck.

The happy news of a second defeat of Digby briefly inserted.
About this time arrived at the Army certain intelligence of a second defeat
given the Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale; who, by killing of an hundred
men, and the taking of 200 horse and many prisoners, among whom diverse
Commanders, by Sir John Brown, were reduced to so much lesser number; And were
yet further extenuated, as they fled toward Beeston-castle, by Colonel Brigs,
who took 200 more of them: About this time also were the several garrisons of
Worton Wiverton, and Welbeck surrendered to valiant, and active Major gen Poyntz.
And yet farther, for the ease of the Ferry-boat that carried Digby to the Isle
of Man, reduced to the number of 20. (besides some few Great ones that escaped
with him) by Major General Vandrusk, who took 180. of them flying through
Westmerland. And here is the end of 1600 of the Kings prime horse.

Nevemb. 1. by Lieut. colonel Jones, and Adjutant Louthian, where were above
100. slain, and about 400. taken prisoners, among whom diverse persons of
quality; few of ours wounded, scarce any slain.

CHAP. VI.
Several passages between the Prince, and his Excellency; and between his
Excellency, and Goring. Concerning Pouldrum. The Enemies preparations to
relieve Excester; and Ours to meet them, etc.

An overture of a meeting made to his Excellency, from the Lord Goring, Sir
John Berkley, and others.
MOreover, during the Armies stay at Autree, the General was acquainted by a
Person of credit, with a desire of the Lord Goring, Sir John Berkley, and
others, to give his Excellency a meeting: which was taken into consideration;
and after consultation with the Members of Parliament then present, and diverse
Officers, the General the next day thus expressed himself to the Gentlemen that
had signified the former desire; His Excellencies answer
That if any thing came in writing from the Lord Goring, or Sir John Berkley,
to the aforesaid purpose, he would afford a meeting. Upon this intimation, the
next day came a Trumpeter from the Lord Goring, with a Letter to the General in
these words:

SIR,
A letter from Goring thereupon.
I have understood by a Person of honor and quality, of your readiness to have
a meeting with some of the General Officers of both Armies, and some others;
wherein there will be a necessity of settling some circumstances, for the
avoiding of all mistakes. I have instructed Colonel Scroop, and Colonel
Philips, in the particulars thereof; and therefore shall desire that you will
be pleased to grant them a Safe Conduct for themselves and two servants, to go
to your Quarters, and return.

Your humble servant, Geo. Goring.
Excester, November. 12. 1645.
His Excellency advising thereupon.
This did put both the Officers, and Members of Parliament there, upon serious
deliberation afresh; and in issue, this answer was returned by the General:

My Lord,
The answer his Excellency returned.
According to your Lordships desire, I have sent you herewith a Safe Conduct
for Colonel Scroop and Colonel Philips to come to my head-quarter, where I
shall be ready to receive them to morrow. I am,

Your Lordships humble servant, Tho: Fairfax.

The reasons of his Excelcies entertaining the motion.
One main and principal reason inducing his Excellency (and approved by those
he consulted with) to grant the Safe Conduct, was, For that it might likely
increase the discontent (or jealousy at least) between Grenvile, and the Lord
Gorings faction, if it were noysed that Goring came out to treat, without the
privity of Grenvile, For, any better effect of the Treaty was not expected, His
Excellency understanding privately, that which they intended to offer, was in
such a nature as was not proper for the Army to meddle with.

Scroop and Col. Philips, upon this Safe Conduct, the next day came to the
head-quarter at Autree; but coming somewhat late, had not access that night
to the General, but were entertained by some of the Colonels of the Army until
the next day, when they were presented to the General, who (before such time as
they began to say any thing of their errand to him) declared himself to them,
to this effect: The effect of the meeting.
That if they had any thing to say concerning the surrender of Excester, or the
disbanding of Armies, or any thing else which was belonging to the General as a
Soldier to take notice of, he would hear them, otherwise he could not. And
this was no more then was intimated unto them, before they came by Com. genesis
Treton, Col. Pickering, and the Judge-Advocate: whereupon they answered, That
the Instructions that they had, were in order to a general Peace: To which was
replied, That that was proper to the cognizance of the Parliament; therefore
the General, as a Soldier, (and the Parliaments servant) without their leave,
would not say any thing to it. Whereupon the next day they returned back unto
Excester, much unsatisfied. The General easily perceiving the drift of their
intentions was, To have had both Armies engage themselves to force both King
and Parliament to Conditions.

His Excellency acquainting the Parliament with the whole proceeding.
And no sooner did the General satisfy himself in the scope of these Overtures
from the Prince, and the Lord Goring; but, by an Express sent up to the
Parliament, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, he was most careful to give
them an account thereof, and how he had entertained the same; which it seems
was but needful, This Army not wanting enemies every where, to give an ill
representation of their actions.

November. 15. to Tuesday December. 2. the General continued at Autree, riding
about sometimes, to see the finishing of the Works at Broad-clisse and
Poultimore, and disposing of the quarters for the Foot, who were sick in most
places, there dying of Soldiers and Inhabitants in the Town of Autree, 7, 8,
and 9, a day, for several weeks together, insomuch that it was not held safe
for the head-quarter to be continued there any longer. Col. Pickering, that
pious, active Gentleman, that lived so much to God, and his Country, and diverse
other Officers, dyed of the New disease in that place; Six of the Generals own
family were sick of it at one time, and throughout the Foot regiments half the
Soldiers: The Army unworthily censured by some.
yet notwithstanding, at this very time did the Army undergo very hard censures
by some, for not being in action. But so long as Conscience and Judgment was
satisfied, that if the season of the year, and the abilities of Men's bodies
would have admitted a March, it should have been most willingly embraced; and
that it was only the Divine providence that had awarded otherwise: The Army had
the less cause to take notice of other men's opinions, especially when the
Parliament had (by Vote) left the General at liberty to dispose of his Army as
he should see cause.

But whosoever would have me proceed in my story, must give me leave first to
weep a while this sorrowful Verse, over deer Colonel Pickerings Hearse.

Anagr. JOHANNES PICKERING. IN God I RECKON HAPINES.

Vain all our profer'd Ransoms are,
There Is no discharge in the Graves war:
Well (i) Proffered ranfomes.
They may show, yet they cannot,
What a brave Captive Death has got.
Only, t'amuse our discontent,
(For Passion kills, that has no vent:)
Might thy wished presence find excuse,
(Of whom we made too little use)
Wee'ld ask, (swift Poster) whose He had done the Kingdom great service, by
riding between England and Scotlan^d before these troubles.
great haste
Was never before the Kingdoms waste:)
Why posts thou from's? Because we The Army rested then some time at Auirce.
rest,
Which suited not thy active breast?
Did that Antiperistasis
Fire thy fine Spirits to thy bliss?
Must thou be scaling Heaven alone,
For want of other action?
Would thou had took that leisure-time,
To visit some responsal-Clime.
Or, must hard The Army was unworthily censured at that time, as is observed
before in the Story.
Censures, (void of love)
Be expiate by thy remove?
Or, Covetous, could thou not stay
For wages, till the end o'th day?
Or could no vantage mend thy He was a little man, but of a great courage.
stature,
(To see our triumphs) under Nature (i) the Heavens.
Nature?
But it is in vain to ravel more,
W^have nothing but thy Name to adore:
That Oracle gives the best guess,
Wherein we hear thee thus profess,
IN God I RECKON HAPINES.
Charles (the Lord Goring having some few days before taken shipping at
Dartmouth for France, to fetch over some fresh forces against the Spring,
leaving the command of his Horse, in his absence, to the Lord Wentworth) The
Prince raising Cornwall and Devon.
and to that purpose sent out Proclamations for the Counties of Cornwall and
Devon, to rise in arms, and to go in person with the Prince, for that his
Highness was resolved to march in person upon the head of them, making no
question (as by their Letters we did understand) to make our Forces rise from
the East side Excester, and enforce our Retreat. And indeed, his Excellency
had certain intelligence, that the Enemy had an Army very considerable, having
drawn several Foot and Horse from their quarters before Plymouth, whereunto
they received some addition in Foot from Dartmouth and Barnstable, which with
the considerable Recruits of Foot that Greenvile, with most extrem and
industrious cruelty had raised and brought out of Cornwall, did make a body of
nine or ten thousand horse and foot, then quartering about Tavestock, and upon
the edge of Cornwall, and also at Okehampton, where were 2000. of their foot
(besides horse) commanded by Sir Richard Greenvile.

Autree, but resolved forthwith to remove (in regard the disease increased so
fast) to Tiverton, which place was agreed on to be an head-quarter, which
resolution was actuated on Saturday, the General having first received
intelligence from Captain Farmer, of a Bark laden with commodities of good
value, going for France, from Excester, taken by him between Topsham and the
Fort.

A council of War called.
Lord's Day December 7. A council of War was called, where it was propounded;
that in regard the garrisons of Nutwell, Broad-Clisse, Poultimore, and Stoak,
were now made tenable against any sudden assault of the Enemy, and possessed
by the forces of Lyme, some foot of Major-Gen. Massies, and some new raised
Regiments of the County, whereby Excester was perfectly straightened upon the
East side, (being by those garrisons made incapable, either to annoy the
country, or relieve themselves on this side,) and in regard that now it would
be convenient to remove our foot beyond the river, in order both to the
straightening of Excester on that side, and to the hindering the Enemies
recruting of his forces, which at this instant he was strongly endeavoring;
The Proposition and result.
that some Regiments should be sent to Crediton, a place that stood in a good
air, which likely would much conduce to the health of our soldiers, and lay
conveniently for a strong quarter upon the West side of the river: Some forces
sent under Sir Hardresse Waller to possess Crediton; and the blocking up of
Excester on that side the River, committed to him.
which force was sent under the command of Sir Hardresse Waller, a Gentleman
faithful, and well able and ready to undergo that charge; but lest the Enemy
upon the advance of our foot thither, should fire the town (as they had often
threatened) a party of Horse and Dragoones were sent all night to get
possession of the town, till the foot could get up to them. Some Dragoons sent
to possess Crediton before hand.
The next morning being Monday December 8. the Dragoones were there by day
break, but by reason of the extremity of the weather, the foot could not get to
Crediton till-Tuesday December 9. on which day the Horse and Dragoons gave them
possession of the town; which within two or three days after, became the more
useful to us, by the Generals going thither to order a design in hand against
Pouldrum House, by water and land; which being on Friday December 12. was
immediately put in execucion, only one day intervening; which brought
intelligence of the taking of Latham-house, in Lancashire, with eight pieces of
Ordnance, six murdering pieces, five hundred Arms, and proportionable
Ammunition: As also of the Kings Propositions to the Parliament for peace, and
of his Letter at the same time to Prince Rupert against peace.

A design upon Pouldrum-house.
The design against Pouldrum-house was this, and thus carried, Lord's Day
December 14. nine of the clock at night, Captain Deane (the Comptroller of the
Ordnance) was commanded over Ex with 200 foot and dragoons, to possess
Pouldrum-Castle, but the enemy had some few hours before got 150 men into it,
unto those that were there before, which our men not discovering before they
had landed, would not return without attempting something; the Church at
Pouldrum (being not far distant from the Castle) they resolved to possess, and
make the best of it, and accordingly did so, and the next morning they got
provisions from Nutwell-house unto them into the Church, and began to fortify
the same; the enemy at Excester much startled hereat, fearing the Castle would
be lost, as well as the River blockt up by the fortifying of this Church; Our
party in Pouldrum-Church acquitting themselves gallantly.
sent therefore on Monday the fifteenth, a party of five hundred foot, who
joining with two hundred from the Castle, assaulted our men about seven at
night, threw in many hand grenades amongst them, and so continued storming
till ten, but were beaten off with much loss, leaving their dead on the place,
and carrying with them many wounded, as appeared by the Snow, that was much
stained with their blood as they retreated.

Farmer (Captain of Dragoones) commanded our men; who as they were beyond
expectation happy in their success, (not one man being lost in the storm) so
they were resolved to continue in their duty; About this time was Hereford
surprised and taken by a most gallant stratagem.
and notwithstanding the extremity of the cold, by reason of the great frost
and snow, and want of all means to resist or qualify the same in the church;
having no firing there, they would not quit the same till they received orders
so to do: which hard service (hard in every respect) although they were not
immediately discharged of; yet the next day, Sir Hardresse Waller marched from
Crediton with a strong party to Exminster to alarm the Enemy, that he might not
make a second attempt upon them, till they had fortified the place, or were
recalled; which action of Sir Hardresse Waller took that effect as was desired:
the Enemy being so amazed, that they durst not march out that day, as they had
purposed, to attempt the church again, lest our men should get between them and
home; and God having blessed the means to their preservation hitherto: The
Generals noble care to bring them off.
The General considering further the bitter coldness of the weather, and the
hardness of the duty they would necessarily be put unto, if they should make
good the church; sent orders to them to draw off, which that they might do with
the more safety; two Regiments were appointed to draw down, and alarm the
Enemy on that side Excester, while they made good their retreat over the River;
by means whereof on Wednesday December 17. The Comptroller, and Captain Farmer
brought off the men very safe, with their arms and ammunition; the Enemy
making no sally out of the Castle upon them, though otherwise they had a fair
opportunity to have fallen on them. And these soldiers thus happily delivered,
and thus honorably come off, were rewarded with proportions out of the prize,
taken by Captain Farmer below Apsham, at the Generals command.

More force sent to Sir Hardresse Waller to Crediton.
But the Enemy drawing more force to Okehampton, two Regiments more were sent
to Crediton, December 18. to assist those that were placed there before; Col.
Okey annoying the enemy at the Lord Chichesters house.
the same day Col. Okey with a party of Dragoones fell upon the Enemy at the
Lord Chichesters house, took a Captain, 12. prisoners, 19. horses, and
returned back to his new formed garrison at Fulford House, without the loss of
a man. Mr. Davis his house at Canon-teene garrisoned for the Parliam..
Also information being given that the house of one Mr. Davis at Cannon-Teen,
(being within four miles of Excester) stood convenient for a garrison, and
might bear an useful proportion toward the blocking up of Excester, and
hindering of provision from the Southams; some more of Col. Okeys Dragoones
were ordered thither to possess the same, who accordingly went and fulfilled
their orders, December 21. and were no longer in the house, Assaulted by the
enemy.
but Monday December 22. in the morning, the Enemy sent a force against it, who
stormed the house, burnt the outhouses; The Enemy repelled.
yet Captain Woggan who commanded the Dragoones, behaved himself so
gallantly, that he beat the Enemy off, killed four, desperately wounded a
Lieutenant Colonel, and took diverse prisoners.

Several Intelligence of the Enemies preparations to relieve Excester.
Tuesday, Dec. 32. His Excellency had intelligence of the Enemies intention to
march with their Army to relieve Excester; and of their preparation of
provisions to that end.

December. 25. or thereabouts, his Excellency had animadversion from the
Committee of both Kingdoms, of incursions made by the Kings horse from Oxford
into the adjacent parts, doing much mischief thereby; whereupon the Regiment
of Colonel Rainsborough (then before Corfe-Castle) was commanded to march from
thence to Abingdon, and Col. Fleetwood with the Generals, his own, and Col.
Whaleys Regiments, and six troops of Dragoones was sent also to lie about
Islip, to attend the motion of the Kings horse, and guard the Associated
counties, as also in relation to the straightening of Oxford.

Friday December 26. The General had advertisement from Plymouth, of the
Enemies actuating their intentions, advancing in a great body toward the
releife of Excester, (as they conceived) which Intelligence was also confirmed
by several of our Spies: The Army resolved to be in readiness to receive the
Enemy.
whereupon a Council of war was called, wherein it was adjudged expedient to be
in a fighting posture, to receive them, if they advanced; and accordingly such
resolution was taken up; to which they saw the more cause to adhere, by another
Spy which came to them the next day with tidings to the same effect;
particularizing moreover, that the Prince was to be in person in the head of
the Army, to countenance the Cornish, and that they would put all upon this
Cast of relieving Excester. The Army advancing toward the Enemy.
Most of the enemies horse were sent the next (being the Lords) day, to
Okehampton, which quickened the Army unto a resolution of a Rendezvous between
that and Crediton on the Monday, which was made good accordingly. The horse and
some foot being drawn up at Cadbury-hill, some four miles from Crediton: but
upon assurance there that the Enemy did not stir from Okehampton, and for that
the weather was bitter cold, and the ground so slippery, that horses could not
well march, (and for other causes) it was held fit to take up quarters
thereabouts: Yet it was observed that this readiness and motion of the Army
checked the Enemies further advance; the Army took time to make provisions for a
continued march, by carriages on horseback, these parts admitting no other.

Tuesday, passed with the good news of the surrender of Skipton-castle in
Yorkshire; the same day the Enemy appointed a Rendezvous again; but the extreme
hard weather rendering it impossible for our horse to march (unless they were
all frosted in an extraordinary manner) kept us still in our quarters.

A messenger of the Princes taken.
The next day was delivered into our hands a messenger of the Princes, going to
Excester for Arms for the Prince his person, who was come to Dartmouth, when
also his Excellency had intelligence that some Forces for his Majesty's service
were to be sent over by the Lord Goring out of France, and to land at Dartmouth.

Sir George Chidley's house garrisoned for the straitning Excester.
Saturday, Ian. 3. The blocking up of Excester was so much further endeavored
by the addition of Sir George Chidley's house at Ashton, to the garrisons which
were possessed by our forces, the better to stop provisions from going into
Excester.

Lord's Day, brought good news from Plymouth, viz. That they had taken two
Works, and a Church from the Enemy, at St. Budeaux, and therein 105. prisoners,
besides 20 Officers: but withal, That the Enemy intended to demand
satisfaction for the same of us, and were for that end advancing with a
considerable strength to relieve Excester.

CHAP. VII.
The slackening of the siege of Excester, by the Armies advance to meet the
Enemy, (leaving only a Force to block up the City) With their great success in
those two actions. The Defeat of the Enemy at Bovey-Tracy, and the taking of
Dartmouth; with a particular account of their Marches, and lesser Passages.

Upon this certain, and renewed intelligence; on the morrow, (viz. Monday Ian.
5.) a private consultation was had, and diverse Officers of the Army sought
council of Heaven that day (keeping it as a private day of humiliation) in
answer whereto, God inclined their hearts to resolve of an Advance. The Army
(by a council of war) resolved to advance toward the Enemy.
The next day, a public Council of war was called, and (that the former
resolution might appear to be the answer of God) it was in this public
Council resolved, Nemine contradicente, to advance into the South-Hams, where
the greatest part of the Enemy lay. The Dragoons from Canonteen were
beforehand with this Resolution, who this day fell into the Enemies quarters,
took a Captain, 9 men, and 20 horse. And that this purpose to advance might
find the less interruption; The same day, the Stockings and Shoes (which the
poor Foot had so great need of, and had so long expected) came to Tiverton most
seasonably, to fit them for a March; wherewith they were so well satisfied, as
that they showed much forwardnes to march, without staying for Clothes, which
they had great need of also, being many of them all to tatters, and the weather
was extreme cold to boot. While he Army was preparing to march, some of our
Dragoons from petty garrisons, on Wednesday, snatched at the Enemy at Huick,
took a Lieutenant, 10 prisoners, 22 horses, and one of their Colors, with this
Motto, Patientia victrix.

The Army advancing according to former resosolution.
Thursday Ian. 8. All things being prepared in readiness for a March, the Horse
and Foot (with their Ammunition on horseback) set forward to Crediton; and at
the same time, Sir Hardresse Waller with two Regiments marched from Crediton to
At this place, Sir Hardresse Waller was engaged with a party of the Enemies
horse and dragoons, where he slew many of them, took 60 prisoners, 40 horse,
and gave an Alarm to the Enemy on all that side the country, whilst the Army
in the mean time did the following action at Bovey-Tracy.
Bow, as if the Army had bent toward Okehampton, (where the Enemy had both
horse and foot) when as indeed, it was only to amuse them; For at the same
instant, a Brigade of horse and foot marched that night to Crediton, and the
next day (though very cold, and much snow upon the ground) the same Brigade
marched to Bovey-Tracy (then the Enemies quarters) Lieut. general Cromwell going
in person with them, who about six at night fell into their quarters at Bovey,
(where part of the Lord Wentworths Brigade then lay) took about 400 Horse,
seven Colors, one of them the Kings colors, with a crown, and C. R. upon it.
Lieut. genesis Cromwell beating up the enemies quarters at Bovey-Tracy.
The Enemy in Bovey were put to their shifts; yet through the darkness of the
night, most of the Men escaped, except a Major and some few Officers more, and
about 50 prisoners. It was almost supper time with them when our men entered the
Town, most of them at that instant were playing at Cards, but our Soldiers
took up the stakes for many of their principal Officers, who being together in
one room, threw their stakes of money out at the window, which whilst our
Soldiers were scrambling for, they escaped out at a backdoor over the river,
and saved their best stakes. In the mean time his Excellency with another part
of the Army was advanced from Tiverton to Morton, within three miles of Bovey;
but part of the Carriage-horses with the Ammunition, by reason of the Frost,
could get no nearer then Fulford.

The former success improved, by pursuing the enemy from place to place.
The next day (the weather still extreme bitter cold) the forces at Morton, and
at Bovey-tracy, had a rendezvous near Bovey, whereat intelligence was brought
by the country, that about 120. of those that escaped in the night, were got
into Ellington church: whereupon a party of horse and foot were commanded after
them, which the Enemy in the church understanding, fled away. The Army marched
that night toward Ashburton, the Enemies head-quarter the night before. A
party of horse was sent to see if the Enemy had quit the town (as his
Excellency had intelligence they had done) who finding the enemy at the towns
end, were engaged with them, beat the enemies Rearguard through the town, took
nine men, and twenty horse, and enforced the rest of their horse to fly
several ways, being two Regiments of the Lord Wentworths Brigade, (that were
left of five) three of them being taken at Bovey-tracy.

January 11. The General, after that by Spies he had sent Intelligence to
Plymouth, of the retreat of the Enemy, marched with the Army to Totness (where
the Enemy had a foot quarter, but upon our advance quitted it) leaving one
Regiment at Ashburton. This Totnesse seems to be one of the finest of an
Inland town in Devon-shire, and many of the Inhabitants rich; a party was sent
from hence toward Dartmouth, to discover what scattered forces of the Enemies
might be gone that way; this party brought in some Officers prisoners, who
seemed to be well apaid with their lot; saying, it was well they were taken,
for they had no where to go to, but the Sea.

About this time those Regiments of Foot under Colonel Hamond, that were
assigned to quarter at the town, which was scarce able to afford them Victuals
(having caught little Fish of six weeks before) was by a wonderful, and
indeed, no less then miraculous providence supplied, and furnished to the^ by
such great draughts of Mullets which God was pleased to send in, in that
abundance at that time, as the like had not been known before; whereby both
Town and Army was plentifully provided for.
Monday January 12. The General taking special care to uphold the courage of
Plymouth, having sent (for more surety, lest the former Messengers should fail)
another Messenger, to give them notice of the Enemies retreat; gave orders for
two Regiments to be drawn before Dartmouth. And at the same time strong parties
of horse were sent toward Tavestock after the Enemy, which the enemy
apprehending to be the Van of our Army, supposing our Army following after
them, with great distraction and fear, quit the siege before Plymouth, leaving
their Forts undemolished, with seven pieces of Ordnance, and four barrels of
Powder, making great have over the River Tamar into Cornwall.

A Summons sent in to Dartmouth.
In the mean while a Summons was sent in to Dartmouth, honorable conditions
offered in the same, but rejected by the Governor; forces were commanded upon
the guard within half a mile of the Town all night, who encountered with extreme
bitter cold weather and snow, yet were most cheerful upon duty, as they went
readily unto it. The next day, the General and the Officers went to take a more
particular view of the Town; it was the joint opinion of them all, that they
might carry the same by storm. The Enemy, according to their wonted manner, not
sparing to take or destroy any thing, whereby they might advantage themselves,
and disadvantage us; burnt Mr. Plumley's house, and therein 400 bushels of Corn
threshed, and as much unthreshed. In order to a Storm, more Forces were ordered
to march to assist those before Dartmouth. By lying three or four cold days
before it, we lost nothing but a little time; for by that stay, Captain Batten
(being desired by the General) was come before the Haven with a Squadron of
ships to assist by sea, and to keep any of their ships from going out of the
harbor, while we stormed by land. Thursday the 15. the Country (upon orders)
brought in Ladders: the Comptroller was sent aboard Captain Batten for some
Seamen, received 200. and allotted them a Post to do duty. Friday the 16. The
General himself took an account in what readiness things were for a storm; More
particular intelligence (to that which came before) was given out of the town,
what condition they were in there; good Guides were sent for from Plymouth,
that were Captain Roopes men, and had been formerly inhabitants of Dartmouth,
to direct our men the best way into the town upon the storm. Saturday, 17. the
General went again to view the Town; all things were concluded on for a storm,
and Lots cast for every man, who should fall on first, and who to come on as
Reserves; the Officers of all the Regiments viewed their several Posts, and
every man provided his guides.

Lord's Day, 18. Mr. Del, in the morning, and Mr. Peter's, in the evening,
exhorted the soldiers to their duty; (For Mr. Bowls, who had formerly
attended the service of the Army, being called to his charge at York, had taken
his leave of his Excellency, Mr. Del succeeding in his room) The soldiers
were all drawn out; about seven at night Forlorn hopes were set; the evening
very mild as at Midsomer, the frost being newly gone: the Word was given, God
with us; the signal of the Soldiers was, their shirts out before and behind.
Dartmouth stormed, and taken.
About 11. a clock at night, the storm begun; and after the Enemy had
discharged once, our Men got under their Canon, and quickly possessed them, and
turned them against the Enemy; for the Army had no Pieces at all of their own,
the way and weather not admitting any to be drawn against that place, where
there were an hundred Pieces ready mounted against them, (a strange and
unparalleld undertaking) The Commanders of every Party possessed those places
they were designed unto: Lieut. colonel Pride, who led on Colonel Harlowes
Regiment, possessed Mount-Boon, wherein were 22 pieces of Ordnance; Colonel
Hamond possessed the West gate, wherein were 4 Pieces of ordnance, and two in the
Flanker: Colonel Fortescue gained Tunstal-church, with 12 Pieces of ordnance,
and so we became masters of the whole Town, and the old Castle, in which were 5
great Iron guns which commanded the River. In all, our men possessed themselves
of about 60. pieces of Ordnance in the storm, among which one Brass Demi-canon.
And such was even the miraculous goodness of God in this storm, that we lost
but one man, and had very few wounded, notwithstanding they plied most fiercely
both great and small shot upon our men from the Forts. The storm succeeding so
well, the Comptroller of the Ordnance was sent to summon two Men of war which
lay in the River, which no sooner received the Summons, but they yielded
immediately. There were two great Forts, wherein were about 34 Pieces of
ordnance, which stood a mile from the town, not taken with the rest, that beat
a Parley three hours together before they were heard; but in issue, Sir Henry
Carry, who was in one of them, had conditions to march away, He and his Officers
with arms; the Governor, and Lord Newport, etc. being in the other Fort, were
refused the like conditions, and submitted themselves to mercy.

Generals to the House of Peers concerning the same, which is more worthy to be
heard it self, as follows.

My Lords,
His Excellencies Letter to the House of ^eers concerning the taking of
Dartmouth.
After my coming to Totnes, the Enemy rising in great disorder from their
siege at Plymouth, leaving their guns and some ammunition behind them, I
considered with those about me, of attempting upon Dartmouth; and it being
concluded affirmatively, I caused two Regiments of Foot to march to Ditsam, and
two to Stoke-Flemming, being on the West side of Dart river. I having summoned
the place before, resolved upon Sunday night to attempt it by storm, which was
agreed to be done in three places; The first Post was on the West-gate, by
Colonel Hamond; On the Northend of the Town, by Lieut. colonel Pride; and on
Tunstal Church and Works by Col. Fortescue: The time resolved upon was in the
evening; Our men fell on with great resolution, to whom Colonel Lamberts
Regiment was a Reserve, and to alarm the Enemy elsewhere. Colonel Hamond enred
the West-gate, where four guns were planted, and two upon the Mill-poole, upon
his Flank, (the Enemy firing his great guns but once) His men that had the
Forlorn-hope did very gallantly (as indeed they did all) and went freely on,
and beat off the Enemy, and possessed one Fort after another, viz.
Mount-Flaggon, the West-gate, Paradice-Fort, and beat off the Main guard, where
were taken four Lieut. colonels; And so possessed the Town, from the West-gate,
to Little-Dartmouth. In the interim, Lieut. colonel Pride attempted the North
part of the Town, called Harness; where beating off the Enemy, he entered, and
took about 80 prisoners in it, and by it possessed all the North part of the
Town, unto the Drawbridge, which divided the North part from the rest of the
Town; where Colonel Hamonds men, and his, met. Colonel Fortescue with his men
attempted Tunstal Church, which was very well manned, with above 100. men, and
having in it 10. guns: His men, after some dispute, with good resolution entered
the place, and possessed it. So that by this time the Enemy was beaten out of
all, except the great Fort on the East side of the River, called
Kingsworth-Fort, and the Castle, with the Fort that lay over the Castle at the
mouth of the Harbor, called Gallants-Bower; to which last, the Governor, and
the Earl of Newport, and as many as escaped us, fled. After they were forced
from their Strengths out of the Town; the Governor coming back from the
Castle, to see in what posture the Town was, had a remarkable shot, as he was
in the Boat: A Musket Shot was made at the Boat, which pierced the Boat, and
both the thighs of one that sat next to him, and about three inches into his
own thigh; whereupon he retreated to the Castle. Our Dragoons, with 2 companies
of our Firelocks, and some Seamen, were only to alarm Kingsworth-Fort, wherein
was Sir Henry Carry with his Regiment, having in it 12 Guns, and 12 Barrels of
Powder, and convenient proportion of Ammunition. This was a very strong Fort,
with about four good Bulwarks, strong enough to make a troublesome resistance:
But the Enemy came willingly to Terms; and to save time, I willingly
condescended to let Sir Henry Carry march away, with the rest, leaving the Arms,
Ordnance, Ammunition, with all Provisions in the Fort, to Me, and All engaging
themselves never to take up Arms more against the Parliament; which was
accordingly performed. Next morning, being thus Master of all, but the Castle,
and Gallants-Bower, I summoned that: The Governor was willing to listen unto
me; but I held him to those terms, upon which after some dispute, he yielded;
which was, To deliver himself, and all Officers and Soldiers, upon Quarter. He
sent me out Colonel Seymour, and Master Denham, for Hostages, with whom came
out the Earl of Newport, and all was this day performed accordingly. In this
Fort and Castle were eleven Guns, with proportion of Ammunition and Provisions:
We have taken in the Harbor two Men of war; one belonging to the Governor of
Barnstable, with 12 guns, Burden 200. Tuns; the other belonging to Newcastle,
formerly Captain Johnsons, of 10. guns.

In the Town, One hundred and three Pieces of Ordnance, and about six hundred
Prisoners, and one hundred Horse, with good proportion of Arms and Ammunition,
an exact particular whereof I am not able to give your Lordships at present.

There being many of the town, Soldiers in Plymouth, and some Officers; and
understanding that that Town has Two thousand five hundred in garrison,
besides Townsmen, I have sent thither for Five hundred Foot for this place, who
quickly will increase to more: And to this I desire your approbation; for
having found more work to do, I held it not fit to weaken my Army, especially
considering the Recruits designed by you, I doubt will be too long before they
come.

I have given your Lordships a brief account of this Service; which I desire
may be accounted a sweet mercy of God, in a fitting season, and only ascribed
to Him, who (truly) did direct and act it, and made all the preparation to it,
both in the ordering our hearts, and giving Health to the Army, who labored
two months ago extremely of Sickness, but is now in good disposition
generally to health. I can say, I find it to be in the hearts of all here, in
all integrity to serve you; And that it is so, is still the mercy of GOD: For
surely, the success of your Affairs only depends upon the ordering of a
Gracious Providence; which is no less visible in your Councels, (which we
congratulate) then amongst us; That being the common root and spring of all,
and which can and will carry you through the greatest difficulties, and us in
serving you, until God has finished his own work. Wherein to profess the
obligation and readiness of my self, and the Army, by the same good hand of GOD,
is all the undertaking of

Your Lordships most humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
Dartmouth, Ian. 20. 1645.
Prisoners taken at DARTMOUTH.
Hugh Pollard, Governor. Earl of Newport. Colonel Seymour.
Lieutenant-Colonels, 4. Majors, 2. Captains, 15. Lieutenants, 14. Ensigns, 9.
and one Cornet. Besides many Country-Gentlemen, Ministers, and Inferior
Officers. All the Common-souldiers, being betwixt 800. and 1000. were set at
liberty to repair to their dwellings. Ordnance, about 120. mounted; and 2 Men
of War in the Harbor.

Monday, 19. Sir Henry Carry marched out of the Town, with all his Officers and
Soldiers, leaving the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein, to us. Some time
was spent this day in the disposing of the Prisoners. The Engineer, being a
Papist, (as the Implements that he had about him did declare, viz. the
Masse-book, Cope, Hood, and Surplice, which were found in his chamber) was in
danger to have been torn in pieces by the Women of the town, for his cruelty
in burning of houses, and other villainous acts. Tuesday, 20. the Guns were
cleared. The General went aboard Captain Battens ship, where he was Nobly
entertained. The noble usage of the Cornish (though enemies)
All the Cornish-men that were prisoners, were set at liberty, and had two
shillings a man, to carry them home; That the Cornish might see, we had forgot
former injuries, and respected them as much as any other County. Commissioners
were appointed to dispose of the Prize-goods taken in the Town, toward the
reparation of the Well-affected of the Town, that suffered at the Storm, who
had the greatest part of the Goods distributed amongst them.

And now the General, having reaped so great and happy an advantage by his
digression from the siege of Excester, (though he left sufficient Force also to
block it up) The next day, without any more delay, returned to Totnes; Issued
out Warrants to four Hundreds, to appear there on Saturday at nine of the
clock, in order to the service of the Kingdom, and particularly for the good
of those Parts.

ANGLIA REDIVIVA. OR, ENGLAND'S RECOVERY.
PART IV.
CHAP. I.
The Army returning to the Siege at Excester: Pouldram Castle surrendered: A
French Vessel struck into Dartmouth, wherein Letters of consequence from the
Queen: How far the reducing of Excester was endeavored before a second
diversion.

HIS Excellency and the conduct of this Army (in all their motion attending
Providence) having answered the call of God in rising from Excester, and
meeting the Enemy (wherein they found that great assistance and success that
has been related) now discerning no further advantage offering it self
against the Field-Enemy at present, his Excellency, with the advice of his
Officers, resolves with all speed possible, to return with the Army to the
Siege of Excester, and to improve the advantage of that further reputation
their late successes had given them, in vigorous endeavors against that place;
and in the mean time, till the other Forces could follow, some Regiments
martched toward Excester, a Summons was sent to S. Edmund Fortescue, Governor
of Charls-fort at Salcomb; from whence a refusal of surrender was returned, and
consultation was had about Barnstable.

Saturday Jan. 24. The Country according to appointment of his Excellency,
appeared at Totnes, in number about 3000. out of whom, upon consultation with
the Committees, a Regiment was to be raised of such as were willing, under
Colonel Fowell: which done, the General martched to the Lady Reynolds her
house, whence on the Lords day after forenoons Sermon, his Excellency martched
to Chidley, endeavoring first to take a view of Pouldram; before which place
Col. Hammond was set down with some force: Pouldram Castle surrendered.
But night coming on (whilst he had yet two miles thither) he was forced to
return to Chidley, whithout viewing the Castle, which ere the next day was
happily put out of a capacity of being viewed by him (but in a new Relation;)
for about twelve at night the news came to him of the surrender thereof, and
therein five Barrels of Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and four
pieces of Ordnance.

A French Vessel (by a good Providence) struck into Dartmouth upon a mistake.
Monday 26. Tidings were brought the General of a French Vessel that came from
France with a Packet from the Queen, which was struck into Dartmouth, presuming
it to have still been in the hands of the Kings Forces: and indeed little
likelihood was there that it should be in any other, especially so suddenly,
and at a time of year so unseasonable for action or storm, but that God
encouraged the Army to undertake it, and his strong Arm prospered them in their
attempt. The Packet of Letters (which were of no small consequence) strongly
recovered.
The Vessel being thus delivered, by immediate Providence, into our hands, the
Packet of Letters was yet more strangely preserved and recovered out of the
Sea, wherinto it was thrown, when they knew their mistake (according to the
Queens directions) but God provided a Wave to bring it to the Boat that was
sent out to seek it, and so it was brought unto his Excellency; wherein was
found Letters from the Queen, Lord Goring, Lord Jermin, Davenant and others,
intercepted: Some of the Contents were these.

The special and most observable Contents of the Letters.
The Queen by her Letters in answer to some former Letters she had received,
touching the King's intentions of transporting the Prince to Denmark, utterly
dislikes it, and neither approves of Holland or Flanders; advises the bringing
of him into France: And as touching his Marriage with the Duke of Orleance his
Daughter, which seemed to be an objection against it, She replied, That they
knew she was engaged elsewhere; and what if he should marry her? the Duchess
of Orleance so far exceeding them in Riches and potent Alliances might be of
great assistance to the King: But desires, That he may be disposed of any
whither, rather then to come into the hands of the Rebels: touching the Scots
affairse, she had this expression; That she had sent William Murray fully
instructed with her mind about it.

The Lord Goring in his Letter to the Lord Wentworth and Sir John Berkley, gave
them assurance, That now the Negotiation with France was happily concluded by
the industry of the Lord Jermin.

In his Letter to Sir Hugh Pollard the Governor of Dartmouth, he does assure
him, That by the first of March he should have five well appointed Men of
War, of the second rank, the least bearing above thirty pieces of Ordnance,
to be solely under his command, so that he might grow rich upon the spoil of
the Rebels, or else put them to the charge of keeping an whole Navy before him.

The Lord Widdrington, not so well satisfied with the preparations of France,
used this expression in one of his Letters; That he gave all hopes for lost,
for ever returning to his own Country again, except the business of the Scots
took effect.

A Summons sent into Excester.
But as to the Siege of Excester, our Forces being drawn near unto this side of
the City, a Su^mons was prepared, wherein honorable conditions were offered
them; which Summons was sent in the next day, being January 17. The Enemies
Answer.
Whereunto on the morrow an Answer was returned very fair to this purpose,
That in honor they could not surrender upon the terms offered, while they
were in no worse condition, and had such probable hopes of relief from the
Prince.

His Excellencies Reply.
Thursday 29. A Reply was returned, the conditions reinforced, and further
urged, by undertaking in the behalf of the Parliament and General, that what
they promised in the Summons should be made good: and this is as far as they
proceeded at this time; being a second time diverted by other action; The
grounds of this second diversion from the Siege of Excester.
for news came this day to the Army, that the Enemies Horse from Oxford were
come near Corfe Castle, and the Lord Gorings Forces were advanced up near
Barnstable, portending a design to join together; to prevent which, the
General went from Chidley to Tiverton to give order about that point, sent
Colonel Cook from thence with three Regiments of Horse of Major General Massies
Brigade, to attend the Enemies motion, and the next day some Regiments of Horse
and Dragoons martched from these parts to a Randezvouz toward the North of
Devon, though upon second advice they were recalled to Quarters.

Excester, had almost driven the Army to a resolution of storming it, insomuch
that Warrants were issued out to all the Hundreds round about Excester for
Ladders, and also a dispatch to Plymouth to send their Scaling-ladders for that
purpose: which disposition of the Army, what influence it might have upon the
Enemy, I know not: but the Lords day Febr. 1. a Lieutenant and ten Horse well
armed, came in to Sir Hardresse Waller from the Enemy, and that night the
Plymouth Regiment took a Major and twenty Horse near Barnstable; and Tuesday
following a Lieutenant-Colonell and fifteen men more with their Arms, came in
from the Enemy; The General in the mean time being returned to Chidley.

Thursday 5. Upon intelligence of the Enemies Horse being gone toward Dunster;
Colonel Cook who had Orders to martch somewhat further Eastward, in order to
the Oxford horse, that by information from the east, were to be in Dorsetshire,
had Orders to return.

Friday 6. Came news that a Party of Horse of the Enemy (computed by the
countries information, fifteen hundred) had put some small relief into
Dunster, taking that opportunity when those Forces that attended therabout were
drawn toward Corfe Castle: in their retreat the Country, with the assistance of
Colonel Blakes Forces, that were not able to oppose so great a Body, and
therefore during Relief secured themselves in a strong house, fell upon their
Rear, slew some, took others prisoners, and disarmed more. The same day the
Army received the good news of Belvoyr surrendered: And now follows, to
discourse how the hand of Providence led us first into the north of Devon, and
then into Cornwall: Only first celebrate that good news of the surrender of
Westchester, after a long Siege, by that faithful and indefatigable Commander
Sir William Brereton, which news came to the General on the Lords day, Feb. 8.

CHAP. II.
Our Army a second time diverted from the Siege of Excester; with a particular
account of the reasons thereof: and the Motion and Actions of the Army
occasioned thereby

A Counsel of War called.
LOrds day, Feb. 8. A Counsel of War was called to consider of martching with
part of the Army into the north of Devonshire, toward Torrington and
Barnstable, for the straightning thereof, and for the better convenience of
Quarter, the Army being much straightned for provisions where they were, as
also to possess those parts, and thereby dispossess the Enemy, who had some
parties of Horse there, which miserably oppressed the Country: whilst they
were in this Consultation, certain intelligence was brought by Spies, That the
Enemy, who had been laboring as for life, to raise the Cornish, and had
brought a considerable number to Launceston, to reinforce their Army (being in
all about four thousand Foot, besides their Horse) were once more with all
their strength martching over the River Tamar toward Torrington, and as the
Spies informed, would be there on Tuesday night: likewise Letters from the Lord
Wentworth to Sir John Berkley Governor of Excester, being at the same time
intercepted, encouraging him to expect Relief shortly. Upon this, Orders were
given for the drawing of most of the Horse and Foot to a Randezvouz the next
day.

A Counsel of War called. The subject of their debate.
Monday Feb. 9. A Counsel of War was called, to advise what to do, and in
issue it was resolved to advance toward the Enemy with part of the Army,
having already with the residue perfectly blocked up Excester on the west side
also, by settling Guards and Quarters at Affington, Barley house and
Reymouth-house, within a mile of the City, and a Garrison kept at Powdram;
besides that some of the Foot under the command of Colonel Shapcoat, blocked up
the Fort at Exmouth; by which means Excester was now completely straightned
and blocked up on both sides. Accordingly Orders were immediately sent to the
Horse and Foot to prepare for a martch, and the Forces designed on both sides
of Excester to straighten that place, were commanded to receive Orders from Sir
Hardresse Waller, to whose care and judgment the management of that business
was recommended, whilst the rest of the Army advanced to the Enemy.

The Army on their martch ^owards the Enemy.
Tuesday Feb. 10. The General and the Army begun their Martch, and that day
martched from Chidley to Crediton the head Quarter, where the Army rested a
day, till the Treasure (that was at Dartmouth) was come up, and other Forces
that were to martch from other Quarters were drawn up to them: The while fresh
intelligence was brought to his Excellency, that the Enemy with five thousand
Horse, and four thousand Foot, were come to Torrington, expecting a thousand
Horse and Foot from Barnstable to join with them, all under the command of the
Lord Hopton, who by a new Commission was made Commander in chief, (the Lord
Goring being in France;) who had used much expedition in his martch, having
martched in one day from Stratton to Torrington, being eighteen large miles;
they brought along with them much Cattle and Sheep, which with salt and other
provisions that were to come from Barnstable, were for the Relief of Excester:
This Intelligence fully resolving the Army in the Motions and Intentions of the
Enemy, engaged them yet deeper in their Resolutions to make speed toward them,
and not passing one or two days intervened their martch: In this interim
tidings were brought the Army, that Warham and the Committees there being
surprised by a party of Horse from Oxford, was by Colonel Cook regained, he
being with fifteen hundred Horse then about Shaftsbury, and that Colonel
Cromwell, who commanded the Kings party, was by him taken prisoner, that the
Horse were escaped and fled into Corfe Castle, not apprehended by our Guards
through the darkness of the night: Moreover that Mr Murrey and Sir David
Conningham were taken coming out of France.

Saturday, Feb. 14. The Army martched from Crediton to Chimleigh, being ten
miles, the Weather wet, and the way dirty; the Enemy but a little before our
Forces came, were in the Town, and were beaten out by the Plymouth Regiment,
Lieutenant Colonel Wicks and others taken prisoners. Here his Excellency
received intelligence, that the Enemy continued at Torrington, and were a
considerable Army: upon which, Sunday Febr. 15. the Army martched early from
Chimleigh, and had a Randezvouz two miles off in the way to Torrington. Our
Horse brought in diverse prisoners to the Randezvouz, who confessed that the Lord
Hopton was in Torrington, and that he had sent out parties by three of the
clock that morning to discover our motion; also one of our Spies came thither
out of Torrington that morning, assuring his Excellency, that the Enemies whole
Army was in and about Torrington, not expecting our being so near.

The Army was drawn to the Randezvouz, with intention to martch to Torrington,
but the weather proving so bad, and the bridges being broken down by the enemy,
and besides, the day being far spent, put the General upon resolution to order
his own Regiment of Foot, and a party of two hundred Horse, under the command
of Captain Berry, to advance three or four mile in the way to Torrington to
amuze the Enemy, and himself with the rest of the Army to return to Chimleigh.

A party of Colonel Butler's men that were upon the Guard, took fourteen men,
and seven and twenty Horse (part of the Enemies Guard) and brought them to
Chimleigh, being most of them of Goring's Lifeguard; who being brought before
the General, confessed they heard of our advance. Cattaine Berry, who was sent
(as before) toward the Enemy, returned with his party of two hundred Horse,
informing the General, that they had met with a party of the Enemy about the
same number, that the Enemy charged him, but he had, by the assistance of God,
routed them, and sore wounded Lieutenant colonel Dundasse, who led on the
party, and brought him and others away prisoners; but Dundasse was so sore
wounded, that he was forced to be left at a country Village upon his Parolle,
to render himself a prisoner if he recovered; which accordingly he very
punctually performed; and the General in commiseraton of his condition, being
disabled for service by reason of his Wounds, upon his tender, to engage
himself never to bear Arms against the Parliament, granted him his liberty.

It should be remembered here, that upon the Armies advance to Torrington,
Colonel Cook, who always readily received, and punctually observed his
Orders, was sent with Major General Massie's Horse to lie before Barnstable,
and upon that part of Devonshire, to be in a posture to interrupt the Enemies
Horse, in case upon the Armies advance into Cornwall, they should attempt to
break through.
Monday, February 16. The Drums Beat by four of the clock in the Morning;
The general Randezvouz of the Army was appointed to be at Rings-Ash, about
three Miles from Chimleigh; where accordingly by seven of the clock in the
Morning, the whole Army was drawn up in Battalia, Horse and Foot, on the
Moore, five miles short of Torrington, and so martched in order ready for a
present engagement, in case the Enemy should attempt any thing in our martch
through the narrow Lanes; the Forelorn-Hope of horse, commanded by Major
Stephens and Captain Moleneux, being advanced toward Stephenston (Master
Rolls his house near Torrington) his Excellency understood, that the Enemy had
two hundred Dragoons in the House, whereupon a commanded Party of Horse and
Foot were sent to fall on them, but upon the advance of our Forces toward
them, the Enemy quit the place; yet our Horse martching fast, engaged their
Rear, took several of their Dragoons prisoners, and afterward the
Forelorn-Hope of Horse on both sides were much engaged in the narrow and dirty
Lanes; at last, we beat them from Master Rolls his house all along the Lane
almost to Torrington. The Army engaged with the Enemy near Torrington.
About five of the clock in the Evening the Van of the Army was drawn up in the
Park, the Forelorn-Hope of Foot was drawn out near the Forelorn-Hope of Horse
in the midway between Master Rolls house and Torrington, and there lined the
Hedges to make good the retreat of the Horse, the Enemy likewise drew out of
the Town four or five Closes off, and lined the Hedges with Musquetteers
within a Close of ours, and flankt their Foot with Horse; whereupon good
reserves were sent to second our Forelorn-Hope of Foot, least the enemy knowing
the ground, and we being strangers unto it, might suddenly encompasse us (it
being by this time dark night, and the whole Army being then come up, having
martched ten miles that day;) about eight at night the Enemy drew off from some
of the Closes they formerly possessed; whereupon we gained the ground they
quitted, and a Counsel of war being called, whether it was advisable it might
engage the Enemies Body then in the town, who were ready with the best
adva^tages of ground and Barricado's to receive us; it was the general sense of
the Counsel to make good our ground and double our Guards till the next
morning, that we might the better take view of the places where we were like to
engage; whereupon the General and Lieutenant General went from Master Rolls his
house to see the Guards accordingly set, but hearing a noise in the Town, as
if the Enemy were retreating, and being loath they should go away without an
affront, to that purpose, and that we might get certain knowledge whether they
were going off or not, a small Party of Dragoons were sent to fire on the Enemy
near the Barricadoes and Hedges; the Enemy answered us with a round Volley of
shot, thereupon the Forlorn-Hope of Foot went and engaged themselves to bring
off the Dragoons, and the reserve fell on to bring off the Forlorn-Hope: And
being thus far engaged, the General being on the Field, and seeing the general
resolution of the Soldiery, held fit, that the whole Regiments in order, after
them, should fall on, and so both sides were accordingly engaged in the dark,
for some two hours, till we beat them from the Hedges, and within their
Barricadoes, which were very strong, and where some of their men disputed the
entrance of our Forces with push of Pike, and butt end of Musket for a long
time; at last it pleased God to give us the Victory, our Foot first entering the
Town, and afterward the Horse, who chased the Enemy through the Town, the
Lord Hopton bringing up the Rear, had his Horse shot dead under him in the
middle of the Town; Their Horse once facing about in the street, caused our
Foot to retreat, but more of our Horse coming up pursued them to the Bridges,
and through the other Barracadoes at the further end of the Town, where we had
no sooner placed Guards at the several Avenues, and had drawn our whole Army
of Foot and most of our Horse into the Town, but the Magazine of near eighty
barrels of Powder, which the Lord Hopton had in the Church, was fired by a
desperate villain, one Watts, whom the Enemy had hired with thirty pounds for
that purpose, as he himself confessed the next day, when he was pulled out from
under the rubbish and timber; and the Lead, Stones, Timber and Iron-work of the
Church were blown up into the Air, and scattered all over the Town and
Fields about it where our Forces were; yet it pleased God miraculously to
preserve the Army, that few were slain besides the Enemies (that were
prisoners in the Church where the Magazine was blown up) and most of our men
that guarded them, who were killed and buried in the ruins: And here was Gods
great mercy unto us, that the General being there in the streets, escaped with
his life so narrowly, there falling a web of Lead with all its force, which
killed the Horse of one Master Rhoads, of the Lifeguard, who was thereon next
to the General in the street, but doing neither him nor the General any hurt.
There were taken in the Town about six hundred prisoners, besides Officers,
great store of Arms (the Lanes and Fields being bestrewed with them) all their
Foot were scattered, their Horse fled that night toward Cornwall in great
confusion; the prisoners we took confessed they had about four thousand Foot
and four thousand Horse at least: the service was very hot, we had many
wounded, it was stoutly maintained on both sides for the time.



To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire; SPEAKER of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Master Speaker,
His Excellencies Letter concerning the Fight at Torrington.
PLymouth being set free, and Dartmouth taken, I sent Colonel Hammond with part
of the Foot to possess part of the houses near Excester for the blocking of it
up on the West side of the River, as formerly I had done on the East, and lay
with the rest of the Army, so as to countenance both that Work, and the raising
of some Forces in the Southams to lie about Totnes for the securing of that
Country, and to keep the Enemy from coming of that side of Devonshire again,
when the Army should remove to the other: These two things, with the continual
foul weather at that time, and the absence of Colonel Cook, with so many of
the Horse, occasioned my stay thereabouts above a fortnight; in which time the
houses being competently fortified, and the Forces raising in the Southams in
good forwardness, I drew the Army up toward Crediton, with purpose to advance
into the North of Devonshire also, either by the taking of Barnstable, or by
blocking of it up, and raising a Force in that well affected corner to keep it
in, so as having all clear or made fast behind me, I might the better follow
the remaining Field Forces of the Enemy into Cornwall. And to continue the
blocking up of Excester on the West side, I left Sir Hardresse Waller with
three Regiments of Foot and one of Horse of this Army, and advanced with five
Regiments of Horse and seven Regiments of Foot, and five Troops of Dragoons,
the rest of the Horse and Dragoons being absent with Colonel Cook in
Dorsetshire, but then sent for to come up, when I was resolved upon my advance
this way. The Enemy at the same time advanced out of Cornwall with all the Foot
to Torrington, about which their Horse did lie before, and began to fortify
the Town: Their intentions therein, as we conceived, and do since further
find, were by the advantage of this place and their Garrison of Barnstable so
near it, to make this part of Devonshire more surely theirs, and more difficult
for us to come into, and lying so much the nearer to Excester (against which
they supposed this Army wholly engaged) to take their best advantages from
hence and from Chimley, which they meant also to have possessed, to relieve
Excester on the North side, or disturb us in the Siege; and it is probable they
might have a further purpose in their posture here, to secure the landing of
Irish or Welsh supplies so much the forwarder toward the East.

On Saturday last, I advanced from Crediton to Chimleigh, where by many
prisoners I was informed, That the Lord Hopton had hereabouts four thousand
Horse, and three thousand Foot; We believed them to be about two thousand Foot
or upwards, and three thousand Horse; the extreme foulness of Weather that
day and the next, occasioned me not to advance from about Chimleigh, for the
next night, save only one Foot Quarter and an Horse Guard advanced to Ring-Ash,
three miles toward the Enemy, to secure a Randezvouz so much the nearer to
them; for the day following I understood by the best Intelligence, that the
Enemy was resolved to make good their station, and set their rest upon it to
fight us there if we would come up to them; and truly men in their condition
could not hope (al things considered) to have more for it, their Horse for
number superior to what I brought up with me, their Foot, as I find since, not
much inferior; and if they could with all their force make good this Town,
and put us to lie in the Field, there being no Villages near it that could
shelter the Army, the wet weather continuing, which was then most likely, would
have forced us to draw back and make our fire Arms little useful, either for
assault or defense; and besides, we were like, for matter of provisions, to be
forced to draw off first, they having both by their posture, with the
plentiful Country of Cornwall behind them, and a River at their backs, securing
also a good part of Devonshire unto them, and by their strength of Horse, much
advantage for longer subsistence then we; and we by the barrenness of the
place where we must have lain before them, especially for Horse meat, their
Garrison of Barnstable lying partly behind us, their Horse more numerous then
ours, which might with stronger parties cut off our supplies, had little
possibility to subsist long before them. These Considerations we had in our eye
to discourage us from going on, as I believe they had to encourage them to
stand; yet on the other side, finding that by reason of the barrenness and
long exhausting of our Quarters behind us, we could neither keep our Horse so
close together as to lie safe so near the Enemy, nor indeed find subsistence
for the Army, either where we were, or in any other Quarters more backward,
where we could lie so as to secure the Siege of Excester from relief, and upon
all considerations conceiving the affairs of the Kingdom did require us, and
God by all did call us to make a present attempt upon the Enemy; We resolved
to go on, to try what God would do for us, and trust him for weather,
subsistence and all things.

Accordingly, on Monday morning I drew out the Army to an early Randezvouz at
Ring-ash, within six miles of the Enemy; the weather still continued very wet,
and so by all signs was like to hold till we were advanced from the
Randezvouz; but suddenly, when we were upon Martch, it, beyond all expectation,
began to be fair and dry, and so continued, whereas we had scarce seen one
fair blast for many days before. The Enemy (as we understood by the way) had
all their Horse drawn together about Torrington, and with their foot prepared
to defend the Town, which they had fortified with good barricadoes of earth
cast up at every avenew, and a competent line patcht up round about it, their
Horse standing by to flank the same, and some within to scour the Streets.
Our Forlorne-Hope had order to advance to Stephenson Park, about a mile from
the Town, and there to stay for the drawing up of the Army, there being no
other place fit for that purpose nearer to the Town on that side we came on.
But when we came near, we understood that the Enemy had with two hundred
Dragoons possessed the House in the Park, and were fortifying it, being of it
self very strong; but upon our nearer approach, their Dragoons quitted the
House, and our Forlorn-Hope falling on them, took many prisoners, and pursuing
them near the Town, were engaged so far as they could not well draw back to
the Park, which occasioned the sending up of stronger Parties to make them
good where they were, or bring them off; and at last, there being some fear
that the Enemy would draw about them and hem them in, Colonel Hammond was sent
up with three Regiments of Foot, being his own, Colonel Harlowes, and mine,
and some more Horse to lie for reserves unto them; by which time the night was
grown on, so that it was not thought fit, unless the Enemy appeared to be
drawing away, to attempt any thing further upon the Town till morning, in
regard none of us knew the ground, nor the advantages or disadvantages of it;
but about nine of the clock, there being some apprehension of the Enemies
drawing away, by reason of their drawing back some Out-guards, small Parties
were sent out toward the Towns end to make a certain discovery, which going
very near their Works, before the Enemy made any firing, but being at last
entertained with a great Volley of shot, and thereupon supposed to be engaged,
stronger Parties were sent up to relieve them, and alter them the three
Regiments went up for reserves, till at last they fell on in earnest; after
very hot firings, our men coming up to the Barricadoes and Line, the dispute
continued long at push of Pike and with butt ends of Muskets, till at last it
pleased God to make the Enemy fly from their Works, and give our men the
entrance: After which our men were twice repulsed by their Horse, and almost
all driven out again, but Colonel Hammond with some other Officers and a few
Soldiers, made a stop at the Barricadoes, and so making good their
re-entrance, rallyed their men and went on again, Major Stephens with their
Forlorn Hope of Horse coming seasonably up to second them, the Enemies Foot
ran several ways, most of them leaving their Arms, but most of their
Officers, with the assistance of Horse, made good their own retreat out of the
Town toward the Bridge, and taking the advantage of straight passages, to
make often stands against our men, gave time for many of their Foot to get over
the Bridge; Their Horse without the Town, after some attempts at other
Avenues, to have broken in again upon us, being repulsed, at last went all
away over another Bridge, and at several other passes of the River, and all
fell Westward; the ground where their Horse had stood and the Bridge they went
over lying so beyond the Town, as our Horse could not come at them but through
the Town, which by reason of straight passages through several Barricadoes
was very tedious, by means wereof, and by reason of continued straight lanes
the Enemy had to retreat by after they were over the River, as also by the
advantage of the night, and by their perfect knowledge of the Country, and our
ignorance therein, our Horse could do little execution upon the pursuit, but
Parties being sent out several ways to follow them, as those disadvantages
would admit, did the best they could, and brought back many prisoners and
Horses, we took many prisoners in the Town, who being put into the Church
where the Enemies Magazine lay, of above four score barrels of Powder, as is
reported, besides other Ammunition, either purposely by some desperate
Prisoner, or casually by some Soldier, the Powder was fired, whereby the
Church was quite blown up, the Prisoners and most of our men that guarded them
were killed and overwhelmed in the Ruins; the houses of the Town shaken and
shattered, and our men all the Town over much endangered by the stones, timber
and lead, which with the blast were carried up very high, and scattered in
great abundance all the Town over, and beyond; yet it pleased God that few of
our men were slain or hurt thereby, save those in the Church, only our loss
of men otherwise in this service was small, though many wounded, it being a
hotter service then any storm this Army has before been upon, wherein God
gave our men great resolution; and Colonel Hammond especially and other
Officers engaged with him, behaved themselves with much resolution, courage and
diligence, recovering the ground after their men were twice repulsed: Of
Prisoners taken in this service about two hundred were blown up, two hundred
have taken up Arms with us, and about two hundred more common Soldiers
remain Prisoners; besides many Officers, Gentlemen and servants, not many
slain, but their Foot so dispersed, as that of about three thousand, which the
most credible persons do affirm they had there, and we find by a List, taken
among the Lord Hopton's Papers, themselves did account them more, we cannot
hear of above four hundred that they carried off with them into Cornwall,
whither their Horse also are gone, being much broken and dispersed as well as
their Foot. By the Considerations and circumstances in this business, which I
have here touched upon, you will perceive whose hand it was that led us to it,
and gave such success in it; and truly there were many more evident
appearances of the good hand of God, therein, then I can set forth, let all the
honor be to him alone for ever, being desirous, as God shall see it good, and
further enable me, to improve the advantage of this success to the uttermost:
The next day having sent some Regiments of Horse and Foot to advance unto
Quarters up toward Holsworthy to set the Enemy more home into Cornwall, and
with more terror upon them, I sent also one Regiment of Foot, with some Horse,
back toward Barnstable to possess the Earl of Baths house at North-Tavestock,
about a mile from Barnstable on this side the River, whereby that Garrison will
be easily kept in on this side, and I shall try what will be done upon it
otherwise, whilst the Army takes a little rest hereabouts, which the
unseasonable Martches, miserable Quarters, and hard Duty both Horse and Foot,
for many days, have been put unto, do necessarily require: But I conceive
that so soon as the Army can be fitted for the purpose, it would be best to
follow the Enemy home and thoroughly into Cornwall; the breaking of that Body of
Horse that is left there being the likeliest means to prevent or discourage the
landing of any Foreign Forces in these parts, or the raising of any more out
of Cornwall: In order to which I must earnestly recommend to your care two
things especially; The one, to provide by the disposal of your Forces in the
Mid-land parts, that by excursions from Oxford hitherward, I may not be
diverted from prosecution of the Work in Cornwall, to send again that way, nor
the Sieges of Excester and Barnstable disturbed when I am engaged further West:
The other, That money may be speeded, if any ways possible, but for a month or
six weeks to enable the Horse as well as Foot to pay Quarters in Cornwall,
whereby the oppositions that People might make would in all likelihood be taken
off, and their affections or good opinions gained, to make them helpful to us
against their present oppressors. There came unto me this day a young man from
Truro, who certifieth me, That Sir Walter Dudley came very lately from France,
to let those about the Prince know, that if there were an absolute necessity
they could bring over their men with a fair wind from France to be here by the
middle of the next month; expressing, that they had near 8000. Foot, and a
thousand Horse in readiness, and three months pay provided for them, besides
ten thousand pound in bullion daily expected, a Mint being ready to coin the
same, but yet intimated a convenience in the giving a little more time for
their coming over; whereupon Sir John Culpepper was to go in all haste to
France upon Friday last, as is supposed, on purpose either to hasten al, or a
good part of those Forces over; I think it will be very good that as much
Shiping as may be obtained be hastened into those parts; I shall upon this
Information, and the good success God has been pleased to give us, so dispose
of the Army, as may most effectually conduce to a speedy and through settlement
of these Western parts of the Kingdom; therefore I desire you again to have
a special care, that the Forces about Oxford be not permitted to range into
these parts, when the Army is like to be engaged so far West, lest it occasion
the division of our Forces, and hinder the accomplishment of that we desire to
effect. I remain

Your most humble Servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
Great Torrington Feb. 19. 1645.
More particularly there was taken here, Lieutenant Colonel Wood, eight
Captains, Commissary Boney, six Lieutenants, one Cornet, three Ensigns, one
Surgeon, four Sergeants, two and fifty Troopers, one hundred seven and
twenty Gentlemen, and about two hundred common Soldiers, in all, four hundred
three and thirty, whereof two hundred have taken up Arms, being (as they said)
forced in by the Enemy; near three thousand Arms (broken and whole) most of
their Ammunition blown up in the Church, eight Colors brought in, whereof one
the Lord Hopton's own, with this Motto, I WILL STRIVE TO SERVE MY SOVEREIGN
KING.

Slain, Major Threave, Captain Frye, and diverse Officers, two hundred
Soldiers, besides those two hundred blown up in the Church, the Lord Hopton
and Lord Caple wounded, besides diverse others of quality; the Lord Hopton's
Commission to be General under the Prince, Sir George Digbye's to be Governor
of the Forces before Plymouth, and other Papers of consequence taken, and about
four hundred or five hundred pounds in Money taken at the Lord Hopton's
Quarters, with much plunder left in Portmantles there, and in other places
behind them.

Tuesday Feb. 17. The General rested at Torrington, that day being spent in
securing the prisoners, and taking Lists of the names, and sending some Forces
toward Barnstable; and that the Enemy might be kept in a continual alarm and
fear by our pursuing of them, a Party were sent toward Holsworth, to fall
upon their Quarters; whereupon they quit that place, and the Country informed,
that their Horse were all fled into Cornwall, and that a great terror was upon
them; and those few scattered Foot that escaped in the dark at Torrington, who
all of them both Horse and Foot (as his Excellency understood the next day)
drew into a Body in Cornwall, to whom were now joined the Princes Regiment, of
about eight hundred Horse, which with some other Cornish Horse, not before
joined to them, mae up a Body of five thousand Horse, much superior in number
to ours: with this body of Horse, and about a thousand Foot (most Cornish) they
kept Guards on the other side of the River Tamar, and this day there came by
twenty and forty at a time of their Foot (being most Devonshire men) that were
scattered the night before, out of the Woods, some with their Arms, and others
without them, and listed themselves in the Army; expressing, that they only
waited for an opportunity to get to us; so that this last defeat was in a
manner, the very ruining of all their Foot.

Commissary General Ireton sent to view Barnstable. About this time
Major General Laughorne obtained great success against the Enemy at Cardiffe
in Glamorganshire, about 400 of them slain and 500 taken prisoners.
Thursday Feb. 19. Commissary-General Ireton was sent with a Party to view the
Garrison of Barnstable, and what places were fit to make Quarters and to keep
Guards about the same, whereupon one Regiment was sent to the Earl of Bathes
at Tavestock to possesst it for Quarters: That day there were three Ships in
Biddiford which struck in thither, thinking it had been in the Enemies power,
their burden was small; the Vessels were afterward, upon Petition, released,
the owners being persons that had not voluntarily contributed against the
Parliament. This night the General returned back to Master Rolls his house at
Stephenson, in regard the Quarter at Torrington was inconvenient, the Windows
shaken in pieces, and the houses so shattered with the great blast, that they
could not perform a convenient shelter from the rain, it being a time of
extreme wet weather.

CHAP. III.
His Excellency with the Army advancing into Cornwall, driving the Enemy before
them, and possessing their Quarters: A gallant piece of Service performed by
Colenel Butler and his Party near Stratton. Prince Charles giving all for lost
by his Excellencies pressing so hard upon them, betakes himself to Scilly: An
advantage to the Parliaments Cause by a Packet of Letters from Ireland, taken
at Padstow.

FRiday 20. It was taken into consideration, how far forth it was expedient to
move toward Cornwall with the maine Forces, to improve the advantage we had
upon the Enemy: which business was also further advised on the next day

A Counsel of War. Their Resolution, and the Reasons thereof.
At a Counsel of War, where it was resolved (nemine contradicente) to martch
into Cornwall: The Reasons inducing them to that Vote, were first, To prevent
the landing of any Forces out of France; of which the Letters taken at
Dartmouth gave an intimation: Secondly, to destroy the Field-enemy, and by
consequence settle the West: Thirdly, Excester and Barnstable would not
probably hold out if the Field force were once subdued; whilst that stood,
they could not in honor yield, and therefore it was thought fit rather to
follow the Enemy into Cornwall to subdue them, then to stay to reduce Excester
and Barnstable, and then to pursue them, for that those Garrisons would be
dying for want of provisions, whilst the Army should be in pursuit of the
foresaid intentions.

Lords day Feb. 22. Orders were given to bring up some small quantity of Money
that was at Tiverton to the Army, that upon their martch into Cornwall, there
might be supply.

The Army martching into Cornwall.
Monday Feb. 23. Part of the Army martched from Torrington to Holsworthy, being
twelve long miles, dirty way; and the rest from Biddiford, Tavestock, etc. to
Torrington, being fifteen miles, and the ways deep: Before the Van of the Army
got into Holsworth, Colonel Butler was commanded before with a Party of Horse
and four hundred Dragoons, to force his passage over the River Tamar, and if
conveniently he could, to fall into the Enemies Quarters; and Captain Woggan,
who was before sent with a small Party of Dragoons, took five and twenty Horse
and some Prisoners, and brought them to Holsworthy.

A considerable performance of Colonel Butler.
Wednesday 25. The Army had a Randezvouz near Tomerton, where Intelligence
came, That Colonel Butler had fallen upon the Enemy, and taken between three
and four hundred Horse and eighty Prisoners, and put Major General Web, with
the Forces under his command to flight, (this service was performed near
Stratton;) and thereupon our Forces entered Stratton, where the people were much
taken with their civility. This day the Army martched to Launceston, ten long
miles, being twelve at night before the Rear came up within two miles of the
Town, three Scouts were taken, who informed of Colonel Bassets being in the
Town with five hundred Foot of Colonel Tremayne's, and some Horse: a Forlon
Hope was sent before to demand the Town, the Gates were shut upon them, the
Enemy resisted, two of them were slain, about an hundred taken, at last the
Enemy was put to flight in great disorder, by the darkness of the night,
narrowness and steepness of the ways, most of them escaped; and our men
possessed the Town which had been garrisoned by them.

Thursday 26. The head Quarter continued at Launceston, the Foot being much
wearied out with the two days martch before: The General viewed the ancient
Castle of Launceston, situated upon a Mount, raised very high, but not
fortified: the Works and Mounts on the top of the Hill the Enemy left standing
undemolished. Many Cornish were taken prisoners in the Town the night before,
who being brought before the General this day, had twelve pence apeece given
them, and Passes to go to their homes: the Towns people in Launceston were
much affected with such merciful usage. The Army in their martch into Cornwall,
thus far had much cause to observe the peoples frights, quitting their
Habitations in fear of the Army; the Enemy having insinuated such an ill
opinion of it into them, endeavoring to make them believe by Oaths and
Imprecations, that no Cornish was to have quarter at our hands; of which
prejudice and misprission, after the people were undeceived, they frequented
the Markets again as in former time.

Plymouth for the Cornish Gentlemen there to hasten to the General to
Launceston; the Rear-Guard of our Horse were appointed to quarter along the
River Tamar, the better to prevent the breaking through of the Enemies Horse,
an evil which his Excellency had ever a watchful eye upon to prevent;
Messengers were sent to Colonel Cook, who was left before Barnstable with
Major General Massies Horse (all except the Lyme Regiment) to keep good Scouts
out, to fall on the Flank of the Enemy, in case they attempted to pass by;
Captain Farmer was sent with a Company of Dragoons to possess a House near
Camelford, to gain intelligence, and the more to amuse the Enemy, touching our
advance after them; and thereupon to enforce them to keep their Horse in a
Body, that they might not take Quarters, and so to weaken and discourage them
from breaking through.

Friday the 27. The Head Quarters continuing still at Launceston, the Plymouth
Regiments of Foot were sent unto, to come from Tavestock thither, and the
residue to lie on the passes upon the River, the more effectually to interrupt
the Enemy, if he attempted to break through.

Saturday the 28. His Excellency had intelligence, That Salt-Ash was quit by
the Enemy, and their Works left undemolished; that the Governor of
Mount-Edgcombe was resolved to conclude upon a Treaty negotiated by Master
Peeters: The Army was ordered this day to Quarters, and advanced four or five
miles toward Bodman, that the Rear of our Horse might quarter with more
convenience, and closer together; and to the end, the next day all the Army,
both Horse and Foot, might martch close in a Body, in regard of the continued
expectation that was of the Enemies Horse breaking through, upon the advantage
of a very open way much of it being Downs;) other Messengers were sent also to
Colonel Cook, for more surety and caution, to be in readiness in case the
Enemy should attempt to break through; for to prevent that, still was the
greatest care of the General, knowing that if the Horse got East and joined
with the Kings force, it might prolong the War, and much disturb the peace of
the Mid-land Counties; likewise a Post was sent to Colonel Whaley to draw from
Oxfordshire toward Wiltshire with some Regiments of his Horse that he had
before Oxford, the better to encounter with the Enemies Horse, that would be to
purpose harrased out with their martch (in case they did break through) by a
hard pursuit of them, which his Excellency intended.

About this time Abbington like to have bin surprised by a great Force from
Oxford, was gallantly defended.
Lords day, March 1. It happened to be a bitter cold frost, the Randezvouz of
the Army was that day about six miles from Launceston, upon the Moors; a Party
of Horse being sent out, discovered the Enemies Scouts, and not far from
Saint Blisland, took eight of them belonging to a Guard of three hundred Horse,
which they kept but a little before our Army; the Scouts confessed they knew
nothing of our approach that day, but expected us the next; that the three
hundred Horse they had upon the Guard (they thought) were drawn off; we had no
sooner advanced a little farther but the Van of our Army discovered their said
Guard, who faced about; our Army made an halt till our Rear was come up; the
Evening drawing on, and having four miles yet to Bodman, it was held fit to
quarter the Body of the Army in the Field, about Saint Blisland, which was the
head Quarter (a very poor Village;) and this was done both for security to lie
close together, being so near an Enemy; and for expedition, to be the readier
for a martch the next morning. Besides, it was held much advantage for the Army
to lie close this night whereby they might keep good Horse Guards, the better
to discover and check the Enemy, if he should seek to break through.

A little before they took the Enemies Scouts, Intelligence came, that our
Dragoons under Captain Farmer and Captain Woggan were engaged with the Enemy
as they were martching from the House they possessed to join with the Army;
whereupon a Party of two thousand Horse were commanded under the Lieutenant
General to fetch off our Dragoons, but before the Horse came up, they had
acquitted themselves well, the Enemy was retired, and they were coming on to
the Army. That Party of the Enemy was commanded by Sir James Smith, and had
they not taken the nick of time and gone away when they did, they had been all
taken in their retreat by our Horse, which came so instantly after them, that
they had like to have gained the pass. The Enemy retreating.
This night his Excellency had intelligence, that the Enemy had quit Bodman
about ten at night, Horse and Foot retreating yet further West, Whither Hopton
went.
and that the Lord Hopton (otherwise Sir Ralph Hopton) brought up the Rear,
most of the men (poor creatures) being drunk when they went away, to mend
their hard fortune.

His Excellency advancing after them.
About this time Ashby-de-la-Zouch, a Garrison in Northamptonshire, surrendered
to the Parliament.
Monday early in the morning, the Army following them, martched toward Bodman,
and had a Randezvouz on the Downs on this side Bodman; from thence part of the
Horse and Foot were commanded to Ware-Bridge, being a passage that was
suspected very convenient for the Enemy, in case they intended to break
Eastward; likewise Guards were commanded to Padstow, for caution, lest there
the Enemy should get over the River; and also the better to countenance the
Townes-men that stood upon their guard against the Enemy. Two actions little
less then miraculous.
This day four Troopers pursued a party of two and forty Musquetteers of the
Enemy beyond Bodman, with their Muskets laden and matches lighted, and after
the rate of a miracle brought them away prisoners, such fear was upon them
(from Heaven certainly;) likewise six Troopers pursued the Enemy on the left
hand as far as Lestithel, made them quit their Guards there, and hearing that
Ammunition was going to Foy in Wane loads, pursued the Convoy thither, forced
them to leave the Ammunition, and so brought back four Wane loads of Match,
Powder, Bullet and barrels of Muskets, and safely convoyed the same to the head
Quarter in Bodman: the Troopers that did this action were rewarded; but who is
able to acknowledge the goodness and power of that God by whom they did these
exployts! Moreover, a Party of our Horse this day took Sir John Greenvils
Lieutenant Colonel and others.

Tuesday March 3. The Army rested at Bodman. Consultation was had, what course
was to be taken to keep the Enemy still before the Army, their head Quarters
then being at Truro, their nearest Quarters about Saint Columb, Grampond and
Tregny, between which Towns and Truro they lay then quartered, keeping their
maine Guard of Horse at Castle o Denisse: All the passes from the North Sea to
the South Sea, were taken into consideration, and Guards of Horse and Foot
disposed unto them, and the Country were enjoined to barricadoe up the Lanes,
and keep men upon the Foards.

Prince Charles gone to Scilly.
Wednesday March 4. His Excellency had certain intelligence, that the Prince
was imbarqued and set sale for Scilly with his Lords and Gentlemen, giving all
for lost, and so evidently irrecoverable did their condition appear to all,
that their refuge of lies failed them, and they did not stick to say in
desperation at their departure, That all was lost. The discouragement it was to
the Enemy.
The Prince his flying much disheartened the Enemy; and what a work should it
have upon us? It might become us here to stay and pause a while, I cannot but
run upon that Scripture in my mind, Isaiah 51. 12, 13, 14. verses. Who art
thou, that thou should be afraid of a man, that shall dye, and of the son of
man, which shall be as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and have
feared continually every day, because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he
were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the Oppressor? The captive
exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not dye in the pit,
or that his Bread should fail. The poor Cornish, like the captive exile,
hastened to be delivered, lest they should dye in the pit, and therefore took
up Arms on any side to make an end of the War, and restore a peace of any
fashion, for the fury of the Oppressor; and where is the fury of the Oppressor?
A Ship has embarked them, a strong wind has carried them away, Scilly has
opened her Arms and received them, etc. but I must remember my story.

The conditions for the surrender of Mount-Edgcomb, a place of great strength
and consideration, were this day presented to the General by Master Coriton,
Master Lower, Master Glanvile, and Master Trevisa, Gentlemen of the Country,
who were glad of the opportunity to present themselves to the General for his
favor; The Propositions were ratified by his Excellency, and Letters of
recommendation were agreed unto, to be drawn and sent on their behalf to the
Parliament; their seasonable coming in was a good service, and Master Peter's
industry in this Negotiation was great and worthy all acceptance and
acknowledgment.

A Su^mons was this day sent unto some few Hundreds of the Country, to appear
on Friday following upon the Downs at Bodman, and strong Parties were sent out
to see if they could meet with the Enemy; who meeting with some of their Guards
forced them to retreat beyond Saint Collomb. This night the General had
intelligence, that a Ship was come into Padstow from Ireland, that the Towns
people seized on it, and stood on their guard against the Enemy, and sent to our
Dragoons, who quartered near them, for their assistance.

Thursday 5. The Dragoons coming to their assistance, boarded the Vessel,
some of the men were put to the sword, others sore wounded, Captain Allen of
Waterford an Irish Rebel, had his life spared, to the intent to make use of his
Confession; the Towns people were violent against them; the Packet-Letters
they brought were thrown over Board; yet by the diligence of the Officers of
Dragoons, were found floating upon the water: which being brought to the
General, there was found amonst them, Letters from the Earl of Glamorgan, that
six thousand Irish were ready to be transported, and four thousand more should
be ready by the first of May; That three hundred special Irish were appointed
for the Prince his Lifeguard, but Allen confessed, that an hundred of them were
to be put into the Monnt, an hundred into Pendennis, and the other hundred to
be about the Prince, in case he should approve of this disposal. There were
Letters also of the Lord Digbies taken in that Packet, being a narrative of his
proceedings against the Earl of Glamorgan, expressing how swimmingly he had
carried his Body in that business: Also Letters from the Earl of Ormond. The
Letters from Glamorgan to the King were not found. Master Coriton and the rest
of the Gentlemen who came from Mount-Edgcomb, being so opportunely here when
the Packet came, had the Original Letters showed unto them, which gave them
such satisfaction, as that they freely expressed themselves, that what force they
could raise in the country should be assisting to the Parliament for the
opposing of all Irish, or any Forraigners whatsoever, that should be brought
over.

CHAP. IV.
His Excellency with the Army driving up the Enemy into Cornwall: A Summons sent
to Sir Ralph Hopton and his Forces to come in, with the several transactions
of that business until the disbanding of all his Forces, fully related, etc.

IT was intended, that the Army should advance on the morrow, but upon
consultation it was held fit to stay that martch, and to consider of a Summons
to be sent unto the Lord Hopton; which was accordingly prepared, and sent away
by the General's Trumpet; which Summons follows in these words:

Sir,
The Summons his Excellency sent to Sir Ralph Hopton.
THrough the goodness of God to his people, and his just hand against their
enemies, your Forces being reduced to such condition, as (to my sense) the good
hand of God continuing with us, wherein alone we trust, they are not like
either to have subsistence or shelter long where they are, or to escape thence,
nor if they could, have they whither to go to have better: I have thought
good, for prevention of more bloodshed, or of further hardship or extremity to
any, but such whose hearts God shall harden to their own destruction, to send
you this Summons, for your self and them to lay down Arms, and withal a
tender of such conditions (upon a present surrender and engagement, never to
bear Arms against the Parliament) as may be better then any thing they can
rationally expect by further standing out.

First therefore, to the Soldiery in general, English and Foreigners, I
shall grant liberty either to go beyond Sea, or to their homes in England, as
they please; and to such English as shall choose to live at home, my protection
for the liberty of their persons, and for the immunity of their estates from
all plunder or violence of Soldiers, and all to go their ways with what they
have, saving Horses and Arms; but for Officers in Commission and Gentlemen of
quality, I shall allow them to go with Horses for themselves and one servant
or more, suitable to their quality, and with Arms befitting Gentlemen in a
condition of peace; and such Officers as would go beyond Sea for other
Service, to take with them their Arms and full number of Horses answerable to
their Offices.

To all Troopers and inferior sort of Horse-Officers bringing in and
delivering up of their Horses and Arms, twenty shillings a man in lieu of
their Horses to carry them home: To English Gentlemen of considerable estates,
my Pass and Recommendation to the Parliament for their moderate composition.

Lastly, for your self (besides what is before employed to you in common with
others) you may be assured of such mediation to the Parliament on your behalf,
both from my self and others, as for one whom (for personal worth and many
virtues, but especially for your care of, and moderation toward the Country) we
honor and esteem above any other of your Party, whose error (supposing you
more swayed with principles of honor and conscience then others) we most
pity, and whose happiness (so far as consistent with the public welfare)
we should delight in more then in your least suffering.

These things (not from any need or other ends then humane and Christian)
having offered, I leave to your consideration and theirs whom they concern,
desiring your and their speedy resolution, which I wish may be such as shall be
most for the honor of God, the peace and welfare of this poor Kingdom, and
for your and their good, so far as may stand therewith.

And having herein discharged (as I conceive) the duty of an honest man, a
Soldier and a Christian, if God shall see it good to let your hearts be
hardened against your own peace, I shall (though with some regreet for that ill
that shall ensue to any, yet with cheerfulness and rejoicing at the righteous
judgment of God) pursue my charge and trust for the public in another way,
not doubting of the same presence and blessing which God has hitherto
vouchsafed in the same Cause to the weak endeavors of

T. F.
March 5. 1645.
Instructions were likewise prepared for those that were to offer something to
the Country that should appear the next morning.

Friday March 6. His Excellency had intelligence, the Enemies Horse began to
draw together, as if they were resolved to break through, for now was the time
for them to do it, or never; for one days advance more, would drive them into
so narrow a compass, that it was in vain to think of it afterward. This was
made known to the Country people, at their meeting upon the Downs, whereupon
there were above a thousand of them expressed much willingness to assist in the
blocking up of all passages and ways, that might prevent the Enemies breaking
through; and the Irish Letters being showed and read unto them by Master
Peter's, did much heighten their resolution to aid and assist the Parliament
against the Foreigners; and not only so, but the forwardness they expressed to
assist against the present Enemy in their Country, with the great joy and
content they showed at the Armies being come thither for their relief, (saying
they had not seen such a day this three years) was beyond expectation: and
certainly there was the great hand and good providence of God in the opportune
bringing in of this Packet of Letters thither, whereby the Country was so much
won unto us. The happy event of this day had a further accession by the news
of the taking of Corfe Castle by a stratagem and storm, managed by the
discretion of that worthy and prudent Gentleman, Colonel Bingham, Governor of
Poole.

Strict Orders were given to all our Forces upon the Guards to be very vigilant
this night, and on the morrow a martch was intended for the whole Army.

Accordingly March 7. The Army martched early to a Randezvouz, some four miles
from Bodman, toward Saint Collombe, but the weather proving extreme wet and
the place they desired to reach that night being a long martch, it was held fit
to take up quarter in the Villages thereabouts for as many as the places could
receive, and the General with the rest of the Army returned back to Bodman.

But to keep the Enemy waking, that they might not refresh their Horse by any
rest in their Quarters, Colonel Rich was sent with a thousand Horse and
Dragoons to fall on the Enemies Guards and Quarters, and to bring in what
prisoners he could light upon; which accordingly he did near Saint Columbe,
beat the Enemies Out-Guards to their Maine Guard, their maine Guard being about
six hundred (most of them the Princes Life guard and Gentlemen) then commanded
by Major General Pert, who seeing no hopes of retreat, drew out to give a
Charge, and gave a good home-charge to our first Division; Maior-General Pert
himself charged through, but being shot, was taken prisoner; instantly the
Enemy was put to the rout before the rest of our Divisions could come up: That
Division of ours that was commanded by Quartermaster-General Fincher, who first
charged them, had the pursuit and execution of the Enemy for three or four
miles, wherein many were wounded and slain, about an hundred taken prisoners,
and about three hundred Horse.

But by reason the General and part of the Army retreated back this day to
Bodman, the Malignants began to rejoice, upon presumption that the Army was
affronted, and hereof they were so confident, that they conveyed it up with
much expedition to Oxford, where it is certain, they had public rejoicing for
the great Victory obtained against FAIRFAX his Forces in Cornwall.

Lords day March 8. Though the day were very rainy, the Army marched to other
Quarters, within six or seven miles of Truro, to Saint Stephens, Saint Blase,
and other parts: Major General Pert was brought to the head Quarters sore
wounded, he was a proper, stout, gallant man; all means was used for his
recovery, if it might have been. He satisfied diverse there, that those men that
were so routed were the Princes Regiment, (most of them Gentlemen and
Reformadoes:) That the Summons sent from the General to the Lord Hopton was not
published: The Copy of the Summons being read unto him, he said, that the
conditions therein mentioned would be readily accepted by the Soldiery, and if
it were once published in the Army, and refused by the Officers, it would break
them to pieces. In Major General Pert's pocket there was found a Letter
intended to be sent to the Lords that were about the Prince, to this purpose:
That the Kings condition is so low, is not our fault; we are not able to break
through the Enemy, nor strong enough to fight them, therefore are resolved to
compound for our selves, and leave you to do what you please,

This day the Lord Hopton returned back the General's Trumpet without Answer to
the Summons, only with this Apology; Viz. By Colonel Rich his beating of their
Guard.
That by reason of the interruption the last night, he could not send a
particular Answer to the General, but would send one very shortly: Which that
he might vindicate from a delatory excuse, he made haste; and this day toward
the Evening an Answer came from the Lord Hopton, wherein he seemed willing to
fancy the King and Parliament into a Treaty and Cessation, and desired to know
if it were not so; as the Answer it self will show, the Copy whereof follows.

Sir,
Sir Ralph Hoptons answer to his Excellencies Summons.
I Received yours, bearing date the fifth of this Month; wherein I must
acknowledge much kindness from you, and a very Christian consideration of
sparing blood: But one thing there is, I am confident you have too much honor
to expect from me; which is, that to avoid any danger, or to enjoy any worldly
advantage, I will renounce my Masters House, to whom I am both a sworn
Subject, and a sworn Servant; That I must profess I am resolved to undergo
all Fortunes with him, and, if there shall be cause, to suffer any thing,
rather then in the least point to taint my honor in that particular; and I
hope there is not a man of any consideration in this Army under my command,
that is not so resolved: yet in all honest and honorable ways, to procure the
peace of this Kingdom, and the sparing of Christian blood, I take God to
witness, I am, and still have been most desirous: And I hear from good hands,
that our gracious Sovereign is at present so far advanced in a Treaty with
the Parliament, as that he has promised to pass four of the principal of
their Bills proposed, whereof the entrusting of the Militia for seven years, in
hands agreed between them, is one. I desire you to deal freely with me in that
particular; for if that be so, it will spare the labor of further Treaty,
being for my part, ready to obey whatsoever his Majesty shall agree to. God
has indeed of late humbled us with many ill successes, which I acknowledge as
a very certain evidence of his just judgment against us for our personal
crimes: Yet give me leave to say, your present prosperity cannot be so certain
an evidence of his being altogether pleased with you. It is true, we are
reduced to a lower condition then we have been in, yet have we a gallant Body
of Horse, that being preserved to a general accord, may be for good use
against our common Enemies; and being otherwise pressed, I may say it without
vanity, want not a resolution, at lest, to sell our selves at a dear rate
against any odds. Your Propositions, though they be not wholly consented to,
yet if a general accord, much more desirable, be not in a likely forwardness
to prevent them, I shall be willing that eight Commanders of ours, with three
Country Gentlemen, give a meeting as soon as you please, to any equal number
of yours, at any indifferent place, to consult of this great business, and to
conclude of some Propositions that may be reasonable and honorable for both
Parts; wherein I hope God will so bless our clear intentions, as may produce a
probable inducement to a general Peace, according to the unfeigned desire of

Your Servant RALPH HOPTON.
March 8. 1645.
But this Art would not do, my Lord Hoptons Magic is not strong enough to
condense the mere air of his own fancy into a Cessation before our Armies, as
by the Generals Reply to this Answer, the Reader may satisfy himself; which
here follows.

My Lord:
His Excellencies Reply.
I Should most truly and freely inform your Lordship the best I could, in any
thing that might lead you to a right understanding of things, in order to the
peace of the Kingdom, or the real good of your self and those with you, so
far as may stand with my trust and duty to the public, to what I conceive
your more certain knowledge of that your desire to be informed in concerning
the Kings offers to the Parliament, would not be prejudicial: But the truth
is, I can give you no other satisfaction or assurance therein then this: That
the King has made some offers to the Parliament; and amongst them, one
concerning the Militia. Something to the purpose, as you say you have heard;
but the just certainty what his last overtures are, or how far they are
advanced to a general accord, I cannot at present certify. I do not hear
they have proceeded so far as to a Treaty; And I believe, that as the
Parliament may be discouraged from the way of Treaty by former experiences of
the fruitlesnesse thereof, and the ill use the same has been designed or
driven unto, viz. only to gain advantages for War, without real intentions
for Peace; so the late overtures that way are the less like to be succesfull,
by reason of the clear and certain discoveries the Parliament have had, That
his Majesty at the same time was and is laboring by Agents in all parts to
draw in Foreign Forces, and especially that the Earl of Glamorgan by
Commission from his Majesty, had concluded a Peace with the Irish Rebels, on
terms extremely dishonorable and prejudicial, upon the only condition of
sending over Force under the command of that Lord, to invade England; whereof I
presume you cannot but have heard. And though his Majesty did in a Letter to
the Parliament, disavow any such agreement, and pretended he had given order to
the Lord Digby for the attainting and impeaching the Earl of Glamorgan of high
Treason, for what he had done therein: yet by late discoveries to the
Parliament, and especially by Letters intercepted the other day at Padstow,
from the Lord Digby, the Earl of Glamorgan, and others, to Secretary Nicholas,
your self, Sir Edward Hide, the Lord Culpepper, and others, it is most clear
and evident, that the arresting of the Earl of Glamorgan was only for a
present color to salve reputation with the people, and continue their delusion
till designs were ripe for execution; for the same peace is fully concluded
with the Rebels, the King to have the aid conditioned upon the same agreement,
and the Earl of Glamorgan at liberty again; and to command that Force in
chief.

Now for the overture of a meeting, to treat further about the Propositions I
sent, though I know nothing material that I can add or alter, except in
circumstances, yet I shall not refuse or decline such a meeting, or ought else
that probably tends to the saving of blood, or further misery to any, Provided,
the meeting be speedily, and number of persons not to exceed four or five. But,
my Lord, when you consider what I have before related concerning Foreign
supplies, which I have reason to think you know and believe; you see what cause
I have to be jealous of advantages sought by delays; and not to intermit any
time, or omit any opportunity, to prosecute the service I have in hand: And
that there may be no color of your expecting that forbearance on my part,
which you offer on yours, I do the more hasten back my resolution to you: In
pursuance whereof, I do not despise nor shall insult upon your present
condition. I question not, nor yet shall, I hope, be much moved with the
resolution of your men; I presume not on former successes nor present advantage
in fleshly power, but desire to trust in God alone, whose favor and blessing
to this Army above others, I do not account in what is past, or expect in
future, to be for any precedence in merit or goodness of ours, whereby we
should be more pleasing to him then others, but from his own Free grace and
goodness toward his people, whose welfare, with the common good of the
Kingdom, we seek and desire with all faithfulness and integrity to pursue.
And so committing the issue of all to his good pleasure, J remain

Your humble Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
March 9. 1645.
Moreover, besides the proportion this Answer might bear to the better
information of the Lord Hopton, his Excellency (to satisfy him more fully)
commanded some of the Regiments to advance this day to Tregny (an ill sign of
a Cessation) and the next day the Army advanced two several ways, part of it
following to Tregny, (the head Quarter that night) another part of it to
Probus, and those parts. But such was the force of the Lord Hopton's
imagination upon his own Soldiers, that they instead of asking, acted a
Cessation; when our Forlorn of Horse coming near theirs, not far from Probus,
they did not endeavor to put themselves in order to receive us, nor did they
make any tesistance, but stood still: our men much wondering thereat. And what
was the cause? but a Cessation between the Armies (as they believed, or would
seem to believe) for so soon as our men came near, they cried, A Cessation, a
Cessation: ours cried, No, no, there was none: and much ado had
Commissary-generall Ireton, and other Officers, to persuade them there was
none; notwithstanding, since they were so possessed and deluded, we wished them
to be gone, and we would take no advantage of them. The Enemy expressing much
sorrow (that there was not a Cessation as they were informed) retired, seeming
also to be somewhat affected, that they had so noble and ingenuous an Enemy,
that took not this advantage to do them any hurt, as we might have done, there
being no Cessation.

The Lord Hopton seeing his stratagem would not take, but he must beg a
Cessation if he would have it, and that his men were so startled at the advance
of our Army, The Lord Hopton sends for a Treaty.
sent this night about twelve of the clock, for a Treaty, naming the place,
Tresillian-Bridge, if his Excellency approved of it: The Trumpet was returned
about three in the morning, That the General did hearken to a Treaty, and would
appoint Commissioners to meet at the place proposed by the Lord Hopton.
Hereupon Commissioners on both sides were nominated to meet at nine the next
day, being Tuesday morning ( March 10.) But the General being unwilling to lose
time, gave Orders for a martch: accordingly the Army that Tuesday advanced by
break of day, and martched to a Randezvouz within two miles of Truro by ten of
the clock, where the Lord Hopton's Trumpeter brought a safe Conduct for our
Commissioners, and they having received the like from us, a Cessation was
agreed to; but withal, a Message was sent to the Lord Hopton from the General,
That he intended to quarter his Army at Truro and Saint Allen that night, which
he thought fit to give him notice of, that none of his Forces might be left in
the Town when our Soldiers entered. This much disrelished with the Lord
Hopton, and his Commissioners that he sent, had much reluctance against it. The
General, upon conference with the Commissioners, was content to let them have
Saint Allen for their Quarter; his Excellency reserving still Truro (the prime
Quarter) to himself. And here we had the Enemy in a pound, so that he had but
six miles breadth to break through, if he attempted it. And now we having the
Pass at Truro, the Lord Hopton drew his Forces to quarter more Westward, and
the Treaty was adjourned till next Morning, and a Cessation observed on both
Sides.

Wednesday the 11. The Commissioners on both sides met again, but could not
make any great progress into the Treaty; the Cessation was continued for a day
longer: about one hundred and twenty Musquetteers came in this day with their
Arms, and Colors flying, being of Colonel Trevanian's Regiment: also diverse
Colonels, Knights and Gentlemen of quality, sent to the General, making known
their desires, to be received into the protection of the Parliament; which so
disheartened Colonel Trevanian, then with his Regiment at Perin, that late that
evening he sent unto his Excellency, desiring he might be included in the
Treaty with the Lord Hopton, and have the same conditions that other Officers
were to have. These things so operated with the Governor of Saint Mawes
Castle, a principal Fort that had a great command of the Haven at Falmouth,
that he sent to the General to be received into favor: And although Arrundell
the Governor of Pendennis, sent to command him to come into the Castle of
Pendennis, he fearing some evil intended against him, refused and persisted in
his former desire: whereupon the General sent him conditions, with a Summons;
which were accepted, and he agreed to surrender.

By reason of the Cessation, our Troopers mixed with the Enemies; and upon this
bruit abroad (though without ground) that the Enemies Troopers should lose
their Horses, they to make some advantage of them, coursed good store of their
best Horses to our men.

By twelve of the clock this night, all the material points of the Treaty were
concluded, matters of circumstance only remained, which yet were so necessary
to be concluded, in order to the perfecting of the Treaty, that the next day
was allowed (and the Cessation continued) for the finishing thereof. When the
Treaty was fully ended, and Hostages appointed, the same day Saint Mawes Castle
was surrendered, and thirteen pieces of Ordnance in it (whereof two great Brass
Pieces, of about four thousand weight apiece) and our Foot were sent to
possess it.

The Treaty being thus ended, with great joy did the Enemies Officers receive
our conditions, and wished they had sooner known our intentions toward them.
Those that seemed most discontented, were the common Troopers that were to be
dismounted, who therefore to mend their conditions, had changed away their best
Horses, for advantage, before the disbanding. And it is not to be credited, how
much our Army did get into the Enemies esteem during the Cessation, and what
sorrowful expressions many of them did make, that they han been so deluded
concerning our carriage; ingenuously confessing, that the civility of our Army
had been ever till now concealed from them. Officers and Soldiers unanimously
desired employment for Jreland; being willing to take the Sacrament Oath (for
that they proposed) or to enter into what other Obligation should be thought
fit, That as they would never bear Arms against the Parliament in England, so
that they would not, if they were employed in Jreland by the Parliament, desist
from pursuing of their commands against the Jrish Rebels, upon any countermand
or other invitation of the Kings: affirming, that they had sufficiently smarted
already for being enticed by him.

Saturday was appointed to be the day of disbanding, which yet of very
necessity was put off till the next day; in the mean time one hundred and
twenty more of the Enemies Foot, with Colors, came in; and now all things
being agreed, the Commissioners of both sides supt this night with the General.

The next day, which was appointed for the Disbanding, was the Lords day, in
which the Army would have been glad to have rested, but in regard time was
precious, and the country suffered so much by the Enemies Forces that lay upon
them, they by good warrant preferred mercy and necessity before sacrifice, and
the French Regiment, under the command of Monsieur Laplane, which was to be the
first disbanded, was that day brought to the place appointed for Disbanding.
Their Horses were very poor, they having before, by private contracts, put off
the best of them. There were about three hundred dismounted; but they having
made their markets before, most of their Horses (as was but just) were turned
back upon their own hands, as not worth the twenty shillings an Horse, which
they were to receive according to the agreement. In the space of five days
more was the work finished, and the whole Field force of the Enemy in the West
of England disbanded; viz. On Monday two Brigades of Horse. Tuesday 17. the two
Brigades of the Lord Cleveland's and Major General Web's. Wednesday 18. part of
the Lord Wentworth's, Colonel Bovile's Brigade, Lord Hopton's Lifeguard, and
Sir Richard Greenvil's Life-guar'd. Thursday two Brigades more, of which the
Lord Goring's was one, and the Princes Life guard. Friday 20. the two last
Troops of all the Cornish Horse were disbanded. The number of Brigades in all
that were disbanded, were nine; viz. the French Brigade, consisting of three
Regiments: The Lord Wentmorth's Brigade, consisting of four Regiments: Sir
James Smith's Brigade, consisting of three Regiments: The Lord Cleveland's
Brigade, consisting of four Regiments: Major General Web's of three Regiments:
The Lord Hopton's Brigade, commanded by Colonel Bovile: The Lord Goring's
Brigade, of five Regiments: The Princes Lifeguard, consisting of nine Troops,
being seven hundred men, armed: Sir Richard Greenvil's Reformadoes. The men
that were dismounted are proper and lusty men.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire; SPEAKER of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
WHilst I lay at Bodman for the necessary refreshment of the Army, and to block
up the Passages from Bodman to the North and South Sea, I sent a Summons, with
Propositions, to Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Army under his command (A true Copy
whereof I have here enclosed) being encouraged thereunto by some of the Enemies
Officers and Soldiers, who came in to me, and informed of their
inclinablenesse to Conditions; and hoping thereby either to bring them to such
terms as should be to your advantage, or would distract and weaken them; and
withal understanding by the intercepted Letters I sent you, that an Irish
Infantry was ready to be shipped for England, I thought fit to try all means
which in probability might break their Body of Cavalry upon the place. When I
had dispatched these Propositions to the Enemy, J advanced upon Monday with all
the Army from Bodman toward Truro, being then the Enemies head Quarters, and
to Tregny, where I quartered that night. Sir RalphHopton sent a Trumpeter to me
with a Letter, desiring to have Commissioners appointed on both sides, to meet
at Tresilian-Bridge the next day, with power to treat and conclude, which I
assented to: The Treaty accordingly began, the Commissioners meeting about four
a clock in the Afternoon, and J in the mean time advancing the quarters of the
Army to Truro and Saint Allen: After some time spent between the Commissioners,
this agreement was made, a Copy whereof I have here also enclosed; and in
execution thereof, this day we began to disband the French Brigade under
Colonel Lapland: To morrow we proceed with three other Brigades, they having
nine in all; and shall endeaveur to shorten this work as much as may be. Truly
Sir, this must needs be acknowledged for an admirable mercy from the same
gracious hand of providence that has hitherto gone along with you, that so
considerable a force as this should be so baffled, first at Torrington, and
afterward should put themselves, as it were, into a Net; whereby they were
necessitated to take terms, to the ^tter Ruin of so great a Body of Cavalry;
which according to all our information, and the confession of our Enemies, was
not less at the time of the Treaty, then four or five thousand Horse. The
Articles of Agreement will speak the mercy, and needs no comment; yet I hope I
may make this observation upon them, that thereby not only so great a Body of
Cavalry is broken, but so many both Officers and Soldiers disobliged from
taking arms against you, and this at such a season when a Foreign Aid so
ready, as the Earl of Glamorgan's Letters sent up formerly (and now sent you)
speak at large, the timely freeing of us for other services that remain, with
discouragement put upon the Enemies Garrisons in these parts, which we hope
will cause them the more speedily to come in, we trust will be good
consequences of this work: It Is the desire of us all, the praise of all may be
returned to God, to whom it is only due. The reputation of this has already
produced a surrender of Saint Mawes Castle, wherein we found about thirteen
Guns, and good proportion of Ammunition; which place gives you a better
interest in Falmouth-Harbour, then the Enemy has: For by the advantage hereof,
you may bring in Shipping without hazard, which they cannot. It has also
occasioned the coming in of between three hundred and four hundred Foot of the
Enemies, with their Arms, to me; and given the Countries such heart against
them, That in Peryn (a Town formerly not very well affected) and in Saint Ive
they stand upon their Guards against the Enemy: For further particulars
concerning this business, I refer you to Master Peter's, who since he came
into this County (where he was borne) has very much furthered the service, in
the bringing of the Country in so freely to the protection of the Parliament: I
remain

Your most humble Servant THO. FAIRFAX.

TRURO, March 14. 1645.
Articles of Agreement concluded betwixt Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
John Lambert, Colonel John St. Aubin, Commissary General Stane, Captain
Edward Herle, and Richard Deane, Comptroller of the Ordnance, Commissioners
appointed on the behalf of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Knight, General
of the Parliaments Army, on the one part: And Colonel Charles Goring, Colonel
Marcus Trevor, Colonel Thomas Panton, Colonel Jordan Bovill, Sir Richard
Prideaux Knight, and Major Goteer, Commissioners appointed on the behalf of
the Right Honorable the Lord HOPTON, General of his Majesty's Army, on the
other part; as follows:
I. IT is concluded and agreed, That no person in the Lord Hopton's Army, not
formerly by name excepted by the Parliament from pardon, shall be excluded from
the privilege of this Treaty, either as being a Forreigner, or for having
formerly served the Parliament; but shall equally have the benefit of what
shall upon this Treaty be granted to other persons of that quality that they
are of in the Army: And for any persons by name excepted by the Parliament,
they shall have present liberty (if they desire it) to go beyond Seas, with
like recommendation and equipage as others of like quality; or if they desire
to live at home in England, to make their addresses to the Parliament, for
that, or other purpose, they shall have leave and reasonable time so to do, and
the General's protection to live quietly and at liberty in any place they shall
nominate and choose within the Parliaments Quarters, until they have received
the Parliaments Resolution; And if the Parliament shall not think fit to grant
such their desires, they shall then have leave and Passes to go beyond Sea, as
before, or to any of the King's Armies or Garrisons, as they shall think fit.
II. That the Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, shall within
six days after the date hereof be wholly disbanded and discharged by the Lord
Hopton, and the General Officers, Colonels, and other Officers under his
command according to the several charges in manner hereafter expessed. III.
That all common Troopers, Corporals of Horse, Farriers and Sadlers, that are
mounted, being of, or belonging to the Forces under the command of the right
honorable the Lord Hopton, shall bring in and deliver up their Horses, with
their Bridles and Saddles, and all their Arms, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, or unto whom he shall appoint to receive them, in manner, time and
place, as is hereafter expressed; Provided, that all Corporals, and such common
Troopers as shall appear Gentlemen of worth, and such other Troopers as shall
go beyond Sea, shall be allowed to keep and carry away with them their Swords.
IV. That upon performance hereof, they shall receive twenty shillings a man, or
keep their Horses, and shall have their Passes to go to their homes in
England, or beyond Sea, with their Bag and Baggage, which they shall have leave
to carry with them, or dispose of them as they please; and those to whom Swords
are allowed, as before, to pass with their Swords. V. That the
Commission-Officers of Horse under the Lord Hopton, for their several Troops
respectively, shall cause the said Horses and Arms to be duly delivered in
without changes, spoiling or imbezlement among themselves, according to the
effect of the first Article before-going. VI. That this being performed, all
the said Commission-Officers of Horse in present command, and all Trumpeters
belonging to them, shall have liberty to go away, either to their homes in
England, or beyond the Seas, with their Bag and Baggage: And also, they shall
have such number of Horses and Equipage, as is hereafter allowed, according to
their several qualities: That is to say, First, For those that shall choose to
go beyond the Seas, the full number of Horses and Fire-armes, if they have so
many of their own. To Trumpeters one Horse a piece, and their Trumpets. To
Quartermasters two Horses and one case of Pistols. To Cornets three Horses and
two case of Pistols. To Lieutenants four Horses and three case of Pistols. To
Captains, Majors and Lieutenant-Colonels, six Horses and four case of Pistols.
To Colonels eight Horses and six case of Pistols. To the Adjutant general six
Horses and four case of Pistols. To the other Adjutants of Brigades, three
Horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To the Scoutmaster-generall six Horses
and two case of Pistols. To the Quartermaster-generall six Horses and two case
of Pistols. To the Marshall-generall four Horses and one case of Pistols. To
the Deputy Quartermaster-generall two Horses. To the Deputy Scoutmaster one
Horse. To the Major general twelve Horses and six case of Pistols. To the
Commissary-generall of Horse provisions, three Horses and a case of Pistols. To
the Commissary-generall of Victuals, three Horses and one case of Pistols. To
the Surgeon general three Horses. To Quartermasters of Brigades three
Horses and one case of Pistols. To Chirurgions of Regiments two Horses.
To all these, except Chirurgions, their desensive Arms, and Swords for
themselves and their servants; and to every Field Officer one Carabine, and
Chirurgions their swords. Secondly, Those that shall choose to abide in England,
with the General Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Protection, and to live at home, shall
have their Proportions as follows. The Trumpeters one Horse a piece and their
Trumpets. To Quartermasters one Horse a piece. To Cornets and Lieutenants two
Horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Captains three Horses a piece and
one case of Pistols. To Majors four horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To
Lieutenant-Colonels five horses a piece and one case of Pistols. To Colonels
six horses a piece and two case of Pistols. To the Major-generall ten horses,
three case of Pistols. To the Adjutant-generall six horses, one case of
Pistols. To the Adjutants of Brigades one horse a piece and one case of
Pistols. To the Quartermaster-generall six horses, one case of Pistols. To the
Marshall-generall three horses, one case of Pistols. To the Deputy
Quartermaster-generall two horses. To the Scoutmaster-generall four horses, one
case of Pistols.
All these to have Swords for themselves and their Servants. To the Commissary
of horse provision, two horses and a case of Pistols. To the Commissary of
Victuals, two horses, a case of pistols. To the Deputy Scoutmaster one horse.
To the Quartermasters of Brigades two horses. To the Chirurgion-generall two
horses. To Chirurgions of Regiments one horse. To Chaplains two horses.
All these, except Chaplains, to have Swords for themselves and their Servants.

VII. That the precedent Articles concerning the surrender of Troopers Horses.
etc. being performed; if any Officer in command that chooses to live at home,
shall appear to have more Horses of his own, then what he is before allowed
by the last precedent Article, the Commissioners of Sir Thomas Fairfax his
part, will recommend it to his Excellencies favor, that they may enjoy the
benefit of such Horses of their own, to the same number as Officers of like
quality that are to go beyond the Seas. VIII That of the Reformadoe Officers
that choose to live at home in England, Reformadoe Quartermasters shall have the
same conditions as Coporals in command; Cornets and Lieutenants shall go away
with one Horse a piece; Captains, Majors and Lieutenant-Colonels with two
Horses a piece, and Colonels with three Horses a piece, if they have so many of
their own, and one case of Pistols: those Reformadoes that desire to go
beyond Seas, to have half the proportion of Horses and Arms allowed in that
case to Officers of the like quality in present command, if they have them of
their own, and all of them to go with Swords, Bag and Baggage, or dispose
thereof at pleasure. IX. That all Gentlemen of quality in Arms or not in
Arms, but living under the protection of the said Army, shall have liberty
either to go to their own houses, or beyond the Seas, with Bag and Baggage,
and Equipage according to their several qualities, as follows; That is to
say, A Knight with four Horses, three Servants, one case of Pistols, and their
Swords. An Esquire with three Horses, two Servants, one case of Pistols, and
their Swords. A Gentleman with two Horses, one Servant, one case of Pistols,
and their Swords. A Gentleman of lowest rank, with one Horse for himself, and
a Sword. Scholars and Clergymen to have one Horse at the least, or more,
according to their different degrees, at the Generals discretion.
X. That to all those who according to the effect of these Articles shall choose
to go beyond the Sea, Passes shall be granted from the General Sir Thomas
Fairfax accordingly, and to those who being English, shall choose to live at
home, Passes for that purpose, and protections for the liberty of their
persons, and also for the freedom of their Estates from all plunder and
violence of Soldiers; and that such Gentlemen, or others, that have
considerable Estates, may have the General's Letters of Recommendation to the
Parliament (if desired) for their moderate composition. XI. That after the
performance of these Articles so far to disbanding and delivering up of what
is to be delivered, All Officers and Soldiers that shall, according to these
Articles, choose to go beyond the Seas, shall have sufficient Quarters assigned
them by Sir Thomas Fairfax, near convenient Ports for their transportation; and
that they shall have twenty eight days allowed to stay in England, from the
day of their several disbanding, and that the charge of quartering their
Horses be discharged by themselves after the first fourteen days for the time
of their further stay; That the General will appoint men to take care that
Shipping shall be provided for transporting their Persons, Arms, Bag and
Baggage, they paying the accustomed rates. XII. That a certain number of
Officers of the Lord Hopton's Army, not exceeding forty, upon the Lord Hopton's
Commissioners request, shall be permitted to have passes for themselves, and
their Servants, Horses and necessaries to go to Oxford; Provided, that their
Servants exceed not the number of two, their Horses three, to every one
respectively. XIII. That the Lord Hopton shall be allowed for his own use, all
his Horses; Provided, they exceed not the number of forty; and Arms for
himself and twelve men; and that the Lord Wentworth shall have all his Horses;
Provided, they exceed not five and twenty, and Arms for himself and eight
men, and places assigned them for convenience of Quarters. XIV. That such
English men as shall choose to abide in England at their homes, and all
Foreigners of the said Army, shall engage themselves by promise, in such form
as is herewith agreed on, not to bear Arms any more against the Parliament of
England, nor to act any thing wilfully prejudicial to the Parliaments
affairs, without first rendering themselves prisoners to the Parliament: And
likewise all such English as shall choose to go beyond Sea, shall engage
themselves in the like promise for three years next ensuing the date hereof, or
otherwise shall lose the benefit of these Articles, excepting the Lord Hopton
and Lord Wentworth, and the number of Officers allowed to go to Oxford in the
twelfth Article before-going, who are by the intention of these Articles left
free from such engagement. XV. That all Horses, Arms and Furniture of War
belonging to, or in the hands of any person in the said Army, not allowed in
the precedent or subsequent Articles, to be carried away, shall be delivered up
to such persons, and at such places near Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his head
Quarters, as his Excellency shall appoint, within six days after the date
hereof, without spoil or imbezlement, at the care as well of the General's
Officers of the said Army, and all Commanders in their several charges, as by
the persons themselves to whom such Arms or Furniture of War do belong, or
in whose custody they were. XVI. That whosoever shall after the conclusion of
this Treaty, purposely break, spoil or imbezle any of the Arms, Horses or
Furniture, agreed and concluded to be delivered up in this Treaty, shall
forfeit the benefit due unto him by any Article in the Treaty. And if any of
the said Army after the conclusion of this Treaty, shall plunder, or wilfully
do any violence unto any Inhabitants of the Country, he shall give satisfaction
unto the persons so wronged, or lose the benefit of the Treaty; and that the
Commissioners of both parties, or any three of them, whereof one or more to be
of Sir Thomas Fairfax his party, and one or more to be of the Lord Hopton's,
shall have power to hear and determine all such cases accordingly. XVII. That
the said Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, from the time of
the conclusion of this Treaty, until the time of their drawing out to be
disbanded, as in the ensuing Articles, shall be quartered in such places
Westward from Truro, as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, which shall be large
enough for their accommodation, and that the Cessation of Arms, and of all
Acts of Hostility betwixt the two Armies shall continue unto the time of the
complete disbanding of the Lord Hopton's Army. XVIII. That for the disbanding
of the said Forces, and delivering up of Horses, Arms, etc. In performance of
the precedent Articles, Every Brigade and Regiment under the Lord Hopton's
command, shall by their respective Commanders be drawn out into such places of
Randezvouz, within two miles of Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his head Quarters,
and upon such days as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall for them jointly or severally
appoint, notice of the same being given to his Excellency in writing sixteen
hours beforehand, under the Commissioners of the Lord Hopton's part, or any of
them, two or more of whom shall for that and other purposes continue at Sir
Thomas Fairfax his head Quarters, until the disbanding be finished, and that
the Quartermaster general, or Adjutant of the Lord Hopton's with one Horsman
from every Brigade, shall also be there with them, and that none of the said
Brigades or Regiments shall be drawn out of their Quarters (which shall be
assigned to them as before) otherwise then upon, and according to such notice
from Sir Thomas Fairfax as before, except to and for their ordinary Guards.
XIX. That to, or before the drawing out of the several Brigades or Regiments
to such Randezvouz as before, the chief Commanders of them respectively, shall
deliver unto whom Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, a true and perfect List of
the Regiments and Troops in the several Brigades, and of all Officers and
Soldiers in their several Troops, expressing by name which of them do choose
to go beyond Sea, and which do go to live at home; as also who are
Reformadoes, and in what degree of command they have served: and that at the
same times and places, the Horses, Arms and Furniture, by virtue of the
precedent Articles to be delivered up, shall be delivered up accordingly; and
all the Officers and soldiers disbanded and discharged, and there shall
receive their passes, with Warrants for quarters by the way for one night in a
place, and be conveyed toward their several homes, as far as Chard, if they
go so far, or unto Quarters assigned them for their transportation,
according to the precedent Articles.
That for the further performance of these Articles, two Colonels of each Army
shall be mutually delivered and kept as Hostages.

H. Ireton. Jo. Lambert. Jo. St Aubin. William Stane. Edward Herle. Richard
Deane. Charles Coring. Marcus Trevor. Thomas Panton. Jordan Bovill. Richard
Prideaux. Jean Goteer.


There came in to the General during the Treaty, many Lieutenant-Colonels,
Serjeant-Majors and Captains.

Many Gentlemen of quality.

Ninety and six common Soldiers from Peryn with Arms.

Twelve more followed them.

One hundred more with their Arms and Colors, of Colonel Trevanian's Regiment.

One hundred Officers and soldiers of Colonel Champernoon's Regiment, Falmouth
by this means, and the surrender of St Mawes, was ours on one side the Harbor.

Now having given you the Narrative, give me leave to make some few
observations on this succesfull progress, even to the Lands end, which may
well be the subject of greatest admiration and thankfulness: The hard task the
Army had in forcing up so great a Body as 5000 of the Enemies Horse, into such
a narrow neck of land, through a Country so cragged, in such a season of the
year, the ground all covered over with Snow, the ways so slippery, and the
Weather so bitter cold, by a hard frost of that continuance, as had not been
known for many years before, may well be compared with Hannibal's forcing his
passage into Italy through the frozen Alps with Fire and Vinegar. That five
thousand Horse and more should be forced to capitulate and yield themselves to
an Army coming short of that number in Horse, is that which History can hardly
parallel, and Posterity will scarce believe. And the benefit is as great as the
wonder: For had this Body of Horse escaped into the Mid-land parts, they might
in probability have much protracted the War: and if they, the Lord Ashlye's
Foot, and the Kings other Forces about Oxford had joined together, they would
have been very considerable in the Field, and so would necessarily have
occasioned the diversion of the Army from the work they had in hand, viz. the
Reduction of the West, which was of that vast importance to the Kingdom,
considering the Negotiations that were in France and Ireland, for the present
bringing over Forces thither (as by the intercepted Letters from those parts
severally did appear) that nothing could be greater: But by this good hand of
God upon us, this Body of the Enemy is secured, their joining prevented, and
all the mischief that would have ensued thereupon, and Cornwall reduced: Which
last particular, that you may see what a considerable sum (alone and by it
self) it amounts unto; cast it up and consider it, as it was a Country having
convenient Ports and Harbors both for France and Ireland, whose natural
situation was very strong and apt for defense, being all very mountainous, and
enwrapt with the Sea on all sides, except toward Devonshire, and there bounded
by the River Tamar, which in a right line, runs almost from Sea to Sea. From
which advantages, it has been in ancient times, one of the last places of
retreat in the Kingdom, and has ever made saving conditions for it self in
those overflowing inundations both of Saxons and Normans. Since the beginning
of our late Wars, it and its Forces have been more then once fatally
disastrous to our former Armies, and had ever been from the beginning of the
Wars in the possession of the Enemy, the people more generally disaffected to
the Parliament then any other part of the Kingdom, from whence the King, as
from a never failing Spring, was constantly supplied with a choice and able
Infantry.

All which particulars whosoever does consider, will acknowledge, that the
reducing of this County was as difficult as desirable: And this is another
happy fruit of the disbanding those Horse, and not only the reduction of that
County of Cornwall, but the absolute conquest of the West of England; most of
the Enemies Garrisons there only waiting to see what would become of these
Horse, upon whom they depended for relief.

All which considered and put together, this service may well live a lasting
Monument, to the glory of God, and the honor of the Instruments.

Moreover, during this space, while the Enemies Forces were disbanding, as an
additionall to the occurrences of these five days, Monday 16. another Packet
of the Lord Glamorgan's taken at Peryn, was brought to the General, being a
Duplicate of those Letters taken at Padstow, (another Vessel being newly
landed there out of Ireland, not knowing but that it was still in the Kings
hand) and that evening was Peryn possessed by our Foot, who were received with
much joy by the Towns people.

Tuesday 17. Lieutenant Colonel Ingoldsbey (a stout and valiant man) going to
view Pendennis Castle, received a shot from some of the Enemies Musquetteers
behind the Mud-walls, of which he dyed within three hours.

Wednesday, The General went to view Pendennis, and possessed Pennycome-Quick;
also Dennis Fort with twenty six pieces of Ordnance, and thirty barrels of
Powder was the same day surrendered to the General; and Pensans and Saint Ives
stood upon their guards against Goring's Forces.

Thursday, Above an hundred men came with their Arms from Michael's Mount, and
tendered themselves to serve in the Army.

CHAP. V.
The Army returning to the Siege of Excester, with all the particulars of the
Treaty, and surrender of the same.

THe whole Field-Force of the Enemy being thus happily reduced, Orders were
given out immediately for the Army to martch back Eastward: Saturday 21. the
General accordingly martched from Truro to Bodman, and the rest of the Army to
other Quarters, where they rested the Lords day. Monday 23. Consultation was
had with the Gentlemen for the settlement of those parts. The Lord Mohune and
others came to his Excellency that day. Tuesday 24. Further debate was had
concerning the ordering of the disbanded Horse, who plundered the Country as
they went, and they were all called over by the List at the Bridges they were
to pass over, to see that none had more Horse with them then were allowed them
at the disbanding place. Wednesday 25. The General and Lieutenant General and
some of the general Officers, went to Plymouth and viewed the Forts and Works,
whilst the Army martched another way, by Launceston: The Governor and the
Town entertaining the General very honorably, three hundred pieces of
Ordnance discharged to welcome him thither.

Thursday 26. The Parliament Men, and other Gentlemen of the Country met the
General at Plymouth; conference was had concerning the defensive posture of
that County, and the speedy sending over of the French that were disbanded; and
accordingly Ships were provided.

Friday 27. The General martched from Plymouth to Oakhampton, four and twenty
miles, by Tavestock, and the Army martched from Launceston that day within five
miles of Oakhampton.

Saturday 28. His Excellency had news of Sir Jacob Ashleys being taken, and of
the routing of his Army by the Forces under the command of Colonel Morgan, Sir
William Brereton, and Colonel Birch, and of Sir Charles Lucas being taken by
Colonel Fleetwood, who with his Horse hindered the conjunction of all the Oxford
Horse with the Lord Ashley. The General rested this day at Oakhampton till the
rest of the Army came up.

Lords day, March 29. They martched from Oakhampton to Crediton, fourteen
miles; some part of the Army went that night to Newton Siers, being eighteen
miles: Orders were given to possess Heavytree, a Village lying within half a
mile of Excester, lest the Enemy should sally out, and burn those Villages
upon the approach of the Army.

Monday, March 30. The General resting at Crediton, some more Foot advanced
close to Excester; a Summons was prepared to be sent in.

Tuesday, March 31. The General drew all his Army round the City within Musket
shot; and as be passed by them, at every post, our men that lay there gave a
volley of shot and a great shout; and so on the other side the River, there
being Bridges made over; and presently after his Excellency sent in a Summons,
and came to quarter that night at Colomb John, the rest of the Army to
Silverton and other parts. The Summons being prepared, was sent in; and ran
thus.

SIR,
BEing returned with my Army from the West, where God in his wisdom saw it
good to bestow a dry and bloodlesse Victory, upon me, to the great peace and
quiet of those parts, and conceiving it my duty likewise to endeavor the good
of this County, which by the occasion of your Garrison is necessarily
obstructed, I thought fit once more to send you a Summons to deliver up to me
the City of Excester, with the Castle, Forts, Arms, Ammunition, and Magazine
belonging to the same; believing that by this time you are satisfied of the
relief from the Princes Army, and may equally be of all relief to come from
any other place, if your intelligence and knowledge were the same with ours:
There is nothing more induces me hereunto then an unfeigned zeal toward any
bloodshed, and, as much as in me lies, to preserve that City, which has
already suffered deeply in these unnatural distractions, from further or
greater misery: Though I shall not boast of my numbers or strength, yet I must
needs tell you that I doubt not but the same power which has formerly made
difficult things easy, will answer this, and will acquit me from being
accounted the occasion of those inconveniences and miseries which necessarily
will ensue upon your refusal. Sir, I shall expect your speedy and positive
Answer herein, and rest

Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
March 31. 1646.
Wednesday, April 1. Sir John Berkley returned this Answer to the Summons.

SIR,
UPon your Summons I called a Counsel of War, where after some debate, it was
determined to treat with you, or with whom you should appoint, and to conclude
upon just and honorable terms: And to that purpose, I desire a safe Conduct
for these persons to repair to your head Quarters, with their servants, on
Friday morning, and to return at their pleasure: I remain

Your Servant JOHN BERKLEY.
April 1. 1646.
Those first named by Sir John Berkley were, Sir Henry Berkley. Mr. Will.
Ashburnham. Sir George Carry. Mr. Jo. Wear. Colonel Godolphine. Capt. Fitz
Garret. Mr. Robert Walker. Mr. Thomas Knight. Mr. Thomas Kendal. Mr. Thomas
Foard.


Whereupon Thursday, April 2. his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax returned this
Answer.

SIR,
I Have received yours, whereby I understand, that in pursuance of my demand in
my Summons, you have determined to treat with me by Commissioners; and in order
to that have sent a List of ten Gentlemen, which you desire for Commissioners
on your behalf, of which there is none in particular that I take exceptions
unto; yet because I desire to carry on the Business with cleernesse and
expedition, which by so great a number cannot be so well effected, I thought
fit to propound unto you the number of six, that being as many as conveniently
can be used in a business of this nature: Upon your consent hereunto and
Answer, I shall, according to your desire, send you a safe conduct for a
proportionable number of Commissioners; and in the mean time shall rest

Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
April 1. 1646. I agree the time to begin on Friday next, according to your
desire; the place Poultymore-house: I have sent a List of the Commissioners on
my part. Lieut. Genesis Hammond. Col. Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Lambert. Col.
Harley. Col. Fry. Commissary Stane.




Thursday Apr. 2. Commissioners were appointed, and a safe conduct granted:
Friday 3. the Treaty began at Poultymore, S. Jo. Bamfields house. This day his
Excellency had the news of the surrender of Deniston: Saturday, Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, the Treaty continued, sitting close at it every
day, and the most part of the night, till they had concluded it. That which
most retarded the proceeding, was some high demands and fruitless quaeries, in
behalf of the Clergy, viz. the Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, and other Cathedral
men there, wherein our Commissioners held them up to what was reasonable; and
after much time consumed therein, they were willing to accept of what we were
willing to grant, and so on Thursday, April 9. the Articles were signed by Sir
John Berkley, in the presence of our Commissioners, and by the General in the
presence of their Commissioners; which Articles were as follows.

Only, first, let it be remembered, that after there was an entrance upon the
Treaty at Excester, and that it was probable to come to a good conclusion, his
Excellency losing no time, sent Commissary-general Ireton, with his own
Rgiment, and Colonel Riche's, and some other Regiments of Horse, to Oxford, to
hinder Provisions from going in thither, and to take all advantages against the
Enemy: His Excellency intending to make all speed himself after the work done
at Excester, to lay Siege thereto.

Articles of Agreement concluded on by Thomas Hammond, Lieutenant General of
the Ordnance, Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel Edward Harley, Colonel
Lambert, Commissary-general Stane, and Major Watson, Scoutmaster-general,
Commissioners on the behalf of the right Honorable his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, General of the Parliaments Forces, on the one Party: And Sir Henry
Berkly, Sir George Carry, Colonel Ashburnham, Colonel Godolphin, Captain
Fitzgerald, Master Jo. Wear, Master Robert Walker, and Master Thomas Knight,
Commissioners on the behalf of Sir John Berkley Knight, Governor of the City
of Excester, on the other Party, touching and concerning the Rendition of the
said City and Garrison as follows:
I. THat the City and Garrison of Excester, together with the Castle, and all
Forts and Mounts, places of defense, of, or belonging to the same; with all
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition, Provisions and Furniture of War belonging to
the Garrison (excepting what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles) shall
be delivered unto Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces, or to
any whom he shall appoint to receive them, for the use of the Parliament, on
Monday next after the date hereof, being the thirteenth of this instant April,
by twelve of the clock at noon. II. That if any Officer, Soldier, or any
person included in these Articles, wrong or plunder in Person or Goods (in
their martch away, or before) any Citizen or Couutry man, or any person
whatsoever, shall as far as he is able, give satisfaction to the persons so
injured, at the Judgment of his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax. III. That if
any Officer, Soldier, or any person (included in these Articles) shall, after
the date hereof, wilfully break, deface, spoil or imbezle any Arms, or other
Provisions of War whatsoever, by the precedent Articles to be surrendered as
aforesaid, shall lose the benefit of the ensuing Articles. IV. That the
Princess Henrietta and her Governesse, with her Household, shall have full
liberty to pass with their Plate, Moneys and Goods, within twenty days after
the conclusion of this Treaty (when she shall desire) to any place within the
Continent of England or Dominion of Wales, at the election of the Governesse,
and there to remain until his Majesty's pleasure be further known touching
her settling; and that the Governesse shall have liberty to send to the King, to
know his pleasure herein, accordingly to dispose of her Highness within the
aforesaid limitation of places, and that fit and convenient Carriages be
provided for their passage, at reasonable rates. V. That the Cathedral Church,
nor any other Church within the City shall be defaced, or any thing belonging
thereunto spoiled or taken away by any Soldier or person of either side
whatsoever. VI. That the Governor, together with all Lords, Clergymen,
Gentlemen, Captains, Officers, Troopers and common Soldiers, shall martch out
of the City on Monday next, the thirteenth of April, by twelve of the clock at
noon, with their Horses, full Arms, Bag and Baggage, and their Goods, Colors
flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, Bullets, full Bandaliers, with
sufficient convoyes unto Oxford, or unto Helston in Cornwall, at their several
elections, and in case the Governor of Oxford shall refuse to receive the
common Soldiers that shall martch thither, they are there to deliver up their
Arms to the convoy, and have passes to repair to their several homes, and
those that martch unto Helston are there to he disbanded, and to have Passes to
their several homes. That all Troopers and common Soldiers which martch not
as aforesaid shall deliver up their Arms, except their Swords, and have
liberty to go to their own homes with Bag and Baggage, and shall not be
compelled to take up Arms against the King; provided also that all Officers
and Gentlemen that shall choose to go to Oxford, and not taking up Arms, shall
repair into the Parliaments quarters within forty days after the date hereof,
and shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles. VII. That all those which shall
martch to the Garrisons aforesaid, shall have free quarter in their martch, and
not be obliged to martch above ten miles a day, and that such other Soldiers
as are Inhabitants in the City, shall receive free liberty to martch out, or
remain therein, without being compelled to take up Arms against the King: And
if any Soldiers fall sick upon their martch, that convenient carriages and
Accommodations shall be provided for them. VIII. That all Lords, Gentlemen,
Clergymen, Chaplains and Officers, that shall choose to go beyond the Seas,
shall martch away with their full Arms for their own use; and that all common
Soldiers shall martch away with their full Arms, with a sufficient convoy
unto the Port which they shall choose for their transportation: Which Arms they
shall there lay down and deliver unto the Governor of the next garrison
belonging to the Parliament; the said Governor providing for their safety
during the time of their abode there, where they shall be assisted for the
procuring Vessels and Shipping for their transportation at the accustomed
Rates, and shall have free Quarter for one and twenty days allowed to provide
for their passage. After which time shall be expired, the same Officers and
Soldiers paying for their Quarters, shall have liberty to stay until Shipping
be provided, and weather seasonable; and that during their stay, or before, it
shall be permitted, that any two of them may go to London, to treat with any
Foreign Ambassador or Agent, for a Commission to be entertained beyond the
Seas. IX. That neither the Officers, Soldiers, nor any person whatsoever, in
their going out of the City, shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful
speeches, or affront offered to them, or any of their persons wronged, rifled,
searched, or their goods seized, or taken away from them by any person
whatsoever. X. That the Governor, Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains,
Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, comprised in these Articles, shall be
allowed and assisted in, of providing sufficient Carriages at reasonable Rates
to carry away their Bag, Baggage and Goods; and that care be taken by the
future Governor of the said City, for the curing of such sick or wounded
Officers and Soldiers as shall be left in the City, and that upon recovery,
they shall have Passes to repair to their own houses respectively. XI. That
the Parliament Forces come not into the City until the King's Forces be
martched out, except one hundred and fifty Foot, and one Troop of Horse, with
their Officers. XII. That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains
(excepting those, who are by name excepted by Parliament from pardon and
composition) Officers, Citizens, and Soldiers, and all other persons comprised
within these Articles, shall be questioned, or accountable for any Act past by
them done (or by any other by their procurement) relating unto the unhappy
differences betwixt his Majesty and Parliament, they submitting themselves to
reasonable and moderate composition for their Estates, which the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax, shall really endeavor with the Parliament, that it shall not
exceed two years value of any man's real Estate respectively, and for
personal, according to the ordinary rule, not exceeding the proportion
aforesaid; which composition being made, they shall have indemnity for their
persons, and enjoy their Estates and all other Immunities, without payment of
any fifth or twentieth part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what
shall be hereafter charged upon them in common, with other Subjects of this
Kingdom, by authority of Parliament. XIII. That all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Clergy and Chaplains (excepted in the precedent Articles) shall have liberty
to go unto any of the King's garrisons, and to have a safe conduct for
themselves and servants, to go unto the Parliament to obtain their
composition for their Estates, and Indemnity for their persons; which (though
it prove ineffectuall) yet nevertheless they shall have four months time next
after the date of these Articles, to endeavor their peace, or to go beyond
the Seas, and shall have Passes for that purpose. XIV. That all Horses, Arms,
Money, and other goods whatsoever, taken as lawful prizes of War, before or
during the Siege, now in the City, be continued in the possession of the
present possessors. XV. That al Officers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Inhabitants,
Clergymen, Chaplains, Soldiers, and all other persons within the City,
during the time of their making their composition, shall have free liberty
either to inhabit within the same City, or shall have free liberty at any time
to depart with their Families, goods and Estates, unto any part of this
Kingdom in the Parliaments Quarters; and before composition made, the
Merchants and Tradesmen to enjoy their Merchandising and Trades; and after
composition made, all others (now prohibited by Ordinances of Parliament) to
enjoy and exercise their professions, or go beyond the Seas; and they, and
every of them, shall have power to dispose and sell to their own uses, either
by themselves or others, whatsoever part of their Goods or Estates they shall
not carry or convey away with them: And all Inhabitants, which did inhabit
within the City, within seven months past, having made their compositions as
abovesaid, shall enjoy the benefit of this and the twelfth and the two and
twentieth Articles. XVI. That all Charters, Customs, Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, Lands, Estates, Goods and Debts, of the Major, Aldermen, Bayliffe,
Commonalty, as a Corporation, and all other Corporations of the said City,
shall be enjoyed by them, and that the ancient government thereof remain as
formerly. XVII. That if any persons or Inhabitants which are comprised within
these Articles, shall break any of them; That such breach shall only touch and
concern such persons, and they to make such satisfaction for the same as the
cause does require. XVIII. That all persons comprised within these Articles,
shall have a certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
or the future Governor of the City, that such persons were in the City at that
time of the surrendering thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.
XIX. That his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax give assurance; That all Officers
and Soldiers in the Parliaments Army, and all others under his command, shall
duly and exactly observe all Articles aforesaid: And that if they, or any of
them, shall directly or indirectly violate or infringe the same, upon complaint
thereof, Justice may be done, and reparation made. XX. That the Inhabitants of
the City shall be eased and freed from all free Quarter or billet of Soldiers,
except in cases of urgent necessity, other then for lodging, and that to be
ordered and disposed by the advice of the Major or his Deputy. XXI. That no
Oath, Covenant, Protestation or Subscription (relating thereunto) shall be
imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within these Articles, but only
such as shall bind all persons aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the
Parliament of England, now sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully do any Act
prejudicial unto their Affairs, whilst they remain in their quarters; except
the persons aforesaid shall first render themselves unto the Parliament, who
shall cause them to be secured if they think fit. XXII. That for the further
and cleerer understanding of the precedent Articles, it is hereby declared,
that the true meaning of them is; That all persons comprised within these
Articles, shall quietly and peaceably enjoy all their Goods, Debts and
Movables during the space of four months next ensuing, and be free from all
Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, and have liberty within the time of the
said four months, in case they shall not make their composition with the
Parliament (and shall be resolved to go beyond Seas) to dispose of their said
Goods, Debts and Movables allowed by these Articles, and to depart the
Kingdom, if they shall think fit, and to have passes for that purpose, or
otherwise to stay in the Kingdom. XXIII. That Mount-Radford, and the Ward in
St. Thomas Parish, with the provisions of War thereunto belonging, be
delivered unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint to
receive them, in assurance of the performance of the precedent Articles, to
morrow by six of the clock in the afternoon, being the seventh of April; and
that four such Gentlemen or Officers as his Excellency shall approve of, shall
be delivered at the same time as Hostages for the performance of the foregoing
Articles on the one part, and two Hostages, such as Sir John Berkley Knight,
Governor of the City of Excester shall approve of, and appoint to be received
for performance on the other part. XXIV. Lastly, that these Articles be
ratified and confirmed mutually by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax on the one
part, and Sir John Berkley Knight, Governor of the City on the other part.
I do hereby ratify and confirm the Articles abovesaid, agreed on by the
Commissioners on my part.

THO. FAIRFAX.
April 9. 1646.
The conditions it is confessed are honorable for the Enemies acceptance, yet no
way dishonorable for Soldiers to grant, considering the consequence of the
timely surrender of that place.

The time for the surrender of the Town was not till Monday, they desiring
that time to put up their Baggage, and prepare themselves to martch forth: The
General thinking it not fit to lose so much time, as to stay till Monday
(though the weather was unseasonable) martched away that night, after the
Articles were signed, to Tiverton, designing his martch for Barnstable.

CHAP. VI.
The Particulars of the Treaty and surrender of Barnstable; and the Resolutions
and Motions of the Army after the Reduction thereof till they came to Oxford.

FRiday the 10. The General came before Barnstable, Summoned the Town, and
received a civil Answer from the Governor, inclining to a Treaty; which began
the next day, and held all that day, and part of the day following, which was
the Lords day, (when it was concluded, much upon the same Articles in effect
with those of Excester) and the Castle and the Town was delivered into our
hands, as a security for surrender of the Fort at eight days end; Colonel
Sheffield being appointed by the General to stay till the surrender, and see
the Articles performed.

This Treaty was carried on and concluded by Commissary-General Stane, who was
sole Commissioner for his Excellency, a Gentleman of great fidelity, who for
this, and sundry other actions of advantage to this Army, well deserves an
honorable mentioning.

Upon the concluding of Barnstable Articles, two Regiments of Foot were
commanded from before Barnstable, to martch to Dunster, and to face the Castle,
whilst the General's Summons was sent in to the Governor; who embraced a
Treaty: and after some time spent in capitulations, Surrendered the Castle to
Colonel Blake.

Monday the 13. The General set his face toward Excester, desirous to have been
there to have seen their martching forth, that the Articles might not be
violated; but the weather proved so unreasonable wet, that he came short: But
such was the vigilance of the Lieutenant General and the Officers, and indeed
such was the temper of the Army, that there was not the least violation of the
Articles.

I shall conclude this Narration of Excester with the commemoration of the
great diligence, faithfulness and industry of Sir Hardresse Waller, who being
left in trust by the General (when he martched into Cornwall) with the command
of the Forces on both sides of Excester, to straiten the Enemy, and hinder them
of provisions, and keep the Enemy from making incursions into the Country,
performed therein the part of a gallant Gentleman, and an experienced Soldier.

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, the 14, 15, 16, and 17. of April, The
General stayed in Excester, settled things in order, to the safety of that
place; and for the ease of the Country, and that he might keep his own Army
entire for more public service, reduced three Country Regiments of Foot into
one, viz. the Regiment of Colonel Shapcoat, who had done good service at
Tiverton, and the Fort at Exmouth; and the Regiment which Colonel Frye had very
readily raised for the then present service of the West; and the Regiment of
Colonel Wear, which had been likewise employed in the same service. These
three Regiments formed into one, was ordered for the defense of the Garrison of
Excester, under the command of Colonel Hamond, whom the General appointed
Governor of the Garrison.

Saturday April 18. The General began his martch toward Oxford, and Quartered
that night at Chard (being eighteen miles from Excester;) the Foot and Train
having had Orders two days before to advance forward. Several Informations
came from our Forces before Oxford, That it was common talk in Oxford, that the
King would escape thence; others said, That he would come into this Army; and
others conjectured (that which since has fallen out) That he would go another
way: all care was taken by our Forces thereabouts (as you may well think it
concerned them) that this prize, at last, might not escape them.

Sunday the 19. The General martched to Dorchester, where most of the Army
quartered that night: Monday the 20. the General martched from Dorchester to
Salisbury, the Train and Foot to Blandford: the General stayed at Salisbury,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, the while the Army and Train of Artillery
were come up, and till all that were behind were come up from their several
Quarters: Sundry Complaints were brought thither unto his Excellency, of the
violation of Excester and Cornwall Articles by the Committees, of several
Counties, taking from diverse their Horses and Arms, and other necessaries,
which by the Articles they were to carry away with them: an act of so much
incivility to the General, as well as injustice to the sufferers, as deserves
to be noted Nigro Carbone, but that I know his Excellency desires not such
revenge: But so many Barbarismes of this kind were there, as were they
particularly related, would make such a Volume, as would scarce be imagined.

Friday the 24. Part of the Army martched to Andover, whither the General also
purposed to have gone that night; but Providence ordered it otherwise,
detaining him at Salisbury till next morning, and then he went to Andover,
where the head Quarter was that night: Lieutenant General Cromwell was two or
three days before gone for London, at the Generals desire, to give the
Parliament an account of the state of the West of England, which God had now so
happily reduced to their obedience.

Sunday the 26. The General rested at Andover, where he received the news that
Woodstock was surrendered upon Treaty, unto Colonel Rainsborow, who had
gallantly attempted it by storm some few days before, wherein he received
some loss.

Monday the 27. The General martched to Newbery, where the next day he received
Intelligence of the Kings being escaped out of Oxford, in a disguised manner,
with his Lock cut off, or tied up at lest, his Beard shaved, and in the habit
of a Serving-man, -- In a distressed time
It Is safe for Kings like poorest men to seem;
Therefore how much livs he that's truly poor,
Safer then Kings? Positisque insignibus Aulae,
Egreditur famuli raptos indutus amictus,
In dubiis tutum est inopem simulare Tyra^no,
Qua^to igitur mu^di dominis securius aevum
Verus pauper agit?
Luc. Pharsal. lib. 8.

with a Cloke-bag behind him, waiting upon Master John Ashburnham: great
doubting and questioning there was, Whither his Majesty was gone, but within
few days after, it was resolved by certain intelligence, that he was received
into the Scots Army, being first entertained at the Quarters of the French
Agent, who not long before had been in Oxford.

It is much to the honor of his Excellencies Army to be mentioned, and to the
honor of those Officers in particular, to whom, being then about Woodstock,
private Overtures were made by some from Court (pretending the Kings privity
and consent thereto) for receiving his Majesty, who was minded to cast himself
upon them: but to their great honor be it known and published, such was their
tenderness and faithfulness in that point, that conceiving it derogatory to
the honor and power of the Parliament (for his Majesty to wave that highest
Court, and address himself to any others in such a nature) and therefore
inconsistent with their trust and duty, being the Servants of the State, to
own or entertain any such thing; they certified the Parliament thereof, and
understanding this to be their sense also, they absolutely refused to be
tampered with concerning that matter. The King on the other hand was as little
to be wrought upon, to address himself to his Parliament, the issue whereof was
that precipitate resolution and disposal of himself, as is related before. And
now O England take up a Lamentation over your King, that to all his Errors he
should contract such obstinacy and irreconcilable prejudice against his
Parliament, and that he should be so far mistaken as while he seeks to avoid
the surmized prejudice and dishonor, of referring himself to his Parliament,
to run himself on a real dishonor in seeking a shadow under their Servants:
Unhappy greatness, that Privileges Kings from hearing of their faults plainly
as meaner men, and splits them on the shelfe of self-willed obstinacy, rather
then it will suffer the^ to amend or acknowledge them. But it is not my work to
Comment but to relate, only to set a character on the integrity of this Army.
I have said thus much; it may be thought too much niceness and scrupulosity in
them to refuse such a proffer, but whosoever shall consider what is hinted
before, must approve of their doing; if others had done the like, they had done
but their duty.

Thursday the 30. His Excellency martched to East-Hondred: this day the Duke of
Lenox, Earl of Lindsay and others came from Oxford to Woodstock, and rendered
themselves to our Forces there: also Sir William Vaughan, Sir George Strowd,
Sir Phillip Mountain, Sir John Cansfield and diverse others, came in to
Commissary-general Ireton, with about three hundred Horse, after the King had
given them the slip, much about the same time.

CHAP. VII.
The Siege of Oxford, the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender thereof;
with the influence of the fate of Oxford upon the remaining Garrisons.

OXFORD, the King's royal Garrison, the place of the King's ordinary residence
and retreat, has, like a Parenthesis, included all the Action of this Army,
between the two Sieges of it; being first in intentition and attempt, though
last in execution and reduction.

May the 1. Being that day twelve-moneth that this Army first martched into the
Field, the General with his Army came before Oxford (wherein was Prince Rupert,
Prince Maurice, and a great part of the Nobility and Gentry of England) with
intention to sit down before it, and lay Siege to it. The Army was drawn to a
Randezvouz between Abington and Garsington; the head Quarter was that night at
Garsington: At the Randezvouz Major General Skippon, who ever since the Battle
at Naseby had lain under the cure of his wounds, and had suffered diverse
incisions, by reason of a piece of Armor which was lodged in the wound, being
now (by the blessing of God) well recovered, came to the Army, and was received
with much joy, and many acclamations of the Soldiers.

May the 2. There was a general Randezvouz of the Army, Horse and Foot, upon
Burlington-Green, and thence the Forces were distributed to several Quarters,
to at Heddington, Marston, and the Towns thereabouts.

The third of May, The General with the Officers of the Army, took a survey of
Oxford, which they found to have received many material alterations and
additions of advantage since their last being before it; and though it was
always justly accounted a place of great strength, yet now it was made
incomparably more strong then ever; [which is very easy to be believed, if you
do but consider, It had been from the beginning of the Wars the King's head
Quarter and Garrison, his chief place of residence and retreat, where his
Counsel, and most of the Nobility that had left the Parliament attended him:
its place being almost in the Center of the Kingdom, gave it no small
advantage for the sending out of Parties upon any design. Besides that, it was
surrounded about with many small Garrisons of the Kings, as Radcoat,
Farrington, Wallingford, Sherborn-house, Borstal, which were as so many
outworks unto it;] the situation of it, in reference to the ground it stood
upon, rendered it very apt for defense, being placed betwixt the two Rivers Isis
and Charwel; upon the west side of it ran several Branches of the River Isis,
some of which running close by the Town walls, was a great defense to it; upon
the East side ran the River Charwel, which by making Locks at Clements Bridge,
they had caused to overflow the Meadows, so that round the City, to the extent
of three parts of it (all except the north side, that was somewhat higher
ground) was surrounded with water, and absolutely unapproachable: To this the
Line about the City (newly finished) they found to be very high, having many
strong Bulworks so regularly flanking one another, that nothing could be more
exactly done: round about the Line, both upon the Bulworks and the Curtin, was
strongly set with storm-poles; upon the outside of the Ditch round the Line,
it was strongly Pallisadoed, and without that again, were dug several pits
in the ground, that a single Footman could not without difficulty approach the
brink of the Ditch: within the Town there was five thousand good Foot, most of
them of the King's old Infantry, which served him from the beginning of the
Wars, and withal they were well stored with a plentiful Magazine of Victuals,
Ammunition and Provisions for War; in a word, whatever art or industry could
do to make a place impregnable, was very liberally bestowed here. All which
strength being apprehended and considered by the General, he concluded, that
this was no place to be taken at a running pull, but likely rather to prove a
business of time, hazard and industry: Whereupon, at a Counsel of War at
Heddington, it was resolved to fix our Quarters: our first Quarter to be upon
Heddington Hill, where was ordered to be made a very large and great Work, or
Intrenchment, of capacity to receive and lodge three thousand men: as also,
that a Bridge should be laid over the River Charwel close by Marston, that
another Quarter might be gone in hand withal between the Rivers, wherein it
was intended most of our Foot should be lodged, that being all the ground we
had to approach on: Warrants were sent out unto the Country round about for
Spades, Pick-axes, etc. for that purpose; as also, a Letter to the Committee
for the Army to hasten more Ammunition, with all Requisites for the Siege, as
Tents for Soldiers, etc. from London: Which were no sooner come from thence,
but the great Work upon Heddington Hill was instantly fallen in hand withal,
and finished in three or four days time, to admiration* the soldiers being
paid so much by the rod for working thereat: This Work was committed to
Major General Skippon. In the mean time, the Bridge intended was made over the
River Charwel, near Marston, where another Quarter was possessed, and a Line
drawn from Isis to Charwel, and a great Work made on that side the Water:
Colonel Rainsborough commanded this Work, there was a third under the command
of Colonel Lambert, the fourth of Colonel Herbert; and a Line was begun to be
drawn from the great Fort on Heddington Hill over against Saint Clements.

The management and carrying on of these Works, Lines and Approaches, was
recommended to the care and skill of Major General Skippon, who went through
the same with much dexterity.

By the intelligence of diverse that came out of the City his Excellency was
further satisfied and confirmed concerning the Enemies great strength within,
and provision for to hold out.

So soon as the several Posts were assigned to the Army before Oxford,
several Forces were taken forth and designed for the blocking up of other
Garrisons, viz. some for Farringdon, under the command of Colonel Sir Robert
Pie; others for Radcot, under the command of Colonel Cook; and others for
Wallingford, under the command of Colonel Pain, and Colonel Barkestend on
Berkshire side, and Colonel Temple on Oxfordshire side: others for
Borstal-house; and as many Horse as could be spared were sent toward
Worcester, for the straitning of that garrison, till such time as the Army were
at liberty to advance thither: An account of all which severally shall be given
in due place.

But before I proceed any further, an account of the surrender of Banbury
Castle comes next to be given in.

The Relation of Banbury.
Banbury, once a great and fair Market-Towne before the late troubles (but now
having scarce the one half standing to gaze on the ruins of the other) was
ever till now unfortunate in all means and endeavors used for its recovery,
having lain under the possession and tyranny of the Enemy from the beginning,
without almost any intermission, which happened to it partly through the
commodiousnesse of its situation for the Enemy, as lying but eighteen miles
North from Oxford, and in such a convenient place as gave it a command into
diverse other Counties, viz. Northamptonshire, Warwickeshire, etc. from out of
which it gathered large contributions for Oxford; The sweetness that the Enemy
tasted in the fruits and effects they reaped by this Garrison, made them, that
upon all our attempts to reduce it, they still were ready with great Forces to
relieve it: But yet I cannot but also look upon, and observe therein, a
special hand and intimation of God against that professing place, where in a
manner judgment began, as at the House of God, and was removed with one of the
last, I pray God sanctify it to them.

The strange sights that were seen over that Town sixteen years ago, in the
night time, when as the appearance of fighting, pikes pushing one against
another, was discerned in the Air, etc. whereof I was an eyewitness, with
many others, might portend the sad fate that has since befallen that miserable
place, and the parts thereabouts.

The Forces employed in the reducing of that place were about 1000 Foot, and
some four Troops of Horse, all under the command of that approved Gentleman
Colonel Whaley: They lay eleven weeks before the Castle; so soon as they came
before it, they entrencht themselves by a Line drawn round the Town, for their
better security from any force without: which done, they sapt up toward the
Castle, ran over several Galleries, over the outmost Mote, and so wrought into
the Enemies Works; the Enemy countermining them, sprang one Mine upon them, but
through Gods mercy did no great hurt; and also flinging down stones upon them,
and hand Grenades amongst them, rendered their duty very hard and hazardous;
yet through the goodness of God, and the courage of the Soldiers, we wrought
so far into the Enemies Works, as put them out of all hopes of keeping the
Castle, which constrained them to a parley and surrender of the Castle, Arms,
Ordnance, Ammunition and Victuals, upon these ensuing Articles. Viz. I. The
Governor Sir William Compton, and Sir Charles Compton his Brother, to martch
forth with one Horse and Arms a piece, two servants attending them, and to
have two months liberty to go beyond Sea. II. All Captains to martch forth
with one Horse apiece and their Swords. III. All the rest to martch forth
without Arms, to be disbanded a mile from the Town, to have Passes to martch
to their several homes, or to go beyond Sea, and to have free Quarter
martching ten miles a day. IV. All both Officers and Soldiers to leave half
their moneys behind them.


There were found in the Castle eleven pieces of Ordnance, eleven barrels of
Powder, and four hundred Arms.

This Castle, though decayed through time, yet was recovered and revived by art
and industry, unto an incredible strength, much beyond many places of greater
name and reputation, and often had our Forces bin defeated before it; and but
that now was Gods time and season for the rendition of it, no other success
could have been expected by these Forces, the Castle standing in its full pride
and strength, being well recovered of all its wounds and batteries received in
former assaults; and having impregnible Works about it, and great variety of
invention bestowed upon it. But to return from whence I digressed, to the
siege of Oxford.

Our four Quarters being settled under their Canon shot, and a Line begun to be
drawn from the great Fort on Heddington Hill round Saint Clements (lying
without Magdalen Bridge) his Excellency sent in a Summons to Sir Thomas Glenham
Governor of Oxford, requiring the surrender of that Garrison: The Copy whereof
follows.

SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up the City of Oxford into my hands, for
the use of the Parliament; I very much desire the preservation of that place
(so famous for learning) from ruin, which inevitably is like to fall upon it,
except you concur: You may have honorable terms for your self, and all
within the Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire your Answer
this day, and remain

Your Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
May 11. 1646.
The same day also his Excellency sent a Summons to the Governor of
Borstal-house, to the same effect for the substance; the copy whereof follows.

SIR,
I Do by these, summon you to deliver up the Garrison of Borstal-house into my
hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honorable terms for your
self, and all within your Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire
your Answer this day.

THO. FAIRFAX.
May 11. 1646.
As also the like to Radcoat.

And the same to Wallingford.

These four Summons were sent to the several Garrisons May 11.

Sir Thomas Glenham Governor of Oxford, returned Answer to the Summons the
same day, as follows.

SIR,
I Have received your Letter, summoning me to surrender the City, which was
given me in trust for his Majesty's use; but in respect there are many persons
of Eminency, I must desire you to receive for Answer a Request, that you will
be pleased to send a safe Conduct for Sir John Mounson, and Master Phillip
Warwick, to repair unto you at such a time and place as you shall appoint, by
whom you shall understand what for the present is desired, I remain

Your humble Servant THO. GLENHAM.
May 11. 1646.
According as was desired, passes were granted for Sir John Mounson and Master
Phillip Warwick, to come out of Oxford that day, and meet our Commissioners,
Colonel Rainsborough, Colonel Harlow, and Colonel Lambert, who were ready to
receive them at the time and place appointed: That which they had in
commission, was a desire from the Governor Sir Th^mas Glenham, of liberty to
send to the King to know his pleasure, upon signification whereof from his
Majesty, they would return a positive answer to his Excellency immediately.

Our Commissioners endeavored to persuade them the vanity of any such desire,
and the Generals impatiency of any such delay, advising them rather to take the
present opportunity, least they afterward fell short of these terms they
might now have by present compliance.

But Sir John Mounson and Master Warwick (it seems) were so bound up and
limited in their Commissions, that at present, they could not undertake any
thing in answer hereto, but returning to Oxford, took time till the morrow,
promising more then. One of the Generals Trumpeters was appointed to go with
them into Oxford, to bring their Answer the next morning.

On Tuesday May 12. The Trumpeter returned with a desire from Sir Thomas
Glenham, that in regard there were, besides the Duke of York and the two
Princes, many other persons of eminency, Lords, Knights and Parliament men
(otherwise Juncto men) and other Gentry and Clergy, besides the Inhabitants,
all concerned in the business (to whom things could not possibly be
represented fully in so short a time) that further time might be granted by his
Excellency.

Whereupon, that what time would be lost that way, might be saved the other,
all things went on for the siege, the dispatch of the Line was hastened, and
order was given for the drawing up of the Batteries.

The same day Prince Rupert, and with him near an hundred Horse, went forth of
Oxford on Colonel Rainsborough's side, to take the air; (Prince Rupert riding
without Boots, only in his Shoos and Stockings) a Party of our men martched up
toward them, and fired upon them; in which skirmish Prince Rupert had a shot
in the right shoulder (but pierced no bone) whereupon they retreated to Oxford,
where all sorts were very busy that day and the two following days,
consulting and advising.

But in issue, Thursday 14. the Governor of Oxford sent to make known his
desire to treat by Commissioners, which was accepted of; and a counsel of War
being called, it was concluded of Master Crook's house at Marston should be the
place, and on Monday following the Treaty to begin.

May 15. The Enemy made another sally out of Oxford, and a Party of ours
skirmished with them; we lost two men.

Lords day, May 17. The Governor of Oxford sent forth the names of the
Commissioners for Treaty on his behalf, desiring his Excellency to return the
like number.

The names of both were, On Sir Tho. Glenhams part. On his Excellency Sir Tho.
Fairfax part. Sir John Mounson. Lieut. Genesis Hamond. Sir John Heyden. Colonel
Ireton. Sir Thomas Gardner. Colonel Lambert. Sir George Bynion Colonel Rich.
Sir Richard Willis. Colonel Harley. Sir Stephen Hawkins. Scoutmaster-Gen.
Watson. Colonel Gosnold. Major Desborough. Colonel Tyllier. Major Harison.
Doctor Zouch. M. Herbert. Thomas Chisley, Esquire. M. Waller. M. John Dutton. Four
more to be named afterward. M. Jeffrey Palmer. M. Phillip Warwick. Capt.
Robert Mead.



Upon the receipt of the names of the Oxford Commissioners, Sir George Bynion
was excepted, as being exempted from pardon by the Parliaments Propositions.

Much about this time also, was brought to the Army the news of the surrender
of Newark; it had been long besieged on the one side by Major General Poyntz,
and on the other side by the Scottish Forces: It was yielded to the English
Forces, commanded by Major General Poyntz, who had given abundant demonstration
of no less faithfulness and diligence, then expert Soldiery in his
attendance on that service. The Scottish Forces presently upon the Kings
coming to them, retreated back in great haste from Newark northward, before
the Town was delivered, or the Articles signed, pretending the cause of Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Army advancing toward them; whereof there was little
likelihood, they being engaged before Oxford, nor did so much as a Horse stir
that way. But to return to the Siege of Oxford.

A Treaty being resolved and accepted on both sides, and to begin Monday the
18. Sir Thomas Glenham sent to the General, desiring, that in regard it was
usual at all Treaties to have a Secretary on each part, That Master H. Davison
his Secretary might have a Pass to come forth with their Commissioners, which
was (...) unto; and Master William Clark was appointed to assist the
Commissioners on our part. The Commissioners on the behalf of the Governor
and Garrison of Oxford, made their demands, which his Excellency sent up to the
Parliament by Colonel Rich, and Scoutmaster-General Watson, two of the
Commissioners for the Treaty, on his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax part,
putting off the Treaty till the pleasure of the Parliament were known
concerning them. The heads of some of the principal of them were these. Viz.
1. To have liberty to send to the King, to know his Majesty's pleasure, Whether
they shall surrender or not? 2. That Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice have
protection to remain in any part of this Kingdom, to have no Oath ^posed on
them, to be at liberty, to do as shall seem good unto them at any time
hereafter. 3. The Governor and all Officers and Soldiers to martch out in as
full equipage, as any since these Wars; with six Guns, ten barrels of Powder,
and to have thirty days time to know the King's pleasure how he will dispose of
them. 4. The Privy Seal and Great Seal to go to the King.
And such as these

The House of Commons upon reading of them, conceived them so high, that they
thought not fit so much as to debate them, but referd it to the General in what
way he thonght fit to prosecute the reducing of that place.

May 24. or within a day sooner or later, was Radcoat house surrendered, after
it had endured great extremity by our Grenades, one whereof falling on the top
of a Tower, made fearful work, tearing it into a thousand pieces, and sending
it several ways, and at last falling into the Cellar, let out all their
Beer: There were an hundred men in it, who were to go to their several
homes, leaving their Arms behind them.

His Excellency upon the forementioned return ftom the Parliament, prepared
Propositions to offer to the Garrison and sent them into Oxford on Saturday May
30. Whereupon at the desire of the Enemy, the Treaty (which upon their flying
so high in their demands, had been discontinued, if not broken off) was renewed
again, they being willing to treat upon his Excellencies Propositions,
submitting therein (as themselves said) to the ^ate of the Kingdom, rather
then any way distrusting their own strength, or the Garrisons tenablenesse.

Oxford was taken (in a Fishermans habit) carrying Letters to the King from Sir
Thomas Glemham and Secretary Nicholas; relating the condition of the Garrison,
and how long probably they could hold out.

A few days before the Treaty ended, when the Enemy peceived it was like to
succeed, they played with their Canon day and night into our Leaguers and
Quarters, discharging sometimes near two hundred (...) in a day, at random, as
was conceived, rather to spend their Powder then to do any great execution,
though they showed good skill, in that they levelled their pieces, so as they
shot into the Leaguer on Heddington-hill (and on that side Lieutenant Colonel
Cotsworth was slain with a great shot) and likewise into the Leaguer on
Colonel Rainsboroughe's side, where they killed with their shot a Sutler and
others in their Tents: Our Canon in recompense, played fiercely upon the enemy,
and much annoyed them in their Works and Colleges, till at last, a cessation
of great shot was agreed to on both sides.

Upon Saturday, June 20. The Treaty for the surrender of Oxford was finished
between the Commissioners, and concluded upon the ensuing Articles.

The same morning that the Treaty for Oxford was concluded, Farrington Garrison
sent also to capitulate, the Governor thereof Sir George Lisle, being then in
Oxford, and to be brief, surrendered upon condition to have the benefit of
Oxford Articles; and so they were included in the same Agreement.

Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed June 20. by the right honorable
Sir Richard Lane Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Francis Lord
Cottington, Lord high Treasurer of England, William Marquess of Hertford,
Edward Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's honorable Household,
Thomas Earl of Southampton, Francis Earl of Chichester, Francis Lord Seymor,
Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of
State, all of them being of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and Sir
Thomas Glenham Knight, and Governor of Oxford, on the one party; And his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised for the
Parliament, on the other party, for and concerning the rendering of the Garrison
of Oxford, as follows:
THat the Garrison of Oxford, with the Castle, Forts, Mounts, and places of
Defense whatsoever, With all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions of
War, with all Magazines and Stores thereunto belonging, exceping what is
allowed in the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered to the General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, without wilful spoil or embezlement, upon
Wednesday the 24. of this instant June 1646. at Ten of the Clock in the
Morning, or thereabouts. II. That his Highness the Duke of York shall have an
honorable Convoy to London, where other of his Majesty's Children are, attended
by his Officers and Servants, and sitting accommodation for the removal of His
Household and goods thither; And shall have an Honorable provision besitting his
Dignity, appointed for Him by the Parliament, and to remain there until His
Majesty's pleasure be known, touching His settling there or elsewhere; and then
to be disposed accordingly to any place within fourscore miles of London, and
shall have such Officers and Servants to continue about him as the Parliament
shall approve. III. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice,
shall have liberty and Passes for themselves, with their Servants, Horses,
Arms and Goods (the number of their Horses for them and their Train, not
exceeding seventy) to repair to any place within fifty miles of London, so it
be not within twenty miles of London, without leave from the Parliament, nor in
any Garrison, and there to abide for the space of six months after the
Rendering, free from any molestation by imposition of Oaths, or otherwise; and
shall have Passes to go beyond the Seas at any time within the said six
months, with their said Servants, Horses, Arms and Goods, they engaging
themselves upon their Honors, not to use the liberty hereby granted in the
mean time to any Hostility against the Parliament of England sitting at
Westminster, or any way wilfully to the prejudice of their Affairs. And they
are to have the benefit of such the ensuing Articles as may concern them. IV.
That the Seals called the Great Seal, Privy Seal, Signet, and the Seals of
the Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Duchy, Admiralty and Prerogative,
as also the Sword of State, shall at such time, and in the presence of two such
persons as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, be locked up in a
chest, and left in the public Library: and if any of the aforenamed
particulars shall not be then accordingly produced, the default thereof shall
not be charged upon any other person then such as has the custody thereof, and
shall wilfully detain or imbezle the same. V. That Sir Thomas Glenham Knight,
etc. Governor of Oxford, with his Servants, and all that to him belongs, and
all Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, and of the Train of Artillery
(as well Reformed Officers and Soldiers as others) with their Servants, and
all that pertains unto them, shall martch out of the City of Oxon. with their
Horses and complete Arms that properly belong unto them, proportionable to
their present or past commands, flying Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums
beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet in Their Mouths, and every
Soldier to have twelve Charges of Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and
with Bag and Baggage, to any place within fifteen miles of Oxford, which the
Governor shall choose, where such of the common soldiers as desire to go to
their own homes, or friends, shall lay down their Arms, which shall be
delivered up to such as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint to receive
them. And all Officers and soldiers, as well reformed as others, that shall
desire to go to their homes or friends, shall have the Generals Pass and
protection for their peaceable repair to, and abode at the several places
they shall desire to go unto, and shall have free Quarter allowed them in all
their martch from Oxon. to those several palaces; the Officers, as well
reformed as others, to pass with Equipage of Horses and complete Arms,
answerable to their present or past commands, and common Troopers with their
Horses and swords only; and all to pass with Bag and Baggage as aforesaid. And
that all other Officers and soldiers (in case there be any such) that shall
desire to take Entertainment from any Foreign Kingdom or State, shall have
free Quarter allowed them for twenty eight days from their martch out of Oxon,
and shall have Passes for their Officers, not exceeding ten, with their Horses
and two servants apiece to go to London to treat with any Foreign
Ambassador or Agent for Entertainment: And all of them shall have Liberty and
Passes to martch (the Officers with their complete Arms and Horses
proportionable to their present or past commands, and the common Soldiers with
their Arms, and all with Bag and Baggage) to the Quarters near to Harwich or
Portsmouth, or to any Port between them, to be transported: Which Arms (except
Officers complete Arms and Horses, and Swords for the common Soldiers, which
they my transport) they shall there lay down and deliver to such as the
General shall appoint, or unto the Governor of the next Garrison belonging
unto the Parliament, who shall take care for their safety during their abode
there, and until Shipping can be provided, and weather seasonable, they paying
for their Quarter after the said twenty eight days expired, and shall assist
them for procuring Vessels and Shipping for their transportation at the usual
Rates accustomed for Freight; the Officers and Soldiers and others before
transportation engaging themselves by promise, not to return into this
Kingdom in Hostility against the Parliament in Bodies as they go, or in
conjunction with other Forces, or in command of any Forces invading this
Kingdom: And no Oath or any other Engagements of this or the like nature to
be, during their said stay, or at their transportation imposed upon them,
saving an engagement by promise, not to do any act of Hostility, or of wilful
prejudice against the Parliament, during their said stay in England. And it is
declared, That those of the three Auxiliary Regiments consisting of Gentlemen
and their Servants, Scholars, Citizens and Inhabitants, who are not properly
of the Garrison in pay; and such reformed Officers and Soldiers who shall not
be willing to martch forth, shall not be forced to martch out upon this Article,
but shall have the benefit of the following Articles, to remove, or remain in
Oxford, and in all things else which may concern them; and those also who shall
martch forth, shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles in all things,
except for remaining in Oxford. VI. That the Governor shall be allowed and
assisted in the procuring a sufficient number of Carts, Teems and Boats and
other necessaries, for the carrying away all Goods allowed in these Articles,
belonging to any Officers or persons of quality now residing in the Garrison,
they paying the accustomed Rates: And that such persons as cannot presently,
through want of Carriages or otherwise, convey them away, shall be assisted with
Carriages at any time within three months for the disposing thereof. VII. That
no Officer or Soldier, nor any person whatsoever comprised in this
capitulation, shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches, or affronts
offered to them, or be stopped, plundered, or injured in their Marrch,
Randezvouz or Quarters, Journeys or places of abode: And if any such thing shall
fall out, satisfaction shall be given at the judgment of any two or more of the
Commissioners, they being equal in number of each party; nor shall the persons
aforesaid nor any of them be enticed or compelled to take up Arms against the
King; nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued or molested for any matter or cause
whatsoever before the Rendering of the Garrison, be it of public or private
interest, during six months after the rendering thereof: And if any Officer,
Soldier or person be sick or wounded, that they cannot at present enjoy the
benefit of these Articles, that such persons shall have liberty to stay until
they be recovered, and fit accommodation and subsistence shall be provided for
them during their stay, and then to enjoy the benefit of these Articles. VIII.
That all Horses, Arms, Money, and other Goods whatsoever taken as lawful prize
of War, before or during the Siege, and now remaining in the City, be
continued in the possession of the present possessors. IX. That these Articles
shall extend to the use and and benefit of all strangers of any Foreign
Kingdom or State residing within this garrison, together with their Wives,
Children, Servants, Horses, Arms, Goods, Money and Debts. X. That all persons
included within these Articles, without exception of any (other then the
Soldiers, that are to martch out upon the fifth Article) shall have liberty
during the space of three Months after the rendering of the Garrison, either to
remain in Oxford, or to remove themselves with their Families, Goods, Horses,
and all things that properly belong to them or to their disposition: And all
Noblemen, Gentlemen and persons of quality, with their Arms and other
equipage, to their Houses or Friends, without any prejudice to their Friends
for receiving them. XI. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Officers,
Soldiers, and all other persons in Oxon, or comprised within this
capitulation, who have Estates real or personal under or liable to
Sequestrations according to Ordinance o^ Parliament, and shall desire to
compound for them (except persons by name excepted by Ordinance of Parliament
from pardon) shall at any time within six months after rendering the Garrison of
Oxford be admitted to compound for their Estates: which composition shall not
exceed two years Revenue for Estates of Inheritance: and for Estates for Lives,
years, and other real and personal Estates, shall not exceed the proportion
aforesaid for Inheritances, according to the value of them. And that all
persons aforesaid, whose dwelling-houses are sequestrated (except before
excepted) may after the rendering of the Garrison, repair to them, and there
abide, convenient time being allowed to such as are placed there under the
Sequestrations for their removal: And it is agreed, That all the profits and
Revenues arising out of their Estates (after the day of entering their names as
Compounders) shall remain in the hands of the Tenants or Occupiers, to be
answered to the Compounders, when they have perfected their agreements for
their compositions, and that they shall have liberty and the Generals pass and
protection for their peaceable repair to, and abode at their several Houses
or Friends, and to go to London to attend their Compositions, or elsewhere upon
their necessary occasions, with freedom of their persons from Oaths,
Engagements and Molestations, during the space of six months, and after, so
long as they prosecute their compositions, without wilful default or neglect on
their part, except an Engagement by Promise, not to ^eare Arms against the
Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as
they remain in their Quarters: And it is further agreed, That from and after
their compositions made, they shall be forthwith restored to, and enjoy their
Estates, and all other Immunities, as other Subjects, together with their Rents
and Profits, from the time of entering their names, discharged of
sequestrations, and from fifth and twentieth parts, and other payments and
impositions, except such as shall be general and common to them with others.
XII. That no Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Scholars, Officers, Soldiers,
Citizens, nor any other persons included in this capitulation (except the
persons mentioned before to be excepted from pardon) shall be molested or
questioned for any thing said or done, in, or concerning this War, or relating
to the unhappy differences between his Majesty and the Parliament, they
submitting to composition, as in the preceding Article; and that the persons
before mentioned to be excepted from pardon, shall have the benefit of this
Article, during the space of six months, from the Rendering of the Garrison,
and after, if they be admitted to, and agree for their compositions. XIII. That
the persons mentioned before to be excepted from pardon, shall have liberty,
and the General's Pass and Protection for themselves, Families, Horses, Goods,
and all things that properly belong unto them now in Oxford, to go unto, and
abide at their own Houses or their Friends, for the space of six months after
the Rendering of the Garrison, and within that time to repair unto London to
endeavor composition for their estates, and indemnity of their persons, and to
make their peace; and if they cannot obtain it, shall have Passes to go beyond
the Seas at any time within the said six months; and that no other engagement
shall be put upon them, save by promise, not to bear Arms against the
Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as
they remain in their Quarters. XIV. That the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars
of the University of Oxon, and the Governors and Students of Christs-Church of
King Henry the eighth his Foundation, and all other Heads and Governors,
Masters, Fellows and Scholars of the Colleges, Hals and Bodies corporate, and
Societies of the same University, and the public Professors and Readers, and
the Orator thereof, and all other persons belonging to the said University, or
to any Colleges or Hals therein, shall and may according to their Statutes,
charters and customs, enjoy their ancient form of Government, subordinate to
the immediate authority and power of Parliament: And that all the Rights,
Privileges, Franchizes, Lands, Tenements, Houses, Possessions, Rents, Revenues,
Hereditaments, Libraries, Debts, Goods and Chattels belonging to the said
University, or to Christ-church, or to any Colleges or Hals in the said
University (except such rents and Revenues as have been already taken and
received by Ordinance of Parliament) shall be enjoyed by them respectively, as
aforesaid, free from Sequestrations, Fines, Taxes, and all other Molestations
whatsoever, for, or under color of any thing whatsoever relating to this
present War, or to the unhappy differences between his Majesty and the
Parliament: And that all Churches, Chapels, Colleges, Hals, Libraries,
Schools, and public Buildings, within or belonging to the city or University,
or to Christs-church, or the several Colleges or Hals thereof, shall be
preserved from defacing and spoil: And if any removal shall be made by the
Parliament of any Head or other Members of the University, Christ's Church,
Colleges or Hals, that those so removed, shall enjoy their profits during the
space of six months after the rendering of Oxon, and shall have convenient time
allowed them for removal of themselves and their Goods from their Lodgings:
Provided, that this shall not extend to retard any Reformation there intended
by the Parliament, or give them any liberty to intermeddle in the Government.
XV. That the Major, Bayliffe and Commonalty, and all Corporations within the
City, shall enjoy their ancient Government, and their Charters, Customs,
Franchizes, Liberties, Lands, Goods and Debts, and all things else whatsoever
which belong to them as Corporations subordinate to the immediate authority and
power of Parliament, and shall not be molested or questioned by color of any
thing before the rendering of this Garrison, done, or ordered by them in the
capacity of Corporations, relating to the differences between His Majesty and
the Parliament. XVI. That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the City, shall not
be charged with free quarter, or billet of Soldiers, other then for lodging
(except in urgent time of necessity) and that to be ordered and disposed by the
advice of the Major, or his Deputy; and that in all Public Taxes they shall be
charged proportionably with the County: And that no Scholar, Citizen, or
Inhabitant in the University and City of Oxford, shall be troubled or questioned
for taking up Arms in the Garrison by express Command during the time it was a
Garrison, for the defense thereof: And that the Scholars, Citizens and
Inhabitants shall the benefit of this Capitulation, in all things that may
concern them. XVII. That no Officer, Soldier, or other person who by the
Articles are to martch out of the City or Suburbs, or to martch in, shall
Plunder, spoil or injure any Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabitant, or other person
in Oxford, in their person^, good^, or estate^, or carry away any thing that is
properly belonging to any of them. XVIII. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and
other women now in Oxon, whose Husbands or Friends are absent from thence, may
have passes and protections for themselves, servants and goods to go to, and
remain at the houses of their Husbands or at their Friends, as they shall
desire, and to go or send to London, or elsewhere, to obtain the Allowances
out of their Husbands or Parents Estates, allotted them by Ordinance of
Parliament. XIX. That such of his Majesty's Houshold-Servants who shall desire
to go to his Majesty, may have free liberty and passes to go accordingly, at
any time within one month next after the rendering of the garrison: And that
His Majesty's Household Stuff, and other his peculiar goods which are now in
Oxford, may be carried to His Majesty's House at Hampton Court; and his
Servants under whose charge or custody any of them are, shall be allowed and
assisted in the procuring of Carts, Boats, and Carriages for the removal of
them thither, and there to remain till His Majesty shall otherwise dispose of
them, and then to be sent or disposed accordingly. And that such of His
Majesty's Servants who are not able for the present to go to Him, shall have
liberty, passes and protections to go to, and remain at his Majesty's said
House at Hampton Court, and have liberty to attend the Committee for his
Majesty's Revenue, to procure a competent Allowance out of his Majesty's
Revenues for their subsistence, until his Majesty shall otherwise provide for,
or dispose of them. XX. That all Clergymen now in Oxford, who shall not upon
composition or otherwise, be restored to their Church Livings, shall have
liberty to go to London, to obtain some fitting allowance for the livelihood
of themselves and their Families. XXI. That it is Intended, Declared and
Agreed, That all persons comprised within these Articles, shall peaceably and
quietly enjoy all their Goods, Debts and Movables allowed by these Articles,
during the space of six months after Rendering the Garrison: And that they
shall be free from all Oaths, Engagements and Molestations, except an
Engagement by promise not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully
do any act prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as they remain in their
Quarters. And that they shall have liberty within the space of six months (in
case they shall be resolved to go beyond Seas) to dispose of their Goods,
Debts and Movables allowed by these Articles, and depart the Kingdom, if they
think fit; And to have passes for their transportation, or otherwise to stay in
the Kingdom. XXII. That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broken
or violated by any person or persons in Oxford, or co^prized within this
capitulation, the fault and punishment shall be upon him or them only who made
the breach or violation, and shall not be imputed to, or charged upon any other
not assenting thereunto, or not an actor in it. XXIII. That the Duke of
Richmond, the Earl of Lindsey, and their Servants that came forth with them,
shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles in whatsoever may concern them.
XXIV. That the Garrisons of Farringdon shall be rendered to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and the Governor, Gentlemen, Soldiers, and all other of what
quality soever within those Garrisons, shall enjoy the benefit of these
Articles in every particular which may concern them, they rendering the
Garrison accordingly as Oxford. XXV. That all persons comprizedin these
Articles, shall (upon request) have a certificate under the hand of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future Governor of the city, That such
persons were in the City at the time of the surrender thereof, and are to have
the benefit of these Articles. XXVI. That the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall
give a Pass to one or two Messengers, with their Servants, to go unto the
King, to give Him an account of the proceedings upon this Treaty, and
conclusion thereof, and to return and receive the benefit of these Articles.
On Wednesday the 24. of June, the day appointed, the Town was accordingly
surrendered: The Enemy martched out about twelve of the clock; a Guard of our
Foot was appointed for them to martch through, which extended in length from
Saint Clements near Maudlin-Bridge, to Shotover-Hill: Our Horse were drawn up
into several Bodies in several places in the Rear of the Foot: There
martched out in a Body well Armed, with Colors flying and Drums beating, about
three thousand, who had not the least injury or affront offered them in their
martch through our men, which the Governor Sir Thomas Glenham has since
acknowledged, much to the honor of the Army: Besides that Body, there went
forth that day before and after them about five hundred, most of them Horse men
and private persons engaged in the Siege. There likewise martched forth this
day at the North gate, all those that went to Yorkshire and Gloucestershire
and those parts, who had a Convoy for that purpose, being a considerable
number: those that martched forth when Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice went
forth on Monday, and those that followed them on Tuesday (when other Gentlemen
of quality left the City) were in all about three hundred persons, most of them
men of quality, and their Attendants. After his Excellency had possession of
the Town, it was the continual employment of some, to make Passes for those
that were yet left behind, and not martched out of the Town with the Body;
there were above two thousand Passes made after the forementioned Forces were
gone, as by a particular List of every man's name was reckoned, whereof many
were Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen of quality, the rest Officers and
Reformadoes, and some Scholars. Likewise after his Excellency had the
Garrison, the three Regiments of Auxiliaries, consisting of two thousand men,
were disbanded, and their Arms brought in: Those that martched out upon
Wednesday, about nine hundred of them laid down their Arms when they came to
Tame, and received Passes to go to their several Houses, and their Arms were
brought into Oxford: One thousand one hundred of them listed themselves for
Foreign service. There were found in the Magazine seventy Barrels of Powder;
besides, they had two Mils which supplied them daily with Powder. There were in
the Town thirty eight pieces of Ordnance, whereof twenty six were Brass: For
provisions of Victuals, by what was found in the Stores, and by what was
informed they had in the Stores before they sold it to the Townsmen, during
the Treaty, to raise Moneys to pay their Soldiers, there was not less then
six months provisions. The Soldiers were much discontented, and much ado
there was to keep them from doing violence to the Lords, for no other cause but
for being the occasion, as they said, of delivering up the Town; a fault which
alas they could not help; the strength of the Works about the Town was found
to be such, as resolved it in the minds of all understanding men, to be much
for the Parliaments service that the town was taken by conditions, especially
considering what unseasonable weather followed; that if the Siege had continued
but to the day of surrender, we must have been forced to have quit some of our
leaguers, the fields being overflown with water. The Citizens were provided
till Christmas with Provisions, and did make no question but of Corn, Beef,
Bacon, Salt, Butter and Cheese, there was plenty for the said time: fresh meat
for the great ones, being the only thing complained of as a want, and yet was
found some store of that at the surrender.

Somewhat in Vindication of the Articles of OXFORD.
SUch is the delicacy of the spirit of man, that when Mercies flow richly and
fully in, we grow curious to please, and God must come in to us then as we
would have him, or we shall scarce thank him for any thing he gives, like some
that return full from feasting, with whom an ordinary dish finds no
acceptance: thus it was in the business of this surrender, because the
Conquest came not up to every point of expectation or humor; therefore it must
not be acknowledged by some, as if men would give Laws to Providence, and
Armies must conquer just as we appoint, and we must draw lines for success to
move in, and unless God save us by our own card and compass, we scarce allow
such a business a place in our Calender.

The House of Commons approving the agreement with Oxford.
The House of Commons in much honor and justice upon receiving and reading the
Agreement for Oxford, which his Excellency by an Express sent up to them, did
by Vote approve and ratify the same; but others, whether from ignorance or
prejudice, or what other cause, I say not, seemed not to be so well satisfied
therewith, exclaming against the Army, and questioning their honor and
integrity in this proceeding.

The Delinquency of the Oxonians extraordinarily garrisoned.
I would gladly demand of such, How Delinquency and offenses, so Garrisoned and
Fortified against Law, as those in Oxford were, could well have been brought to
an higher degree of suffering and expiation, without staking a treble value of
men, and of success, and running an hazard of bringing all the glory of so
much conquest back again, and with danger of reversing all the success we
had; and for my part, I think those Victories most glorious that are cleanest
from Blood, and that War most Christian, that (the common safety, which is
the end of War, provided and secured) is as little stained or purpled as may
be; and there is more of God and of Israel, where Cities fall at the breath of
Trumpets (as of Rams Horns) and the Summons overcome more then the slaughter;
and thus has this army prevailed, by taking in the Inhabitants before the
Cities, and men's hearts before their persons.

The Relation of Oxford to learninh respected in the Armies proceeding by
Treaty.
And I would demand one thing more of any that have either love or learning,
How Oxford a place of Books and Colleges, could have been reduced into its
Gown and Peace, but by a motion as calm as peaceable, as little destructive,
and as suitable to the ingeny of such a place of Arts; but this is the least in
the Balance with the other considerations.

The Vindication of the Agreement held forth in the light of the entire
transaction.
And because men are rational, and would be rather argued then persuaded to
believe: I shall hold out the whole business in the entireness and
transaction of it, that all may be rather convinced and engaged by argument and
truth, that things were fair and just, and highly advantageous, then meetly
desired or entreated to believe so.

His Excellency appearing with the Army from the West before this City (leaving
behind him no remembrance of an Enemy, but days of praises for victories) was
not without its advantage to the surrender.

His Excellency with the Army appearing before Oxford, observably the very day
twelve month that he first martched forth.
The first day of May he appeared before Oxford, being that day twelvemoneth he
martched into the Field, which perhpas might be safely observed (without
superstition) to be of Providence, as if the same day which was for beginning,
must be for finishing of the work; A Christian may soberly observe those
Conjunctures which the superstitions adore.

The Quarters settled.
The head Quarter was at Garsington, three miles from Oxford; it was the sixth
of May before the Quarters about the City and the several Posts were
appointed, and the Leaguer designed in order to a close Siege, the Soldiers
casting up (...) Trenches (to secure their Leaguers) Lines, Works and
Approaches, with the great Work upon Heddington Hill.

These things I mention, because they are in some order to the procuring of the
Treaty; for the appearance of the Army in this way of digestion and approach,
did ripen the Enemy to treat; and this close and orderly management of things
without, was not without its influence upon those within.

The Garrison summoned.
May 11. His Excellency summoned the Garrison: and as the Leafes of some Trees
move easily at a gentle wind, so some in the Garrison at the air of this
Summons, were in motion to answer it by a Treaty: so as by this the pulse of
the Enemy were observed at that distance, to beat toward a surrender, which
could not but a little engage his Excellency to a further pursuit of this
means, being so providentially corresponded with in the first design of it.

The Treaty begun. The Oxford Commissioners (...) in their demands
And now after the Summons for surrender, the Treaty begins, the Commissioners
on both sides meeting at Master Crook's at Marston: but the Oxford
Commissioners were so high in some demands (one of which was to be free from
all Sequestration) His Excellency thereupon putting off the Treaty, and
acquainting the Parliament with (...) Enemies demands.
that his Excellency thought it not fit to proceed with them, but acquainred
the House of Commons therewith (as still desirous to move as much as might be
in the wisdom and sense of that Counsel that first entrusted him) and making
them by such a pause and refusal, to know themselves a beleaguered Enemy:
These were advantages not to be forgotten in this work: A Spy out of Oxford
taken ^ith Letters.
but before the Treaty brake off, a Spy was taken with Letters to his Majesty
from Sir Edward Nicholas and Sir Thomas Glenham; which Spy was a Captain in
the Garrison, that freely casheered himself into a Fishermans habit for a time
to do that work; the Fisherman was caught himself with his Letters, after he
was got on his way as far as Banbury: Which Letters opened one Mystery of the
Garrison, Which was divided Counsels and Designs of the Lords and Soldiery,
and how able they were to Defend the Place, And how the Lords had overpowred
them into a Treaty, because of his Majesty's power committed to them at his
departure; The advantage by intercepting those Letters.
so as here were some more advantages gained; a knowledge how much a Treaty did
divide and unclapse them, who else had been at unity for their own
preservation, and a discovery of their strength and resolutions, which were so
considerable, as it appeared, that a Treaty was the best and safest argument to
obtain the place, and to disperse the Enemy into more Faction by offering
conditions, who were at as much distance as could be within the same Walls, by
this way of proceeding against them, and made Enemies to one another, who else
had been all as one Enemy against us; and now they were already disbanded in
Counsels, a good preamble to the disbanding of their Garrison.

His Excellency preparing and sending in Propositions of his owner.
The Treaty being thus broke off, upon occasion of the Enemies high demands,
and their Propositions being wholly laid aside, other Propositions were
prepared and digested by his Excellency and the Commissioners on our part,
which were not framed without much debate, and taking the affairs of the
Kingdom according to their then present posture, into prospect and
consideration, as they stood in relation to this Business.

These Propositions were sent into the Garrison, and the Treaty was reinforced
on both sides; yet now his Excellency treated as one who rather gave Laws,
then took any reciprocally from them: having sent them such Propositions, as by
advice with his Officers, were just and honorable, and as from which he could
not vary (save in point of circumstance or explanation.)

His Excellency not so engaged to a Treaty, as to agree to dishonorable
terms, but rather advising how to reduce it by force.
In this renewed Treaty, there appeared yet much difficulty and averseness on
the Enemies part, I mean in their Commissioners. Whereupon a Counsel of War
was held by his Excellency, to consider yet of reducing the Garrison by force,
if the Enemy should fly off in the Treaty: This was the fullest Counsel since
this Army martched, consisting of the General, Major General,
Lieutenant General of Horse, Commissary General, Lieutenant General of the
Ordnance, The General Officers of Horse and Foot, besides the Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels and Majors of the Army. I observe this to take off all
aspersions of dark and private proceedings by parties and factions, and to
strengthen the reputation of such intelligence, such Counsels and grounds, as
were received and proceeded on.

At a Counsel of WAR held at Marston, at the Leaguer before Oxford, June 9.
1646.
Present, The General. Major Genesis Skippon. Lieuten Genesis Cromwell. Lieut. Genesis
Hamond. Commis. Genesis Ireton. Colonel Sheffield. Col. Sir Hardresse Waller
Colonel Graves. Colonel Lambert. Colonel Ingoldesby. Colonel Herbert. Colonel
Rainsborough. Colonel Harley. Colonel Okey. Comptroler of the Ordn. Colonel
Pindar. Judge Advocate. Colonel Bulstrod. Adjutant-Gen. Evelyn. Adjutant-Gen.
Gray. Scoutmaster-General. Qu. mast. Genesis Fincher. Qu. mast. Ge. Gravenor
Lieut. Col. Bowen. Lieut. Col. Ewers. Lieut. Col. Hewson. Lieut. Col. Ashfield.
Th. Herbert Esquire Commissioner of Parl. Major Desborow. Major Alford. Major
Horton.


The Resolves of the Counsel were, first, That there were four thousand Foot
and three hundred Horse, by their best intelligence, in that Garrison for
Defense.

The second was, That they might hold out six months before they wanted
provisions of Victual and Ammunition.

The third was, That it was not advisable to storm Oxford.

The fourth was, That the most probable way was reducing it by approaches, in
case they could not close by Treaty.

The City now appearing in this Reputation of considerablenesse, we shall look
over into particulars of its strength, Soldiery, Ammunition and Victuals.

The strength of the Garrison.
For its strength, it was surrounded on all sides, but the North, with Rivers
and Meadows overflowne, so as it was only approachable on the North side; and
this way was only approved on by the Counsel of War, and yet this way there
were two Lines and Works, which in Reasons of War would have stood in no
little cost and Blood; for against every Port of the second Line, were Colleges
(which however once places of Books and Peace, yet now served as petty Castles
of defense;) which thing was worthy to be considered, not so much out of
tenderness to them, or indulgency to the Blood of this Army, but out of
providence to the Kingdom, whose Guard it was: As for them, it is well known
they were never such Husbands of their Blood, when the State stood in need of
it.

The store of Ammunition.
For Ammunition and Victual, it was well stored, there being Ammunition which
well husbanded might have served them six months, and Victual for as long (so
as themselves and their Artillery would have both lived and determined
together.)

The numbers of Soldiers very considerable.
For the Soldiery, there wanted no numbers for that business, four thousand,
according to the best intelligence (and as afterward by passes did appear)
above three thousand, beside Reformadoe, Scholars, Townes-men; who, though a
Miscellany, yet would all have been men of War, and of one profession in a
time of defense.

And beside all this, we had the name and reputation of the Governor Sir
Thomas Glenham to take in, who has been known into places, that had been
otherwise of a dejected fortune, to put life and spirit; witness his
performance at York, which (after the total routing of the Kings Army before
the walls of that City) being beleaguered by the three Generals, with greatest
advantage possible, stepping immediately from the Victory to the Leaguer, he
yet defended till he obtained honorable conditions.

And after that despaired of no less at Carlisle, where he endured ten months
siege, submitti^g to eat dogs and horseflesh, before he would yield without
honorable conditions.

So as according to this account, consider what expense of time and blood would
have issued in carrying on the approaches for the reducement by force; December
being a month they might very well have reached unto, which must necessarily
have engaged the Army into so much winter, water, cold and difficulty, as that
the issue might (in reason of War) have proved as sad for the Besiegers, all
things considered, as for those in the City; three months time would have been
the least; and when all things had been ripe for enforcing, the hazard of how
many honest, gallant men against earth and walls, against Lines and Colleges?

But surely we flow not so with good men in the Kingdom, that we should be so
indifferently prodigal of those we have, if Victories may be purchased
cheaper, and at an easier rate, beside the spoil and firing of Colleges, and
it may be, of that famous Library, which how it would have stood with the
Reputation of this State, to destroy places of Arts so freely, let others judge.

The particular grounds of concluding the Treaty upon such Articles.
A Treaty therefore being judged the best and most counselable way, His
Excellency and the Commissioners resolved to enforce it, and that not only in
respect to the Army upon the forementioned considerations of the difficulty,
danger and tediousness of other ways, but also with reference to the State of
the Kingdom, and diverse other considerations. As

First, in relation to the many other Garrisons of the Enemy yet unreduced, as
Worcester, Wallingford, Ragland, Farringdon, Borstall, with diverse others,
which did all bear up in the existence and being of this, and were linked to
this, as to the Head and Garrison-royall of all the Enemies, that like members
of one body, they could not but live and dye together, so as this Cities
surrender would shake all the other into a Treaty, and the taking in of this,
would take in the rest, being all threded upon one string of dependency.

Secondly, the Negotiations of the King in Foreign parts for assistance,
particularly in France, as is clear by the French Agent, who received his
Majesty first in his Quarters, and Negotiated with him at Newcastle, and by
Ashburnham's dispatch into France (notwithstanding the Parliaments demand of
him) all which put together (though we would rather quench then cherish any
suspicion of such a Neighbor State) yet it cannot but be judged well beseeming
his Excellency and his Counsel, wisely to provide, and put cases of things to
come, and occur and prevent (if it may be) dangers possible, being well assured
we deal with an Enemy, who has lost neither Wit, Friends, Activity nor
Resolution, to play his Game once more over, if he knew at what Card to begin.

Thirdly, the suspicions and jealousies that were kindling toward some in our
Brethrens Army, upon the sudden Alarm of his Majesty's reception there, and
some other passages from the North; not that the Army did conclude a doubt or
suspicion of them, but rather hasten to be upon such a free and strong interest
and disengagement, as might sooner put all things into better correspondency,
while both Armies are fairly at liberty in their own interests, and upon
equal bottomes, whereby a third designing party (I mean the Kings) might not
work upon the inequality of the other two; Temptation and Opportunity being the
worst Enemies that honest men have.

Fourthly, the Treaty in Ireland for a peace with those there, and to make that
peace a way of wa^tage over for some new supplies into England; which though
then was but by divine intelligence discerned, yet now things are cleerer and
more certain.

Fifthly, the arming the Parliament with a free and unengaged Army (as came to
pass by the surrender of this City) so as now they might treat or capitulate,
as a Kingdom upon its own interest and bottom, with the more honor, and
with no more condiscention, then love and justice would persuade them; surely
they that know the difference betwixt a State, attended on by a free and entire
Army in times of design and distraction and beginnings of settlement, and
betwixt a State served by broken Regiments, and an engaged Force or Army,
cannot judge the freeing and disingaging this Army so soon from the attendance
of Oxford, to a mere attendance upon the State in a time of such high
concernments, to be less then a Counsel both of necessity and of advancement
to the Kingdom.

And now I shall fairly remove some Objections, which may be moats in the eyes
of some, and hinder their discerning the fairness of this proceeding.

First, that of permitting excepted persons to go unpunished; but I cannot
grant this Objection so far, that they did go unpunished, unless all
justice and righteousness run down only in the blood of the Offender:
Indeed the State of Israel fought by such Laws against the Nations, as in the
case of Agag; but how far such Laws are rules to the State of Christians,
who are not under that judicial policy and special precepts, I leave to be
disputed: but surely those six excepted persons went not unpunished, they
received loss of all (one of them an Estate worth an hundred thousand pounds)
and if yet nothing but life be justice, they lost that too; I mean, their life
in this Kingdom, being never more to live in this State, so as in a manner
they are dead to us, though not unto themselves; nor could their life be so
easily come at, without the loss of many, it may be, more dear and precious;
and had the approaches and storm gone on, who can undertake those few, those
six excepted persons, might not have escaped? and then how had this assay of
justice succeeded? surely justice is not all of one color, all purple, there
is punishment by banishment, and confiscation as well as death; and suppose
after the loss of many an honorable spirit to purchase six men, they had been
taken and delivered up, there are ways of escape from States as well as Armies.

For that other Objection of the exemption from the Oath or Covenant for six
months; why should it be a crime to his Excellency now, which was none to the
Lieutenant General of the Scots Army, who at Carlisle granted that Article, To
be excepted from any Oath whatsoever (as by referring to the said Articles may
appear) and our General grants but an exemption for six months; how is it that
offenses are more fairly interpreted in Scotch then English? And it is not
amiss to consider Redding, once a Garrison of the Enemies, yet surrendered upon
honorable conditions, to the Earl of Essex, his Excellency, then General,
Oxford and Redding differing but in three things: First, Oxford was more
considerable and Redding less: secondly, the Delinquents of Redding martched
out of the Town, and those of Oxford out of the Kingdom: thirdly, Redding had
but four Barrels of Powder when they capitulated, Oxford a plentiful Magazine.

After all these things, I wonder how any can find fault with this Army or
Soldiery, for dispatch of their work so soon; and never till now (and now by
what Law I know not) was it an offense to have War soon ended? Let me ask
what has this Army done ill in this business? Has it not done justice upon
Offenders? it may be not justice of our very fashion, according to such a very
pattern of some, because they could not conquer just by a rule, but as
necessity of State and War would suffer them: Has this Army by this
surrender failed of that plunder and rich spoil they might have had in the
storm? This was a fault wherein the Soldiery were more conscionable then
covetous: and me thinks we should easily pardon them in this, That they had
rather end the War to the Kingdoms, then their own advantage.

Has this Army by this surrender been more free, entire, and at liberty, to
guard both State and Parliament? me thinks this should be only the grief of
our Enemies not of our Friends.

Has this Army by this surrender brought in so many other Garrisons, as follo
in this Story, etc? surely such ways of fighting as leave the Enemy scarce an
interest in the Kingdom, is a new kind of failing, and an offense not heard of
till our times, wherein ingratitude and reproaches are by too many thought good
pay for greatest services.

Has this Army by this surrender and disingagement, awed and affrighted the
gatherings of new Parties to increase the old? this is indeed a mischief; but
to whom? even to every one that is not a lover of the Kingdoms safety.

Has this Army by a spirit more Almighty then their own, brought home an
Olive to this State, after such overflowings of War and Blood, and shall not
the Dove be taken into the Arc? shall there be no preservation for them that
preserve others?

CHAP. VIII.
The Siege and Surrender of Worcester and Walling^ord.

AFter the Surrender of Banbury Castle, Colonel Whaley was sent with some few
Troops of Horse to Worcester, for the better keeping in of the Enemy; Colonel
Morgan who was before such time attending that service with the Glocestershire
Forces, was ordered by the General to Ragland, to command in chief those
Forces that should be employed for the reducing of that place, if upon the
Summons sent into Worcester the Enemy stood off and would not treat; which
accordingly falling out, the Enemy in Worcester returning a very high and
presumptory Answer upon the Summons that was sent into them, and making higher
demands then were granted to Oxford. Colonel Morgan according to his Orders,
martched to Ragland, leaving Colonel Whaley (to attend the service before
Worcester) who with the Forces of the Counties of Worcester and Shropshire,
together with some Forces of Newport-pagnel, Warwick and Northampton, lay
before it, so as to keep off relief and hinder the Enemy from getting in
provisions from the Country: But there was a great want of Foot for a regular
and close Siege, which when the service of Oxford was over, and that Garrison
surrendered, was instantly supplied, Colonel Rainsborough being sent with a
Brigade thither, who no sooner came before the Town, but he laid his Foot
Quarters close to the Enemies Works, and in two or three nights (according to
much judgment and resolution) raised a Work, which much annoyed the Enemies
great Fort: whereupon they came to a capitulation, and being much distracted
with the surrender of Oxford, and fearing if they neglected their opportunity,
they should have no conditions at all, expecting the whole power of the Army to
come upon them, They came to conditions as follows:

Worcester, and the Forts belonging thereunto, concluded July 19. 1646. between
Colonel Thomas Rainsborough, on the behalf of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, and Colonel Henry
Washington, Governor of Worcester.
THat the City of Worcester with all Forts, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Stores
and Provision of War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered, without wilful
spoil and imbeazlement, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or to such as
he shall appoint to receive them, upon the 22. of this instant July at ten of
the Clock in the morning, in such manner and with such exceptions as are
contained in the ensuing Articles. II. That on the 23 of July the Governor and
all Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison, with all other persons therein that
will, shall march out of Worcester with their Horses, Arms, and Baggage
belonging to them, to any place within one mile of Worcester, which the
Governor shall choose, where all their Horses and Arms, except what allowed in
the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax shall appoint. All the Soldiers shall be disbanded, and all
such both Officers and Soldiers, and others, as shall engage themselves by
promise never to bear Arms any more against the Parliament of England, nor
do any thing wilfully to the prejudice of their affairs, shall have the
benefit of these ensuing Articles. III. That all such as shall desire to go to
their own homes, or private friends, shall have the Generals Passes and
protection for their peaceable repair to and abode at their several places
they shall desire to go unto; The Governor to pass with all Horses, Arms,
and Baggage properly belonging to him, and each Colonel to pass with three
Horses, and each Lieutenant Colonel and Sergeant Major with two Horses, each
Captain, Lieutenant and Cornet with one Horse, and every person not under the
degree of an Esquire with three Horses, and all of them with their Arms and
goods properly belonging to them to be carried on their Horses, and all
Soldiers with their Swords and such Baggage as properly belong to them, which
they carry about them. IV. That all persons which are to have the benefit of
the preceding Articles, shall, if they desire it, have Passes to go beyond
Seas, provided they depart this Kingdom within two Months after the surrender
of the Town. V. That the City and Garrison of Worcester, and all the Inhabitants
thereof shall be preserved from all plunder and violence of the Soldier. VI.
That Sir William Russell, now residing in Worcester be excepted from any
benefit of these Articles.
HEN. WASHINGTON.
Signed and Sealed July 19. 1646.
When the forementioned Forces were sent unto Worcester, another Brigade was
sent to Ragland, and the Generals Regiment, with Colonel Lilburnes, were sent
to assist our Forces before Wallingford; by whose accession the Siege being
strengthened, presently a Summons was sent into the Castle; the Governor
perceiving new Forces to face the Garrison, (and that by so fatal an occasion
and disaster to them as the surrender of Oxford) came to a Treaty, which took
effect, and was concluded upon these Articles.

Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax
Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one Party; and
Col. Tho. Blag, Governor of Wallingford, on the other Party: for and concerning
the rendering of the Garrison of Wallingford Castle and Town, July 22. 1646.
I. THat the Castle and Town of Wallingford, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunitions, Stores and Provisions of War thereunto belonging, shall be
delivered up without wilful spoil or imbezlement, unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or such as he shall appoint to receive the same, upon Wednesday
the 29. of July, 1646 by nine of the clock in the morning, in such manner, and
with such exceptions as are contained in the ensuing Articles. II. That on the
said 29. day of July the Governor and all Officers and Soldiers of the
Garrison, with all other persons therein (that will) shall martch out of
Wallingford with their Horses and Arms properly belonging to them,
(proportionable to their present and past commands or employments) with flying
Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullet
in their mouths, and every Soldier twelve Charges of Powder, Match and Bullet
proportionable, with one piece of Ordnance, with equipage, and with Bag and
Baggage, to any place within ten miles of Wallingford, which the Governor
shall choose, where (in regard his Majesty has no Garrison left open, nor Army
near) all their Horses and Arms, except what are allowed in the ensuing
Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
shall appoint; all the Soldiers shall be disbanded, and all such, both
Officers, Soldiers and others as shall engage themselves by Promise, never to
bear Arms against the Parliament, nor to do any thing wilfully to the
prejudice of their Affairs, during their abode in the Parliaments Quarters,
shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles; That is to say; III. That all
such as shall desire to go to their homes or private Friends (who shall not be
prejudiced for receiving them) shall have the Generals Pass and Protection for
their peaceable repair to, and abode at the several places they shall so
desire to go unto; The Governor, Officers and Gentlemen to pass with Equipage
of Horses and Arms answerable to their present and past commands or qualities;
and all both Officers, Soldiers and others, to pass with Bag and Baggage, and
the Troopers only with their Swords, and their Bag and Baggage. IV. That all
such (if there be any) who shall desire to take entertainment for Foreign
Service, shall have Passes for their Officers (not exceeding four) with their
Horses and two Servants apiece, to go to London to treat with any Foraigne
Ambassador or Agent for entertainment, and all of them shall have liberty and
Passes to martch (the Officers with Equipage of Horses and Arms properly their
own, and answerable to their present past and commands, the common Soldiers
with their Swords, and all with Bag and Baggage) to the Quarters near unto
Harwich or Southampton, or to any Port between them, to be transported, where
they shall be assisted in the procuring of Vessels and Shipping for their
transportation, at the usual Rates accustomed for Freight, by the Governor of
the next Garrison or Port Town, who shall also take care for their safety and
accommodation with Quarters, until Shipping be provided and Weather
seasonable, they paying for the same after twenty eight days from the Render.
V. That all the persons now in Wallingford (not being of the Soldiery of the
Garrison) shall have liberty and protections for their Persons and Goods to stay
in the Town of Wallingford one month after the Rendering (if they desire it.)
and then to have the Generals Pass and Protection, as others going out at the
Rendering, upon the like engagement; and that any person whatsoever (who being
sick or wounded, cannot at present Remove) shall have liberty to stay till they
be Recovered or able to go away, and shall have fit accommodation and
subsistence provided for them during such their stay, and then shall enjoy the
benefit of these Articles. VI. That no person whatsoever comprised in this
capitulation shall be Reproached, Reviled, Affronted, Plundered or Injured in
their Martch, Randezvouz or Quarters, Journies or places of abode, by these
Articles allowed, nor shall be compelled to bear Arms, nor be Imprisoned,
Restrained, Sued, Molested or Damnified for any matter whatsoever, of pulick or
private concernment, Relating to the present War, the matter or grounds
thereof, arising before the Rendering of the Garrison, during the space of six
months after the Rendering thereof, nor be compelled to take any Oaths or other
Engagements then what is mentioned in the second Article, during the time of
six months, and to have liberty during the said time, to travel about their
lawful affairs. VII. That all Horses and other Goods now in Wallingford,
taken as lawful prize of War, or properly belonging to the Governor or
Officers of the Garrison, before or during the Siege, shall be continued in the
possession of the present possessors, except such as are to be delivered up by
the Tenor of these Articles. VIII. That such Household Stuff and Goods now in
Wallingford, as shall appear to the General, or such as he shall depute for
that purpose, to have been borrowed by any Officer or Gentleman in the Garrison,
for their use and accommodation in the Garrison, shall be restored back to the
Owners. IX. That if any person or persons shall wilfully violate these Articles
in any parts, the guilt thereof shall be imputed to such person or persons
only, and shall not prejudice any other, not acting or consenting to the same.
X. That the Governor and three more such Officers and Gentlemen as he shall
name, shall have Passes from the General for themselves, with two Servants a
piece, their Horses, Swords, Pistols, and necessaries, to go to the King to
give him an account of the said Garrison, and to return to their homes, or
Friends: And that five weeks shall be allowed for this Journey, which shall not
be reckoned any part of the six months mentioned in the sixth Article, but he
and they shall be allowed six months after the end of the said five weeks. XI.
That no Officer, Soldier, or other person, who by the Articles are to martch
out of the Castle or Town of Wallingford, (or shall martch in) shall plunder,
spoil, injure any Inhabitant or other Person therein, in their Persons, Goods
or Estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging to any of them.
XII. That all persons comprised within these Articles shall peaceably and
quietly enjoy all their Goods, Debts and Movables, during the space of six
months after the Rendering, and shall have liberty within the said space (if
they shall resolve to go beyond the Seas) to dispose of their said Goods,
Debts and Movables, and to depart the Kingdom with the same, as they shall
think fit and desire, and shall have Passes for their Transportation
accordingly from his Excellency. XIII. That all persons comprived in these
Articles, shall, upon request, have a Certificate under the hand of the
General, or such as he shall appoint, that such persons were in the Castle and
Town of Wallingford at the time of the Rendering thereof, and are to have the
Benefit of these Articles. XIV. That the Townsmen and Inhabitants of the Town
of Wallingford shall not be troubled or questioned for any thing said or
written by any of them, nor the Corporation thereof prejudiced for any thing
done by any of them by express command, since it was a Garrison, and that they
shall have the benefit of these Articles in all things that may concern them.
XV. That Master John Chamberlain of Sherborne, shall have the benefit of these
Articles.
THO. FAIRFAX.

After the Articles were Signed and Sealed, and the day of surrender agreed
upon, a Party of Officers and Soldiers, upon some discontent, mutined against
the Governor, and dividing themselves from the rest, came in a threatening way,
presenting their Muskets at him, if they might not have their wills and demands
granted. Whereupon the Governor was necessitated privately to send for the
Passes, and to deliver the Castle a day sooner then intended, and
Lieutenant Colonel Jackson was enforced to draw in his Regiment into the Town
between the two Parties (the Mutiners and the Governors Party) to enforce an
orderly delivery of the Garrison: The tuition of this Garrison was by his
Excellency committed to that vigilant and faithful Commander Adjutant Evelyn,
Adjutant-General of the Horse.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Reduction of Ragland Castle and Pendennis.

OXford Garrison having run to its period of obstinacy against the Parliament,
and being now reduced, many other Garrisons that attended its fate fell with
it, even like ripe fruit, with an easy touch: But these two Garrisons of
Ragland and Pendennis, like winter fruit, hung long on. Ragland Castle, a
strong hold in Wales, Garrisoned for the King under the command of the
Marquess of Worcester, situated conveniently to command all the parts of
South Wales, being straightned by some Forces of Sir Trevor Williams and
Major General Langhorne, before Colonel Morgan was ordered from Worcester
thither, to command in chief the Forces that were, and should be sent before
it, was at length formidably and closely besieged: The same Captaine-Engineer
that gave so good demonstration of his skill at Banbury, at the reduction of
that Castle, Captain Hooper, was employed here; and so soon as he could get
Spades and Shovels, he went most dexterously to work against this Castle of
Ragland; Colonel Morgan at first had but fifteen hundred men to carry on the
design; the Enemy was eight hundred strong within in Horse and Foot, and made
diverse desperate sallies upon Colonel Morgan, who received him as gallantly,
and in every of them was personally engaged, with great hazard to himself in
particular: In one sally, the Enemy took a Color of ours, the Cornet lost his
life withal; In exchange whereof, a Major and Captain of the Enemies was
slain, and diverse wounded on the Enemies part: But at length, by the addition
of two thousand more to Colonel Morgan from his Excellencies Army, after Oxford
was over, as is noted before: the Enemy in the Castle was reduced to more
caution, and taught to lie closer.

And especially when his Excellency in person was come thither from the Bath to
put life into the Siege, which was by that time in a good forwardness, both
for their Works and Approaches: Who being come, sent in this Summons into the
Castle.

MY LORD,
BEing come into these parts with such a strength as I may not doubt, but with
the same good hand of providence that has hitherto blessed us, in short time
to reduce the Garrison of Ragland to the obedience of the Parliament; I have in
order thereto thought good to send your Lordship this summons; hereby requiring
you to deliver up to me for the Parliaments use, the said Garrison and Castle
of Ragland, which as it only obstructs the Kingdoms universal peace, the
rendition may beget such terms, as by delay or vain hopes cannot hereafter be
expected. I remain

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX.
Leaguer before Ragland, Aug. 7. 1646.
(...) which Summons begat an intercourse of many Messages from one side to the
other; with the copies whereof I shall continue that part of the Story.

SIR,
ALthough my infirmities might justly claim privilege in so sudden an answer;
yet because you desire it, and I not willing to delay your time to your letter
of summons to deliver up my House, and the only house now in my possession to
cover my head in; these are to let you know, that if you did understand the
condition I am in, I dare say out of your judgment you will not think it a
reasonable demand, I am loath to be the Author of mine own ruin on both
sides, and therefore desire to have leave to send to his Majesty to know his
pleasure, what he will have done with his Garrison. As for my House, I presume
he will command nothing, neither am I knowing how either by Law or conscience I
should be forced out of it. To this I desire your return, and rest

Your Excellencies humble servant, H. WORCESTER.

MY LORD,
TOuching your sending to his Majesty, it is that which has been denied to the
most considerable Garrisons of England, further then an account to his Majesty
of the thing done upon the surrender, which I do also freely grant to your
Lordship: And for that distinction which your Lordship is pleased to make, it
is your House; If it had not been formed into a Garrison, I should not have
troubled your Lordship with a Summons, and were it dis-garrisoned, neither you
nor your House should receive any disquiet from me, or any that belong unto me.

This I thought good to return to yours, and thereby to discharge my self
before God and the world, of all extremities and sad consequences that will
ensure upon the refusal of the rendition of your Garrison, upon my Summons.

I remain yours, THO. FAIRFAX.

SIR,
I Do so much confide in your Honor, as that being at stake, concerning leave
to send to his Majesty, I will at this time forbear to make further motion in
it: Only one thing which is extraordinary, I offer to your consideration for
the just cause, besides my Allegiance of my reasonable request: which is, That
upon his Majesty's promise of satisfaction, I am above twenty thousand pounds
out of purse, and if I should do any thing displeasing unto him, I am sure all
that is lost, and no benefit to the Parliament. If you knew how well known I
was in Henry Earl of Huntington's time, unto your noble Grandfather at York, I
am assured I should receive that favor at your hands that safely you might
afford. God knows, if I might quietly receive my means of subsistence, and be
in security with the Parliaments approbation, and freed from the malice of
those Gentlemen that are of the Committee within this County, I should quickly
quit my self of the Garrison, for I have no great cause to take delight in it.
I have that high esteem of your worth, nobleness and true judgment, that
knowing you will offer nothing ignoble or unworthy for me to do, as the case
stands with me, I desire to know what Conditions I may have, and I will return
you present answer, and in the mean time I rest,

Your humble servant H. WORCESTER.

MY LORD,
ACcording to your Lordships desire, I have returned you conditions, such as
may be fit and satisfactory to the Soldiery. To your Lordship and Family, I
have granted quiet and security from all violence of any that belongs to me: I
would persuade your Lordship not to fear any ill or disrespect from the
Committee of this County (I shall easily reconcile that Party) or that they
will do any thing, but as they shall receive order from the Parliament. By
this means you are at liberty to send to the Parliament, and upon a present
surrender and submission to their mercy and favor, your Lordship cannot but
think to receive better terms for your self, then if you stand it out to the
last extremity; when besides the hazard of your person, and of those in your
Family (which I do presume are dear to you) and the spoil of the Castle,
which cannot be avoided in extreme undertakes against it. Your Lordship has
no reason to expect better then the Marquess of Winchester received; who in
making good Basing-house to the last, narrowly escaped in his own person, lost
his friends, subjected those that escaped to great frights, and hazard his
House and Estate to utter ruin, and himself to extremity of Justice. Touching
your Lordships twenty thousand pound, your Lordship has liberty to solicit
about that, by the same hands your Lordship shall give an account of the
surrender to his Majesty. I desire your Lordship upon receipt of these, to
dismiss my Trumpeter, and to return Answer by one of your own.

THO. FAIRFAX.

SIR,
THe difficulty of resolution by the Soldiers and Officers (other then I
thought) causes my request for your patience in not giving you full answer to
the conditions you sent me yesterday; but as soon as I shall obtain it, you
shall not be long without it. But one thing, and that of moment, I desire to be
satisfied in; whether if any conclusion should be made, that afterward I shall
be left to the mercy of the Parliament for alteration at their will and
pleasures; and if it be so, I shall endeavor in vain to study more about it:
For example, in my Lord of Shrewsbury his case, and diverse others, how
conditions have been broken, does a little affright me: I know by your will and
consent if should never be; but Soldiers are unruly, and the Parliament
unquestionable, and therefore I beseech you pardon my just cause of fear, and I
will rest,

Your humble Servant H. WORCESTER.

MY LORD,
I Have perused your Letter of this eleventh of August. As to your scruple
wherein you desire to be satisfied (so far as I understand it) I can only give
you this resolution, That wat I grant, I will undertake shall be made good: As
to the instance you give in my Lord of Shrewsburie's case, the actors in that
breach (who were none of my Army) have received their censure, and by this time
I believe the execution. But here, if any conclusion be made while I stay, I
dare undertake there shall be no such thing, or if any, there shall be
reparation.

THO. FAIRFAX.

SIR,
FOr the better accommodation of these unhappy disferences, if you please that
there may be a cessation of Arms and working, and to engage your Honor for
the return of my Commissioners to morrow by ten of the clock, they shall wait
upon you in your Leaguer, where they shall vindicate me for being the only
obstruction of the general peace: So in expectation of your sudden Answer, I
rest,

Your humble Servant, H. WORCESTER.

MY LORD,
HAving not yet received in any of your Letters a direct answer to the
conditions I sent you; I have no grounds or consideration for such a cessation
of Arms and working, as in your Letter you desire; but if it be your purpose
to return your answer by Commissioners, I shall by the hour you mention,
appoint Commissioners of mine own to receive the same in the Leaguer, as you
desire, and engage my self for the safe return of yours, not exceeding six
Commissioners, and as many servants: And in order to this, I shall be content
there be a cessation of Arms and working from nine of the clock to morrow
morning till two in the afternoon.

Yours, etc. THO. FAIRFAX.

SIR,
HAd I not thought you had been in the Leaguer, to the end that Propositions
from the place in answer to yours, might have been first presented unto you,
and to avoid delays, which I thought your side would best like of, it was
resolved to send Commissioners together with our Propositions; but considering
it was otherwise, I have sent you such as I am advised unto, to take into your
consideration, and because there is some addition to yours, I would have been
glad you had heard the just reasons thereof, to the end you might not have been
persuaded to slight them without just cause; your pleasure for the ordering of
business, I at your leisure expect, and if you please, the dismission of this
Messenger; and so rest

Your humble servant, H. WORCESTER.

MY LORD,
I Have perused the Propositions sent out by your Commissioners, which I find
such as deserve no answer: I have offered your Lordship and the rest conditions
which you may yet have if you accept in time: if there be any thing in them
obscure, needing explanation or wanting circumstantials, for the better
performing of the things intended therein, I shall be willing to appoint
Commissioners on my part to treat with yours to that purpose, upon those
Propositions of mine, provided you send Commissioners instructed with power to
treat and conclude, and return your resolution herein by six of the clock this
evening.

Yours, etc. THO. FAIRFAX.
August 14. 1646.
In the mean time our Approaches went on toward the Castle, our maine Work
was some sixty yards from theirs, we had planted four Mortar-pieces in one
place, and two Mortar-pieces at another, each Mortar-piece carrying a Granadoe
shell twelve inches diameter.

August the 14. His Excellency (who was every day in the Trenches) appointed a
new approach, which the Engineer, Captain Hooper, had so far proceeded in as
to throw up approaches of an hundred yards in circuit, making, exacting running
Trenches, so secure, as if they were Works against a storm, coming within
sixty yards of their Works.

August 15. The Marquess sent forth his desire to treat, upon the Generals
Propositions; whereupon the Treaty was appointed at Master Oats his house
(about a mile and a half from Ragland,) to begin at two of the clock that
afternoon: His Excellencies Commissioners were Colonel Morgan, Colonel Birch,
Master Herbert, one of the Commissioners of Parliament, residing in the Army,
Quartermaster General Gravesnor, Lieutenant Colonel Ashfield, and Major Tulida.

By Monday August 17. The Treaty was concluded (the Marquess casting himself
upon the mercy of the Parliament) according to the ensuing Articles.

Articles concluded and agreed upon betwixt his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one part: and
the right honorable the Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Governor of the
Castle and Garrison of Ragland, on the other part: for and concerning the
surrender of the Castle and Garrison of Ragland.
I. THat the Castle and Garrison of Ragland, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, and provision of War thereunto belonging, shall be delivered up
without wilful spoil, unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or such as he
shall appoint to receive the same on Wednesday next, being the nineteenth day
of this instant August, by ten a clock in the forenoon, in such form as shall
be expressed in the ensuring Articles. II. That upon the said nineteenth day of
August, the Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers of the Garrison, with all other
persons therein, shall martch out of the said Garrison with their Horses and
Arms, with Colors flying, Drums beating, Trumpet sounding, Matches lighted at
both ends, Bullet in their mouths, and every Soldier with twelve charges of
Powder, Match and Bullet proportionable, and Bag and Baggage, to any place
within ten miles of the Garrison, where the Governor shall nominate: Where, in
respect his Majesty has no Garrison in England, nor Army any where within this
Kingdom and Dominion of Wales, their Arms shall be delivered up to such as
his Excellency shall appoint to receive them, where the Soldiers shall be
Disbanded; and that all both Officers, Gentlemen and Soldiers shall have the
benefit of these ensuing Articles, except persons excepted from Pardon and
Composition, they engaging themselves not to bear Arms hereafter against the
Parliament, nor do any thing during their abode in the Parliaments Quarters,
prejudicial to their Affairs. III. That all such as desire to gae to their
own homes, or to their private Friends, shall have the General's Pass and
Protection for their peaceable repair to, and abode at the several places
they shall desire to go unto, the Officers and Gentlemen to pass with their
Horses and Arms; also such Officers or Gentlemen, Reformed or not Reformed,
that want Horses, shall martch with their Arms; and all Officers, Gentlemen,
Soldiers and others shall pass with Bag and Baggage. IV. That all Officers,
Gentlemen and others, comprised within this present Capitulation, shall have
three months time allowed them to remain in any place within the Parliaments
Quarters, for the endeavoring their Peace and Composition, and all Gentlemen
that desire to go beyond the Seas, shall have their Passes for themselves and
their Servants, and all other Necessaries to any Sea Port to Ship themselves,
they paying the usual Rate; Provided, They go within three Months after the
said surrender; and that all Gentlemen, Officers and others as shall desire to
take Foraigne entertainment, shall without exception have Passes for themselves
and servants to go to London or elsewhere, to treat with any Ambassador or
other to that purpose, with their Bag and Baggage, to martch to any Sea Port to
be transported whither they please, they likewise paying the usual Rates
accustomed. V. That such as are wounded or sick, shall either have liberty to
stay in the Castle, or be removed to such other places as the Governor shall
choose for their Recovery. VI That no Officers, Gentlemen or Soldiers during
these three months, shall be questioned for any word spoken or acts done,
Relating to this War, since the commencement of it; That no person comprised
within these Articles be Reproached, Affronted, Plundered or Injured in their
martch, quarters or places of abode, or any person that shall Receive them,
shall be molested, or suffer any prejudice therefore, but shall have liberty
during the limited time to pass about their lawful occasions; Provided, they
act nothing to the prejudice of the Parliament; and in case any of these
Articles be broken by any particular person, that the punishment extend no
further then the party so offending, and that all these Articles may be
faithfully observed, according to the true intent thereof, without any cavil or
mental Reservation to infringe them or any of them.
On Wednesday August 19. The Castle was surrendered (according to agreement) to
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the use of the Parliament; the Enemy was
no sooner martched forth, but his Excellency entered the Castle, took a view of
it, had some conference with the Marquess, and afterward went that night to
Chepstow, where he was nobly entertained by the Committee there; from whence on
Thursday 20. he returned to his Quarters at Bath.

This Castle of Ragland was a very strong piece, having a deep Mote
encompassing it, besides the River running by it; there were delivered up with
i^ twenty pieces of Ordnance, only three Barrels of Powder, but they had a
Mill, with which they could make a Barrel a day there was found great store of
Corn and Man ^t, Wine of all sorts, and Beer; the Horses they had left were
not many, and those that were, almost starved fur want of Hay, of which they
had none left, and not many Oats, so that the Horses had like to have eaten one
another for want of meat, and therefore were tied with chains: there was also
great store of Goods and richFurniture found in theCastle, which his Excellency
committed to the cure and custody of Master Herbert Commissioner of the Army,
Mr. Roger Williams and Major Tuliday to be invento^ied; and in case any of the
welaffected of the country could make a just claim to any of them, as being
violently taken from them, of they compelled to bring them in thither, they
should have them restored.

There martched out of the Castle the Marquess of Worcester, the Lord Charley
the Marquesses Son, the Countess of Glamorgan, the Lady Jones, Sir Phillip
Jones, Doctor Bayley, Commissary Guilliam, four Colonels, eighty two Captains,
sixteen Lientenants, six Cornets, four Ensigns, four Quartermasters, fifty two
Esquires and Gentlemen: Not any that martched forth had the least incivility
offered them by our Soldiers, but the Articles punctually observed to them.

After the Reduction of Ragland, his Excellencies Forces being at liberty, and
there being three or four Garrisons in North Wales yet unreduced, before which
Major General Mitton was with some Forces, his Excellency sent to Major General
Mitton, offering him, for the more expeditions reduction of those places, to
send him either Foot, Horse or Artilery.

But his Excellency understanding from him, that he had more Forces from the
country then he could well maintain, his Excellency commanded the Forces
intended that way, to martch to Quarters near Oxford, leaving the work of
reducing those Garrisons wholly to Major General Mitton, who had given so great
testimony both of his ability and faithfulness in former actions. And now to
Pendennis.

Pendennis castle, a strong Hold in the utmost parts of Cornwall, standing upon
the Sea, commanding in a great part the Harbor of Falmouth, where Ships that
Trade to the East frequently put in, Garrisoned for thc King under the command
of John Arundel of Trease Esquire, was blockt up by part of his Excellencies
Army, under the command of Colonel Fortescue by land, and by Captain Batten
(Viceadmiral of the Parliaments Ships) by Sea: about the latter end of July the
Enemy made a sally by Botes to fetch in relief, but were forced back with
loss.

About ten days before which a Summons was sent them, but they, in hope of
Relief by Ships from Saint Mallows, returned a denial; and after those Ships
were by contrary winds beaten to Morleys, yet the Enemy persisted in his
obstinacy, expecting a propitious blast to bring their Relief to them; nor
could the fate of Oxford, Worcester and Litchfield surrendered, coming to their
ears, work them to any other resolution then to hold out, without his
Majesty's special Warrant to surrender, whom the Governor was very earnest to
obtain liberty to send unto; or if not to the King, at lest to the Prince, and
would feign have persuaded Colonel Fortescue to condescend thereto, as but a
common courtesy, but could not prevail, he not understanding it so: by a
Lieutenant of ours, whom Colonel Fortescue exchanged another of theirs for, he
understood that a Shallop had gone forth about the 26 of July to the Prince his
Highness, to certify him of their condition, unable to hold out many days
without Relief.

Captain Batten kept ten large Boats and Barges well manned, before the mouth
of the Harbor every night, within command of the castle, drawing them off in
the morning: One morning when he was newly drawn off, a Shallop got in by
stealth, which caused great triumph in the Castle; but 'twas conceived (and
Colonel Fortescue was so informed by good hands) that little Relief was in it,
save a Hogs-head or two of Wine.

Some Overtures were made to the Enemy within, to go for Flanders, an Agent
from the King of Spain came for that purpose, desiting to speak with some of
the Soldiers in the Castle, while some of ours should be by; which being
granted, he made an Overture to some Papist Officers of entertainment in the
King of Spaine's service in Flanders; they desired to be satisfied of the
Agents authority, and to see the conditions; which being readily condiscended
unto and performed on the Agents part, they answered him, That at present they
were engaged, but should they be once free, next to their present Master they
would serve his Majesty of Spain: This courtesy was taken well from Colonel
Fortescue by the Enemy and the Agent; and certainly any thing belonging merely
to civility, without involving danger in its consequence, was never denied by
him.

The Enemy in the Castle kept fires all night, for direction to any Relief
that should make toward them. They were very prodigal of their powder, making
two hundred great shot in the space of three days at our men, but without any
great execution, only three of our men being slain thereby: The Work of
keeping them in so straightly from Relief, was very great, and was not performed
without very hard duty to our Soldiers, the Enemy within being so numerous,
which therefore redounds as much to the honor of the Besiegers: and Captain
Batten with his Ships by Sea was no less careful and vigilant, though indeed
he wanted Shallops and Pinaces for the service.

Some days after the forementioned Shallop, there came in another to the
Castle, but it was conceived not much more Relief in that then in the former,
and that because the Governor sent about the same time a Letter to Colonel
Fortescue, to know if he had power to treat with him, and whether he could make
good the conditions he should grant; alleging, that otherwise it would be a
dishonor to him to treat, and the agreement to be contradicted by any other:
Colonel Fortescue returned answer, He had power to treat and to make good the
agreement: Whereupon the Governor took two days time to con^ider, and in
issue, embraced a Treaty; Commissioners were named on both parts.

The time appointed for the Treaty to begin was Monday, August 10. when
accordingly the Commissioners on both sides met, the Enemy making his demands,
ours offering their propositions, which held them till Wednesday noon, when
their Commissioners brake off, and went away in great discontent at the terms
that were offered them; but on Friday 14. the winds were laid, and the the
Treaty (by Colonel Fortescue's art) came on again, and by Saturday night the
15. all was concluded, save the time of surrender, which was agreed the next
day, and the Articles signed, which were as follows.

Articles agreed on the 16. of August, Anno Dom. 1646. between Sir Ahraham
Shipman, Lieutenant Colonel Richard Arundel, Colonel William Slaughter, Colonel
Charles Jennings, Colonel Lewis Tremaine, Nevil Bligh, and Joseph June Esquire,
Lieutenant Colonel Anthony Brocket, on the behalse of the Honorable John
Arundel of Treacise Esquire, Governor of the Castle of Pendennis, of the one
Party: And Colonel John S^. A^bin Esquire, high Sheriff of the county of
Cornwall, Sir John Ayscue Knight, Colonel Robert Bennet, Lieutenant colonel
Edward Herle, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Fitch, Leiutenant colonel Richard
Townsend, Major Thomas Jennings, and Capt. Walter Mainard, on the behalf of
the honorable Colonel Richard Fortescue, Commander in chief under his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of all the Forces of Horse and Foot within the
County of Cornwall, and the honorable Captain William Batton, Vice Admiral
and Commander in chief of the whole Fleet employed for the Service of King and
Parliment, on the other party.
THat the Castle of Pendennis with all Fortresses, Forts, Fortifications
thereunto belonging, the Ship and all other Vessels lying under the Castle, with
the Furniture and Provisions unto them appertaining. All Ordnance of all sorts,
with their equipage, and all Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and all other
Implements of War, Necessaries, and Commodities of, and belonging to the said
Castle and Garrison (except what otherwise shall be disposed by these Articles)
shall without any manner of diminution, spoil or imbezlement, be delivered
upon Monday, the seventeenth day of this instant August, at two of the clock in
the afternoon, into the hands and custody of the two Commanders in chief by
Sea and Land respectively, or such person or persons as shall be by them
appointed for the receiving of the same. And that immediately upon signing the
said Articles, the said persons shall be admitted into the Castle to see the
just performance of the Premises, and Hostages given for the due observance of
them. II. That John Arundel of Trecise Esquire, Governor of the said Castle of
Pendennis, with his Family and Retinue, and all Officers and Soldiers of Horse
and Foot, and all the Train of Artillery, and of the Ships, as well
Reformado'd Officers as others. And all Gentlemen, Clergymen and their
Familyes and Servants, shall martch out of the Castle of Pendennis, with their
Horses, complete Arms, and other Equipages according to their present or past
commands and qualities, with flying Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating,
Matches lighted at both ends, Bullets in their mouths, and every Soudier
twelve charges of Powder, with Bullets and Match proportionable, with all their
own proper Goods, Bag and Baggage, with a safe convoy unto Arwinch Downs: And
because His Majesty has neither Army nor Garrison in England to our knowledge,
they shall there lay down Arms (saving their Swords) unless such who are
Officers inCommission, who with their servants are to retain their arms
according to their qualities. CountryGentlemen and their Servants their Swords
only, Ensigns their Colors, where such Persons as Colonel Fortescue shall
appoint are to receive them. And as many as desire it are to have Let-Passes
from the Commanders in chief to pass to their several Dwellings, or to such
other places under the power of the Parliament, or beyond the Seas, as they
shall desire, and not be plundered, searched or injured in their March, or
after, they not doing any thing to the prejudice of the Parliments Affairs;
and no man to be prejudiced for giving any of the persons comprised in the said
Articles entertainment in their houses: And that the old garrison Soldiers who
have houses in the Castle, shall have 28. days after the surrender, for the
removing and disposing of their Goods. III. That the Princes Servants with
their Arms, and al Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen, Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Clergymen and all others with their retinue that desire it, shall ^ave liberty
to pass with their Bag and Baggage, and what else is allowed in the Articles
beyond the Seas, and to that purpose, there shall b^ provided by the
Vice Admiral a sufficient ^ber of navigable Vessels, with a safe convoy for
their safe transporting from the Haven of Falmouth, within 28. days after the
surrender of the saidCastle, to be landed at Sa^t Maloes in France: and in the
mean time to be signed free Q^arters at convenient places by Colonel
Fortescue Commander in chief; and during the said time that they be not
Plundered, or Injured, they acting nothing prejudicial to the Parliament
affairs. IV. That Colonel Wise and all Officers and Soldiers of his Regiment,
or as many of them as desire it may be ship^ in Falmouth Harbor in Vessels, to
be provided by the Vice Admiral, and landed at Swansey in Wales: And that such
are of the County of Cornwall to be shipped and landed at Looe, and those that be
of Devon, to be landed at Yalme; and all to be shipped with Bag and Baggage, and
such Arms as formerly allowed them, nor to be Plundered nor Injured in their
passage. V. That whereas by reason of the long siege of the Castle of
Pendennis, many of the Officers and Soldiers of the said garrison are grown
into great nessity of all such things as might enable them to martch to their
several Dwellings, many sick and wounded: And to the intent they may be
supplied with necessaries for their accommodations within the time limited to
them by these Articles. It is promised and consented unto by the Commissioners
for the Leaguer, to and with the Commissioners for the Castle, that five
hundredth pouuds sterling shall be delivered into the hands of the Commissioners
of the Castle, or any three of them, at eight of the clock to morrow morning
at Penrin, to be distributed vmong the Officers and Soldiers aforesaid, as
they shall think fit. And they are not to take any free quarter in their
martches. VI. That all Goods taken from any person for the accommodation of
this Garrison or any person therein, shall be restored to their proper Owners,
or such as they shall appoint; and all Goods now in the Castle that properly
belong to any other persons, shall be restored to the Owners thereof. And if
any person carry away any Goods not properly belonging unto him, and deny to
deliver them upon demand in presence of any Officer in Commission, he shall
loose his Bag and Baggage, and have such punishment as the now Governor of the
Castle and the Commanders in chief, or any two of them shall think fit. But
all persons may retain whatsoever was taken from persons in Arms, as law^ull
prize of War. VII. That the Governor and all Field-Officers with their several
retinues shall be allowed carriage by Sea or Land to carry away their said Goods
to any Place within their County. VIII. That no Officer, Soldier or other
person comprised in these Articles, shall be reproached, or have any
disgraceful words or affronts offered, or be stopped, Searched, Plundered or
Injured in their martches, Rendezvous, Quarters, Journeys, places of abode, or
passages by Sea or Land; and if any such thing be done, satisfaction to be made
according to the judgment of any two Commissioners or more, being of equal
number of each party; nor shall any of the persons aforesaid be compelled to
take up Arms against the King, nor be imprisoned for any cause of public or
private concernment during the space of twenty eight days after the surrender
of the said Castle, nor for any cause of public concernment, or twenty eight
days after the said twenty eight days are ended. IX. That if any person
within the Garrison be sick or wounded, that they cannot take the benefit of
the Articles at present; they shall have liberty to stay, and be provided for
at convenient places until they recover, and then they shall have the fruit
and benefit of these Articles. X. That all persons comprised in this
capitulation shall enjoy their Estates real and personal, they submitting to
all Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and shall fully enjoy the benefit of
these Articles. XI. That all Prisoners of War, of either side, be set at
liberty, and that liberty be given immediately after the surrender of the said
Castle to the Governor thereof, to give notice to their friends of the
surrender of the said Castle. And that no Vessel coming with relief within
ten days after the surrender shall be made prize. XII. That if any of these
Articles shall in any point be broke or violated by any person or persons in
Pendennis or comprised within this capitulation, the fault and punishment shall
be upon them or him only who made the breach or violation, and shall not be
imputed or charged on any other not assenting thereunto or acting therein.
XIII. That all persons comprised in these Articles, shall upon request have
certificate under the hands of the Commander in chief respectively, that such
persons were in the Castle at the time of the surrender thereof, and were
otherwise to have the benefit of these Articles. XIV. That the Commanders in
chief respectively shall give Passes to one or two Messengers with their
Servants not exceeding six, to go to the King by Sea or Land from the
Governor, to give an account to Him of the proceedings of this Treaty, and
conclusion thereof, and to return and receive the benefit of these Articles.
XV. That Commissioners be appointed on both sides for the performance of the
Articles, and places appointed for the accommodation of sick men. XVI. That
confirmation of all the precedent Articles shall be procured from the
Parliament, or from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax within forty days after
the signing of these Articles.
Near to Pendennis is the Mount in Cornwall (omitted to be mentioned in its
just order) which was surrendered to Colonel Hamond, who lay before it with
some of the foot of this Army, and obtained the surrender of it some few days
after the surrender of Excester: The Governor of the Mount was Sir Arthur
Basset; the Marquess of Hamilton was in it, fifteen pieces of Ordnance, with
great store of Ammunition and Provisions were gained with it.

It is a place of great strength, the Tide flowing about it twice a day, which
rendered the reduction of it a service of great difficnlty and consequence, and
Redoun ding much to the honor of Colonel Hamond, who underwent the same; whose
Merits also in that singular Service of settling Quarters on the West Side of
Excester at Saint Thomas Hospital, etc. within half Musket Shot of the Enemy;
afterward martching to Torrington with his Regiment, deserves a special note
to be put upon it.

Besides this of the Mount, there is one Service more omitted to be mentioned
in its proper place, viz. The reduction of Borstall-House, which was some few
days before the surrender of Oxford, agreed to be surrendered upon conditions.

And thus yon have a true (though plain and brief) account of the Actions of
this Army, which God reserved for such a time as our lowest estate, when his
season was to deliver us. It was once intended, the Story should have broken
off at Oxford, but you see it is continued to the last piece of Service
performed by this Army, though somewhat more briefly then the former Actions;
which was for want of those Materials of Observaiions and Collections, which
were furnished me in the compiling of the Story till then, by One, to whom all
that reap any satisfaction by this Story, owe great thanks for his diligence
and faithfulness therein.

And now there being no Enemy either in Field or Garrison, his Excellency after
sow small time of refreshment and rest from his continual weariness and
action, was by the Parliament Ordered from Oxford into the West, there to
disband Major General Massies Brigade; whither accordingly he immediately
martched, viz. to the Devizes, where in the space of eight days, his
Excellency disbanded the whole Brigade, consisting of two thousand five hundred
Horse; whom (to give them their due) he found for the most part, prepared to
obey the Ordinance of Parliament; which was the more commendable, in respect
that of many months Arreares which were behind, they received but six weeks
pay, which yet is not wholly to be reckoned to the ingenuity of the men, but in
a great part to the carfulness and prudence of Major General Massy, Colonel
Cook, and the rest of the Officers: Diverse of the Disbanded come from very
remote Countries, and had Passes some for Egypt, others for Mesopotamia and
Aethyopia.

This work was no sooner over, but it pleased God to visit the General with a
sore fit of the Stone: Saint Paul needed a Thorn in the flesh; and by thirst
and lack of water Sampson (after his great Exploits) might know himself to be
a Man. This fit continued on him for many days together; so soon as he was
recovered, he made a Journey to London: This was the first time of his visiting
London since he martched forth with the Army, having a small desire to see that
place till he could bring an Olive branch in his mouth, choosing rather to
hasten Peace, then spin out the War, which made a humble Tent more acceptable
to him till he had attained his end, then a glorious City.

Loudon November. 12. while he was yet some miles off the City, he was met by the
Mliitia of the City: He who had so often encountered a Militia of Enemies, is
now embraced by a Militia of Friends, who had no other Errand but to thank him,
who had done so much, as that he had left nothing for them to do, but to fetch
in this Man of War, who had converted them to Men of Peace, who through his
Watch fullness and Valor had excused them from stirring out of their city to
fight a Battle; only now in the interest of their own honor, they were
drawn out to bring in the Prize of so many Battles, even Englands Peace.

Many well-affected Citizens also went forth with the Militia, upon this
Expedition, and the hearts of thousands ran and met him, whose persons were not
seen there.

No sooner was he come to Town, but (the next day) both Houses of PARLIAMENT
were in motion to acknowledge their GENERAL, and make a congratulatory Visit to
him, communicating their sense the one House to the other therein, and making
these repective ORDERS thereupon.

DIE VENERIS, November. 13. 1646.
ORdered by the LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, that it is left to the SPEAKER
of this House, what to speak to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX from this House, upon these
several Heads, viz. To Congratulate his coming to this Town, and to
acknowledge his good Service done to the Parliament and Kingdom.

JOHN BROWN.

DIE VENERIS, 13. November. 1646.
ORdered by the COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, That Master SPEAKER and the
whole House do to Morrow at ten of the clcck, give a Visit to Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, General of the PARLIAMENTS FORCES, and return him the Thanks of the
COMMONS of England, and an Acknowledgment of the great Blessings of ALMIGHTY
GOD upon his faithful Services, wise Conduct and great Valor in the whole
discharge of the great TRUST committed unto him, and reducing the distracted
Affairs of this KINGDOM to this happy condition and Issue.

H. ELSYNGE Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Thus those that honor God, God will honor, and those that seek only, and
are content with that honor that is of God, shall (sometimes) perchance have
the honor that is of Men last into the Bargain.

On Saturday, November 14. Both Houses actuated their Orders and Intentions;
and first, the Right honorable EDWARD Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the
House of Lords, pro tempore, accompanied with the Earl of Northumberland,
Pembroke, and diverse other Peers of the Kingdom, went together in their
Coaches to his Excellencies house in Queenstreet, to congratulate his
Excellencies Successes and happy return, according to the Order of their
House, which the Earl of Manchester enlarged with diverse Expressions of
gratitude and honor to his Excellency; The Contents of the Earl of
Manchester's Speech.
In the Name of the House of PEERS, giving his Excellency Thanks for all his
Care and Pains, in the defense of the Public, expressing their great Esteem
of his memorable Services, and faithful Performance of the Trust reposed in
him, which their Lordships should always have in remembrance, and be ready
upon all Occasions, to express their Gratitude unto him.

And when they had done, and were gone (with never a jot less Honor, I trow,
for that which they had left upon his Excellency) the House of COMMONS also
attended their SPEAKER on the same Errand; where WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire,
Speaker of that House, delivered himself to this Effect:

SIR,
I Have a very hard Task to perform to present the Respects of the House of
Commons according to your Excellencies Merit, and their desires to effect this
accordinly, I should have informed my self from Histories that have preserved
the memories of the famous Worthies of former Ages and should have taken the
Dimensions of the largest Coronts and Trophies wherewith they are made
Glorious, and even those would rather straighten then enlarge the Temples of
yours Excellency; or else I should have consulted some of the most Learned and
Eloquent Orators, who have set forth the glorious Gests performed in former
times, whereby I might have insisted on some Parallel for your Wisdom, Piety,
Justice and Valor; but I conceive the Virtues and Success which God has
bestowed upon you, were very hardly to be matched, and rather needed more
Industry and Memory to Enumerate, then Oratory to Polish.

Heretofore when I read the Histories of the Acts of famous Princes and
Warrious, in this or other Nations, it was not without some Jealousy, that in
them there was some mixture and glosses of Oratory and Art, the more to set
off, and give Luster to the Acts, as Arguments of Emulation, for others to
follow the Footsteps of their Virtues; but the Actions of your Excellency will
add Lnstre and Belief to them, being all verified in you: And (indeed) here,
considering the swift Martches, and the Ex peditions in these grand and
difficult Attempts, which were prosecuted and effected by your Excellency, I
may say, The Almighty came Riding on the Wings of the Wind, for these were
nothing else but the Magnalia Dei, acted in and by you his Instrument.

It was the Custom of the ancient Romans, after a glorious and succesfull
Prince, to derive his Name to Posterity, in memory of his Virtues, as after
that great Prince JULIUS CAESAR, his Successors retained the Name of CAESAR'S,
as AUGUSTUS CAESAR, TYBERIUS CAESAR. etc. Thus hereafter all Famous and
Victorious succeeding Generals in this Kingdom (if the time shall prove so
unfortunate) will desire the addition of the Name of FAIR FAX.

And surely the Honor of the late Lord General was not, whiles he lived, any
way eclipsed by the succession of your Excellency in his Command, but rather
augmented, whiles each retained the brightness of his own Honor, having both
Rays enough to enlighten a Kingdom, then overset with Clouds and thick
darkness.

I shall need to say no more but this, That the Wo^ld will admire your
Excellencies Worth, Posterity will honor your Name; and that the whole House
of Commons, in the Name of the Commons of England, does return you Thanks for
your faithful and memorable Services; the beginning, continuance and effect
whereof, I must solely attribute to the Almighty (the Lord of Hosts and
Victories.)

But never had JuliusCaesar the honor in those Civil wars when he came to Rome
as a Conqueror; one poor Metellus confronts him and gives check to his
Victory, sweld spirit, breaking up the Doors of Saturnes Temple: Indeed there
is a manifest cause of difference; Caesar did not plead the Senates cause did
not fight for the Roman Liberties. The Senate fled when Caesar drew near, but
his Excellenci^s War was the Parliments Peace; by his Motion they sat still.

Happy man may I say of him that is able to Engage Kingdoms and Parliaments in
such Respects and Duties, and happy Kingdom and Parliament also, for whose
Exstreame and low Condition God Reserves such a chosen Vessel.

To all which his Excellency made a very modest return, Expressing, How much
he Esteemad himself Honored by the great Respects of the Houses toward him,
and that he accounted it his greatest Happiness under God to be in the least
kind Isntrumental for theirs and the Kingdoms good.

So great was the benefit and Obligation of his Excellencies Services, that the
Lord Major and Aldermen in their own and Cities interest, feeling the same,
particularly could not discharge themselves in their Consciences to acknowledge
to their General in their representive the Commons of England. but on the
Tuesday following came with a Train of Coaches to his Excellencies house, in
the name, and on the behalf of the City, to render Thanks unto him, by whose
watchfulness this famous City, so much longed for by the Enemy, was preserved
from being sacked and plundered, as well as the Kingdom recovered: Master Glyn
the Recorder was their Mouth, to this effect:

SIR,
I Am to declare unto you, in the behalf of ihe Lord Major, and the whole City,
that they in the first place, bless Almighty God for the great Victories and
Successes wherewith it has pleased God to Crown your faithful Endeavors:
And next, they give your Excellency hearty Thanks for your great and
incomparable Services, whereby you have settled the City and whole Kingdom in
so peaceable a Condition, as it is at this day.

To which his Excellency gave a very modest Reply in way of Thankfulness for
that Visit, and the Respects of the City toward him: And in close, the
Recorder further gave his Excellency to understand; That the City intended very
shortly to make a further acknowledgment of their Thankfulness, and to give a
greater Testimony of the high Esteeem they had of his Excellency.

Town, and here I could be glad to leave him, Pacem te possimus omnes, but I
must carry him Forth again, but it is not to War nor Battle, it is to discharge
Armies and Soldiers, that England may, if it be the Will of God, be a quiet
Habitation again, and the noise of War not heard in it. His Excencellency had
not long staid at London but he was Ordered to provide a Convoy to go with the
two hundred thousand pounds for the Scottish Army, upon their martching out of
England. His Excellency living more to the Public Service and Commonalty then
his own Ease or Accommodation: On Thursday December. 18. went from London
toward Northampton, having before ordered most of his Forces to advance to
those parts, and appointed three Regiments of Horse, viz. Colonel Sir Robert
Pye's, Colonel Grave's and Colonel Rossiter's, and three Regiments of Foot,
viz. Major General Skippon's, Colonel Lilburnes, and Colonel Sir Hardresse
Waller's, to martch under the command of Major General Skippon, as a Convoy to
the said Money to Newcastle upon Tyne; a tedious Winter martch, being near two
hundred miles from the place where some of them received the Money; yet the
better to be undergone, when it ends not in fighting, as many tedious Martches
of this Army have done.

And thus you have an account of six Regiments, how they are disposed, the rest
of the Army I leave in their Quarters, to practice Saint John Baptists Lesson,
Do violence to no man, and be content with your Wages.

And would to God I might here set Finis to our English Troubles, as well as to
this History: Times and Issues are in the Hand of God; we cannot know what is
to come, let us look over and recount with thankfulness what God has done for
us, who for his Works sake among us, is glorious in the Eyes of all Nations;
yea, in the Consciences of our Enemies, who cannot but confess, our Rock is
not as their Rock; if he be not glorious in our Eyes, it is the least can be
said, his Mercies have been ill bestowed upon us.

It may be expected here, I should conclude with a Panegyric of the Army, and
a Paraenetick to the Kingdom, to Love and Honor them: but me thinks there
should be no need of that, the whole Story proclaims their Worth and Merit;
their Name is Engraven by God himself, as with the Point of a Dyamond, on the
Gates and Walls of many of our chief Places; Yea, they have Sown a Name to
themselves in the Earth, and Watered it with their Blood in many places of this
Kingdom: and if all those great Works God has done for the Kingdom by them,
have not yet prevailed for a Precious and honorable Esteem of them, in vain
should I attempt to be their Advocate: Only I shall take the Boldness to say
(knowing within what compass I speak) that they who think such men not sit to
serve a State, they must (undoubtedly) question whether it were for the Service
of the State, that which they have done; for they who shall acknowledge the
Reducing the Kingdom to its Peace, and to the Parliaments Obedience, by
Vanquishing their Enemies and Strengths, to be good Service, must needs
acknowledge those that did it to be good Servants, and worthy of all Honor and
Acceptance therein: And they that would persuade otherwise, it is not because
they know how to have the State better served, but because they think it is
served too well, and are not so much Enemies to these particular men as to the
Commonwealth; and were all of their mind (which God forbid) should we be served
with such as would take our Money, and do little for it, that would spin out
and protract the War, as these have contracted it; that would serve us in
Stews and Tavernes, and drink away the Kingdoms Cares and Sorrows, yea the
Kingdoms Blood in Bouls of Wine, and fight with God (instead of his Enemies)
by Oaths and Blasphemies, and all horrible Wickednesses, we were well served.

If such as these be good Soldiers and Servants a State, I confess this is
not the Guise of this Army: But if Valor and Faithfulness, Prudence and
Activity be the qualifications of good Soldiers, these will obtain a Name
among the First; or if tedious Martches and vehement Battails, and fierce
storming of impregnable Strengths, be any demonstration of these things, we
want them not.

But it is time to Retreat; let us be thankful to God, and we shall not be
unworthy to his Instruments. I shall only add a Character of the Army, that
those who have approved themselves so we^ in their Actions may be better known
to us in their Spirits and Principles, and then I shall leave them to the
Acceptance of God and the Censure of the World.

A CHARACTER OF THE ARMY.
First, of the General Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
I Shall here pass over his Extraction, Education and contract, as having been
touched upon before, and now to begin with him as General, which He began to be
in as little a copy and proportion as has been known, setting out with an
Army scarce large enough for his title; so as he began as all true natural
growths and encreasings, from seeds and small beginnings, and so grew up more
naturally then artificially into compleatnesse, rather by providence then
violence, rather by course then wonder; as if God rather then men should make
him and his Army grow.

His way of steerage and conduct at first, was amongst men in reputation for
Religion, as if the best place he could find for counsel and action was there
where God was; and he prospered accordingly, as if Providence would let him
see, there is the best Policy where there is the best Piety.

He wanted one thing, and yet had the more by such a want; and that was a
Privado or Favorite of passion, as if providence had intended him for men, and
therefore would keep him from man: Men were rather his Friends then his
Favorites, and his Judgment was rather enamoured of men, then his Affections;
Religion and the Public being the best lines for great men to live and love by.

He never discovered passions abroad in counsels or actions, what he had at
home in himself, he (not others) knew; and this was of advantage, both to what
was advised and what was done; for the business of War is best managed by
peace at home, and those counsels that are least troubled themselves, bring
over most trouble to the Enemy, and the Steersman that sits at Helm, had not
need to have the palsy in his hand.

In counsels for action, he was ever ready to let those reasons that had most
appearance of God prevail; as if he had observed Faith to be of more success
in these Battles, then Reason.

His carriage in this War has been constant action, diligence and
vigilance, being never less in title, then when any thing was to do, as if to
be General raised him only to do more, not to be more then others.

He was not without love, clemency and meekness, by which he kept his Army
less stained in the Blood of his Enemy; but not less Victorious; for by this
he only drew less blood, but more men to him.

In the midst of our Troubles in Religion, he was thus far in Peace, that he
could bear the different opinions in their unity to the public, seeing the
Work go on as well as if all had been of one mind, and weighed men (as we
hope) by love to God, and to the public, and by this he kept clear from
dashing against God and good men, in pretense of opinion: and thus the work
has been done with as much appearance of God, as has been seen in many Ages.

He was still for action in Field or Fortification, esteeming nothing
un^easible for God, and for man to do in Gods strength, i^ they would up and
be doing; and thus his suceesse has run through a line cross to that of old
Soldiery, of long Sieges and slow approaches; and he has done all so soon,
because he was ever doing.

For his love to Religion, that is a business as well of the heart as of the
hand, of power as of form, and we hope he is that to God that he is to others;
if we may judge men's piety by their practice, he is not wanting in Religious
duties, in reading, in exercises; but God and not men must commend him in this.

For his personage, he is tall, yet not above just proportion, yet taller (as
some say) when he is in the Field, then at home, as if Victory were in his
spirit beforehand, and raised him higher then his ordinary stature.

His body is not without its infirmities, as of Rheums and Distillations, which
sometimes cause an impediment in his speech: Thus Providence pitches him in a
Tent, something crazy, in a Body weakened by War and Watchfulness, that he may
live humbly, and know himself to be but man in the hands of God, and be a man
as well of infirmity as of glory.

Thus I have writ him over, I hope, in truth to those that know him, but rather
for those that know him not but by Pen or Picture, yet with this clause, That
what is good in him, we may not know to be his own, but his that gave him it;
even his who is the Author and Finisher of all our good.

THE Officers of this Army, as you may read, are such, as knew little more of
War, then our own unhappy Wars had taught them, except some few, so as men
could not contribute much to this work: Indeed I may say this, they were better
christians then soldiers, and wiser in faith then in fighting, and could
believe a Victory sooner then contrive it; and yet I think they were as wise in
the way of Soldiery as the little time and experience they had could make them.

These Officers, many of them with their Soldiery, were much in prayer and
reading Scripture, an exercise that Soldiers till of late have used but
little, and thus then went on and prospered: men conquer better as they are
Saints, then Soldiers; and in the countries where they came, they left
something of God as well as of Caesar behind them, something of piety as well
as Pay.

They were much in Justice upon Offenders, that they might be still in some
degree of Reformation in their Military state. Armies are too great Bodies to
be sound in all parts at once.

The Army was (what by example and justice) kept in good order, both
respectively to it self, and the country: nor was it their pay that pacified
them; for had they not had more civility then money, things had not been so
fairly managed.

They were many of them differing in opinion, yet not in action nor business;
they all agreed to preserve the Kingdom; they prospered more in their unity,
then uniformity; and whatever their opinions were, yet they plundered none with
them, they betrayed none with them, nor disobeyed the State with them, and they
were more visibly pious and peaceable in their opinions, then many we call more
orthodox.

They were generally constant and conscientious in duties, and by such
soberness and strictness conquered much upon the vanity and loosnesse of the
Enemy; many of those fought by principle as well as pay, and that made the work
go better on, where it was not made so much matter of merchandise as of
conscience: They were little inutinous or disputing commands; by which peace
the War was better ended.

There was much amity and unity amongst the Officers, while they were in
action, and in the Field, and no visible Emulations and Passions to break their
Ranks, which made the public fare better. That Boat can go but slowly where
the Oars row several ways; the best Expeditions is by things that go one
way.

The Army was fair in their martches to Friends, and merciful in Battle and
success to Enemies, by which they got some love from Enemies, though more from
Friends.

This Army went on better by two more wheels of Treasurers and a Committee; the
Treasurers were men of public spirits to the State and Army, and were usually
ready to present some pay upon every success, which was like wine after work,
and cheered up the common spirit to more activity.

The Committee which the House of Commons formed, were men wise, provident,
active and faithful in providing Ammunition, Arms, Recruits of men, clothes:
And that Family must needs thrive that has good Stewards.

Thus you have a Copy of our Army; we will not say they have no faults, but
those they have, we wish rather reformed then read by the World.

A LIST of the Names of the OFFICERS in chief of Foot and Horse, the Train of
ARTILERY, and other Officers, under the command of His Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX; As Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors and Captains, etc.
GENERAL OFFICERS.
HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax General. Major General Skippon, Major
General to the whole Army. Lieutenan Genesis Cromwell, Lieut. Genesis of Horse. Lieut.
Genesis Hamond, Lieut. Genesis of the Ordnance. Commissary-Gen. Ireton, Com. Genesis of
the Horse.
The TREASURERS at War, viz.
Sir John Wollaston Knight. Thomas Adams Esquire. John Warner Esquire. Thomas
Andrews Esquire. George Wytham Esquire.
ALDERMEN. Francis Allien. Abraham Chambrelan. John Dethyck.
ESQUIRES. Captain Blackwel, Deputy-Treasurer at Wars. Commis. Genesis Stane,
Commis. Genesis of the Musters Major Watson Scoutmaster Genesis to the Army.
Quartermaster Genesis Spencer, Quartermaster Genesis of Foot (now Quartermaster Genesis
Gravesnor.) Quarterm. Genesis Fincher, Quarterm. Genesis of Horse Colonel Pindar.
Harcourt Laighton. Thomas Herbert. Capt: Potter, slain at Naseby (now Capt:
Vincent Potter, Esquire)
Commissioners of Parliament residing in the Army. Captain Flemming. Captain
Evelyn.
Adjutants Genesis of Horse. Lieutenant-Col: Gray Adjutant Gen: of the Foot.
Captain Deane comptroller of the Ordnance. John Mi's Esquire, Judge Advocate.
John Rushworth Esquire, Secretary to the General and Counsel of War. Master
Boles Chaplain to the Army. Commissary Orpin, Commissary Gen: of Victuals,
(now Commissary Cowling.) Capt: Cook, Commissary Gen: of Horse-Provisions,
slain at Naseby (now Commissary Jones.) Master Richardson Waggon-master
General. Doctor Pain. Doctor Strawhill. (since Dr: French.)
Physicians to the Army. Master Web, Apothecary to the Army. Master Winter
Surgeon to the Generals own Person. Captain Wykes, Marshal-General of
Foot. Capt: Rich: Lawrence, Marshal-Gen: of Horse. Mr: Fran: Child,
Markmaster-Gen: of the Horse. Master Robert Wolsey, Assistant to the
Quartermaster-Gen: of Foot, (wounded at Naseby.) M: James Standish M: Rich:
Gerard
Deputies to the commissary-Gen: of Musters. M: Thomas Wragge M: William Clarke
Clerks to the Secretary. M: Richard Chadwel M: Constantine Heath
Messengers to the Army
For the Foot.
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Col. His own Company commanded by Capt: Fortescue, since
Capt: Aidley. Lieutenant col: Jackson. Major Cook, dyed before Bristol. Capt:
Gooday, now Maj. Capt: Boyce. Capt: Musket. Capt: Maneste (dead) Cap. Wolf.
Capt: Highfield. Capt: White. Capt: Bland, since Capt: Leigh.
Major Genesis Skippon. Lieutenant-Col: Frances, slain at Naseby. Major Ashfield,
now Lieutenant Colonel. Capt: Samuel Clark, now Major. Capt: Streater. Capt:
Harrison. Capt: John Clark. Capt: Bowen. Capt: Gibbon. Capt: Cobbet. Capt:
Symonds.
Sir Hardresse Waller, Col. Lieutena-col: Cottesworth slain before Oxford, now
Lieutenant col. Salmon. Major Smith. Capt: Howard. Capt: Waade. Capt: Hill,
slain before Bristol, now Capt: Ask. Capt: Gorges. Capt: Clark. Capt: Thomas.
Capt: Hodden.
Colonel Hamond. Lieutenant-col: Ewre. Major Sanders. Capt: Disney. Capt: Chara
Capt: Smith Capt: Johu Boyce Capt: John Puckle Capt: Stratton Capt: Rolfe.
Colonel Harley Lieutenant Colonel Pride Major Cowell Capt: Goff Captain
Gregson, wounded at Rerkley Capt: Sampson, wounded at Bridgewater Capt: Hinder,
wounded at Bristol Capt: Forgison Capt: Mason Capt: Lago.
Colonel Mountague, since colonel Lamberts Lieutenant-collon. Grimes Major
Kelsey, since Major Rogers Ca^tain Blethen. Captain Nunney Captain Biscoe.
Captain Rogers. Capt. Wilks, slain at Basing. now Capt. Cadwel. Capt. Thomas
Disney. Capt: Sanders.
Colonel Lloyd, slain at Taunton, since Colonel Herbert. Lieutenant Colonel
Gray. Major Read (now Lieutenant Colonel) wounded at Taunton, now Major Waade.
Capt: Wilks, slain at Taunton. Captain Gettins, dyed in Gloucestershire, now
Capt. Lundy, wounded at Berkley. Capt. Wigfal, slain at Berkley-castle. Captain
Melvin, wounded at Bristol. Captain Spooner. Captain Short.
Colonel Pickering (dyed at Antre) now Colo. Hewsons. Lieutenant-colon. Hewson
(now Colonel.) Major Jubbs (now Lieutenant Colonel.) Capt. Axtel (now Major.)
Capt. Husbands (now Capt. Grimes.) Capt. Jenkens, slain at Farringdon, after
Capt. Tomkins, slain at Naseby; now Captain Toppington. Capt: Carter. Capt:
Silverwood. Capt: Gayle, slain at Bristol Capt: Price.
Colonel Fortescue. Lieutenant-colo. Richbell slain at Taunton.
Lieutenant-col: Dursey slain at Bristol, Lieuten: col: Ingoldsby slain at
Pendennis, now Leutenant-col: Cobbet. Major Jennings. Capt: Gettins, now Capt:
Farley. Capt: Fownes, slain at Tiverton. Capt: Young. Ca: Gollidge, slain at
Taunton Capt: Whitton. Capt: Bushel.
Colonel Ingoldesby. Lieutenant-col: Farringdon now Lieut: col: Kelsey. Major
Cromwell, slain at Bristol, since Maj: Ducket Capt: Henry Ingoldesby. C:
Gibson, now C: Stephens Capt. Allen. Cap: Ward slain at Bristol, since Cap:
Williams, since Capt: Tho: Ingoldesby. Capt: Mils. Ca: Bamfield, now C:
Wagshaft. Capt: Grimes.

For the Train.
Lieutenant-Gen: Hamond, Lieu: gen: of the Ordnan. Capt: Deane, Comptroller of
the Ordnance. Master Hugh Peter, Chaplain to the Train. Peter Manteau van
Dalem, Engineere-General. Capt: Hooper, Engineere Extraordinary. Eval Tercene,
chief Engine: Master Lion. Mr: Tomlinson
Engineers Master Francis Furin, Master-Cunner of the Field. Master Matthew
Martin, Paymaster to the Train.
Colonel Rainsborow. Lieutenant-col: Bowen. Major Done, slain at Sherburn,
Major Cross slain there, Major Edwards. C: Cross, slain at Sherburn Capt:
Edwards. Capt: Drury. Capt: Dancer. Capt: Creamer, wounded at Sherburne. Capt:
Stern, slain at Bristol
Colonel Weldon, now Colonel Lilburne. Lieutenant-col: Kempson. Major Masters.
Capt: Peckham. Capt: Fenton. Capt: Franklin slain at Exeter, now Capt: Holmes.
Capt. Dorman. Capt. Tolhust. Capt. Monday, dead in the West, now Capt. Welden
Capt: Kaine. Master Phips, Commissary of Ammunition. Mr. Tho. Robinson, Com. of
the Draught-Horse.
Firelocks.
Capt. Lieutenant Desborow Capt. Lieutenant Brent.
Capt: of Pioners.
Captain Cheese.

For the Horse.
Sir Thomas Fairfax, General His Troop commanded by Captain Gladman. Major
Desborow. Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Brown Capt. Packet Capt. Berry.
Colonel Butler. Major Horton. Capt. Foley. Capt. Gardner. Capt. Pennyfether.
Capt. Perry, dead, now Capt. Bethel.
Colonel Tho. Sheffeild. Major Fincher. Capt. Robotham. Capt. Rainsborow Capt
Martin. Capt. Evelyn.
Col. Fleetwood. Major Harrison. Capt. Coleman. Capt. Selby slain at Naseby,
now Capt. Laughton. Capt. Zanchy. Capt. Howard.
Colonel Rossiter. Major Twisleton. Capt. Anthony Markham. Capt. Jo. Nelthrop.
Capt. Peart. Capt. Henry Markham.
Lieutenant-Gen. Cromwell. Major Huntington. Capt. Jenkins. Capt. Middleton.
Capt. John Reynolds. Capt. Bush, slain at Naseby, since Capt. Blackwell.
Colonel Rich. Major Alford. Capt. Nevil. Capt. Ireton. Capt. Dendy, now Capt.
Husbands. Capt. Bough, now Capt. Hawys.
Colonel Sir Robert Pie. Major Tomlinson. Capt. Margery. Capt. Knight. Capt.
Barry. Capt. Rawlins.
Colonel Whaley. Maj. Bethel, slain before Bristol. Capt: Swallow, now Major
Capt: Groves. Capt: Cannon. Capt: Evanson.
Colonel Graves. Major Scroop. Capt: Fleming (Adjutant-General.) Capt. Lord
Calfield. Capt: Barton.
Colonel Ireton, commissary General. Major Sedascue. Capt. Guilliams, slain at
Bristol, since capt. Pretty Capt: Gibbons Cap: Holkins, slain at Naseby, since
capt: Cecill Capt: Bury now cap: Morgan.
His Excellencies Lifeguard
Capt: Doyley, now Capt: Hall.
Dragoones.
Colonel Okey. Major Moore. Capt: Farmer. Capt: Mercer. Capt: Abbots. Capt:
Far. Capt: Bridge. Capt: Woggan. Cap: Skirmager Capt: Turpin, since Capt:
Neale.

A Journal of every days Martch of the Army under the command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; with the names of the Towns and Villages where
the Head Quarters have been; the distance of miles, and how many nights the
Quarters continued in each Town or Village.
Towns and Villages. Counties. mi. ni. 1645. April 30 From Windsor to Reding.
Berksh: 12 1 May 1 to Theale 4 1 2 To Newbery 11 2 4 To Andover Wiltsh: 12 1 5
To Salisbury 15 1 6 To Sixpenny Hauley Dorsetsh. 10 1 7 To Blandford 7 1 8 To
Wichampton. 7 1 The same day a Party martched Westward to relieve Taunton. 9 To
Ringwood. Hampsh. 10 1 10 To Rumsey. 14 2 12 To Alresford. 14 1 13 To
Whitchurch. 10 1 14 To Nebwury Berksh. 10 3 17 To Blewberry. 10 2 19 To Newnam.
Oxon. 9 1 20 To Garsington. 2 2 22 To Marston and the Siege of Oxford. 4 14
June 5 To Mars Gibbon. Buckinghamsh. 9 1 6 To Great Brickhill. 12 1 7 To
Sherrington. 8 2 9 To Stony Stretford. 4 2 11 To Wotton. Northamptonsh. 8 1 12
To Killingbury. 4 1 13 To Guilesbury. 6 1 14 To the Battle at Naseby, and
from thence to Harborough, Leicestersh. 6 1 15 To Kibworth, to great Glin. 7 1
16 To Knighton, and Leicester Siege. 6 2 18 To Leicester. 1 2 20 To
Lutterworth. 10 1 21 To Lillington. Warwicksh. 10 1 22 To Warwick. 2 1 23 To
Clifford. Gloucestersh. 7 1 24 To Campden. 6 1 25 To Norledge. 14 1 26 To
Lechlade. 8 1 27 To Wambro. Wiltsh. 7 1 28 To Marlingbury. 7 2 30 To
Ambersbury. 14 1 July 1 To Burchalk. 11 1 2 To Blandford. Dorsetsh. 12 1 3 To
Dorchester: 12 1 4 To Beamister. 12 1 5 To Crookhorne. Somersetsh. 4 2 7 To
Evil. 8 1 8 To Ivelchester. 3 1 9 To Long Sutton. 4 1 10 To the Battle at
Langport, and to Midlesey. 9 1 11 To Weston and Bridgwater siege. 2 15 21
Bridgwater stormed, part taken. 22 Bridgewater yielded. 26 To Marcock. 13 2 28
To Wels. 15 4 30 Bath surrendered. Augu. 1 To Queen Cammel 12 1 2 To Sherborne:
Dorsetsh. 4 17 15 Sherborne Castle taken. 18 To Castle Carey. Somersetsh. 8 1
19 To Shepton Mallet. 6 1 20 To Bishops Chew. 12 2 22 To Canesham. 5 3 25 To
Stableton. Gloucestersh. 4 17 Sept. 10 Bristol Stormed, some of the Works and
Line taken. 11 To Bristol surrendered. 2 5 15 Farley Castle surrendered.
Somersetsh. 16 To Bath. 10 1 17 To Trubridge. Wiltsh. 7 1 18 To Devizes. 7 8 23
Lacock-House surrendered. Vize-castle surrendered. 26 Barckle, the castle taken.
Gloucest. 26 To East-Lavington 4 1 A Party martched toward Winchester and
Basing-House. 27 To Warmister. 8 3 Sept. 30 To Shaftsbury. Dorsetsh. 12 2
October. 2 To Midleton. 15 1 3 To Dorchester. 8 1 4 To Beamister: 12 2 6 To
Chard. Somersetsh: 8 8 14 To Hunniton Devonsh: 12 1 15 To Cullumpton. 7 2 17 To
Tiverton: 4 3 19 The Castle of Tiverton taken. 20 To Silverton. 5 2 22 To
Newton Syer. 5 1 23 To Crediton. 3 3 26 To Silverton. 8 1 27 To Topsham. 8 5
Nov. 1 To Poultimore and Broad Clisse. 5 1 2 To Wimple. 3 2 4 To Mary Antre. 3
32 Dece. 6 To Tiverton. 12 33 Jan. 8 To Morton. 20 1 9 To Bovy Tracy, took
three or four hundred Horse. 6 1 10 To Ashburton. 6 1 11 To Totnes. 5 8 19 To
Dartmouth, stormed and taken. 7 2 21 To Totnes. 7 3 24 To Newton Bushel. 7 1 25
To Chidlay. 5 16 That day Poulderham Castle taken. Febr. 10 To Crediton. 12 4
14 To Chimleigh. 9 2 16 To Stephenston, master Roules his house, that night
faced Torrington, and entered. 8 8 24 To Houlsworthy. 10 1 25 To Launceston.
Cornw. 10 4 March 1 To Blisland. 16 1 2 To Bodman. 4 5 7 To a Randezvouz at
Lanevet, and back to Bodman. 6 2 9 To Tregny. 15 1 10 To Truro. 6 11 Goring's
Army of Horse surrendered and disbanded. 21 To Bodman. 20 5 1646 26 To
Launceston (the General to Plymouth) 20 2 28 To Okehampton. Devonsh: 15 1 29 To
Crediton. 14 2 31 To view the Siege at Excester, and to Collumb-John. 13 13
Apr. 13 To Excester surrendered. 4 5 18 To Chard. Somersetsh: 24 1 19 To
Dorchester. Dorsetsh. 22 1 20 To Salisbury. Wiltsh: 32 4 25 To Andivor. 15 2 27
To Newbury. Berksh. 13 3 30 To East Hendred. 12 1 May 1 To Garsington. Oxon: 9
1 2 To Heddendon. 3 53 June 24 To Oxford, surrendered. 1 0

The Contents of the several Chapters.
PART I.
CHAP. I. COntaining by way of Poem and Introduction, a general account of
the miserable condition of this Kingdom, before this present Parliament; The
occasion and Instruments of calling it; The snare laid for us in a former
Parliament. The Quarrel between the Royal party, and the Parliament, stated:
And showing how the Command of the Parliaments Forces came to be devolved to
Sir Thomas Fairfax, their present General. CHAP. II. Wherein a brief
Character of the General and Lievtenant-General; The framing of the New-Model;
The beginning of their Action at Issip-Bridge, Blechington-house, Bampton-Bush,
etc. And the effect these things had on His Majesty at Oxford. CHAP. III. The
General with the Army matching into the West; Upon after advice recalled, and a
party only sent to Taunton; Their good success in the relief of Taunton.
Lieutenant General Cromwell defending his Quarters against Goring. CHAP. IV.
The Army employed to besiege Oxford: How far they proceeded therein. Several
Garrisons thereabouts besieged, and some taken. The loss of Leicester, and the
Discontents and discouragements that ensued thereon. With a modest enquiry into
the cause of our low condition at that time. CHAP. V. The Army commanded to
rise from before Oxford; Their several Martches till the Battle at Naseby,
with all the particulars thereof, fully related. CHAP. VI. The Victory at
Naseby improved by pursuing the Enemy, who fled into Wales: Leicester (not long
before taken by the Enemy) summoned, and after preparations for Storm,
^urrendred upon Articles, found to be unjust, and the charge retorted on them.
An Instance of the Enemies desperate profaneness, joined with Barbarous and
Inhumane Cruelty.
PART II.
Chap. I. His Excellency with the Army, martching Westward to relieve Tauton
the second time; taking in Hiworth Garrison by the way: Curbing the Clisbmen,
the retaking of Ilchester, and the brave Fight at Langport. CHAP. II. The
Particulars of that gallant Service, the storming of Bridgwater. CHAP. III. The
taking of Bath. The Club-mens Reply, and his Excellencies Rejoinder, in two
considerable Actions defeating them. The impregnable Castle of Sherborne taken
by Storm. CHAP. IV. The Siege of Bristol, the taking of it, with the Actions
that intervened, viz. the taking of Nunny Castle, etc.
PART III.
Chap. I The Devizes and Laicock-House surrendered: Berkly Castle, after in part
stormed, surrendered: With an account of the Counsels that did lead these
Actions. CHAP. II. The Counsels whereby the Army steered their course imported.
The Reduction of Winchester. CHAP. III. The Motions and Actions of the Army
unto Tiverton, The storming and taking of Basing-House fully related. CHAP. IV.
The cheap Reduction of Tiverton Castle, by a strange Providence. The surrender
of Langford-House. CHAP. V. Excester straightened in order to a Siege; with
several Debates and Resolutions thereabout. CHAP. VI. Several Passages
between the Prince and his Excellency; and between his Excellency and Goring.
Concerning Pouldrum. the Enemies preparations to relieve Excester, and Ours to
meet them, etc. CHAP. VII. The slackening of the Siege of Excester, by the
Armies advance to meet the Enemy, (leaving only a Force to block up the City)
With their great success in those two Actions. The Defeat of the Enemy at
Bovey-Tracy, and the taking of Dartmouth; with a particular account of their
Martches and lesser Passages.
PART IV.
Chap. I. The Army returning to the Siege at Excester: Pouldram Castle
surrendered: A French Vessel struck into Dartmouth, wherein Letters of
consequence from the Queen: How far the reducing of Excester was endeavored
before a second Diversion. CHAP. II. Our Army a second time diverted from the
Siege of Excester; with a particular account of the Reasons thereof: and the
Motions and Actions of the Army occasioned thereby. CHAP. III. His Excellency
with the Army advancing into Cornwall, driving the Enemy before them, and
possessing their Quarters: A gallant piece of Service performed by Colonel
Butler and his Party near Stratton. Prince Charles giving all for lost by his
Excellencies pressing too hard upon them, betakes himself to Scilly: An
advantage to the Parliaments Cause by a Packet of Letters from Ireland, taken
at Padstow. CHAP. IV. His Excellency wit the Army driving up the Enemy into
Cornwall; A Summons sent to Sir Ralph Hopton and his Forces to come in; with the
several transactions of that Bunesse until the disbanding of all his Forces,
fully related, etc. CHAP. V. The Army returning to the Siege of Excester, with
all the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender of the same. CHAP. VI. The
Particulars of the Treaty and surrender of Barnstable; and the Resolutions and
Motions of the Army after the Reduction thereof, till they came to Oxford.
CHAP. VII. The Siege of Oxford; the Particulars of the Treaty, and surrender
thereof; with the in^luence of the Fate of Oxford upon the remaining Garrisons.
CHAP. VIII. The Siege and surrender of Worcester and Wallingford. CHAP. IX. Of
the Reduction of Ragland Castle and Pendennis.
FINIS.
A Table of the Motion and Action of the Army under the Command of His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, From April 15. 1645. To August 19. 1646.
Wherein is expressed what Battles were fought, what Places of strength were
taken, whether by Storm, or Surrender, the number of Slain, of Prisoners, what
Ordnance, Arms, and Colors were taken: The name of the Commander in Chief, the
day of the Month when, the COUNTY where the ACTION was done.
The Month, and Day The Year. Battles fought. Places Relieved, Taken, and
particul. engagements The manner How. Days of the siege and time of fight.
Number of slain in fight or siege. Number of prisoners taken. Number of
Ordnance taken. Number of Arms. Number of Colors. The chief Commander of ours
in each design. Commanders of the Enemies. The County. Horse. April 15 1645
Rout at Islip By a party of horse. 2 hours 60 200 400 The qu. and 3 others.
Lieut. Genesis Cromwell Ear. of Northampton Oxfordshire 500 April 16 1645
Bletchington house By a party of horse and dragoons. 4 hours 150 450 3 Lieut.
Genesis Cromwell Col. Windebanke Oxfordshire 72 April 26 1645 near Farringdon By a
party of horse. 2 hours 10 40 50 3 Col. Io. Fienes Berkshire 150 April 27 1645
Bampton-Bush By a party of horse. 2 hours 230 200 Lieut. Genesis Cromwell Col. Sir
W. Vaughan Oxfordshire 60 May 11 1645 Taunton relieved the first time. By part
of the Army. 54 200 slain in the siege. 200 260 Col. Welden General Goring
Somersetshire 30 May 22 1645 Oxford foot and horse Routed. By a party of horse.
3 200 200 1 Adjutant Flemming Capt. Gardener Oxfordshire 12 May 24 1645
Godstow-house quitted 2 10 30 General Fairfax Oxfordshire 6 June 1 1645
Gaunt-house yielded 3 2 82 100 Col. Rainsborough Oxfordshire June 14 1645
Naseby Battle fought in 2 hours 800 4500 12 and two Mort. pices 8000 112 Genesis
Fairfax King Charles, Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice. Northamptonshire 200
June 18 1645 Leicester town yielded 3 6 14 2600 8 Genesis Fairfax Lord Hastings
Leicestershire 300 June 27 1645 Highworth garris yielded 3 hours 4 70 180 2
Genesis Fairfax Major Hen Wiltshire 12 July 3 1645 Taunton Relieved the second
time. 5 weeks 1000 of the enemies. 400 400 Genesis Fairfax Lord Goring
Somersetshire 460 July 8 1645 Ilchester garrison quit 1 18 Genesis Fairfax Col.
Phelips Somersetshire July 1645 Ilmore Fight By a party of horse. 2 hours 50
200 300 9 Major Genesis Massy Lord Goring Somersetshire 300 July 10 1645 Lamport
Battle, Lamport Garrison. Fought and quit. 1 60 1600 2 2500 32 Genesis Fairfax
Lord Goring Somersetshire 1200 July 13 1645 Borough hill fort yielded 4 8 151
200 Col. Okey Somersetshire July 23 1645 Bridge water stormed 11 30 1600 44
3000 9 Genesis Fairfax Col. Windham Somersetshire 200 July 30 1645 Bath City
yielded 1 140 6 400 2 Col. Rich Sir Thomas Bridges Somersetshire 11 August 4
1645 A Club-Army on Hamilton-hill. routed 1 hour 60 400 600 12 Lieut. Genesis
Cromwell Master Bravel of Compton. Dorsetshire August 15 1645 Sherburne Castle
Battered and stormed. 16 200 of ours. 340 19 600 2 Genesis Fairfax Sir Lewis Dives
Dorsetshire 30 August 20 1645 Nunny Castle yielded 2 5 100 Col. Rainsborough
Capt. Turbervile Somersetshire August 28 1645 Portshotpoint Fo. yielded 6 3 6
140 1 Lieut. Col. Kempson Somersetshire September. 10. 1645 Bristol City stormed
18 160 of ours. 200 151 6000 8 Genesis Fairfax Prince Rupert Somersetshire, and
Gloucestershire. 20 September. 23 1645 Devizes Castle yielded 7 5 2 400 Genesis
Fairfax Sir Charles Lloyde Wiltshire September. 24 1645 Laicock house yielded 2
Col. Pickering Col. Bovill Wiltshire September. 25 1645 Barkley Castle stormed 9
40 90 11 500 Col. Rainsborough Sir Charles Lucas Gloucestershire October 8 1645
Winchester Castle yielded 6 4 7 500 Lieut. Genesis Cromwell Lord Oagle Hantshire
October 14 1645 Basing house stormed 6 40 300 11 500 Leiut. Genesis Cromwell Marq.
of Winchester Hantshire 80 October 18 1645 Langford house yielded 1 Lieut. Genesis
Cromwell Sir Barth. Pell Wiltshire October 20 1645 Tiverton castle stormed 6 4
200 4 400 2 Genesis Fairfax Sir Gilbert Talbot Devonshire 20 January 8 1645 Near
Barnstaple, quarters beaten up. By a party of horse. 80 100 2 A Captain of the
Plymouth Regiment. Sir Allen Apsley Devonshire 80 January 1645 Bow fight by a
party 3 hours 60 100 Sir Hardresse Waller Devonshire 40 January 9 1645
Bovy-Tracy quarters beaten up. By a party of horse and foot. 12 60 200 ^one of
the K. with C. ^ Lieut. Genesis Cromwell Lord Wentworth Devonshire 350 January 16
1645 Plymouth siege raised. By the advance of the Army. 22 5 left in the works.
80 Genesis Fairfax Major General Sir John Digby. Devonshire January 19 1645
Dartmouth stormed 7 20 800 106 1600 14 Genesis Fairfax Sir Hugh Pollard Devonshire
60 January 25 1645 Poulderhamcastle yielded 1 2 300 Col. Hamond Sir (...)
Meredith Devonshire February 16 1645 Torrington stormed 60 400 80 ba^ of powd.
fired 1600 9 Gen Fairfax Lord Hopton, Lord Wentworth, Lord Capell. Devonshire
70 February 24 1645 Engagement of horse near Stratton. by a party 12 40 250 4
Col. Butler Major Genesis Web Devonshire 300 February 25 1645 Launceston quitted
after dispute. 2 hours 3 160 200 Genesis Fairfax Cornwall 30 February 28 1645
Saltash garrison quitted 3 left in the works. Genesis Fairfax Cornwall February 29
1645 Lisard Town quitted 3 Genesis Fairfax Cornwall March 3 1645 Mount Edgcomb
yielded 5 Genesis Fairfax Col. Edgecombe Cornwall March 3 1645 Foy Town quitted 60
10 140 Genesis Fairfax Cornwall March 1645 Castle-Dennis engagement of horse. by a
party 100 300 Col. Rich Major Genesis Pert Cornwell 300 March 14 1645 Treaty at
Truro Horse disbanded 2000 ^ Colors of horse Genesis Fairfax L. Hopton, L. Wentw.
Cornwall 4500 disbanded. March 16 1645 Exmouth Fort yielded 46 16 Col. Sir Har.
Waller Col. Arundell Devonshire March 16 1645 Dennis Fort yielded 22 200 2 Genesis
Fairfax Cornwall April 1646 Corfe castle By stratagem and storm. 48 11 5 Col.
Bingham Major Laurence Dorsetshire April 13 1646 Excester city yielded 180 100
40 75 1500 Genesis Fairfax Sir John Berkley Devonshire April 15 1646 S Michaels
mount yielded 15 15 400 Col. Hamond Sir Arthur Basset Cornwall April 20 1646
Barnstaple Town, Castle, and Fort. yielded 30 20 35 400 Genesis Fairfax Sir Allen
Apsley Devonshire April 1646 Dunster Castle yielded 150 20 6 200 Col. Blagge
Col. Windham Somersetshire April 1646 Woodstock gar. yielded 20 40 2 Col.
Rainsborough Capt. Fawcet Oxfordshire May 1646 Salcomb Fort yielded 50 8 Col.
Welden Col. Fortescue Devonshire May 1646 Banbury Castle yielded 8 9 600 8 Col.
Whaley Sir William Compton Oxfordshire May 1646 Radcot Fort yielded 15 6 2 140
Col. Saunderson Col. Palmer Berkshire June 10 1646 Borstall House yielded 18 5
300 Genesis Fairfax Sir William Compton Buckinghamshire June 24 1646 Oxford City
yielded 55 60 300 2000 Genesis Fairfax The Lords of the privy Council, and Sir
Thomas Glemham. Oxfordshire June 24 1646 Farringdon house yielded 55 40 4 500
Sir Robert Pie Sir William Courtney Oxfordshire July 22 1646 Worcester City
yielded 20 25 1500 Col. Rainsborough Col. Washington Worcestershire July 27
1646 Wallingford cast. yielded 65 5 7 800 7 Genesis Fairfax Col. Thomas Blagge
Berkshire August 17 1646 Pendennis castle yielded 17 94 860 Col. Fortescue Col.
Arundell, and Sir John Digby. Cornwall August 19 1646 Ragland castle yielded 20
23 500 Genesis Fairfax Marq. of Worcester Munmouthshire

Place this Table between folio 334. and 335.


