KAINA KAI PALAIA. THINGS New and Old. OR, A Storehouse of Similies,
Sentences, Allegories, Apophthegms, Adagies, Apologues, Divine, Moral,
Political, etc. With their seveall Applications. Collected and observed from
the Writings and Sayings of the Learned in all Ages to this present.

BY JOHN SPENCER, a lover of Learning and Learned Men.

Deus nobis haec otia fe^t.
Virgil. Eclog. 1. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson and I. Streater, for John
Spencer at Sion College. MDCLVIII.

CLERO Gentisque Anglicanae populo, Florilegium hoc quale qualecunque. D. D. Q.

I. S. De Utcester Staffordiensis, and Collegij Sionij apud Londine^ses nunc
Bibliothecarius, minime dignus.

TO THE READER.
EXceptions are easier prevented, than removed; a dim eye may fore-fee such as
this Book must encounter, reducible to two heads, as made either against the
Author, or Matter thereof. Against the Author, as if it were presumption in
him, no Scholar by profession, to adventure on such a design; It is answered;
First, I know no such Monopoly, for Scholars to engrose Book-making to
themselv^s: Secondly, He has from his Childhood conversed with Books and
Book-men; and, always being where the Frankincense of the Temple was offered,
there must be some perfume remaining about him. Lastly, What he lacks in
Learning, he has supplied in industry; Indeed, filling stones, which require
more pains for portage, then art for polishing, are in their kind (though not
so graceful) as useful as squared stones, and as much benefit may redound from
the reading of this Book, as from those of more elaborate composure.

Against the matter of the Book it may be objected; That it is taken out of
other Men's Books, and Sermons; But was it not, I pray, true of the Ax, of the
Son^ of the Prophet, 2 Kings 6. 5. Alas, it was borrowed? Is the Spiders poison
the better for being sucked out of her self, or Bees h^ny the worse, for being
extracted from flowers? Some Men's ^ooks are indeed mere Kites-nests, a
collection of stolen things, such are pure Plagiares, without any grateful
acknowledg^ment; but herein the Ingenuity of our Author is commendable, that on
the Margin he has entered the names of such, at whose Torch he has lighted his
Taper; and I am confident, that by such quotations, he has revived the
memories of many Worthies, and of their speeches, which otherwise had utterly
been lost.

The Title acquaints us with the nature of the Book, Things NEW and OLD. Only
to propound things New and New, does please rather then profit, and more tickle
the itch of the ears, then satisfy the appetite of the Soul: On the other
side, to present us with things Old and Old, does show a lazy Writer, and will
make a weary Reader; such Books are like an imperfect Map of the World, wherein
all America is wanting. This Author has endeavored to compound both together,
and I hope with good success; And like as changeable Taffata, having the woof,
and the warp of different color, seems sundry stuffes to several standers
by; so will this Book appear, with wrinckles and gray headed to the lovers of
Antiquity, smooth and with down (...) such, to whom Novelty is most
delightful; He does desire and hope, that his Book shall find that candor of
course, and courtesy general (which Custom has almost made a due) to
forgive all venial (though false Divinity, true Morality) mistakes. But the
Reader will catch cold, by keeping him too long in the porch of this Preface,
who now (the door being opened) may enter into the House it self, with the
best wishes of

From my Chamber in Sion Coll. London, Jan. 10th. 1657. Thy servant in Christ
Jesus, THO. FULLER.

The Names of the several Authors cited in this COLLECTION.
A.
PEtrus Abaelardus. George Abbot, Cant. Robert Abbot, Sarum. Robert Abbot.
Laurentius Abstemius. Iacobus Acontius. Josephus Acosta. Thomas Adams. Melchior
Adamus. Adamantius. Aelianus. Aelius Spartianus. Alardus Aemstelredamus.
Aemilius Probus. Aesopus Phrygius. Paulus Aegineta. Aeschilus. Agathias.
Albertus Magnus. Ulysses Aldrovandus. Alcoranus Turcorum. Ioh. Henricus
Alstedius. Petrus de Alliaco. Andreas Alciatus. Alexander Alensis. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Ammianus Marcellimus. St. Ambrosius. Robertus Am^sburiensis: Isaac
Ambrose. Lancelot Andrews, Winton. James Andrews. Pier d' Ancre. John Angier.
S. Anselmus. Anacharsis. Annotations on the Bible. Appianus Polyhistor. Ioh.
Apostolius. Apollodo^us. Levinus Apollonius. Sidonius Apollinaris. Michael
Apostolius. Thomas Aquinas. Benedictus Aretius. Aristophanes. Aristoteles.
Simeon Ash. S. Athanasius. Athanaeus. Athenagoras. William Attersoll. S.
Augustinus. Ludovicus Aurigarius. Avicenna. Ausonius. Aurelius Victor.
B.
GErvase Babington. Wigorn. Sir Francis Bacon. Peter Bales. Isaac Bargrave, D.
Cant. John Barlow. Walter Balcanquel, D. D. S. Basilius. Thomas Bastard. Caesar
Baronius. Basilius Seleuciae. Sr. Richard Baker. Casper Barthius. Richard
Baxter. Bartholomaeus. Paul Bayne. John Bailey. Venerabilis Beda. Robertus
Bellarminus. Fulk Bellers. S. Bernardus* Bernardinus Senensis. Petrus
Berchorius. Richard Bernard. Jacobus Bergomensis. Joh. Berry. Theodorus Beza.
Hieronymus Benzonius. Petrus Bizarus. Jacobus Billius. Petrus Blesensis. Ioh.
Bodinus. Robertus Bodius. Mauritius Bohemus. Carolus Bon^inius. Antonius
Bonfinius. Jeremiah Boroghs. Hector Boe^hius. Philippus Bosquierus. Giovanni
Bosteno. Thomas Bowyer. Bonaventura. Immanuel Bourn. Ioh. Boys, D. Cant. Samuel
Bond. John Bond. Martinus Borhaius. Robert Bolton. Edward Brerewood. John
Brinsley. Johannes Bromiardus. Jonathan Brown, D. Hereford. L. Brook. Matthew.
Brooks. Joh. Browning. Joh. Bromiardus. Thomas Brooks. Abrahamus Bucholcerus.
Georgius Buchananus. Samuel Buggs, D. D. Joh. Buntingus. Anthony Burges. Joh.
de Burgo. Johannes Buntingus. Robert Burton. Johannes Buxtorphius.
C.
PHilippus Cameracensis. Edmund Calamy. Gulielmus Cambdenus. Johannes Camero.
Ioh. Calvinus. Ioh. Cassianus. S. Caecilius. Joseph Caryl. Ludovicus de
Carbone, Vincenzo Cartari. Calvino Turcismus. Thomas Cartwright. John
Carpenter. R. Carpenter. Cassiodorus. Carolus R. Nathaniel Cannon. Seth
Calvisius. Catena. Patrum Grae. L. Capel. Daniel Cawdery. Michael de Cervantes.
Cedrenus. William Cecill. L. Burleign. Robert Cecil. E. Salsb. Pier Charon.
Martinus Chemnitius. Thomas Cheshire. Thomas Cheast. S. Chromatius. S. Johannes
Chrysostomus. Nathaniel Chytraeus. R. Clark, D. D. Samuel Clark. Franciscus de
S. Clara. Petrus de Clavis-rubeis. Isidorus Clarius. Claudianus. Clemens
Alexandrinus. Ludovicus Coelius. M. Collings. James Connyers. Columella.
Johannes de Combis. Phillippus Comineus. Ianus Cornarus. Patrick Copland.
Aegidius Corozetus. Samuel Cottesford. Samuel Croke. Sir George Croke, Judge.
William Crashaw. Petrus Crinitus* I. Crompton. Henry Cuffe. Ezekiel Culverwel.
James Curle, Winton. Q. Curtius. Ioh. Cuspinianus. S. Cyprianus. Cyriacus
Spangenbergensis. Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
D.
Sir Robert Dallington, Ioh. Dalton. Damascenus. Samuel Daniel. Ioh. Davenport.
Martin Day, D. D. William Day, Winton. Dares Phrygius. John Denison.
Demosthenes. Phillippus Diez. Paulus Diaconus. Pontius Diaco. Diogenes
Laertius. Dialogus Creaturarum. Dionysius Carthusianus. Diodorus Siculos.
Sermones Discripuli de Tempore. Dion Cassius. Ioh. Downame. George Downame.
John Done, D. S. Paul. Hieronymus Drexelius. Matthaeus Dresserus. Joh.
Drusius. Edward Dunstervile. Bryan Duppa. Sarum. Jeremiah Dyke. Daniel Dyke.
E.
PHilip Edlin. Richard Edes. Thomas Edwards. John Elborow, D. D. Edward Elton.
Gasper Ens. Epiphanius. Des. Erasmus. Antonius Eremita. Evagrius. Joh Evans.
Euripides. Eutropius. Eusebius Pamphilus. Eustathius Thessalonicensis:
F.
BEnevent. Fabius. Thomas Fathers. Samuel Fawcet. Daniel Featly, D. D. Richard
Field. Owen Feltham. Nicholas Felton, Eliens. Ludovicus Fenestella. M. Fenner.
Joh. Fenelius. Arnold Ferron. Johannes Ferus. Marfilius Ficinus. Johannes
Fienus. Nigid. Figulus. (...) Firmicus. Charles Fi^z. Ieffery. John Fisher,
Roffensis. Tho. Fle. cher. John Fox. James Forsith. Christoph. Fonseca.
Radulphus Fornerius. Paulus de Francis. Frontinus. Fulgentius. Thomas Fuller.
Baptista Fulgosus. William Fulk, D. D. Funeral Sermons. Johannes Funccius.
G.
PE^rus Galatinus. Claudius Ga^enus. Franciscus Garcia. Ludo^icus de Granada.
Samuel Garey. R. Gardener. Thomas Gataker. John Gauden, D. D. Johannes
Gerhardus. Joh. Gee. Aulus Gellius. Germanicarum rerum Scriptores. Johannes
Gerson. Conradus Gesnerus. Gillebertus. Abraham Gibson. Gulielmus Gibieuf.
Franciscus Godwinus. Thomas Goffe. Rodolphus Goclenius. M. Goddard. Godfrey
Goodman, Glocestr. Philip Goodwin. Thomas Goodwin, D. D. Franciscus Gomarus.
John Gore. Nich. Gorranus. Stephen Gosson. William Gougs, D. D. Gregorius
Magnus. Richard Greenham. John Gray. Thomas Granger. John Green. John Grent.
Matthew Griffith, D. D. Hieronymus Guadalupense Fr. Guicciardino. William
Gurnall. Guido Bituricensis. Henricus Guilimannus. Lilius Gyraldus. Gyralcus
Cambrensis.
H.
GEorge Hackwel, D. D. John Hampton. Ios. Hall. Norvicens. William Hall. Robert
Harris, D. D. Nathaniel Hardy. H. Hardwick. Sir John Harrington. Andrew
Harwood. Sir John Hayward. Hegesippus. George Herbert. Thomas Hering.
Herodotus. Hermes Trismegistus. Hesiodus. Peter Heylin, D. D. Thomas Hill, D.
D. John Hill. Arthur Hildersham. Augustine Hill. Samuel Hieron. Hilarious.
Hispanicarum rerum Scriptores. William Holbrook. Richard Holdsworth, D. D.
Robert Holcot. Ralph. Hollinshed. Homerus. Honorius. Iocodus Hondius. Richard
Hooker. John Hooper, Wigorniens. John Howes. Q. Horatius Flaccus. William
Howel, D. D. Tho. Hugget. Hugo de S. Victore. John Hughes. John Hume. David
Hume. Henricus Hungtindonus. Hippocrates. S. Hieronymus.
I.
THomas Iaggard. K. James. Cornelius Iansenius. George Iay. William Iemmat.
William Ienkin. Michael Iermin. John Jewel, Sarum. Ignatius Martyr. Flaccus
Illyricus. Gabriel Inchinus. Index Expurgatorius Hispaniae. Thomas Jones, D. D.
William Jones. Josephus Iudaicus. Paulus Iovius. Irineus. Isidorus Hispalensis.
Isocrates. Franciscus Iunius. Justinius Martyr. Justinius Trogus. Iuvenalis.
K.
John King, Londinens. Henry King, Cice^trens. Richard Knoles.
L.
LActantius Firmianus. Pomponius Laetus. Arthur Lake, Bathoniens. Aelius
Lampridius. Cornelius a Lapide. Hugh Latimer, Wigorniens. William Laud, Cant.
Thomas Laurence, D. D. VVolfgangus Lazius. Edward Leigh. James Leslye, D. D.
Jeremy Leech. Leo Hebraeus. Thomas Lightfoot. John Lightfoot, D. D. Peter
Lilie. Aloysius Lippomannus. Liturgia Eccles. Anglicanae Iustus Lipsius. Titus
Livius. Tenures de Littleton. Petrus Lombardus. Johannes Lorinus. Christoph.
Love. William Low. Lucianus. Lucanus. Conradus Lycosthenes. Nicholaus de
Lyra.
M.
I. Mab. Nicholaus Machiavellus Macrobius. Centuriae Magdeburgenses. Ioh.
Magirus. Johannes Malcolmus. Gulielmus Malmsburiensis. Thomas Manton. Constant.
Man^ssus. Johannes Manlius. Iacobus Marchantius. Gervase Markham. Peter Martyr.
Ramundus Martinus. Martyrs Letters. Antonius Margarita. Marcus Marulus. Stephen
Marshall. Andreas Masius. Henry Mason. Radford Maverick. Anthony Maxey, D. D.
Maximus Tyrius. S. Maximus. Richardus de Mediavilla. Phillippus Melancthon.
Otho Melander. Gasper Melo. Stephanus Menochius. Menander. Fred. de Mendoza.
Paulus Merula. Methodius. Pedro de Mexia. I. Micklethwayt. Richard Midleton.
Petrus Molineus. Sir Thomas Moore. Fines Morison. Basilius Monnerus. Philippus
Mornejus. Thomas Moufettus. M. Moss. Sebastianus Munsterus. Abrahamus
Musculus* Simeon de Muis. Ioachimus Mynsingerus.
N.
SIr Robert Nanton. John Nash. Triumphus of Nassau. Gregorius Nazianzenus.
William Negus. Benjamin Needler. Philippus Nepos. Solomon Neugebaverus.
Gulielmus Neubrigenfis. Newlanders Cure. T. Newsham. Nicephorus Gregoras.
Nice^as. Gervase Nid, D. D. Nicephorus Calistus. Petrus Nonnus. Aloysius
Novarinus.
O.
OLaus Magnus. Timothy Oldmayn. Origines. Oppianus. Samuel Otes, D. D. Lucas
Osiander. Pub. Ovidius, Naso.
P.
GEorgius Pachimerius. Ephraem Paget. Saints Pagninus. Antonius Panormitanus.
Henricus Pantaleon. Onuphrius Panvinius. Mathaeus Parisiensis. David Pareus.
Velleius Paterculus. Johannes Passeratius. Sir George Paul. Pausanias. Mine
Here Paw. Asconius Pedianus. Isidorus Pelusiota. William Perkins. Aulus
Persius. Franciscus Petrarcha. Thomas Pestell, D. D. Josephus Phovorinus.
Philemon. Philo Indaeus. Phocilides. Johannes Philastrius. Phil^^tratus.
Jeremiah Philips. Joh. Picus. C. Mirandula. Johannes Pierius. John Pigot.
Pindarus. Charles Pinner. Hector Pintus. Pinke Avoth. Marcellinus de Pise.
Petrus Pizarus. Plato. Thomas Playfere, D. D. Baptista Platina. Plautus.
Johannes Plantavitius. Plinius Secundus. Plutarchus. Thomas Plummer. Polienus.
Arnoldus Pontanus. Porphyrius. P^ssidonius. John Potter, Carleolens. M. Powel.
Gabriel Powel. Grabriel Prateolus. Preachers Travails. Daniel Price, D. D.
Sampson Price, D. D. William Price. John Prideaux, D. D. Sylvester de Prierio.
John Preston, D. D. Robert Prior. Primasius. Procopius. Prochorus. Catullus
Tibullius Propertius. Prosper. Fedinando Pulton. Samuel Purchase. Pythagoras.
Q.
QUintilianus. Quirinus de Salazar.
R.
SIr Walter Raleigh. Johannes de Rampegolis. Fr* Rawlinson, D. D. Petrus de
Ravenna. J. Raiment, D. D. J. Reeks. Georg. Ressoldus. Nicholaus Reusnerus.
Thomas Reeve. Edward Reynolds, D. D. Reynerius de Pis^s. Rhenanus. Rhemigius
Attissiodorensis. Rhemigius Rhemenfis. Caelius Rhodoginus. Francis Roberts.
Angelus Roccha. John Rogers, D. D. John Rogers. Nehemiah Rogers. Nathaniel
Rogers. Valerius Rothmarus. John Rowlandson. Hieronymus Rubeus. Ruffinus.
Samuel Ruterford.
S.
COccius Sabellicus. Francis Salis. Alphonsus Salmeron* Sir Edwin Sands. George
Sands. Salvianus. Josephus Scaliger. Laurentius Scalabonius. Gulielmus
Schickardus. Abrahamus Schultetus. William S^later, D. D. Josias Shute.
Nathaniel Shute. Henricus Sedulius. Obadiah Sedgwick. Luc. An. Seneca. iean de
Seres* Richard Senhouse, Carleolens. Richard Sibbs, D. D. Carol^s Sigonius.
Silius Italicus. Joh. Simson. Shadrach Simpson. Robert Skinner, Oxoniens.
Johannes Sle^danus. Miles Smith, Glocestrens. Samuel Smith. John Smith.
Socrates Scholasticus. Julius Solinus. J. Some, D. D. Sophocles. Palladius
Soranus. Sozomenus. John Speed. Speculum Exemplorum. John Spencer, D. D.
William Spotswod. S. Andreae. Henricus Spondanus. John Squire. Richardus
Stanihurstus. Thomas Stapletonus. John Staughton. D. D. Didacus Stella. Matthew.
Styles, D. D. Richard Stock. John Stow. Strabo. Gaspar Strezo. Walter
Strickland. George Strode. William Strong. Suetonius Tranquill^s. Suidas.
Sulpitius Severus. Laurentius Su^ius. Thomas Sutton, D. D. John Swan. Reginald
Swale, D. D. M. Swinburne. Fredericus Sylburgius. Aeneas Syl^ius. Archibald
Symmer. Ios. Symonds.
T.
Cornelius Tacitus. Talmud Iudaeorum. Thomas Tailor, D. D. Pub. Terentius.
Johannes Theutonicus. Tertullianus. Theodoretus. Theophraestus Eresius.
Theopompus. Hieronymus Thriverus. Thucidides. John Timberlake. Franciscus
Tolletus. Samuel Torshel. Alphonsus Tostatus. Alexand, Trallianus. Johannes
Tritenhemius. John Trap. Thomas de Trugillo. M. Tullius Cicero. Adrian.
Turnebus. Thomas Turnor, D. D. Isaac Tzetzes.
V.
J. Valentine, D. D. Valerias Maximus. Ephraem Udal. Maph. Vegius Ralph.
Venning. Polydor Vergilius. Verinus. Georgius Vetterus. Venatorius Honorius. P.
Victorius. Claudius Veixmontiu^* Richard Vines. Vincentius Burgundus.
Vitruvius. Ludovicus Vives. Rodolphus Volateranus. Flavius Vopiscus. Daniel
Votyer. Iacobus Usserius Armachan. Loys de Urretta.
W.
NAthaniel Waker. John Wall. Johannes Walchrius. Thomas Walsingham. George
Walker. Paulus de Wann. Samuel Ward. Edward Waterhouse. Thomas Watson. Anthony
Warwick. John Web, D. D. John Weemse. Thomas Wentworth. Thomas Westfield.
Bristoliens. S. Whaley. Degothy Whear. Francis White. Eliens. John White, D. D.
Thomas White. Jeremiah Whitaker. To. Willan. Michael Wigmore. John Williams.
Lincolniens. Henry Wilkinson. Andrew Willet. M. Wincop, D. D. R. Wingfield. Dr.
Winniffe. Lincolniens. I. Wilson. Thomas Wood. John Wodnote. Thomas Worrall, D.
D. Edoardus Wottonus. Sir Henry Wootton.
X.
XEnophon. Xyphilinus.
Y.
John Yates. R. Young.
Z.
HIeronymus Zanchius. Hieronymus Zeiglerus. Zenodotus. Zeno. Zonaras. Conradus
Zuingerus
KAINA KAI PALAIA. THINGS NEW AND OLD, OR A large Storehouse of Similies,
Sentences, Apologues, Allegories, Apophthegms, Adagies, Divine, Moral,
Political, etc. with their several Applications.
God to be consulted, at all times: but more especially, in the beginning of
all Public concernments.
AB Jove principium, Virgil. Eclog. 3. In praefat.
was the Law of Nature; the Gentiles were wont to begin from their Oracles and
Oratories. It was ever the style of the Civil Law, Reg. Aluredi ad leges suas.
to begin a Deo optimo maximo. Our old Saxon Laws had the ten great Precepts
of the Decalogue prefixed in their front. Sr. H. Spelman in council.
And it is said of Scipio Africanus, Aul. Gellius in noct. Attic.
that it was his custom before the day broke out, to go into the Capitol, in
cellam Iovis; and there to stay a great while, as if he were advising with his
god, concerning the Commonwealth's good. Psalm 119.
But the example of David may stand for all, who, in all his streights, Is.
Bargrave Parliament-Serm. 1624.
in all his undertakings, went to ask counsel of the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
Thus it is, that the children of God, are to consult with God, to ^uspicate all
their solemn actions, Apoc. 1. 8.
to preface all great consultations for the common good, with some such
religious Acts, as shall best conduce to the glory of God, making their
Creator, who is the Alpha and Omega of all Creatures, the beginning and ending
of all their actions.

Dreams, not to be altogether slighted.
IT is said of S. Cyprian, that in a Dream he saw the Proconfull give order to
the Clark of Affizes, Pont. Diaconus in vita ejus, ut est vid^re in ^p.
praefixa operibus ex edit. Sim.
to write down his Sentence (which was to be beheaded) which when the Clark by
signs made known to S. Cyprian, the good Bishop desired some delay of the
Execution, that he might set his house in order; and the Clark answered him in
his dream, That his Pe^ition was granted; and so it fell out accordingly, that
that day twelvemonth after he had this dream, Goulartij. House of mourning, or
Fun. Se^m^ns.
his head was struck off: Thus it has been from the beginning, that God has
been so gracious to many of his children by Dreams, or otherwise to give them
notice of their departure hence, Quae sensu volvuntur vota diurno, Tempore
nocturno reddit amica quies. Claud.
to some the has made known the year, to some the month, to some the very day
and hour; and not only so, but the manner also of their death; some per viam
lacteam by the pleasant passage of Nature, some per viam sanguineam, the blody
way of Martyrdom, etc. Dreams therefore, as they are not with Eastern people
Superstitiously to be observed, so neither are they amongst us Christians,
totally to be neglected as idle and vain nocturnall fantasies.


IT is mentioned of a City, Conr. Zvingeri. Theat. hum. Vitae.
strongly besieged by a potent Enemy, which holding long out, was brought to
extreme want, no hope of relief appeared; Famine and Sword, the two sad
concomitants of War, attended; the one without affrighting, the other within
dismaying, the poor Inhabitants; insomuch that they were even at their wits
end; and thereupon fell upon a serious consultation, Paul. De Wann. Sermon. de
Tempt.
what was best to be done for their better safety, the result whereof was this,
That there should be a considerable number of dead bodies, Speculum Exemplorum.
(of which they had great store lay starved in the streets) clapped up in
Armor, and set upon the Walls in the still time of the night, that so next
morning, the Enemies upon sight thereof, might be somewhat amazed, which fell
out accordingly; for it was thereby conceived, that some fresh supplies were
brought in to their assistance; and thereupon the Siege was raised, Peccati
mortificatio, Diaboli flagellum.
and the City relieved. This distressed City, so strongly besieged, Sedul.
Hybern.
is the Soul of Man; the potent Enemy that lies before it is the Devil, that
great Commander in chief, over all such Regiments, as the World and the Flesh
can possibly raise for his service. And what course must the poor Soul take in
such a case? Surely no other, but, consultation first had with God by Prayer,
to set out it is dead and mortified lusts and affections; and then no doubt, the
Devil, upon the sight thereof, will quit the place, and never for the time to
come, adventure his whole strength to so little purpose.


THere is a story, how that one offered to give his Horse to his fellow, Mart.
ab (...) Norvarri Concilia. in ^ap. de oratione and. horis canonicis. In
Dialogo ad Luciferium.
upon condition, he would but say the Lords Prayer, and think upon nothing but
God. The proffer was accepted, and he began; Our Father which art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name. But I must have the Bridle too, said he. No, nor the
Horse neither, said the other; for thou have lost both, already. And thus it
is, that too too many, Men and Women, in their both private and public
addresses, unto God by prayer, are by the suggestions of Satan, walking with
St. Hierom in the Galleries of Rome, having their hearts roving after pleasures
of sin, their thoughts taken up with the things of this world, and their whole
Man set upon vanity; Non vox, sed votum, etc.
whereas they should rather mind that which they are about, keep close to God,
and be so watchful and intentive over their souls, that their hearts and
tongues may go comfortably together: Esaias. 6. 5. 5. Psalm. 4. 1. 2.
For, the outward work only, is but like the loathsome smoke of Sodom;
whereas the inward devotion of the heart, is not unfitly compared to the
pleasant perfume, of the sweetest Frankincense.


AS in Nature so in Government, Nothing is permanent that is violent; It is
therefore hard to see an old Tyrant, Aver. Metaph. Thales Miles. Foelix
criminibus nullus erit diu. Ausonius. Plin. not hist. lib. 8. cap. 11.
was the saying of a Wiseman; And good reason had he for so saying. For though
for a time he may uphold his State by force and policy, yet in the end divine
Justice confounds his practices and infatuates his counsels to his own ruin
and overthrow; For, as in that mortal war between the great Elephant and
poysonfull Dragon, this one with his ta^le enclaspeth that others feet, making
him fall, and he in his fall bursteth himself, and cursheth that other in
pieces: So when Ambition and Envy meet as Combatants in the heart of a Man, Sir
Rob. Dallington's Aphorisms.
he needs no outward force to assail him; For the venomous tail of his Envy
entangleth the winged sect of his Ambition, making him fall, Ingens mole sua,
etc.
and in the fall to burst with his own weight.

Policy above strength.
THe Dolphin finding himself unable to hurt the Crocodile, Plin. not. hist.
Lib. 8. Chap. 25.
by reason of his hard scales which no weapon can pierce, diveth under him, and
with his sharp fin strikes him into the belly being Soft and tender, and so
kills him. Thus, what Nature taught the Creature, Experientia docet.
Experience has taught Man; To strike the Enemy where he may, Militem
privatum, non solum debere esse volentem, etc.
with most hurt; and leave things impossible unattempted; for Prudence is of
force, where Force prevails not; Policy goes beyond strength, and contrivance
before action: Hence is it, that direction is left to the Commander, Execution
to the Soldier, who is not to ask Why, Zenoph. Cyropaed, Lib. 2.
but to do What he is commanded.

The state of a kingdomc or Commonwealth known best by the administration of
Justice.
THe Constitution of a Man's body is best known by his pul^e; Iean. Bodin. de
la Republique. Justitia Remp. firmat.
if it stir not at all, then we know he is dead; if it stir violently, then
we know him to be in a Fever; Ant. Bonfinius, Lib. 3. rerum. Hungar.
if it keep an equal stroke* then we know he is sound and whole: In like
manner we may judge of the state of a Kingdom, or Commonweal, by the manner
of execution of Justice therein, for Justice is the pulse of a Kingdom; If
Justice be violent, then the kingdom is in a Fever, in a bad estate; if it
stir not at all, then the Kingdom is dead; but if it have an equal stroke,
the just and ordinary course, then the Kingdom is in a good condition, Jer: 22.
15.
it is sound and whole without the least corruption imaginable.

The prevalency of fervent Prayer.
SOcrates tells that when a terrible fire in Constantinople had fastened on a
great part of the City and took hold of the Church, Lib. 7. Chap. 28.
the Bishop thereof went to the Altar, and falling down upon his knees, I.
White Sermon. at St. Paul^s London. 1612.
would not rise from thence, till the fire blazing in the Windows, and
flashing at every door, was vanquished, and the Church preserved, Flectitur
iratus voce rogante Deus. Ovid.
so that with the floods of his devotion he slaked the fury of that raging
Element: And the same shall be the force of Englands prayers, for Englands
peace and welfare, if we be fervent therein; Heretics and Schismatics may
range, Enemies conspire, and the People rise up in tumults; Psalm. 50^^5.
but let us trust in him that never forsakes them, that faithfully call upon
his holy name.

God only to be seen in Christ Jesus.
A Man cannot behold the Sun in the Eclipse, it so dazeleth his eyes; Rich.
Holdsworth. Sermon. at St. Paul's Lon. 1624.
What does he then? He sets down a basin of water, and sees the image of the
Sun shadowed in the Water: So seeing we cannot behold the infinite God, nor
comprehend him, we must then cast the eyes of our Faith upon his image, Christ
Jesus; When we look into a clear glass, it casts no shadow to us; Videmus
D^um per Christum, etc.
but put steel upon the back, then it casts a reflex, and shows the face
in the glass: So when we cannot see God himself, Fulgent.
we must put the Manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ (as it were a back to his
Godhead) and then we shall have a comfortable reflex of his glory.

Riches avail not in the day of Wrath.
IT is said, that there stands a Globe of the World at one end of the Library
in Dublin, D. Staughtons Sermon.
and a Skeleton of a Man at the other; there it is, that one need not study
long for a good lesson. Haud ullas portabit opes Acherontis ad undas, Propert.
And what lesson is that? Though a Man were Lord of all that he sees in the Map
of the world, yet he must dye, and become himself a Map of Mortality: And
therefore, if the Devil tempt him with a View of the glory of the World,
Matthew. 4.
Omnia haec tibi dabo; he may resist him with the words of our Savior, Sed
quid proderit homini? etc? What will it profit a Man to win the whole world,
Mark. 8. 36.
and to lose his own soul?


A Tender hearted Father walking with his little Son, B. White Sermon at St.
Paul's. London. 1617
suppose in the City, when he perceives him gaze up and down, and wander from
him, withdraws himself behind some pillar, or hides himself in some corner of
the street; not that he means to lose him, but to make him cry and seek after
him, and keep closer to him afterward: So does our heavenly Father with us, he
corrects every son whom he loves, he hides himself, Exigu^ percussus
fulminis ictu Fortior ut possit cladibus esse suis. Ovid. ep.
and, as it were, pulls in the beams of his Gracious favor for a time, when
we are rambling about in our thoughts, and (...) in our imaginations; but it
is to make us cry after him the louder, and to keep closer to him for the time
to come, and to walk more circumspectly than ever we did before.


IF a Man stain were found in the field, Deu^. 21. 7.
and it not known who slew him, God provided That the Elders of the next City
should wash their hands in the blood of an Hey^er, and say; Our hands have not
shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it: be merciful O Lord unto thy
people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
People of Israel's charge; Ephesians. ^^dal. Ser. at Mercers Chapel. London 1642.
and the blood shall be forgiven them. So this, one day, will be a comfort to
the Consciences of all well minded men, that they may appeal, to the great God
of heaven, that they have prayed heartily for peace, have Petitioned humbly for
peace, Pa^^m te poscimus omnes.
have been contented to pay dearly for peace, and to their powers, have
endeavored to refrain from sins, the only breakers of Peace; and therefore
trust that the Christian, English, Protestant blood which has already been,
and hereafter may be shed, shall never be visited on their score, or laid to
their charge.


DAngerous was the mistake committed by Sir Francis Drake in 88. when,
neglecting to carry the Lanthorn (as he was commanded,) in the dark, Tho.
Fuller Holy State.
he chased five hulks of the Dutch Merchants, ubi virtus discretionis perditur,
etc.
supposing them to have been of his Enemies the Spaniards: such and worse
Errors may be committed in the Reforming of a Church or Commonwealth; good
mistaken for bad, Greg. lib. 3. moral.
and bad mistaken for good; where the light of knowledge is wanting for
direction.


IT was wont to be a Trial, Rich, Stainihurst, de rebus Hybern.
whether land belonged to England, or Ireland, by putting in Toads, or Snakes,
or any other venomous Creature into it: and if they lived there, it was
concluded, that the land belonged to England; if they died, to Ireland. Romans 6.
12.
So, if venomous Lusts live in us, if sin reign in our mortal bodies, we
belong to Hell; Jos. Shute, Sermon at S. Mary. Wolnoth L^mbards^^eet, London,
1619. John 14. 2.
but if they die by Mortification, if there be no life in them, then shall we be
sure to set up our eternal rest in Heaven, and be made heirs of Heaven, and
have full possession of those Mansions, which Christ our elder brother has
prepared for us.

God's way, the safe way to walk in.
IF a Man, traveling in the King's highway, be robbed between Sun and Sun,
satisfaction is recoverable upon the County, R. Skinner, Sermon. at Court, 1626.
where the robbery was made, but, if he takes his journey in the night, Via
divine* via (...)
being an unseasonable time, then it is his own peril, he must take what
falls. So, if a man keep in God's ways, he shall be sure of God's protection;
but if he stray out of them, he exposes himself to danger.

God's time, the best time for deliverance.
THe Physician turns the hour-glasse, and resolves the physic shall work so
long; R. Stock, Sermon. at Alhallowes Breads^^. Lon. 1616.
the impatient Patient (...), and thinks every hour two, till he be refreshed;
but the other knows the fittest time, and will not till then afford any
comfort at all. Thus the children of God cry out in the midst of their heavy
pressures, Rev. 6. 10.
How long, Lord, how long? Shall the rod of the wicked lie always upon the
back of the righteous? Psalm. 125. 3, Tempus (...) tempus opportunum.
But he has turned the glass, he will not hearken to their cry; they must
stay their time, he knows best when and how to deliver them; had they but so
much Faith as to believe it, or Patience to wait for it.

The difference betwixt Spiritual and carnal Prayers, in respect of Answer.
CHildren shoot arrows on purpose to (...) them, and never so much as look
where they light; but Men, when they shoot, aim at the mark, and go after the
arrow, to see how near it falls: So, wicked carnal men, when they have said,
not made, their prayers to Almighty God, it is but Opus operatum, Edw. Wilkison
Sermon. at St. Paul's Land. 1639.
they have no more regard of them: But God's children, when they, upon the
bended knees of their ^ouls, dart out their Prayers, when they pour out their
requests unto him, they look after their Prayers, eye them up into Heaven,
observe how God entertains them; and wait for a happy return, at his good will
and pleasure.

God's knowledge, and Man's knowledge, the difference in event of things.
IN a sheet- Almanac, D. Price Sermon. at Christ-Church Land. 1620.
and man may uno intuntu, at one view, see all the months in the year, both
past and to come; but in a book- Almanac, as he turns to one month, so he
turns from another, and can but look only on the present. This is the true
difference betwixt the knowledge of God and Man; 1 John 3. 20.
he looks in one instant of time to things past, present, and future; 1 Cor.
2. 11.
but the knowledge of Man reaches only to a few things past, and present, but
knows nothing at all of things that are to come, that is God's peculiar so to
do, and a piece of Learning too high for any mortal man to attain unto.

Riches, Honors, Preferments, etc. transitory.
THe great Conqueror of the world caused to be painted on a Table, Plutarch in
vita Alexandri.
a Sword in the compass of a Wheel; showing thereby, that what he had gotten
by the Sword, Jos. Shure Sermon. at St. Paul's Land. 1619.
was subject to be turned about by the wheel of Fortune. Such is the condition
of all things here below, whether they be Riches, Honors, or Preferments,
there is no more hold to be had of them, than Saul had of Samuel's lap; they do
but like the Rainbow, Act. 20.
show themselves in all their dainty colors, Nihil in vitae durabile* non
opes, non honores,
and then vanish away; and if by chance they stay with us as long as death,
they do but like Saint Paul 's friends, bring us to the grave, as they brought
him to the ship, and there leave us: So uncertain, non potentia, etc. Constable.
Minos, Annal.
deceitful, unconstant, are the things of this world, to the owners thereof.


THe Church of Christ (says St. Hilary) is aptly resembled to a Ship, Com. in
Matthew. chap. 13.
for as the Ship is small in the fore-deck, Boys. Postills. Terras Astr^^
reliquit.
broad in the middle, little in the stern: so the Church in her beginning was
exceeding little, in her middle age flourishing; but in her old age, Luke 18. ^.
her company will be so small, and her belief so weak, that when the Son of
man shall come to judge the ^ons of men, he shall scarce find faith on the
earth.


THemistocles intending to sell a Farm, Plutarch in Apophth^gm. Ant, in
Melissa. p. 2. Sermon. 33. T. Westfield, Sermon. at St.
(as Plutarch has it) caused the Crier to proclaim, that it had amongst other
commodities, A good Neighbor, as being assured, that this one circumstance
would be advantageous to the sale, and much induce the Chapman to purchase it.
And surely, he that has a good Neighbor, has a good morrow; but, (...) Land.
1641.
a Minister that lives amongst such, has got a rich Benefice; he may
acknowledge with David, (rebus sic stantibus) that his Lot is fallen into a
fair ground; Psalm. 120.
and bless God, that he is not a brother to the Dragons, and a companion to
the Estriges of the times; nor constrained to his great grief to dwell with
Meshec^, and to have his habitation amongst the tents of Kedar.


THe bunch of grapes that the Spies of the children of Israel carried from the
land of Promise, Numb. 13.
(it is Luther's observation) was born by two strong men upon a pole or staff;
John Boys, (...)
he that went before could not see the grapes, Mar. Luth. in loc. com. de
Christo.
but he that was behind might both see and eat them. So the Fathers,
Patriarcks, and Prophets of the Old Testament, did not in like manner see the
bunch of Grapes, that was the Son of God made man, Plus vident oculi qu^m
oculus.
as they that came behind, the Evangelists, Apostles, Disciples, under the New
Testament, both saw and tasted it, after John had showed this Grape, Joh. I. 1^.
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.


AS a passenger in a storm, that for shelter against the weather, steppeth out
of the way, betaketh him to a fair spread Oak, stands under the boughs, with
his back close to the body of it, and finds good relief thereby for the
space of some time; till at length comes a sudden gust of wind, that
^eareth down a main arm of it, which falling upon the poor passenger, either
maimeth or mischieveth him, Th. Gataker's Parley with Princes.
that resorted to it for succor. Thus falls it out not with a few, meeting
in the world with many troubles, and with manifold vexations, they step asiae
out of their own way, and too too often out of Gods, to get under the wing of
some great one, and gain, it may be, some aid and shelter thereby for a season;
but after a while, that great one himself coming down headlong, and falling
from his former height of favor, Nulla fides pi^tasque viris, etc.
or honor, they are also called in question, and so fall together with him,
that might otherwise have stood long enough on their own legs, if they had not
trusted to such an arm of flesh, such a br^ken staff, that deceived them.


RIches, Th. Ga^aker's True Contentment in God's way, a Sermon. 1619.
though they have alas Aquilinas, great Eagle's wings, to fly away from us
whilst we are here in this world, yet have n^ Passerinas quidem, not so much as
little Sparrowes wings to fly after us, and follow us when we go hence. Nihil
attulisti, nihil hinc at^olles, Job 1. 21.
We brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any thing hence.
(...) tellus and domus, etc.
Naked came we (...) world, and (...) naked must we return again. Hora^. c^^.
2. 3.


Not to be over hasty in the desire of Justice, for wrongs sustained.
AS one that has been either robbed himself, (...)
or that has his friend murdered, If he have the party apprehended, Evang.
and said fast in prison, is not presently out of patience, Eccles. 8. 11.
because he ^eeth him not instantly executed, but is well content quietly to
expect the time of the Assizes, Th. Gataker's Appeal from Princes to God.
though it be half a year after, as long as he is sure, that he shall then have
Justice against him. So ought we not presently to fly out, because evil doers
prosper, or grow impatient, i^ we see not justice done instantly, so soon as
our hasty hearts shall require it, upon those we suppose have wronged us; but
rest content to stay God's leisure, and to expect that day of his great Assize,
when we shall be sure to have justice done us, according to that which the
equity of our cause shall require; Carcer ejus est cor ejus.
. remembering withal, that all wicked ones are in the mean while in this world,
Bernard
as in God's Jayle, under the chains of a guilty conscience, out of which
there is no possible means of escape, without judgment.

God^s favor above the world's contentments, to a godly man.
THe old Grecians, Eustath. in Homeri Iliad ^ Th: Gataker's Gain of godliness:
that had fed altogether on Achorns before, after that bread came in amongst
them, they made no reckoning of their mast any more, but kept it only for
their swine: And leathern and iron money began to grow out of request amongst
the Lacedaemonians, after that gold and silver came in use. So when a man has
once found the favor of God in his heart, Seneca de benefic.
and the love of God in Christ has once lighted on it, Virtutibus a^rum vilius.
and got assurance of it, he cease then to be greedy of this worlds trash,
which is, in regard of it, but as dross, or peeble stones, to gold and
diamonds, Horat.
as mast to the best bread-corn; yea, rather of far less worth or value to
that, than either of these are to it.

A good Heart is a melting Heart.
IT is observed, B. Hall occasional Meditat. Vilius argentum est auro.
that gold is both the fairest, and the most solid of all Mettalls, yet is the
soonest melted with the fire; others, as they are coorser, so more churlish,
and hard to be wrought on by a dissolution. Thus a sound and a good heart is
easily melted into fear and sorrow for sin, Horat.
by the sense of God's judgments, whereas the carnal mind is stubborn and
remorselesse. All mettalls are but earth, yet some are of a finer temper than
other; all hearts are flesh, yet some are through the power of grace, more
capable of spiritual apprehensions, than others are.

An idle man subject to the least temptation.
SEt a narrow mouthed glass near to a Bee-hive, B. Hall, ut antea.
and you shall soon perceive how busily the Wasps resort to it, being drawn
thither by the smell of that sweet liquor, wherewith it is baited; and how
eagerly they creep into the mouth of it, and fall down suddenly from that
slippery steepinesse, into that warry trap, from which they can never rise; but
after some vain labor and weariness, they drown and die: Now there are none
of the Bees that so much as look that way, they pass directly to their hive,
without any notice taken of such a pleasing bait. Thus idle and ill disposed
persons, In promptu causa est, etc.
are easily drawn away with every temptation, they have both leisure and will
to entertain every sweet allurement to sin, and wantonly prosecute their own
wicked lusts, Ovid.
till they fall into irrecoverable damnation; Variam semper dant otia mentem.
Lucan.
whereas the diligent and laborious Christian, that follows hard and
conscionably the works of an honest calling, is free from the danger of those
deadly enticements, and lays up honey of comfort against the winter of evil.


SAint Basil complained of the covetous rich in his age, Sermon. in divites (...).
because they preferred only that kind of devotion, I. Boys Sermont.
which is without cost; as, to pray for fashion, and fast out of
miserableness; but they would not offer one halfpenny to the poor. Such are
to be found in our days, (...)
who are content to hear God's Word read, and preached, with their hatts on
their heads, and leaning on their elbowes, and (if need be) they will make
bitter invectives against Atheism and Popery; yet they are willing to serve God
with that which cost them naught: Let but the Parish impose an ordinary charge,
toward the necessary repairs of the Church, or the Pastor desire but some oil
for his lamp, accustomed Offerings for his better subsistence, you shall have
them as a bulrush in a wet place, so dry, that a penny is as easily skrewed
from them, as a new coat from a child, or a sword from a soldier enraged.


WE read in our Chronicles of King Oswald, Bedae hist. lib. 3. cap. 6.
that as he sat at Table, when a fair silver dish, full of regal delicacies,
was set before him, and he ready to fall to, hearing from his Almoner, that
there were great store of Poor at his gates, pitiously crying out for some
relief, did not fill them with words, as, God help them, Jam. 2. 16.
God relieve them, God comfort them, etc. but commanded his Steward presently,
to take the dish off the Table, and distribute the meat, then beat the dish all
in pieces, R. Holdsworth Sermon. at S. Peter po^r.
and cast it among them. This was true charity. Words, be they never so
adorned, cloth not the naked; be they never so delicate, feed not the hungry;
be they never so zealous, Land. 1630.
warm not him that is starved with cold; be they never so oily, Verbis non
solvendum est quidquam. Terence.
cure not the wounded; be they never so free, set not them free that are bound,
visit not the sick or imprisoned.


BEfore the destruction of the holy City and the Temple, I^ lib. de (...) I^d.
Josephus wirteth of a man troubled in mind, that ran about the City, crying,
Woe to the City, Woe to the Temple, Woe to the Priests, Woe to the People; and last
of all, Woe to myself: at which words, he was slain on the Walls by a stone out
of a sling. Let us take away but one letter, D. Featly Clavis mystica. Divide
and impara. Machiav. Mark 3. 24.
turning WOE into O, and his prophecy may prove our admonition: O that the
World, O that this Nation in the World, O that this great City of the Nation, O
that both City and Country would yet be wise, and lay it to their hearts, that
our distractions will prove our destructions; That a Kingdom divided within it
self cannot long stand.


THe Naturalists observe, Plinius, (...)
that the Females of Birds oftentimes lay eggs without Cocks, but they are Ov^
subventanea, eggs filled with wind, unfit to be hatched. Such is the issue of
most men's love now adays, it brings forth Partus subventaneos, windy brats,
good words, large promises, and happy wishes, but no deeds, little or no
performance at all.


IT is a thing that the Emperor Caligula is laughed at in all Stories: Sueton
hist. Xyphilinus, house of mourning.
There was a mighty Navy provided, well Manned and Victualled; and every one
expected, that the whole Country of Greece should have been invaded, and so it
might have been: but the Emperor had another design in hand, and employed his
Soldiers to gather a company of Cockle-shells, and pibble stones, and so
returned home again. Just such another Voyage does almost every man make here
in this World, were the particulars but truly cast up, Discite in hoc mundo
supra mundum esse, etc.
God has given us so much time, it may be twenty, thirty, or forty years; it
may be but a day, or two more: In this time, he has furnished us with that,
which may be a means to conquer Heaven it self: Ambros. lib. de Virg.
Now if we lay out this little only about wife, or children, or to purchase a
little wealth, is not this to spend money for that which is not bread? to
labor for that which satisfies not? Is not this the greatest folly that may
be?

No personal security to be had, in time of public danger.
CIcero in his time laughed at the folly of those men, Lib. 1. epist. 15. ad
Atticum.
Qui amissa Republica priscinas suas fore salvas sp^rare videntur, who seemed
to conceive such a windy hope, that their Fish Ponds, and places of Pleasure
should be safe, when the Common wealth was lost. Preface to the B. of Winchest.
Sermon.
And we may well mourn over the security of most men in our times, such as look
for personal safety, in the midst of public danger; that take more care for
their trifling fardells, Res tua tunc agitur, etc.
than the preservation of the ship they go in: But let such know for certain,
that if the Public suffer either in Church or State, no man's private;
pleasure or profit can stand firm unto him; no man's, whatsoever he be.

Governors, as they are qualified, are a curse or a blessing to any People.
JOsephus reports, In lib. Antiquit.
that Solomon being but twelve years of age, when he first began to govern, the
People listening to that Sentence which he gave, at his first sitting in
judgment, touching the two women that contested about their child, Dividatur
aequaliter, Let the child be cut in twain, many laughed at it, deeming it to be
a childish Sentence; 1 King. 3. 26.
but afterward, weighing the discreet course that he had taken, in justifying
the truth, without any further proof or testimonies, they then cried out,
Cuspinianus.
De coelo elapsus, The King is sent us down from Heaven. But on the other side,
there was one Phocas, a most cruel Emperor of Constantinople; whereupon a
religious Monk, in a corner of his Cell, thus complains unto God, Cur fecisti
eum Imperatorem? Why did thou make him Emperor? Who had no sooner made his
moan, Christ. ^onse cae Quadrag^s^ma.
but was answered with a voice from Heaven, Non inveni pejorem, I could not
find a worse. And certainly, nothing can more manifest the love of God unto a
People or Nation, than in having given them wise and religious Governors;
Delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi.
and there cannot be a more plain argument of his wrathful displeasure, than
to cast a wicked Ruler over the People; for, as God is pleased with a People,
he gives them Governors accordingly.

Tyranny, Oppression, Murder, etc. are not long lived.
THales Milesius, Plutarch in Convi.
the prime wise man of Greece, being demanded, What he had observed to be of
most difficulty in the world, Diogen. Laert. in Vita. Psalm. 55.
answered, Tyrannum senem, To see a Tyrant live to be an old man. Thus, if
cruelty and oppression, sacrilege and profaneness, Sine caede and sanguine
pauci Descendunt Reges and sicca morte Tyranni,
murder and manslaughter, promise to themselves long life, it is a wonder, and
more than God has warranted: For, Sanguinarii non dimidiabunt dies suos,
Blood-thirsty men shall not live out half their days. Juvenal.


God^s Children must have God's qualities.
THe Roman Censors took such a dista^t at the son of Africanus, Ammian.
Marcellin.
for his debauched life, that they took a Ring off his finger, in which the
image of (...) father was engraven; because he so much degenerated from his
father's excellent parts, they would not suffer him to wear his father's
picture in a Ring, whose image he bare not in his mind. D. Featly Sermons.
Neither will God suffer any to bear his Name, and be accounted His Sons, who
bear not His Image, who resemble not His Attributes in their virtues, Et quae
non fecimus ipsi vix ea nostra voco.
His Simplicity in their sincerity, His Immutability in their constancy, His
Purity in their chastity, His Goodness in their charity, His Justice in their
integrity, etc.


WHen Cyrus took the King of Armenia, Xenoph. cyro (...). lib. 3.
and his son Tigranes, and their wives and children prisoners, and upon their
humble submission, beyond all hope, gave them their liberty and their lives; in
their return home, as they all fell a commending Cyrus, some for his personage,
some for his puissance, some for his clemency; Tigranes asked his wife, What
think thou of Cyrus? is he not a comely and a proper man, of a majestic
presence? Truly (said she) I know not what manner of man he is, I never looked
on him. Why, quoth he, where were the eyes all the while? upon whom did thou
look? I fixed my eyes, says she, all the while upon him, (meaning her husband)
who in my hearing offered to Cyrus, to lay down his life for my ransom. And
thus* if any question the devout soul, whether she be not enamoured with the
beauty of Cherubins, Seraphins, Angels and Saints, with the pomp and splendor
of that Heavenly Court; D. Featly, ut antea.
her answer will be that of Tigranes his wife, That she never did so much as
cast a look upon them, Si Christum discis, satis est (...) ^aetera n^scis.
because her eyes were never off Him, who not only offered to lay, but did lay
down his life for her, and ransomed her with his own blood: Whom should she
have in Heaven but Him, who has none on Earth but her?


THe Panther carries with him a sweet sent, Plinii not. hist. lib 8. cap. 17.
but an ugly face; that, enticeth beasts after him; this, affrights them:
therefore he hides his head, till he have the prey within danger. Rob.
Dallington's Aphorisms.
So is the favor of sovereignty and greatness very sweet, but the ugly face
of those means by which it is gotten, men see not; and so run into the Toil,
and perish in the pursuit: For, being once embarked in so bad a cause, Nec
^nim lex justior ulla est, etc. Ovid.
the farther they wade, the deeper they are drowned in the whirlpool of their
own errors; the more they weave in the Loom of such deceitful plots, the
faster they are ensnared in the trap devised for others.


HOw sick soever a man be with Physic, Lud. ^ Granada meditat.
he is not afraid of dying, because he considers, the Physician in wisdom
gave him, what now occasioneth his present sickness and distemper. No more
should we be dismayed at the bitterness of our cup, Superanda omnis fortuna
ferendo est. Virg.
if (with Christ) we did but take notice: It is the Cup that our heavenly
Father has mingled, and has given us only for our correction, not confusion.


AUgustus the Emperor hearing, Macrob. Sat. lib. 2. cap. 4.
that a Gentleman of Rome, notwithstanding a great burden of debt, wherewith
he was oppressed, slept quietly, and took his ease, desired to buy the bed that
the lodged on: His servants marvailing thereat, D. King, lect. on Jonah.
he gave them this answer, That it seemed unto him to be some wonderful bed,
and worth the buying, wher^on a man could sleep, that was so deeply engaged.
Surely, if we did but consider with our selves, the duty and debt we owe to
God, to Man, to our Country, to our Family, to home-born and strangers,
especially to the household of Faith, it would make us vow with our selves,
never to suffer our eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of our heads to take
any rest, until we have finished that charge whereunto we are appointed, and
perfected the account, wherewith we are entrusted.


IT is said of the Pismires, Th. Mouffe^'s Insector.
that to prevent the growing (and so the corrupting) of that corn which they
hoord up for their winter-store, they bite off both the ends thereof, wherein
the generating power of the grain does consist. Tho. Fuller's Holy State.
Thus, when we have committed any sin, we must pray to God so to order it, that
the procreation thereof may be destroyed, and that by a true and unfeigned
sorrow, we may condemn it to a blessed barrenness, that there be no more of
the breed.

More care for the Body than the Soul, condemned.
APelles, the famous Painter of Greece, Clem, Alexan. Paedog. lib. 2. cap. 12.
having observed, that one of his Scholars had painted Helena, set out with
much gold and embroidery, said unto him, O adolescens, quum non possis pingere
pulchram, fecisti divitem; Ala^s poor young man, Mich. Jemin. Com. on* Prove.
when thou could not draw her fair, thou have made her rich. Thus many do
set a fair outside on the body, and utterly neglect the inside of the soul;
pamper the body, but starve the soul; trick up the body with gold and silver,
whilst the soul is naked of all grace and goodness.

The baseness of Ingratitude.
AThenaeus reports of Milesius, Deipnosoph. lib. 13.
that having bought a Dolphin alive, and letting him go again into the Sea;
Mich. Jermin. ut ante^.
afterward, himself being cast away by shipwreck, and ready to perish in the
midst of the waters, Ingratus vir ^^lium est perforatum. Lucianus.
the Dolphin took him, and carried him safe to the shore. But, though it be
more than probable, that the truth has suffered shipwreck in this narration,
yet the application is good; That it is more than beastly ingratitude for any
man, to reward evil for good, not to be thankful for a courtesy received.

Every man to speak Truth to his neighbor.
IN the body of Man, Mich. Jermin. ut antea.
one Member will not lie to another, the hand will not lie, in telling what it
touches; the tongue will not lie, in telling what it tastes; the eye will not
lie, Quae vera sunt, loqui, virum ingenuum decet. Ephesians. 4. 25.
in telling what it sees; but every Member is a true witness to another, a
true witness to his neighbor. And thus it should be in the body Politic of
Government and Society, in the Mystical body of the Church and Christianity,
that seeing we are members one with another, every one should speak the truth
to his neighbor; and such should be the care of those especially, as profess
Christianity, as to lose their breath, rather than to use their breath, in
speaking any untruth of another.

A little with God's blessing goes far.
IT was a good saying of that poor woman, Page 1874. edit. ult.
in the Book of Martyrs, who being threatened to have but a little bread one
day, and a little water on the next; replied, Th. Plummer a Sermon. at St. Paul's
Land. 1616.
If you take away my meat, God, I hope, will take away my hunger: If God give
but a little, he can make that little serve the turn, and then enough is as
good as a feast. Well then, is thy provision small? thy appetite shall be
less. Is there but a little meal in the barrel, a little oil in the cruse?
God will make it hold out. Is that little coorse, Natura pauci^ contenta.
and none of the finest? Brown bread and the Gospel (said Mr. Greenham) is
good cheer; Iovis omnia plena.
and indeed, Brown bread, and the blessing of God, is a rich banquet. It is not
the greatness and daintiness of the fare, Virgil.
nor the clothing in soft raiment, but God's good blessing that does nourish
and strengthen the body of man. God makes bread to be a staff and a stay to
satiate the righteous man, when the wicked may have the staff broken to them,
Prove. 13. 25.
but the ^^ay taken away; they eat, and are not satisfied; they drink, but
their thirst is nothing at all quenched.

The things of this World, a great stop in the way to Heaven.
AS the Reubenites, Numb. 23.
having taken a liking of the Country which was first conquered, because it was
commodious to the feeding of their Cattle, (though it were far from the Temple,
Joh. Downham 's Warfare.
where they might have ^ed their ^ouls) and therefore to enjoy it, renounced
all interest in the land of Promise. Thus do the worldly Reubenites of our
times, Solum non Coelum amatur.
they their hea^^s and affections upon the earth, and earthly vanities, Rhemig.
Rhe^.
because they are at hand, and fit to feed their sensual and brutish
appetites, preferring it before the heavenly Canaan, and Temple of God's
holiness, where their ^ouls might be satisfied with those ravishing joys, and
transcendent pleasures, which are at God's right hand for evermore.


THere is mention made of two famous Philosophers, Plutarch de cohibenda ir^.
falling at variance, Aristippus and Aeschines: Aristippus comes to Aeschines,
Shall we be friends? Yes, with all my heart, says Aeschines. Remember (says
Aristippus) that though I am your elder, yet I sought for peace. True, says
Aeschines; and for this, I will always acknowledge you to be the more worthy
man; for I began the strife, and you the peace. This was a Pagan glass, Je^^m*
Borough 's Heart- divisions.
but may very well serve a great many fiery spirited Christians, to see their
blemishes in. How usual is it now for a man to say, I will be revenged upon
such or such a one, (...).
he has done me wrong, I will be even with him: and so he may too. But I Will
show him a way how he may be above him. How Is that? Forgive him; for by
yielding, pardoning, putting up the wrong, he shows power over his passion,
over himself, and that is a far greater thing, than to have power over another.


LOok upon a candle; R. Prior.
how it fails before it be well lighted, or is drowned with much moisture, A
Sermon. at the Funer. of B^. Smith, 1632. Vive memor lethi, hoc quod loquor inde
est. Persius.
or is puffed out with the wind, or is extinguished by the hand of man, or
goes out of its own accord. So Man, if not entombed in his mothers belly,
dies not in the cradle, withers not growing up, be not conquered when ablest
to conquer, but does hold out till old age; then, die he must. Una via vitae,
shut the door of the Womb, and then no entrance into this World; but being
here, moriendi mill figurae, so many are the passages hence, that there is no
stopping of them: So that poor, fragil, weak man, is always in a dying
condition, he dies daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31.


THe Eagle before he sets upon the Heart, Plin. not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 20.
Th. Play^er's Sermon.
rolleth himself in the sand, and then flies at the Stagg's head, and by
fluttering his wings, so dustyeth his eyes, that he can see nothing, and so
strikes him with his tal^ns where he lists. You may read of an unclean
Spirit in the Gospel, Mat. 12. 43. Ovid. Metam.
which led the possessed man into dry places. Now the sand and the dust, with
which this Eagle the Devil fills his wings, are earthly desires, and
sensual pleasures, wherewith after he has put out the eyes of the carnal
man, he deals with him at his pleasure. Mercury could not kill Argus, till he
had cast him into a sleep, and with an enchanted rod closed his eyes; and the
devil cannot hurt any man, till he have lulled him asleep in security.


TWo men playing at Tables by an inch of candle in the night time, Gabr.
Inchinus de quat. novissimis.
and being very earnest in their game, the candle goes out, and they perforce
give over, Si nunquam moreretur, etc. Bern. (...). ^52.
who (no doubt) if the light had lasted, would have played all night very
willingly. This inch of candle is the time of life, allotted to a wicked man,
who is resolved to spend it all in sinful pleasures and pastimes; and, if it
would last perpetually, he would never lea^e his play: And therefore since he
would sin eternally (though by reason the light of his life goes out, he
cannot) he deserves eternal punishment.

Civil dissension, attended by uncivil destruction.
IT is said of the Cranes, Aristot. (...).
that when they fall out amongst themselves, the fight is so fearful and
fierce, that they beat down one another, and so are taken as they fight. This
shows the fruits of civil dissentions, the case of such as will diviae one
against another, till they become a prey to the public Enemy; whereof the
Apostle gives warning, Gal. 5. 15.
If ye bite and devour one another, take ^eed lest ye be consumed one of
another.

A poor Child of God com^orted with the hopes of Heaven.
IT was a comfortable speech which the Emperor used to Galba in his childhood
and minority, Sueton in vita Cl. Nero.
when he took him by the chin, and said; Tu, Galba, quandoque imperium
degustabis; Wal^. Soul's ornament, a Sermon. 1616. Magna tamen spes est in
bonitate Dei:
Thou Galba shall one day sit upon a Throne. Thus it cheareth the Saints of
God, how little, how mean soever in the eyes of the World, that they shall one
day reign with Christ, and be installed with him, and receive as it were
Stallum in Choro, and vocem in Capitulo, a seat in the Quire, and a voice in
the Chapter of that blessed Temple which is above, whilst the whole world shall
cry with those, Ovid. epist. Theodoret. hist. lib. 6. cap. 22.
Vicit Deus, and Christus ejus, The Lord and his Christ has got the victory,
the Lord and his Saints do reign for evermore.

God's choice of eminent Persons to be exemplary to all others.
WHen God is disposed to hang up a Picture in his Church, Joh. Williams B.
Lincoln.
to be well observed of all that shall come after, Sermon. at a Fast, Westminster. 162^.
that the people which shall be born may praise the Lord, he does it not by
limming and painting, but by the art of cutting and embroyderie: For, the
Painter deals but in colors, ordinary colors, which, according to the
strength of his imagination, he tempers, and lays out to the view of the eye;
but the Embroiderer, he deals in more costly matter, takes the cloth of gold
and silver, which he mangles into a thousand pieces, bits, and fragments, to
frame and set out his curious Imagery. So Almighty God being to adorn his
Church, not with blocks and stones, but with some rare pictures of Christian
virtues, works not these in ordinary colors, men of low degree; but in gold
and silver, men of eminency, Princes, and Nobles, and great Estates. Abraham,
Genesis 22. 12.
a great, rich, and mighty man, a Patriarck of his Country, was first tempted
in his son, Numb. 12. 3.
and then set up for an example of obedience. Moses, another Prince and
Potentate, was first afflicted in Egypt, and then erected in the Church for an
image of meekness. David, a King, first persecuted by Saul, and then accounted
a statue of uprightness. Job, the greatest man in all the East, was, and many
others since him, have been pulled in pieces with a thousand miseries, but in
the latter end shall be blessed up, as patterns of patience and princely
resolution. These are such as God first mangles, and cuts into bits and pieces,
with crosses, calamities, and deep temptations; but afterward, when he finds
them supplied and humbled with sorrow and repentance, he makes up again into
most heavenly and angelical forms and images, to be looked on by us, in the
Church Militant, and to look upon Him in the Church Triumphant.

The Church's Enemies are in God^s hands.
THe story sets out Neptune in a Statue, Vinc. Cartari. Imagini de Dei (...)
Antichi.
holding those two terrors of the Sea, Scylla and Charibdis in chains, with
this inscription, as if calling to the ships: Pergite securae per freta nostra
rates.
Ships, securely saylon
Through our watery Ocean.


And let all drooping spirits lift up themselves in this assurance, Job 41. 2.
that God holds the Church's enemies in chains, having his hook in their
nose, Esa. 37. 29.
and his bridle in their lips; Ad cujus tonitrua contremiscunt, etc.
so that when they seem to be beyond and above all bounds and limits
whatsoever, even then, Tertul. ad Scapulam, cap. 28.
if he do but utter his voice, in token of his commanding power, it is enough
to make their Chariot-wheels drive heavy, and to crush them into Atoms.


AS the morning Star in the midst of the clouds, B. King's lect. on Jonah.
and as the Moon when it is at full; as the flower of the Roses in the spring
of the year, and as the Lillies by the springs of waters; as the branches of
the Frankincense in the time of summer, and as a vessel of massy gold, set
with all manner of precious stones, and as the fat that is taken from the
Peace Offering: De tot modo millibus unus. Ovid.
So is one Henoch that walks with God, when others walk from him; one Rhahab
in Jericho; one Elias, that boweth not his knee to Baal; one David in Meseck,
one Hester in Shushan, one Judith in Bethulia, one Joseph in the Sanhedrim of
the Jews, one Gamaliel in the Council of the Pharisees, one Innocent and
Righteous man, in the midst of a crooked and froward Generation.


A Friend gives me a Ring, Rob. Harris's Hezekiah's recovery.
I Will wear it for his sake; a Book, I Will use it for his sake; a Jewel, I Will
keep it for his sake; that is, so, as may best express my love, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and report his goodness. And were we truly thankful to our God, we would
then use all his tokens for his sake, do all things to his glory; we would eat
our meat to Him, wear our clothes to Him, spend our strength for Him, live, to
Him, sleep to Him, die for Him, etc. thus we should do: But alas, we use his
blessings, 2 King. 9. 12.
as Iehu did Iehoram's messengers, 2 Samuel 19.
David, Goliah's sword, we turn them against their Master, and fight against
Heaven with that health, wir, wealth, friends, means, and mercies, that we have
from thence received.


IN Queen Marie's days, Acts and Monuments, p. 1785. Tibi absit quod ad
resuscitanda corpora, etc.
the body of Peter Martyr's wife, was, by the charity of that time, taken out
of her grave, and buried in a dunghill, in detestation of that great Scholar
her husband, sometimes Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford.
Augustine. de Civitate Dei. lib. 22.
But when the tide was once turned, and that Queen Elizabeth of happy memory,
swayed the Scepter of this State, her bones were reduced to their place, Th.
Fuller Ser. at S. Dunst. East Lon. 1647
and there mingled with the bones of St. Frideswide, to this intent, that if
ever there should come an alteration of Religion in England again, (which God
forbid) then they should not be able to discern the ashes of the one from the
other. Thus Death has mixed and blended the bodies of men, women, and children,
with the flesh of beasts, birds, and serpents; has tossed, typed, and turned
their ashes both into air and water, to puzzle (if possible) the God of heaven
and earth, to find them again, but all in vain: He can call for a finger out of
the gorge of an Eagle, for a leg out of the belly of a Lion, for a whole Man
out of the body of a Fish: If the devil, Esa. 9. 6.
or thy corrupt reason, shall suggest, that this is impossible, make no other
answer but this, Genesis 17. 1.
God is omnipotent, God is infinite.


POpe Silvester, Bapt. Platina. in Vita.
when he was bid to beware of Jerusalem, for that whenever he should come
thither, he should surely dye; he thereupon flattered himself, that he should
then live long enough, for he was sure, that he should never trevell thither;
Dan. F^^tly's Sermons.
little thinking, that there was a Church in Rome of that name, into which he
had no sooner set his foot, but he met with his evil Genius, as Brutus did at
Philippi, A dangerous fire that begins in the b^dstr^w. W. Cant. Pref. to reply
against Fisher.
and suddenly ended his wretched days. Now it is not Rome in Italy which we
so much need to fear, but Rome in England; not Amsterdam in Holland, but
Amsterdam in England: The Popish faction on one side, and the Schismatic
party on the other side, both of them fireballs of dissension in the State*
and of schim in the Church, to set all in a combustion.

Zeal and Knowledge must go hand in hand together.
PH^^ton, in the Poet, Ovidii Metam. lib. 2.
takes upon him to drive the Chariot of the Sun; but through his inconsiderate
rashness, Importabilis absque scientia est zelus, etc.
sets the world in a combustion. What a Horse is without a Rider, Sermon. 49. in
Cant.
or a hot-spur'd Rider without an Eye, or a Ship in a high Wind, and swelling
sail, without a Rudder; such is Zeal without Knowledge. Knowledge is the eye of
the Rider, that chooses the best way; the bridle in the hand, to moderate the
pace; the rudder in the ship whereby it is steered safely. St. Bernard hits
full on this point, Discretion without zeal is slow-pa^ed; and zeal without
discretion is strong-headed; let therefore zeal spur on dis^retion, and
disoretion reyne in zeal.

Not so much the quantity, as the quality of Devotion, acc^ptable to God.
IT is said of Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 1.
Duobus annis regnavit, that he reigned two years over Israel, when
notwithstanding, according to the computation of men, he reigned twenty; but
the Scripture reckons only upon the dates of grace, Josiah Shute Sermon. at St.
Mary Wolnoth Lombard street Land. 1623.
not counting those at all which either went before, or followed after. A
Musitician is commended, non tam multum, sed tam been, not that he played so
long, but that he played so well. And thus it is, not the days of our life,
but the goodness of our life; not the length of our prayers, but the fervency
of our prayers; not the measure of our profession, but the sincerity of our
profession, that is acceptable unto God Almighty.

The deceitfulness of Riches.
He that sees a flock of birds sitting on his ground, Isidor Pelusio^. in
Epist.
cannot make himself any assurance, that therefore they are his own, and that
he may take them at his pleasure. Thus he that has riches, and thinks himself
fully possessed of them, may be deceived, Joh. Davenport Ser. at S. Laur. Jury
Land. 1617.
and soon deprived of them; a small spark of fire may set them flying, a thief
may steal them, an unfaithful servant may imbezle them, a soldier, a wrack at
sea, a bad debtor at land; there is a hundred ways to set them packing: They
have wings, and hop from branch to branch, from tree to tree, from one man to
another, seldom to him that is the true owner of them.

Glory is to be given to God only; and why so?
THat workman should do ill, Joach. Myncing Schol. in. lib. 3. Institut.
Fons^^a.
who having built a house with another man's purse, should go about to set up
his own Arms upon the front thereof; and in Iustinian's Law it was decreed,
That no workman should set up his name within the body of that building,
Quadrag. Sermon
which he made out of another man's cost. Thus Christ sets us all at work, it
is he that bids us to fast, and pray, and hear, and give alms, etc. But who is
at the cost of all this? whose are all these good works? Surely God's. Iovis
omnia plena. Virgil.
Man's poverty is so great, that he cannot reach a good thought, much less a
good deed: All the materials are from God, the building is His; it is His
purse that paid for it: Give but therefore the glory and the honor thereof
unto God, and take all the profit to thy self.


YOu shall have a man scrape and crouch, and keep a do with a man he never saw
or knew before, one that he is ready, it may be (when his back is turned) to
curse; but yet he will do this for his alms, for his gain, to make a prey, a
use of him some way or other; this man loves his alms, loves his prey, loves
his bounty; Funeral Sermons.
but all this is no argument of love to the man. Thus, for a man to make
toward God, and to seem to own him, and to be one of the generation of those
that seek his face, to address himself in outward conformity, and many other
things, by which another may (if he have no other ground) judge charitably of
him; yet all this is nothing, except a man may discern something, that may give
him a taste, Deus propter seipsum diligendus e^^, Ambros.
that his spirit does uprightly and sincerely seek God, that he loves God for
God himself, that he loves Grace for grace it self, he loves the Commandments
of God, because they are God's commandments, etc. And thus it is, that our
love, our desire after God must be carried sincerely, not for any by and base
resp^cts whatsoever.


THere be many things that move, and yet their motion is not an argument of
life: A Windmill, when the wind serves, moves, and moves very nimbly too;
yet this cannot be said to be a living creature; no, it moves only by an
external cause, by an artificial contrivance; it is so framed, that when the
wind sits in such or such a corner, Mart. Day, fun. Sermon. 1619
it will move, and so having but an external motor, and cause to move, and no
inward principle, no soul within it to move it, it is an argument, that it is
no living creature. So it is also, if a man see another man move, and move very
fast in those things, which of themselves are the ways of God; you shall see
him move as fast to hear a Sermon, as his neighbor does, is as forward and
hasty to thrust himself, and bid himself a guest to the Lord's Table (when God
has not bid him) as any. In omnibus rebus princip^a sunt diligenter
con^^deran^a. Fr. Guichard lib. 1.
Now the question is, What principle sets him a work; if it be an inward
principle of life, out of a sincere affection, and love to God and his
Ordinances, that carries him to this, it argues, that man has some life of
grace: but if it be some wind that blows on him, the wind of state, the wind
of law, the wind of danger, of penalty; the wind of fashion or custom, to do as
his neighbors do: If these, or the like, be the things that draw him thither,
this is no argument of life at all; it is a cheap thing, it is a counterfeit
and dead piece of service.


THe gods of the Gentiles were senseless stocks and stones, Dan. Featly clavis.
not able to apprehend, much less to revenge an injury done unto them. Well
therefore might the Philosopher be bold with Hercules, to put him to his
thirteenth labor, in seething of his dinner; and Martial with Priapus, in
threatening him to throw him into the fire, Esa. 8. 11.
if he looked not well to his Trees. A child may play at the hole of a dead
Aspe, and a silly woman may strike a dead Lion; but who dare play with a living
Serpent? who dare take a roaring Lion by the beard? Let Christians then take
heed, how they provoke the living God, Heb. 12. 29.
for He is a consuming fire, and with the breath of his mouth, he is able to
throw down the whole frame of Nature, and destroy all creatures from the face
of the earth.


IT is not possible, that those things which are knit together by a bond,
should hold fast together, after the bond it self is broken; nor can a sinew
hold steady the joint, if it be sprayned, or broken, or cut assunder. Religion
is the band of all society, the strongest sinew of Church or Commonwealth; God
forbid there should be any rupture, any sprain in this sinew. Dan. Featly, ut
antea.
The like of Unity; Pluck i^ you can a beam from the body of the Sun, it will
then have no light; break a branch from the Tree, it will bear no fruit; sever
a River from the Spring, it will be soon dried up; cut a member from the body,
Cyprian de simplicit. Praelat.
it soon dies; cast a Pumice-stone into the water, and though it be never so
big, which it remains entire, and the parts whole together, it will swim above
water; but break it once into pieces, and then every piece of it will sink to
the very bottom. Fulcrum imperiorum est servare Religionem and Vnitatem. Lips.
in praefat* ad Poliocret,
Thus, both Church and Commonwealth, which are supported, and as it were held
up by Religion and unity, peace and concord, are ruined and destroyed by
discord, dissension, schism, and faction. O tam bonum quam jucundum; How happy
are such a People, such a Nation, such a Church, such a State, as live together
in peace and unity!

Peace with Men will make our peace with God.
WHen upon news of earthquakes, M. Tul. Cicero. de Arusp. respon.
and other prodigious signs, the Soothsayers foretold great calamities that
were to befall the State of Rome, unless the wrath of the gods were suddenly
appeased; the Orator determines the point most divinely; Dan. Featly's Sermons.
Faciles sunt deorum ira, etc. God will be easily reconciled to us, if we be
reconciled one to another. And most true it is, we cannot be one with God, so
long as we are one against another: when we are at peace one with another, then
God will be at peace with us; and if God be at peace with us, all creatures
shall be in league with us, so that neither devil nor man, nor any thing else,
shall have any power to hurt us.

The great folly of too late Repentance in any thing.
IT was a sad confession, that, by the testimony of a B. D. Sarum.
reverend ear-witnesse, dropped from the mouth of a very considerable person in
Scotland; Ioh. Spotswood Hist. of Church of Scotland, in Epist. to the Reader.
viz. That it was true, he, with the rest of his Nation, had buried Episcopacy,
and their ancient Monarchy, in one and the same grave; but upon the sad
consequences of it they would be content to tear up the very earth of that
grave with their teeth, so that they might but raise both of them up again. And
such is the precipitate folly, and madness of many, that are at this day to be
found in the midst of us, (...). Mich. Aposto lius in paroemiis.
who act ill at the first, and then to their great grief, consider what they
have so acted; such as have, and do still, run headlong upon one mischievous
design or other, and then, Phrygian-like, repent when it is too late, wishing
that undone which is done; whereas one day they will find, to their great
loss, Sero sapiunt phryges. Erasm. Ad^g. Prove. 22. 3.
that the safest course had been, with prudent Prometheus, to have foreseen a
danger, and shunned it, then with foolish Epimetheus, in the want of due
consideration, to go on, and be deservedly punished.

The Church robbed of her maintenance, upon pretense of Reformation.
Dionysius the Tyrant, Justin. hist. lib. 51.
entering into a Temple of Idols, took away from the chiefest amongst them, a
Cloak of gold; and being demanded why he did it, his answer was, This Cloak is
too heavy for the summer, and too cold for winter. Taking likewise a golden
Beard from Aesculapius, he said, That his father Apollo having no beard,
Christ. Fonseca Sermon.
there was no reason his son should wear any. But this was but a mask for his
covetousness. And thus it is with some in these days, they will strip the
Church of her maintenance, Quadragesimal.
to keep the Clergy from laziness; and they tell us, that the King's Daughter
is all glorious within; so as they may pocket up her Rayments of needlework,
and fine gold, it is no matter how she is without. They profess encouragements
to the Ministers of the Gospel, and in the mean time pare off a great deal of
their necessary maintenance. But let them know, Sr. Ben. Rudiard's Speech.
That it is scandalous maintenance that makes a scandalous Minister; and * Jam.
Sibald's Sermon at Spittle. 1638.
that a beggarly clergy, is always the sign of a bankrupt Religion.


MAny sitting up so long at play, Christ. Fonseseaca, ut antea.
are necessitated to go to bed darkling. This our living in this world, is a
kind of playing or gaming, whose bed is Eternity: Let us then study to give
over this play in some good time, and not stay at it, till the very snuffing
and topping of the candle go out, lest darkness overtake us, and we take up
our lodging in hell to all eternity.


IT was the pride of Seneca, Epist. 2.
and he boasted much, Ubicunque ago, Demetrium circumfero, That wheresoever he
went* he bare Demetrius with him. O that we could but say the like of God,
Ubicunque ago, Deum circumfero, Wheresoever I go, I bear Christ Jesus with me,
not in a material Crucifix, or a visible Picture of him wrought in gold, D.
Bargtave's Sermon. at St. Marg. Westminster. 1624.
or framed in silver, but the sweet remembrance of my blessed Savior, that is
ever with me; the print of his love, the example of his virtue, the image of
his goodness, the record of his mercy, all the miracles that he wrought for my
conversion, all the miseries that he endured for my liberty, all the
indignities that he sustained for my salvation; the power of his death, the
triumphs of his Cross, the glory of his rising, the comfort of his appearing,
is that which I lay as Camphire between my breasts, Nobile (...).
that which I hug with all my soul; wheresoever I go, whatsoever I do, Christ
is still with me, (says the devout soul) as the lot of mine inheritance, as
the crown of my felicity.


Quench not the Spirit, Com. in loc.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Nec in te, nec in alio, (says Aquinas) Quench it not in your
self, by forbearing to hear the Word preached; quench it not in others, by
discouraging them that do preach, for so St. Chrysostom understands the place,
taking an example from the Lamp J. Done, Sermon* at S. Paul's Land. 1627.
that burnt by him whilst he was preaching: You may quench (says he) this
Lamp, by putting in water, and you may quench it, by taking out the oil. So a
man may quench the Spirit in himself, if he smother it, or suffocate it with
worldly pleasures and profits: And he may quench it in others, if he withdraw
the favor, or the maintenance which keeps the Preacher in a careful discharge
of his duty.


IT was the advice of the late E. of Salisbury to his son, In his book of
Precepts.
That as in a project of War to be fo^led once by the Enemy, it would be very
hard to recruit; so in the choice of a Wife, Ux^r bona ^hara supellex.
to err but once, is to be undone for ever; and the rather, because, as in a
Lottery, there may be an hundred blanks drawn, before one prize; many a bad
Wife made choice of, before one, that may become a fit helper, is so much as
thought on.


Noah is commanded, Genesis 6. 16.
to make a window in the top of the Ark, and a door in the side of it; Mat.
Styles, a Sermon at St. Paul's.
a window is for the eye to look out at, a door is for the whole body to go
out. And he that will ever be a good Christian, must not only make a window
for contemplation, Dan. 6.
as Daniel did, at which he prayed thrice a day; but a door for action, Genesis 18.
as Abraham did, at which he sat once a day. At the window of contemplation he
must meditate with a very good heart, to keep the Word; at the door of action
he must go out, to bring forth fruit with patience.

No quietness in the soul, till it come to Christ.
NIcaula the Queen of saba could never be quiet in her own Country, Th.
Playfer's Sermons.
till she came to Solomon; but when she saw his glory, and heard his wisdom,
then her heart failed her, she had enough, she could desire to see and hear no
more. So the soul of a true Christian can never be quiet in the strange Country
of this world, till it come to Christ the true Solomon, the King and Prince of
peace eternal.

The true Christian takes no comfort in this World.
EDward the third, Ral. Hollingshed's Chron.
having the King of Scots, and the French King, his prisoners here in England,
both together at one time, held royal Justs in Smithfield; the Just being
ended, he feasted both the Kings sumptuously at supper; after supper,
perceiving the French King to be sad and pensive, he desired him to be merry as
others were. To whom the French King answered, Quomodo cantabimus cantica in
terra aliena? How shall we sing songs in a strange land? If the French King
after all this princely pastime, Th. Sutton's Disce vivere.
and stately entertainment, took it so heavily to heart, that he was kept
prisoner out of his own Country; Vbi Christus incipit dulcescere; necesse est
am^rescere mundum Bern, in Sermon.
great then must needs be the mourning of every good Christian, for his
captivity here in this world, that he is forced to sojourn in Meseck, and live
in the tents of Kedar; that he must make his abode here below, especially
seeing, that he neither has such welcome in the world, as the French King had
in England; neither yet is England so far from France, as Heaven (the place of
his desires) is from them both.

Man's nature is altogether sinful.
THe Irish History tells us, Rich. Stanihurst de rebus Hyberh.
that the City of Waterford gives this Posie in her Arms, Intacta manet,
because since it was first conquered by Henry the 2 d. it was never yet
attainted, Th. Playfer's Sermon.
no not so much as touched with treason. It is said also, that the Isle of
Arren in that country, has such a pure air, that it was never yet infected
with the plague. Vnicuique dedit vitium nature a creato.
It cannot be said thus of the Nature of man, that it is either so clear from
treason as that City, or that it is so free from infection as that Island is;
Propert. lib. 2.
for, our very reason is treason, our best affection is no better than
infection, if it be well sifted in the sight of God: In many things we sin all,
Iam. 3. 2.

The Law of God a perfect Law.
THere is a saying, Dr. Gillingham. a Sermon. at. Allhal. in the Wall. Land. 1647.
New Lords, new Laws. Good Lords make good Laws, Tyrants make cruel Laws,
and Fools make absurd Laws. Inerrability is not tied to the chair of the best
Lawgiver; Councills, though Oecumenicall, may, and have erred. That Law which
was suitable to former times, is repealed in these, and these may not hereafter
be approved in those that follow. But the Law of God is a perfect Law, Psalm. 25.
ever in force, unalterable, so full, that it needs not to be eeked out by
any Traditions, or human inventions whatsoever; which to do, were in effect no
more, than to add supernumerary limbs to a complete body.

The guilt of Innocent blood crying to Heaven for vengeance.
IT is reported of Philip the 2 d. Guil^man. de faelici success. Phil. 2.
King of Spain, that besieging the Town of St. Quintin, and being to make a
breach, he was forced with his Cannon, to batter down a small Chapel on the
Wall, dedicated to St. Lawrence: in reparation to which Saint, he afterward
built that famous Chapel in the Escuriall in Spain, for workmanship, one of
the wonders of the world. Most sure it is, that many Churches and Chappells of
the God of St. Lawrence, have been laid waste by the late Wars of
Christendom; and which is more, (and more to be lamented) many living Temples
of the holy Ghost, Th. Fuller's Good thoughts in bad times.
Christian people of all conditions, of both sexes, have been causlesly and
cruelly destroyed. But how shall the Nations ever be able to make recompense?
what compensation can there be, for such effusions of Christian, Protestant
blood? God of his infinite goodness forgive that debt, which they of
themselves are no way able to satisfy.


PRocopius reports, Arcana. hist.
that near to the Pole, where the night endures many months together, the
Inhabitants in the end of such a long night, when the Sun begins to appear, get
up to the tops of the Mountains, striving who should have the first sight of
that desired Creature; and so no sooner do they see it, but they deck
themselves in their best apparel, and with mutual embraces of joy,
congratulate each other, Joh. Boys's Sermons.
saying, ^cce Sol, Behold the Sun, the Sun appears! How then should we
rejoice in the happy light of the Gospel? How should we live and love
together, when after such a long Egyptian night of popery and superstition, the
Sun of Righteousness is risen unto us? Exodus 9. 26. Psalm. 76. 1.
It was once light only in Goshen, and all Egypt dark besides; In Jury only
was God known. But now, Ecce sol, light is come into the world: Lux mundi, non
lux modii, the Sun of the Gospel is so full, that it is but opening the
casements of our hearts, and it flows in upon us. Let us rejoice and be glad
thereat.


HEnry the 7 th. in derision of Star-gazers, asked one (who had before
prophesied of his death) this qu^stion; What shall be^ide me this Christmas?
The cunning man forsooth answered, he could not tell. What then I pray thee
(quoth the King) shall become of thee? Joh. (...), ut antea.
To this he answered likewise, that he knew not. Well then, said the King, I am
then more learned in thy Science, than thy self; for I know, that thou shall be
committed to prison, and there lie fast all this Christmas, for a juggling
companion. What this ^^lly man could not tell by the influence of the Stars, as
concerning the bodies of men, there is an hypocritical generation of censurers
of others, Sunt aliqui qui de omnibus m^le judicant, etc.
but justitiaries to themselves, that can tell what will become of the souls of
themselves and others: This man is a poor carnal man, that man is a precious
Saint; one man is damned already, Greg moral. lib. 6.
another man is in heaven: As for their selves, they know their place in Heaven
as perfectly, as their pew in the Church, which they have a key to. But the
blessed Spirit of God has long since branded this wicked censorious
generation, Romans 14. 4.
and checks them plainly, Who art thou that judge another man's servant, to
his own master he stands or falls: And so shall thou.


TAke a River, Joh. Preston's covenant.
let it be damned and stopped up, yet if the course of it be natural, if the
vent and stream of it be to go downward, at length it will overbear, and ride
triumphantly over: Or, let water that is sweet be made brackish, by the coming
in of salt water; yet, if it naturally be sweet, at the length it will work it
out. So it is with every man, look what the constant stream of his disposition
on is, Expellas furca licet, usque recurret.
look what the frame of it is; that which is most natural and inward to a man,
though it may be damned up, and stopped in such a course for a while, yet it will
break through all at the last; and though there be some brackish, some sinful
dispositions, that may break in upon a man; yet he, by the grace of God will
wear them out, because his natural disposition, the frame of his heart, runs
another way.

Impossible, but that a true Christian will be a thankful Christian.
IF a man, Lud. Granatens. (...).
being wearied through a tedious and long journey, should rest himself at the
foot or bottom of some Tower or Castle, and should be exceedingly tormented at
the same time with hunger and thirst, In omnibus gr^tus Deo benefactori.
and that one in that Tower or Castle should reach unto him as much meat and
drink, as he desired; could he possibly contain himself, (...) lib. 4.
but that he must needs look up, to see who it is that thus relieved his
necessity? So it is not possible, but that a true Christian, that lives daily
upon the almes-basket of God's providence, should be a thankful Christian, and
cast up his eyes to Heaven, that he may see who it is that thus liberally
furnishes him, in the time of his so great extremity.

A factious spirited Man, unfit for the work of the Ministry.
MArtianus, Socrates hist. lib. ^. cap. 20.
Bishop of the Novatians at Constantinople, having ordained Sabbatius, a Jew,
Priest; and finding him afterward to be a turbulent man, Utinam super spinas,
etc. (says he) O, would to God I had laid my hands on briars, rather on such a
man's head. Procul hinc, procul ite nocentes. Statius.
And it is to be feared, that many now in these days have just cause to
beshrew their fingers, for ordaining them, whom they have no sooner put into
the Ministry, but they become the Ringleaders of faction and schism, against
that very Authority, which ordained them.

Bitter Spirits, no gracious Spirits.
PLiny tells of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, Not. hist. lib. 9. cap. 39.
that in her wanton bravery at a supper, made for Marcus Antonius, she
dissolved a Pearl in vinegar, and drank it off, and prepared another, Borogh's
Heart-divisions.
both which were valued near five thousand pounds. But oh, the many precious
Pearls of patience, humility, love, brotherly kindness, etc. worth many
thousands of gold and silver, that are dissolved by the vinegar-sournesse of
men's spirits, in these sad distracted times, in these sharp dissentions that
are amongst us.

We must not be careless hearers of the Word.
AS market-folk returning from the market, will be talking of their markets, as
they go by the way, Th. Gataker's* Gain of godliness.
and be casting up of their penny-worths when they come home, reckon what they
have taken, and what they have laid out, and how much they have gotten. So
should we, after we have heard the Word publicly, confer privately of it with
others, Debet totus festivus dies ^xpendi in operibus Sancis.
at least meditate on it by our selves, and be sure to take an account of our
selves, how we have profited that day by the Word, that has been spoken to us,
and also by other religious exercises, that have been used of us. R. Gros^hed.
in Decalog.
And as the market-man counts that but an ill market day, that he has not
gained somewhat more or less; so may we well account it an ill Sabbath day to
us, whereon we have not profited somewhat, whereon we have not increased our
knowledge, or been bettered in our affection; whereon we have not been either
informed in judgment, or reformed in practice; whereon we have added nothing to
our Talent.

Protestant Religion, the only comfortable Religion to die in.
AS an eminent Steph Gardener.
Prelate of the Church of Rome said of the Doctrine of Justification by faith
only, that it was a good supper-doctrin, though not so good to breakfast on:
In Epist. (...) Lake's works.
So it must be acknowledged of our reformed Religion in general, that although
it be not so plausible and pleasant a Religion to live in, as some other may
be; yet it is the only comfortable Religion to die in, as being that which
settles a man upon the true Rock, and gives a sure footing to his Faith, when
all the superstitious devices of man's brain, do like sand fail, and moulder
away.


RObert Holgate, Franc. Godwin de Prae^ulibus Angl.
who was sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, because he could not peaceably
enjoy his small Living in Lincolnshire, in regard of the litigiousnesse of a
neighboring Knight, coming to London to right himself, he came into the
favor of King Henry the Eighth, Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions
and so got by degrees the Archbishopric of York; he thought he got well, by
the quarrelling of this wrangling Knight. So let every man say of that strife
and contention, that disorder and confusion, that it is foelix contentio, and
foelix confusio, a happy contention, a happy disorder, when the strifes of men
shall put him upon those providence and duties, which shall be so blessed unto
him, as to forward his getting into the favor of the most high God, and the
enjoyment of peace, and to the admiring of his free grace, who has brought him
into so great a good from so great an evil.


THe World is not unfitly compared to a fishing-net, Math. 13. 47.
the end of the world to the drawing up of the nets. While the nets are down,
there is nothing said to be caught; Th. Gataker's Gain of godliness.
for the nets may break, and the fish escape: But at the end of the world, when
the nets are drawn up, it will then evidently appear, what every man has
caught; and then those that have fished for riches, or gain, sovereignty, and
power over their breathren, Luke ^. 7. August. in Palm. 76. 5.
for the honors and preferments of this world, may say with Peter, Domine,
tota hac nocte laboravimus, etc. Lord, all this night have we labored, and
caught nothing at all. They dreamt of riches, and honors, and power; but being
now awake, they find nothing in their hands at all. But those that have here
fished for godliness, for peace, for the honor of God, may say, Domine, in
verbo tuo retia dimisimus, etc. Lord, at thy word we have let down our nets,
and have caught, Romans 2. 7.
yea, we have caught abundantly; we have fished for godliness, and have gotten
life eternal; for grace, and we have gotten glory; for goodness, and we have
gotten God himself, who is the fountain of all goodness and glory.


WHen the King removes, D. Staughton's Sermon.
the Court and all the Carriages follow after, and when they are gone, the
hangings are taken down, nothing is left behind but bare walls, dust and
rubbish. So, if God removes from a man, or a Nation, where he kept his Court,
his Graces will not stay behind, and if they be gone, farewell peace, farewell
comfort; down goes the hangings of all prosperity, nothing is left behind but
confusion and disorder.


SOcrates, Hist. tripart. lib. 8. cap. 1.
the Ecclesiastical Historiographer, reports a story of one Pambo, a plain
ignorant man, who came to a learned man, and desired him, to teach him some one
Psalm or other. Ma^ul. lib. 4. cap. 6.
He began to read unto him the 39 Psalm, Dixi, custodiam, etc. I said, I will
look to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. Having passed this first
verse, Pambo shut the book, and took his leave, saying, That he would go learn
that point first. When he had absented himself for the space of some months, he
was demanded by his Reader, when he would go forward. He answered, B. Lake on
Psalm. 51.
That he had not yet learned his old lesson; and he gave the very same answer
to one that asked the like question, forty nine years after. Such a hard thing
it is to rule this unruly member of the tongue, Psalm. 32. 51.
that it must be kept in with a bit and a bridle, Psalm. 12 and 57. 8.
bolts and bars. It was David's glory, and it is our shame. It is row held to
be a piece of Religion, Digito compesce labellum.
to be offensive with the tongue, to slander, revile, and backbite their
neighbors; nay, such a sinful liberty have men taken to themselves, as to
speak evil of authority, to throw dirt in the face of supreme power, forgetting
that of St. James, Jam. 1. 16.
He that seems to be religious, and refraineth ^ot his tongue, that man's
religion is in vain.

Forgetting of Injuries past is necessary, upon a making of Peace.
THrasibulus feared, Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 1.
there would be exceeding heart-burnings amongst the Athenians; Sigonius de
rebus Atheniens.
that those who had been banished, would be revenged on those, they judged the
causes of it; and the other would be enraged against them: Therefore
Thrasibulus got the People to join with him in a Law, which they called
Amnestia, Cicero in Philip.
that all former wrongs should be forgotten, and that they should live lovingly
and peaceably hence forward one with another, as if such breathes had never
been amongst them. Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions Ne mal^rum memineris.
Thus, when God shall restore peace to a Kingdom or State, and set all to
right, the addition of such an Amnestia, an Act of Oblivion, will be very
necessary, not to rip up old things, but that there be a line of forgetfulness
drawn over them; Val. Max.
otherwise, such will be that extreme bitter exasperation, and deadly rage of
men's hearts one against another, that whatsoever peace shall be concluded, if
it be not made exceeding sure, the Pacification is like to be but the
foundation of greater evils to come.

The silent Christian is the sound Christian.
WHat a noise do the poor souls make in the streets of London, B. Hall
Occasion. meditat.
when they cry their commodities? each tells what he has, and would have all
hearers take notice of it; and yet (God wot) it is but poor stuff they make
such an outcry about: You cannot hear of any of the rich penny-fathers talk of
the mony-baggs that they have in their chests, or what treasures of rich wares
the Merchant has in his Warehouse; altum silentium, not a word of that; every
man rather desires to hide his wealth, Quaedam melius laudantur silentio quam
oratione.
and when he is urged, is ready to dissemble his ability. No otherwise is it in
the true spiritual riches, he that is full of true saving grace, and good
works, affects not to make show of it to the world, but rests sweetly in the
comforts of a good conscience, Plutarch.
and the silent applause of God's Spirit, witnessing with his own. Whiles on
the contrary, a venditation of our own worth, or parts, or merits, argues a
miserable indigence in them all.

A total deprivation of Grace in the heart of man, is deplorable.
THe taking back of any good thing does much amplify the deprivation; B. Lake
on Psalm 51.
but how much more does it amplify, that nothing is left behind? Though the
harvest be carried away, yet if there be some gleanings behind; though a Tree
be cut down, yet if there be a root left in the ground; though the Sun go down,
yet if it be twilight: Those small remainders of greater Goods, are no small
refreshings to a loser. It does a man some good, to keep some monuments of his
better estate, especially when they are pledges of some sparkle of good will
toward us, continuing in Him, upon whose just displeasure we forfeited all.
Thus, as God in favor gives the holy Spirit, so in displeasure does he take
Him away; and we cannot guess better at the measure of his displeasure, than
by the measure of the deprivation; Miserum est fuisse foelicem.
if he take it but in part, then he tempers mercy with judgment; but if he
leave no sparkles of grace that may be kindled again, if there be such a rowt
made, that there is no hopes of rallying, then we become Lo-ruhama, Hos 1. we
are clean shut out of the bowels of his compassion.

God is the only object of his Children's delight.
HE that truly loves his friend, Th. de Trugillo Thesaur. conciona^.
transporteth himself often to the place where he was wont to see his friend,
he delights in reading his Letters, and in handling the gages and monuments
that he has left behind him; how grateful is the sight of any thing, Ante
omnia in omnibus Deus e^t.
that presents unto him the memorial of his absent friend? And thus the child
of God, to testify his love to him, transporteth himself often to the place,
where he may find God in his Sanctuary, amongst his Saints; he delights in
reading his Letters, the Scriptures; he delights in eating those holy monuments
and pledges, the Sacraments, which he has left behind him, as tokens of his
good will, until he come again.


BY the Laws of England, Mogna Charta Angliae.
Noblemen have this privilege, that none of them can be bound to the Peace,
because it is supposed, that a noble disposition will never be engaged in
brawls and contentions; It is supposed, that the Peace is always bound to
them, and that of their own accord, they will be always careful to preserve
it. It is the base bramble that rends and tears what is next unto it.
Gentleness, mercy, goodness, love, tenderness of other's sufferings, are the
greatest ornaments of a noble spirit; and where it is sanctified, the grace of
God shines bright in such a heart.


WHen Mahomet, (...). de (...) viris Germ. cap. 9.
the second of that name, besieged Belgrade in Servia, one of the Captains at
last got upon the wall of the City, with his Colors displayed. A noble
Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captain, and clasping him fast about his
middle, asked one Capistranus, standing beneath, whether it would be any danger
of damnation to his soul, if he should cast himself down headlong with that
dog, (so he termed the Turkish Captain) to be slain with him? Capistranus
answered, That it was no danger at all to his soul. The Bohemian forthwith
tumbled himself down, P. Jovii. hist.
with the Turk in his arms, and so by his own death only, Th. Playser' s Sermon.
saved the life of all the City. Such an exploit as this, Christ plays upon
the Devil; the Devil, like the great Turk, besieged not only one City, but
even all Mankind; Christ alone, like this noble Bohemian, encountered with him:
And seeing the case was so, that this dog the devil could not be killed stark
dead, except Christ died also, therefore he made no reckoning of his own life,
but gave himself to death for us, that he only dying for all the People, by
his death our deadly enemy might for ever be destroyed.


EVery man naturally loves that which is his own, Rich. Holdsworth' s Sermon. at
Merc. Chap. Land. 1627.
and if the thing be good, it does him the more good to look upon it. Let a man
walk in a fair meadow, it pleases him well; but it will please him much more,
if it be his own, his eye will be more curious in prying into every part, and
every thing will please him the better; so it is in a corn-field, in an
orchard, in a house, if they be ours, the more contentedly do they affect us:
For this word Meum, is suavissima amoris illecebra, it is as good as an amatory
potion. So then, if God the Lord be lovely, how much more lovly should he be in
our eyes, if he be our Lord God, and does appropriate that infinite good that
he has, Qui habentem omnia habet.
unto us? And who would not joy to be owner of that God, which is independent?
He is what heart can desire, and who can but rejoice in having Him, in having
of whom, we can want nothing?


THe Romans at the first, Onuphr. Panvin. de ludis Circens.
used to set wild Beasts upon the Stage to kill one another; and after this,
they came to be delighted to see Gladiatores and Fencers kill one another; and
thirdly, they were much affected to see men cast upto the wild beasts, to be
devoured and torn in pieces; so that from the sight of killing of Beasts, they
delighted to see Men killed. And was not this our case? by swearing and lying,
Joh. Weemse Pourtraiture.
we came at last to killing: Thus were we broken out, and blood touched bloods,
2 Samuel 26. 2. Homicidarum condici^ fit deplorata, etc.
blood in the plural. He that has killed one, cares not to kill an hundred;
a dogg's neck was formerly cut off with more reluctance, than the precious life
of man was taken from him. Killing of men was but sporting, like that of the
young men at the pool of Gibeon. Plutarch. de legibus.
Fools make a sport of sin, and so did men, of the crying sin of murder. But
if the Sword had thus played Rex any longer, it would have been bitterness in
the end, which God in the greatness of his mercy has of late years prevented.

Reverence to be used in the service of God.
VAlerius Maximus tells a story of a young Nobleman, Lib. 6.
that attended upon Alexander, while he was sacrificing; this Nobleman held his
Censer for Incense; and in the holding of it, there fell a coal of fire upon
his flesh, and burned it so, as the very scent of it was in the nostrills of
all that were about him; and because he would not disturb Alexander in his
service, Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions.
he resolutely did not stir to put off the fire from him, but held still the
Censer. If Heathens made such a do, in sacrificing to their Idoll-gods, that
they would mind it so, as no disturbance must be made, Templa petas supplex,
etc.
whatsoever they endured; what care should we then have of our selves, when we
come to worship the high God? Oh that we could mind the duties of Gods worship,
as matters of high concernment, as things of greatest consequence, that so we
might learn to sanctify the name of our God in the performance of duty, more
than ever we have done.

The condition of Temporizers.
IT is observable, Plin. hist. not. lib. 7. cap. 38.
that the Hedghog has two holes in his siege, one toward the South, another
toward the North; now when the southern wind blows, he stops up that hole,
Th. Playfer's Sermon.
and turns him northwards; and then when the north wind blows, he stops up
that hole likewise, and turns him southward again. Such Urchins, such Hedghogs,
Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur, etc.
are all time-servers, they do all things for the time, but nothing for the
truth; they believe for a time, as long as the warm Sun shines on them; but as
soon as any storm of persecution arises, by and by they have a starting hole
to hide themselves in; they turn faces about, and change their Religion with
the Time.

God does not only deliver, but also comfort his Children.
THe Eagle does sometimes carry her young ones, Ulysses Aldrovand. Ornitholog.
only from a dangerous to a safer nest; sometimes she rouseth them out of
their floath, and directs them where they may find their prey. B. Lake on Exodus
19.
Even so deals God with his children, he freeth them from danger* and
brings them to comfort. He did not only bear the Israelites on the Eagles
wings of protection, which showed a deliverance from evil; but he brought them
to himself, which showed a bestowing of good.

How a man is said to pray continually.
THough in the old Law, Levit. 6. 12. ^ Sr. Rich. Baker on the Lord's Prayer.
the Priest did not continually offer sacrifices unto the Lord, yet fire was
continually burning upon the Altar, and never went out. So, though we do not
continually offer to God the calves of our lips, yet the fire of devotion, and
spiritual fervency, must continually be burning in our hearts, and never go
out: 1 Thessalonians. 15. 17.
And this is the true meaning of the Apostles exhortation, Pray continually;
not pray continually with the tongue, as though that should never lie still;
but, pray continually, meaning with that part, which does indeed never lie
still, except we be still, and that is the Heart.


IT was the complaint of the Emperor Adrian, Xyphilin. in Adridno.
when he lay a dying, Many Physicians have destroyed the Emperor, meaning,
that their contrary conceits, and different directions, J. Woodnoth's New
descant on old Records.
had hastened his death, and cut him off before his time. Just thus, there are
many censurers and correctors of our, not sick, but sound Religion, approved by
the sacred Scriptures, and attended by the blood of many faithful Martyrs:
There are so many Reformers and Rectifiers, of all ages, sexes, and degrees, of
all professions and trades, that take upon them to order our Church, according
to the crooked line of their own several imaginations, that they have almost
reduced all things in it, into a Chaos and confusion, and so spoiled and
defaced one of the most complete Churches, for Doctrine and Discipline, decency
and order, now extant in the Christian world.


IT is reported of one Leonides a Captain, Caelius. lib. 19. cap. 6.
who perceiving his Soldiers left their Watch upon the City-walls, Aelian.
variar. hist. lib. 3. cap. 14.
and did nothing all the day-long, but quaff and tipple in Alehouses, near
adjoining; commanded, that the Alehouses should be removed from that place
where they stood, Th. Playfer's Sermon.
and be set up close by the Walls, that seeing the soldiers would never keep
out of them, at the least they might watch as well as drink in them. So,
because we itch after delight and pleasure, we must needs have, Deo servire
libertas est.
and we cannot be kept from it; God has appointed, that we should take delight
enough, Hieron. in Epist. ad Simplicianum.
and yet serve him never a whit the less: For, it is no part of Gods meaning,
when we enter into his sweet service, that we should be debarred of all
delight, but only that we should change the cause of our delight, delight of
the service of sin, into a delight in the service of God. Isaac must not be
sacrificed, but the Ram, all rammish and rank delight of the world, not Isaac;
i. e. all spiritual laughter, all ghostly joys, all heavenly delight and
pleasure.


THe Sun does manifest it self, B. Lake on Exodus chap. 19.
first, by daylight, and that is common to all which dwell in the same
Horison, unto which the Sun is risen; some have more than daylight, they have
also the Sun-shining light, which shining light of the Sun is not in all
places, where daylight of it is. Finally, the Sun is manifest in the Heavens
in his full strength, for the body is present there, which none can endure but
the Stars, which become glorious bodies, by that special pr^sence of the Sun
amongst them. In like manner God, in whom all things live, and move, and have
their being, does manifest himself unto some, by the works of his general
providence, Act. 14.
of which St. Paul speaks, God le^t not himself without witness, etc. This
manifestation of God is like the daylight, it is common to all, it is an
universal grace: Psalm. 145. 15.
The eyes of all things look up unto thee, etc. There is a second
manifestation, and that is more particular, but to some only; it is like the
Sunshine, it is that manifestation which God vouchsafes to his Church, of
which Esaias speaks, Arise, Esa. 60. 1.
shine, for thy light is come, etc. for, in comparison of the Church, the rest
of the World sits in darkness, and in the shadow of death. The third and
last manifestation, is that which God makes of himself in Heaven, to the
Angels and Saints, the clearest and fullest whereof a creature is capable; and
those which partake this presence of God, become thereby glorious Saints, more
glorious than the Stars, which receive their resplendent luster from the aspect
which they have to the Sun's body; so that it seems, there are those who are
in better case than we are, Sort tu^ contentus ^bi.
and there are those who are in worse; and therefore we must thank God for our
present advancement, and remember, that we make forward unto that nearness,
unto which God is reserved for us in the Heavens.

The seven Sacraments of the Papists, not of divine Institution.
WHen Christ feasted that great multitude with five loaves and two fishes,
Matthew. 14. Joh. Boys 's Postills.
it is observed, that the five loaves were of the Baker's making, and the two
fishes of God's making. The Papists stiffly maintain seven Sacraments in their
Church, viz. Baptism, the Eucharist, Matrimony, Orders, Penance, Confirmation,
and extreme U^ction. But most sure it is, that the two first only are of God's
making; in the other five appears the knavery of the Baker, they are of the
Pope's making, and not of God's.

Christian Liberty abused by the Sectarian party.
CAmbyses demanding of his Counselors, Herodor. hist. lib. 3.
Whether he might not marry his sister by the Law of the Land? They answered,
That they found no Law, that allowed a brother to marry his sister; but one,
that permitted the King of the Persians to do as he list. Thus our proud,
peevish, sectarian Libertines, impatient of Government, a rebellious and
obstinate people, cannot in all the Scripture find any sound or seeming proof,
for their foul rebellions against lawful Authority; neither can their falls
prophets, their chief counselors, Joh. Woodnoth's New search on old Records.
find out any such places for them; but therefore they use in a wrong sense, so
to enlarge and amplify the great benefit of our Christian liberty, (the which
indeed is a freedom from all hellish slavish fear, but not from a holy and
son-like fear; a freedom from the curse, but not from the obedience; from the
damnatory, Quod liceat nescimus adhuc, and cuncta licere, Credimus. Auson.
but not from the preceptory part of the Law) that they have now made simple
people, little seen in heavenly matters, believe, that the reyns lie loose upon
every Christian's neck, and they left to their own disposalls; that there is a
liberty purchased for Christians, a quidlibet audendi, to do what every man
likes, and to live under no obedience to Governors, whether Ecclesiastical
or Civil.

How to take Pleasure safely.
HE that handles a Hedghog takes him by the heel, Claudius Viexmont.
and not by the head, otherwise he may chance to beshrew his fingers; for,
though it seem to be but a poor silly creature, not likely to do any great
harm; yet it is full of bristles or prickles, Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
whereby it may annoy a man very much. Thus must we take pleasures, not by the
head, but by the heel, considering not the beginning, but the ending of them;
for they may seem to be little or nothing dangerous at the first, yet
afterward, as with bristles or prickles, they will pierce through the very
conscience with pains intolerable.

The Secrets of God's Counsels not to be pryed into.
THe Israelites charge is, They must not presume to go up to the Mount. And
indeed, a boundary were no boundary, if it might be passed. A man knows by his
ground, B. Lake's Ser^on Exodus chapter 19.
that an Enclosure is no Enclosure, if it may be common. But how much more must
this be conceived of the Enclosure of God, that ground which he has fenced
unto himself for a sanctuary. We must take heed then of profaning the Sanctuary
of God, and venturing in sacred things further than he gives leave. Curiosity
in this kind has been the mother of Heresies, when men have been busily witty
in searching into, rather than believing of, that profound Article of the
Creed, concerning God the Father. Man that is not able to understand his own
Nature, (David confesses, Psalm. 139. 6.
such knowledge is too wonderful for him) dreameth, that he can comprehend the
nature of God. Quae Deus occulta esse voluit non sunt scrutanda.
Others have lost themselves, whilst they have dived into the mysteries of the
Incarnation, who are not able to understand their own Regeneration. Thus they
busy themselves, as some have done, to know where Lazaras's soul was, when his
body lay three days in the grave, and in the mean time care not what becomes
of their own souls; so that, what with the cuous, Cur, Prosper. de vo cat
gentium.
Why, of some, and Quomodo, How, of others; there has been manifold passing
the bounds, climbing the mount, and intrusions upon God, and the things of God.
Tu^ quo^ nihil resert percontari de^inas.
There has been a great deal of foolish knowledge in the world, prying into
God's Ark, enquiring into things not revealed; so that as there needs a spur
unto good and saving knowledge, Terent.
so a bridle to restrain and keep men in, from that knowledge which is curious
and presumptuous: Romans 12.
And blessed is that discretion which makes wise to s^briety.


HE that has an house to build, Will. Attersol on Philemon.
will not admit of every workman that offers his help, or that is commended
by others, or will labor best cheap; but he will be sure to have the most
experienced, the most able workman. Thus it was, when the Tabernacle of God was
to be builded, 1 Kin. 12. 32.
they took not tag and rag from amongst the refuse of the Congregation, Qui
ordinant indignos eisdem subjacent poenis Chrysostom. de dignit. sacerdot.
but such as were filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,
in knowledge, and in all workmanship. And shall we then choose or commend to
the Ministry, to the spiritual building of the house of God, every cobbler and
bungler, unsufficient, illiterate persons, either Ieroboam's Priests, that were
of the lowest of the people; or such as Eli's sons, who were the lewdest of the
people.


LYcurgus being importuned to establish a popular Estate amongst the
Lacedaemonians, Plutarch. Moral.
that so the least and the meanest, and most unfit to rule, might bear like
sway with the greatest and wisest, Mr. Woodnoth ut antea.
fitly answered, That he who most desired it, should begin it first at home in
his own house; presuming, that in a private house or family, parity would never
be liked. And thus, there have been The Levelling party.
some both in Church and Commonwealth, that so earnestly longed for equality in
the one, and parity in the other, Ordine servato, mundus servatur. Lucan.
that they would no longer dispute for it, but fell to fight for it; and since
they could not bring it in with their tongues, they would therefore take help
of their hands. Cant. 6. 4. Romans 13.
But it were to be wished, that all so minded, would learn some wit from
Lycurgus, in their anger; and first weigh in judgment, by the poise of wisdom,
in the balance of indifferency, hanging upon the beam and rule of Right, the
inconvenience of pulling down all Officers, and setting up community of Rule in
an Army; and then consider, whether the like equal Masterdom may be justly put
upon the Church, which is an Army with banners; or such a level flatted upon
the face of the Commonwealth, which is to consist of Governors and Governed.


SR Founder of the great Library at Oxon.
Thomas Bodley, that great advancer of Learning, did give for his Arms three
Crowns, with this Posie, Quarta perennis erit; as if he should have said,
These three Crowns which I bear in my Coat, are but the difference of my House
and Gentry; but, Quarta perennis erit, the fourth Crown which I look for in
Heaven, shall be everlasting and immortal. That fourth, though it be but one
Crown, yet shall be worth all those three Crowns, yea, three thousand more
than such as those are: Th. Playfer's Sermon.
The fourth shall be eternal. Thus it is, that the men of this world may
abound in such things as may make them seem more excellent than their
neighbors, Job 19. 9.
may be crowned with Rose-buds, with outward pomp and splendor: But this
Crown, Alii flammis exusti, alii ferro perempti, etc.
if not taken off their heads by violence, will fall of it self by mortality,
and then there is an end of all their hopes and honors both together. Now the
state of many of the dearest of God's children here in this life, Eusebius. hist.
lib. 8. cap. 11. 12. Heb. 11.
is not usually so eminent and illustrious: they wander up and down in
sheepskins, and goat skins; are made a byword, Credula vit^^ Spes ^ovet, and
melius eras fore semper ^it.
a laughing stock, the drunkard's song; and instead of roses, they are crowned
with thorns, and for the testimony of a good conscience, many times with
martyrdom. Yet here is their comfort, that there is a crown of life, of
righteousness, immortal, Manet alttr^. (coelo.)
incorruptible, laid up for them in the highest heavens, which God the
righteous Judge will set upon their heads in that day, Revel 2. 10. 2 Timothy 4.
8. 1 Cor. 9. 15.
when all their enemies shall be clothed with shame and confusion of face for
ever.

What true Repentance is.
SIn is an aversion from God, and conversion to the World; Repentance therefore
must shake off the World, B. Lake Sermon. on Luke 3.
and embrace God. Nazianzene sets it forth in a very fit resemblance, comparing
the soul to a pair of writing Tables, out of which must be washed whatsoever
was written with sin, Scelerum si been poenitet, Er^ denda, etc.
and instead thereof must be entered the writing of grace; both these are
necessary in true repentance: God has dedicated both parts in His own
Repentance, Hora^.
for as when He repented of the evil intended against us, He does not only
give over to have us, but also He does embrace us with love: Even so, when we
repent of our sins against God, we must not only cease for to hate Him, but
begin to love Him also.

Content, a great blessing of God.
ONe observes concerning Manna, when the People were contented with the
allowance that God gave them, Alph. Tostatus.
then it was very good; but when they would not be content with God's
allowance, Jer. Borogh' s Heart-divisions
but would be gathering more, then says the Text, Exodus 16. 20.
There were worms in it. So when we are content with our conditions, and that
which God disposes of us to be in, there is a blessing in it; but if we must
needs be reaching out for more than God has allotted, or to keep it longer
than God would have us to have it, then there will be worms in it, a canker to
eat it, a moth to fret it, nothing at all that is good.

Not to envy each others Gifts or Preferments.
IT is said of one Pelaretus a Lacedemonian, Plut. Ap^phthegm.
that standing for a place of credit, to be one of the 300. which was a degree
of honor at Sparta; and missing of it, though a man highly deserving, Alterius
rebus non macrescit opimis.
yet he was so far from complaining, or grudging, or grieving threat, that when
others marvelled at his contentment, and enquired of his reason, he told them,
That he rejoiced at the happiness of that Commonwealth, that it had three
hundred men more worthy to govern than himself. Mr. Woodnoth (...) antea.
Invide, quid sus piras? Proprium ne malum, an alienum bonum? Basil.
But how many are there in these times of clearer judgment, wherein it is
apparently known, that true godliness teaches every man contentment, to move
in that Orb and place where God has placed him, with that portion that God
has given him: Yet, as sore eyes are offended at clear lights, so they fret at
the brightness of other men's fortunes, virtues, and prosperity, and envy
because of other men's wealth or honor. How many rage and storm like Aeolus,
not that 300. nor three, but some one eminent person, is preferred before them.

Riches have wings.
IT is a term amongst Falconers, Th. Fuller' s Sermon. at S. Clem. Land. 1647.
that if a Hawk fly high, she lessens, O she lessens, (says the Falconer);
but if she soar yet higher, then he cries out, O she vanishes, she vanishes.
And it is now found to be true by sad and woeful experience, that Riches are
upon the wing, and have of late by one means or other, taken such a flight out
of many men's purses, that they have lessened and lessened every day more and
more, and are now at present by the continuance of time, even as good as quite
vanished.

Rulers and Governors are the supporters of a Commonwealth.
THere is a generation of men that are murmurers and mutineers, Plutarch. in
Coriolan.
such as speak evil of Authority, Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 9.
and do withdraw their necks from obedience, upon this ground, That Superiors
live by the sweat of the Inferiors brows, being themselves devoid of care;
Menenius Agrippa.
their quarrel is like that in the Apologue, That out ward members of the body
fell out against the stomach, they complained of his l^zinesse, and their own
painfulnesse, B. Lake' s Sermon. on Esa. chap. 9.
and therefore conspired to starve him, and ease themselves; they even
discovered their folly, for soon after, the hands began to faint, and the legs
to falter, and the whole body to pine: Then, and not till then; they perceived,
that the stomach, Non populus co^sa gubernatoris, sed gubernator, etc. Plato
apud volat.
which they condemned as lazy, labored for them all, and that they were
beholden to the labor of the Stomach, that themselves had any streng^h to
labor. So it is in the body Politic, though the State of the Prince or Ruler
be supported by the Commons, yet the spring of the Commonwealth is the
providence of the Prince; and soon will the Streams dry, if that Fountain be
damned up.


A Fisherman, Joh. Andrews, a Serman at S. Paul's, Land. 1616.
when he casts his angle into the River, does not throw the hook in, bare,
naked, and uncovered, for then he knows the fish will never bite; and
therefore he hides the hook within a worm, or some other bait, and so the fish
biting at the worm, is catched by the hook. Thus Christ speaking of himself,
says, Ego vermis and non homo; Psalm. 22. 6. Greg. Nyssen. Orat. cap. 23.
he coming to perform the great work of our Redemption, did cover and hide his
Godhead within the worm of his human Nature: The grand water-Serpent,
Leviathan, Job 40. 20. the Devil, thinking to swallow the worm of his
Humanity, was caught upon the hook of his Divinity; this hook stuck in his
jaws, and tore him very sore; by thinking to destroy Christ, he destroyed his
own Kingdom, and lost his own power for ever.


PYthagoras bound all those whom he received into his School, Laert Diogen. in
vita.
to five years silence, that they might not fly nor be chirping on every
hedge, before they were fledged; that as soon as ever they crept from the
shell, they might not aspire to the house top; Erasm* in Adag. ex Suida. Mr.
Woodnoth, ut antea. Quis homo est tanta confidentia ut sacerdotium, etc. Plaut.
Rud. Barbarus has segetes? Virgil.
that their tongues might not run before their wits; that they might hear
sufficiently, before they spoke boldly. And so strong was his (...), so much
did his word prevail with them, that faithfully and constantly they obeyed his
commandment. Many Tutors now adays, though wiser and better than Pythagoras;
yet, seeing their young ones too forward to make wing, cannot possibly beat
them back into the nest, cannot keep their Pupills within the limits of
learners five years, no, nor four years, till they have taken some Degree in
Schools; but they must needs in all haste take upon them the sacred profession
of God's Word; and not only some thin, obscure, ignorant Roguel, some Parishes
of the Country; but Jerusalem, and the chief Cities, but the greatest
Congregations, and most knowing people, must take notice of their ripe and rare
intelligence, in their own, though raw in other men's opinions. Being drunken
with pride, they delight to be seen in the most public Assemblies, as there
are some that must needs show themselves in the Market or Fair, being drunken
with wine, or some meaner liquor.


IF a great King should encourage a poor man in his suit, Alphons. ab Avendano
in Matthew. cap. 5.
and say unto him, Alas poor man, I p^rceive thy distress; do but draw up thy
petition, and I will give thee a satisfactory answer; this would be a ground of
great hope: But if he shall say, Go to my Secretary, and bid him draw it up
thus and thus, and in this manner, would not this be a matter of greater
comfort? Yea, but if he shall say to the Prince his Son, standing by him, Do
you present this poor man's petition into my hands, what unspeakable comfort
must this needs be? And just thus God deals with his children; God hears
our prayers, Romans 8. 34.
the blessed Spirit draws them up, and Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
presents them to his Father. Without all doubt, great is the comfort of that
poor soul, that can by prayer have two or three walks a day upon this Mount
Tabor, and with holy Moses, converse with God in three Persons, on the Horeb of
fervent Prayer; for then, with Jacob, he sees the sweet vision of Angelis,
ascending and descending, climbing up and down that sacred Ladder, which stands
betwixt Heaven and Earth; at the top of it is the Father, the whole length of
it is in the Son, and the Spirit does firmly fasten it thereunto.

Christ's government is a peaceable government.
DIvus Nerva (says Tacitus) duas res olim insatiabiles con^unxit, Annal. lib.
3. Xyphilin. hist.
Imperium and Libertalem; He spoke with the most, that ascribed so much to
Nerva, as that he should join two such inconvertible things, as Government and
Liberty, the one calling for subjection, B. Lake' s Sermon. on Esa. 9.
the other intending nothing but disorder. But it may be truly said of Christ,
that his Kingdom is a Kingdom of peace; his service, perfect freedom; that
where he reigns, there is peace, and free liberty for every subject; so
sweetly, so freely, so comfortably, are all things carried, where the Scepter
of Christ is set up in the hearts of men.

Alms given to the Poor are the Giver's gain.
THeir ordinary form of begging in Italy, Relation di Botero.
is not after the manner of our English, I pray you bestow something on a poor
man, T^tevil' s Essays.
etc. but, Fate ben per voi, Do good for your own sakes. So those that are
courteous, Ephesians. 4. 3^. Matthew. 14. 1. Joh. 4. 7.
and tenderhearted toward others, (...), they gratify themselves, says the
mouth of Truth. The Lord that fed five thousand, could always have fed Himself
and his Disciples; but he would be relieved by the hands of Women, that so
their charity toward him, might be an occasion of benefit to themselves. And
so it is with us, we pleasure not the poor so much by our giving, as we do
profit our selves by their receiving.

Officers to be honest in their places.
ISocrates, In Orat. ad De monicum.
an Athenian Orator, in his counsel to Demonicus, (a young Gentleman, like to
be called to a great place) says unto him thus; (...), etc. That he should
depart from a Place or Office conferred upon him, Mr. Woodnoth, ut antea.
(...), not more rich, but more honorable, then when first he undertook it.
The instruction given by this Heathen, may shame many Christians; Quocunque
modo rem.
some Officers in these days regard not, with what dishonor or dishonesty,
they keep or leave their Places, Per fas and nefas.
so they may be rich; never fear, though they tread their wine out of other
men's grapes, reap their corn out of other men's fields, so they may store their
own houses with provision, so they may make their children great, and turn them
into Gallants; they take no care, make no scruple, though they turn their own
souls into hell.

Prosperity of wicked men destructive.
IT is said of the Locusts, Sam. Faucer, a Sermon. at St. Alphag. Lord. 1646.
that came out of the bottomless pit, that they were like unto Horses, and on
their heads were, as it were, Crowns of gold; and their faces were, as it were,
faces of men; and their hairs as the hair of a Woman, and their teeth were,
Rev. 9. 10. 11.
as it were, the teeth of Lions, etc. Here are quasi, Horses; quasi, Crowns of
gold; quasi, faces of Men, etc. Just such are all the comforts and prosperity
of wicked men; their gold and their silver, but, as it were, gold and silver;
their prosperity and plenty, but, as it were, prosperity and plenty; their
victories and success, but, as it were, victories and success. But when the
blessed Evangelist comes to set down a description of the Locusts tails,
Pros^era hujus mundi asperitatem habent v^ram. etc. Aug. Epist. 36.
he does not say, There were as it were stings in their tails; but in plain
downright positive terms, There were stings in their tails, r^all, true, not
imaginary stings. And such is the evil that attends upon the thriving and
prosperous estate of wicked men, there is a sting in the tail of it, such as is
not quasi, but realiter, what it seems to be.

peace to the wicked.
THere is no peace unto the wicked, says my God, B. Lake's Ser. on Esa^ chap.
9.
Esa. 57. He compares them to the Sea, still raging and foaming, casting out
their own shame: And Solomon, unto vanity, adds vexation of spirit. It may be
seen in the particular case of all wicked men, that surely they have no rest;
no rest, ab intra, they never can light on that which does sistere appetitum;
De vitio rotantur in vitium. Greg. in Psalm poenit.
which makes them range in their desires, in their endeavors, never finding
where to settle: and ab extra too, they are unquiet; for, the whirlwind of God
drives them like chaff, and like a flood it drives them down the stream. And
indeed, how should they be quiet, that are compared to the Sea, which when
there is no storm, cannot stand still, but has his flux and reflux? and no
wonder, for it is the subject of the Moon, than which, nothing is more
changeable: A fit emblem of the World, upon which, whosoever depends, cannot
be stable, when the world it self is so unstedfast. And such is a wicked man
too, unstable, uncertain, disquieted, distracted in all his ways.

exemplary
IF the mountains overflow with waters, Not. Hardy Sermon. at Westminst.
the valleys are the better; and if the head be full of ill humors, the whole
body fares the worse. The Actions of Rulers are most commonly rules for the
People's actions, and their Example passes as current as their Coin. Regis ad
exemplum, etc.
If a Peasant meet luxury in a scarlet robe, he dares be such, having so fair a
cloak for it. The common People are like tempered wax, easily receiving
impressions from the seals of great men's vices, they care not to sin by
prescription, and damn themselves with Authority. And it is the unhappy
privilege of Greatness, to warrant by example as well other's, as its own
sins; whilst the unadvised Vulgar take up crimes on trust, and perish by credit.

precious.
SAint Ambrose writes, Ambros. Epist. tom. 5.
that Theodosius the Emperor, when he dyed, had a greater care of the Church,
than of his sickness; his life was not dear unto him, so the Church might
flourish after his death; Woodnoth, ut antea.
so peace might be within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces. Such
ought to be the care of every good Christian, to pray for the peace, to act for
the peace, to contend for the peace of the Church: But so it is, that if men
may enjoy health, and obtain plenty for the back and belly, wax rich and great,
and live like Emperors, no matter which way Religion turns, no matter how
the Church fares, either for the future, or the present; how it goes with the
Church they respect little, so themselves and their Families may go on; nay,
which is yet a worse symptom, and bewrays the great power of Satan over
them, Quocunque mo do rem.
what scruple at all do they make, to pill, and spoil, and rob the Church, so
as they may enrich themselves, and their Families thereby?


PLutarch records an excellent speech of Pelopides, Plutarch in vita and in
Apophthegm.
when going out of his house to the Wars, his Wife came to take her leave of
him, and with tears in her eyes, prays him to look to himself: O my good wife
(said he), It is for private Soldiers to be careful of themselves, not for
those in public place; they must have an eye to save other men's lives. Such a
spirit becomes every man in public place; flesh and blood will be apt to
prompt a man, Sudandum estiis qui Magistratum gerunt, etc.
that it is good to sleep in a whole skin, why should a man hazard himself, and
bring himself into danger. But let such know, that men in public places, Cic.
pro Sestio.
are to have public spirits, and to take notice, that though there be more
danger by standing in the gap, than getting behind the hedge, yet it is best to
be where God looks for them to be.

Every man to be employed in his Calling.
NO Creature, B. Lake' s Ser. on Esa. chap. 9. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
though destitute of Reason, but keeps his course, they let us see in their
working, whereto they were ordained: The Sun gives his light, the fire his
heat, the water moistness, the earth bears fruit. In all Creatures may be
read this lesson, Deus and natura nihil faciunt frustra. And if Creatures, void
of Reason, do so; much more should those that are endued with Reason, not to
wrap up their Talent in a napkin, and hide it; but, as St. Peter advises,
Every one as he has received the gift, so he must dispose it.

Death strips us of all outward things.
SAladine, Coccius Sabellic En. lib. 9. 5.
a Turkish Emperor, he that first of that Nation conquered Jerusalem, lying at
the point of death, after many glorious Victories, commanded that a white sheet
should be born before him to his grave, upon the point of a spear, with this
proclamation, Bergomensis. lib. 12.
These are the rich spoils which Saladine carries away with him, of all his
triumphs and victories, Platina. in Caelestin. 30. Woodnoth, ut antea.
of all the riches and Realms that he had, now nothing at all is left but this
sheet. Why then should we desire so much after other men's goods, and seek to
get them by hook and by crook? Why should we devour houses, even widows
houses? Why should we encroach upon other men's fields, and seek unlawfully to
join land to land, calling the lands after our own names, entayling them upon
children's children, to make (as the Lawyers speak) a perpetuity? when at last,
Omnia mors aequat. Claudian
if we could conquer never so much, rake and scrape up all that we can reach,
we must come to the pit with Saladine, and carry nothing away with us, but a
shrouding mantle.

Selfishnesse condemned.
THere is a story of a Fool, Steph. Marshal' s Sermon. at Westminster. 1644
who being left in a chamber, and the door locked when he was asleep; after he
awakes, and finds the door fast, and all the people gone, he cries out at the
window, Oh my self, my self, Oh my self! Such Fools have we now amongst us in
these self-seeking days; nothing but self is in men's thoughts, in their
hearts, and all their endeavors; self ends, self-policy; like that of Israel,
an empty Vine, Hos. 10. 1. Phil. 2. 21.
that brings forth fruit to her self. All seek their own, themselves, not the
things of God; and it were just with God to leave such men to themselves
hereafter, that look so much to themselves here in this World.

To bless God for the peace of Conscience.
WHen the Romans by conquest might have given Law to the Grecians at Corinth,
Titus Livius in hist.
in the solemn time of the Isthmian games, their General by an Herald
unexpectedly proclaimed freedom to all the Cities of Greece; the Proclamation
at first did so amaze the Grecians, that they did not believe it to be true;
but when it was proclaimed the second time, they gave such a shout, that the
very birds flying in the air were astonished therewith, and fell dead to the
ground. But if you will have a better story, take that of the Jews, who when
at first they heard of Cyrus's Proclamation, and that the Lord thereby had
turned the captivity of Sion, they confess, that at the first hearing of it,
they were like men that dreamed; but afterward, Psalm. 126. B. Lake' s Ser. on
Hagg. chapter 1.
their mouths were filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing. Now
the peace that the Grecians and the Jews had, was but the peace of a People,
or a Nation, and a great blessing of God too; but how much more reason is
there, that our affections should be strained to the highest pitch of ^oy and
thanks, when we hear of the Proclamation of the peace of conscience? that
peace, which is not of our bodies, but of our souls; not of our earthly, but of
our heavenly estate; a peace that shall be begun here, that shall endure for
ever hereafter; such a peace, as will make God at peace with us, reconcile us
to our selves, and make us at concord with all the world.


FAbius Maximus kept aloof from the Carthagenian Army, T. Livii. Dec. 3. lib.
12 Dan Featly' s Sermon.
upon an high hill, till he saw that Han^^bal had worsted (...) in the plain;
but then he falls upon him, and routs all his Troops: Whereupon Hannibal
uttered that memorable speech, Nihil vel parvum h^stile a te^g^ fit
r^linquc^dum. Not. Com. lib. 16.
I ever feared, that the cloud which hovered so long on the hills, would in the
end pour down, and give us a sad shour. The case is ours, we are together by
the ears in the plain, as to the matter of judgment especially; but Fabius is
upon the hill, there is a considerable party upon the mountains, a foreign
Enemy, that has an eye upon our divisions, and if not prevented, may in all
likelihood, by the reason of our sins, be the destruction of us.


Precious things, ^osh. Shute H^gar and Sarah.
whereof we make account, the weaker they be, the more tenderly and charily
they are to be handled, as China-dishes, and Crystall-glasses, and the like; of
all parts of the body, the eye is most ^enderly used and touched. Now what
things, what persons are more precious than a Wife? and yet withal a weak
vessel, and therefore to be born withal. As the Husband is the stronger, so
he must bear with the infirmities of the weak. Romans 15. Exodus 4. 25. 1 King.
21. 1 Pet. 3. 7.
The language of Zipporah was not so rough to Moses, as his was smooth to her;
Ahab replies not to the upbraiding words of Iezeball; and they that do
otherwise, may look big, and stand upon their headship and authority; but the
wisdom that should be in such heads, as to dwell with their wives according to
knowledge, is much to be questioned. And certainly, this is not to bear with
the weaker vessel, but rather to crush and shatter, what they should but
tenderly touch.


THe Charriot-wheeles when they run, the second runs near the first all the day
long, Joh. Preston's Covenant of God with Man.
but never overtakes it. In a Clock, the second minute follows the first, but
never reaches it. So it is with all ^uncta^ors in Religion, such as defer the
time of Repentance, as the doing of it now and now; and to morrow, and to
morrow: Tol^e mora^: semper n^cuit differ, etc. Lucan.
Now these little distances deceive us, and delude us; we think to do it i^ a
short ^im^, and by reason of the neernesse and vicinity of the time, we think
we shall do it easily, that we can take hold of that time: But it is not so; we
are served just as Grasshoppers and Butterflies deceive children, when they
think to lay their ^and upon them, they hop a little further, and a little
further, that at last they take them not at all. And thus do we cozen our
selves, we lose our life, we lose our op^ortu^ity of grace, thinking that we
may take it when we please.


MArk the Iaylors, Dan. Featly' s Clavis mystica.
they often suffer their Prisoners to have their hands and feet free, neither
are they in any fear, that they will make an escape, so long as the
prison-doors are sure locked, and fast barred. Thus deals Satan with those
men, that he holds in his captivity, he lets them sometimes have their
hands at liberty, to reach out an alms to the poor; and sometimes their feet
at liberty, to go to Church, to hear the Word preached; but he will be sure to
keep their ears, which are the gates and doors of their soul, so fast made up,
that they shall hear nothing to their comfort; and if they do, it shall be to
little purpose.

The Minister's Authority should be as much looked on as his sufficiency.
TWo things are considerable in a Minister, B. Lake's Ser. on Haggai, chap. 2.
his sufficiency and his authority: the people listen much to his sufficiency,
but take little heed to his authority; and therefore come they to Church,
rather to judge than to be judged, forgetting that many may be as skillful, but
none can be so powerful in binding and loosing, as is the Minister. A Judge or
a Justice of Peace may have less Law in him, than a private man, but he has
much more power, and they that appear before him, regard his acts according to
h^s power: So should it be in the Church. But men fear the Magistrates that are
under earthly Kings, because the pains which they inflict are corporal; our
hands, our feet, ^eel their manacles and fetters: And did but our souls as
truly feel, as indeed they should, the Pastor's binding and loosing of them,
Sententia excommunicationis pastoris metuenda est. Greg in regist.
we would make more account of those offices than we do. And it were good we
did so; for they so bind, as that they can loose again; but if we neglect them,
when our Lord and Master comes, he will command all contemners so to be bound
hand and foot, that they shall never be loosed again.

Self-praises condemned.
CAto the elder, Plinii hist. Plutarch in Apophthegm. Id. in Cicerone.
had that commendations given him by consent, which none in his time was
thought fit to deserve, (except it were one) to be Optimus Orator, optimus
Senator, and optimus Imperator: A most singular Orator, a most singular
Statesman, and a most singular General: And yet this so singular a man, was so
much given to boast himself, that his veriest friends were ashamed of him. And
there was Tully too, Fulgosus lib. 8. cap. 15.
a man so excellently qualified, that none but a Tully, that is, one admirably
eloquent, was sufficient to speak his worth; and yet that is not unremembred by
them, B. Smith's Ser.
who were willing to conceal a blemish in him, that his speech which flowed
from him as sweet as the honey, he made to taste as bitter as wormwood many
times, by the interlacing of his own praises. But these were such, as saw God
only by the dim light of Nature, therefore the more excusable. What then shall
become of them, that know their Masters will? such as by the Sunshine of the
Gospel cannot but discern, Luke 9. 4^. Jer. 9. 23.
that, He who is the greatest, ought to account himself as the least; that, It
is not for the wiseman to glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man to glory in
his strength, nor the rich man to glory in his riches; but for him that
gloryeth, to glory in this, that he understands and knows God, who is the
giver of all things; yet do expiscari famam, Hoc faciunt (...) quos gloria
vexat inanis.
are never in the right kue, till Mountebank-like, they are exposing themselves
in their own worth upon every stage: Surely such a wise man will prove a ^ool,
such a strong man will turn his back, such a rich man will scratch a beggar by
the head, when God shall call for an account of their stewardship, and to
reckon with them for what they have received.

Complaint of the want of Faith, is an argument of true Faith.
THere is mention made of a melancholy person, Treatise of Melancholy, page
215.
who was so strongly possessed, that he complained he had no head, nor could be
otherwise persuaded, than by that course which Philotimus, a learned Physician,
took with him, when he caused to be made a cap of lead, very weighty and heavy,
and the same to be put upon his head, that feeling the weight thereof upon his
head, he might be persuaded he had a head. Thus it is with weak Christians,
their complaint of the want of Faith, Joh. Negus's Treatise of Obedience.
is an argument of the being of their faith, wherein like this Melancholic^,
they think they want that, which indeed they have. And the same cure would do
well with them, that was fitted for him; lay upon them no other burden, but
the weight of their own burden, the burden of holy sorrow, and grief, and
doubtful despair for their wanting of faith, (as themselves do deem) which is
so weighty, as they are like to sink under it; yet that being laid upon the
head of their faith, they may be asked, whether they feel any such weight, and
are pressed under the heavy burden of the same? which if they be, let them
never doubt more, but that they have faith, and their faith has both head and
heart too, that has life in it, which moves the sense, and causes that
feeling, and works that holy grief and sorrow so to complain, the whole soul
being quickened thereby throughout, and all the graces of God's Spirit, that are
therein.


THere lies a great guilt upon Christian states, and this amongst the rest,
that they have not been careful to bring them that sit in darkness, B. Lake's
Ser. on 1 Kin. 8. 37.
and in the shadow of death, to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Much travailing
there is to the Indias, East, and West; but wherefore? Some go to possess
themselves of the lands of the Infidells, but most for commerce; and by
commerce, to grow richer by their goods. But where is the Prince or State, that
pittieth their souls, and without any worldly respect, endeavors the gaining
of them unto God? Some show there is that way, but a very poor one; it is but
(...), an accessory to our worldly desire, (...) it is not; Matthew. 6.
it is not our primary intention: whereas Christ's method is, primum quaerite,
etc. If the Apostles and Apostolic men had affected our salvation no more, we
might have continued till this day, such as sometimes we were, barbarous
subjects to the Prince of darkness.


ST. Paul prayed, Phil. 1. 9. Heb. 13. 1. Dan. Fea^ly's Sermon.
that the Philippian's love might abound more and more; and he exhorted also
the Hebrews, Let brotherly love continue. But in these uncharitable days of
ours, the Exhortation may be cast into a new mould, Let brotherly love begin;
for were it but begun, there could not be so many quarrels, so many sects, so
many factions, so many broiles, such envy, hatred, and malice, as is at this
day to be found amongst us.


NOne ever more faithful in God's House than Moses, B. Smith' s Ser. on Joh.
6. Exodus 17.
none deeper in God's Book, none more graced with Miracles, none more careful
of the People's good, and none more honored by the People than himself was;
yet, if the People be but once distressed, and straightened in their provisions,
they will put down Moses, and set up a new Governor. Gal. 4. 15.
How did the People at the first entertain Paul? even as an Angel of light, and
were ready to pull out their eyes, and to give them to him to do him good; but
after they had once hearkened to seducers, then was St. Paul no longer a Father
to them, Gal. 4. 16.
but an enemy; and in stead of plucking out their own eyes to do him good, they
seemed forward enough to pluck out St. Paul's eyes, to do their falls Apostles a
pleasure. Joh. 12. 13.
Nay, had not Christ himself an Hosanna one day, and a crucifige on the next?
Hence it is, that nothing is more uncertain, than the minds of that Bellua
multorum capitum, Neu^rum modo, mas modo, vulgus.
the Multitude, constant in nothing but inconstancy, you cannot tell where to
have them; nothing more uncertain than their hearts and minds, Scinditur
incertum studia in contraria vulgus. Virgil.
you cannot tell when you have them; nothing more ungrateful, or a worse
esteemer of men's deserts, you cannot make any account of recompense from them;
humorous, clamorou^, (...), unco^stant, giddy headed, etc. have always been
the proper adjuncts of the People.


PHarnaces sent a Crown to Caesar, at the same time he rebelled against him;
but he returned the Crown, and this message back, Faciat imperata prius, Let
him return to his obedience first, Plutarch in Pompeio. Dr. Staughton' s Sermon.
and then I will accept the Crown by way of recognisance. Thus God will not be
crowned with our bare profession, except we crown that with a suitable
conversation.

Man's being is from God.
ABen Ezra, Joh. Plantavit. Flori^^g. Rabbin.
a learned Rabbi of the Jews, has a witty conceit of the Hebrew names, that
signify Man and Woman, Ish and Ishak; they have in them (says he) some
letters, that are part of the Name of God, (JEHOVAH) which if you take away,
there will remain no other letters, than those that make up the word, which
signifies fire. The Moral of the conceit is, That their subsistence is in God,
and they will both come to ruin, Phil. 3. B. Lake' s Ser. on Ezra.
if they be severed from him. St. Paul makes this good, It were to be wished
that we did all learn of him, whence to take, and how to make the estimate of
our Being, we should not then so much overvalue our nothing, and undervalue
that which can make us something, as commonly we do.

The Doctrine of free Grace abused by licentious Libertines.
THe Philosopher observed, that of three of the best things in the world,
through the wickedness of men, three of the worst things proceeded and grew:
1. Of Virtue, Envy. 2. Of Truth, Hatred. 3. Of Familiarity, Contempt.
But we that are Christians may add a fourth, viz. Of the Doctrine of free
Justification, carnail Liberty. Combesii Enchiridion.
The Catholic Doctrine of Justification by faith alone, Dan. Featly's Clavis
mist.
is the true Nectar of our souls, so called, (...), because it keep^th from
death; yet, fit nectar acetum, this sweetest wine in the Spouses flaggons,
proves no better than vinegar, or rather poison in their stomachs, who turn
free Grace into wantonness, and Christian liberty into all licentiousness.

The Soul^s steighting of Christ offering mercies, deplorable.
HE^odotus in his Urania, Lib. 8.
makes mention of Themistocles, coming upon the men of Andrus, for a round sum
of money, and to that purpose said unto them, that he had brought two goddesses
into them, Persuasion and Necessity. The men of Andrus answered him, that they
had likewise two great goddesses with them, which did forbid them to give him
any money, and those were Pov^rty and Impossibility. B. Smith' s Ser. on 2 Kin.
6. Matthew. 8. Luke 14. 23.
Thus Christ, he comes unto the sons of men, with an Invitation, and a
Compellation; an Invitation, Venite ad me, etc. Come unto me, all ye that are
weary and laden, etc. a Compellation, Compelle intrare, etc. Compel them to
enter, etc. But what return does the Soul make? she bolts up the door of the
heart, denies entrance, and either demurs with those builders in Haggai, Nondum
venit tempus, It is time enough yet to serve the Lord; or else makes answer
with a flat Nolumus hunc regnare, Luke 19. 14.
We will not have this man to reign over us.

God's goodness satisfied with Man's thankfulness.
THemistocles, Plutarch in vita.
when he entered into the Olympic games, and all the Grecians cast their eyes
upon him, and pointed at him, and whispered one to another, This is
Themistocles that delivered Greece from Xerxes, and the barbarous Perstans;
this is Themistocles. Suidas. hist.
All which he having taken notice of, said; This day I must confess I am
abundantly recompensed, for all the pains that ever I took for Greece. Thus Go^
looks for no other reward, Dr. Staughton' s Sermon.
but this; he loads us with benefits, he gives all the commodities of the world
to the sons of men, reserving only this Royalty to himself; De omni bono
apparen^i a nobis referantur Deo lauds. Bernard. Psalm. 107.
He calls for no other tribute, but that we should attribute all unto him, give
him the glory, with a Non nobis, Domine, non nobis. And therefore it is, that
the Psalmist repeats it very often, and very pathetically, O that men would
therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wondrous works that he
has done for the children of men.


JUdges and Magistrates are the Physicians of the State, B. Lake' s Sermon. on
Ezra.
and sins are the diseases of it. What skills it, whether a Gangreen begin at
the head, or the heel, seeing both ways it will kill, if the part that is
diseased be not cut off; except this be the difference, that the head being
nearer the heart, a Gangreen in the head will kill sooner, than that which is
in the heel. Rerum German. Scriptores.
Even so will the sins of great Ones overthrow a State sooner, than those of
the meaner sort; therefore wise was that advice of Sigismund the Emperor, when
upon a motion to reform the Church, one said, Let us begin at the Minorites;
Nay rather (says the Emperor) let us begin at the Majorites; for if the great
ones be good, the meaner cannot be easily ill; but be the mean ones never so
good, the great will be nothing the better.


AEschines perceiving every one give Socrates something for a present, Diog.
Lacrtius in vita.
said unto him, Because I have nothing else to give, I will give thee my self.
Do so, (says Socrates) and I will give thee back again to thy self, J. Donne'
s Ser. at St. Paul's Land. 1626.
better then when I received thee. So (says God) if thou will give thy self to
me in thy prayers, in thy praises, in thy affections, and in all thy actions, I
will give thy self back so much mended, that thou shall receive thy self, and
Me too; thy self in a holy liberty, to walk in the world in a calling; My self,
in giving a blessing upon all the works of thy calling, and imprinting in thee
a holy desire, to do all things to My glory.


THere is a story of a certain old woman in the Low Countries, Eman. Meteranus
in hist. Belgica.
that she being near her end, required her keeper, of all loves, and in any
case, to put upon her the Cowle of a Friar Minorite, (when she should be ready
to give up the ghost) which she had prepared for that purpose: And (said she)
if death happen to come so suddenly, that thou can not put the whole Cowle
upon me, yet fail not at the least, to put one of my arms into it, that by
virtue thereof, three parts of my sins may be forgiven me, and the fourth
expiated in Purgatory. Thus Meteranus, of the old wifes persuasion touching the
virtue of the ^ryer's Cowle; which persuasion, superstition bred, covetousness
tendered, and folly entertained. It cannot be said so of the virtue of the Robe
of Justice, of Equity, and square dealing, whether distributive or commutative,
private or public, (though all very good) that they should have power to
forgive sins; B. Smith' s Ser. Job 29. 1 John 1.
no, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sins. But this may be boldly
said, that it is an excellent Robe and a Diadem, such a one that yields a
sweet savor unto the nostrills of God, as Esau's garment upon Jacob's back did
to Isaac their father. Genesis 27.
Of all the garments you can put on, after Faith and Love, there is none to be
compared to it. Courtiers may have soft cloathing^, Matthew. 11.
a garment of needle work is only for the Queen's wearing, garments of diverse
colors are suitable for King's Daughters; Psalm. 45.
and there was a Babylonish garment, 2 Samuel 13.
which Achan purloyned to his destruction; Josh. 7.
Herod's glittering apparel, mentioned by Josephus, garments of gold and
silver, In lib. Antiquit. lib. 7. cap 8.
at which Dionysius jested, That they were too cold in the winter, and too
heavy in the summer: Perfumed garments, such as were the undoing of Muliasses
King of Tunis; Iustitia tutamen patriae, curalanguorum solatium pauperum, etc.
Cyprian.
as Paulus Iovius relates. These were for some persons, but not for others;
for some certain times, but not for all. But Justice is a ro^e for all sorts of
men to put on, for all times of the year; sweet without fulsomnesse, precious
without burthensomnesse, safe without dangerousnesse, indifferent to all
degrees, to all persons; common, equal, glorious, full of majesty, and full of
good works.

Miracles, why ceased.
A Gardener, Joh. Weems Pourtrait.
when he transplanteth a Tree out of one ground into another, before the ^ ree
take root, he sets stays to it, he powre^th water at the root of it daily; but
when it once takes root, he cease to water it any more, and pulls away the
stays that he set to uphold it, and suffers it to grow with the ordinary
influence of the Heavens. So the Lord in planting of Religion, he put-to the
help of Miracles, Eccl^siae authoritas miraculis inchoata, vetustate formata.
August.
as helps to stay it; but when it was once confirmed and fastened, and had
taken deep rooting, he took away such helps; so that, as St. Augustine has it,
Qui expectat miraculum, miraculum est, He that looks for a miracle, is a
miracle himself; for, if the death of Christ will not work faith, all the
miracles in the world will not do it.

Other men's harms to be our arms.
WHen the Lion was sick, Christ. Fonseca Quadrages. Sermons. Vestigia nulla
retrorsum.
all the Beasts of the field went to visit him, only the Fox stayed behind,
and would not go unto him; being asked the reason, he answered, I find the
track of many going in, but of none coming out; and I am not so desperate, as
to cast my self wilfully away, when I may sleep in a whole skin. Thus other
men's punishments ought to be our instructions; Iustitia alien^, disciplinan ^
stra.
nocumenta, documenta; their harms, our arms: And that man is a fool, whom
other men's harms cannot make to beware. The ^ootsteps of the Angels that
fell, may mind us of pride, the ashes of Sodom tell us of our filthiness,
Absol^m's hanging by the hair forwarn us of rebellion, etc.

Encompassed by death on all sides.
IN the beginning of every Almanac, Tho. Prior's Sermon. at the ^^neral of B.
Smith, Glocest. 1626. Moriendi mill figurae.
there is usually the picture of a naked man, miserably beset on all sides; the
Ram pusheth at the head, the Bull goareth the neck, the Lion teareth the heart,
the Scorpion stings the privy parts, another shoots at the thighs, etc. Every
man living is but an emblem of that livelesse Anatomy; one dies of an Apoplexy
in the head, another of a Struma in the neck, a third of a Squinancy in the
throat, a fourth of a Gough and Consumption of the lungs, others of
Obstructions, Inflammations, Pluri^ies, Gouts, Dropsies, etc. and him that
escapes the sword of Hazael, 1 King. 19. 17.
him does Iehu slay; and him that escapes the sword of Iehu, does Elisha slay.
Let but God arm the least of all his creatures against the strongest man, it is
present death and dissolution.

A rich man had rather part with God, than his gold.
TAke a narrow mouthed bot^le, B. Wes^field' s Sermon. at Bristol, 1644.
it will receive the wine or beer that is poured into it, without any noise at
all; but if you turn the bottle upside down, the bottom upward, it will not let
any thing out, but with a great deal of bubling and rumbling. Thus it is with
every worldly man, he would quietly, and without any noise or relu^tation (if
possible) suck in the graces of God's Spirit into his heart; but tell him that
the bottle must first be emptyed, Matthew. 19. 21.
that he must sell all that he has, and gi^e to the poor; durus est hic sermo,
this is a hard saying; how does he murmu^ and repine at this? choosing with
that profane wretch, rather to have his part in Paris than in Paradise, the
pleasures of sin for a season here in this world, than the pleasures which are
at Gods right hand ^or evermore. Heb. 11. 25.


How sin is made the prevention of sin.
WHen children begin to go, T. Lightfoot' s Sermon. at (...) in Staffordshire,
1642.
they use to be so well conceited of the strength of their legs, that they
need not any help of their Nurse; to let them see their folly, the Nurse will
leave them to their selves, that so smarting by a ^a^l, they may better be
brought to find what need they have of their Nurse. The best of us all are but
babes in grace, yet do we think that we can stand of our selves, yea, and run
the ways of God too; now God does refute us by our own experience, and by this
Mistress of fools, makes us better known to our selves: But though he leave us
for a time, yet does he not forsake us for ever, no more than a Nurse does the
weakling child; she makes use of one fall, to keep the child from many; and
God does make use of our sinning, to make us see how prone we are to sin, and
so prevent us for the future.


DId the goldsmith but know before hand, Christ. ^onseca's Sermons
Quadragesimal.
that his refining of silver would turn to dross, he would rather break his
bellows and chrysolls in a thousand pieces, than once offer to set himself
about such an unprofitable piece of service. And if many a Father did but know,
that his Son would prove a spend-thrift Devil, he would sooner fire all he
had, than leave one penny behind him.


IT is reported of Dr. Andrew Willet, the volumnious Atlas of Learning, that at
the age of fourteen years, or thereabouts, his father sent him to the
University of Cambridge, where he applied himself so seriously to his studies,
that in short time he had not only gained a good measure of knowledge in the
learned Tongues, but likewise in the Arts, and all necessary literature; so
that it might well be said of him, Plinius in Ep.
as Pliny said of Trajan, Docendi tempore discendi nihil habuit, He had nothing
of those things to learn, when he was to teach them to others. What a shame is
it then for those, that dishonor that Athenian life with Dorick manners? that
like to the father of Francis Iunius, to whom his Grandfather writing, when he
was at the University, Paul Merul. in vita Fran. Junii.
was wont thus to superscribe his Letters, Diony^^o dilecto filio misso ad
studendum, At tu, dum prium floret tibi temporis aetas. Tibul.
To my beloved son Dionysius, sent to study; when (as it seems) he did nothing
less, than that which he was sent about. So many young Scholars spend that
time which should be at their books, aut male, aut nihil, aut aliud agendo,
either doing wickedly, or that which they should not do, or else nothing at
all; so that their Tutors are enforced to dismiss them, with a Pol, ego operam
and oleum perdidi, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain.


WHen Elisha demanded of the Shunamite, 2 King. 4. 15.
what he should do for her, or whether there were any thing to be spoken for
her to the King, or the Captain of the Host, W. Atte^sol on Philem.
she answered, I dwell among my people; she lived in peace and quietness, she
had no cause to make any complaint against any of her neighbors, she was not
driven to make any suit to the King, or the Captain; she troubled not others,
and others troubled not her: And this she accounted an happy life, and so it
was. But what then is the happy estate and condition of the faithful? surely a
thousand times greater; they are at peace with Heaven and earth, with men and
Angels, with themselves and all others, with life and death; there is nothing
that is able to dismay them, nothing able to hurt them.


THey that have a long journey to make, B. Smith' s Ser. on Jer. chap 9.
and but a short time allowed them, must make but short baits by the way, and
cannot stand to take every acquaintance by the hand that they meet: And they
that are to paint or print, or any ways delineate a pitched field, within the
compass of a sheet or two of paper, can make but few soldiers, whole or
complete, Non tam multum, sed tam been.
but are fain to set down for the most part their heads only, or their
Helmets. So he that has many things to speak unto, within a small compass of
time, must contract himself, and be contented to touch only the heads of the
greatest part of them; and as for long discourses, he must wave them.

Curiosity in the hearing of God's Word, condemned.
MAny men take no pleasure in flowers, Christ. Fonseca' s Sermon. Quadrages.
or care any further for them, than to look upon them, smell to them, and have
them in their hands; but the Bees draw from them both honey and wax; and the
skillful Apothecary makes many medicines of them, against diverse and sundry
diseases. Thus, many hear Sermons only for their pleasure, for the elegancy of
the style, delicacy of the words, smoothness of the language, and
gracefulness of the delivery; but this is but to make a nosegay to smell to
for a while, and cast it anon after into a corner; to hear the word gladly, but
in time of temptation to fall away.

Ambition proves its own ruin.
THe poisonfull Aconite, Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 27.
so much desired of the Panther, is purposely hung up by the Hunters, in
vessels above their reach, whereof they are so greedy, as they never leave
leaping and straining thereat, till they burst and kill themselves, and so are
taken. Sr. Rob. Dallington' s Aphorisms.
Thus do men that aim at honor and greatness, too high for their reach, and
too great oftentimes for their merit; for, an ambitious hear: overgrown with
this rank Aconite, neither admits of the beams of Grace, to mollify its
hardness, nor the bounds of Nature, Omnia recta and honesta negligunt, dumm^
to potentiam consequantur. Cicer.
to restrain the swelling; but is unnaturally carried to ruin those of his own
gang that are living, and to blemish the honorable fame of those that are
departed. Surely, ambitious Tyrants may bear themselves up for a time, but in
the end they shall find, that though divine Justice has leaden feet, she has
iron hands; though slow in coming, yet she strikes home.

To be content in the present condition.
THey that are not contented with their present condition, Ier. Borogh' s
Hearts-content.
are fitly compared to little children, that are gotten upon a hill, and they
look a good way off, and see another hill, and they think, if they were on the
top of that, then they were able to touch the Clouds with their fingers; but
when they are on the top of that hill, alas, then they are as far from the
clouds as before. So it is with many that think, Semper avarus eget.
if they were in such a condition, then they should have contentment; and it
may be so, that they get into that condition, yet they are as far from
contentment as before; not considering, that in the very lowest of conditions,
they may for the present be serviceable to the counsel of God, that has thus
put them into it.

A godly Christian is a constant Christian
AFfections to God must be constant. The air (you know) is light, and yet we
call it not a lightsome body, because it is lighted by the presence of another,
and when that body is removed, Funeral Sermons.
it is dark; for the air is dark in the night, when the Sun is absent; as it
is light, when the Sun is present: Those only we call lightsome bodies, whose
light is originated and rooted in themselves. So, they are not godly persons,
that may have some injections of godly thoughts, and godly affections cast into
them, and be in them for a spurt, and a brunt, and for a little flash, (like a
flash of lightning in the air) and so gone* but it must be rooted and grounded
in a man, so as that it will continue, continue so, as that the exercise of
graces, and duties toward God, Esa. 26.
should be frequent and quotidian, daily to have converse and communion with
God, Nec taedia coepti Vlla mei capiam, etc. Ovid.
to walk with him, and talk with him, to approve our selves to him, to set our
selves in his presence, to make a constant trade with him, to be his daies-man,
to work by the day with him, and withal to hold out to the end.


WEak and sickly bodies agree well with no air, Joh. Downham's Christ. warfare.
and are not much bettered by their* often removes and changes of place,
because they carry about them their distempered humors, Impa^iens est homo
mutabilis enervis.
which are the causes of their disease. So, he who is sick of impatiency, and
peevish discontent, agrees well with no condition, but picketh quarrels as
well against his prosperity as adversity, Paschal. de virt. and vitiis.
and is well (as we say) neither full nor fasting; but (like those who are sick
of a feavour) bitter and sweet taste both alike, loathing the very sight of
wholesome nourishment, because his humor makes every thing to relish of his
aguish condition.


KIng Porus, Plutarch in Apophthegm.
when Alexander asked him, being then his prisoner, how he would be used,
answered in one word, (...), that is, like a King. Alexander again replying, Do
you desire nothing else? No, says he, all things are in (...) in this one
word, R. Holdsworth' s Sermon. at Camb. 1642.
Like a King. Whereupon Alexander restored him again. But this has not always
been the happiness of Kings and Princes. Yet however, he that has God, has
all things, because God is all things. Take a pen, and write down riches,
honors, preferments, they are but as so many ciphers, they signify nothing;
but write down God alone, and he will them raise to thousands, hundred of
thousands: And then it is, that a Christian is truly happy, when he can find
himself, and all things, in his God.


IF the vessel be saved, Diodorus. lib. 17.
though the wares be spoiled with the seawater, or cast over shipboard, yet
we may arrive at the haven, and there be in safety: If the Field be gotten by
us, (as Alexander told Parmenio) our baggage and horses will be recovered again
with advantage: If a Tree be sound at the root, there is hope that it will
sprout out, B. Smith's Ser. on Joh. chap. 6. Bonum animae pretiosius est
omnibu^ bonis. Arist. lib. 7. polit.
notwithstanding it should be lopped, and shred never so much; but if it be
rotten at the root, fare it well. In like manner, if the soul be safe, if it
live by faith in the Son of God, if it fight the good fight of faith, and win
the field, all other losses are not to be reckoned of; we are more then
gainers, more then conquerours. But if the soul perish, (and it will perish,
except it be fed with the Word of the Gospel; and it will make shipwreck, if
Christ sit not at the stern; and it will be overcome, if Christ be not the
Captain, Savior, and Deliverer) then all the world is gone with us, it had
been better with us we had never been born.


HE is a scholar in the school, House of mourning.
that begins at Christs-crosse row; and he is entered into the College, that
reads but Seton's Logic; and he is a member of the family, that was bound
Apprentice but yesterday. Thus, if thou be a penitent, though not in fullness
of perfection; Fit surculus arbor.
if thou believe, though not with the fullest measure of believing; if thou
obey, though not in the highest degree of obedience; be comforted in thy weak
beginnings, and resolve to proceed, and know that thou art already entered into
the Covenant of Grace, and shall enjoy that which Christ has promised, Joh. 8.
51.
freedom from damnation, Thou shall never see death.


A Merchant being about to buy a parcel of wines, Joh. Downham's Christ.
warfare.
does taste of them, and thereupon approves them, wishes them stowed in his
own Cellar; yet when he understands of the price he must give for them, leaves
them unbought, and goes his way. Such were those Hypocrites, Luke 8. 13. and
such are many amongst us at this day: Religio proba ante res humanas hab^nda.
Lipsius. Sit. 2. 12.
A glorious Christ they would have by all means, but a crucified Christ is not
for their turn; hearing what excellent things are prepared for God's faithful
ones, they are much taken with the taste and relish of them; but when they
understand of the price that is set upon them, that they must deny themselves,
and their worldly lusts, Romans 8. 13.
forsake the world, and the vanities thereof, mortify the flesh, etc. they
leave them, as being too dear, and rather be without them, than come to so high
a price.

The godly man's afflictions, not destructive, but corrective.
AS David gave charge to his Soldiers, 2 Samuel 18. 5. Coplan's Ser. of Virgins.
that by no means they should kill Absalom his son, though he sent them with a
full Commission against Absalom, to stay his unnatural rebellion, Post
afflictiones vita bonis transquillior.
to reduce him to his former obedience. So God, when he sends his judgments out
into the world, he forbids them, and, as it were, lays a prohibition on
crosses and afflictions, Nazian.
that they shall not destroy his children; they shall have a corrective, but no
destructive power; they shall serve to purge out their corruptions, but they
shall not destroy their graces.

Grace, not Greatness, makes Magistrates glorious.
THere was a great King, Plutarch. Apophthegm. Nemo foret qui te, etc.
( Antigonus by name) that turning and winding his Diadem, said to them that
stood by, That if a man knew, what a deal of care and trouble were lapped up,
and lodged in it, he would not account it worth the taking up. And there was a
Pope, Platina in vita
(by name Hadrian the sixth, not the worst Pope) that confessed to his friends,
That he lived a happier life, when he was a poor Schoolmaster in Lovayn, than
since he was advanced to that high See. Joh. Speed. B. Smith' s Ser. on Job 29.
Plutarch in Apophthegm.
Such or the like expressions were made by Henry the fourth of England, lying
on his deathbed, upon occasion of his son's removal of the Crown out of his
sight. All which signify thus much, that it is* not the high place, nor the
great state, that makes a Magistrate happy; it is not his standing on the
higher ground that makes him glorious, but when with Pericles in Plutarch he
can say, 2 Cor. 1. Act. 20.
that he never caused any to wear a mourning gown; and with St. Paul, This is
our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience; and, That they are pure
from the blood of all men: i. e. from shedding innocent blood.

To make good use of good men, while we have them.
WHen any man borrowes a book, House of mourning.
he is diligent in the perusal of it, and taking notes out of it, because he
cannot tell how soon the owner may have occasion to use it himself; as for his
own books, he lets them lie by, presuming to use them at his pleasure. Thus God
raises up a good Ruler, a good Magistrate, a good Minister, such as are
eminent for wisdom, exemplary in life; these he sets up in a Kingdom, in a
County, in a Parish or Neighborhood, as lights to walk by. How then should we
improve such opportunities, and walk by the light while we have it? Actum est
de Repub.
for the Sun of such examples will set, and it is then night in such a Kingdom,
such a County, such a Township, such a Family, when a good Governor, a good
Magistrate, a good Minister, a good Friend, Parent or Master, is by death
removed.

Discord ill beseemes the Disciples of Christ.
ALexander Severus seeing two Christians contending one with another, Lamprid.
in hist.
commanded them, that they should not take the name of Christians any longer
upon them: For, Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions
(says he) you dishonor your Master Christ, whose Disciples you profess to
be. Most sure it is, that divisions, whether of Church or State, foreign or
domestic, are very dishonorable to Christ. And were it that they darkened our
names only, it were not so much; but that which darkens up the glory of Christ
should go something near us.


ARtemisia, Aulus Gellius lib. 10 cap. 18. Joh. Weems Pourtrait.
Queen of Caria, showed an act of wonderful passionate love toward her husband
Mausolus; for, death having taken him away, she not knowing how to pull the
thorns of sorrow out of her soul, caused his body to be reduced to ashes, and
mingled them in her drink, meaning to make her body a living Tomb, wherein the
relics of her husband might rest, from whom she could not endure to live
separated. Thus the true child of God, when there is any thing that may seem to
preserve the memory of God in his soul, how does he embrace the very invention
of it? he becomes a true Mausolean tomb indeed; he has a comfortable and true
conjunction with Christ, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; and these
two can never be separated again.


AS he is a Traitor to his Prince, Geor. Abbot Cant. on Jonah.
who takes upon him to coin monyes out of a base metal, yea, although in the
stamp he puts for a show the image of the Prince: So he that shall broac^
any Doctrine that comes not from God, whatsoever he say for it, or what
g^osse soever he set on it, he is a Traitor unto God, yea in truth a cursed
Traitor, though he were an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1. 8.


IT is commonly known, Greg. de la Naza, tract. Evang.
that the branches have all their sap from the root of the Tree, it is that
which makes them flourish and grow; but if you cut them off from the root, they
wither presently. So it is with the Spirit, with the soul of man; if God do but
a little withdraw himself, let sin but make a separation betwixt God and the
soul, it is like a withered branch, it has nothing of its self to revive its
self, because it is divided from the root, which is Christ: At the least it is
with the Soul, as it is with a Tree in the dead of winter, though the sap
remain in the root; so though it remain in union with the root, yet the
moisture is gotten into the root i^ self, and does not now infuse it self into
the branches: Yet withal it is confessed, that the servant of God, which is
once united to Christ, shall never be separated, the union is now, and always
shall be; but nevertheless, the sap and comfort of the Spirit, it may remain
in the Head, our life may be hid in Christ, and may not appear in us at all;
and we are then in that estate, as if we were branches cut off; so that
whatsoever life, and comfort, and strength of spirit we had, it was from
Christ, and by the influence and working of his gracious Spirit.


ONe Bidulph, in the relation of his travells to Jerusalem, reports, Jer.
Boroghs ut antea.
That the Turks were wont to wonder much at our Englishmen, for pinking and
cutting their clothes, counting them little better then madmen, for making
holes in whole cloth, Fera regnat Erinnys. Ovid.
which time of it self would tear too soon. But how foolish and how mad in the
eyes of all good Christians, do the cuts and the rents, and the slashes that
are in men's spirits, the divisions that are amongst us at this day, how
uncomely do they render us, and the Religion that we take upon us to profess?


MErchants and Shopkeepers, T. Tailor Ser. at S. Mary Alderm. Land. 1626.
to procure a better sale, and greater credit to their several Stuffs, call
them Sempiternum, Perpetuana, Durance, etc. but how soon does the moth fret
them, and they are gone? nothing left but the bare name. But God, he is the true
eternal Being, All Creatures have a lasting, Angels have an outlasting, but
god has an everlasting Being; He only is Alpha and Omega, before the
beginning, and beyond all ending, from everlasting to everlasting, the King, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
eternal, immortal, etc.

Ill company to be avoided.
WHen Cerinthus came into the Bath, Eusebius. Pamph. hist.
John the Evangelist got him out, and called to his fellows, that they should
come away with haste from the company of that companion, lest the house should
fall upon them; he thought that place was guilty, Geor. Abbot Cant. on Jonah.
which received a man that was guilty; and that the house was in danger, which
harbored a man obnoxious. Here let them then look about them, who not only
without all care do sort themselves with all comme^s, not fearing the faults of
others, but are glad they can meet with such companions. Vices and vicious
persons are alike dangerous. He that walks in the Sun shall be tan'd, and he
that touches pitch shall be defiled, and he that associateth himself with the
ungodly, will soon be tainted with their company.

That it is lawful to praise the Dead.
IT is said of the Aethiopians, Herodot. in Thalia.
that they make Sepulchers of glass; for after they have dried the corpse, they
artificially paint it, and set it in a glased coffin, that all that pass by
may see the whole frame and lineaments of the body, and this is commended in
them. But surely, they deserve better of the dead, and more benefit of the
living, who draw the lineaments of their mind, and represent their virtues and
graces in a Mirror of Art and Learning: Rich. Holdsworth Fun. Sermon. 1626.
Vetustas judicavit honestum esse ut mortui laudarentur. Thucid. lib. 2.
And they are as much to blame on the other side, that out of the purity of
their precise zeal, ita praecidunt, so near pare the nails of Romish
superstition, that they make the fingers bleed, who out of fear of praying
forsooth for the dead, or invocating them, are shie in speaking any word for
them, or sending after them their deserved commendations. It is p^ety to honor
God in his Saints; it is justice, suum cuique tribuere, to give every one his
own; it is charity, to propose eminent examples of heavenly graces and virtues
shining in the dead, for the imitation of the living; and then you cannot
praise any so safely as the dead, for you cannot humor them into danger, nor
melt away your self into flattery: Such jewels ought not to be locked up in a
^offin, as in a cabinet, but to be set out to the view of all men.

Men, though differing in judgment, must not differ in affection.
THere is mention made of two Rivers in the East, Bo^ero's relatition.
Sava and Danuby, that run along in one channel theescore miles together,
without any noise, and yet they keep themselves apart, the colors of the
waters remaining distinct all along. And why should not Men go along close
together in love, Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions.
though in somethings their judgments and practices be apparently different one
from another? Opinionum varietas, and opinantium unitas non sunt (...). Men may
go to heaven with the variety of opinions, but with the difference of affection
they shall never see God in the face to their comfort.

A man dead in sin, is a senseless man.
IF a man be naturally dead, R. Abbot' s Ser. at S. August. Land. 16^1.
bring a candle into the room, set it on the table, he sees it not; let the Sun
shine in his face, he perceives not the beauty, or feels the warmth thereof;
offer him rich presents, he receives them not; he has not an eve to see them,
nor a heart to desire them, nor a hand to reach out unto them. Thus it is with
one that is spiritually dead, let the Sunshine of the Gospel put out never so
clear, he sees it not, because he is in darkness; though he live under
plentiful means, and rich dispensations, yet he is blind and sottish; offer
unto him the rich pearls of the Gospel, those rich treasures of grace in
Christ Jesus, yet he has no heart to them, Dormi^ securus.
no hand of faith to lay hold upon them; so blind, so sottish is he, so stupi^
and senseless, that though these rich treasures, these graces, these pearls of
the Gospel, be conveyed unto him in earthen vessels, in a plain and familiar
manner, yet he does not, he cannot apprehend them; judgments do not affright
him, and mercies do not allure him.


THieves, Joh. Weems Divin Exercit.
when they come to rob and steal, the first thing that they do, is, to put out
the candle, that they may pilfer the more securely. Thus the Antinomians, that
they may cry up their Idol of Christian liberty with more ease, and vent their
doctrines of pleasing domnation, Qui male agit, odit lucem.
more freely, they set themselves against the Law, and would banish it out of
the Church; and thus carnal and profane men too, labor to abolish it, that
they may sin the more securely, and with greater liberty.


SOcrates, Diog. Laert. in vita Socrat.
at a banquet, falling at odds with one of his familiars, and openly rebuking
him, Plato could not hold, but said unto him, How much better had this been
spoken privately? And had you not done better to have told me so privately?
quoth Socrates. Plato could see Socrates's fault of unseasonable reprehension,
but his own he could not perceive. Mr Woodnoth, ut antea.
Thus, look but amongst such as call themselves holy brethren, but indeed, rank
Protestants, devout dissemblers, and you shall find, that they are not half
so forward in examining themselves, as in finding fault with other; and they
are not half so curious in their own, Iudice^ ille de alterius errore, qui non
habet in seips^ qu^d condemnet.
as they are captious and cruel over other men's lives; they can readily accuse
others of blackness, and spiritual deformities, saying, They are wicked, he
is naught, they are Antichristian, rotten-hearted, etc. such a one has a Pope
in his belly: Ambros. in Matthew. 5.
when at the same time, they have but little (God knows) of Christ in their
hearts: They can gaze at the mo^e in their brother's eye, but care not for
pulling out the beam that is in their own sight: They cannot bear with a few
infirmities of their brethren, no not of their fathers; but their own fowl
enormities they can easily conceal and continue.


BY the want of one nail, Lud. Grana^. dux peccat.
the iron- shoo is lost; and the shoo being lost, the Horse falls; Coercenda
criminis infantia ne juvenescat augmentis.
and the Horse falling, the Rider perishes. Such are the dangers that he
incurreth, that neglects small things; the neglect of the lesser, makes way
but for the greater evil; and he that sets light by small things, falls
by little and little. Cassiodorus, Ecclus. 29.



THe light of the Sun, M. Styles Ser. at S. Paul's, 1629.
the light of the Moon, and the light of the Air, for nature and substance are
one and the same light; and yet they are three distinct lights: The light of
the Sun being of it self, and from none; the light of the Moon from the Sun;
and the light of the Air from them both. So the Divine Nature is one, and the
Persons three, subsisting after a diverse manner, in one and the same Nature.


TAmar may so disguise her self, Joh. Barlow's Good man's Refuge. a Sermon. 1616.
walk in an unaccustomed path, so as Judah may not know her. Isaac, through the
dimnesse of his sight, may bless Jacob, and pass Esau. Tract of time may make
Joseph to forget, or be forgotten of his brethren. Genesis 38. 27. 44.
Solomon may doubt, to whom of right the child belongs; And Christ may come
to his own, 1 King. 3.
and not be received. But the Lord knows who are his, and his eye is always
over them; Ubscurum nihil Deo potest esse. Cic. de not. D^orum.
time, place, speech, or apparel, cannot obscure or darken his eye or ear; he
can discern Daniel in the den, Ioh, though never so much changed, on the
dunghill: let Jonah be lodged in the Whales belly, Peter be put into close
prison, or Lazarus be wrapped in rags, or Abel rolled in blood; yet can he call
them by name, and send his Angels to comfort them. Ignorance and forgetfulness
may cause love and knowledge to be estranged in the Creature, but the Lord is
not incident to either; Psalm. 131. 1, 2.
for his Eye, as his Essence, is every where, he knows all things.

For the abuse of a thing, the use is not to be taken away.
LYcurgus (says Plutarch) was not so well advised, In lib. d^ audi endis
Po^^is.
when seeing the Lacedemon^ans drink too much, and fall to drunkenness, and so
to further sin, he commanded to cut down their vines, and would not suffer any
to grow in that Commonwealth: It had been better (says he) to have digg^d
Wells near to the Vines, and so to have allayed and assuaged the strength and
Licorishnesse of Wine, Mr. Wood note, ut ante^.
with Water. Thus it is, that certainly, if our Fonts, if our Communion-Tables,
Pulpits, Seats, Temples, have been abused in time of Popery, with a multitude
of supers^titious Ceremonies, and needless Innovations; what, shall we
therefore use them ^o more? rather let us use them no more so. Propter abusum
non tollendus est usus.
What, shall we therefore give them over? that were extreme folly; rather let
us use them better. Christ did not condemn M^ses chair for the life of a
Pharisee, but preached where they had preached, though they were notorious
hypocrites, though he denounced so many woes against them, as against none
more; yea, though the Temple in his time were become a den of thieves, yet then
and there sent he up devout and holy prayers to Heaven.

Get but God, and get all.
AS Noah (when the Deluge of waters had defaced the Earth, Dr. Sta^ghton' s
Sermon.
and blotted the great book of Nature) had a copy of every kind of Creature,
in that ^amous Library of the Ark, out of which all were reprinted to the
World: So he that has God, Habentem ^em nia habet. Aug.
has the original copy of all blessings, out of which (if all were perished)
all might easily be renewed: Let friends, and goods, and life, and all forsake
us; yet let but the light of God's countenance shine upon us, and that shall be
life, and friends, and goods, and all unto us.

Afflictions, the ready way to Heaven.
A Man taking his journey into a far Country, Josh. Shute' s Sermon. at St. Paul'
s Land. 1624.
and enquiring for the way, is told, that there are many plain ways, but the
straight and right way, is by woods, and hills, and mountains, and great
dangers; that there are many Bears and Lions in the way, much difficulty is
upon the road thither. Now when he is tra^ailing, and finds such and such
things in the way, such mountains and hills of opposition, such flats and
valleys of danger, he concludes, that he is in the right way thither. Per
varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, Tendimus in Coelum.
And so the child of God, that is going to the kingdom of Heaven, though there
be many ways to walk in, yet he knows, that there is but one rig^t way, which
is very strait and narrow, full of trouble, full of sorrow and Persecution,
full of all manner of crosses and afflictions; Act. 14. 12.
and when in this life he is persecuted for God and a good cause, whether in
body or in mind, it argues plainly, that he is in the right way to salvation.

To be provident for days of trial.
MEn in policy prepare cloaks for the wet, Joh. Ba^low's Good man's Refuge, a
Ser. 1616.
provision for winter, a staff for old age, a scrip for the journey; they will be
sure to lay up something for a rainy day, or a bank of money to fly to, when
occasion serves. Thus it should be with all true Christians, they should be
always striving for the more and more assurance of God's favor, to be sure of
a stock going in the Lord's affection; to get some persuasion of God's love,
whereby they may be able to stand in the evil day, in the saddest of times, in
the hour of death, and in the day of judgment.


IT was the Poet's vain and groundless conceit of Hector, Horat. in Epist.
Nath. Shute' s Sermon. 1625.
that so long as he lived, Troy could not be destroyed, terming him the
immovable and inexpugnable pillar of Troy. But well may it be said of a
faithful man, that he is a mighty stay and strength, a main defender and
upholder of the place where he lives; for whose sake, for whose presence and
prayers, out of the Lord's abundant kindness to all His, even the wicked are
often within the shadow of God's protection, and spared.


ANtigonus told the Sophister, Pluta^ch in (...).
he came out of season, when he presented a treatise of Justice to him, that
was at that very time besieging a City; he could not hear the voice of the
Laws, Dr. Staughton' s Sermon.
for the noise of Drums. And so the Laws of God, the comfortable voice of the
Gospel cannot be heard in times of war and hostility. Religio do^enda non
coercenda; Fire and faggot are but sad Reformers. It is Peace that is the good
Joseph, Act. 9. 31.
the best Nurse to Religion. When the Church had peace and rest, then, and not
till then, it multiplied.


PArents are very careful to prefer their children to great places, Will.
Perkin's on Creed.
and Noblemen's houses, and to that end they give them gentile breeding, which
is welldon of them: But if they would indeed be good parents to their children,
they should first endeavor to get rooms for them in the kingdom of Heaven.
But how shall this preferment be had? Ade^ a teneris con^uescere multum est.
Virg. 2. Georg.
God has an upper and a lower house, His Church and the ^ingdom of Heaven; the
Church is his house of grace, Heaven is his house of glory; Now if thou would
bring thy child to a place in the house of glory, then thou art first of all to
get him a place in the house of grace, bringing him up so in the fear of God,
that both in life and conversation, he may show himself to be a member of the
Church; and then assure thy self, that after this life, he shall be removed to
the second House, which is the house of glory, and there for ever be a freeman
in the kingdom of Heaven. In thus doing, thou shall not leave him an Orphan
when thou die, for he shall have God for his Father, Christ for his Brother,
and the Holy Ghost his Comforter to all eternity.


FIre, P. Bayne's Counterbain to co^etousnesse.
which here we kindle, and is engendered on the earth, it being no earthly, but
an heavenly body, has ab origin, an aptn^sse and inclination, carrying it
toward the sphere of Fire, which is the proper place thereof. So, from what
time a man, by God's calling, is begotten to be an heavenly creature here on
the earth, he has produced in him an inclination, which does make him move
Godward; being heavenly principled, Sursum ^orda.
he tends Heavenward. Never did poor exile so much long to smell the smoke of
his native Country, as he breathes and pants after the Kingdom of Heaven.


IT is observable, Will. Jenkin on Jude.
that a Huntsman or Forrester goes usually in green, suitable to the leaves of
the Trees, and the grass of the Forest, so that by this means, the most
observant in all the Heard, Vt saxis adhaerens polypus proloco muta^ur. Sencc.
in Epist
never so much as distrusteth him, till the Arrow stick in his sides. And thus
the Devil shapes himself to the fashions of all men; if he meet with a proud
man, or a prodigal man, then he makes himself a flatterer; if a covetous man,
then he comes with a reward in his hand. He has an apple for Eve, a grape for
Noah, a change of raiment for Gehezi, a bag for Judas. He can dish out his meat
for all palats, he has a last to fit every shoo, he has something to please
all conditions, to suit with all dispositions whatsoever.

Love, the bond of all perfection.
AS the P^imum mobile in the Heavens sets all the other Spears a going, Dr.
Staughton'^ (...).
which move and make musi^k (as the Pythagoreans thought) in the god's bosom.
As Ens in Logic communicates his being to the ten Pre^icaments: So is Love to
the ten Commandments, Dilectio radix est omnium bonorum. August.
in which they live, and move, and have their being. Love is the end, the scope
at which they all aim, the perfection in which they rest, the tribute which
they exact; it is the bond of perfection, or perfection of bonds, the most
perfect bond, that ties all graces to us.

Forgiveness of others, an argument of God's forgiveness of us.
TAke a piece of wax, Will. Perkins on the Lord's Prayer.
and put to a seal, it leaves an impression or mark like it self in the wax,
which when a man looks on, he does certainly know, that there has been a seal,
the print whereof is left behind. Even so it is in every one, that has a
readiness to forgive others, Neque dignus est venia, qui nemini ^at veniam.
Seneca.
by which a Christian may know easily, that God has sealed to him the
forgive^esse of his sins, in his very heart. Let men therefore but look into
their hearts, whether they have any affection, any inclinations to forgive
others, for that is as it were the pri^t in their hearts, of God's mercy
toward them, in forgiving of them.

Popular Government, popular confusion.
IT was said of old, He that is friend to all, is true friend to none; and that
which has many heads, Amicus omnium, amicus nullorum. Tullias, de amicitia.
has no head at all. Such is that many-headed Monster, ( the Multitude) which
has neither head for brains, nor brains for government. And as in a medicine,
if there be not a due proportion of the simples, in the mixture, there is a
mischief for a remedy, not a remedy for a mischief. So in a popular State,
where the People are agreed, Sr. Rob. Dalling^on' s Aphorisms.
and where there is no equal temperature, and counterpoise of supreme power,
against the strong ingredient of the Multitude, which is always hot in the
highest degree, there must needs be disorder, and a way open to all confusion.

Sathan's restless uncessant employment.
IT was Hannibal's saying of Marcellus, Ti^. Livius. lib 23. Plutarch in
Marcello.
That he had to do with him, who could never be quiet, neither conqueror, nor
conquered; but, conqueror, he would pursue his victories; and conquered, labor
to recover his l^sse. But much rather may a man say the like of Satan, that
great ramping Lion, the Arch-envier of our peace and happiness, Mr. Woodnote,
ut antea
who is the most wrathful, and the most watchful enemy; who is never idle,
but ever employed, in sowing cockles amongst the Lord's good corn, who though
we stoutly resist him, and overcome him for a while, yet will he never rest,
nor give over, but will be tempting again; yea, will not cease to tempt us
again and again, with the same temptations, hoping at length to ^in our
consents, and so give us the foil in the conclusion.

Spiritual desertions, no distractions to the child of God.
IT was a barbarous act of that Nation, Lud. Vives in Augustine. de Civit. Dei.
who imprisoned, condemned, executed, and ripped up an Ass, to recover the Moon
out of him, which they suspected he had swallowed, because they saw him drink
at the water, when the Moon appeared by reflection, Dr. Staughtons Sermons.
and immediately upon that being wrapped up into a cloud, they mist her: And
thus do simple Men, that think the grace of God is extinct quite, when some
cloud of sin robs them of the comfortable light of it; How are they frighted,
as the Ancients were with these Eclipses, and are much distracted in the midst
of such spiritual desertions? Yet the knowing experimental Christian is nothing
troubled thereat, but expects the return with patience.


IF a Malefactor for his punishment should be appointed every day to carry a
stick of wood to an heap to burn him twenty years after, Will. Perkin's Treat.
of Repentance.
it must needs be an exceeding great punishment and misery: And this is the
case of every sinner, who neglecting Repentance from day to day, does thereby
employ himself in heaping up the coals of Gods wrath to burn his soul in hell
when the day of death comes; It is no other but a treasuring up of wrath
against the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5.



ICarus, in the Poet, being furnished with wings by the Art of his Father
Daeclalus, could not content himself in a lower sphere, Ovidii Metam. Sir Rob.
Dallington's Aphorisms.
but he must needs be soaring so high, that the Sun melting the wax wherewith
his wings were fastened, he fell down headlong to his own destruction. These
two wings of Icarus thus joined on with wax, are just like Popular and Military
dependence in Noble men to make them great: they will help for a while to make
them so, and mount them aloft in the thoughts of Men, and then fail them at the
very height; It is therefore safer to stand upon two feet, then fly with two
wings, the two feet of Justice Communicative and distributive; For great Men
shall grow greater if they but advance merit, and relieve wrongs.


WHen Charles the nineth of France propounded to that famous Prince of Conde
this threefold choice: Iean de Serres hist. de France.
either Mass, or Death, or perpetual Imprisonment, the most Christian worthy
made this answer; God assisting me I will not choose the Mass, Mr. Wootnote ut
ante^.
the other two I refer to the King's determination; yet, so as (I hope) God, in
whose hands the heart of the King is, by his gracious providence will provide
and dispose of these also: Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior it^.
Thus should it be with every Christian to be a resolved Christian, to suffer
any hardship for Christ, not to do as the men of the world do, that so as they
may avoid death and imprisonment, Virg. Aened. 6.
care not how they rise upon other men's ruins; so they may eat of the fat, and
drink of the sweet, so they may swallow down the good things of the land, and
cloth with the softest of the Wool, impose what Religion you will, either Mass
or Mahumetisme, what government you will in Church or State, you shall find
them servile enough, the good Centurion never kept such obedient, ready, and
resolute servants, they will fit you every way, fashion and put forward
themselves for any employment.


WHen Pompey could not keep his Soldiers in the Camp by persuasion, he cast
himself all along in the narrow passage that led out of it, Plutarch in vita.
and then bid them, Go if you will, but you shall first trample upon your
General, and this overcame them; Dr. Staughtons Sermons.
so it is, that every sin makes Gods head ache, as the Rabbines were wont to
tell their Scholars, to scare them: nay more, we cannot go to commit sin but we
must trample upon the precious blood of Christ Jesus, for our sins crucify him
rather then Pilate, crown him with thorns rather then the Soldiers.

The happiness of good Government.
THere was a law amongst the Persians, that when their Governor was dead,
Herodotus lib. 9.
there should be (...), a lawlessness for five days after, that every man
should do what he list; Ant. Burges Sermon before the Lord Mayor of Land. 1646.
now for those five days there was such killing, and robbing, and such
destroying one another, that by the time the five days were over, they were
glad of government again: So that any kind of government is better then no
government; but happy is that People, bona si sua norint, that live under a
good government, where Justice flows from the Supreme as head, and is conveyed
by subordinate Ministers unto the People.

Faith is the fountain of all graces.
WHen Toxaris saw his Countryman Anacharsis in Athens, he said unto him, I
will at once show thee all the wonders of Greece, Lucianus in Scytha.
Viso Solone vidistiomnia, In seeing Solon thou see all, even Athens it self,
and the wholly glory of the Greeks: Tell me Christian, Have thou faith and
assured trust in the Lord? then thou have more then all the wonders of Greece,
John Boys Postills. Romans 14. 23.
upon the point all the wonderful gifts of grace; for faith is a mother virtue
from which all others spring, and without faith all the best of our actions are
no better then sin.

Hypocrites in their saying well, but doing ill, reproved.
^Ulius Caesar in his Commentaries, writes of the French Soldiers, that in
the beginning of the battle, at the first onset, they were more then Men; but
at the second, Mr. Woodnote ut ante^.
or before the end, less then Women; They would talk bravely, and come on
courageously; but at length give off cowardly. Such are the hypocritical
Hotspurs of our times, who have Gods word swiming in their heads, but not
shining in their lives, Qui ^urios ^imulant, and Bacchanalia vivunt Iuvenal.
such as set up the Temple with one hand, and pull it down with the other* like
scribbling School-boyes, that what they write with the forefinger they blur
with the hinde-finger; who if words may be received, their pay is gallant, but
if deeds be required, their money is not current; who in professing and
protesting are more then Protestants, but in practicing and performing, and
persevering less then Papists.

Zeal in God's service, made the worlds derision.
DOgs seldom bark at a Man that ambles a softly fair pace, Dr. Staughtons
Sermons.
but if he once set spurs to his horse, and fall a galloping, (though his
errand be of importance, and to the Court perhaps) then they bark and fly at
him; and thus they do at the Moon, not so much because she shines, for that
they always see, but because by reason of the clouds hurried under by the
winds, she seems to run faster then ordinary. And thus if any Man do but pluck
up his spirits in Gods service, and run the ways of his commandments, it is
Iehu's furious March presently, and he shall meet with many a scoff by the
way, that runs with more speed, then ordinary.

The great danger of Sacrilege.
IT is no Christian, but a right Heathenish trick to demolish holy places, or
through sloth, Psalm. 79.
and covetousnes to suffer them to fall. Nay, the very Heathens would never do
that to the Temples of their false Gods, that we Christians do to the house of
the true God, for they hated and fled from all sacrilegious persons. Were the
Church leprous we could do no more then pluck out the stones, Plutarch in
Timoleone.
as they did in the old Law in a leprous house; Lev. 14. 40.
nay they would not even in such a house pluck out all the stones, as they do
in Churches, but only such as were leprous: Well, let such know, that next to
the injury done against the Temple of man's body, there can be no greater injury
then that which is done against the body of the Temple, Nath. Shute Sermon. at
Mr. Fishborne's funeral, 1624.
and one day all such sacrilegious, irreligious, profane persons may chance to
feel that whip upon their conscience, which sometime Celsus felt: who after the
robbing and profaning of many Churches, hearing one day that place of Esaias
read; Woe unto them that join house to house, Isa. 5. v. 8. Greg. Turonens ll.
4. c. 24.
that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone
in the midst of the Earth; cried out immediately. Vae mihi and filiis men's, Woe
then be to me and my children for ever.


IT is reported of the Shee-wolfe, that she has an yearly defect in
procreation, Plinii hist. na^.
for at the first she bears five young ones, the second time but four, the
third time but three, Joh. Boys Posti^s.
the fourth time but two, the fifth time but one, and then afterward remains
barren: Thus Hypocrites forgetting the solemn vow they made to God in Baptism,
as also those principles of Religion wherein they seemed expert to their
Catechizers, as they grow upward in age they grow downward in Grace, with Demes
embracing this present World, and with Hymeneus and Alexander making shipwreck
of a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 9.
verifying the byword, young Saints, old Devils.


IT is said of Paulus Emilius, Plutarch in vita ejus.
that having put away his wife Papinia, without any cause, as it seemed to
others, stretched forth his foot, and said, You see a new and neat shoe, but
where this shoe wringeth me; not you, but I alone know; meaning, that there
were many secret jars, happening between the married, which others could not
possibly perceive: And certainly the most wicked men, the greatest enemies to
God and his Gospel, Mr. Wootnote ut antea.
the most traitorous and rebellious of a People or Nation may be so jocund and
merry and show such magnanimity in their faces, that none can imagine by any
outward circumstance, Non intus and in cute.
but that they are truly cheerful and courageous in their hearts; and yet in
the midst of all their mirth, and greatest delights, even in the very ruff of
all their bravery, they have secret heart-burnings, and grievous vexations,
what God and themselves only know. The Lord has spoken it t^ice, and therefore
it must needs be plain and peremptory, Esaias 48. 22.
That there is no Peace to the wicked. Their looks may be sometimes lively, but
their hearts are always heavy.


AMongst all the gods of the Heathens, Homer. Ovid.
Jupiter was in the greatest esteem, as the Father, and King of gods, and was
called lupiter, quasi juvans Pater, a helping Father, yet (as the Poets feign)
he wept when he could not set Sarpedon at liberty; such was the imbecility and
impotency of this Master-god of the Heathen; But the hand of our God is never
shortened that it cannot help, Hume expofit* on Psalm. 26.
he is ever able to relieve us, Psalm 86. 8.
always ready to deliver us; Amongst all the gods there is none like unto him,
none can do like unto his works, he is God omnipotent.


THe Romans in a great distress were put so hard to it, Edm. Calamy Fast-serm.
at Westminster.
that they were fain to take the weapons out of the Temples of their gods to
fight with them, and so they overcame. And this ought to be the course of every
good Christian intimes of public distress to fly to the weapons of the
Church, Prayers and Tears; The Spartans walls were their spears, the Christians
walls are his prayers, Preces and lacrimae, etc. Psalm 124. 8.
his help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made both Heaven and Earth.

The gradation of Faith*
THe heart of every believer is like a vessel with a narrow neck, John Boys
Postills.
which being cast into the Sea is not filled at the first ^asily, but by reason
of the strait passage receives water drop by drop. Thus God gives unto us
even a Sea of mercy, but the same on our part is apprehended and received by
little and little, we go from strength to strength, from grace to grace, and
from one degree of virtue to another, praying always as the blessed Apostles;
O Lord increase our faith, that from weakness of faith, and slender assurance,
we may grow to firmness of the one, and fullness of the other.

The Christians humiliation, the Christians exaltation.
A Gathocles, and Willigis two men, Caelius lect. antiqu. lib. 13. cap. 4.
famous in their generations; the one was exalted to be King of Sicily, being
put a Potters son; the other, to be Arch^ishop of Mentz (a Prince Elector in
Germany) being but a Wheelers son; They both acknowledged Gods providence, and
work in their advancement, and were so far from being ashamed of their low
birth and parentage, that the one would not be served with any other plate then
Earthen, B. Smith sermon. on 1 Pet.
to show how nobly he was descended; The other gave in his Coat of Arms three
wheels, with this Motto, or rather Memento, written in his Bedchamber in great
letters; Bucholccrus.
Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris; O Willigis remember from whence thou
came. This indeed is the way to become high, (to be exalted before God and
wisemen) to be lowly in our own eyes, Esto parv^s in ocu is tuis ut sis magnus
in oculis Dei, etc. (...) dor in Synonim.
to confess that we are Worms and not Men; that we are sinful Men and not
Saints, that we are unworthy the least of Gods mercies, and that it is of his
mercy only that we are not consumed; that what we are, and we have, is all
received; what we have received we have corrupted, and made worse; and what we
have corrupted, we ought to be called to an account for, and so to be cast out
as unprofitable servants.

The works of God in the Creation of the World, are to and beyond admiration.
A Rchimedes was much commended amongst the Heathen, for his skill and
contriving the Motions of the Sun, Moon and Planets, Caelius Rodogin, lib^ 2
ca. 17
with the course of the Heavens and caelestial Spheres in his Horology;
Archites was much extolled for causing a Dove of wood to hang in the Air;
Apelles and Zeuxis and excellent pair of Painters, whose pen^ils were to
admiration, Hume exposit. on Psalm. 26.
the one for deceiving, the beholders with a counterfeit fly; and the others,
the birds with lively painted grapes: O but when with David we shall consider
the Heavens, Psalm 8. Job 9. 9.
with job lift up our eyes to contemplate the celestial Spheres, with Solomon
observe the nature of Flies and Pismires, Prove. 30. 25.
that the Earth should hang in the Air, that the Sea should be confined with a
wall of sand, etc. We cannot but stand amazed, and wonder at that wisdom, and
power by which all these were created, and are still governed.

Self-examination required,
IT is reported of Plato, that when he did walk in the streets, Diogen La^r^ius
in vita.
if he saw any disordered in speech, disguised in drink, or otherwise out of
frame, he would say to himself, Number ego talis, Am I such a one as this is, such
a drunkard, such a Rebel to God and Man, etc. So must every good Christian say;
Number ego talis, Am I such a one as this is? such and such; And as the Apostles
asked Christ, Edm. Calamy sermon. at Westminster.
Master is it I? so must every one look into his heart, to see how things stand
betwixt God and his own soul, and say; Am not I the man that ought to be
ashamed for the many sins that I have committed against my God? Am not I the
man that have done thus and thus? etc.


A Man diseased in body can have little joy of his Wealth, Tho. Gataker gain of
godliness.
be it never so much; A golden Crown cannot cure the headache, nor a velvet
slipper give ease of the Gout, nor a Purple robe fray away a burning Fever; A
sick man is alike sick wheresoever you lay him, on a bed of gold, or on a pad
of straw, with a silk quilt, or a sorry rag on him: So no more can Riches,
gold, or silver, land and livings, had a man much more then ever any man had,
minister unto him much joy, yea, or any true or sound joy at all, where the
mind is distract and discontent; Without contentment there is no joy of ought,
there is no profit, no pleasure in any thing.


IF Jacob had not heard there was Corn in Egypt, B. Smith sermon. on Jer. 6.
in what a sad condition had he and his Family been, when all his provision was
consumed in Canaan? If Joseph had not met with a man, that told him where his
Brethren kept their sheep, when he was sent to them by his Father, he might as
well have been devoured of a wild beast indeed, as he was falsely reported to
be: It is a great blessing to meet with a faithful guide when a man is out of
his way: When a man is at a stand in his Religion, what he may hold, and what
he may let go; what he may embrace, and what he may abhor; when he is puzzled
and cannot tell which way to turn him, whether to the right hand, or to the
left; then to find such a faithful Counselor as Iehosophat did of Micaiah
touching War and Peace; 2 Kings 22. Acts 8. 30.
such an Interpreter as the Eunuch did of Philip touching the interpretation of
some hard place in Scripture, etc. this must needs be as sweet, and as welcome
as a shower of rain in the time of drought; nay, as bread is to the hungry, and
drink to the thirsty soul.


SOcrates was wont to say, That he had rather love (...), the Kings Countenance
then his Coin, Diogen Laert. Dr. Staugh tons Sermons. Non am^ divitias, non
op^o, etc.
a good look from him rather then his gold: Th^s a Christian thinks himself
richer when he is able to say, God is mine, then if he h^ the Treasures of both
Indies; One smile from God is better then all the Treasuad of the World; If the
Sun be wanting, it will be night for all the Stars; and it res light of Gods
countenance be wanting, if he frown upon us, Theogn.
a man may fit in the the dow of death for all the glister of worldly
contentments.


VAl. Cordus in his Dispensatory observes, The. Gataker. Just man's joy.
That those which prescribe Rules for the choice of Simples, advise to take
herbs in the Spring, flowers in Summer, fruits in Autumn, but Roots in Winter;
And why Roots for the most part at that time? Surely, because the sap is then
gone down, it is most in the Root when it is least in the stock; and so it is
oft-times with the joy of God's children; it is most rife many times with them
inwardly in the heart, when least show appears outwardly in the life, their
mirth is most many times when it is least seen; it is an inward rejoicing.


A Braham when the King of Sodom offered him some part of his spoils, The.
Gataker gain of godliness.
refused to take so much as a shoo-latchet of him, that the King of Sodom might
not say another day, that he had made Abraham rich; that men might not say,
that Abraham had been made rich, Genesis 14. 23.
not by Gods bl^ssing, but by the King's means, and that he might thank the
King of Sodom for what he had. So a godly man will not gain, or desire to gain
so much as a shoo-string, or a shoo-thread by profaning the Sabbath, Nehem.
13. 16
with the Sidonian Merchants, by fraud or deceit, by oppression or extortion,
by biting usury, the devils brokery; by rifling and plundering, or by any
other unlawful or indirect means, that the devil may not one day say, that he
has made him rich, as he said sometimes to our Savior, Omnia (...) tibi dabo,
All these will I give thee, etc. Matthew. 4.
.

Riches oft-times prove pernicious to the owners thereof.
QUintus Aurelius, in the days of Sylla, (that Sylla of Rome) had a fair
Grange, Plutarch. in Sylla.
that lay commodious to some great one; for love whereof, he was attainted, and
killed amongst them that were put to death: B. Smith' s Ser. on loh. 6.
whereupon he cried out, when he saw his name in the paper, Fundus Albanus me
perdidit, Out alaffe, it is my land that I have at Alba, and not any offense
that I have done, Grave quid prodest pondus mihi divitis auri? Tibull.
that is the cause of my death. And is not this the case of many a man amongst
us? has not many a man suffered for his means sake? It is a common saying,
that when any man is in trouble, his means will hang him. Who were they, that
heretofore were robbed and plundered? were they not the ablest, and the richest
of the land? Did you ever hear of a poor Malignant? It was the heinousness of
the wealth, not the heinousness of the fact, that has undone many a good
Family. So pernicious, prove rich^s many times to the owners thereof.

The security of a good Conscience.
THough the World should rattle about his ears, a man may sit merry, Dr.
Staughton Serm^ns
that sits at the feast of a good conscience; nay, the child of God, by the
virtue of this, in the midst of the waves of affliction, is as secure as that
child, which in a shipwreck was upon a plank with his mother, till she awaked
him, Hic murus a^eneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, etc. Virgil.
then securely sleeping; and then with his pretty countenance, sweetly smiling,
and by and by sportingly asking a stroke to beat the naughty waves; and at last
when they continued boisterous for all that, sharply chiding them, as if they
had been his playfellowes. O the innocence! O the comfort of peace! O the
tranquillity of a spotless mind! O the serenity! No Spanish sky so clear, as
a good conscience.

Not to mourn for losses, because all is made up in Christ.
SEneca tells a Courtier, that had lost his son, Fas tibi non est, salvo
Caesare, de fortunatua queri, etc. Epist. 26. ad Polybium.
That he had no cause to mourn, either for that or ought else, so long as his
Sovereign was in safety, and he in favor with his Sovereign, he had all
things in him; and he should be unthankful to his good fortune, if he were not
cheer^ull both in heart and look, so long as things stood so with him as they
did. How much better may it be said to every true Christian, Th. Gataker's loy
of the just.
let his wants and his crosses be never so great, his afflictions never so
pressing, his necessities never so biting, that he has little cause to mourn
for them; so long as he is in grace and favor with God, he has all things in
Him, and so long therefore he is happy, and he have nothing else beside him.

An ill tongue never speaks well of any one.
IT is commonly known, B. Hall's Occasional meditat.
that Scarabs and flies swarm to the galled part of a poor pack-horse, and
there sit feeding upon that worst part of his flesh, not once meddling with the
other sound part of his skin. Lingua mali pars pessima servi.
Even thus do malicious tongues of Detractours; if a man have any infirmity in
his person or actions, that they will be sure to gather unto, Juvenal. sat. 2.
and dwell upon; whereas his commendable parts, and well deservings, are passed
by without mention, without regard: And what do they get by it? It must needs
be a filthy creature, that is always feeding on stinking carrion.


ONe Vitus Theodorus, Melch. Adamus, in vita.
a German Divine, sends to advise with Melancthon, what he should do, when
Os^ander preached against him. Melancthon writes to him, and beseeches him for
the love of God, yea charge him, that he should not answer Os^ander again,
but that he should hold his peace, and make as if he heard nothing: Jer.
Borogh's Heart divisions.
Vitus Theodorus writes back again, that this was hard to do, yet he would
obey. And thus must every good Christian do, he must not be too hasty to oppose
oppositions, not be like those Salamanders, that are never well, but when they
are in the fire of contention, but go on patiently in a constant way, resolving
to bear what he meets with; Optimus ille, qui far novit injurias plurimas.
rather to suffer an hundred wrong* than return one; and then God at length
will make his righteousness break forth as light: For it is the only valor
to remit a wrong, and the greatest applause, that a man might hurt, and would
not.


THieves, when they go to rob a house, Mr. Alsop' s Ser. at S. Clem. Land. 1650.
if they cannot force the doors, or that the wall is so strong, they cannot
break through, then they bring little boys along with them, and these they put
in at the windows; who are no sooner in, but they unbolt the doors, and let in
the whole company of Thieves. And thus Satan, E^x parva scin ti^^a fit magnum
incendium.
when by greater sins he cannot tell how to enter the soul, then he puts on,
and makes way by lesser, which insensibly having got entrance, set open the
doors of the eyes, and the doors of the ears, then comes in the whole rabble;
there they take up their quarters, there, like unruly soldiers, they rule,
domineer, and do what they list, to the ruin of the soul so possessed.


IT is a sure sign, that a man is awaked out of his sleep, Sen^^. Epist. 5.
Somnium narrare, vigilantis est. etc.
when he discovers and sees the error of his dream; and a sure sign of
health, when a man is able to tell his disease. In the drawing up of water out
of a deep well, as long as the bucket is under water, we feel not the weight of
it, but so soon as it comes above water, it begins to hang heavy on the
hand. When a man diveth under water, he feels no weight of the water, though
there be many Tuns of it over his head; whereas half a tub-full of the same
water, taken out of the River, Arist. de^ Coelo. lib. 4. cap. 16. Elementa in
suo loco gravia non sunt.
and set upon the same man's head, would be very burdensome unto him, and make
him soon grow weary of it. In like manner, so long as a man is over head and
ears in sin, he is not sensible of the weight of sin, it is not troublesome
unto him; but when he begins once to come out of that state of sin, wherein
he lay and lived before, then begins sin to hang heavy on him, August. de.
vera Relig. cap. 14
and he to feel the heavy weight of it. So, so long as sin is in the will, the
proper seat of sin, a man feels no weight of it; but like a fool, it is a
sport and pastim unto him to do evil. Prove. 10. 23.
And it is therefore a good sign, that sin is removed out of his seat, out of
his chair of state, when it becomes ponderous and burdensome to us, as the
Elements do, when they are out of their natural place.


A Cracked Bell makes a very harsh sound in every ear; the metal is good
enough, B. Hall's Occasional meditat.
and it may be was once well tuned; it is the rift that makes it so
unpleasantly jarring. Just thus is a scandalous, and an ill-lived Preacher; his
calling is honorable, his noise is heard far enough; but, (O the sad but!) the
slaw which is noted in his life, marrs his doctrine, and offends those ears,
which else would take pleasure in his teaching. It is possible, that such a
one, even by that discordous noise, may ring-in others into the triumphant
Church of Heaven, whilst there is no remedy for himself, but the fire, either
for his reforming, or judgment.

Every Christian ought to be an ingenuous Christian.
WE read, Matthew. 4. Christ had a great dispute with the Devil, Jer. Borogh's
Heart-divisions.
in which he had him at great advantage, in his quotation of Scripture, verse.
6. He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they
shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. This
was quoted out of the 91 Psalm, verse. 11 and there it is, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. Yet Christ did not
catch this advantage, he did not so much as upbraid him, for leaving out that
passage, which he might justly have done; but he answers to the thing: Yea,
Christ might have taken a further advantage against the Devil; for the words
following in the Psalm, are a prophecy of Christ, destroying the power of the
Devil, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and the
Adder shall thou tread under thy feet. Christ did not take the advantage of
this neither, and upbraid him with it; he had enough against him in the thing
it self he brought. How unseemly then is it for men, when they are seeking out
for truth, Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts, Emollit mores, etc.
to piddle about words, to catch at phrases, to lie at the catch for
advantages, and to get hold of expressions. It is for Christians to be
ingenuous, to be plain one to another. For it is a sign, that men have less
advantage of the matter, when they seek so much after expressions, and pass by
the meaning. Sure it is, if God should catch at advantages with them, the most
pregnant; and ripe-witted, would never be able to abide it.

Philosophy to be subservient to Divinity.
THe Jews read the book of Hester in their Synagogues, Step. Menoch. de Repub.
Heb. Dr. Staughton' s Sermons.
because they account it Canonical Scripture; but before they read it, they
let it fall to the ground, because they do not find the Name of God once
mentioned in it, as their Rabbis have observed: So for the moral Treatises of
Philosophers, we must read them, because they speak of virtue and happiness,
and are good Handmaids to Piety and Devotion: But we must let them fall to the
ground before we read them, they must be subservient to the Scripture, they
must be read with reference to Scripture, because they do not give glory to God.

Impossible for a man to know all his sins.
IT is with the children of men, as with the Housewife, that having diligently
swept her house, Th. Gataker's Joy of the just. A^ sole per fenestras illucente
radios atomorum, etc.
and cast the dust out of doors, can see nothing amiss, not so much as a spe^k
of dust in it; whereas if the Sun do but a little shine in, through some cranny
in the wall, or some broken quarrel in the window, she may soon see the whole
house swim, and swarm with innumerable moats of dust, floating to and fro in
the air, which for dimnesse of light, or sight before, Spin^us de Instit
Christ.
she was not able to discern. Even so it is with many that are careful of
their ways, so that little may be seen amiss, that might require either
reformation or amendment; yet when they shall come to look more intentively
into God's Law, a little beam of light, reflecting upon their souls from it,
will discover unto them such an innumerable company, as well of corruptions in
their hearts, as of errors and oversights in their lives, that it shall make
them, Psalm. 19.
as men amazed, cry out, Lord, what earthly man does know the errors of his
life!

Children to be well principled.
EVery thing must be taken in his time. Let a bladder alone till it be dry, B.
Hall's Occasional meditat.
and all the wind in the world cannot fill it, no not so much as raise it up;
whereas being new and moist, the least breath enlarges it. It is no otherwise
in ages and dispositions; Inform a child in precepts of learning and virtue,
whiles years makes him capable, Tenaciter haerent Quaecunque a primis nascentes
hausimus annis. Paling.
how pliable he yields? how happily is he replenished with knowledge and
goodness? But let him alone till time and ill example have hardened him, till
he be settled in an habit of evil, and contracted and clung together with
sensual delights, he becomes utterly indocible; sooner may such a plant bow
than break, such a bladder be broken than extended.


THere are some of the Heathens that worship the Sun for a God, Joh. Pierii
Hierogliphica.
and they would offer to the Sun somewhat suitable; and therefore because they
did so much admire at the swiftness of the motion of the Sun, they would not
offer a snail, Jer. Borogh's Gospel worship.
but a flying horse, a horse with wings. Now a horse is one of the swiftest
creatures, and one of the strongest to continue in motion for a long time
together; then having added wings to the horse, Hi^ tibi praecipue ^it pur^
mente colen dus. Cato.
they conceived he was suitable to be a sacrifice for the Sun. So when we come
to God, to worship him, to sanctify him, to call upon his Name, we must not
bring the bare calves of our lips, but the fer^ency of our hearts; we must
behave our selves so, as to give Him the glory, that is fit for such a God to
have. God is a Spirit, and he must be worshipped in spirit and in truth; not a
civili only, but a divine worship also, proportionable in some measure even to
the Nature of God himself.


TAke a blindman, Th. de Trugillo thesaur. Concionat.
set him in a clear night with his face upon the Moon when it shines, when all
the Stars are sparkling round about, yet he sees nothing of the brightness of
the one, or twinkling of the other, only some glimmerings; or keperceives some
kind of reflex upon him, whereby he concludes, that the Moon is up, and that
the Stars show themselves. But then take a quick-sighted man, with a
perspective-glasse in his hand, Mirum non est coecum non judicare de coloribus.
and he discovers all, he walks all over the sky, from star to star, from one
Constellation to another, he is able to give account of all. Thus, take a man
in his pure naturalls, set him in the midst of the Ordinances; let the
Administrations be never so pure, Fr. Junius in 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the Dispensations never so clear, he sees nothing of God, but as it were
through chinks and crannies of Nature; some glimpse and glimmer only of divine
light. O, but the child of God, having the perspective-glasses of the Old and
New Testaments in his hand, especially that of the New Testament, a very
clear-sighted glass, he walks from star to star, from one Attribute of God to
another; he discovers stars of the first magnitude, as Faith, and Hope, and
Charity; nothing in order to salvation is hid from his eyes.


Methinks Philadelphia, Joh. Pigo^' s Ser. at S. Mary Woolnoth Land. 1643.
(the name of one of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.) is a very proper
fitting name for a Church, which signifies, Brotherly love; and every
Congregation ought to be, in a good sense, the family of Love; breaches and
divisions, distractions and heart-burnings, may happen in other Kingdoms,
Psalm. 122. 3.
which are without God in the world, and strangers to the Covenant of Grace,
yet let Jerusalem, the Church of ^od, be always like a City, which is at unity
within it self.


IN the ringing of bells, B. Hall's Occasional medit.
whilst every one keeps his due time and order, what a sweet and harmonious
sound they make? all the neighbor villages are cheared with the sound of them;
but when once they jarre and check each other, either jangling together, or
striking preposterously, how harsh and unpleasing is that noise? So that as we
testify our public rejoicing, by an orderly and well tuned peal, so when we
would signify the Town is on fire, En qu^ discor^ia Cives
we ring the bells backward, in a confused manner. It is just thus in Church
and Commonwealth, when every one knows his station, and keeps their due ranks,
there is a melodious consort of comfort and contentment; but when either States
or Persons will be clashing with each other, Perduxit miseros Virgil.
the discord is grievous and extremely prejudicial; W. Laud ^ant. in Ep. Ded.
of reply to Fisher.
And such a confusion either notifieth a fire already kindled, or portendeth
it; and that of all other must be a dangerous fire that begins in the
bed-straw. Popular States may ring the changes with safety; but the Monarchial
government requires a constant, and regular course of Rule and inferiority,
Government and subjection which cannot be violated without a sensible
discontent and danger; And so in the Church, take away Discipline, and the
Doctrine will not be long after.

Sin to be renounced as the cause of Christ's death.
SUppose a Man should come to a Table, and there is a knife laid at his
trencher, and it should be told him; This is the knife that cut the throat of
your child, or your Father; Alphons. ab Avendano in Psalm 119.
if he could now use that knife as any other knife* would not one say; Surely,
there was but little love either to the Father or to the child: So, when there
is a Temptation to any sin, this is the knife that cut the throat of Christ,
that pierced his sides, that was the cause of his sufferings, that made, Christ
to be a curse; Now will thou not look on that as a cursed thing that made
Christ to be a curse? Oh with what detestation, should a man or woman fling
away such a kni^e! and with the like detestation it is required that a man
should renounce sin; for that, and that only was the cause of the death of
Christ.

Ministers not to be afraid of the faces of Men.
POpilius a Roman Ambassador, sent to Antiochus the great, having delivered his
message, Plutark Apophthegm.
and the King deferring his answer, and demurring on it, drew a circle round
about him with his wand, T. Livius li, 45.
and conjured him to determine, and resolve, whether he would have Peace or
War, before he went a foot out of the circle: which wondrous resolution and
confidence caused him presently to define Peace; And do we not see how bold
every petty Constable will bear himself upon the higher Power, Dr. Staughtons
Sermons.
I charge you in the Kings name, etc. And why then should God's Ambassadors
only, be afraid like children of shadows and bug-bears; Courage and Resolution
becomes them best, Jer. 44. 11.
their Commission is large and will bear them out, and the penalty great if
they faint in the execution; Fear not their faces (says the Lord of Jeremy)
lest I destroy thee.

The Creature moves not but in and by God.
THe Creature can do nothing but as it is commanded by God; It is the vanity of
the Creature that it can do nothing of it self, Joh. Prestons Treatises.
except there be an influence from God; As for example, Take the hand, it moves
because there is an imperceptible influence from the Will that stirs it: So the
Creature moving and giving comfort unto us, it is God's will it should do it,
and so it is applied to this or that action: Est Deus in nobis; agita^te
calescimus illo.
The Artificer using a hatchet to make a stool, or the like, there is an
influence from his Art, that guides his hand to the work; So the creatures
working, is by a secret concourse from God, doing thus, or thus, whether it be
this way or that way, all is from God.

The Schismatics abuse of Scripture.
IT is reported of one Procrustes, a notorious theevish Innkeeper, who when
any Travelers came to lodge at his house, Plutarch in Romulo
. would make his guest's stature equal with his bed, either by stretching them
out to the length of it, if they were too short, Woodnote ut antea.
or by cutting some part of them, if they were too long; He would not fit his
bed to his guests, but his guests to his bed: Nothing more common shall we find
amongst Heretics and Schismatics, than either with false senses to stretch
and enlarge, or with loud lies to mince and mangle the sacred Scripture, that
so they may frame them to their likings, and make them serve their own turns
at all essays They will either suppress the words, or else not express the
sense; they will either blot out, or else blemish the Scriptures, rather then
they will abolish or any whit alter their own fantasies; Of their own opinion
and writings they will not abide the least amendment; but of the holy word of
God they care not what havoc they make.


MAuritius the Emperor said of Phocas, who conspired against him, Dr.
Staughton's Sermons.
having enquired of his disposition, and hearing that he was fearful; Si
timidus est, homicida est, said he; So it may be said in this case; The
Cowardice of the Ministry, is cruelty; he that fears the faces of men, he is a
murderer of the souls of Men.


REgenerate-men sin, yet the Peace is not broke betwixt God and them; because
their minds never yielded to sin; Joh. Preston Self-denial.
As it is betwixt Princes, they are at peace; though Pirates of either Nation
rob the others subjects, yet it breaks not the peace, it being done without the
wit of the King: So it is with sin in Gods children, it breaks not the peace
betwixt God and them, because it is but a Rebel, and they agree not to it; --
Et quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco.
There is a difference betwixt entertaining of sins as Thieves and Robbers, and
as guests and strangers; Wicked men entertain sin as a guest, the godly man as
a Robber; the one invites it as a friend and acquaintance, the other throws it
off as a rebellious Traitor.


CUshai and Ahimaaz ran a race who should first bring tidings of Victory to
David; T. Fuller Observar.
Ahimaaz, though last setting forth, came first to his journeys end; Not that
he had the fleeter feet, but the better brains to choose the way of the most
advantage; For the Text says, 2 Samuel 18. 23.
So Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overwent Cushai. Prayers made to
God by Saints fetch a needless compass about, that is but a rough and uneaven
way; The way of the plain, or the plain way; both shortest and surest is, Call
upon me in the day of trouble; such prayer though starting last, comes to the
mark first.


Coepio a Roman Consul, with his Soldiers robbed the wealthy Temple of
Toulouse, A. Gellii noctes Atticae* Des. Erasmi A^agia.
a City of Narbon in France, near the Pyrene mountain; but of those that had a
share of any of those goods, not one ever prospered; It was so generally
observed, that it occasioned a Proverb; If any man (what by means soever
decayed) were fallen into poverty, they would say of him, Aurum habet
Tholosanum, He has some of the gold of Toulouse: The endowment of all other
Churches (whereof many have been plundered of rich Chalices, and other utensils
in sacrilegious times) are like the gold of Toulouse, Mr. Woodnote ut ante^.
that brought ruin to them and their Families, If any man thriveth with them
that holds them by a wrong tenure, he has better luck then any such
Malefactor before him: How many sacrilegious persons have utterly ruinated
themselves, as it is easy to find in many Monuments of learning, how a Canker
has eaten their estates, as a Gangrene did their consciences; but see the
Chronicle, Dic mihi Musa virum.
search the histories of sundry Nations both ancient and modern, and find me
out but one Church-robber here, that has thrived past the third generation.

A seeming Religion no saving Religion.
Wandering Empiricks may say much in Tables and Pictures to persuade credulous
people their Patients; J. Shu^e Sermon. to the East. India comp. 1630.
but their ostentation is far from apprehension of skill, when they come to
effect their cures; How many Ships have suffered shipwreck for all their
glorious names of the Triumph, the Safeguard, the Good-spe^^, he Swift-sure,
Bona-venture, etc.? So how many souls have been swallowed up with the fair
hopes of men's feigned Religions? such as have at that very time the De^il in
their hearts, when they seem to have nothing but God at their tongues end.

The vanity of needless and intricate questions.
CAmbden in his History of the life of Q. Elizabeth, T. Fuller Holy State.
relates how Captain Martin Forbisher fetched from the farthest Northern parts
a Ships-lading of (as he thought) mineral stones which afterward were cast out
to mend the highways: Thus are they served, and miss their hopes, who long
seeking to extract hidden mysteries out of nice questions, leave them off at
last as altogether useless and unnecessary.


IOnah's condition was but bad at the best, as to be rocked and tossed to and
fro in a dangerfull Ship, the bones whereof aked with the violence of every
surge that assailed it; the Anchors, Cables, or Rudders either thrown away, or
torn in pieces; having more friendship preferred him, then he had hap to make
use of; and at length to be cast into the Sea, a merciless and implacable Sea
roaring for his life more then ever the Lion roared for his prey, the bottom
thereof seeming as low to him as the bottomless pit, and no hope left to esca^e
either by Ship, or by Boat, no Tabula Naufragii, no plank or piece of board
appearing whereby to reco^er the land; besides all these, B. King Lect. on
Jonah.
to make the measure of his sorrows up to the brim, the burning of God's anger
against his sins, like a River of brimstone: This is the case of us all in the
whole course of our lives, as Ez^chias sang in his song; From day to night thou will make an end of me. We are tumbled and tossed in a vessel as frail as
Ionah's Ship was, Esaias 38.
which every stream of Calamity is ready to dash in pieces, every disease is
able to fillip on one side or other, where neither Anchor, nor Rudder is left,
neither head nor hand, -- Nil sine magn^ Vita labor dedit mortalibus. Horat.
nor stomach is in case to give any comfort; where, though we have the kindness
of Wife and Friends, the duty of children, the advice of Physicians, we cannot
use their service; where we have a grave before us greedy to receive, and never
to return us, till the wor^s and creepers of the Earth have devoured us; but if
the anger of God for our sins accompany all these, it will be a woeful adventure
for that Man; when the sins of his soul, and the end of his life shall come so
near together, as the trespass of Jonah, and his casting out of the Ship.

Sacrilege cursed with a curse.
IT was usual in former times, when any thing was given to the endowment of the
Church, Ang. Roche. Billioth. Vat. Woodnote ut antea.
it was done with a curse against all such as should ever presume to alienate,
or take them away; Whether Man's curse shall take hold on such Church-robbers,
is wholly in the disposition of God, and a secret; But sure it is, that God
himself has openly cursed all those, how many, or how great soever they be
that rob him of Tithes and Offerings. Yea, cursed them with a curse, Mal. 3. 8.
redoubling the words, not without great cause, but emphatically to signify
that they shall be cursed with a strange curse, such a curse, such a signal
curse, that he that hears of it his ears shall tingle, and his knees smite one
the other.


SEneca writes of himself, Justus Lipsius in vita.
that he had a very flourishing memory, being able to recite by heart 2000
names, in the same order they were first digested. Portius La^ro writ that in
his mind, which others did in Note-books. He was a man of cunning in History,
that if you had named a Captain unto him, he would have run through all his
acts presently; In lib. de claris Oratoribus.
a singular gift from God. But, as Tully, comparing Lucullus and Hortensius
together, both being of a vast memory, yet he prefers Lucullus before
Hortensius, because he remembered matter, this but words. Thus certainly, as
the object about which memory is conversant, is more principal, so the gift
more commendable: B. King on Jonah.
And the most excellent object of all others, either for the memory to account,
or for any part of the soul to conceive, is, God the Lord; for, he that
remembereth the Lord, as the Lord has remembered him; that names his
blessings by their names, as God the stars, and calls them to mind in that
number and order, that God has bestowed them upon him, if not to remember them
in particular, which are more then the hairs of his head, yet to take their
view in gross, Psalm. 116. 12.
and to fold them up in a general sum with David, What shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits? Though he forget his own, and his father's house;
though the wife of his bosom, Meminisse juvabit.
and the fruit of his loins; yea, though his memory be so treacherous unto him,
that be forget to eat his bread; it is no matter, he remembereth all in all,
and his memory has done him service enough, in reaching this object, God the
Lord.


TUlly charged some dissolute people, In lib. Fin. de bon. and mal. Th.
Fuller's Holy state.
for being such sluggards, that they never saw the Sun rising or setting, as
being always up after the one, and a-bed before the other. So some negligent
people, never hear prayers in the Church begun, or Sermon ended; the Confession
being past before they come, and the Blessing not come, before they are passed
away.


THere arose a sedition at Antioch, Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 20.
for that Thedosius the Emperor exacted a new kind of tribute upon the People,
In that commotion, the People brake down the Image of the Empress Placilla,
(who was lately dead). The Emperor in a great rage sent his Forces against the
City, to sack it. When the Herald declared so much to the Citizens, one
Macedonius a Monk, endued with heavenly knowledge and wisdom, played a
prudentiall part, sending unto the Herald an answer to this effect, Tell the
Emperor these words, That he is not only an Emperor, but a man also; and
therefore let him not look only upon his Empire, but upon himself also; for,
he being a man, commands those also who are men. Let him not then use men so
barbarously, who are made to the image of God. He is angry, and that justly,
that the brazen image of his wife was thus contumeliously used, and shall not
the King of Heaven be angry, to see his glorious Image in cruelty handled? Oh
what a difference is there betwixt the reasonable soul, and the brazen image?
We for this Image are able to set up an hundred, Joh. Weems's Pourtraiture.
but he is not able for all his power, to set up one hair of these men, if he
kill them. These words being told the Emperor, he suppressed his anger, and
drew off his Forces. This Monk like another Moses, stood in the gap, and
preserved the People. Happy had this angry age been, if it had had such
another. Had but the generation of men formerly sprung up, Vacuas caedis habete
manus.
with serious consideration laid their hands more upon their hearts, and less
upon their swords, they would not have been so ready to break down the Image of
God in Man, nor sheathe their swords in each others bowels, as they have done.

The Churches complaint for want of Maintenance.
AS the old Patriark Jacob said of his children; Ephr. Udall. N^li me tangere
Genesis 42. 36.
when Benjamin was sent for by Joseph into Egypt, Ye have bereaved me of my
children; Joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin also, all
these things are against me. So may the poor Church of England complain, and
say, Ye have taken away my Tithe, and my Glebe, and many other profits are not;
and now ye will take away the rest of my revenue; all these things, may the
poor despised Church of England say, are against me; unless putting up that
prayer of the Pat^iark, she prevail in it with God; Now God almighty give me
favor in the eyes of the men, that they may send back that, that is taken away
already, and let that alone that yet remains.

Ministers and Magistrates to be diligent in their places.
THomas Becket, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, an evil man, and in an
evil cause, Fran. Godwin in vita.
but with words not impertinent to his place, had he well applied them,
answered one, who advised him to deal more moderately with the King; Clavum
teneo, and ad somnum me vocas? Sit I at the stren, and would you have me to
sleep? Thus it must be with Ministers and Magistrates; the one is not to keep
silence, but to lift up his voice like a Trumpet; B. King lect. Jonah.
the other is not to bear the sword in vain. And why? because the one steereth
the Rudder of the Church, the other sits at the Helm of State; both of them,
jure divine, having their warrants immediately from God so to do.

To bless God for our Memories.
STaupitius, Tutor to Martin Luther, and a godly man, Melch. Adamus in vita.
Matthew. 1.
in a vain ostentation of his memory, repeated Christ's Genealogy by heart in
his Sermon; but being about the captivity of Babylon, I see, (says he) God
resists the proud, and so betook himself to his Book again. Let no man
therefore abuse his memory, to be sin's register, nor make advantage thereof
for wickedness, Th. Fuller's Holy State.
but be thankful to God for the continuance of their memories, whereas some
proud people have been vi^ited with such oblivion, that they have forgotten
their own names.

Christ is the true Christians All in All.
DO you ask me, where be my Jewels? My Jewels are my Husband, and his
triumphs, Plutarch in Phocione. B. Smiths Ser. on Psalm. 2.
said Phocion's Wife. Do you ask me, where be my Ornaments? My Ornaments are my
two Sons, brought up in virtue and learning, said the Mother of the Gracchi. Do
you ask me, where be my Treasures? My Treasures are my Friends, said
Constantius, the father of Constantine. But ask a child of God, where be his
jewels, his treasures, his ornaments, his comfort, his delight, and the joy of
his soul, he will answer with that Martyr, Col. 3. 11.
None but Christ, none but Christ: Christ is all in all unto me.

Blessings turned into Curses.
WHat Tully reports amongst his wonders in Nature, Ex Plinio lib. 31. (...).
4 B. King's (...) Jonah.
that in one Country, In agro Narniensi siccitate lutum fieri, imbre pulverem,
Drought causes dirt, and rain raises dust, may be truly applied unto us, that
abundance of grace has brought forth in us abundance of sin; and as sin took
occasion by the Law to wax more sinful, so iniquity has never been more rife
amongst us, but through the rifenesse of the Gospel. So far is it, that we are
become true Israelites with Nathanael, or but half, nay almost Christians with
Agrippa, that we are rather downright Atheists, no Christians at all.


THe Natural history marketh, Plinius.
that the Whelps of the Lions, who have the sharpest paws, do so prick the
matrix of the dam, Joh. Weems's Poutraiture.
that they are whelped the sooner, and so never come to a full strength and
vigor. So fares it with young men, who in confidence of their parts, hasten
out of the Universities, before they be furnished with any gifts or abilities
at all. Therefore as Christ bad his Disciples stay at Jerusalem, Luc. 24.
till the holy Ghost came down, so let them stay at Jericho, till their beards
be grown, till they be well principled, and enabled for the great work of the
Ministry.


A Gentleman made choice of a fair stone, Th Fuller's Holy State.
and intending the same for his gravestone, caused it to be pitched up in a
field, a pretty distance off, and used often to shoot at it for his exercise.
Yea, but (said a wag that stood by) you would be loath to hit the mark. Thus
many men build their Tombs, prepare their Coffins, make them death's-headrings,
with memento mori on them; yet never think of death, and are very unwilling to
die, embracing this present world with the greater greediness.


CAleb said to his men, Jacob. Marchantii ^ortus Pa^^orum.
I will bestow my daughter upon one of you; but he that will have her, must
first win Kiriath Sepher: i. e. a City of Books; he must quit himself like a
man, Josh. 15. 18.
he must fight valiantly. And certainly, he that will be one of God's Priests,
an Ambassador of Christ, a true Minister of the Word and Sacraments, must not
be such a one, that runs before he is sent; that has a great deal of zeal, but
no knowledge at all to guide it: But one that is called of God, that has lain
long before Kiriath Sepher, that has stayed some time at the University, and
comes thence full fraught with good learning; such a one, and such a one
only, is a fit match for Caleb's daughter, fit to be a dispencer of God's Word
and Sacraments.


ARistotle writes of a certain Bird called Capri-mulgus, Lib. de Animal. Andr.
Willet on Levit.
a Goat-sucker, which uses to come flying on the Goats, and suck them; and
upon that, the milk dries up, and the Goat grows blind. So it befalls them,
who suffer themselves to be seduced by heretical and false Teachers, their
judgment is ever after corrupted and blinded: Matthew. 15. 14.
And, as it is said in the Gospel, If the blind lead the blind, both fall into
the ditch.


IT is said, Sr. Rich. Baker disqui^t. on Psalm. 51.
that David praised God upon an Instrument of ten strings; and he would never
have told how many strings there were, but that without all doubt he made use
of them all. God has given all of us bodi^s, as it were Instruments of many
strings; Non chordis mu^ica sed cor.
and can we think it music good enough, to strike but one string, to call upon
him with our tongues only? No, no, when the still sound of the heart by holy
thoughts, and the shrill sound of the tongue by holy words, and the loud sound
of the hands by pious works, do all join together, that is God's consort, and
the only music wherewith he is affected.

The way to have our Will, is to be subject to God's Will.
IT is reported of a Gentleman traveling in a misty morning, T. Fuller, Holy
State.
that asked a shepherd (such men being greatly skilled in the Phy^iognomy of
the Heavens) what weather it would be? I will be, said the shepherd, what
weather pleases me: and being courteously requested to express his meaning;
Sir (^aith (...)) it shall be what weather pleases God; and what weather
pleases God, pleases me: Thus a contented mind makes men to have what they
think fitting themselves, for moulding their will into Gods will, they are sure
to have their will.

The excellency of good Government.
IT has been questioned and argued, Whether it were better to live under a
Tyrannous government, B. Smith sermon. on Job 23.
where ever^ suspicion is made a crime, every crime, capital; or under an
Anarchy, where every one may do what he lift? And it has been long since
overruled, That it is much better to live under a State, Sub quo nihil liceat,
quam sub quo omnia, A bad government, rather then none. So then, if the worst
kind of government be a kind of blessing in comparision; What then is it, to be
under an able Christian Ruler? (...), etc. Homer: Mat. 8.
One that does govern with counsel, and rule with wisdom; and under such Judges
and Magistracy that do not take themselves to be absolute, the Supreme
Authority, but confess themselves to be dependant, that they are (...) like
the Centurion in the Gospel, and to give an account, not only to him that is
Judge of quick and dead, but also to the higher Powers on Earth, if they should
chance to forget themselves.

We must learn to live well before we desire to die.
AS old Chremes in the Comedy, told clitipho his son, a young Man without
discretion, who because he could not wring from his Father ten pounds to bestow
upon his Sweetheart, Terence.
had no other speech in his mouth, but emori cupio, I desire to die, Priks,
quaeso, disce quid sit vivere.
I would I were dead; But what says the old Man? first, I pray you, know what
it is to live, and when you have learned that, then if you be a weary of your
life, speak on: Thus they that are so hasty to pronounce the sentence of death
against themselves, that wish themselves in their graves, out of the world,
must first know what belongs to the life of a Christian, ^. King Le^t. on
Jonah.
why it was given them by the Lord of life, to what end he made them living
souls, what duties and service he requires at their hands; by that time these
things are rightly considered, they will be of another mind.

A negligent Christian, no true Christian.
IF a man should bind his son Apprentice to some Science or occupation, Will.
Attersoll on Philemon.
and when he had served his time should be to seek of his Trade, and be never a
whit the more his Crafts-master in the ending of his years then he was at the
beginning, he would think he had lost his time, and complain of the injury of
the Master, or the carelessness of the servant; Or, if a Father should put his
Son to school, and he always should continue in the lowest Form, and never get
higher, we should judge either great negligence in the Master, or in the
Scholar. Behold such Apprentices or such Scholars are most of us! The Church of
God is the School of Christ, and the best place to learn the Science of all
Sciences; Now if we have many of us lived long therein, some of us twenty, some
thirty, some forty, some fifty years, etc. and some longer, Quid est, quod ex
tanta turba discentium, etc. Hugo lib. 3. didas^.
and we no wiser then a child of seven, Were it not a great shame for us? What,
no forwarder in Religion then so? O disgrace! And may we not be condemned of
great negligence in the matters of our salvation?

Hypocrisy may pass for a time undiscovered*
MAud, Mother to King Henry the second, being besieged in Winchester Castle,
counterfeited her self to be dead, Will. Cambden Britan. Matthew. Paris Hist.
and so was carried out in a Coffin, whereby she escaped: Another time being
besieged at Oxford, Anno 1141. in a cold Winter with wearing whit^ ^pparel she
got away in the snow undiscovered: Thus some Hypocrites by dissembling
Mortification, T. Fuller Holy State.
that they are dead to the world, and by professing a snow-like purity in their
conversations may pass away a while undiscovered, Tandem apparebit Vtrum lupus
^it in pelle ovina, etc.
but time will come that their vizards shall be pulled off their faces; they
may go for a while muffled up in their cloaks of pretended sanctity and zeal
for the public good, Aug. in Mat. 7.
but all will be revealed at the last, if not here, hereafter.


IT was a custom amongst the Indians, Philostrati. Statuae.
after the death of any worthy man, to inscribe his name, and his act upon the
doors of his house, for the ennobling of his issue. So it was ever esteemed no
mean blessing to be well descended, to be born of Noble Christian Parents. And
though the Fathers goodness shall avail thee little, if thou be not good thy
self, Nihil mihi conducit Martyr pater, si male vixero, said Origin;
Pier-Charron Trois verites.
What if my Father, for the testimony of a good conscience, gave his body to be
burnt, it shall do me no good, if I live wickedly: yet for all that, it
avails much to make a man good, there being no way more expedite of
instruction to good life, than by the knowledge of things past, and of the
worthy acts of true Christian Parents, their Histories being our instruction,
and their honors our incitements to goodness.


THe Rich man in the Gospel was a bad accomptant when he set down a false sum
to his soul, Will. Attersol on Philemon.
saying, Thou have much goods laid up for many years, Luke 12. he sets down
years for days, nay, years for hours, like the deceitful Tradesman that sets
down pounds for shillings: Thus many men that would seem to be cunning in the
practice of this faculty, P. S. in vit^ And. Willetti.
are out of their reckonings and much deceived, they busy themselves in
Addition and Multiplication, and dream of many years that they are to live,
whereas they should be careful to practice Substraction and diminution, know
that every day, nay, every hour, every moment calls off a part of their lives.

is a courageous Christian.
IT is reported of the Eagle, that whereas all other birds make a noise when
they are hungry; Jer. Boroghs Christ Content.
he is never heard to make any noise at all though he be very hungry indeed:
and it is from the magnitude of his spirit, that whatsoever befalls it, Ulys.
Aldrovaldini Ornitholog. l. b. 3.
yet it is not always whining and repining as other fowls will do when they
want their food; it is because it is above hunger and above thirst: So it is an
Argument of a gracious magnitude of spirit, that whatsoever befalls it, yet it
is not always whining and complaining, so as others are; but goes on still in
its way and course, and blesses God, and keeps in a constant tenor whatsoever
thing befalls it; such things as cause others to be dejected, and fretted, and
vexed, and takes away all the comfort of their lives, makes no alteration at
all in their spirits.

Many are the troubles of the Righteous.
IF they were many, Ioh. Boys's Postills.
and not troubles, then, as it is in the Proverb, The more, the merryer: or, if
they were troubles, and not many, then, The fewer, the better cheer. But it
has so pleased the Almighty God to couple them both together, Many and
Troubles; in nature, troubles; in number, many, that through many tribulations
we might enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Hospitality commendable.
IT is reported of Mr. Thomas Willet, P. S. in vita, praefixa Synopsi Papismi.
a grave Divine, and father of the indefatigable, Dr. Andrew Willet, who also
in his younger years was sub-Almoner unto that reverend Prelate, Dr. Cox,
Eleemosynary, and Schoolmaster unto King Edward 6 th. then England's young
Josiah, that having two Benefices, Barley in Hertfordshire, and Thurkiston in
Liecestershire, a Living of good value, where having provided a sufficient
Curat for the place, once or twice a year he came, and spent the means amongst
them, relieving some way or other every one of them, the better sort of them by
hospitality and entertainment, the poorer by his alms, all of them by his
prayers, 1 Timothy 3. 4. Hierom. in Epist. Ruff^^o.
remembering the Apostle's exhortation, to be given to hospitality; and fearing
(as Hierom said of himself) Ne Maria cum Joseph locum in diversorio non
inveniat, etc. lest Mary and Joseph should want room in the Inn, or Jesus
himself, excluded, might say another day, I was a stranger, and ye took me not
in, he refused no guest that came: A happy man, in making himself so happy a
president of piety and pity to succeeding times. But where is the charity, the
hospitality, the tenderness of bowels, the largeness of heart, in these
strait-laced times of ours? Here is fasting and prayer amongst us, Act. 10. 4.
but where are the Alms that must go along with them? It was not the prayers
of Cornelius alone, but the prayers and alms of Cornelius together, that went
up into the presence of God. Let but a despised member of Christ, Patroclo
sordidiores. Aristoph. in Plut.
(not to speak of common Mendicants) whose wants are smothered up in a modest
silence, whose looks, and clothes, and All, speak for relief; let (I say) but
such a one appear, what is the answer? I have not for you, (and I think so too,
not a heart to do any good) ^od bless you, God comfort you, be warmed, be
filled, Jam. 2. 16.
and yet give them nothing: This is the charity of these uncharitable times.
And indeed, if men could but eat precepts, and drink good counsel, they would
soon find hospitality in abundance.

A covetous man, good for nothing till death.
IT is a common saying, And. Willet on Levit.
that a swine is good for nothing whilst he is alive; not good to bear or
carry, as the horse, nor to draw, as the ox; nor to cloth, as the sheep; nor
to give milk, as the cow; nor to keep the house, as the dog; but, ad solam
mortem nutritur, fed only to the slaughter. So a covetous rich man, just like
a Hog, does no good with his riches, whilst he lives; but when he is dead, Job
27.
his riches come to be disposed of: The riches of a sinner are laid up for the
just.

Others Harms to be our Arms.
THe Lacedaemonians were wont to make their servants drunk, ^ustin. hist. T.
Fu^ler's Ser. on (...) at Westminster. 1644.
and then to show them to their children, that they then beholding their
frantic sits, and apish behavior, once seeing, might ever shun that beastly
vice. Our sins have made this Land, which formerly was our faithful servant,
drunk with blood: It is to be hoped, that our children, seeing the miserable
fruits and effects thereof, will grow so wise and wary by their father's folly,
as for ever to take heed how they engage themselves in such a civil war again.


IT is an exorbitant course while the Ship is found, the tackling sure, the
Pilot well, the Sailors strong, the gale favorable, the Sea calm, to lie idle
at Rode, carding, dicing, drinking, burning seasonable weather; and when the
Ship leaks, the Pilot is sick, the Marrin^rs ^aint, the storm boisterous, and
the Sea tumultuous, then to lanch forth, Joh. Boys Postills.
and (...) up sail for a Voyage into far Countries; And yet such is even the
skill of evening-repenters, who though in the morning of youth, and soundness
of health, and perfect use of Reason, they cannot resolve to weigh the Anchor,
and cut the Cable that withdraws them from seeking Christ; -- Ser^ medicina
paratur, Cum mala per longas convalu^re (...) Ovid.
nevertheless they feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when their
wits are distracted, their senses astonished, all the powers of the mind, and
parts of the body distempered; then, forsooth, they think to leap into heaven
with a Lord have mercy upon me, in their mouths, to become Saints at their
death, however they have demeaned themselves like devils all their life before.


MRs. Willet made a quaerie unto her Husband Dr. Willet, then lying on his
deathbed, P. S. vita in ut antea.
touching the mutual knowledge that the Saints in glory have one of another;
such another question being proposed to Luther a little before his death; he
resolves her with the words of Luther (unto which Chemnitius and many others do
subscribe) That as Adam in the estate of innocence, when God first presented
Eve unto him, Genesis 2. 23.
whom he had never seen before, asked not whence she came, but said, This is
bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Even so the Saints of God in Heaven,
beatifically illuminated with knowledge beyond Adam's in his first condition,
shall know not only those whom here they knew not, but even those whom before
they never saw.


IT is observed of the Crocodile, Aristot. hist. animal. lib. 5.
that he comes of an egg no bigger then a Goose-egge, yet he grows till he
be fifteen cubits long; Pliny says thirty; he is also long lived, and which is
much, increases as long as he lives: This sets forth the manner of the
increasing of Satan's Kingdom, and how cunningly he disposes of his
temptations; -- Vires acquirit eundo.
First he begins with small matters, and so by degrees to greater, from
thought to consent, from consent to action, from action to custom, from custom
to a habit of sin; Judas is first inured to theft, and trained up in another
false trick, as in repining at the box of ointment poured on Christ, John 18.
at the length he is brought to betray his Master. Thus, was the gradation of
Peter's sin, first lying, then cursing, after swearing, etc.


SUppose that the Sea should break forth in this Land (as such a thing might
soon come to pass, T. Fuller sermon. at Westminster. 1642.
were not the waters thereof countermanded by God's Prerogative Royal) it is
not the endeavor of a private man can stop it. What if he goes with a Faggot
on his back, and a Mattock on his shoulder, and a spade in his hand, his desire
is more commendable then his discretion, it being more likely the Sea should
swallow him, then he stop the mouth of it; No, the whole Country must come in,
Children must bring earth in their hats, Women in their aprons, Men with
Hand-barrows, Wheel-barrows, Carts, Carrs, Wains, Wagons, all must work, lest
all be destroyed; So when a general deluge, and inundation of God's anger
seizes upon a whole Kingdom, when he breaks in upon a Nation like the breaking
forth of waters, 1 Chronicles. 14. 11.
it cannot be stopped by the private endeavors of some few, but it must be an
universal work, by a general Repentance, all must raise banks to bound it, till
this be done, no hope of Peace, no hope of Reconcilement at all.

How Christ's sufferings are made ours.
AS the Burgess of a Town or Corporation sitting in the Parliament House (...)
the person of that whole Town, John. (...)
or place; and what he says, the whole Town says; and what is done to him, is
done to the whole Town. Even so Christ upon the Cross stood in our place, and
bare our persons, and whatsoever he suffered, we suffered, and when he dyed all
dyed with him, all the faithful dyed in him, and as he is risen again, so the
faithful are risen in him.


WHen a clock within is disordered, and the wheels out of frame, the hammer and
bell must needs give an uncertain sound; Joh. Downham's Christ. Warfare.
so when our hearts are inwardly disordered, and corrupted with worldliness and
profaneness, our speech outwardly accords with them; The doorkeeper said
unto Peter, Thou art surely a Galilean, thy speech bewraieth thee; And
whosoever he be that has his mind taken up, and chiefly delighted with the
Worlds music, has his tongue also tuned to the same key, and takes his joy
and comfort in speaking of nothing else, but the World and worldly things; if
the World be in his heart, it will break out at the lips; A worldly-minded man
speaks of nothing but worldly things.


LAnquet in his Chronicle, Page 3201 John Boys Postil^^.
relates that in Frizland, there was a fantastical Prophet, named David
George, who calling himself, God's Nephew, said, Heaven was empty, and that he
was sent to choose the children of God, that the great work of Election was left
unto his disposal, to appoint such as he thought fit to be saved: Thus in our
time, there be many such Prophets, electing and damning whom they please;
deifying this man, and devilifying that man; but, sure it is, they have no more
authority to make devils, then the Pope has to make Saints; As then a number
of his Saints are in Hell, so questionless, many of their devils are glorious
Saints in Heaven.


THe Wheels in a Watch or a Clock move contrary one to another, Dr. Sibbs sermon
at Gray's Inn 1632.
some one way, some another, yet all serve the intent of the workman, to show
the time, or to make the Clock to strike. So in the World, the providence of
God may seem to run cross to his promises, one man takes this way, another
runs that way; good men go one way, wicked men another, yet all in conclusion
accomplish the Will, and center in the purpose of God the great Creator of all
things.


TOstatus observes out of Pliny, And. Willet on Levit. qu. 92.
that the Mole, after he has long lived under ground, begins to see when he
dies, oculos incipit aperire moriendo, quos clausos habuit vivendo, he
begins to open his eyes in dying, which he always had shut whilst he lived:
This is the true State of a wicked earthly-minded man, he neither sees Heaven,
nor thinks of Hell: tell him that the wicked shall be turned into hell, and
all that forget God, Psalm 9. 17. ^
it is but as brutum fulmen, a mere scarecrow, he fears not God nor man all
his lifetime, till he approaches to judgment, and then too soon he begins
to feel that which he could not be brought to believe.


THere is a kind of Serpent, Joh. Downham Christian Warfare.
called by the Greeks (...), which when she cannot overtake the fleeing
Passingers, does with her beautiful colors so amaze them, that they have no
power to pass away, till she have stung them; So does the counterfeit beauty
and bravery of the world, inveigle and bewitch those who behold it with
over-partial eyes, that they stand astonished till it have stung them with
carnal concupiscence, and doting love, so as they have neither Will nor power
to set one foot toward their heavenly Country.


MEn talk much of the Philosophers-stone, Joh. Boys post.
that it turns copper into gold; of Cornucopia, that it had all things
necessary for food in it; of Panaces the herb, that it was good for all
diseases; of Catholicon the drugge, that it is instead of all purges; of
Vulcans armor, that it was full proof against all thrusts and blows, etc.
^Well, that which they did attribute vainly to these things for bo^ily good, we
may with full measure attribute justly to the Scripture in a spiritual manner;
It is not an herb but a Tree, or rather a complete Paradise of Trees of life,
which bring forth fruit every month, and the fruit thereof is for meat, and
the leaves for Medicine. In a word, Rev. 22. 2.
it is a Panacy of wholesome food against fenowed Traditions; A Physicians shop
of Preservatives against poisoned heresies; Schola coalestis, eru^^itio
vitalis, c^^iodor* in Psalm 15.
a Pandect of profitable laws against Rebellious spirits; a Treasury of most
costly Jewels against beggarly rudiments.


LAnd-flouds make a great noise, Dr. Sibbs ^erm. at Gray's Inn, 1629.
swell high, but are suddenly in again, whereas the Spring or vvell-head
continues full without augmentation, or diminution: such are the things of the
world, such are all Creature-helps, how do they flourish for a while? but are
soon gone. But God, he is the Wellhead, puteus inexhaustibilis, never to be
drawn dry, the eternal Spring that feeds all other streams; in him, and in him
only are the Rivers of pleasures for evermore.


IT is Seneca's observation, Anth. Burges of Justification.
that the Husbandmen in Egypt never look up to Heaven for rain in the time of
drought, Hab. 1. 16.
but look after the overflowing of the banks of Nilus, to be the only cause
of their plenty: And such are they that sacrifice to their own nets and yarn,
that look upon their own endeavors, attribute all success to their own
projects, and in the mean time never so much as cast up an eye unto God the
Author of all, in whom they live, by whom they move, and from whom they have
their being.


Cyrus having relieved the Jews from their captivity in Babylon, does not
dismiss them with an empty grace, but with a Royal bounty; What a mountain of
Plate was then removed from Babylon to Jerusalem? No fewer then five thousand
and four hundred vessels of gold and silver; Certainly this great Monarch
wanted not wit to think: It is a rich booty that I find in the Temples of
Babylon, having vanquished their Gods, I may well challenge their spoil; How
seasonably does it now fall into my hands to reward my Soldiers? How pat does
it come to settle my new Empire? What if this treasure came from Jerusalem? the
property is altered; the very place (according to the conceit of the Jews) has
profaned it; The true God, I have heard, is curious; neither will abide those
vessels which have been polluted with idolatrous uses: B Hall's Contempl.
It shall be enough, if I loose the bonds of this miserable people; Zerub. Ezra.
if I give liberty, let the next give wealth; they will think themselves happy
with bare walls in their native Country. To what purpose should I pamper their
penury with a sudden store? But the princely heart of Cyrus (though an
heathen) would admit of no such base sacrilegious thoughts; those vessels that
he found stamped with God's mark, he will return to the owner; neither his own
occasions, nor their abuse, shall be any color of their detention. O Cyrus,
Cyrus, how many close-handed, griple-minded Christians, shall once be choked in
judgment, with the example of thy just munificence? Thou restoredst that, which
is now ordinarily purlo^ned; Quis enim laesos impune putaret Esse Deos? Lucan.
the lands, the treasures, the utensills of the Chruch, are now rifled and
devoured; but there is a woe to those houses, that are stored with the spoils
of Gods Temple, and a woe to those fingers, that are tainted with holy
treasures.

The Minister's Blessing after Sermon, to be attended.
IT is reported of Dr. In preface to his works.
Lake, Bishop of Bath and Wells, that whether it were so that himself preached,
or not, after the Sermon done, and the Psalm sung, as the manner is, standing
up in his Episcopal seat, he gave the Benediction to the People, after the
example of the High Priest, Numb. 6. 23. which thing as he Performed like
himself, i. e. in a most grave and father-like manner; so any man that had but
seen, with what attentive and devout gestures, all the People received it, what
apparent comfort they took in it, and how careful every particular man was,
not to depart the Church without it, could not but conclude, that there was
quaedam vis and efficacia, Flac. Illiric. Clavis Script. in verbo Benedicere.
a secret virtue in the prayers and blessings, as of the natural, so of
spiritual parents, Heb. 7. 7.
which as they are never he worse for giving, so those that have relation to
them, are much the better for receiving. And it is not for naught, that the
Apostle says, The lesser uses to be blessed of the greater. Much then are
they to be blamed, that rush out of the Church, leaving such a blessing behind
them; they think all is done, when the Sermon is done; nor is the Sermon done,
till they have practiced what they have heard; and the only way so to do, is,
to attend the blessing of the Minister, as a good preparative thereunto, which
(no doubt) will procure God's blessing thereupon, and then all is completed.
Again, if Grace after meat be required, surely Grace after the Word heard, is
much more necessary: And if Much good do it you, S. Croke visita^. Sermon. at
Bath, 161^.
be good manners after a dinner, surely, much good do it us, Much good do it my
soul, is more than a complement after a Sermon.

A rich Fool described.
A Great man lying on his deathbed, Th. Adam 's Ser. at S. Greg* Lon^. 1617.
sent first for his Physician, to advise with him about the recovery of his
health; no means was left untryed, but all in vain, the Physician gave him up
for a dead man. Then he sends for his Lawyer, much time was spent with him in
making his Will, Virtus post (...)
there he settles his Estate on friends and kindred, strives to make the
Inheritance of his Land sure to his Heir, and in the interim neglects his own
in heaven: Yet however, if it be but for formalities-sake, he will not seem to
be utterly carel^sse in that point, and therefore in the last place, he sends
for the Physitian^ of his soul, to consult about his spiritual estate, even
then when he was hardly capable of any advice at all. His Fool standing by, and
having observed all that passed, desired his Master, to give him the staff that
he used to walk withal. He gives it to him, but on condition, that he should
give it back again to the next he met with, that was a verier fool than
himself. Nay then, said the Fool, Here Master, take the staff again, for a
verier fool than thou art, I shall never meet again; that did first send for
a physician to strengthen thy body, then for a Lawyer to make thy Will, and in
the last place for the Priest to comfort thy poor soul, which should have been
the first work of all. And such fools are they, that ravell out their precious
time, tormented with the cares of the world, Ede, bib^, ^ude, post mortem nulla
voluptas.
that lade themselves with thick clay, such as sing Requiems to their souls,
that put the evil day far from them, with a Nondum venit tempus, till it come
to the last pinch, that the last sand is dropping in the glass, and their
souls (except God be more merciful) into the pit of hell for ever.


TWo Grecian Bishops, being fallen out about some difference in point of
judgment, parted assunder in great anger; but the elder of them, (for so the
wiser is to be accounted) sent unto his Colleague a message, only in these two
words, sol ad occasum, The Sun is about to go down. The other no sooner heard
it, but he reflected on that of the Apostle, Epho^ 4. 26.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; and so they were both friends again.
How does this amity of theirs, condemn the enmity that is amongst many of us at
this time? As that deadly feud of the Scots, who entailed their Lands on
posterity, conditionally, that they should fight against the party that had
offended, and never entertain any the least pacification: And such wrangling
Lawsuits, T. Full^^'s* Ser. Ser. at S. Clem. 1627.
as that of the two noble Families, Barclay and Lisle, which began in the
reign of Edward the fourth, and continued to the first year of King James,
full seven score years. It cannot be denied, but that a man may, with good
qualifications, go to Law for his own; but the length of time in the Suit, when
the Grandchild shall hardly end, that which the Grandfather began, may draw on
a great suspicion, in the want of charitable affection.


THe conceit of propriety, B. Hall's Contempl. ut antea.
hardens a man against many inconveniences, and adds much to his pleasure:
The Mother abides many painful throws, many unquiet thoughts, many unpleasant
savours of her child, upon this thought, It is my own. The indulgent Father
magnifies that in his own son, which he would scarce like in a stranger; and
why, but because he is his own. The want of this to Godward makes us so
subject to coffeehouse, and cooles our delight in God, because we think of
him aloof off, as one in whom we are not interessed: Could we but think, It is
my God that cheareth me with his presence and blessings, whilst I prosper; my
God, that afflicts me in love, when I am dejected; It is my Savior, that
sits at the right hand of my God in Heaven, my Angels stand in His presence; it
could not be but that God's savor would be sweeter, his chastisments more
easy, his benefits more effectual unto us.


LUd. Vives, Lib. de tradend. discipl.
that worthy learned man, does wonder at some Physicians, that they could
possibly be covetous, and greedy upon the world, in as much as both in their
speculative study, and their practical ministrations, they behold every day,
how tickle a thing life is, how soon the breath is gone, how the strongest die
in a moment, and the youngest fall on the sudden, and so by consequence, that
the use of riches is uncertain, and that all worldly things are transitory: And
it were to be wished, Esa. 4. 6.
that many Physicians of the Soul were not sick of the same disease; they know,
Geo. Abbot Cant. lect. on Jonah 4.
that all flesh is grass, and the grace of it but a flower; that our breath is
but a vapor, Jam. 4. 14.
and our life but as a bubble. They speak much of mortality, and preach other
men's funeral Sermons; yet in the midst of their studies of contemning the
world, they are in love with the world, and look too much after Mammon.


EPiphanius makes mention of those, Lib. de Anchorat.
that travail by the deserts of Syria, where are nothing but miserable marshes
and sands, destitute of all commodities, nothing to be had for love or money; if
it so happen, that their fire go out by the way, then they light it again at
the heat of the Sun, by the means of a burning glass, or some other device
that they have. Pet. du Moulin 's Communicant.
And thus in the wilderness of this world, if any man have suffered the sparks
of divine grace to die in him, the fire of zeal to go out in his heart, there
is no means under the Sun to enliven those dead sparks, to kindle that
extinguished fire again, but at the Sun of Righteousness, that fountain of
Light, Christ Jesus.

To love our enemies, and do them good.
IT was wont to be said of Archbishop Cranmer, Jer. Borgh's Heart divisions
If you would be sure to have Cranmer do you a good turn, you must do him some
ill one; for, though he loved to do good to all, Joh. Fox's Acts and Monuments
yet especially he would watch for opportunity, to do good to such as had
wronged him. O that there were but a few such leading men, of such sweet
spirits, amongst us, how great a blessing of peace might we enjoy? Did we but
rejoice in any opportunity, in doing any office of love to those, who differ
from us, yea to those who have wronged us, things would be in a better posture
than they are.

Plain preaching is profitable.
IN the building of Solomon's Temple, Josh. Shute's Sermon. at Merc. Chap. Land.
1627.
there was no noise heard, either of axes or hammers; all the stones were
prepared, squared, and fitted in the Quarry, 1 King. 6. 7. And thus the
Minister, in the building up of the mystical body of Christ, should make all
the noise in his study, there he must turn his books, and beat his brains; D.
Staughton's Ser. at Aldermanbury, Lon. 1637.
but when it comes to Church-work, to the Pulpit, then it must be in
plainness, not with intricacy, and tying of knots, but with all easiness that
may be. It is confessed, that painted glass in Churches is more glorious, but
plain glass is more perspicuous: Arth. Lake Bath.
Oratory may tickle the brain, but plain doctrine will sooner inform the
judgment; I Cor. 14. 2^.
that Sermon has most learning in it, that has most plainness. Hence it is,
that a great Scholar was wont to say, Lord, give me learning enough, that I
may preach plain enough. For people are very apt to admire that they understand
not, but to preach plainly is that which is required.

The very approaches of afflictions torment the wicked.
PLutarch tells, Lib de superstitione.
that it is the quality of Tygres, that if Drums or Tabours sound about them,
they will grow mad, and then they tear their own flesh, and rend themselves in
pieces. And it is so with the unbelieving Reprobate, with all wicked men, if
they do but hear the noise of afflictions, the very sound of sorrows
approaching, how do they fret, and fume, and torment themselves? nay, by
cursing and swearing, how do they re^d the body of Christ from top to toe in
pieces?

Malice and Envy, not fit guests for God's Table.
ST. Posidon. de vita.
Augustine could not endure any at his Table, that should show any malice
against others, in backbitings or detractings, and had therefore two verses
written on his Table, to be as it were monitors to such as sat thereat, that in
such cases, the Table was not for them.

Quisquis amat dictis absent^m rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
Thus Englished.

He that does love an absent friend to ^eer,
May hence depart, no room is for him here.
And how much less will the Lord endure any at his Table, Jer. Dyke's Worthy
Communicant.
that come thither with malice and hatred against their brethren? If love be
required at our own Tables, how much more will God require it in those, that
come to His Table. When one man's heart swells with envy against another, when
a second is filled with malice and hatred, this is not to eat the Lord's
Supper, but to eat one another; this is not to sit at the Lord's Table, but to
be a guest at the table of devils.


IT was said of Sr. Sr. Rob. Nanton Fragment. Regalia.
Will. Cecill, sometime Lord Treasurer of England, that when he went to bed, he
would throw off his Gown, and say, Lie there Lord Treasurer, as bidding adieu
to all State Affairs, that he might the more quietly repose himself: So when we
go to any Religious duty, whether hearing, or praying, coming to the Lord's
Table, or in any other religious addresses whatsoever, we should say, Lie by
world, Jer. Borogh's Gospel Worship.
lie by all secular cares, all household affairs, all pleasures, all traffic,
all thoughts of gain. Lie by all, adieu all. We must now be as those, that have
nothing to do with the world for the time, we must separate our hearts from all
common uses, that our hearts may be wholly for our God.


IT was once said to Luther, In vita per incertum.
when he was about interesting himself, in seeking Reformation of those bad
times, Abi in cellam, and dic, miserere nostri; O Luther, rather get you into
your Cell, and say, Lord have mercy upon us. Rich. Sibbs D. D.
And another being once asked, why he did not write his judgment, about the
controversy of the time, answered, Cui usui Reipublicae? cui bono mihi; To
what purpose? it would not help the cause, Jer. Borogh's Heart-divisions
but much hazard him that should meddle. And most true it is, he that meddles
with the divisions of the times, may expect to be divided himself; to have his
name, his repute cut assunder, and thrown this way and that way. It has ever
been an unthankful work, to meddle with a divided people; a man may with as
much safety put his hands into a nest of Hornets, as to enterpose in the midst
of such wild and unruly divisions, as are now amongst us.


THe Be is observed, Plutarch. de Tranquillitate*
to suck out honey from the Thyme, a most hard and dry herb: So the good and
faithful minded man, sucketh knowledge and obedience from the bitter potion of
adversity and the cross, Geo. Abbot lect. on Jonah.
and turns all to the best. The scouring and rubbing which frets others,
makes him shine the brighter; the weight which crusheth others, makes him like
the Palm Tree grow the better; the hammer which knocks others all in pieces,
makes him the broader and the larger: In incude and malleo dilatantur, They are
made broader on the Anvill, and with the hammer; although it be with the
hammer, yet, dilatantur, they are made to grow the wider.


EXamination and trial of a good Scholar, Ludovic. Granat. Dux peccatorum.
hurts him not, either in his learning, or in his credit; Talis est natura
fidei, etc.
nay, it advances him much in both; his very examination rubs up his learning,
Chrysostom. in Matthew. 13.
puts much upon him, and sends him away with the approbation of others. And
thus in the trial of faith, there is an exercise of faith; faith examined and
tried, proves a faith strengthened and increased: Some things sometimes prove
the worse, and suffer loss by trial, but the more faith is tried, the more
faith is enlarged.


A Mariner, Jer. Borogh's Gosp^l-worship.
when he takes his leave of his friends on the shore, sees them a while, but
when he is failed a little further, then they are quite out of sight, and he
sees only the houses; Multi vocem praedicationis audiunt, sed post vocem vacui
recedunt.
then failing a little further, he sees nothing but steeples, and such high
places; but then sailing a little further, nihil est nisi pontus and aer, he
sees nothing but air and water. So it is with too too many unprofitable
hearers of the Word; it may be, that when they are gone home from the Church,
there are some things fresh in memory; Greg. Moral.
but on the next day, they have lost some, but there are some other things that
do yet present themselves before them, and then they lose more and more, till
they have lost the sight of all; no more of the Word appears then, as if they
had heard nothing at all.

All divisions are against Nature.
PHilosophers say, O^iedo Ariagua.
Non datur vacuum, there cannot be vacuity in the world; the world could not
stand, but would be dissolved, it every part were not filled; because Nature
subsists by being one; Jer. Whitakers Sermon. at Westminster. 1646.
if there were the least vacuity, then all things should not be joined in one,
there would not be a contiguity of one part with another: This is the reason,
why water will ascend, when the air is drawn out of a pipe, to fill it; this
is to prevent division in Nature. O that we had but so much naturalnesse in us,
that when we see there is like to be any breach of union, we would be willing
to lay down our self ends, our self-interes^s, and to venture our selves to be
any thing in the world, but sin, that so we may still be joining, still
u^iting, and not rending from each other.

The hell of a guilty Conscience.
PHilo Iudaeus tells, Li. in (...).
that Flaccus played all the parts of cruelty that he could devise against the
Jews, for their Religion's sake; but afterward, when the doom if Caligula fell
upon him, and he was banished to Andros, an Island near Greece, Sonus excitat
omnis Suspensum. Virgil.
he was so tormented with the memory of his bloody iniquities, and a fear of
suffering for them, that if he saw any man walking softly near to him, he would
say to himself, This man is devising to work my destruction: If he saw any go
hastily, Surely it is not for nothing, he makes speed to kill me. If any man
spoke him fair, he suspected that he would cosen him, and sought to entrap
him; If any talked roughly to him, Geo. Abbot's lect. on Jonah. Nihil est
miserius, qu^m hominis animus conscius. Plaut.
then he thought that he contemned him: If meat were given to him in any
plentiful sort, This is but to fat me as a sheep, or an ox, to be slaughtered.
Thus his sin did lie upon him, and ever remember him, that some vengeance was
to follow from God, or Man, or both: And this is the case of all wilful,
bloody, presumptuous sinners, that though there be some struglings and
wrestlings to the contrary, yet their hearts and consciences are greater than
themselves, and will put them in mind, that nothing but destruction waits on
them; if they walk abroad, sonus excitat omnis suspensum, they are afraid of
every leaf that wags; if they stay at home, nothing but horror attends them:
In the day, they are struck with variety of sad apprehensions; and in the
night, they are tormented with fearful dreams, and strange apparitions: Such
and so great is the hell of a guilty conscience.

Love of Gods children, is a sincere love.
THe Son of a poor man, Th. de Trugillo thesaur, concionat.
that has not a penny to give or leave him, yields his father obedience as
cheerfully, as the son of a rich man, that looks for a great Inheritance: It is
indeed love to the father, not wages from the father, that is the ground of a
good child's obedience. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
If there were no heaven, God's children would obey him; and though there were
no hell, yet would they do their duty; So powerfully does the love of the
Father constrain them.


THe Lord Ellesmer, Sir. Rob. Nanton Frag. Regalia.
sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, a great lover of mercy, Prove. 12. 10.
was heard to profess, That if he had been a Preacher, this should have been
his Text; A righteous man regards the life of his beast. A merciful man and a
merciful Text well met; But oh the Prophetical incendiaries of the late
fearful, un-natural, civil war* how far were they from this sweetness of
disposition? how far from thoughts and bowels of mercy? how far from a desire
to preach mercy? when it was a common course with them by Viperine glosses to
eat out the bowels of a merciful Text; Mr. Woodnote New descant on old Records.
when nothing was more usual amongst them, than to allege the words of the
Scripture against the meaning; than to wrong and wring the Scripture till it
bled again, but they would misconstrue, and misapply it one way, or other, to
stir and incite men to such actions as little became the profession of the
Gospel.


IF any man would know whether the Sun shines or not, John Negus of Obedience.
let him go no further, but look upon the ground to see the reflection of the
Sunbeams from thence, and not upon the body of the Sun, which will but the
more dazzle his fight; The pattern is known by the Picture, the cause by the
effect: Let no man then soar aloft to know whether he be elected or not, but
let him gather the knowledge of his Election from the effectualness of his
calling, and sanctification of his life, the true and proper effects of a
lively faith stamping the Image of Gods Election in his soul.


IT is but Aesop's, De Seen and Morte.
fable, but the Moral of it is true; A poor desolate old Man returning home
from the vvood with a burden of sticks on his back, threw them down, and in
remembrance of the misery which he sustained, called often for death to come
unto him, as if he would live no longer: But when death came to him in earnest,
and asked him, what he should do, the old Man presently changed his mind, and
said; That his request unto him was, that he would help him up with his wood:
This most commonly is our case; we would find some other business to set death
about, if he should come to us, Geo. Abbot Lect. on Jonah.
when vainly we have wished for him, we dismiss him with a Nondum venit tempus,
bid him call to morrow, we are not yet at leisure: How do men vainly wish for
death, and how mercifully does the Eternal deal with them, Nullus hominum fidus
est amicus tumulo.
who oftentimes in his love denies that which they so earnestly desire,
Euripid*
and which if they should presently enjoy, they would prove, of all men most
miserable; for being removed hence, it is to be feared the accounts betwixt God
and their own souls would fall short of what they should be.


THe Jews in the celebration of the Passover, did sing the 113. Psalm with the
five following Psalms, Ta^^uld. Iudae^rum.
which they called, The great Hallelujuh, and it was always after that cup of
wine which they called, Poculum hymni, or laudationis, The cup of praise. And
thus it should be with us; At all times, upon all occasions, in all places we
should sing Hallelujahs to God, and praise his holy name; but at the Sacrament,
in that Eucharistical action we should sing a great Hallelujah; Jer. Dykes
Worthy communicant.
No time but we should bless God for the work of our Redemption, but at the
Sacrament we should have our hearts greatly enlarged in a more special manner
to bless God for the benefit of Christ's death, and the sweet comforts that we
receive thereby in the use of the Sacrament.

Not lawful to fight for Religion.
WHen Mahomet was about to establish his abom^nable superstition, Pomp. Laetus
de exortu Mahom.
wherein he had mingled the Laws and doctrines of Heathens, of Jews, false
Christians and Heretics, with the illusions and inventions of his own brain;
he gave it forth for a main Principle, how God at the first in his love to
mankind sent Moses, after him Jesus Christ, who were both of them endued with
power to work miracles, but men gave small heed to them: Flectere si nequeo
Superos* (...).
Therefore he determined to send Mahomet, a man without miracles, a Warrior
with a sword in his hand; that whom miracles had not moved, weapons might
compel. Thus they may derive their authority perhaps by a long descent from
Mahomets pretended Charter, but most sure it is they can find no syllable of
allowance in the great, assured, sacred Charter of Gods word, who seek to set
up Religion by the sword; fire and faggots are but sad Reformers; T. Full^r.
The Church therefore was wont to be gathered by the mouths of Ministers, not
by the swords of Soldiers. It was well said of one, Let Religion sink to Hell,
rather then we should call to the devil for help to s^pport it.

The weight of sin to be seriously peized.
POrters and Carryers, Ludovic. Gr^natens. Duae peccatorum.
when they are called to carry a burden on their shoulders, first they look
diligently upon it, then they peize and lift it up, to try whether they be able
to undergo it, and whether they shall have strength to carry it when it is once
on their backs. And thus should every man do, that for a little pleasure has
enthralled himself to carry the burden of sin; he should first prove and assay
what a weight sin is, Prove. 18. 14.
what a burden the punishment of sin is which he must bear, or sink under it;
and by this means he shall soon find himself at a loss, For a wounded spirit
who can bear?

Licentious libertines impatient of Government.
THere was sometimes in Gaunt, Phil. Camerasensis.
as diverse of the Magistrates were sitting on a bench in the streets, a beggar,
who passing along, craved their Alms, and complained that he had a secret
disease lying in his bones, and running all over his body, which he might not
for shame discover unto them; they moved with pity, gave him each of them
somewhat, and he departed; One more curious then the rest, bad his Man follow
him, and learn if he could, what that secret disease should be; who coming to
him, and seeing nothing outwardly upon him, but well to look at; Forsooth
(quoth the beggar) that which pains me you see not, I have a disease lying in
my bones, and in all my parts; so that I cannot work: some call it, Sloth, an^
some others call it, J. White Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land. 1610.
Idleness. Now there is a sort of Men that have a disease holds them much like
this of the beggar's, -- Cuncta licere creditur Auson.
they cannot endure to be subject: to have looked at them formerly, you could
have discerned little or nothing, for they were close; but there crep't all
over all their body through every joint, and was settled in their marrow, and
is now broke out at their mouths, a Lordly humor, that they cannot obey, nor
understand themselves to be any longer subjects than they please themselves.

Preaching Tradesmen, Preaching-souldiers, etc. not sent of God.
THere is a relation how Zeno the Emperor tempted God in the choice of a
Churchman, Niceph. hist. lib. 16. cap. 18.
by laying a blank paper on the Altar, that God might write in the paper the
name of him who should be Bishop of Constantinople; but one Flavitius that was
otherwise Scholar enough, corrupting the Sexton with a considerable sum of
money, caused him to write-in his name, and so obtained the Bishopric; And are
there not many amongst us Clero-Laicks, Preaching-Trades-men,
Preaching-Souldiers, John Weemse Exercitat.
etc? Such there are, but certainly not sent of God, not written down in the
book of Gods approbation, but are crep't in by the corruption of the time, and
have boldly thrown themselves into the work of the Ministry, and are many of
them the only men admired for gifts: of whom it may be said, as sometimes
Aulus Gellius did, of one Vendidius Bassus, Concurrite omnes augures, aruspices,
Portentum inusitatum conflatum est recens;
Nam mulos qui fricabat, Consul factus est.
But, Noctes A^ticae. lib. 5. c. 4.
blessed be God, there is yet no such a Famine in this our Samaria, that an
Asses head should be valued at fourscore pieces of silver. 2 Kings 6. 25.



ARistotle having gotten great Learning from Plato, by whom he was taught no
less then ten years; afterward became a great enemy unto him, and by all means
sought his discredit: A course clean contrary to all moral Rules and even
common humanity: the which unthankfulness caused Plato to call him Mule; The
property of which beast is, Aelian. variar hist. lib. 4.
That when they have filled themselves with their Mothers milk, they beat their
Dams with their heels for a Recompense: And well may our Universities, Mr.
Woodnote New descant o^ old Records.
the Nurseries of Gods Vineyard, the Seminaries of Christian learning, and
Fountains of holy Religion, yea the eyes, the light, the salt, the seasoning of
the whole land, take it very unkindly, that some of them whom they have not
only taught, but maintained with all necessaries, some ten years, some more,
should now be found their greatest opposers; This may be an Aristo^elian, an
Heathenish, but surely no Christian requital; Such unworthy Disciples,
dissemblers, may be men in countenance, but in condition, Mules.


HE that drives a nail into a Post fastneth it at the first stroke that he
makes with his hammer; Ludovic. Granat. Dux peccatorum.
but more firmly at the Second stroke; but so fast at the third, that it can
hardly be pulled out again; Animus sceleri bus assuetus, vix ab eis divelli
potest.
and the oftener that he knocks it, the faster it sticks, Isidor. insolilo
quiis.
and is pulled out with the greater difficulty: So in every one of our wicked
actions which we do, sin is driven deeplier into our souls, as it were with the
great hammer of Gods anger, the nail is sin, inclination to sin fastens it,
delight in sin enters it further, custom drives it further, and habit sets it
home to the head, and there it sticks so fast, that nothing in the World can
be found out, but only the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, by which it may be
haled and pulled out again.


IF the King freely without desert of mine, and at the mediation of another,
give me a place about him, J. White, ut antea.
and never so much right unto it, yet I am bound if I will enjoy it, to come
unto him and do the things that the place requires. And if he give me a Tree
growing in his Forest, this his gift ties me to be at cost to cut it down, and
bring it home, if I will have it; And when I have done all this, I cannot brag
that by my coming and service, I merited this place; or by my cost, in cutting
down, and carrying home the Tree, made my self worthy of the Tree, as the
Jesuits speak of their works; Opera bona non causa sed via regnandi.
but only the deed is the way that leads to the fruition of that which is
freely given. Bernard.
There cannot be produced a place in all the Scripture, nor a sentence in all
the Fathers, which extend our works any further, or make them exceed the
latitude of a mere condition, or way whereby to walk to that, which not
themselves, but the blood of Christ has deserved.

A true Christian, the more he is afflicted and troubled, the better he
thriveth.
PLiny in his natural history, Lib. 12. cap. 9.
writes of certain Trees, growing in the red Seas, which being beat upon by
the waves, Sr. Her. Wootton in a letter to Sr. Rich. Bakes, then in prison,
1628.
stand like a Rock immovable; yea sometimes, pleno ae^^u operiuntur, in a full
Sea they are quite covered over with waters; and it appears by many arguments,
that they are bettered by the roughness of the waters. Even so a Christian,
planted by faith, in the red Sea of Christ^s blood, resists all the waves of
temptation; afflictions are but as so many p^essing irons, to better obedience;
the more he is beat upon, yea and overwhelmed also with the billows of
distress and trouble, the better he thriveth, and the more he flourishes in
spiritual graces.

Troubles not to be so much questioned how we came unto them, as how to get out
of them.
ST. Ier. Whitaker at Westminster. a Sermon. 1646.
Augustine tells of a man, that being fallen into a pit, one passing by, falls
a questioning of him, what he made there, and how he came in. O, says the poor
man, Ask me not how I came in, but help me, and tell me how I may come out. So
let not us enquire, Ille ego qui feci, etc. Virgil.
how we came into such p^rplexed times, how into the pit of popular confusion:
One says, that the late King; another, that the Parliament; a third, the Army
is the cause of all our trouble, that they have put us in. But who is it that
takes care how to get out? who is it that smites upon his thigh with his hand,
and concludes, that his sin has caused all this sorrow, that his iniquity has
raked up the ashes of these hot distempers? Could but men do this, then they
might cheerfully look up unto him, who has got the advantage of upper ground,
who can, and is willing to draw them out of the deeps of their distress, and
deliver them.

The good of Adversity, and the ill of Prosperity.
THe Naturalists observe well, B. Lake on Psalm 51.
that the North Wind is more healthful, though the South be more pleasant; the
South with his warmth raises vapors, which breed putrefaction, and cause
diseases; the North with his cold, dries those vapors up, Pliny. Si fortuna
ride^ c^v^to tolli, etc.
purging the blood, and quickening the spirits. Thus adversity is unpleasant,
but it keeps us watchful against sin, and careful to do our duties; whereas
prosperity does Hatteringly lull us asleep: It never goes worse with men
spiritually, then when they find themselves corporally best at ease; Hezekiah
was better upon his sickbed, then when he was showing of his treasures to the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon. Esa. 39.
How wicked the Sodomites were, we read, Genesis 18. but Ezekiel, chap. Diodorus
lib. 15.
16. tells us, the cause was fullness of bread. It was a wise policy then, of
Epaminondas, to stand Sentinel himself, when the Citizens were at their
Bacchanalls; And surely, when we have the world at will, it is good providence
then to look most to our ways.

The great danger of malicious turbulent spirits.
IT is one of Hipocrates's Aphorisms, Sr. Rob Dallington 's Aphorisms.
That long festered ulcers are beyond the p^ssibility of cure, Vindicta nullum
relinquit facinus. Seneca in Thyest.
especially in hydropick bodies, where the humors are rank and ve^emous. Such
is the condition of all turbulent and tumultuous spirits, exulcerate with the
corrosive of many supposed wrongs, and impatient in delay of their revenge, are
so far transported from reason, or accepting the supple oil of reconciliation,
as that they enter into resolutions of desperate consequence, and vent the
p^yson of their malice, by the pipes of their treasonable practices, into every
vein of their native Country, to the great hazard of her health, and public
safety.


ALL the thoughts of worldly men are employed, Dan. Fea^ly 's Sermon. 1622.
all their care's taken up, all their time bestowed, all their means spent, in
purchasing, or some way procuring unto themselves (as they call it) a ^ortune,
an ^state of Land of Inher^^ance, or Lease for term of years or life; Lanc.
Andrews Winton. Sermon. at Court^ 1612.
all which are yet subject to a thousand ealamities. Let us then rather look
after Heaven, and labor for the state of Grace, which is past all hazard,
being assured unto us by the handwriting o^ God, and the seal of his blessed
Spirit; an Estate, not for term of years, but for etermity; an Esta^e that is
subject neither to the corruption of tinearum forensium, Westminster Hall
moaths; nor tinearum urbanarum, bankrupt debtors; nor tinearum militarium,
plundering thieves and robbers; but such as cannot be spoiled by hostile
invasion, nor wrung from us by power, nor won by Law, nor mortgaged by debt,
nor impaired by public calamity, nor changed by Kings and Parliaments, nor
violated by death it self.


TAke a dead man, Th. de T^ugillo thesour. Concionat.
and put fire to his flesh, pinch him with pincers, prick him with niedles, he
feels it not; scourge him, and he cries not; showt in his ear, he hears not;
threaten him, or speak him fair, he regards not, he answers not. This is the
condition of one that is spiritually dead in sin, let the judgmen^s of God, and
terrors of the Law, Greg. de cura past^r-part. 3.
be laid home to his conscience; let the flames of hellfire flash in his soul,
he regards it not, he is Sermon-proof, and judgment-proof; he hears of
judgments abroad, and sees judgments on others; nay, let judgments come home to
his own doors, yet he thinks, all is well, like Solomon's fool, he out-stands
all reproof; let the Minister hit him never so home, They have stricken me,
(says he) but I was not sick, Prove. 23.
they have beaten me, but they might as well have beaten the air. Such, and so
deplorable is the sad condition of every senseless sinner.


ALL Plants and other Creatures, Plin, hist. not. lib. 8. cap. 25.
have their grouth and increase to a period, and then their diminution and
decay, Sr. Rob. Dallington 's Aphorisms.
except only the Crocodile, who grows bigger and bigger even to death. So
have all passions and perturbations in man's mind, their intentions and
remissions, increase, and decrease, except only malicious revenge; for this,
the longer it lasts, the stronger it waxes still, even when the malign
humors of avarice and ambition are settled, or spent. Hence is it, that such
^iery spirits as these, have always pr^ved apter for innovation than
administration, for desolation than reformation; and dangerous to the State
where they live.


EXperience shows, Dan. Featly's Clavis mystica. Sic parvis componere magna.
that Briflow and Cornish-stones, and many other ^als Gems, have such a luster
in them, and so sparkle like true Jewels, that a cunning Lapidary, if he be
not careful, may be cheated with them. Such are the enlightening graces which
shine in hypocrites, they so nearly resemble the true sanctifying and saving
graces of the Elect, that the eye of spiritual wisdom it self may mistake
them, if it be not single, Matthew. 27.
and look narrowly into them. Peter's true t^ars of repentance, may be taken
for Esau's tears of discontent and revenge; Heb. 1^.
the temporary faith of Simon Magus may seem as good, Act. 8.
as that of justi^ying faith in Zacheus; a seared conscience hardly to be
discovered, Luke 19. 11. 21.
such as the possessed man had, from a secured conscience, Act. 24.
such as St. Paul's was; a sudden exaltation of the spirit, such as the Jews
was, Joh. 5.
from true joy in the holy Ghost, Psalm. 4. 7.
such as David's was.

Prosperity divides, affliction unites the hearts of Christians.
WE read in Scripture of the Manna that God gave his People, Jer. Borogh's
Heart-divisions.
such was the nature of it, that the heat of the Sun melted it. You will say,
How could it then endure the heat of the Oven? for they baked it in the Oven;
Sequitur fortunae lumina vulgus. Ovid. de Trist.
yet so it was of a strange kind of nature, that it could bear the heat of the
Oven, and not the heat of the Sun. Even of such kind of temper are our hearts,
the heat of the Sun of prosperity dissolves us, causes us to run one from
another, to divide one from another; but the heat of the fiery furnace of
affliction bakes us, brings us, and settles us together; it makes us to be one,
it takes away our ^awnesse^, it consumes many of our ill humors, and so
composes our spirits into one.

Newtrality in Religion, enmity of Religion.
THe sons of God, Genesis 6.
that is, those that did love God, fell in love with the daughters of men, B.
Lake on Matthew. 22.
that is, their own lusts: What issue had they? Giants, (...), such as fought
against God. The Samaritans worshipped both the God of Israel, and the
Assyrians Idols, Cruentas leges ore dictant, etc.
and they were the most deadly enemies of Jerusalem. Never have you seen an
Heretic, Ambros. orat. in Auxent.
that is, a person that professes partly the truth, and partly error, but he
turned a bloody persecutor of the Truth. And he that loves God and the World,
out of his love to the world, will do the greatest dishonor he can unto God.
Luke 16. 13.
Two loves, if one be good, and the other bad, cannot stand together, No man
can serve two Masters, (as Christ tells us) if he love the one, he will hate
the other.

The direful effects of War.
PLiny in his Natural history writes, Lib. 8. cap. 21. Grotius de jure belli
ac pacis Pa^ optima rerum. Sil. Ital.
that the nature of the Basilisk is, to kill all trees and shrubs it breathes
upon, and to scorch and burn all herbs and grass it passes over. Such are the
dismal effects of war; For, be the title never so clear, the cause never so
just; yet the means are not without fire and sword, nor the end without horror
and bloodshed; Nulla salus bello, Peace therefore is to be preferred, so it be
not with blemish of the Prince's honor, or prejudice of the public good.

God accepts the will for the deed.
A Pilot (as Quintilian observes) cannot be denied his lawful plea, Declamat.
lib. 3
dum clavum rectum tenet, Though the Ship be cast away, he is not to make
satisfaction, so long as he held the stern right, Dan. Featly's Sermons.
and guided it by the compass. In like manner, though our actions and good
intentions miscarry in the event, we are not to be blamed, if we steered our
course according to the Word of God; though the Bark be cast away, In magnis,
and voluisse ^at est. Propert.
as St. Paul's was, yet the lives of all in it shall be safe. It is very true,
that the Ship, even at the Port, may be driven back again, may meet with many
brushes and Knocks, when it was thought to be most safe; the dearest child of
God may be at the gates of death, so distracted, that not one word of sense or
reason may appear; yet all, no doubt, is very well; it is the fever that
rages, the disease that speaks idly, not the party; and therefore, ut ante
delirium, ita ad judicium, (said a learned man) God measures our actions not
by the obliquity of them, but by the rectitude of the heart, and will not lay
them to our charge.

Not the assurance only, but the joy of Salvation, gives content.
IT is often day when the Sun does not shine, B. Lake 's Ser. on Psalm. 51.
and though thick clouds breathed from the air, make a sad face of the sky, as
if it were night, yet we cannot say, the Sun is gone down. This is many men's
condition in the state of salvation, the Sun is with them, they are children of
the day; yet have they no joy of their salvation, their Sun does not shine,
Laetitian^ (...) Hie^onymas. Psalm. 51.
they have no clear day. Hence it is, that assurance of salvation will ^ot
content the soul, except it may have the joy of salvation also. This was that
which made David cry out, Restore me to the joy of thy salvation.


BUcholcerus gives a parcel of witty counsel to his friend Huebnerus, Melch,
Adamus in vita.
who being to go to Court, to teach the Prince Elector's children; at their
parting, I will give you one pro^itable rule, Cave multos, (...) ^ingulos non
times.
(says he) that shall serve for all your whole life. He listening what if
should be: I commened (says he) unto you, the faith of the devils. At which
H^^b^erus wondering: Take heed (says he) how you trust any at the Court,
believe their Promises, Jer. Borogh's Heart diuisi^ns.
bu^ warily, with fear, etc. The like must we do, not believe all that is
spokea, not confide in all that make a show of friendship; there is abundance of
outside love in the world, many complementall promises, but little or no
performance at all.


AS poison is of such force, Sr. Rob. Dallington 's Aphorijms.
that it corrupeth both blood and spirits, besieging, seizing, and infecting
the heart with the venomous contagion thereof, quite altering the complexion
and condition of the man, that has drunk it; So the Pesti^erous desire of
Sovereignty, Regnandi dira cupido, Quid non?.
though it seize on a mind of mild and mansuete disposition, yet it is of
such forceable operation, as it not only alters man's nature, but makes man
unnatural.


THe Angel bad Tobias, Tob. 6. 8.
to unbowell the fish, and to take out the gall, as being useful in medicine,
Dan. Feat^y 's Clavis mystica.
and a special means to recover his eyesight. The story is Apocryphal, but
the application is Canonical, and agreeable to the doctrine of the inspired
Scriptures. Sperne volupta^es. etc.
If we unbowell worldly pleasures, and carnal delights, and take out the gall
of them, Horat. Epist. 2.
that is, seriously think upon the bitterness of them; the bitterness which
they leave behind them, it will prove a sovereign remedy against our
spirituali blind^ess.


AS Moses added a Deuteronomy to the former books of the Law, B. Lake. on Exodus
19.
though he repeated but the same things: Decies repetita placebunt.
And the Evangelists added Gospel upon Gospel, of the (...) argument: And the
Apostles added Epistles to Epistles, not much varying their doctrine: So it
must not grieve the Minister to write and speak the same things to the people,
and for them it is a sure thing, as the Apostle teaches.


AS extreme windy stomachs do not only hinder digestion, Joh. Yates Arraignment
of Creature.
by interposition with the wholesome meat, and relaxation of the mouth of the
stomach, which ought to shut it self so close about the meat, that not so much
as the least vacuity may be left; but also either by ill digestion, fills the
body with crudities, obstructions, and consequently putrefactions; or else,
because wind is so stirring, make ejaculation, and a sudden regurgitation of
all that is received. Scientia inflat.
So in like manner, windy knowledge above wholesome sabriety, 1. Cor. 8. 5.
makes such an interposition and relaxation of the mind, that it cannot digest
wholesome doctrine, Verascientia aficit non extollit. Greg. lib. 3. Mora.
but fills it self with all manner of raw humors, and unstable opinions, which
breed such obstructions in the mind, that presently It falls into diverse
sicknesses, and can keep nothing that is good and savoury; but presently being
received, by the pride and self-conceit that it has in it self, casts it up
again, and so by a continual casting, breeds that weakness, that so much
I^aven of evil doctrine is soaked into the very filmes of the Soul, that it
breeds that disease, which Physicians call Corruption ad acciditatem, which sets
an eager and sharp appetite in the mind, that it hungers continually to be sed
with new opinions, and so at length, rottenness and putrefaction is bred
therein, and consequently death and destruction.

God is to have the glory of all things.
AS bright shining and golden vessels, Ioh. Downham's Christ. warfare.
do not retain, do not engrosse the beams of the Sun, (...).
which they receive, but return them back, and double them by reflection: Thus
the sons of Men, having from the Sun of Righteousness the bright beams of his
grace and virtue, not only to warm their hearts, but also to shine out in
their words and actions, are to reflect them back again, with all praise and
glory ^ue unto them, seeing that from him alone they have received them.

Not to be reconciled to God before we sleep, very dangerous.
THat man which dares go to bed with a conscience, B. Lak's Ser on Luke 3.
charged with the guilt of one enormous sin, is much more desperate, then he
that dares lie unarmed, with seven armed men, that are his deadly foes; for, a
sinner is less sure of his life than the other. What a sad thing is it to
sleep securely on the brink of Hell? to go to bed drunk over night, and find
himself awake in hell the next morning. He that inures not himself daily to
reconcile himself unto God, makes a com^ortlesse end for the most part, and is
snatched hence, before he has a thought of making his peace with his Maker.

No such thing as Independency in this life.
TRimethius, In vita Occami.
in his catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, mentions what Occam, Auxilium
ab omnibus petendum est* etiam ab infimis. Salust.
the famous Schoolman, said upon occasion unto Lewis the Emperor, Domine
Imperator, Romans 12. 19.
desende me gladio, and ego te defendam calamo; here was the Emperor's sword,
and Occam's pen standing in need of one another. This shows, there is no man
absolutely independent in this world, nor ever shall be, so long as he has any
dependency here below. The head cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee.
The Master cannot be without his Man, nor the Landlord without his Tenants, nor
the King without his Subjects. He that takes place before all in some things,
must be content to give place, and come behind others in some things else.

The remembrance of sins past, the only way to prevent sins to come.
IN the Country of Arabia, Plinii hist. not. lib. 12. cap. 27.
where almost all Trees are savoury, and Frankincense and Myrrh are even as
common firewood; Styrax is sold at a dear rate, though it be a wood of
unpleasant smell: because experience proves it to be a present remedy to
recover their smell, Dan. Featly's ^lavis mystica.
who before had lost it. We all of us have lived in the pleasures of sin, have
our senses stuffed, and debilitated, if not overcome; and the best remedy
against this malady, will be the smelling to Styrax, the unsavory and
unpleasing smell of our former corruptions; thus David's sin was ever before
him, and St. Augustine (as P^ssidonius notes) a little before his death, Psalm.
51*
caused the peniten^iall Psalms to be written about his bed, which he still
looking upon, out of a ^itter remembrance of his sins, continually wept, giving
not over long before the dyed. This practice will work repentance not to be
repented of.

The not returning thanks unto God for grace received, is the ready way to be
graceless.
RIvers receiving their fullness from the Ocean, Ioh. Downham 's Christwar fare.
pay their tribute, by returning their streams unto it back again, which
homage, if they should deny to yield, their swelling waters would bear down
their own banks, and drown the Country. So we receiving from the in^inite Ocean
of all goodness, whatsoever fullness we have of grace and virtue, Quid babes
quod ^on accepisi^?.
the praises and glory due unto them, are, by humble acknowledgment and
thanksgiving, to return to him that gave them. But if we shall was unthankful,
and refuse to pay the tribute due, and show our rebellion against our great
Lord, by encroaching upon his right, thinking to grow rich by robbing of him,
and keeping of all to our own use; These gifts thus retained, will make us but
to swel with pride, and breaking down the banks of modesty and humility, will
not only empty us of all grace and goodness, but make all our good parts we
have hurtful and pernicious. And thus it is, that the not giving unto God that
which is God's, the not returning praise to God for grace received, is the
ready way to be graceless.


TAcitus reports, that though the Amber-Ring amongst the Romans were of no
use, In lib. Animal.
nor any value, yet after the Emperor had began to wear it, it began to be in
great esteem, it was the only fashion amongst them. So (methinks) since our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus has born his cross, Dan. Featly's Clavis mystica.
and was born upon it, we should make better reckoning of crosses, than many of
us do. How nice and tenderly have many of us been brought up, that we can
hardly endure to see the sight of our sweet Savior's Cross? We stick to sip
of that cup, which was holy David's dyet-drink, and Job and Jeremy took it all
off. Are we better than these holy men? nay, Be^nard de Passione.
are we too good to pledge our Savior, in the cup of his Passion? Nos
suspiramus in cruciatibus, ille expiravit in cruce, Do we breathe out some
sighs in our cr^sses? he sighed out his last breath in torments upon the
Cross. It certainly then behooves every Christian, to take up his Cross, and
follow him.


AS in Chesse-play, so long as the game is in playing, all the men stand in
their order, and are respected according to their places; House of mourning.
first, the King, then the Queen, then the Bishops, after them the Knights, and
last of all the common Soldiers: But when once the game is ended, and the
table taken away, then they are all confusedly (...) into a bag, and happily the
King is lowest, and the pawn upmost. Even so it is with us in this life, the
World is a huge Theater or Stage, wherein some play the parts of Kings, others
of Bishops, some Lords, many Knights, other Ye^men. But when the Lord shall
come with his Angels to judge the World, all are alike, no difference betwixt
the King and the Peasant, Omnia mors aequat. Claudian.
the Courtier and the Clown; and if great men and mean persons, are in the same
sin, pares culpae, pares poenae, they shall be sharers in the same punishment.


IT is observable, Fran. Godwin de Praesulibus Angliae.
what answer Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, gave unto one that solicited
him on the behalf of a poor Kinsman of his, Tractent fabrilia fabri.
that he would prefer him; but being in^ormed, that he was an Husbandman; Then
(said he) if his Plow be broken, I will repair it, or, rather than fail, bestow
a new one upon him, whereby he may go on his course; but to dignifie him, as to
make him forsake his Calling and Trade, wherein he was brought up, I mean not
to do. And indeed, when the members of the body are out of their proper places,
what readiness is in them to do any work or service? So when a man is out of
his own calling, in any society, it is as if a member were out of joint in the
body, Sr. Geo. Paul in vita Whitegifti. Cant.
there is no pleasure in it: Every man is to be suited to his Genius too, to be
planted according to the natural bent of his mind: For a man to make his son a
Tradesman, if he be fit for Learning, or to apply him to Learning, when he is
cut out for a Tradesman, to send him to the Court, when he is fitter for the
Cart; this is as much, as if he should apply his toes to feeling, and not his
fingers; and should walk on his hands, and not on his ^eet, which is never like
to do well in the conclusion.

God the proper Agent in all things.
THe Scribe is more properly said to write then the pen; And he that makes and
keeps the clock, is more properly said to make it go and strike, then the
wheels and peyzes that hang upon it; Joh. Down. Christ Warfare.
and every workman to effect his work rather then the tools which he uses as
his Instruments: So the Lord, who is the chief agent and mover in all actions,
may more fitly and properly be said to effect and bring to pass all things
which are done in the Earth then any inferior or subordinate causes, as meat to
nourish us, clothes to keep us warm, the Sun to lighten us, friends to provide
for us, etc. seeing they are but his tools, and Instruments, but as they are
ruled, and guided by the power and providence of so heavenly a Workman.

Afflictions, crosses, etc. a surer way to Heaven then pleasures
PAssengers that have been told that their way to such a place lies over a
steep Hill, Alphons. ab Avendano Com. in Ps. 119.
or down a craggy Rock, or through a moorish Fen, or dirty Vale; if they
suddenly fall into some pleasant Meadow enameld with beautiful flowers, or a
goodly corn-field, or a fair Champion Country, look about them, and bethinking,
themselves where they are, say, Surely we are come out of the way, we see no
Hills, nor Rocks, nor Moors, nor Fens, this is too good to be the right way: So
in the course of our life, which is but a Pilgrimage on Earth, when we pass
through Fields of Corn, or Gardens of Flowers, and enjoy all worldly pleasures,
and contentments; when the wind sits in such a corner as blows Riches, honors,
and preferments upon us, let us then cast with our selves, Acts 14. 22.
Surely, this is not the way the Scripture directs us unto, here are not the
Temptations, not the Tribulations that we must pass through; We see little or
no footing of the Saints of God in this Road, but only the print of Dives
feet, some where we have mist our way, let us search and find where we went out
of it; It is very true that God has the blessings of this life, and that which
is to come in store for his children; Hac itur ad astra.
when he sees it good for them, they may go to Heaven this way; but certainly,
afflictions and troubles are surer Arguments of God's love, and a readier way
to Heaven then the other.

Desperate Devils.
AS a forlorn desperate Rebel out of all hope of pardon, stands upon his
guard, raises a Faction, John Boys Postills.
and maintains a party against his Sovereign Lord and Master: So the Devil,
past all grace and goodness, in despite of God, labors to set up a Kingdom
of his own, the Kingdom of darkness against the Kingdom of light, the Kingdom
of Antichrist against the Kingdom of Christ, he knows himself to be damned
already, and therefore thinks himself most happy when he can make another
unhappy.

Forgetfulness of injuries commendable.
THemistocles, when a famous Artist undertook to teach him the Art of Memory,
made answer, Plutarch Apohth.
Mallem oblivisci doceres, I had rather thou would read some Lectures of
Oblivion to me, Sir George Paul in vita Whitegifti* Cant.
that thou would teach me to forget, for I remember many things too well. This
is just our case, O for a blessed Amnestia to forgive and forget wrongs done
unto us! were our memories as strong as our sins, were we as retentive of God's
favors, as we are of injuries which affront us, there would be no need at all
to scrub up our memories, but rather an Act of Oblivion to suppress our
passion, tha^ works too strongly upon the least apprehension of a wrong though
but intended.


AS children with their faults provoke their Parents to anger, J. Downham's
Christ. Warfare.
and move them to turn their fatherly smiles into bitter frowns, and the fruits
of their love into effects of hatred in outward show, as namely, severe
countenances, sharp reproofs, and rigorous chastisements, and in respect of
these outward signs and effects of their anger, they are usually said to be out
of favor, and in their father's displeasure; however in truth at the same
time, they entirely love them, and use all this wholesome severity, not because
they hate, but because they would reform them. So Gods children, when by their
sins they do offend him, and provoke his anger against them, are said to be out
of his favor, not that God does ever change his Heavenly affection, or
purposes utterly to reject them, but because he changes the effects of his
love, into the effects of hatred in outward show; as when inwardly he suffers
them to be terrified with horrors of conscience, and with the apprehension of
his anger and displeasure, and outwardly whipp^th and scourges them with
temporary afflictions, all which he does not with hatred to their persons, for
he never hates them whom he has once loved in Christ; but for the hatred of
their sins, and love of them sinner, whom by this means he brings by the
r^ugh and unpleasant way of Repentance, unto the eternal pleasure of his
Kingdom.


THe Soldiers of Hannibal were much effeminated by the pleasures they had at
Capua, Hieron. Epist. ad H^liodorum.
infomuch that Corpus assuetum ^unicis, loricae onus non fert, etc. their
bodies being used to soft raiment, Seneca de tranquil. animi.
cannot bear the weight of an Helmet; the head wrapped in silk night-caps,
cannot endure an iron head-peece; and the hard hilt hurts the soft hand: Dan.
Featly Sermons.
Sound trees are not blown down with the wind, but the root rather fastened
thereby; but corrupt trees, eaten with worms, engendered of superfluous
moisture, are therefore thrown down by the least blast, because they had no
strength to resist. Res adversae non frangunt, quos prosperae non corruperunt,
The cause of our so great distemper, in our afflictions, we owe to the delights
of our prosperity; Why else do l^sses of goods so vex us, but because we trust
in uncertain Riches? Why is disgrace a Courtiers hell, but because he deemed
the favor of his Prince, and places of honorable employment, his Heaven? Thus
it is, that the very thoughts of our former pleasures, add to present sorrows,
Miserum est fuisse, there is the grief; We are therefore astonished at our fall,
Psalm. 30. 6.
because with David in the height of our worldly felicity, we said, we shall
never be moved.


PHilo the Jew, J. Plantavit^i Florid. Rabbin.
discoursing of Aarons Ephod, which he put on when he went to pray, says, it
was (...), A representation of the whole World, having in it all colors to
represent the conditions of all States, of all People whatsoever: This was
Aarons practice; J. White Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land. 1616.
and, to speak truth, we err more grossly in nothing than in bearing malice,
and wiping men's names and conditions out of our prayers, as if our private
affections were the Calendar of every man's salvation, when no man can rent
himself from his brother, but he must rent himself from Christ, who is the root
whereon, he and his brother both do grow together.


THere is no Man in his right wits would come as a Suitor to his Prince, Joh.
Down. Christ. Warfare.
and bring his accuser with him, Quae non missa Deo vacuis in nubibus haerent.
Aus on.
who is ready to testify and prove to his face his Treason and Rebellion; much
less would any present himself before so great a Majesty to make petition for
some benefit after he had killed his Sovereign's only Son and Heir, having
still in his hand the bloody weapon wherewith he committed that horrid act;
There is no Adulteress so shamelesly impudent, as to desire pardon of her
jealous husband, having her lover still in her arms, with whom she has often
had wanton dalliance in times past, and is resolved to have the like for the
time to come; If any be so mad, so shameless to make suits in this odious
manner, they are sure to be repulsed, and find wrath and vengeance where they
look for grace and mercy; But thus do they behave themselves toward God, who
remaining polluted with their sins, do offer up their prayers unto him; for
they bring their accussers, even their defiled consciences, and crying sins,
which continually accuse and condemn them, and call for that due judgment, and
punishment which they have deserved* They bring the weapon into God's presence
(even their sins) whereby they have crucified and slain the only Son of God,
and they present themselves into God's presence to sue for grace, embracing
still with ardent affection, the World and worldly vanities, with whom they
have often committed spir^tual whoredom, with a purpose to continue still in
their former uncleanness. And therefore let not such fondly imagine that God
will hear them, and grant their suits, but rather expect in his terrible wrath
he will take vengeance on them, and turn their temporary afflictions into
hellish torments and everlasting punishments.

Temporal pleasures, a great hinderance to spiritual joys.
ARistotle makes mention of a parcel of ground in Sicily, that sends forth
such a strong smell of fragrant flowers to all the fields and le^zows
thereabout, Ja^o. Acontii Stra^agem.
that no Hound can hunt there; the scent Satanae.
is so confounded with the smell of those flowers: O amotores mundi, nybdum
cujus rei gratia militatis* etc.
It is a thing considerable in this licentious age of ours, whether the sweet
pleasures, and profits of the world, have not wrought the like effect in our
souls, whether they have not taken away all scent and sense too, of heavenly
joys; whether they hinder us not in our spiritual chase; Aug. lib. con^es.
if not, we may take the greater joy and comfort in them, because it is an
Argument of true happiness, not to be overcome of earthly delights, not to be
corrupted with temporal happiness.

A Drunkard hardly to be reclaimed.
A Gentleman hearing that his Son at University was given to dicing, J. Boys
Works
answered, That want of money would happily make him leave that fault:
Afterward underderstanding, that he was given to whoring, -- In lu^em semper
Acerra ^ibit.
said, That either Marriage or old age would one day cure that folly; Mar^ial
lib. 1. Ep. 29.
But when he was informed of his Wine-^ibbing, Out upon the Villain (says the
Father) I will surely disinherit him, for that fault will increase with his
years; A Gamester will continue so, long as his purse lasts; and Adulterer, so
long as his loins last; but a Drunkard, so long as his lungs and his life last.

Riches without grace yield no true comfort.
AT a Funeral dinner there are many guests, J. White ut a^ted.
and great cheer, but all a mort, no mirth, because he is dead that should make
it; So in the state of Riches, there are many friends but little true comfort,
there is great plenty, and much abundance of outward things, but no security of
mind, if they be not well used; And why? because that is wanting that should
give it, the hope of salva^ion, and assurance of the world to come.

Submission to the wisdom of God as concerning outward worldly things.
LOok upon a child, he takes no care for himself, but rests contented with
that provision and allowance which his loving Father allotteth to him, Joh.
Down. Christ. Warfare.
because he knows that his Fathers discretion exceeds his; and if being
sick, we be content to receive upon the Physicians bare word, not only those
things which we affect, but even bitter p^lls, and unpleasing potions, which we
loath and abhor, because we know his skill exceeding ours, he is much better
able to direct us for the recovery of our health: Then how much rather should
we lay aside care, and rely upon the allowance of our heavenly Father? How
much rather should we trust this spiritual Physician, Magna petis Phaeton* etc.
whose skill faithfulness never failed? We in our foolish appetite desire
worldly honors, Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
but he in his wisdom denies them, because he knows they are but windly
meats, which would not nourish our souls, but puff us up with pride; we
affect worldly Riches, but he with-boldeth them, because he well sees they
would be a means to make us poor in grace; We dote upon carnal pleasures, but
he keeps them from us, because he knows our liquorish and greedy appetite
would easily surfeit of them, and so lose our spiritual strength and health, if
not our bodily also; And therefore why should not we be contented to want those
things, which if they would not bring more hurt then good, more loss then
profit, our heavenly Father, and wise Physician, would not have denied them to
us.


Jacob saw in his Vision, Genesis 32.
Angels ascending upon a ladder to Heaven; What? Angels got by steps into
Heaven? One would think, Dan. Featly Clavis mystica.
that being spirits, they might easily mount thither and back again in an
instant; Surely, it is not without a mystery, showing that Magistrates and
Ministers, who are in the Scripture styled Angels, are not suddenly to leap, or
hastily to climb up to places of preferment, but ascend by degrees when God
sets a ladder for them to go up by.


THose that are planted in the Church, must not conceal the Grace they have
received, no more then a Tree does his sap: Laurent. Scalabonii moral. in
passionem Christi.
We glory in the discovery of rich metals and precious stones, which Nature
has buried in the Sea; We suffer nothing of this great World to lie hid, we
labor to bring it forth, to behold, to show it; So should we deal with the
gifts and graces of the spirit, Bonum sui diffusivum.
which God has treasured up in this little world of ours; True grace is
diffusive, no Tree can more strive to send forth fruit, then it will to show it
self in good works.


THe wisest of all the Philosophers made this profession, Hoc scio, quod nibil
scio, This I know, that I know nothing; Origin, the learned of all the Greek
Fathers, made this Confession, Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, I am not ignorant
of my own ignorance; And the most judicious of all the Latin, was the
humblest: for in his heat of contention with Hierom, he acknowledges him his
better, Hyeronymus Presbyter, Jos. Shute Sermon. at a visitat. in St. Laur. Jury,
Land. 1629.
Augustino Episcopo major est, Though the dignity of a Bishop exceed that of a
Priest, Psalm. 131.
yet Priest- Jerome is a greater, than Bishop- Augustine; David, the best of a
Kings was freest from pride, Lord (says he) I am not high minded. Theodosius,
the noblest of all the Roman Emperors, his Motto was, Malo membrum esse
Ecclesiae quam caput Imperii, It was greater honor to him to be a member of
the Church, then the head of the Empire, and Paul, though nothing inferior to
the chief of the Apostles, yet was least in his own eyes. Thus it was, that
like the Sun in the Zenith they showed least, 1. Cor. 15.
when they were at the highest; like vessels, they made the least sound when
they were fullest; Esto parvus in oculis tuis ut sis magnus in oculis Dei.
or like the deepest waters, they ran most silent: In the weighing of gold, the
lightest pieces rise up, but the weighty bear down the scale; And surely they
are but light that are liften up with a self-conceit, but shallow waters, that
make a noise; but empty vessels, that make a sound: And such are all they that
are wise in their own conceits, Isidor. in Synonym.
such as think they can dispute de omni scibili, that they move in a circle of
knowledge, when as (God wot) they know little or nothing at all.

Riches are snares.
IT is written of one of Euripides's Tragedies, that it was so acted by the
Players, that it made such an impression in the beholders, that they went all
home in a Frenzy, J. White Sermon. at St. Paul's. Land. 1616.
in a strange passion, pronouncing Iambicks, and grew into such a vein of
Tragedy-playing, pacing and acting in the streets as they went, with the lovely
words of Perse^s to his (...), that it was long ere this (...) could be swaged
again: Aurum materia laborum; periculum possidentium, etc.
This Tragedy made the Spectators no madder, than in our times we have seen
worldly greatness and Riches do to many men; who have gone to the Theater sober
enough; Aug* de verb. Do^.
but when Wealth, and Riches, and greatness, and places of preserments have
presented themselves on the stage unto them, and with their lovely aspect a
little enchanted them, there has been nothing with them but madness and
presumption.

Worldly things dispensed by God in Wisdom.
THere is no wise Physician gives the same Physic to all Patients, or in the
same proportion, John Down. Christ. Warfare.
but he fitteth it in quantity and quality to every ones need, giving to one a
pill to purge him, to another a Cordial to restore him; one must be lanched,
another must be healed; one must have sauce to quicken his appetite, another
must fast it out, and be cured by abstinence: And thus the Lord in wisdom
deals with the sons of men, he gives that allowance to every one which he
knows most requisite for them, respecting the persons of none, but doing good
unto all, as their state and condition does require; Non omnis fert omnia
^^llus.
One man is bettered by liberty, another by restraint; One being ingenuous by
Nature, is made better by benefits, another of a more ^ervile disposition
becomes worse, and is only mended with threats and punishments; One man is fit
to be rich, another to be poor; One for the Court, another for the Cart; Thus
every one has his portion, every one his station allotted by God in his wisdom
and goodness.

The sinners estate, miserable.
WHen we see beggars, B. Lake Sermon. on Psalm 51.
Lazar^, one without limbs, another so sick, that he seems to be without life;
One even starved with hunger, another bereft of his senses; when we see men any
ways afflicted, we pity them, and confess them to be miserable: But, o si
adspici possint laniatus! had we but eyes to see the spiritual wounds and
sores, the wants and the woes of Adulterers, Drunkards, Murderers,
Blasphemers, or any other wicked livers, we would conclude them to be much more
miserable then any others whatsoever.

Relapses in sin, dangerous.
WE find in Scripture many desperately sick, Alphons. ab. Avendano Com. in
Matthew.
yet cured the first time by our Savior, but where do we read in all the
Scripture, where in all the Gospel, of any blind man's eyes, twice (...)? of any
deaf ears twice opened? of any tied tongue twice loosened, of any possessed
with devils twice dispossessed? of any dead twice raised? No doubt but that
Christ could have done it, but we read not that ever he did it; the reason,
that we should be most ^areful to avoid relapses into former sins, Heb. 6. 4.
the recovery whereof is very uncertain, always difficult, and in some cases,
(as the Apostle teaches) impossible.

Scripture-knowledge, the only necessary knowledge.
THe Philosopher being asked, What was the cause that Philosophers attended at
the gates of Rich men, Joh. Weemse Pourtraiture.
and rich men attended not at the gates of Philosophers? He answered, because
Philosophers knew what they stood in need of, but the Rich knew not that they
had need of Philosophy. So, did but men know how much they stood in need of
spiritual knowledge to lead them to their Creator, Om^em scientiam a^que
doctrinam sacra Scrip^^ra transcendit. Greg. in moral.
they would tread oftener upon the threshold of the Sanctuary, they would be
more diligent in searching the Scriptures; more laborious, digging as it were
for silver; and they would be more chary too of those Earthen vessels, by which
such excellent treasure is conveyed to them.


IT is observed by the Mythologists, that Pleasure went on occasion to bath her
self, Mr. Alsop Sermon. at. St. Clem. Land. 1649.
and having stripped off her clothes, laid them on the waterside; but Sorrow
having hid her self in the covert as unseen, steals the clothes away, puts them
on, and so departs; Hence it comes to pass, that Multitudes in the World are at
a great loss, they run and ride, court, and woo Pleasure; which they have no
sooner obtained, but they perceive their error, and acknowledge their mistake:
It is nothing else but Sorrow in Pleasures clothes, the pleasures of the world
are bitter-sweets at the best; -- Nulla est sincera voluptas.
God only is true happiness, fons and origo boni, at his right hand are true
pleasures for evermore.


GOd is compared to an Husbandman, all the World is his Farm: now you know
that a good Farmer that has any parcels of ground overgrown with briars and
thorns, B. Lake Sermon. o^ Psalm ^1.
takes great comfort to see them grubbed up, and the ground made good pasture
or arable. Even so God, who would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge
of his truth, is well pleased with those that are instruments thereof, such as
plow up the fallow ground of their hearts, such as fit them to receive the ^eed
of the Word, and they can never please him better then when they are employed
in such husbandry.


ST. Augustine had woeful experience (as himself confesses) of his many years
sticking in the heresy of the Manichees, Confess. lib. 3. cap. 11.
and thence was that complaint of his; Had I but (says he) slip't only into
the error of the Manichees, and soon got out, my case had been less fearful and
dangerous; but novem ferme anni sunt quibus ego in illo limo, etc. God knows,
that almost for nine years I wallowed in that mud; the more I strived to get
out, the faster I stuck in: Heresies and moral vices are like quagmires, we may
slightly pass over them without any danger, but the longer we stand upon them,
Dan. Featlie's Sermon.
the deeper we sink, and if we be not drowned over head and ears in them, yet
we escape not without much mire and dirt; If then we cannot be so happy as to
keep out of the walk of the ungodly, yet let us be sure not to stand in the way
of finners, muchless sit in the seat of the scornful; Psalm 1.
if we cannot be so clean as we desire, at least let us not with Moab settle
upon the lees of our corruption.


WHen Ulysses in his travels had left his men with Circe that Witch, she
changed them all into diverse sorts of beasts; Momerus.
as into Dogs, Swine, Lions, Bears, Elephants, etc. Ulysses when he returned,
complained that Circe had done him wrong in turning his Men into beasts; Circe
replied, that the benefit of speech was left unto them all, and so he might
demand of them, whether they would be changed into men again: John Weem^e
Pourtraiture.
He began first with the Hog, and demanded of him whether he would be a Man
again or not; he answered, that he was more contented with that sort of life
then ever he was before; for when he was a Man he was troubled with a thousand
cares, and one cross came in the neck of another, and one grief followed
another; but now he had no care but to fill his belly, and so lyedown and
sleep: And so he demanded of all the rest, but they refused to turn Men again,
-- Laqueo tenet ambitios^ Consuetudo mali.
until he came to the Elephant, who in his first estate had been a Philosopher;
He demanded of him whether he would be a Man again; Juvenal. Sat. 7
yea, that he would with all his heart, because he knew what was the difference
betwixt a Man and a Beast: Thus beastly Creatures, given over to their sensual
appetites, transformed and changed by Satan into beasts, in their hearts they
desire never to return to a better state, but to live still in their swinish
pleasures, and to follow their sinful appetites: But those who have the spirit
of grace in their hearts, and are fallen into some heinous sin, having tasted
of both the estates, like the Elephant, they cannot be quiet till they are at
their first estate again.

Repentance is to be universal.
THere is a story of a devout man, who had amongst many other virtues, the gift
of healing, unto whom diverse made resort for cure, amongst the rest one
Chromatius being sick, Specul. Exempl.
sent for him; being come, he told him of his sickness, and desired that he
might have the benefit of cure as others had before him; I cannot do it (said
the holy man) till thou have beaten all the Idols and Images in thy house to
pieces. O that shall be done, said Chromatius, Here, take my keys, and where
you find any Images, let them be defaced; which was done accordingly. To prayer
went the holy man, but no cure was done; O (says he) I am as sick as ever,
very weak and sick; It cannot be otherwise (replied the holy man) nor can I
help it; there is one Idol yet in your house undiscovered, and that must be
defaced too; True, (says Chromatius) It is so indeed, it is all of beaten
gold, it cost 200l. I would fain have saved it, but here take my keys again,
you shall find it fast locked in my Chest, break it also in pieces; which being
done, Mr. Alsop Sermon. at. St. Clem. Land. 1640.
the holy man prayed, and Chromatius was healed; Thus ends the story, but here
begins the moral of it. The case is ours, we are all of us spiritually sick,
full of wounds and putrified sores; the spiritual Physician tells us, that if
we look for any amendment, it must be by the amendment of our lives, he
prescribes Repentance of our sins, that we are willing to do in part, but not
in whole, we would fain keep one Dalilah, one darling beloved sin, but it must
not be, there must not be one sin unrepented of, we must repent as well for our
Achans as our Absolons; our Rimmons as our Mammons; our David's as our Goliahs;
our covert as well as open sins; our loved as loathed lusts, our
heart-abominations as well as loathed scandals; our babe-iniquities as well as
Gyant-provocations; Our Repentance must be universal.

In the loving our Neighbor, we love God.
LIght is the only Object of our eye, for our eye was made to see the light;
but light is not only in the body of the Sun, B. Lake Sermon. on Mat. chapter 22.
or Moon, or Stars, but by beams it does insinuate it self into all these lower
Creatures, and presents it self in that great variety of colors wherewith this
lower World is beautified; In seeing them we see the light, and delighting in
them, we take pleasure in the light, from whom they have their gracefulness:
Even so God is the proper Object of our love, and his goodness must draw our
abilities unto it, Per amorem Dei gignitur amor proximi, etc.
and it is able to satisfy them to the full, though they to the full can never
possibly apprehend it; Greg. moral. 7.
So that out of the nature of God, we need not seek for any other Object of our
love: But because God is pleased to communicate himself unto his Creatures, and
frame the reasonable part of them according to his image, he would have our
love to attend this communicating of himself, and be bestowed on them whom he
does so grace; And this our so loving of others, our neighbors, our selves,
detracts nothing from that All which is due to God, because we do it by his
direction, and our love does still reflect upon him, and in loving them, we
love and admire him also.


THe Scolopendra, Plinii hist. not. lib. 9. cap. 43.
having devoured the bait, when she feels the hook to prick her, casts up
all that is in her belly, till she have got up the hook, but as soon as that is
out of her bowels, she suppeth all that up which before she had cast from her:
How excellently has Nature in the property of this fish set before our eyes
the sad condition of a graceless sinner? who after he has devoured Sathan's
morsels, Dan Featlie's Sermons.
feeling the hook of his conscience, and being pricked with some remorse, rids
the stomach of his soul by confession, and never leaves fasting, and praying,
and sighing, and sobbing, till the hook be out, and the wound of conscience
healed with the balm of Gilead, but that being done, resorbet interiora omnia,
he returns to his former vomit, and greedily gourmandizeth the bait which
before he had vomited up; being void of true grace, he resolves to be a sinner
still.


A Man is in a deep consumption, he advises with the Physician; the Physician
bids him take so much water and heat it, Joh. Weemse Pourtrait.
then take such and such herbs and put in it, and make a decoction thereof:
The Patient takes water, and drinks it, but he leaves out the herbs, and
dies of the Consumption: Thus the blessing of God in the use of means, whether
it be in Physic, or in meat and drink, or in any transactions of men
whatsoever, is like the herbs to be put into the water; if it be left out,
Deuteronomy. 28.
all is in vain; this is that staff of bread. All the power to nourish and feed
comes immediately from God alone. Mat. 4. 4.



OUr English Chronicle has a notable passage between the King of England and
the King of Wales, Sir Richard Baker Collect. of hist. Eng.
who after a hot dispute by the sword, appointed a Treaty of peace at the River
of Severn; after some discourse inclining to a Reconciliation, the Competitors
for Sovereignty became Corrivals in humility: The English King forced his horse
into the River to offer his first embraces unto his Brother of Wales; The Welsh
blood being overcome with this admired condescension, he lighted from his
horse, and swam the stream to meet his Corrival, with these words, Tho. Fathers
Sermon. at West. 1646.
Vicit humanitas tua in justitiam meam, Rex invictissime, thy goodness has
overcome me: Surely, it is the glory of man to pass by offenses. In great men
it is the greatest glory, and it will one day be found the choicest Diamond in
the Diadem of greatness, to manage power by a self-denying spirit of meekness
and humility; and that if he must needs shoot at his brother, as who can
always shun the occasion? to shoot as Jonathan did at David, Dan. Tutevile
essays.
either short or gone, that wheresoever he hits, he may not hurt, because he
may not seem to cut off the hope of Reconcilement, or build his safety on the
neck of his Brother ruin.


IF a man profess himself to be a Painter, and take upon him to make the
picture of a King, and misshapen him, does he not deserve just blame? yes
surely, for he occasioneth strangers to think meanly of the King's person,
because of his ill-favored pourtraiture: B. Lake Sermon. on Exodus 19.
Thus Christianity is nothing else but an imitation of the divine nature, a
reducing of a man's self to the Image of God, in which he was created to
righteousness and true holiness; Then, shall a Christian escape punishment,
whose life is to be a visible Representation of Christ; if Infidels, and
Enemies of all goodness blaspheme him while they judge of him according to his
counterfeit? He shall not; I Cor. 2. 5.
wherefore faciamus de terra coelum (says St. Chrysostom) Let us represent
Heaven in Earth, Mat. 5. 16.
so live, that men may say, God is in us of a truth, and our light so shine
before men, here on earth, that they may glorify God which is in Heaven.

The Temporizer described.
THe cunning Artizan in Macrobius, about the time of the civil War between
Anthony and Augustus Ceasar, had two Crows, and with great labor and industry
he taught one of them to say, Salve Antoni Imperator, God save Emperor Anthony;
J. White Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land. 1616.
and the other, Salve Auguste Imperator, All hayl my Liege Augustus, so that
however the world went he had always one bird for the Conqueror; So the
Romanists, if the reformed Religion prevail, their bird's note is, Ave Christ,
spes unica, but if Popery be like to get the uppeer hand, they have a bird then
that can sing, Ave Maria, Regina coeli. And there is a double-faced Ianus-like
generation that as occasion serves can sing, Vive le Roy, and at another time
that which is clean contrary; their opinions and their tenants like the ancient
Tragedian buskin indifferently fitting either foot, passable as well at Rome as
Geneva; As the Hell otropium turns always to the Sun, so their opinions and
practice in matters of Religion to the prevailing faction in State.

Afflictions to be looked on as coming from God only.
A Man when he would drink of the water of the River, he drinks not of it
near the Sea where it is brackish, Mr. Goddard Sermon. at St. Greg. Land. 1649.
but he goes up to the Fountain where it is sweet and pleasant. So if we will
ever find comfort in our afflictions, we must learn to take them out of Gods
hand, to pass by the Instrument, and look up to the Agent; for in the second
causes we shall find much malice and hatred, Job. 1. 21.
but in God much mercy and goodness; 2 Samuel 16.
and thus did Job when the Chaldeans robbed him; thus David when Shimei cursed
him; Genesis 45. 8.
thus Joseph when his Brethren maligned him; and thus that Kingly picture of
patience when he was even worried to death by his own enraged People. Car. R. 1.


Ceremonials and Circumstantials of Religion, not to be much contended for.
TVlly in the first book of his Offices, has a story how the Nolans and the
Neopolitans had a controversy about a piece of ground which lay between their
several Countries, and Fabius Leo being invited to determine the difference,
gave unto them the exterior limits of the ground adjoining to their respective
Countries, Mr. Fathers Sermon. at West. 1646.
and reserved for the State of Rome all the land which lay in the midst betwixt
the two confines. And let us be well advised, that whilst with the dog in the
Fable we s^ap at the shadow we lose not the substance; whilst we do most
unhappily contend about the confines, the very outsides of our liberties and
privileges, about ceremonies and circumstances of Religion, our good friends
of Rome do not come in and give us as much sensual liberty as we can desire,
but take away from us also the saving truths of the Gospel, and that purity of
Ordinances, and Administrations which lie betwixt us in medio, on both sides so
much contended for.

Why God delivered the Law with such Majestic ceremonies.
MOrtal Princes come not to great assemblies, B. Lake Sermon. on. Exodus 19.
as to Parliament, to the throne of Judgment, to the ratifying of Leagues, but
(...) with a great deal of Pomp, Acts 25. 3. If ever, then it is that they show
their Royalty, they make it appear that they are neither beggarly nor
contemptible, nor unable to revenge themselves, they make show of their glory
and their power: for the vulgar, that have no judgment of true morality,
Caeremoniae licet negligenter obeuntur, ^amen homines sua umbra, etc. Throverus
in Apopth. 66.
are held in from disrespects to their Governors by these Ceremonies, and the
attention of their ears is kept in waking by such amazing of their eyes; and
discreet policy does by this means make them obedient beyond their
understanding; God takes the same course, and when he was to deliver the Law
unto Moses, he showed not himself but with much ceremonious Majesty unto his
people.


IT was agreed upon by both Armies of the Romans and the Albans, T. Livii Hist.
dec. 1. lib. 1.
for the sparing of much bloodshed, to put the trial of all to the issue of a
battle betwixt six brethren, three on the one side the sons of Curatius, and
three on the other side the sons of Horatius: while the Curatii were united,
though they were all three sorely wounded, they killed two of the Horatii; the
third remaining, though not hurt at all, yet not finding himself able to make
his party good against all three, begins to take his heels, and when he saw
them follow him slowly one after another as they were able, Dan. Feat. Sermons.
by reason of their heavy Armor and sore wounds: he falls upon them one after
the other, and slayes them all three. Thus it is the cunning ^leight of the
devil to divide us from one another, that he may prevail against us as Horatius
did against the Curatii; It is with us as in the Church of Corinth, one says,
I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollos, another, I am of Cephas; so in our
Church, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
one says, I am of ^uther another, I am of Calvin, another, I am of Luinglius;
(...) etc*
one is Episcopal, another Presbyterian, a third Independent; all carnal, all
(...), as if Christ were divided, or the reformed Religion deformed.


EZekiel in one of his Visions saw an Image or Idol of jealousy set up at the
North gate of the Temple. Jo^. Weems^ P^urtraiture.
What he saw then in a Vision, is clearly apparent in our ^yes, not one, but
many Idols of jealousy are in all places of the Nation set up, and worshipped
too; Ez^k. 8. 5.
What else mean those fears and jealousies that are now so rise amongst us?
Omnia timens, emnia suspi^cans, etc.
Here Is no trust, no credit given to the speeches, or actions of one another;
and hence it is that we are engaged thus one against the other; Chrysostom. in
Mat. cap. 12.
this is far from that godly jealousy wherewith St. Paul was jealous over his
Corinthians, chapter 9. and if not speedily amended, God that is a jealous God will
not suffer such fears and jealousies to be long unpunished.


IT is reported of the Hedgehog, that he goes to a pile of apples, and gathers
up as many as he can upon his prickles, Jacob March^nt hortus Pastorum.
and when he comes to his hole, he goes in with his prickles, but leaves his
apples behind him: Thus how many are there that have wallowed themselves in the
apples of their sweet contentments, which they have pursued with may pricks and
gripes of conscience, who when they shall descend, as shortly they must to
their holes of darkness, they must then leave all the sweet apples of their
false delights behind them, and shall carry nothing with them but the stings
and stripes of a wounded conscience, and will say, as many that have gone
before them, what has pride profited us? or what has the pomp of Riches
brought us? All those things are passed away like a Post that passes by, Jer.
49. 16* Nocet empta dol^re voluptas. Ovid.
but we are tormented, we are consumed in our own wickedness; Now too late we
find, that pleasures here in this life, are attended with pains hereafter.


IT is the saying of St. In lib. de Coena Domini.
Bernard, Cecidimus super acervum lapidum and in luto; when Adam fell, and
when every one of us does fall, he may be compared unto a Man, that falls not
only into the mire, but also on a heap of stones; he may quickly be bruised,
B. Lake Sermon. at Court, 1619.
but not so quickly healed, there is great time spent therein, even the whole
time of our life: As there be many reasons why the Church is compared to the
Moon, and Christ to the Sun, so one main reason may be; The odds between
Justification and Sanctification; Justification makes Christ's Righteousness
ours, and it is from the first moment at the full, not capable of any increase;
but Sanctification is righteousness in us, which if it have not his wains,
certainly it has its waxings, and will not be at the full till the day of
death.

Our whole life to be a life of Repentance.
A Nselm, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the Church of Rome has
inserted into the Canon of Saints (but he ranketh himself among the Apocrypha
of sinners) recounting with hearts grief and sorrow the whole course of his
life, In lib. Medita^.
and finding the infancy of sin in the sins of his infancy, the youth and
growth of sin in the sins of his growth, and the maturity and ripeness of all
sin, in the sins of his ripe and perfect age, breaks forth into this
passionate speech. Quid restat tibi o peccator, and Dan. Fea^lie's Clavis (...).
etc. what remains for thee, wretched man, but that thou spend the remainder
of thy life in bewailing thy whole life? And thus must we do, considering that
even when we pray against sin, we sin in praying; when we have made holy vows
against sin, our vows by the breach of them turn into sin; and upon repentance
of sins, Epist. 7.
many there are that repent of their repentance, and so increase their sin;
hence it is, that St. Jerome in his Epistle to Laeta calls for a continual
Lent of discipline, that her whole life should be a life of Repentance.

The safest way is to trust God with our Riches.
HE that goes a far journey, John's Weem^e Exercit.
returns his money usually by a bill of Exchange, and carries not his money
along with him, only so much as will defray the charges of his journey, and
all this for fear of robbing: So the children of God, they lay out their money
to the poor, they take God's bill of Exchange for it, and then it meets them in
the world to come, and there they do not only receive it, but it receives them
into everlasting habitations.

Fear of the loss of Gospel Light.
CAmden could not reach the height of his conceit, Sam. Ward. Ser. at Ipswich,
1636.
who bore in his shield, a Savage of America, with his hand pointing to the
Sun, and this Motto, Mihi access^, tibi recessu; In access to me, in recesse to
thee: However, this is most sure, The Sun of Righteousness has appeared unto
those Savages of America, with healing under his wings, they are many of them
brought unto civility, and are in a fair way to Christianity; Religion (said
one not many years since) stands a tip-toe, Isa. 32. 25*
and looks Westward: Let us all pray unto God, that the Prophecy in Esaias be
not fulfilled in our days, The Wilderness shall become a fruitful field, and
the fruitful field shall become a Forest.

The Christians inside-Religion, and outside, must be suitable.
IN the things of this World, how does every man strive to be suitable to his
rank, and is accounted base if he be not so? If of a yeoman he become a
Gentleman, of a Gentleman a Knight, D. Valentine A Sermon. at. St. Paul's, Land.
1622.
as his person is improved, so will he improve his port also; yea the excesses
of all men show; that every man goes beyond his rank, in his house, in his
fare, in his clothes; building like Emperors, clothing like Kings, feasting
like Princes; But in our spiritual estate it is nothing so; For our house, we
can be contented to dwell in seeled houses, when the Ark of God is under tents;
And who does endeavor that himself may be a Temple fit for the holy ghost to
dwell in? A^ for our clothes, they should be royal, our garments should ever be
white, the wedding garment should never be off; but we are far from this kind
of clothing, we do not endeavor to be clothed with the righteousness of the
Saints. Finally, for our diet, we that are called to the Table of the Lord, and
should be sustained with Angels food, content our selves with swines meat, for
what else are filthy lusts? we are called to be the sons of God, yet our eye
is very seldom upon our Father to see what beseems his sons; we are called to
be members of Christ, but little do we care what beseems that mystical body;
we are rather in name then in deed, either children of God, or members of
Christ.


A Bucket or Tub may for want of ^se, D. Gouge Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1644.
and standing dry, be so full of slits and rifts, that all the water you take
up in it, runs out; yet the often dipping it into the Well, and filling it
with water, will make it moister then otherwise it would have been, and more
retentive. Thus it is with our memories in the things concerning God and the
good of our souls, being very brittle and pertuse, that they will hold very
little or nothing at all, they are dolta pertusa, all goes through; this must
therefore be matter of great necessity, to hear often, that the frequent
inculcation of the same things may imprint that in our mind by often hearing
which others of more happy memories have got at the first.


EUsebius in his Ecclesiastical story records, that the persecutors took
those Primitive Christians, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
and set them naked before the Lions to be devoured, yet the Lions durst not
touc^ them; they stood foaming and roaring before them, but hurt them not, Joh.
Weemse Pourtaiture.
and thereupon they were forced to put the skin of wild beasts upon them, and
so tear them in pieces; Thus thou that art a wicked man, and have no part of
the Image of God to defend thee, no marvel if thy dog bite thee, thy horse
brain thee, thy Ox gore thee, etc. but as for thee that art the child of God,
and have the Image of thy Creator stamped on thy soul, Hos. ^. 18.
thou needst not fear the Creatures, though thy walk lie by the vale and shadow
of death they can offer no violence or harm unto thee (unless it be upon
particular dispensation for thy good and spiritual comfort) because they are
reconciled unto thee by God's own promise.


TUlly relates, how Simonides being asked by Hiero the King of Sicily, What
God was, Lib de (...), Deorum.
desired one day to consider of it; And after one day being past, having not
yet found it out, desired two days more to consider of it, and after two days
he desired three: And to conclude, at length he had no other answer to return
unto the King, but this; That the more he thought upon it, the more still he
might: For the further he waded himself in the s^arch thereof, the further he
was from the finding of it: De Deo (...) dicitur non potest dici. H^lar.
And thus Plato, What God is (says he) that I know not, What he is not, that I
know: 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Most certain it is, that God only in regard of himself, knows himself, as
dwelling in the light inaccessible, Drexelii considerat. de aeternitate*
whom never man saw, neither can see. Here now the Well is not only (...), but
we want a bucket to draw with^l; God is infinite and never to be comprehended
essentially; Oh then that we could so much the more long to enjoy him, by how
muchless we are able to apprehend him.


IT is Christ's own comparison, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
that his second coming shall be like the stealing on of a Thief in the night,
Luke 16. 8.
Et quod decuit Christum cur mihi turpe putem? nay, Christ bids us imit^t^ not
only the bad Steward in his providence, Matthew. 10.
but the Serpent also in his wisdom. B. Lake Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land. 1623.
St. Paul borrows se^tences out of the Heathen Poets; St. Augustine made use
of a rule of interpreting the Scriptures from Tichonius the Donatist: Truth and
goodness in whomsoever they are, they are God's, and therefore whether the
point be speculative or pr^^tick, if it be of this kind, in whomsoever we find
it, we may follow it, and in following it, we follow not men but God; It is too
much preciseness to dislike something in our Church, Virtus vel in host
l^^atur.
because therein we follow the Church of Rome, as if all Principles of Religion
and Reason were quite extinguished in them.

Injuries not only to be forgiven but forgotten also.
THe Athenians took one day from the month of May, and raced it out of all
their Calendars, Plutarch. de amore fraterno.
because on that day Neptune and Minerva fell out with one another, they could
not endure any remembr^nce of that quarrel; And it is Pythagoras rule, Coelius
Rhodogin Lect. var. 16. 19.
Ignem gladio ne ^odias, do not stir up the fire that is almost out: Even so
let Christians much more, bury th^se days in silence, and strike them out in
their Almanacks in which any bitter contention fell amongst them, and the
breach being once made up, Ne malorum memineris Val. Max.
and the wound closed, not to rub upon the old sore; and the heat being over,
not to rake into the Embers or ashes of the fire of that contention lately put
out, but to make a blessed Amnestia, an absolute act of Obli^ion upon all
injuries forepassed.

Afflictions lead to Heaven.
MErchants do usually show their worst clothes first to their Customers, then
the best; Semones Discipuli de Tempore, Judge. 1. 15.
At the wedding in Cana, the last wine was the best; Dulcia non meruit qui non
gustavit amara; before the Israelites could reach to Canaan, they must march
Southward through the dry and barren parts of the Mountains. And thus God
shows his children great afflictions and troubles the; South parts as it were
at the first before they can reach the Land of Promise; the way to Heaven must
be by the gates of hell. Acts 14. 12.
Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Eternity of punishment in Hell.
SUetonius reports of Tiberius Caesar, Lib. 3. cap. 6.
that being petitioned unto by a certain Offender to hasten his punishment, and
to grant him a speedy dispatch, he made him this answer, Hieron. Drexelil
Con^^derat. de ^ternitate.
Nondum tecum in gratiam redii, Stay Sir, you and I are not friends yet; Thus
it is betwixt Christ and the damned soul; Christ is a most just Judge, no
Tyrant, no Tiberius; and yet if one of the damned after a thousand years
burning in hell, should beg and entreat for a speedy death, H^rrend^ modo fit
miseris m^rs fine morte, ^inif sine fine, etc.
he would answer after the same manner, Nondum tecum in grattam redii, Greg.
lib 9. moral.
you and I are not yet friends; if after thousands and millions of years the
request should be renewed, the answer would continue still the same; Stay, you
and I are not yet friends; So just and right a thing it is, that he that would
not by Repentance accept of mercy when it was offered, should by punishment be
torm^nted, and have justice without mercy for ever.

God and his Attributes are answerable
IT is well known that the title of Augustus has been given to such Caesar's as
did not enlarge, but diminish the Empire; of Pater patriae to those that were
so far from being Fathers, that they were plain Tyrants; of Pontifex maximus
given to them which were so far from serving the Gods, that they did
sacrilegiously Canonize themselves for Gods; and yet propter spem, the Senate
gave them these titles, and by flattery they did amplify in the rest; B. Lake
Sermon. on Esaias 9.
He that had but a small conquest, increased his style as if he had conquered a
whole Kingdom, as appears in the titles, of Germanicus, Illyricus,
Britannicus, etc. nay, the Eastern Monarchs were very fond this way, claiming
kindred of the Gods, of the Stars, and what not, which might amplify their
Majesty; In a word, hope and flattery are the best ground, whereupon all
worldly men's titles are built, Coelius Rhoedogin.
especially great men's, and Kings most of all: Var lect.
But it is not so with the King of Heaven; the truths in him are answerable to
the titles that are given him, the Attributes proportionable; they are not
given him propter spem, but rem: He is that which he is called, neither is
there in them any flattery; yea, his titles do come short of, they do not
exceed those perfections that are in him; So that we may not measure the style
of God as we do the styl^s of mortal Kings, but conceive rather more then less
when we hear them.


I Have seen the wicked (says David) in great power, Psalm. 37. 35.
and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree. And why like a green Bay Tree?
because in the Winter, when all other Trees, as the Vine-tree, Fig Tree,
Apple Tree, etc. which are more profitable Trees, are withered and naked, yet
the Bay continues as green in the Winter as the Summer: So fares it with
wicked Men, when the children of God in the storms of persecutions and
afflictions, Tangerlarii Postill^.
and miseries seem withered, and as it were dead, yet the wicked all that time
flourish, and do appear green in the eyes of the World; they wallow in worldly
wealth, but it is for their destruction; they wax fat, but it is for the day of
slaughter; It was the case of Hophni and Phinees, the Lord gave them enough, 1 Samuel ^. 25.
and suffered them to g^ on, and prosper in their wickedness; but what was the
reason? because he would destroy them.


IT is evident to all, (except others be made keepers of their Reason, as now
they are of their Liberties) that the eye alone sees in the body, yet the eye
which see^h is not alone without the other senses; Sylvest. de Prierio ^^rea
rosa in Evang.
that the Forefinger alone points, yet that finger is not alone on the hand;
that the Hammer alone strikes on the Bell, yet the hammer that strikes is not
alone in the Clock; that the heat alone in the fire burns, yet that heat is
not alone without light; that the Helm alone guides the Ship, and not the
Tackling, yet the helm is not alone, nor without the ^ackling; In a compound
Electuary, Rubarb only purges choler, yet the Rubarb is not alone there
without other Ingredients: Thus we are to conceive, that though faith alone
does justify, Non bovema^^^to (...) numina gaudent Sed quae praestanda est.
etc.
yet that faith which justifies is not alone, but joined with charity and good
works. Ovid. Ep.
St. Bernard's distinction of Via regni, and Causa regnandi, clears the truth
in this point; Though good works are not the cause why God crowns us, yet we
must take them in our way to Heaven, or else we shall never come there; It is
as impious to deny the necessity, as to maintain the merit of good works.


IT is a custom in Germany, Hieron. Drexelii Con^iderat. de aeternitate.
that in the evening when a candle is first lighted, or brought into a Room
they say, Deus det vobis lucem aeternam, God grant light eternal; And it is
usual in many parts of this Kingdom to say, God grant us the light of Heaven;
The custom is good, and the words warrantable, but were the light of Heaven
more in our hearts, and less in our tongues, there wo^^d be fewer works of
darkness in our lives and conversations; We speak of the light of Heaven, and
wish for the light of Heaven, Plautus.
and we talk of new lights to heaven; but all this is like that silly Actor in
the Comedy, that cried out with his finger pointed to the Earth, and his eye to
Heaven, Encoelum, oterra; Heaven is in our mouth, but Earth in our hearts; We
are Heteroclit^s in Religion; not reas, but nominals in profession.


IT is too usual with men, the wiser they are, the more to be turbule^t and
disquieters of the State; B. Lake Sermon. on Exodus chapter 9.
and the more power they have, the more to tyrannize and lord it over their
fellow Subjects; For such men do seldom suffer themselves to be guided or
governed by the Counsels and dictates of others, and run headlong of
themselves, swayed by a kind of impulsive providence, and so care not but to
please their own fancy, no matter whom they displease besides; But it is not so
with Christ, he that is Wisdom it self, that is wonderful for Counsel, mighty
for Power; bends both his wisdom, and his power, and his counsel to work peace,
that peace which is the portion of his people, the inheritance of his Church,
which none can partake of but those that are true members thereof.

Study of the Tongues, to be encouraged.
DAvid made a Statute in Israel, 1 Samuel 25.
that they who tarryed by the stuff should part alike with those who went to
battle: Weemse Portraiture.
The Professors of the Tongues are they who keep the stuff, and they should be
as well rewarded as they who go into the field and fight in the Ministry.

The anger or wrath of God best appeased, when the sinner appears with Christ
in his arms.
THemistocles understanding that King Admetus was highly displeased with him,
Diodorus lib. 11.
took up his young son into his arms, and treated with the Father, holding
that his darling in his bosom, Plutarch. in vita.
and thereby appeased the King's wrath: God is at this time offended with us,
and has a controversy with us; there is no better way then to come to him
with Christ in our arms, to present our suits by him; We have so far provoked
the Almighty by our sins, that he may justly fall on us with a back-blow that
we never yet dreamt of; Lib. 2. de Isaac.
And who in Heaven or Earth can or dare treat for our peace, but Christ our
Peacemaker; Ille oculus est per quem Deum videmus, etc. (says Ambrose) He is
our eye with which we see God, our hand by which we offer to him, and our mouth
by which we speak unto him.

The Vanity of heaping up Riches.
IT is a great deal of care and pains that the Spider takes in weaving her web,
she runs much, and often up and down, she fetches a compass this way and
that way, Hieron. Drexelii Con^iderat. de aeternitate.
and returns often to the same point, she spends her self in multitudes of
fine threads, to make her self a round Cabinet, she exenterateth her self, and
works out her own bowels, to make an artificial and curious piece of work;
which when it is made, is apt to be blown away with every pusse of wind; she
hangs it up aloft, she fastneth it to the roof of the house, she strengthens
it with many a thread, Jos. Hall Exon. meditat. occasional.
wheeling often round about, not sparing her own bowels, but spending them
willingly upon her work; And when she has done all this, spun her fine
threads, weaved them one within another, wrought her self a fine Canopy, hanged
it aloft, and thinks all is sure; on a sudden, in the twinkling of an eye, with
a little sweep of a Beesom all falls to the ground, and so her labor
perishes: But here is not all; Poor Spider, she is killed either in her own
web, or else she is taken in her own snare, haled to death, and trodden under
foot; Thus the silly Animal may be truly said either to weave her own winding
sheet, or to make a snare to hang her self. Just so do many Men wast and
consume themselves to get preferment, to enjoy pleasures, to heap up riches,
and increase them; and to that end they spend all their wit, and oftentimes the
health of their bodies, running up and down, Dives p^n^non censu. Pet. Raven.
in Ser.
laboring and sweating, carking and caring; And when they have done all this,
they have but weaved the Spiders web to catch flies, yea, oftentimes are caught
in their own nets, are made instruments of their own destruction, they take a
great deal of pains with little success, to no end or purpose.


A Man that walks by a River, if he follow the River against the stream, it
will at length bring him to the Springhead from whence it issues; Jos. Shute
Sermon. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1626.
but if he go along with the stream, it will drill him on to the salt Sea. So
he that is cross-grained to the humors of the World, that swims against the
stream of sensual delights and pleasures, that well improveth these outward
things to God's glory, shall at the length be brought to God, the sweet
fountain of them all; but if he sail with wind and tide in the abuse of the
good Creatures of God, they will carry him down like a Torrent, into the mare
mortuum of perdition.


WHen in our travel we chance to cast our eye upon some goodly structure of
inestimable value, Joh. Weemse Pourtraiture. Hac iter est Superis* etc.
we presently conceive it to be the palace of a Prince: So when we see the
frame of Heaven so full of wonders (where Stars are but as dust, Ovid. Met. li.
1.
and Angels are but servants) where every word is unspeakable, and every motion
is a miracle, we may safely conclude it to be the dwelling of him, whose name
is Wonderful.


ONe Guerricus hearing these words read in the Church, out of the book of
Genesis, Chap. 15. And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and
thirty years; and he dyed: All the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve
years; and he dyed: And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years;
and he dyed: And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine
years; and he dyed, etc. Hearing, I say, these words read, the very conceit of
death wrought so strongly upon him, Hieron. Drexelii Con^iderat. de aeternitate.
and made so deep an impression in his mind, that he retired himself from the
world, and gave himself wholly to devotion, that so he might dye the death of
the godly, and arrive more safely at the haven of felicity, which is no where
to be found in this world. And thus should we do when we look back to the many
ages that are past before us; but thus we do not. Like those that go to the
Indies, we look not on the many that have been swallowed up by the waves, but
on some few that have got by the Voyage; we regard not the millions that are
dead before us, but have our eyes set on the lesser number that survive with
us, and hence it comes to pass that our passage out of this world is so little
minded.


LOok upon a common beggar, he knows the road-way from place to place, can tell
you the distance from Town to Town; nay more, can inform you of such a
Noble-mans, Edw. Elton Sermon. at St. Mary Magd. Bemonds Southwark, 1619.
such a Knights, such a Gentleman's house, though it stand a great way off from
the Road; of such a Farmers, and such a Yeomans house, though it be in never so
obscure a Village, yet all this while has no settled home, no abiding place of
his own: Such is the knowledge of every Christian, except a true Christian, he
can tell you of the pleasures that are at the right hand of God in the highest
Heavens, can talk and prate of God, discourse of goodness, but all this while
is not good himself, nor can make our unto himself any assurance of Interest in
those heavenly things which he so much talks of.


RAchel was very fair, a goodly Woman to see to, beautiful to the eye; O but
she was barren, that marred all. So there are many in the world, such as make
specious shows of Religion, such as would seem to be Saints; O but they are
barren, they are fruitless, Genesis 29.
sap-less, leave-less Christians; they would seem to honor God, but not with
their substance; Joh. Weemse Pourtrait^re. H^rodes devotionem promittit sed
gladium aluit. etc.
they would seem to be religious, but they will not refrain their tongues; they
would seem to be charitable, but they will not part with a penny; they have all
form, but little or no power of g^dliness; many goodly blossoms of profession,
no r^al fruits of confession appearing; outside, specious, not true, not real
Christians. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 2.


Order both in Church and State commanded and commended.
GOd is not the God of confusion, but of order; Confusion is from the Devil,
Order is from God; 1 Cor. 14.
especially in the Church, which St. Paul resembles to our body, B. Lake Sermon.
on Esaias 9.
wherein the parts are fitly disposed, and every one keeps his place; The
eye, 1 Cor. 12. and cap. 7.
the hand, the foot; one usurpeth not the function of another: In
answerableness whereunto, the Apostle tells us, That all are not Prophets,
all are not Ap^stles, and exhorts all men, Ordine servato mundus servatur, etc.
As God has called them, so to walk; A good rule for these unruly times,
Boethius.
wherein the hands, yea, and the feet too, play Rex, and take up the room of
the Head, and every man thi^keth himself fit to be a Teacher, both by his pen
and tongu^, whose place notwithstanding is amongst the learners.

Security in time of danger condemned.
IT is said of Archimedes, that when Syracuse was taken, all the people being
as it were distracted, Plutarch. in Mar^ell^.
the Soldier doing all manner of outrage, he was found sitting at home
securely, drawing circles with his compass in the dust: And do not we see men
now a-dayes, when there is Hannibal ad portas, a popular sword playing Rex
within, and a Royal sword enraged without, even when the eternal salvation of
their souls is in question, Nunc mihi parta quies, etc.
handling their dust, and stretching themselves to their farthest compass,
Virgil.
set upon the tenter-hooks as it were, and distracted with Lawsuits, with
money matters, and wordly business, that shall profit them nothing at the
last: Eternity is a thing they never think on, or else very slenderly for a
snatch and away, as dogs are said to lap at Nilus, etc.

An ungodly life will have an ungodly end.
A Philosopher asking one, Christ. Fonseca Sermon.
Which of these two he had rather be, either Croesus (who was one of the
richest, Quadragesimales.
but most vicious in the world) or Socrates (who was one of the poorest, but
one of the most virtuous men in the world) his answer was, That in his life he
would be a Croesus, but in his death a Socrates: So if many in these days were
put to their choice, they would be Dives in their life, but Lazarus in their
death; they would with Balaam, die the death of the righteous, but live the
life of the wicked; Qu^lis vit^, fini^ it^.
but that cannot be, for death is a k^nd of truck or Exchange: here it is that
the Israelites make the bri^ks, and the Egyptians dwell in the houses; but
hereafter, St. John Baptist's head will become a Crown as well as a platter:
and he that has had his consolation, his Heaven in this world, shall at the
time of death meet with torments and Hell in that which is to come.

A child of God is restless, till he come to Heaven.
LOok upon a silly poor Country-lad coming to be an Apprentice in the City, how
does he hone and mourn after his Father and Mother? How does he grieve because
he is far from his friends and acquaintance? he is never quiet till he has
been at the Carryers to hear from them, T. Tailor Sermon. at St. Mary Al^erm.
Land. 1631.
and fain would he be with them again, though he be at that very time in a very
good service, and placed with an honest loving Master: And thus it is with a
child of God, though he have a competent measure of grace to support him in
this life, and the hope of Heaven in that which is to come, yet he is restless
till he comes to Heaven, he groans and mourns because he is absent from his
heavenly Father, and from his friends and acquaintance, the blessed Saints and
Angels.


A Tenant that holds land from a Lord, B. Lake Sermon. on Hag.
may not use it otherwise then according to the Covenants agreed upon, if he
do, the Premises are forfeited; Even so it is betwixt God and us, the grant
which he makes to us of his Creatures is conditional, we may take convenient
food for our sustenance, decent clothes to shroud us from the injury of the
weather, and we may bestow our money to supply our own, and other folks
necessities; to these ends we may use Gods creatures: but we may not riot with
our meat and drink, we may not be fantastical in our apparel, neither may we
with our wealth grind the faces of the poor; we have no Covenant that warrants
any of these, and therefore, the doing of any of these is a forfeit to the
Proprietary: And how often might Christ re-enter upon our goods, if he would
take advantage of our daily abuses; nay, he daily does re-enter, had we but
grace to see it. What multitudes of Inhabitants has drunkenness spued out of
their possessions? What goodly Patrimonies has pride and oppression brought to
naught? It were to be wished that the World did as much take notice of it, as
almost very place does give them occasion so to do.


IT was a good answer that one Messodamus gave one, Guido Bituricensis.
inviting him to feast the next day; My friend (says he) Why do thou invite
me against to morrow, I could not for these many years, so secure my self that
I should live one day, for I am in daily expectation of the time of my
departure; Hieron. Drex^lii Considerat. de aeternitate.
And indeed no Man can be sufficiently armed against Death, unless he be ready
to entertain it; What rashness and folly is it then for a man to lie down in
^ase upon a Feather-bed, to sleep securely, ^norting and snoring, and all this
while to lodge an Enemy, a deadly Enemy all the while, Sin in his bosom; sudden
deaths are common: How many have we heard of, Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse
supremum.
that went well to bed over night, for ought a man could tell, and have been
found dead in the morning, and it is much to be feared, have gone impenitently
to bed, it may be dead-drunk, and have found themselves awake in hell the next
morning: Unpreparedness for death must needs therefore be dangerous. I. S.
1648. H. S. 1657.


Dionysius the Tyrant, Plutarch. in vita. Dionys.
sent to Plato (that he might come to see him) one of his fairest Galleys,
Fonseca. Sermon. Quadrage^mal.
with store of dainty provision, and well accompanied: And at the Haven where
he was to land, had provided a Coach with four horses to be ready to receive
him, that he might come in the greater pomp to his Palace, and all this honor
he was willing to do him, for that he was a wise man: Now, if such men as he
shall cause admiration in the world, what admiration then must he raise in
men's minds, who is wisdom it self, and in whom all the treasures of God's
wisdom are laid up for evermore?


IT is said of the Serpent, John Boys Postills.
that he casts up all his poison before he drinks: It were to be much desired,
that herein we had so much Serpentine wisdom as to disgorge our malice before
we pray, to cast up all the bitterness of our spirits, before we come to the
Sacrament of Reconciliation.

Special places of Scripture marked with Gods special Authority.
MOrtal Princes use not to sign Bills, B. Lake Sermon. on Hag. oh. 2.
or Petitions, the contents whereof are trivial matters, many things are done
by vert^e of their Regal authority, whereunto their signature is not used: Even
so ordinary matters pass in the Word of God, without any special urging of his
Supreme power, but when it comes with a sic dicit dominus, then the point is of
great regard; and if it be often ingeminated, it gives us to understand, that
we must take special notice of every clause of it.

In all our doings we should have our eye upon Eternity.
ZEuxis the famous Painter, Aelian var. hist. lib. 14.
was observed to be very slow at his work, and to let no piece of his go abroad
into the World to be seen of men, Hieron. Drex elii Considerat. de aeternitate.
till he had turned it over and over, this side and that side, again the again,
to see if he could spy any fault in it; And being upon a time asked the Reason
why he was so curious, why so long in drawing his lines, and so slow in the use
of his pensil, he made this answer, I am long in doing what I take in hand,
because what I paint, I paint for Eternity; As for our parts, we write, we
read, we sing, we pray, we labor; whatsoever we say, whatsoever we do,
whatsoever we think, all is transmitted to Eternity, all to be viewed by a most
judicious and all-seeing eye, so that no fault can escape, and being viewed and
considered, they are to be committed either to be eternally punished, or
eternally rewarded; We must labor therefore to be perfect, so to live to God,
that we may live with God; so to live on Earth, that we may live in Heavan; so
to live for Eternity, that we may live to all Eternity.

At the time of death to be mindful only of Heaven.
CHrist perceiving his death to be near at hand, Joh^ 11.
withdrew himself, and would walk no more openly among the Jews. Psalm 39.
And David being at the last cast of his life, Leon. de Utino Sermones.
says, Remitte mihi ut refrigerer, etc. Give me leave O Lord to dispose of my
self, and to render thee an account of my life, before I go hence, and be seen
no more: These are Lectures of Mortality read to all of us in this world, That
when we are about to die, we should have nothing else to do but to die, we
should bid these sublunary things Adieu, and sequester our thoughts from the
World, and retire into our selves to see how the case stands betwixt God and
our own souls.

A tongue nimble to evil, slow to goodness, is reproveable.
PLiny in his Natural History, Lib. 7. cap. 2.
makes mention of a certain people in the Indies upon the River Ganges, called
Astomi, that have no mouth, but do only feed upon the smell of herbs and
flowers, etc. The truth of this may be uncertain, but most sure it is, Mr.
Goddard Sermon. at St. Greg. by St. Paul's, Land. 1649.
that there is such a generation amongst us, that when they should speak well,
they are like men possessed with a dumb devil, they have no mouth, no lips, no
tongue at all; but if it be to blaspheme God and the King, to backbite and
slander their Neighbor, they have tongue enough, and to spare.

A Minister is to distinguish his Auditors.
Schoolmasters range their Scholars into forms, B. Lake Sermon. on Matthew. 7.
Diligenter adhibe curam eis, quibus te praeesse contigerit, etc.
and though themselves be never so learned, Aug (...) Pro. 11
yet they read unto their several forms no deeper points then they are capable
of: if they should do otherwise, well might they show their learning, they
would show no discretion, neither would the Scholars be the better for that
which they should teach them: Even so Ministers must remember to distinguish
their Auditors; to feed some with milk, some with strong meat, to catechize the
youth plainly and briefly, to build on those that are elder and riper in years
and judgment, with more learning and more full instruction.


SYmphorianus, a Christian young man, after that he was almost scourged to
death, Hieron. Drex elii Confiderant. de aeternitate.
as he was dragged to death at Augustodunum, met his mother upon the way. But
how? not tearing the hair from her head, or rending her clothes, or laying open
her breasts, or making grievous lamentation, as the manner of foolish women is
to do; but, carrying her self like an heroic Christian Lady, called to her Son
and said, Son, my Son I say, Remember life eternal, look up to Heaven, lift up
thine eye to him that reigns there; Life is not taken from thee, but
exchanged for a better: At which words of his Mother, Spes pramii solatium fit
laboris.
the young man was so exceedingly animated, that he went willingly to
execution, Hieron. in Ep.
and cheerfully laid down his head upon the block, and was decolled. This is
the case of every man living, we go not so fast as Symphorianus did, we are not
yet under the fiery trial, but we are fair for it; we are all going, and we
have not far to it; Now the noble Army of Martyrs which are gone before us,
they call unto us from Heaven, and say as the Christian, and courageous mother
said to her Son; Remember life eternal, look up to heaven, see who is there,
the Judge of all the world that will do righteous things.


IF a company that are bound out for some long Voyage, should strive who should
be Master, and who Masters mate, and who should have this or that Office, they
were not too much to be blamed; But when they are almost at home within sight
of Land, Funeral Sermons.
when they shall begin to strike sail, to tack in all, and go ashore; then if
they shall fall a quarrelling for places, and use all the means they could
make, it were a ridiculous thing and folly: So it is with us, Time was,
when the world was in beginning, and then when a man came into the world, by
the course of Nature he might well say, I have a matter of six, or seven, or
eight hundredth years to go on in my Pilgrimage, before I shall end my journey,
and then if a Man should bestovv a little time to think with himself, Well, if
I can but live to see my self the ^ather of a thousand children, and so might
come to people a Country, etc. then if a man should greet the World, Orimur
morimur.
he might be excused; But now since God has contracted the time of our age,
so that as soon as we begin our Voyage, we are ready to strike sail
presently, that we have but a little time to continue here, and a great deal
of work to do for hereafter, and now to stand striving who shall be greatest,
who shall rule all, to cry out of afflictions, just when we are going
ashore, when we have (as it were) one foot in our graves, is extremely folly
and madness.


THere is much water in the Well, or Springhead, it comes to us in leaden
pipes or wooden troughs; Now what is the leaden pipe, or wooden trough more
then another? Nothing at all; Gab. Inchini Scala Coeli.
It is the water in the pipe or trough that makes them esteemed above others:
It is true, they can do more then others; but if you look upon them in the use,
i. e, to convey the water into us, then they are more excellent then all others
whatsoever: So in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, there is
water in the one, and bread and wine in the other, yet what is this water, this
bread and wine more then any other? Are not they the same we have at home? yea:
O but if we look upon them as ordained of God to convey his mercies into our
hearts, to seal unto our souls the remission of sins, etc. and that God has
set them aside to that end and purpose, then they are more excellent than any
other water, bread, or wine possibly can be.

Our Affections to be regulated.
HE that rides a fierce horse, B. Lake Sermon. on Psalm 75.
let the horse keep what pace he will, so long as the Rider commands him by the
bridle, we say, he rides strongly; but if the horse get the Bit in his mouth,
and run away, the faster his pace, the weaker the Rider, because he cannot
check him: Our affections are just like that fierce horse, and our reason
should be as a strong bridle, stir they never so much: if reason command, we
are strong; but if reason have no power, and they run loose, then certainly,
the more violent they are, the more weak we are.

A contented man, no base spirited man.
MArcus Curio, Jer. Boroghs Christ. C^nte^l. Plutarch. in Apop^hthegm.
when he had bribes sent unto him, to tempt him to be unfaithful to his
Country, he was sitting at dinner with a dish of Turnips, and they came and
promised him rewards; well, says he, That man that can be contented with such
fare that I have, will not be tempted with your rewards, I thank God, I am
contented with this fare; And as for rewards, let them be offered to those that
cannot be content to dine with a dish of Turnips as I do. The truth of this is
apparently seen, the reason why many men do betray their trust, and by indirect
means strive to be rich, is because they cannot be contented to be in a low
condition, whereas the man that is contented with a hard bed, and a bare board,
is shot-free from thousands of Temptations that prevail against others, even to
the damning of their souls.

The resolved Christian makes his way through all difficulties.
Travelers that go by Sea, Gab. Inchini Scala (...).
merely to be Sea-sick a little, or in sport; if there arise but a black cloud,
they presently give over, their Voyage is at an end; they come not to be
weather-beaten, to adventure shocks, and storms, and dangers; they come for
pleasure only: But the Merchant, that is bound upon a Voyage, whose trade and
employment of life it is, House of mourning.
every cloud and gust of wind does not make him to return back again to shore,
and so to lose his Voyage, but he drives through all: So it is with one that is
not indeed and in earnest traveling toward Heaven, he is easily taken off
upon a little storm arising, if God do but frown, if there be but ever so small
a wrinkle (as I may say) in his brow, all the delight in Religion is gone, --
Per (...) virtus.
for it was some other thing he aimed at, it was but for pleasure that he came
in here; Itur ad (...) per (...) p^ricula sed^s.
But a resolved Christian who is bound for Heaven indeed, and his course,
Varinus.
and the bent of his soul lies that way, that like a ship with full sail is
carried thitherward, storms cannot beat him off, let the wind rise, and the
rain beat, and the Seas lift up their voice, he makes his way through all, till
he arrive at the Haven intended.

Afflictions add unto the beauty of a true Christian.
LOok upon a painted poast or sign whose color is laid in oil, Will Jenkin
Lect. on Jude, at Christ-Church, Land. 1646.
how the rain beats upon it in stormy weather, that one would think all the
color would be washed off, yet how the water glides away, and leaves it rather
more beautiful then before: And thus it is with every child of God, being well
varnished, and garnished with graces of the Spirit, let the wind of persecution
blow, and the floods of affliction lift up their voice, they shall never braid,
nor deface, but rather add unto their beauty; Such is the condition of grace,
that it shines the brighter for scouring, and is most glorious when it is most
clouded.


WE see that though the Sun be above the Horizon, and so apt to make a glorious
day, Lud. Carbo Interior homo.
yet many fogs and mists arising from the Earth, overcast the sky, and
intercept the comfortable influence of the light. Even so, though God vouchsafe
never so good a Prince, a Prince under whom the people enjoy abundance of
peace, and the free passage of the Gospel, such may be their gracel^ssness that
they may be the better for neither of them.


BY the Art of Navigation, with great pains and industry, men can fetch in the
silks of Persia, Jer. Borogh's Christ. Content.
the spices of Egypt, the gold of Ophir, the treasures of the East and West
Indies; O but by the Art of Contentment, a man may stay at home and fetch in
the comfort of any condition whatsoever, that is, he may have that comfort by
contentment, that he should have if he had the very things themselves.

A Godly man is bettered in evil Company.
THey say that Lillies, or Roses, or such like pleasant flowers, if they be
planted by Garlic or Onions, Funeral Sermons.
or such like unsavory things, they do not lose, but rather increase in their
former sweetness: So it is with good and godly men when they are planted, and
as it were him'd in with wicked men: the vileness and odiousness of their
wickedness makes them to loath wickedness so much the more, Ex bono malus vix
melioratur, etc.
and to love godliness, and to bless God that has kept them, Chry^ost. in
Matthew.
that they have not run to the same excess of Riot.


IT was a true Christian-like speech of St. Jerome; If my Father should stand
before me, Licet ex collo pendeat, etc. in ep. ad Heliodorum.
my Mother should hang upon me, my Brethren should press about me, I would
break through my Brethren, throw down my Mother, tread under feet my Father,
that I might the faster cleave unto Christ Jesus my Savior: O the surpassing
love to Christ, that is in a true Disciple of Christ; let money perish, and
friends fail, the World frown, Dan. Fea. Ser. Cui portio Deus est. etc.
yea life it self vanish, Christ is better then them all; If Christ should say
to him, Amb^^s. de tuga seculi.
Take thy fill of sinful delights, eat, drink and be merry, solace thy self in
the midst of all thy abundance, thou shall not perish, only thou shall not be
with me; Not with thee Lord Jesus, where then? then farewell del^ghts, farewell
pomp and plenty, farewell all; I will follow thee whither soever thou go, for
it will certainly be Hell where thou art not.


OUr memory is usually a good storehouse, but no good Steward, it lays up
much, but of it self dispendeth nothing; it needs some help to make use of
her store, the speculative memory does, B. Lake Sermon. at Court, 1617.
and the practick much more. How many be there whose memories are richly stored
with excellent rules of life, whereof in their life they make little or no use?
Their memory does not ^ffer them, when they have occasion to be doing, as if
they had never known Commandemen^s or Creed, they live like In^idels, Memoria
reti ^imilis. Erasm.
or sons of Belial; Wherefore as the eye of the body ne^deth the light of the
Sun, to raise and convey the visible species unto it: Even so does the eye of
our understanding need the light of the Sun of Righteousnes^ to stir up, and
present unto it the Principles of grace, whereof it has need in the well
ordering of our life; without this actual grace, our Memory will never make use
of the habitual.

Contentment keeps up the Soul in the saddest of conditions.
A Mariner when he is at Sea, let him have never so much provision in his
Ship, Jer. Boroghs Christ. Content.
yet if he be thousands of leagues from the shore, or in a rode that he shall
not meet with a Ship in three or four months, if he have never a lantern in
his Ship, nor any thing whereby he can keep a candle light in a storm, he would
be but in a sad condition, he would give a great deal to have a Lanthorn, or
something that may serve instead of it, when a storm rises in the night, and
he cannot have any light above board, but what is presently puffed out, his
condition must needs be lamentable: Thus many men can keep in the light of
comfort when there is no storm; but let there come any affliction, any storm
upon them, their light is soon puffed out, and then what shall they do? But
when the heart is once furnished with the grace of contentment, as it were the
lanthorn on the decks of the ship, it will keep comfort in the spirit of a Man,
it will keep up a light in the soul, whatsoever storms or tempests of
temptations shall come into it, and keep out whatsoever may damp the comfort,
or put the light out of it.

Outward blessings do not always make a blessed Man.
WAs Abraham rich? so was Abimelech; Was Jacob rich? so was Laban too. Was
David a King? so was Soul; Was Constantine an Emperor? so was Julian; Funeral
Sermons.
Was John a Disciple? so was Judas. Thus Riches, Honors, and Preferments,
though the blessings of God, yet they are no demonstrations of a blessed Man;
What a wise good God have we? Lest any man should take them to be ill, they are
bestowed on them that are good; and lest any man should reckon them for the
chief good, they are likewise cast upon the wicked.

A wicked man, hardly drawn to examine himself.
IT is reported of the Elephant, P. Goodwin Evang. Communicant.
how unwilling he is to go into the water, but being forced, he puddles it,
lest by the cleerness of the stream, he should discern his own deformity; This
is the condition of every wicked man, he is loath to look into himself, had
rather put the candle out at the door, then go with it into his house to make
any discoveries there; either he thinks he is so good, as he needs not examine,
or he thinks he is so bad, that he is loath to examine himself.

Pride, the complement of all sins.
AS Tertullian calls the Commandment that God gave Adam in Paradise, In
libro contra Jud.
Matricem omnium praeceptorum Dei, In lib. 2. de rup.
The Matrix, or womb of all the Commandments of God; And as Theodoret calls
Moses, (...) A very Ocean of all Divinity; And as some have called Rome,
Epitomen Universi, An Epitome or Abridgement of the whole world: B. Smith Ser.
on Jer. chapter 9.
So it may be said of Pride, that it is the sum of all naughtiness, and a very
Sea of it, a complicated sin, there is no sin almost but Pride participates
with it; It is a kind of Idolatry, Hab. 1. 16. a kind of drunkenness, Esaias 48.
9. a kind of Sacrilege, Esaias 26. 12. a kind of Murder, Hab. 2. 5. etc. Thus
as Aristotle says out of Theognis, That in Justice all virtues are couched,
(...) summarily: In lib. Eth.
so it may be said of Pride, that in it all vices are as it were in a bundle
lap'd up together.

A mere Soldier, an Enemy to peace.
WE read in Plutarch of one Demades, In moralium lib.
who by profession was a maker of Coffins, and he was banished out of the City
of Athens for wishing that he might have good trading; that wise State truly
interpreting the language of his wish, T. Fuller Holy State.
as desiring some epidemical disease; his private profit being inconsistent
with the public flourishing of the Commonwealth. So those people, who are
undone and cannot live but by undoing of others, who live by the sword, who, as
Demetrius, by this craft get gain, desiring a perpetuity of War for their
possession, certainly wish no good either to Church or State where they are,
but must needs be State-Barrettors to keep the sore always raw betwixt the
Prince and People.


Origin after he had chosen, rather facere periculose quam perpeti turpiter, to
burn Incense to the Heathen Gods, In vita, praefixa operibus.
than to suffer his body to be defiled by a Blackmoor, and the flower of his
chastity, which he had so long preserved to be some way blasted; at a Church in
Jerusalem goes into the Pulpit, opens the Bible at all adventures, intending
to preach upon that Text which he should first light upon, but falling upon
that Verse of Psalm 50. But to the wicked (says God) what have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth?
(which contained his suspension) shuts his book, speaks not a word more,
House of mourning, Eccl. 12. 5.
but Comments upon it with his tears. So (me thinks) when any man shall read
that Text, Man goes to his long home, and the (...) go about the streets. In
which he shall find his capital doom written, he cannot do better then follow
that Fathers president, and shut up not only his book, but his mouth also, and
seal up his lips, and comment upon the coherence with distraction, the parts
with passion, the notes with sighs, the periods with groans, and the words with
tears; For alas, as soon as a Man comes into his short booth in this world,
which he saluteth with tears, he goes to his long home in the next world, And
the mourners go about the streets.


IT is storied of Henry the fourth of France, asking the Duke of Alva, if he
had observed the Eclipses happening in that year, Jean. de Seres Hist.
he answered, That he had so much business on Earth, Charron de la sagesse.
that he had no leisure to look up to Heaven; A sad thing it is for men to be
so bent, and their hearts so set on the things of this world, as not to cast up
a look to the things that are in Heaven; nay, not to regard though God brings
Heaven down to them in his word and Sacraments; yet so it is, most men are of
this Spanish Generals mind, Mundum mundani quaerunt.
witness the Oxen, the Farms, the pleasures, the profits and preferments that
men are so fast glued unto, that they have hardly leisure to entertain a
thought of any goodness.


IN our natural bodies, the more fat there is, the lesser blood in the veins,
and consequently the fewer spirits; and so in our fields, abundance of wet
breeds abundance of tares, B. Smith Sermon. on Jer. 9.
and consequently great scarcity of Corn: And is it not so with our souls? The
more of God's blessing and wealth, the more weeds of carnality, and vanity; and
the more rich to the world, the less righteous to God commonly: What meant
Apuleius to say, that Ubi uber, ibi tuber, but to signify; that pride and
arrogance are companions to plenty? And what made Solomon to pray against
fullness, -- Virtus and summa potestas Non coeunt.
Prove. 30. but to show, that as they must have good brains that will carry much
drink, so they must have extraordinary souls that will not be overcome with the
world; Lucan.
Goodness and greatness do seldom meet together, as Asdrubal Haedeus said in
Livy. Raro simul hominibus bona fortuna bonaque men's datur, Who is the man
except it be one of a thousand, Bernard. lib. 2. de consolat.
Cui praesens faelicitas si arrisit, non irrisit, but if the world ran in upon
him, he would soon outrun it.

Perseverance is the Crown of all good actions.
WHatsoever is before the end, it is a step whereby we climb to the top of
salvation, Cyprian in lib. de si^pl. Pr^lat.
but it is not the uppermost griece, whereby the highest part of the top may be
taken hold of: A man may be tumbled down from the ladder, as well when he is
within a round or two of the top, as when he is in the midst or below the mi^st
B. Smith Sermon. on Joh 6.
And a man may make Shipwreck when he is within ken of land* as when he is a
thousand miles off: What had it profited Peter to have escaped the first and
second Watch, if he had stuck at the iron gate, and had not passed through that
also? Who makes account of land-oats that shead before the Harvest, Gal. 3.
or of fruit that falls from the tree before it be ripe? It is not to begin in
the spirit and end in the slesh, Luke 9. 62.
not a putting of the hand to the Plow, and looking back, but a constant
perseverance to the end, Mat. 24. 13.
that shall be crowned.

Prayers of the godly, the unanimity of them.
WE read of Ptolomeus Philadelphus, Conrad. Zu^^gerus excitat. variorum.
King of Egypt, that he caused the Bible to be translated by seventy
Interpreters, which seventy were severally disposed of in seventy several
cells, unknown each to other, and yet they did so well agree in their several
translations, that there was no considerable difference betwixt them, in
rendering the Text; an argument, that they were acted by one and the same
spirit: Surely then it must needs be a great comfort to all good Christians,
when they shall call to mind, T. Fuller. Ser. at Savoy 1642.
what! seventy? nay, seventy times seventy, yea seventy hundredth, yea seventy
thousand which are peaceable in Israel, which on the bended knees of their
souls pray daily unto God for peace; And though they know not the faces, no not
the names of one another, have neither seen, nor shall see one another till
they meet together in Heaven, yet they unite their votes, and center their
suffrages in the same thing, that God would restore peace and order both in
Church and State, and to every particular member therein, that we may yet live
to have comfort one of another, who no doubt shall have a comfortable return of
their prayers in Gods due time.

The powerful effects of Rhetorical Elocution.
THe breath of a man has more force in a Trunk, and the wind a louder and
sweeter sound in the Organ-pipe, Ant. de Rampegoli.
then in the open air. So the matter of our speech, and theme of our discourse,
Fig. Biblicae. Eloquii tanta est gloria, etc.
which is conveyed through figures and forms of Art, both sound sweeter to the
ear, Ovid.
and pierce deeper into the heart; there is in them plus (...) and (...) more
evidence and more efficacy, they make a fuller expression, and deeper
impression, then any plain, rough-hewen, long-cart-rope speeches or language
whatsoever can do.

A Caveat for unworthy Communicants.
MR. Philip Goodwin Evang.
Greenham in one of his Sermons, speaking of Non-residents, wishes that this
Inscription or Motto might be written on their study-doors without, Communicant.
and walls within, on all their books they look in, beds they lie on, tables
they sit at, etc. The price of blood, The price of blood; The like were to be
wished for, to all that have been bad Communicants, that in great letters it
were written, on their shop doors without, walls within, on all their doors, on
their day-books, and debt-books, and whatsoever objects are before their eyes,
The guilt of blood, the guilt of blood, even the guilt of the blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ who dyed for them.

in season, opportunely.
EVery Husbandman as he has, so he observes the seasons to sow his seed, and
his ground to cast his corn into; Rich. Stock. Funeral Sermon. L. Harrington.
some he sows in the Autumn and fall of the leaf, some in the Spring and
renewing of the year, some in a dry season, some in a wet, some in a moist
clay, some in a sandy dry ground; as the Holy Ghost speaks, He sows the
Fitches, Scriba doctus in regno Coelorum, etc.
and the Cummin, and casts in Wheat by measure, Mar. 13. 52.
Esaias 28. 25. Thus the spiritual Husbandman deals with the husbandry of his
God, he has his seed for all seasons, and for all grounds, and all hearts;
some for the time of judgment, some for the time of mercy, some for the season
of mirth and mourning, as wet and dry seasons, some for the birth and burial,
as for the Spring and Fall, some for them who sorrow in Sion, and some for them
that rejoice in Jerusalem, Esaias. 6. 2.

the only comfort.
A Traitor that is condemned to death, may have the liberty of the Tower to
walk in, Tho. Woods. Sermon. at St. Marg. New-Fish. Land. 16^9.
and provisions of meat and drink appointed at the States charges, yet he takes
little comfort in either, because his Treason is not pardoned, and he expects
daily to be drawn to execution: Thus a man that has the advantage of all these
outward things, if he want assurance of the pardon of his sins, and of Gods
love in Christ Jesus to his soul, they will be but as miserable comforters to
him, and he cannot take any true delight in them.

Sermons preached, and Sermons printed.
SErmons preached are for the most part as showers of rain that water for the
instant, Phil. Goodwin ut antea.
such as may tickle the ear, and warm the affections, and put the soul into a
posture of obedience; hence it is that men are oft-times Sermon-sick, as some
are Sea-sick, very ill, much troubled for the present, but by and by all is
well again, as they were; Vox audita perit.
But printed sermons or other discourses, are as snow, that lies longer on the
Earth, they are longer lived, they preach when the Author cannot, and which is
more, when he is not: Sights, as they come sooner to the eye, than sounds to
the ear; so they abide longer; Audible words are more transient, visible works
more permanent; the one may make the ear more attentive, but the other, the
memory more retentive; both in themselves excelling.


BE wise now therefore O Kings, Psalm. 2. B. Smith Sermon. on Psalm 2. 1 Kings 7.
Two kinds of wisdom are required in Kings and Princes: wisdom or knowledge in
God's matters, otherwise called Divinity; and wisdom or knowledge in worldly
matters, otherwise called, Prudence, or Policy. Both are not only like the two
pillars that Solomon put in the porch of the Temple for ornament, Exodus 17.
but also for special use, like the hands of Aaron and Hur, which did support
the hands of Moses for the discomfiture of the Amalekites. Duo sunt quae ab
egregiis Principibus expectantur, sanctites Domi, in Armis fortitudo, etc.
Arist.
And good reason too; for if they be pious only in God's matters, and be not
otherwise prudent: then they are fitter for the Commonweal of Plato, then for
the corrupt estate of Romulus, for the Cloister then for the Court; again, if
they be prudent or politic only, and be not pious, then they are fitter to be
Kings of Babel, where dwells confusion, then of Jerusalem, where Gods glory
is seen; and more rightly to be called, the children of this world, which goes
to naught and perishes, then the children of God, who love truth in the
inwards, and care for none but for such as worship him from a pure heart with a
good Conscience.

A sad thing to lose both soul and body at one and the same time.
DUdithius relates a sad story of one Bochna a Woman, Citat. e Thucidid. Hist.
which had but two sons, and whilst she was walking with the one toward the
River, she heard the other crying out, Obad. Sedgw. Sermon. at a public Fast.
Westminster.
and hasting back, she found a knife sticking in his side, which killed him
immediately; then she made haste to the other child, but he in her absence was
fallen into the River and drowned, both lost at once: This is our case, every
one of us has two children, a soul and a body; a life temporal, a life
eternal; What a heavy loss would it be to lose both these at once? yet such is
the sad condition of many* that whilst they busy themselves to catch at the
shadow, and to set up a rest for their souls here in this world, they lose both
shadow and substance, soul and body, the rest of their souls here, and the true
souls of their eternal rest hereafter, both together.

A good Magistrate or Minister is the support of the place where he lives.
MEn use to fence and defend, to keep watch and ward over their cornfieldsd,
whilst the corn, Rich. Stock ut ante^.
and fruits are in them unreaped, ungathered, but when the corn is inned and
safe in the Barn, then is open-tide (as they say) they lay all open, Reipub.
fulcrum Princeps bonus. Aristor.
throw in the fence, and let in beasts of all kind; nay, sometimes they set
fire on the stubble: Thus every zealous Magistrate, every godly Minister, every
good Christian is as it were a fence, a hedge to that place, that parish where
they live; and when they are once plucked up, when they are taken away by
death, or otherwise removed, that Kingdom, that place, that parish lies open to
all manner of ruin and destruction.

The certainty of Faith.
IN the midst of a tumultuous Sea, the Nodes of the Compass remain unmovable,
because they govern themselves not according to the winds, P. du Moulin Combat.
Christian.
but according to the influence of the Heavens; And so the faith of the
faithful remains firm amongst the rude agitations, and distracted variations
of the World, because it governs it self not according to the instability of
the affairs of this world, but according to the promises of God, which are from
all Eternity.

The danger of unworthy Communicating.
IT is reported of Mr. Bolton, a famous Divine, and Minister of Kettering in
Northamptonshire, Phil. Goodw. Evang. Commu.
that calling for his children on his deathbed, after some speech to them, he
concludes thus; And I hope there is none of you will dare to meet me at
Christ's tribunal in an unregenerate estate; intimating the great and
inevitable danger that must needs attend such a condition: And it were to be
wished, that none would dare to meet at the Lord's Table in a sinful state;
which if they do, and will with unhumbled, and unhallowed hearts come unto that
tent, and as Sisera, Judge. 4. 19. take the milk and the butter, the bread and
the wine, let them know, that there is a nail and a hammer for them, they eat
and drink their own damnation.

A Minister to be careful in the delivery of God's message.
EArthly Kings and Magistrates are offended (and good reason too) if their
subjects or servants shall do from them, B. Abbot Lect. on Jonah.
or in their names, such messages as they send not; or if their Ambassadors
being limited by advertisements, what they shall do, and what they shall not
do, should negotiate to the contrary: Then should all Ministers of Jesus
Christ, whose Ambassadors they are, be careful in a very high degree, that they
deliver the whole counsel of God, that they speak nothing but what they have in
Commission, otherwise they shall offend a Lord of more dreadful majesty; who
is more jeal^us of his glory, and more able to punish, then any earthly Kings
or Magistrates whatsoever.


THe Virgin Vestals of the Pagans (from whence proceeded those many Cloisters
of Nuns at this day) had a continual fire, Franc. Salis. Introduct. ^ la vie
devote.
which if it hapened by any mischance to go out, they might not give it light
again, but only from the Sun: Thus our natural clearness, and purity of life
being quite extinguished by the sin of Adam, there is no means under heaven to
renew it, we cannot kindle it again but at the Sun of Righteousness, Christ
Jesus our Lord, to whom belongs that which is said in Psalm. 3. 6. The
fountain of life is in thee, etc.


LOok upon the Sun how it casts light and heat upon all the World in his
general course, Rich. Holds. worth Sermon at St. Paul's, Land. 1625.
how it shines upon the good and the bad with an equal influence, but let its
beams be but concentered in a burning-glass, then it sets fire on the
objectonely, and passes by all others: And thus God in the Creation looks
upon all his Works with a general love, Erant omnia vald^ bona, they pleased
him very well; O but when he is pleased to cast the beams of his love, and
cause them to shine upon his Elect through Christ, then it is that their hearts
burn within them, then it is that their affections are inflamed; whereas others
are but as it were a little warmed, have a little shine of common graces cast
upon them.


IN our English Chronicles, Ioh. Speed Chron. of Eng.
we read of the rare affection of Elianor the wife of Edward the first; the
King having gotten a wound by a poisoned Dagger, she sets her mouth to the
wound to such out the poison, venturing her own life to preserve her Husbands.
Philip. Goodwin Vt ante^.
Such is the strength of a true Christians love to Christ, that were it to suck
poison out of Christ's wounds, it would be contented so to do; as when Christ
his Church, his cause, his people are smitten and wounded by the poisonous
tongues of blasphemers, the railing tongues of licentious libertines, the
hellish fiery tongues of a rebellious generation, Heb. 11. 26. Psalm. 69. 9.
and a good Christian is willing to draw it all upon himself, to take it off
from Christ, and that Christ may have the glory he cares not what he
undergoeth.


BIlney, Ioh. Fox Acts and Mon.
a Martyr in Q. Mary's days, tried his finger by himself in the Candle,
before he tried his whole body in the fire at the stake: If thou have run with
the footman (faith God by the mouth of the Prophet) and they have wearied thee,
then how can thou match thy self with Horses, Jer. 12. 5? How shall our faith
abide the ^iery trial by others, Ierem. Dyke's worthy communicate.
if it have never been put to the fiery trial by our selves? How shall that
faith try a match with horsemen, smile at torments, stare a disguised death in
the face, that never yet tried a match with footmen, that never tried it self
in private, that never strugled with natural corruptions? Surely self trial
will pave the way smooth to all other trials; And that man will never abide to
be tried at a bar or stake, that is loath to be tried in his Closet or his
Chamber.


IT is reported, Agathias Hist. ib. 5.
that when on a time the City of Constantinople was shaken with a terrible
Earthquake, many Houses were overthrown, and with the fall many people
perished; The whole City is hereupon so amazed, and every one so remembered to
think on God, that they fall to their public devotions, the Churches were
thwack'd full with people, all men for a while were much amended, Justice
commutative and distributive both, advanced; the poor relieved, Justice
exalted, Laws executed, no fraud in bargaining, it was become a very holy
place; but when God held his hand from punishing, they held their hearts from
praying; when his wrath ceased, their Religion ceased also: And was it not
alike in the civil Wars of France? after the putting forth of that Act, or
Edict, January 1561. and in the second and third years of those Wars, Jean. de
Seres Hist. de France.
such as were of the Religion, then groaning under the heavy cross of poverty,
oppression, and war, how devout were they toward God? very careful in their
ways, glad to hear any preach the Word, and glad to receive the Sacrament any
way: but when the third peace was concluded, which seemed a very sound peace,
and the Rod was now thought to be removed afar off; such carelesn^sse and
security overgrew the hearts of all, and in the Protestants there was so cold a
zeal, Tanta erat Religiosorum taediosa curiositas etc. and that within less
then two years, that a Sermon plainly made with good grounds of Divinity, Fidem
secunda poscunt, adversa exigunt. (...). in Agamemn.
was not thought to be worth the hearing, unless it were spiced with
Eloquence, or flourished over with courtly expressions: Nomine mutato d^ nobis
fabula, The case is ours, witness that Marian persecution, when so many of the
dear children of God mounted like Elias to heaven in fiery Chariots; What
prayers were made within the Land and without? and what coldness benumbed some
hot ones of that time not long after? Call to mind that miraculous year of 88.
How did the piety of our Land exceed at that time? young and old then came
together into the Courts of the Lord; Geo. Abbot, Cant. Sermon. at Court. 1624.
Sabbaths were then sanctified, week-dayes well spent; How did the people flock
to Church? It might have been written in golden letters over every Church-door
in the Land, Cor unum, via una; such was the unity, such was the uniformity of
their devotions at that time; but with the cold of the winter, their devotion
grew cold too, and many months had not passed, but as in few things some were
the better, so in many things a great deal worse: To come yet downwards, Anno
1625. to omit others, The chief City of our Kingdom being struck with the
plague of Pestilence, seemed no other then a dreadful dungeon to her own, B.
Halls Sermon. at Court. 1625.
a very Golgotha to others; What then? The King commands a Nineveh-like
humiliation; with what eagerness were those fasts devoured? What loud cries did
beat on all sides of the Gates of Heaven? and with what inexpectable,
unconceivable mercies were they answered? Suddenly those many thousands were
brought down to one poor unite, not a number; then was all the fasting and
mourning turned into joy and laughter: To come yet lower to this very year, this
very day; How has the Sword devoured? and whilst it did so, how did the people
unite and associate; but when it seemed to be but a little sheathed, what
remisness, what divisions were found amongst us? It is so, and it is not well
that it is so; It is a reproach to some, No Penny, no Paternoster; it is a
shame to us, No Plague, no Paternoster, no punishment, no prayer.

Carnal and spiritual men, their difference in doing good.
AN Organ, Syly. de Prierio, ^urea rosa in Evang.
or any other wind-instrument, makes no Music til there be breath put into
it; but a stringed Instrument, as the Lute, or Viol, yields a pleasant sound
even with the rouch of a finger: And thus a carnal man that is dead in sins and
trespasses, must have a new life breathed into him by the blessed spirit of
God, before he be able to set forth the praises of his Maker; whereas one that
is spiritualized, one that is furnished with the graces of the spirit, does
good, and receives good upon the least touch of the spirit, is a Trumpet of
Gods glory upon the least occasion that can possibly be offered.

Faith makes us partakers of every good thing in Gods Ordinances.
LOok but on a Conduit that is full of water; ^erem. Dykes Worthy Communicant.
now a man that would fill his vessel, must bring it to the Conduit, set it
near the Cock; but yet that is not enough, if that be all, and he do no more,
he may go home again with an empty vessel; and therefore he that would fill his
vessel, when he has brought it to the Conduit, and set it under the Cock, he
must also turn the Cock, and then the water runs forth and fills his vessel: So
Christ is the Conduit of all grace and goodness, the Fountain of living
waters, he that would be spiritually filled must come to him; his Ordinances,
the Word and Sacraments are the Cocks of this Conduit; so that a man that would
be filled, must not only go to Christ, but to Christ in his Ordinances: and
that is not enough neither; Fides luine ^ est animae, ^stium vitae etc Chrysostom.
in Symb.
when he is come to them, he must turn them: But how must that be done? the
Well is deep, and I have no bucket to draw, the Cock is hard locked, and I
cannot tell how to unlock it, says the weak believing Soul: What of all this?
Thou have faith, a true faith, though a weak faith; now that faith actuated and
working upon the Ordinances, turns the Cock, and then the efficacies and
virtues of Christ flow forth, then it is that we are filled with the Holy
Ghost, that with joy we draw waters out of the Wells of our salvation, Isai.
12. 3.


WHen Luther had woefully wronged and reviled Calvin; Melch* Adamus, in vita.
well said Calvin, Etiamsi Lutherus millies me Diabolum vocet etc. Let Luther
hate me, and call me Devil a thousand times, yet I will love him, and
acknowledge him to be a precious servant of God: This was an excellent temper
of Calvin, and truly such a frame of spirit, P. Goodwin, ut anted.
such a sweet composure of the soul, as to forgive and forget, to pass by
offenses, to leave all to God, not to answer wrath with wrath, not to study
revenge, not to be mindful of injuries received, is all along the Scripture
commanded, by God himself commended, and by every good Christian to be
carefully practiced.


AS a Pilot that guids the Ship, Phi. Bosquieri Ara Coeli, Hab. 1. 16.
has his hand upon the Rudder, and his eye on the Star that directs him, at
one and the same time: So should every man be diligent in the use of all lawful
means, industrious in his calling; but withal he must have a care that he do
not sacrifice to his (...), and burn incense to his own yarn; that he do not
attribute too much to his own endeavors, but look up to God the giver of all
good things, and wait upon him for a blessing.


PLutarch in his Pelopidas tells, Plutarch in Pelopida.
That Antigonus had a Soldier, who being vexed with an ill Disease, and
thereby so weary of his life, that he was always one of the foremost in
service, one so ready as no man more in the whole company: The General much
liking this, cast such an affection to the valor of the man, that to his great
expense he caused him to be cured, who lately held himself incurable; But then
looking that his Soldier should be forward as before, he found him to draw
back, never offering to come within danger; Asking the reason, the Soldier
makes answer; Geo. Abbot Cant. lect. on Jonah.
That now he had somewhat to lose, and that was a healthful and sound body,
with which he should grieve to part; but before when he was in misery, he had
thought his case should have been very happy, if he might have been dead, and
buried: Thus the wisdom of God does foresee that in us, which Antigonus found
but afterward in his Soldier; That we who in anguish and persecution, do
desire the company of the Elect in heaven, and with St. Paul, to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, would lie grovling in prosperity, as if tied and glued
to the world, and therefore is it, that in his love he whips us sometimes, that
we may seek unto him, and sue to be in heaven with himself.

A Sermon preached many years before, may be the means of salvation many years
after.
IT is recorded, Ierem. Dyke, ut ante^.
how that many resorted unto Christ, and said, John did no miracle, but all
things that John spoke of this man were true; And they believed on him there,
Joh. 10. 41, 42. John, it seems, had preached of Christ before, yet they did
not thereupon believe in Christ when he preached; John was dead and gone, but
now when Christ comes amongst them, they upon John's former Sermons preached
unto them some while since do now believe: John was dead, but his word was not
dead, that now works while he lies in his Grave. ^dolor hic tibi proderit olim.
Ovid.
Thus many a man hears the word and minds it; but at present it has no work at
all: It is possible, that seven years, twenty years after it may fall a
working; a Sermon preached seven years before, may be the means of a man's
conversion seven years after.

The danger of Conventicles
CUnning Thieves, Philip. Goodwin. Evang. communicant.
when they can draw a Travailer out of the common road way into some by path,
then it is that they rob him; deceitful Tradesmen will be sure of a false
light, to put off their bad Wares by: and in dark Cellars, there may soon be
water mixed with wine. Thus the Ordinances of God are never more perverted, and
the doctrine of the Gospel by seducers never more corrupted, then when they can
draw silly men and women, out of the open places of ordinary recourse, into
their close corners, and lone houses; there it is that they vend their
counterfeit Wares, and there it is too that that they mix their Wine with
Wormwood, set false glosses upon the truth of Gods word; there it is that they
make Scripture speak not what God intends, but what they in their wild fancies
imagine, but that there would be such as should cry up Christ in a corner,
Christ himself foretold it; Behold he is in the secret Chamber, Mat. 24. 26.

The whole Armor of God to be put on.
IT is reported by the Poets, Ovidii Me^am
of Achilles, the Grecian Captain, that his Mother being warned by the Oracle,
dipped him being a child, in the River Lethe, to prevent any danger that might
ensue by reason of the Trojan war, but Paris his inveterate enemy,
understanding also by the Oracle, that he was impenetrable all over his body,
except the heel, or small of his leg, which his Mother held by, when she dipped
him, Lauren. Scalabonii moral. in passionem Christi, Ephesians. 6.
took his advantage, shot him in the heel and killed him: Thus every man is, or
ought to be armed cap a pe with that Panoplia, that whole Armor of God. For
the Devil will be sure to hit the least part that he finds unarmed; if it be
the eye, he will dart in at that casement by the presentation of one lewd
object or other; if it be the ear, he will force that door open by bad counsel;
if the tongue, that shall be made a world of mischief; if the feet, they shall
be swift to shed blood, etc.

God, slow to anger.
IT is observed in Men, Geo. Abbot. Cant. lect. on Jonah.
that they are long in making any thing, but very quick in marring of it; A
House built in a year, may be plucked down in a month, and sooner; A Castle
which has been long in setting up, by mining and powder may be blown up in a
moment; a City which many generations have but brought to its beauty, is in a
little time brought to ruin: only God is quick in making, but pauseth upon
destroying, he comes not but step by step, step after step, and when he should
strike, he stays, and turns, and looks away; the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, had but one day for their Creation, but Man had a hundred and twenty
years before the coming of the flood to his destruction: And Jerusalem shall be
warned by the Scriptures before the appearance of Christ, by John Baptist
afterward, by our Savior personally: and when they have killed that just One,
yet forty years shall pass, before it be quite destroyed: Six days made the
world, but almost six thousand years have been afforded to it, before the end
overtake it.


When a man is drawing water out of a Well (it is Epiphanius his observation)
with two vessels of a different metal, In (...). de Anchoratu.
the water at the first seems to be of a different color; Ioh. Weemse
Exercitations.
but when he draws up the Vessels nearer to him, the diversity of colors
vanish, and the water appears to be of one and the same color; and when he
tastes them, they have one and the same relish; Thus, although at the first
sight there may seem to be some contradictions in the Scriptures, yet when we
look nearer and nearer into them, and compare one place with another, we shall
find no contrariety in them, no repugnancy at all, but a perfect harmony and
full consent of one place with another; As the Patriarks relating to the
promises made to Abraham before the Law; the Prophets grounding themselves upon
Moses under the Law; and the faith of the Church, relying upon the doctrine of
the Apostles under the Gospel; all of them agreeing in one, nothing at all
contradictory*


THe Poet Aratus made this answer to one that asked him, Diogenes La^rt. de
vitis Philosophorum. lib. 90.
How he might have Homers Poems free from corruption and faults; Get, says he,
an old Copy not reformed; and he gives this reason* That curious wits laboring
to amend things well done, commonly quite mar them, or at least make them
worse: Thus have the Innovators of our times done, they have cried out for
Reformation, Reformation both in Church and State; but behold a Deformation,
they will not inquire for the good old way, Phi. Goodwin Evang. Communicant.
they will not write by any primitive Copy, the Reformation must be in their
own way. And thus have they wrought the same mischief here, which the
turbulent Orators of Lacedemonia did in that Commonwealth, so wisely settled
by Licurgus his Laws, which whilst they took upon them to amend, they
miserably defaced and deformed.


ANglers, Nath. Shute Sermon. at Mers. Chap. Land. 1627.
when they have long waited, and perceive that nothing does as much as nibble
at the bait, do not impatiently throw away the Rod, or break the hook and line,
but pull up and look upon the bait, and so throw it in again: Thus should every
good Christian do, though he has fished all night and caught nothing, though
he has been much in prayers unto God; yet after long expectation, not a
syllyble of comfort appearing, no return made at all; let him not break off his
prayers, but look to his prayers, that they be not mingled with corruptions,
that they be not bare of grace, naked of faith, void of love, etc. and so mend
them, and no doubt but Christ will appear at a time he thinks not of, with such
a gracious answer as shall abundantly satisfy his longing expectation.


DIodorus Siculus writes, Antiquitat. lib. 43.
that in Aethiopia there is a people of that quality, that they are not at all
moved with the speech of them who sail by them, or with the sight of strangers
approaching to them, but only looking upon the earth, they use to stand
unmovable, as if their senses took knowledge of no man; If any, says he,
should strike them with a drawn sword, they fly not, but bear the blows;
neither is any of them moved with the vvounds or hurts of another, Geo. Abbot.
Cant. lect. on Jonah.
but oftentimes they behold their Wives and Children slain before their faces
without any reluctance at all; An insensible sort of people surely they are,
if any such there be which hardly can be believed; yet are not we the same?
Many years last past, the sword has been glutted with eating of flesh, and
drinking of German blood, and what the sword left, famine seized on; Which of
us were then affected with those things, or remembered Joseph in those his sad
affictions? Who did think that his part was in that Tragedy, his share in that
bargain, or that ever that cup should come to him to taste on; but so it is,
that we who were then idle spectators, are now made sad Actors; we that were
like so many Gallioes, as it were, men caring not for those things, as men
unconcerned, are now encompassed on all sides, and ripe for destruction, if God
in mercy prevent not.

Promises of the Gospel are the poor man's supporter.
THe Fishermans Net is so framed, Ioh. Prestons Sermon. at Lincoln's Inn, 16^6
that there are leaden waights to make it sink at the bottom, and Corks to make
it swim on the top: And thus it is that the leaden, heavy weight of poverty and
wordly cr^sses keep the poor man down, and make him ready to sink under the
burden, were it not for the comfortable promises of the Gospel that buoy up
his confidence, and make him swim, and hold up his head above all opposition
whatsoever.

Ras^, inconsiderate Preaching condemned.
IT is said of Archbishop Whitguift, Sir Geo. Paul in vita.
that though he preached often, yet he never durst adventure into the Pulpit,
but he first wrote his Notes in Latin, and afterward kept them by him during
his life; And he would say himself, That whosoever took that pains before his
preaching, the elder he waxed, the better he would discharge that duty; but he,
if he trusted to his memory only, his Preaching in time would become prattling:
What shall we then say to those that rush into the Pulpit without any
preparation at all, that presume upon a dabitur in illa hora, so that quicqnid
in buccam, out comes that which lies uppermost, whether sense or nonsense,
all is one, running like an Horse with an empty Cart over Hedge and Ditch, till
the Hourglass stop them; It was the complaint of S. Jerome, of such shallow
brains, in his Comment on Ecclesiastes, Gerv. Nid. Sermon. 1616.
9. 11. Nam videas in Ecclesia imperitissimos quosque florere etc. You may see
how in the Church, the most ignorant are most esteemed; and because they have
profited in boldness of front and volubility of tongue, they are accounted the
only Preachers of the time; and to speak truth, Impudence and Ignorance are
the only qualifications of such Preachers.

It is Man, not God that changes.
THe Sun has but one simple act of shining; W. Barlow. Good man's refuge, a
Sermon. at Paul's.
yet do we not see that it does unite clay and straw, dissolve Ice and water?
it hardens clay, and melts wax; it makes the flowers to smell sweetly, and a
dead Corpse to scent loathsomly; the hot fire to be colder, and the cold water
hotter; cures one man with its heat, yet therewith kills another; What Is the
reason? the cause is in the several objects, and their diverse dispositions,
and constitutions, and not in the Suns act of shining, which is one and the
same thing; or tell a Looking-glass be set in the Window; Will it not represent
to the eye diversity of objects? If thou go to it in decent and seemly apparel,
shall thou not see the like figure? if dejected, and in coorse Raiment, will it
not offer to thy view the same equal proportion? Do but stretch thy self, bend
thy brow, and run against it, will it not resemble the like person and actions?
Where now is the change? shall we conclude in the glass? No; for it is neither
altered from the place, Sic oculos, sic ill^ manus etc. Virg.
nor in the nature: Thus the change of love and affection is not in God, but in
respect of the object about which it is exercised; if one day God seem to love
us, another day to hate us, there is alteration within us first, not any in the
Lord; we shall be sure to find a change, but it must be when we do change our
ways, but God never changes; such as we are to our selves, such will he be to
us; if we run stubbornly against him, Psalm. 18. 24.
he will walk stubbornly against us, with the froward he will be froward, but
with the meek he will show himself meekly: yet one and the same God still, in
whom there is not the least shadow of change imaginable.


PLutarch in his Book of Conjugal Precepts, Hieron Drexelii. Cancer Laur^at.
makes use of that known Parable, how the Sun and the Wind were at
variance, whether of them should put a man beside the Cloak which he had upon
his back; while the wind blevv, he held it the harder, but the Sun with the
strength of his beams, made him throw it away from him. And Ice we know that
hangs down from the eves of the House in frosty weather, is able to endure
the stormy blasts of the sharpest Nothern wind; but when the Sun breaks our, it
melts and falls away: Thus it is that Adversity and Necessity are rather
preservers of Piety, Tempore sic duro est, inspicienda sides. Ovid
then plenty and prosperity; Prosperity makes many men lay aside that clean
vesture of purity and innocence, which they buckled hard to them while they
were trained up in the School of Affliction, prosperity melts them down into
vanity, whilst adversity lifts them up into glory.


THere is mention made of a company of poor Christians, August. de Civit. Dei.
lib. 2. cap. 29.
that were banished into some remote parts; and one standing by seeing them
pass along, said, That it was a very sad condition those poor people were in,
to be thus hurried from the society of men, Totus in Caelo Deus est* totus in
terra etc. ib.
and to be made companions with the beasts of the field: True, said another, it
were a sad condition indeed, if they were carried to a place where they should
not find their God; but let them be of good cheer, God goes along with them,
and will exhibit the comforts of his presence whithersoever they go, he is an
infinite God, and fills all places: Thus as every attribute of God is a
breast of comfort not to be drawn dry, so this of his omnipresence is none of
the least, Tho. Worrals Sermon at St. Fosters, Land. 1620.
that he is both where we are, and where we are not; he is in the midst of our
enemies, we think that they will even swallow us up alive, but God our best
friend is with them, to confound all their devices, and insatuate their
Counsels; our friends, our relations of Wife and Children, if they be taken
hence God is with them; and God is with us too on all occasions, in all
conditions, he is ordering all things for his Childrens good.


BOys Sisi the French Leiger in England enquiring what Books Dr. Whitguift then
Archbishop of Canterbury had published, was answered, that he had only set
forth certain Books in defense of the Ecclesiastical Government, and it was
incidently told him beside, That he had founded an Hospital and a School at
Croydon in Surry uttered these words; Sir Geo. Paul. In vita Whitegifti Cant.
Profecto Hospitale ad sublevandam paupertatem, and erudiendam ju^entutem sunt
optimi libri, quos Archiepiscopus scribere potuit: Truly an Hospital to sustain
the poor, and a School to train up youth, are the worthiest Books that an
Archbishop could possibly set forth: And certainly such was the piety, such the
charity of former times, that in this Kingdom of ours, a man might have run and
read in many such Books, the Founders bounty and Munificence, witness those
Ramahs, Barbarus has se getes. Virg.
those Schools for the Prophets, those Colleges in both the Universities so
well filled, so orderly governed, and so richly endowed; But of late, how
faintly did those streams run, which were wont to make glad the City of our
God? How were those breasts dried up, that once nursed up so many?
Kiriath-Sepher made Kiriath-Havala; a Kingdom of learning fairly onwards on the
way to be made a Kingdom of ignorance, Isai. 24. 10.
and Seminaries of sound learning and saving knowledge, likely to be Seed^plots
of barbarous ignorance, and intolerable presumption.

The exceeding bounty of God.
WE read of a Duke of Millain, that marrying his daughter to a son of England,
he made a dinner of thirty courses, and at every course gave so many gifts to
every guest at the Table as there were dishes in the course; Joh. White Sermon.
at St. Paul's, Land. 1616.
This you will say was rich and Royal entertainment, great bounty; yet God gives
much more largely. Earthly Princes are fain to measure out their gifts, why?
because their stock is like themselves, finite; but the Treasury of God's
bounty is puteus inexhaustibilis, never to be drawn dry; Iovis omnia plena.
Virgil. 2 Samuel 12. 18.
It is he that gives the King his Royalty, the Noble^man his Honor, the
Captain his strength, the Rich man his wealth, etc. And as Nathan said to
David, If all this were too little, he would give yet much more.

To wait with Patience God's leisure.
DAvid being assured that he should see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living, Will. Barlow Good man's safe^y.
did not faint, but expect with patience the time appointed, Psalm. 27. 13. The
Husbandman patiently expects the time of Harvest; The Mariner waits with
content for wind and tide, and the VVatch-man for the dawning of the day; So
must the faithful learn patience in all their troubles, not to make haste, or
mourn as men without hope, but tarry the Lords leisure, and he in the fittest
season will comfort their drooping souls, ^Dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virgil^
He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. (...).

To be mindful of the day of Death.
IT is written of the Philosophers called Brachmanni, that they were so much
given to think of their latter end, Geo. Strode Anatom. of Mortal^^y.
that they had their graves always open before their gates, that both going
out, and coming in, they might be mindful of their death; And it is reported of
the women in the Isle of Man, that the first Web they make, is their winding
sheet, wherewith at their going abroad, they usually guird themselves, to show
that they are mindful of their Mortality; And thus though we have not our
graves dug before our eyes, nor carry about us the ugly, ghastly picture of
death, Vive memor lethi Persius. 5.
yet let us carry in our hearts, the true picture of our death, a sense of our
mortality, a consideration of Eternity, and in all our doings to remember our
latter end, and then we shall never do amiss, Eccles. 7. 36.

The ruin of the Churches enemies to be desired.
THe Landgrave of Hesse (a mild and gracious Prince, but whose clemency was
much abused) being cast by adventure on a Smiths forge, Otho Melander
Ioco-seria.
overheard what the Smith said all the while he was striking his Iron:
Duresce, inquam duresce, utinam and Landgravius durescat: And truly the
presumption of some amongst us is such in corrupting the truth with their
books, and opposing it with their heresies, Joh. White Sermon. at Paul's* Land.
1616.
that all true-hearted Protestants are generally of the Smiths mind, to wish
those sons of Belial that flie-blow Religion, and blast the Laws of the Kingdom
with their stinking breath, placing their greatest piety in the greatest
mischiefs they can bring to Church and Commonwealth, may feel the metal
harder, that by a just law is tempered for such kind of spirits as they are of.

The necessity of Catechizing.
BEda makes mention of one returning out of England to Aidanus a Religious
Bishop in Scotland, Hist. Anglorum ^b. 3. cap. 5.
complaining that the people little profited by his preaching, to whom Aidanus
answered, that it was perhaps because he did not after the manner of the
Apostles, give them milk first, i. e. principle them well in the foundation of
Christian Religion: And it is most true, that super structures must needs down
where the ground-sills are not well laid, Rich. Bernard Sermon. of Catechism.
that the only way to increase knowledge is by knowledge of the Principles of
Religion, being thus grounded there will be an ability to judge of truth and
false doctrine, so that men will not so easily be carried about with every wind
of doctrine, as the profane and ignorant multitude be, such as are tiling the
house, when they should be laying fast the foundation, such as think they move
in a circle of all divine knowledge, when (God knows) they know little or
nothing at all.


THere is a story of a certain holy Man, Ant. Douraltii Speculum (...)
who at first had led a dissolute life, and chancing on a time into the company
of a godly honest man, was so wrought on by his holy persuasion (such is the
force of good Society) that he utterly renounced his former course of life, and
gave himself to a more private, austere, moderate, and secluse kind of living,
the cause whereof being demanded by one of his old consorts, who would have
drawn him (such is the nature of evil company) to his usual riot and excess,
he made this answer; I am busy, meditating and rea^ing in a little look which
ha^h but three leaves in it, so that I have no leisure so much as to think of
any other business; And being asked a long time after whet^er he had read over
the book, replied, This small book has but three leaves, and they are of three
several colors, Geo. Strode Anatomy of Mortality.
red, white, and black, which contain so many mysteries, that the more I
meditate thereon, the more sweetness I find, so that I have devoted my self to
read thereon all the days of my life; In the first leaf, which is red, I
meditate on the passion of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and of his
precious blood shed for a ransom of my sins, and the sins of all his Elect,
without which we had been bondslaves of Satan, and fuel for hellfire; In the
white leaf, I cheer up my spirits with the comfortable consideration of the
unspeakable joys of the heavenly Kingdom purchased by the blood of Christ my
Savior; In the third leaf, which is black, I think upon the horrible and
perpetual torments of Hell, provided and kept in store for the wicked and
ungodly. Here Is a good man, a good book, and a good example well met together:
Would but the men of this world carry this book of three leaves in their
hearts, and meditate often thereon, it would restrain their thoughts, bridle
their affections, and center all their words and actions within the limits and
boundaries of the fear of God; but alas, men like Nabal, Quos gloria vexat
inanis.
are so busied about white Earth, red Earth, and black Earth, in gathering and
scraping of transitory trash, or have so prostituted their affections unto
carnal pleasures and delights, that they spend their time like Domitian, in
catching of flies, or like little children, in running after butter-flyes, so
that they have little or no leisure to think either of God or any goodness, and
so on a sudden the Sun of their pleasure sets, the day of their life ends,
the night of their death comes, and like a man walking in the snow, not seeing
his way, they chop into their graves before they be aware.


A Father lying on his deathbed, called three children to him which he kept,
and told them that one only of them was his natural son, W. Perkins Governm.
of tongue.
and that the rest were only brought up by him, therefore unto him only he
gave all his goods, but which of those three was his own son, he would not in
any wise declare: When he was dead, every one pleaded his birthright, and the
matter brought to trial, the judge for the making (if possible) a true
discovery, took his course; He caused the dead corpse of the Father to be set up
against a Tree, and commanded the three sons to take bows and arrows to shoot
against their Father, to see who could come nearest to his heart; The first and
second did shoot and hit him, but the third was angry with them both, and
through natural affection of a child to a Father, threw away his bow and would
not shoot at all: This done, the Judge gave sentence, that the two first were
no sons, but the third only, and that he should have the goods: The like
trial may be made of God's children; Can the drunkard be God's child, that
gives him vinegar and gall to drink? No, he is a child of the Devil; Can the
blasphemous swearer that rends God in pieces, and sh^ots him through with his
dart, as it is said of the Egyptian when he blasphemed, that he smote or
pierced through God's name, Levit. 24. 11. No, he is a Devil incarnate,
whereas a child of God is discovered by his affections to his God, -- Fructu
dign^s^itur arbor.
he makes conscience of an Oath, his tongue is the trumpet of God's glory, he
possesses his vessel in holiness, and if at any time he sin against God, as
who is it that does not? If he chance to shoot at God a bitter word, and
unclean thought, a sinful act, it is as Jonathan did at David, either short, or
over, seldom or never, home; In a word, such is his care, his zeal, his love to
his God, that if he sin by infirmity, he returns by Repentance immediately.

Judges and Magistrates are to be the Patrons of Justice.
IT is reported of a Lord Mayor of London, that giving order to an Officer to
call in the Company of Brewers before him, Dr. Leighton's Troubles.
instead of them he warned in the Vintners to appear, whom the Lord Mayor no
sooner espied in the Court, but asked, What they made there. The Officer
replied, that upon his Lordships command, he had warned them in; But, says the
Lord Ma^or, I gave order for the Brewers; True, my Lord (said the Officer) And
these be the greatest Brewers in the Kingdom, or grand Impostors in corrupting
the Queen of liquors, as I and my ^ellows find by woeful experience, whereupon
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen approved the Officers wit, and took the matter into
consideration. Thus, the Judges are in a most special manner Patres legis,
Spreto moderamine juris, Curritur in facinus.
the Patrons of the Law, the great Masters of the Wine-cellar of Justice; but
if they once mix wine and water, and turn judgment into Warm-wood, they are
then the Brewers, ^os. Scaliger in lib. 8. Epid^rpidum.
the grand Impostors that poison the State, because they corrupt the Fountain
of the peoples birthright, in making the known Laws of the Kingdom speak
according to their pleasure.

An argument of extreme folly not to be mindful of death.
IF a man were tied fast to a stake, at whom a most cunning Archer did shoot,
and wounding many about him, Geo. Strode Anat. of Mortal.
some above, and some below, some beyond, and some short, some on this hand,
and some on that, and the poor wretch himself so fast bound to the stake, that
it were not any way possible for him to escape; Would it not be deemed
madness in him, if in the mean time forgetting his misery and danger, he
should carelessly fall to bib, and quaff, to laugh, and be merry, as if he could
not be touched at all? who would not judge such a man besides himself, that
should not provide for his end? yet such Gotamists, such Bedlamites, such mad
men are most amongst us, who knowing and understanding that the most expert
Archer that ever was, even God himself has whet his sword, and bent his bow,
and made it ready, Heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur!
and has also prepared for him the Instruments of death, and ordained his
arrows, Psalm. 7. 12, 13. Yea, that he has already shot forth his darts, and
arrows of death, and has hit those that are above us, Superiors and Elders;
such as be right against us, companions and equals; such as be very near us,
kindred and Allies; on the right hand, our friends; on the left hand our
Enemies; yet we think to be shot-free, sit still as men and women unconcerned,
not so much as once thinking of our latter end.


IT is no wonder that in Italy (which is a parcel of Antichrists Kingdom)
Blasphemies should be darted out against God, John Boys. Postils.
and his Christ, openly, being made phrases of gallantry to the Brewer, Sand's
Relation.
and very interjections of speech to the Vulgar: But in England (where the
Scepter of Christ's Kingdom has a long time flourished) it cannot but wound the
heart of such as mourn for the sins of the Land, to consider how commonly not
only the Ruffian in the Tavern, ^fera regnat Erinnys.
and the Rascal on the Stage, but also the Labourer at his work, and the
Gentleman at his recreation, and the very Boys, yea the Babes in the streets
curse their Maker, and revile their Redeemer.


A Grave and chaste Matron being moved to commit folly with a lewd Ruffian,
Will. Perkins of Repent.
after long discourse and tedious solicitations, she called for a pan of hot
burning coals, requesting him for her sake, to hold his finger in them but one
hour: He answered, that it was an unkind request: To whom she replied, That
seeing he would not so much as hold his finger in a few coals for one hour, she
could not yield to do the thing for which she should be tormented body and soul
in hell fire for ever: And thus should all men reason with themselves, when
they are about to sin; none will be brought to do a thing that may make so much
as their finger or tooth to ache; If a man be but to snuff a candle, he will
spit on his finger because he cannot endure a small and tender flame; What care
is then requisite to leave sin, whereby we bring endless torments to body and
soul in hell sire, to which our fire is but Ice by way of comparison?


A Good Husband will repair his House while the weather is fair, Geo. Strode
Anat. of Mortal.
not put off till winter; a careful Pilot will take advantages of wine and
tide, and so put out to Sea, not stay till a storm arise: The Travailer will
take his time in his journey, and mend his pace when the night comes on, least
darkness overtake him; The Smith will strike while the Iron is hot, least it
grow cool and so he ^ose his labor: So we ought to make every day, the day of
our Repentance, to make use of the present time, ^nulli nostrum est ultima nota
dies. Billius.
that when we come to dye, we may have nothing to do but to dye, for there
will be a time when there will be no place for Repentance, when time will
be no more, when the Door will be shut, when there will be no entrance at
all:


A Godly man cannot do that which he would, Will. Perkins Combat of flesh and
spirit.
Romans 7. 18. And wherein he is like a Prisoner that is got out of the Goal,
who that he might escape the hands of the Keeper, desires and strives with
all his heart to run an hundredth miles in a day, but by reason of the heavy
bolts and fetters that hang at his heels, cannot for his life creep past a mile
or twain, and that too with cha^ing his flesh, and tormenting himself. And
thus it is that the servants of God do heartily desire and endeavor to run in
the ways of Gods commandments, as it is said of that good King Josias,
^Videt meliora probatque sed deteriora, etc.
to serve God with all their heart, 2 King. 23. 25. Yet because they are
clogged with the bolts of the flesh, they perform obedience very slowly, and
weakly with many slips and failings.


When one comforted a poor Widow which had lately lost her Husband, John Boys:
Postills.
for that he was an unthrift, and unkind, she replied; Well, though he were
but a bad Husband, yet he was a Husband, and such an one is better then none:
So the commodities of Government are so great, that a very bad Husband to the
Commonwealth is better then none at all: For whereas in a corrupt Monarchy,
there may be one Tyrant, in an Oligarchy some few Tyrants, in a Democracy many
Tyrants, in an Anarchy they are all Tyrants.

Death, the good Man's gain.
IN the Ceremonial Law, Levit. 25. there was an year they accounted the year of
Iubilee, and this was with the poor Jews a very acceptable year, Geo. Strode
Anat. of Mortal.
because that every man that had lost or sold his Lands upon the blowing of a
Trumpet, returned, and had possession of his estate again, and so was recovered
out of all the extremities in which he lived before. In this life we are just
such as those poor men of Israel, rifled, plundered, spoiled, in a manner and
condition every way straightened; now Death is our Iubilee, and when the Trumpet
begins to sound, life is then loss; Death is the good man's advantage, then it
is that he enjoyes a better state than ever he had before: Nonne mori satius
etc. Claudian.
What though Death be to the wicked as the Rod in Moses hand, that was turned
into a Serpent, yet to the godly it shall be like that of Eliah, a wand to waft
them into a better life: then it is that the funeral of their vices, shall be
the resurrection of all their gracious actions.

The greatest of Men, subjects of Mortality.
IT is with Men as with Letters, that have great and glorious superscriptions,
Right Honorable, Anth. Burges Fast. Sermon. 1646.
Right Worshipful; etc. but when opened, there is nothing but a little black
ink, and dust upon them: So, though men have great places and offices, whether
it be in Church or State, and make a great outward show in the world, yet
within there is but a little black blood, and dusty flesh to cover it, dust
they were, and to dust they must return again.

Death strips us of all worldly outward things.
IT is with us in this world, T. Gatakers true Content.
as it was in the Jewish fields and vineyards, pluck and eat they might what
they would while they were there, but they might not pocket or put up ought to
carry with them, Deuteronomy. 23. 24. Or as with Boys, that having gotten by stealth
into an Orchard, Gul. Parisiensis, summa de vitiis.
stuff their sleeves and their Pockets full with Apples and Pears, well hoping
to get out with them, but when they come to the Door, they find one that
searches them, and takes all their fruit away from them, and so sends them
away empty, with no more fruit then they brought in: Or as poor men, that
being invited to a rich man's board, have the use of his Plate to drink in, and
silver spoons to eat with, whilst they are there; but if any of them dares to
be so bold as to put up a piece of Plate, or a spoon, there is search made by
the Porter e're they are let out for what is missing among them, and so they
are turned out as they came in: In like manner it is with us, in regard of
these temporal blessings, Omnia mors devorat.
we have free liberty to use them while we are here, but when we are to go
hence, there is one waiting on us that will be sure to strip us, and suffer
nothing to pass with us, unless it be some sorry sheet, or a sear ragge to rot
with us, such as we shall have no sense of nor be, any whit at all the bette^
for, than if we were wholy without them.

The worth of a true Christian.
WHen Henry the fourth, that late King of France, Tho. Adams, the Temple, a
Sermon. at Paul's Land. 1616.
was told of the King of Spains ample Dominions; As first, he is King of
Castile, and I (quoth Henry) am King of France; he is King of Navarre, and I am
King of France; he is King of Naples, and I am King of France; he is King of
the Sicilia's, nova Hispania, of the Western India's, and I am King of France;
he thought the Kingdom of France equivalent to all those: So let the soul of
every good Christian solace it self against all the wants of this mortal
Pilgrimage in this, that it is a member of the Church: one has more learning
or wit, yet I am a Christian; another has more honor or preferment in the
world, yet I am a Christian; another has more silver and gold and riches, yet
I am a Christian; another has larger possessions, yet I have an inheritance in
heaven, I am a Christian: Were but this consideration of the true Christians
worth laid in the balance of the Sanctuary it would weigh down all temporary
conceits whatsoever.


IT is said of Lewis the King of France, Ant. Burges Sermon. at Court, Marsh.
Land: 1625.
that when he had through inadvertency granted an unjust suit, as soon as he
had read that verse in the Psalm, Blessed is he that does righteously at all
times recalled himself, and upon better thoughts gave his judgment quite
contrary: Hence it is that an act of justice ought to flow from mature
deliberation, and advised attendency, especially there ought to be
consideration when it concerns the life or death of a man.


AS the Israelites travailing through the Wilderness toward the Land of
promise, Tho. Gatakers Sermon. of self-suffering.
Numb. 9. 22, 23. (which to have gone the next way, had not been a journey of
many days, yet were they many years about it) they were to go as God led them,
as they saw the cloud go before them, and not to take that way that seemed
best, or most compendious in their own eyes: So must we observe Gods ways in
our trade at home, and traffic abroad: in our walking toward wealth we must
keep the way that God leads us, go no other way then we can see him going
before us, follow the line of his Law, though it seem to lead us in and out,
backward and forward, as it were treading in a Maze, and not take those ways
that seem gainer, and nearer in our own eyes, and much more compendious then
the other: though we might compass wealth with a word or two, Via Dei. v^a
tu^tissima.
with the bow of a knee only one way, whereas we must travail, and toil and
moyl much e're we come by it the other way; though we might attain to it in a
day or a week the one way, whereas we are like to stay many weeks, many
months, nay many years, it may be, e're we come at it the other way; yet this
way must we keep, and resolve to forsake all the world with our Savior, Math.
4. 10. If it be offered to entice us out of it; The Israelites when they went
out of Gods precincts, they went withal out of Gods protection, and so fell
before their foes, Numb. 14. 44. So those that make more haste then good speed
to be rich, that balk Gods path, and step out of Gods way to get wealth, shall
surely come to evil, Psalm. 28. 20.


THere can be no difference betwixt a gliding star and the rest, B. Hall.
Occas. medit.
the light seems alike, both while it stood and whiles it fell; but being once
fallen, it is known to be no other then a base slimy Meteor, gilded with the
Sunbeams, and now a man may tread upon that with his foot, which before his
eye admired; had it been a s^ar, it had still and ever shined, now the very
fall argues it a false and elementary apparition: Thus ^ur charity does and
must mislead us in our spiritual judgments, if we see men exalted in their
Christian profession, fixed in the upper Region of the Church, shining with
appearances and outsides of Grace, we may not think them other then Stars in
this lower firmament; but if they fall from their holy station, and embrace
this present world, whether in judgment or practice, renouncing the truth and
power of godliness, we may then conclude that they never had any true light in
them, and were no other then a glittering composition of Pride and Hypocrisy.

A vain rich Man.
AS a Brook with a fall of Rain-waters, Nath. Shute Fun. Sermon. 1624.
swells, and, as it were, proud of his late increase, makes a noise, nay runs
here and there to show it self, till by running it has run out all that ever
it had: Even so some rich men, upon some fall of wealth begin to swell, as if
they were little Seas; then make a noise of ostentation; and because they have
but one tongue of their own, they get the echo of some soothing flatterers*
they overflow the lower grounds, the poor, and spread their names in letters
of blood; in the end after some short noise, as the brook leaves nothing but
dirt and mire behind, so do they leave nothing at their death to themselves but
confusion before God and men.

Reason must submit to Faith.
When three Ambassadors were sent from Rome, Sabellicus Ps. ^. ma.
to appease the discord betwix Nicomedes and Prusias; whereof one was
troubled with a Megrim in his head, another had the Gowt in his Toes, and the
third was a Fool; Cato said vvittily, That Embassage had neither head, nor
foot, nor heart: So that man vvhosoeever he be, shall never have a head to
conceive the truth, nor a foot to walk in the vvayes of obedience, nor a heart
to receive the comfortable ^ssurance of salvation, that suffers his Reason,
Will, and Affections to usurp upon his faith; Qui se sibi constitui^, slultum
habet magistrum. He that goes to school to his own reason, has a fool to his
Schoolmaster; and he that suffers his faith to be overruled by his Reason, may
have a strong Reason, but a weak faith to rely upon.

The patience of God provoked, turns to fury.
AS a child in the Mothers womb, Edm. Calamy Sermon. at Fast.
the longer it is in the womb before it comes forth, the bigger the child will
be, and the more pain it will put the Mother unto: Thus it is with God, though
he has leaden feet, yet he has iron hands; the longer he is before he
strikes, the heavier the blow will be when he strikes, the longer he keeps-in
his wrath, and is patient toward a People or a Nation, the bigger the child of
wrath will be when it comes forth, and the greater will be their misery and
affliction.

Distrustful cares reproved.
LOok on the Robin-red-breast, B. Hall Occas. medit.
pretty bird, how cheerfully does he sit and sing in the Chamber window, yet
knows not where he is, nor where he shall make the next meal, and at night must
shroud himself in a bush for his lodging: What a shame is it then for
Christians that see before them such liberal provisions of their God, and find
themselves set warm under their roofs, yet are ready to droop under a
distrustful and unthankful dullness, and are ready to say, Can God make windows
in Heaven, 2 King. 7. 2. Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Psalm. 78.
19.

No harm in Humility.
A Man goes in at a door and he stoops; T. VVestfields Sermon. 1637.
the door is high enough, yet he stoops; you will say, he needs not stoop; yea,
but says Bernard, there is no hurt in his stooping, otherwise he may catch a
knock, this way he is safe: Thus a man may bear himself too high upon the
favor of God, having some good measure of sanctification, and of assurance of
eternal life, Lib. Meditat.
it will be hard not to be proud of it; Pride has slain thousands, O but
spiritual pride has slain her ten thousands; Humility never yet did harm to
any, there is no danger in stooping: It is better to be an humble servant of
the Lord, than a great Lord of many servants, the lowest of Gods friends, then
the highest amongst his enemies.


IT is reported of Xerxes, Edm. Calamy Sermon. at West. 1644.
that having prepared 300000. men to fight with the Graecians, and having
mustered them up into a general Rendezvous, and taken notice of their strength,
Justin.
and the greatness of their number, he fell a weeping, out of the consideration
that not one of them should remain alive within the space of an hundredth years:
Much more ought we to mourn then, when we consider the abundance of people that
are in England, and the abundance of sin perpetrated amongst us; and what shall
become not only of our bodies within these few years, but what shall become of
our souls to all Eternity.


IT is written of the Camelion, that when he espies a Serpent taking shade
under a Tree, Scaligeri Epidorpides.
he climbs up the Tree, and lets down a thread breathed out of his mouth, as
small as a Spiders thread, at the end whereof, there is a little drop as clear
as any Pearl, Tho. Play^eres Sermon.
which falling on the Serpents head, kills him. Christ is this Camelion, he
climbs up into the Tree of his Cross, and lets down a thread of blood issuing
out of his side, like Rahab's red thread, hanging out at the window, the least
drop whereof being so prestious and so peerless, falling upon the Serpents
head, kills him.


THere is a famous History of one Androdus the Dane, Appian Polyhistor.
dwelling in Rome, that fled from his Master into the Wilderness, and took
shelter in a Lions den, The Lion came home with a thorn in his foot, and seeing
the man in the den, reached out his foot, and the man pulled out the thorn,
which the Lion took so kindly, that for three years he fed the man in his den;
After three years the man stole out of the den, and returned back to Rome, was
apprehended by his Master, and condemned to be devoured by a Lion; It so
happened, that this very Lion was designed to devour him: The Lion knows his
old friend, and would not hurt him; The people wondered at it, the man was
saved, and the Lion given to him, which he carried about with him in the
streets of Rome, from whence grew this saying; Hic est homo medicus Leonis,
Edm. Calamy Sermon. at West. 1645.
hic est Leo hospes hominis. Well, most true it is, that the great God of
Heaven has plucked out many and many a thorn out of our feet, has delighted
himself to do us good, let then the experience of such love prick us on to
better obedience, not to bring forth thorns and briars to him, not to have our
hearts barren and dried up as the thorny ground, not to kick against him with
our feet, whilst he is pulling out the thorn that troubles us.


WE read that Daniel strewed ashes in the Temple to discover the footsteps of
Bells Priests which did eat up the meal: Playfer's Sermons.
And Abraham did strew ashes in his memory, saying, I will speak unto my Lord,
though I be but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. And thus do all the faithful,
remembering they shall be one day turned to dust and ashes, that so seeing and
marking the footsteps of death, how it continually comes and steals away their
strength (as Bells Priests did the meal) how it daily eats up, and wastes,
and consumes their life, they may be always prepared for it.


When a Hushandman has thrown his seed into the ground, T. Ga^aker Joy e^ the
Just.
he does not look to see it the same day again, much less to reap it the same
day (as one says of the Hyberborean people for North) That they sow shortly
after the Sunrising, and reap before the Sunset, Heresbachius de Ri Rustica.
that is, because the whole half year is one continued day with them: No, he
expects not the next day, nor the next week neither, to see it above ground,
but he is content to wait patiently till the year come about, and is glad when
he sees after a months time it may be, that it begins to peep out of the
ground, living in hope still of the further growth of it, and to enjoy at
length, after the spire and blade a full ear, and a plentiful Harvest. Thus
every child of God must learn to wait God's leisure. What though he has prayed
long, yet not a word of comfort, no return at all appears, yet let him pray
still? What though he sees not for a long time after much mortification,
Per^ert patientia palmam.
but a slender growth of spiritual joy in his heart, nay scarce any glimpse,
any sight at all, yet let him not be dismayed, or discouraged therefore, but
live in hope as the Husbandman does, of a further increase, and a full crop at
length, when God shall see it good, and most advantageous for his spiritual
state and condition.

A good man will be a good Example to others.
When Diogenes saw a bungling Archer shoot, Laert. Diog. in vita.
he went as fast as he could to the mark. The lookers on wondered what he meant
to do in so doing; He answered, To make sure that he might not be hit, for this
fellow (says he) never means to come near the mark: And thus must we do, when
we see profane straglers starting aside like a broken bow, and roving a great
way wide in their lives and conversations, we must presently run to the mark,
that not only we may keep our selves safe from the danger of their ill
Example, but also we may give ^im as it were to others by our good example, and
direct them that they be neither wide nor short of the mark intended.

Mortification of sin breeds sense of sin.
NEm^ aegre molitur artus suos; A living member is not burthensom to the body,
Seneca ep. 121
A man's arms are not any burden to him, though otherwise massy and weighty;
but a withered arm, or a limb mortified, hangs like a lump of lead on it: T.
Gataker Joy of the Just.
Thus so long as sin lives in the soul, unkilled wholly, and unmortified as
yet, so long our corruption is nothing at all cumbersome unto us, but when it
is once mortified in a man, it begins to grow burdensome unto him, and to
hang like a lump of dead flesh on his soul, and then begins the poor soul,
pestered and oppressed with the weight of it to cry out with the Apostle; O
wretched man that I am, when shall I be once freed from this body of sin? Romans
7. 24.

How to take our pleasures and serve God too.
IT is reported of one Leonides a Captain, Aelian. variar. hist. 3. cap. 14.
who perceiving his Soldiers left their watch upon the City-walls, and did
nothing all the day long, but quaffe and tipple in Alehouses near adjoining,
commanded that the Alehouses should be removed from that place where they
stood, and set up close by the walls, That seeing the Soldiers would never
keep out of them, at the least they might as well watch as drink in them: Tho.
Playfer ut anted.
So because pleasure we must needs have, and we cannot be kept from it, God
has appointed that we should take delight enough, and yet serve him never a
whit the less; for it is no part of Gods meaning when we enter into his sweet
service, that we should abandon all delight, but that only we should change
the cause of our delight; delight of the service of sin into a delight in the
service of God, Isaac must be sacrificed, not the Ram, all Rammish and rank
desires of the world, not Isaac, i. e. all spiritual laughter, all ghostly joy,
all heavenly delight and pleasure.


CAmbden in his Britannia, Tho. Fullers Sermon. at Clem. Eastch. Land. 1650.
makes mention of a great high Hill in Staffordshire, called Weever, under
which there is a little Village called Wotton; Now this Village being seated in
so sad a dreary, dolesom place, the Sun not shining into it any further then on
the tops of the houses, by reason of the height of the hills over-topping it,
the people of the place have been observed to chant out this note; Wotton under
Weever,
Where God came never.


This now were an excellent place for a rapacious rich man to make a purchase
of, and then to plant a Colony there, where God came never; A good place for
Drunkards to swill in, -locis praesens fimul est Deus omnibus unus. Prosper.
for Epicures to surfeit in, for the voluptuous to take pleasure in, for the
Prodigal to riot in etc* But let them all know that God is at Wotton, and God
is with them all, Psalm. 139. 7.
in all places, at all times, every where included, no where excluded; Whither
shall (...) fly (said David) from thy presence?


SOlomon desired wisdom of the Lord, Prove. 30.
but for outward things his prayer was, that he might have a mean Estate; Rich.
Greenhams Sermon.
the Lord gave him wisdom which his heart so much desired, and Riches also
which he did not once desire: Abraham gave unto the Lord Isacc his Son, which
when the Lord did behold, he gave him his Son again: And thus must we do, The
readiest way to obtain life, is to be heartily well contented either to live or
dye, and to commit our selves unto the Lord; and for these outward things, the
very ready way to obtain them, is to give them up wholly to his hands, so that
when we least desire them, we shall have them; and when we freely give them up
to him, we shall sooner have them again.


SIR Francis Drake, though a curious searcher after the Revolution of time, in
three years sailing about the World, Tho. Fullers Holy State.
through the variations of several Climates, lost one whole day, which was
scarce considerable in so long a time: It is to be feared that there are many
amongst us that lose a day in every week, one in seven, neglecting the
Sabbath, nay every day in the week, not once thinking on God, or any goodness
at all.


IF some silly Astrologaster, Rich. Greenham, ut anted.
or Figure-flinger, do but hit in one thing of twenty, he is presently cried up
for a Cunning man; but let the Physician work six hundred cures, yet if through
the impatience of his Patient, he fail but in one, that one fail does more turn
to his discredit* then his many eminent cures did formerly get him praise. Thus
does the world deal with men in the matter of censure; If a worldly minded man
have but an outward gift of strength, of speech, or of any other natural
endowment, he is accounted filius gallinae albae, one of the white boys of the
time, -vexat censura columbas^.
a precious man, a man of excellent parts, etc. though he be at the same time
in ordine ad spiritualia, an Idolater, a profane person etc. But let the child
of God be truly zealous for God, honest and holy in life and conversation; yet
if there be but one infirmity in him (as who is free) or if he have through
weakness fallen into some one sin; that one infirmity against which he
striveth, or that one sin for which he is grieved, shall drown all the graces
in him, be they never so eminent, never so great, and the World is ready to
give him up for a wicked man, an Hypocrite etc.

The godly and ungodly, their different motions in goodness.
A Violent motion is quick in the beginning, Joh. de Burgo Pupilla oculi.
but slow in the end; a stone cast upward, is then most weak when it is most
high; but a natural motion is slow in the beginning, quicker in the end: For if
a Man from a high Tower cast a stone down-ward, the nearer to the center, the
quicker is the motion: And therefore when a man at his first conversion is
exceeding quick, but afterward waxes every day slower and slower in the ways
of goodness, his motion is not natural and kindly, but forced: otherwise like
a constant resolved Christian, the longer he lives, and the nearer he comes to
the mark, the more swiftly does he run, the more vehemently does he contend for
that everlasting Crown, which he shall be sure to attain, at his Races end.

Self-conceited Men, blame^worthy Men.
St. Hierome observes ^hus much of Petrus Abaelardus and his followers, that
he was used to say in point of Controversy; B. Smith. Glocestr. Sermon.
Omnes sane Patres sic dijudicant at ego non etc. Indeed the stream of all the
Fathers run this way, but I am of another judgment. So what S. Augustine
affirms of some in his time, Nisi quod faciant nihil recte judicant, is too
too true in this self-conceited time of ours, Men wade so far in a vein of
singularity, that they think nothing well done, but what they do themselves;
how do they dote upon the issue of their own empty brains? and, thus admiring
themselves, whom do they not censure? hating the persons of their superiors,
and scorning the opinions of their elders.

Great Men, to be merciful Men.
AS the Snow which falls upon the Mountains, being dissolved into water by the
beams of the Sun, and descending into the valley makes it to give her
increase; but being deprived of the Sun's heat remains congealed, useless,
Paul. de Francis. Orat. Regia (cred^ mihi) res est, succurrere lapsis. Ovid.
and unprofitable: So they which are in high places, as it were Mountains in
Court or Country, upon whom the favor of God and the King shine most, ought
not to be frozen in Charity, not to be bound up to themselves, but to be
public spirited men, to have the bowels of Piety and pity melt within them
for the good of their inferior brethren.

A Rich Man is Gods Steward.
A Beggar upon the way asked something of an honorable Lady, Ephr. Udall. Sermon
at S. Aug* Land. 1^32.
she gave him six pence, saying, This is more then ever God gave me; O (says
the Beggar) Madam, you have abundance, and God has given you all that you
have; say, not so good Madam: Well (says she) I speak the truth, for God has
not given, but lent unto me what I have, that I may bestow it upon such as thou
art: And it is very true indeed, that the poor are Gods Almesmen, and the Rich
are but his Stewards, into whose hands God has put his Moneys to distribute to
them in the time of necessity.

An Orthodoxal Christian, has a like esteem of all Gods Ordinances.
WHen at the taking of new Carthage in Spain, Tho. Fullers Holy State.
two Soldiers contended about the murall Crown, due to him who first climed up
the wall, so that the whole Army was thereupon in danger of division; Scipio
the General, said, He knew that they both got up the wall together, Plutarch
in vita Scipionis.
and so gave the scaling Crown to them both: Thus a good Orthodoxal Christian
does not clash Gods Ordinances together about Precedence, he makes not odious
comparisons betwixt Prayer and Preaching, Preaching and Catechizing, Prayer
public and private, premeditate and extemporary, but compounds all
controversies about Gods Ordinances, by praising them all, practicing them all,
and thanking God for them all.


THere is mention made of a Lodestone in Aethiopia, Vincentii Speculum morarle.
which has two corners, with the one it draweth-to, with the other it puts the
Iron from it: So God has two arms, the one of Mercy, the other of Judgment;
two hands, the one of Love, Nath. Hardy Sermon. at Paul's Land. 1647.
the other of wrath; with the one he draws, with the other he drives; the
one stroaketh, the other strikes: and as he has a right hand of favor
wherewith to load the Saints, so he wants not a left hand of fury wherewith to
dash the wicked in pieces.


AS Tertullian says of a King, that he is solo Deo minor, has in his Kingdom
none above him but only God: B. Lakes Sermon. at Wells, 1619
so is a Woman in a Family* solo marito minor, she should command all in the
house but her Husband, she may be similis but not aequalis honoris; she may
partake in the same kind of honor, but not in the same degree of honor as Man
does: otherwise if it come to a (...) to the rule of a woman, actum est de
^amilia, farewell all good order. Why? Because women have more of the heart then
the head, their affections out-step their discretion, they are commonly more
witty then wise, so that wisdom requiring the pondering of circumstances, the
forwardness of their affections will not suffer them to pause so long; hence
it is that their resolutions are rash and wilful, which cannot prognosticate
any good event; Vxor bona chara supellex.
Happily some woman may be as wise as Abigail, and some man as silly as Nabal;
yet then neither does Man lose his Prerogative, nor Woman acquire a title above
him, deal with him she may per viam consilii, but not imperii; counsel him she
may, command him she may not.


When the Romans immortalized any of their Emperors, Wolfg. Lazius de reb.
Romans
they did it with this Ceremony; They brought one to swear, that they saw him
go to Heaven out of the fire, intimating, That the fiery trial had passed on
him: sure it is, that the fiery trial is now on the Church, and the Lord will
discover what is in the heart of his Israel, while they are in the troublesome
wilderness, e're they come into Canaan a Land of rest.


IT is reported of young King Edw. the sixth, Sir Ioh. Hayward in vita.
that being about to lay hold on something that was above the reach of his
short arm, one that stood by espying a boss'd Bible lving on the Table, offered
to lay that under his feet to heighten him, but the good young King utterly
disliked the motion, and instead of treading it under his feet, he laid it to
his heart,: But now there are many amongst us, that make Religion but a
stalking Horse to their policy, -rabido gestans sub pectore vulpem. Pers. sat.
5.
that make use of the Bible to no other end, but to reach at, and to seek out
their own wicked designs, quaerentes sua non quae Christi, seekers of their own
things, not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 21.

The Churches enemies, the Churches good.
AS we say of fire and water, M. Strickland Sermon. at West.
and as the Romans said of Caligula, Nemo melior servus, nemo pejor dominus, we
may say of the Churches enemies, they are very bad Masters, Suetonius.
executing their own lusts and cruelty against Gods people, yet very good
servants, if the divine hand make use of them for the Churches service: just
like the good Husbandman, which makes use of briars and thorns, which though
they be fruits of the curse, and cumber the ground, yet will he suffer them to
grow in hedges, that he make them a fence unto his fruitful ground.

The Devil's endeavor to darken the understanding.
IT is written of Antiochus, John Boys Postills.
that entering into the Sanctuary, he took away the golden Altar, and the
Candlestick for light; And Nebuchadnezzar when he conquered Zedekiah, put out
his eyes, and bound him in chains, and then carried him to Babel. In like sort
the Devil, Match. 1. 23. 2 King. 25.
So soon as he has entered into man's soul, which is Gods holy Temple, he does
endeavor instantly to put out the light, to darken the understanding, that a
man may not be able to discern betwixt good and evil, and so be more easily
carried into Babylon, to his souls confusion.

The Devil's charge, and the sinners discharge.
THere is a story, P. du Moulin de IN amor de Dieu.
how the Devil appeared to a dying man, and showed him a Parchment Role which
was very long, wherein was written on every side the sins of the poor sick Man,
which were many in number: and there were also written the idle words he had
spoken, which made up three quarters of the words that he had spoken in his
life, together with the false words, the unchaste words, and angry words;
afterward came in rank his vain and ungodly words; and lastly his actions,
digested according to the Commandments; whereupon Satan said, See here,
behold thy ver^ues, see here what thy examination must be: whereunto the poor
sinner answered; It is true, Satan; but thou have not set down all, for thou
should have added, and set down here below, The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all our sins; And this also should not have been forgotten,
That whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life,
whereupon the Devil vanished. Thus, 1 Ioh. 1. 3. Ioh, 3. 1^.
if the Devil should muster up our sins, and set them in order before us, let
but Christ be named in a faithful way, and he will give back, and fly away
with all the speed that may be.

The dangerous effects of Riches, being not well used.
THere was in the King of Denmarks Court, John Whites Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1616.
one that played on the Harp so exceeding well that it was said, He could put
men into what passion he listed, though it were into fury and madness; One
desirous to make the trial, would needs hear him, but so that diverse Gentlemen
standing aloof off out of the hearing, should be ready to come in and stay the
Music, if they saw him in any distemper: Things thus ordered, the Musician
began to play, and first he struck so deep and sweet a note, that he put the
man into dumps, so that he stood like one ^orlorne, his Hat in his eyes, his
arms across, sighing and lamenting; Then the Musician began a new Note, and
played nothing but mirth, and devices, that the man began to lose his dumps,
and fell a dancing: But in the third place, the Harper so varied his Notes, and
by degrees so wrought upon the Man according as he saw him incline, that from
dancing, he brought him to showting, until he grew frantic, and slew four of
his friends that came to stay him: Divitiarum sequela est luxuria, ira
intemperans, furor injustus, etc.
And thus it is with Riches, if not used the wiselier, they will play such
feats as the Harper did; first in the beginning, when a man is gathering of
them together, they fill him with care and and restlessness, that nothing is
more miserable then a man carking after the world: Then in the second place,
Chrysostom. lib. 1. quod nemo laeditur, etc.
when he has tasted the sweetness of them, and is gotten through his travel,
when he comes to be Master, then he falls a dancing, shows the vanity of his
mind, speaks high, looks big, and his apparel is excessive, and usually in this
fit his Wife fetches a frisk or two with him: But when this merry fit is over,
the third passion is frenzy, killing and slaying all that come in his way, he
becomes a rapacious griping Usurer, grinds the face of the poor, breaks the
backs, and cuts the throat of many a Man, and is so strong and boisterous, that
no Man can tell how to get within him, and come off with safety.


OH, Jer. Dyke Worthy Commu. Exodus 8. 8.
says Pharaoh, take away these filthy frogs, this dreadful thunder. But what
says holy David? Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant; The one would be
freed from punishment, Psalm. 25. 11.
the effect of sin; the other from sin, the cause of punishment. And it is most
true, that a true Christian man is more troubled at sin, then at Frogs and
Thunder, he sees more filthiness in sin, then in Frogs and Toads, more horror
then in Thunder and Lightning.


SUch was the Love of the Saints of God in old time, Dan. Featly Clav* mist*
that their hearts were knit one unto the other: yea, which is more, All the
believers had but one heart. Cor unum, Viauna; no breach in their affections,
no difference in their judgments: Such Love is not to be read in our books,
Acts ^. 32.
not to be found in our Conversations, we are not descended of this peaceable
line, but rather from that of C^elius, whose Motto was, -- Rara est concordia
fratrum.
Dic aliquid ut duo simus, who could not be quiet unless he were engaged in one
quarrel or other; such as the Salamander, that live not but in the fire of
contention: All the true family of love may even seem to be extinguished, and
the household of faith quite broke up, for the greatest part of Men, as if they
had been baptized in the Waters of strife, are in continual frettings, vexings,
quarrels, schisms, and factions.


AS Joseph thought not himself fit to be presented to Pharaoh, B. Smith on* Job
9.
before he was shaved, and had thanged his Raiment. As Bartimeus threw away his
Cloak when he was going toward our Savior. Genesis 41.
And as Moses was bid to put off his shoes before he approached to the bush
where God appeared. Mark 10.
So it behooves every Christian, Exodus 3.
when he addresseth himself unto God by prayer, that he be prepared, that he
cast away every thing that (...)* and the sin that does so easily beset him
Heb. 12.


IT was a shame for Caesar to confess, B. Smith Sermon. ut anted.
Melior causa Cassii, sed denegare Bruto nihil possum; And Henry the Emperor
(the seventh of that name) is much taxed in story, Su^ton Impp. vitae.
for that being appealed unto by a couple of Lawyers, who contended about the
Sovereignty of the Empire, they first making the agreement betwixt themselves,
that he for whom the Emperor should give sentence, should win a horse of his
fellow Lawyer; Now the Emperor fairly pronounced truth to be on his side, that
spoke most for his power and Authority, whereupon this Proverb was taken up,
Iudicis officium est, ut res, ita tempora rerum, Deuteronomy. 1.
Alter respondet aequum, sed alter habet equum, The one has the right on his
side, but the other rides the horse; Thus it is, that partiality perverteth
right, and corrupts Judgment, whereas the Law is plain, you shall have no
respect of persons in Judgment, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
etc. And the Apostles charge unto Timothy is, that he do nothing (...), i. e.
by titing the balance on one side.

Weak ones, how to be catechized and instructed.
TAke a bottle, Ioh. Preston Sermon. at Linc. Inn, 1616.
or any other vessel, with a narrow mouth, liquor must be poured into it softly
and by degrees, or else more will be spilt on the ground, then filled into the
vessel; so it is with weaker Christians, such as have narrow-mouthed
capacities, shallow apprehensions, dull conceptions, the Word of God must be
teached unto them by degrees, now a line, and then a line, now a pr^c^pt, and
anon a precept, they are not to be surcharged. It was well considered of Jacob,
when he and his brother Esau were to travel together, That the children were
tender; and that not the flocks, but the Herds with young were with him also,
and that if they should be over-driven but one day, they would perish; he
desired his brother therefore that he would pass before him, Genesis 33.
and that he would come softly after, Qui animarum curam pro Domino suscipit ut
e^^antes doceat.
as the Cattle and the younglings were able to endure. Thus must every Minister
do, he must not set out before the weakest of the flock, but stay and take them
along with him, he must so drive on with them, that they may hold on with him;
so instruct them, that they may profit by him; so principle, so catechize, so
feed them with milk as tender Babes, that they may by degrees take in meat like
stronger men.

The Law, Gods Rhetoric in the delivery of it; Man's duty to attend it.
THe whole nineteenth Chapter of Exodus is but an Exordium to the next, B. Lake
on Exodus 19.
where in the Law was delivered; and therein is observable, how God plays the
skillful (...), and performs all things which the best Rules in Rhetoric
require in an Exor^^ium: The Rules require that an Orator should first, captare
been ^olentiam, work himself first into the good liking of his Auditors; And
why? because if they like not the Man, Aristot. Rhetor. lib. 3. cap. 1.
they will not much care for the matter; This God does at the fourth verse, he
sets forth his well-deservings of them in overthrowing their enemies, and in
setting them free; and what may better give them an earnest for their love,
then an experiment that he had given them of his love? The next Rule of
Rhetoric is, Red^^ere auditores* dociles, to bring them that already affect
the Man, to understand the matter; and how is that done? by showing how much
the matter concerns them, how beneficial it will be to them: For men gladly
hear of their own good, and the greater good, the more gladly do they hear of
it: Excellently does God play his part of the Orator, at the fifth and sixth
verses, significantly setting forth the benefit which they shall reap by their
obedience, showing them what rate he will set upon them, what an approach they
shall make unto him, how sacred, how blessed their estate shall be; and who
will not be curiously inquisitive after such a matter, and hear them gladly
that bring such tidings? The third point of Rhetoric is, Auditores attentos
reddere, to rouse his Auditory, to make them attentive, that no part of the
speech slip by, or pass unweighed: God omitteth not this part of Rhetoric
neither, he sets before the people the danger that might overtake them, the
respect that must be used by them: The case now is ours, the same Sermon that
was then preached to Israel is now ours, let us therefore be attentive,
A^cipite ergo animis atque haec mea ^igite dicta. Virgil. Aeneid. 10.
God has deserved better of us then ever he did of Israel, we enjoy the truth,
whereof they had but the type. Have we not reason then to affect him? yea, and
to affect that also which is delivered by him, for it contains our spiritual
good, our blessed Communion with God, and those spurs of attention must work no
less upon us, then upon them; For though we be not called to the Parliament, we
must be at the Assizes, which will be far more dreadful at the meeting, then
ever the Parliament was.

Not to make use of the present time, dangerous.
IT was day at Jerusalem in Christ's time, at Ephesus, in St. John's time, at
Corinth, Philippi, etc. in St. Paul's time, at Crete, in Titus time, at
Alexandria in St. Mark's time, at Smyrna, in Polycarps time, at Pergamus, in
Antipas time; at Antioch, in Evodius and Ignatius time, at Constantinople, in
St. Chrys^stom's time, at Hippo, in St. Augustines time, etc. It is now night
with most of them, and yet day with us, Jerusalem had a day, Dan. Featly Clavis
mystica. Nemo vestrum parvi ^stimet tempus, etc.
and every City, every Nation, every Church, every Congregation, every man has
a day of grace, if he have but grace to take notice of it, has an accepted
time if he do but accept of it, and he may find God if he seek him in time; but
if he let the Sun of righteousness go down, Bern. ad Scho-^ lares.
and work not out his salvation whilst it is called to day, he must look for
nothing but perpetual darkness, when time will be swallowed up into Eternity,
when there will be no time at all.


IF one should have a Vial or a glass of that precious blood which distilled
from Christ on the Cross, and were forced to remove it, and transport it from
place to place, How wise would this party be, that he did handle it warily,
least if the glass should break, all should perish? This were no great task for
an ignorant or silly fellow to undertake; Geo. Abbot Cant. Lect. on Jonah.
But the Minister, as St. Bernard has well observed, has the charge of those
souls in his Congregation, whom Christ loved more then his blood; for he was no
unwise Merchant, who gave that to redeem them, and therefore he who should have
to do with these, De Adventu. Domini, Ser. 3.
should be no Baby for knowledge and understanding.


THe hand of a dead man (as they say) stroaking the part, cures the Tympany;
And certainly the consideration of death is a present means to cure the
swelling of Pride in the most high-minded, it will level the aspiring thoughts
of the most ambitious. Jer. Leech Sermon. at St. Mary le Bow, Land. 1619.
In this life, many things make a distance between men and women, as the
greatness of birth, the freeness of education, the abundance of wealth,
alliance, honors, and preferments; But death makes all even, Respice
sepulchra, etc. says St. Augustine. Survey men's graves, and tell me then, who
is beautiful, and who deformed; Lib. de Nature and Gratia.
all there have hollow eyes, flat noses, and ghastly looks; tell me, who is
rich, and who is poor, all there wear the same weeds, their winding-sheets;
Tell me who is noble, who is rich, and who is base; the worms claim kindred of
all: Tell me who is well housed, and who ill, all there are bestowed in dark
and dankish rooms under ground; And if this will not satisfy, take a sieve,
and sift their dust, and tell me which is which; Omnia mors aequat.
It is granted that there is some difference in dust, there is powder of
Diamonds, Princely dust; gold- dust, the remains of Noblemen; Pin- dust, the
relics of the Tradesman; Saw- dust, the remains of the laboring man; common
dust, the remains of the vulgar which have no quality, or profession to
distinguish them, yet all is but dust, one and the same dust; The consideration
of this will allay the heat of all distempered spirits.


AS a Traveller with his staff in his journey, W. Perkins Ex posit. on Creed.
as long as it does further him, so long he will carry it with him: but when it
hinders him, then he casts it away; So must we do with the things of this
world, as long as they are helps to further, and fit us for the Kingdom of
Heaven, but if they be any hinderance to the regiment of Christ, we must
renounce them, and cast them away, be they never so precious unto us.


A Man's good name is like a piece of white paper, which if once blotted, will
very hardly be got out again, E. Calamy Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land.
so as to leave no print of it behind; It is like a Merchants estate, long a
getting, but lost in a moment, and when it is lost in the bottom of the Sea,
how shall it ever be recovered again? What care? how circumspect, then ought
men to be in what they say of their brother? not to steal and murder his good
name, Curam habe de bon^ nomine, etc. Eccl. 41.
which is as precious as life it self; And so to do, is a sin that God will
not pardon, unless the Party that is guilty make restitution, which is a work
not easy to be done, yet God will accept of endeavors, if faithful and
industrious.

An unregenerate Man, a careless Man.
THe Infant, while it lies in the dark prison of the Mothers womb, never
quatcheth nor weepe^h, Dan. Featley, ut antea
but as soon as ever it comes out of the womb into the light, it knits the
brows, and wrings the eyes, and cries and takes on: Even so the child of God,
whilst it is yet kept in the dark of ignorance, in his unregenerate estate,
never cries to his Father, nor weepeth for his sin; but as soon as the light
of Grace shines upon him, he bewaileth his grievous misery, and never thinks
that he has filled his cup with tears full enough.

Curiosity in the hearing of Gods word, condemned.
IF a man should come to a Table furnished with variety of Dishes, and he
should pass over the most wholesome nourishing meat, and fall a pidling and
picking here and there upon Kickshawes and puff-past, that had little or no
substance in them, should not we judge such a man to be sick and queazy
stomacked? So when God by the mouths of his Ministers presents us with
wholesome doctrine, with meat fit for men, and we should pass it over, and not
rest satisfied, but with new coined phrases, and quaint expressions, D. Some
Sermon. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1640.
would not this savor of great distemper? There were the Israelites, nothing
would down with them but Quails, no wholesome diet, they must have picking
meat, birds to feed upon, but they were paid for it, they had their bellies
full in the end. Quidam veni. unt ut audiant. etc* Sen. ep. 20 2 Timothy 4 3. 4.
Surely then a heavy judgment hangs over this Nation of ours in this very
thing, we must have quails too, new lights, n^w ways, new doctrines, God
affords wholesome meat, fit for our appetites, but we must have it fit for our
lusts; we do not receive the truth in the love of the truth, we come to Church
to please our humors, and tickle our ears, and it is just with God that we
should be delivered up to all loose opinions.

An humble heart, a contented heart.
THe Sheep can live upon the bare commons, Tho. Wood Sermon. 1629.
where the fat Ox would be starved; A dinner of green herbs relisheth well on
the poor man's palate, whereas a stalled Ox is but a coorse dish for the rich
man's stomach: Thus an humble heart is content with a mean condition, takes up
with hard commons which a proud spirit would murmur at, and scorn to be owned
by.

Jobs true Heraldry.
EZekiel in one of his Visions sets out unto us twenty five young men, so
besotted and ravished in beholding the Sun, Ezekiel. 8. 16. Chr. Fonseca. Sermon.
Quadrages.
that with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their faces toward
the East, they must needs worship the Sun, which by way of exposition
signifies, the adoring of the glory of their birth. Such are many among us,
which are much taken with the nobleness of their lineage, and out of a desire
they have to make good their descent and beginning: they multiply Coats, hang
up Escocheons, blazen forth their Arms, tell the large History of their
Pedigrees and Geneolagies, and many times most of them mere lies and fables;
but Job was a better Herald then any of these that thus gloried in the gold
that only glisters; he makes Corruption his Father, and the worms his Mother
and Sister, Chap. 17. v. 14.


AS in an Orchard there is variety of fruit, B. Lake on Psalm. 51.
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Plum-trees, etc. and every tree endeavors to suck
juice answerable to his kind, that it may bear such a fruit; and an Apple Tree
does not turn a Plum-tree, nor a Plum-tree a Cherry-tree, etc. but every Tree
contents its self to be of its own kind: So in the Church and Commonwealth
there are varieties of callings, Pastors, People, Magistrates, Subjects; some
higher, some lower: And here now every man is to walk as he is called of God, 1
Cor. 1. 20.
and learn what belongs thereunto, not to encroach or intermeddle with that
which belongs to others; for the saying of that Roman General, Limis oculis in
res alienas in. quirens. Horat.
to the Soldier that kept the Tents, when he should have been fighting in the
field, Non amo nimium diligentem, will be one day used of God, if he call us to
one profession, and we busy our selves about another; if he set us on foot,
and we will be on horseback; if he make us subjects, and we must needs be
superiors; God will not be pleased with such busybodies.


IT is an usual saying, He cannot likely want Money that is Master of the Mint;
and he can never be poor that has my Lord Mayor for his Uncle: Tho. Gataker
Sermon. of true gain.
Much less then can that man want ought, that is good, who is possessed of
God, who is Lord of lords, and King of kings, the very fountain of all good; In
regard whereof, David having prayed for many temporal blessings in the behalf
of his people, that their Sons might be tall and hardy, like goodly young
Cedaers, etc. Psalm 144. At last he winds up all with this Epiphonema or
conclusion, Blessed be the people that are in such a case, v. 15. but on the
neck of it, he comes as with an Epanorthoma, or a Correction of his former
speech, yea rather blessed are the people that have Jehovah for their God, that
have the Lord for their portion.


IT is noted that the Creatures which are nearest the Earth, take most care to
get store of provision, Geo. Abbot Cant. lect. on Jonah.
those which are more remote are less busied; but those who live next the
Heavens have their hearts least upon it; What hoardeth like the Emmet or
Pisemire, which is an earthly thing, and has its dwelling thereupon, Prove. 6.
8.? But the birds of the air which fly next to heaven, as Christ himself does
teach, do neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into barnes. Math. 6. 26. Then let
the meditations of every good Christian mount higher then their wings can
reach; Os jubet and me^^em tollere ad astra piam. Ovid.
that though they live with men, yet their love may be with God; Sursum corda,
was the language of the ancient Liturgies, and it is well backed by the
Apostle, Let your conversation be in Heaven, from whence ye expect a Savior
which is Christ the Lord, Phil. 3. 20.


A Man in his journey sees afar off some great mountain, B. Halls Ocoas* Medita.
so that his very eye is weary with the foresight of so great a distance, yet
his comfort is, that time and patience will overcome it, and that every step he
takes, sets him nearer to his journies end, and being once there, he shall both
forget how long it then seemed, and please himself in looking back upon the
way that he has measured: It is just thus in our passage to Heaven, Omne opus
leve fieri solet etc.
our weak nature is ready to faint under the very conceit and length of the
journey, our eyes do not more guide than discourage us; Many must be the steps
of grace and true obedience, that must insensibly bring us thither, only let
us move and hope, and Gods good grace will perfect our salvation: And when we
are once come to the top of that holy Mount, meminisse juvabit, all the weary
steps, and deep sloughs that we have past through, all the pangs that we have
felt, all the sorrows that we have undergone, all the difficulties that we
have met with in the way, shall either be forgotten, or contribute to our
happiness in the remembrance of them.

Extreme folly, not to be mindful of Death.
IF a Travailer coming into an Inn having but a penny in his purse, Will.
Perkins Expos. on Creed
should sit down, and call for all sorts of provision and dainties, till such
time as the reckoning were inflamed to such a height, as his slender stock
could no ways compass; what would be thought of such a man? Surely in the
judgment of all men, he would be esteemed a fool or a madman; and such are
most of us whilst we are in this world; How foolish and mad is the practice of
every man that lives in his sins, bathing himself in the pleasures of this
world, Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie. Mart. 1. 11.
never thinking how he shall meet God at the last day of judgment, and there
come to an account of all his doings? That which sounded always in S. Hieroms
ears, ought to ring in the ear of every good Christian, Surgite mo^tui, venite
ad judicium. In all thy doings remember thy end, and so thou shall never do
amiss.

A good name once lost, very hardly recovered again.
THere is a fable, how that Reputation, Love and Death, Maph. Vegius de
liberor. educat.
made a covenant to travail all the world over, but each was to take a several
way; when they were ready to depart, a mutual enquiry was made how they might
find each other again; Death said, they should be sure to hear of him in
Battles, Hospitals, and in all parts where either famine or diseases were rife;
Love bad them hearken after him amongst the children of poor people, whose
Parents had left them nothing; at Marriages, at Feasts, and amongst the
professed servants of virtue, the only places for him to be in: They long
expected a direction from Reputation, who stood silent; but being urged to
assign them places where they might find him, Famam bonam tueri facile est,
extinctam etc. Senec.
He sullenly answered, His nature was such, that if once he departed from any
Man, he never came to him more: And it is most true, that honor or credit, or
a good name, being once lost, seldom or never returns again; a cracked credit
will hardly be sodred anew, and Credit is said to be a good fore-game, but a
bad after one, very hardly and with much difficulty to be recovered.

The best Christian, is the best Artist.
MAny there are that are accounted deep Scholars, great Linguists, Will.
Artersol. Com. on Numb.
profound Philosophers, good Grammarians, excellent Mathematitians, sharp
Logicians, cunning Politicians, fine Rhetoritians, sweet Musicians, etc. these
for the most part spend all their time to delight themselves and please others,
catch usually at the shadow and lose the substance; they study the circumstance
of these Arts, but omit the pith and marrow of them; whereas he is the best
Grammarian that has learnt to speak the truth from his heart; the best
Astronomer, that has his conversation in heaven; the best Musician that has
learnt to sing the praises of his God; the best Arithemetitian, Psalm. 15. 2.
that numbreth his days: He that amendeth his life and grows every day
better and better, Phil. 3.
is cunning in the Ethics; He that traineth up his Family in the fear of God,
Heb. 2. 12.
is best seen in the Oeconomicks: who so is wise to salvation, Psalm. 90. 12.
prudent in giving and taking good counsel is the best Politician, and he is a
good Linguist that speaks the Language of Canaan,: Thus the best Christian is
the best Artist.


IT was a good speech of Alphonsus, King of Arragon, That if he had lived in
those times, Panormitan. in vita.
when the Roman Commonwealth was almost consumed with mutual and civil jars,
he would have built a Temple, Iovi positorio, wherein men should have deposited
and layen down all heart-burnings, Anth. Burges Sermon. at Court Mar^^. Land.
1646.
all quarrels, before they entered the Senate: How necessary were such a place
for the Magistrates, Ministers, and People of these times? For Magistrates
before they come into any places of public judicature, where they may meet
and lay down all private thoughts, all prejudicate opinions, that so Justice
and Judgment; may be duly and conscionably administered, For Ministers; before
they preach in public, where they may teach themselves the lessons of
self-denial, and self-seeking, that so the Kingdom of Jesus Christ may be
advanced: For People; before they touch the Mount, before they come to hear the
word preached, or to partake of the blessed Sacrament, where they may lay aside
all carnal and worldly thoughts, all prejudices of the Ministers and
Ordinances, that so the word of God, and the professors thereof be not evil
spoken of: That Magistrates, Ministers, and People, may be so peaceably minded,
that the God of peace may delight to dwell amongst them.


IT was a true Norman distinction, that William the first made, when he
censured one that was both Bishop of Bayens and Earl of Kent; Rob Harris Drunk*
Cup.
And his Apology to the Plaintiff Pope-ling was this, That he did not meddle
with the Bishop, but with the Earl: Thus in the matter of hatred and envy, We
must hate our enemies, as David did his; How is that? Odio perfecto, with a
perfect hatred; love their persons, but hate their vices; meddle not with them
as they are friends or acquaiutance, but abhominate their uncleanness etc.


SAlis onus unde venerat illuc abiit, says the Latin Proverb, The burden of
Salt is returned thither from whence it came. Des. Erasm. Adagia.
The occasion was this; A Ship laden with Salt being torn by wrack, let the
Salt fall into the Sea from whence it was first taken: So for the most part,
Goods gotten by spoil, or plunder, are usually lost in the same way;
Vespasian's Officers, that by rapine and exaction, filled themselves like
spunges, Sueton. in vita.
after they were full, were squeezed by the Emqerour: And it is daily seen,
that the spoiler is himself spoiled, and that which was gathered by the hire
of a Whore, returns to the wages of an Harlot, Mich. 1. 7.


THe Heathen said, That there were three things impossible to be done, Eripere
Iovi fulmen; Ioh. Weemse Exercitat.
Herculi clavam; and Homero versum; to pull Jupiters Thunderbolt out of his
hand, Hercules Club out his hand, and a Verse from Homer; for they thought
there was such a connection between Homers Verses, that not one Verse could be
taken away, without a great breach in the whole Work: But this may much more be
said of the Scriptures of God, there is such a coherence, such a connection,
such a dependence, that if you take away but one Verse, the whole will be
marred; all the Books of Scripture being like a chain linked together, except
the Book of Solomon's Proverbs, which is like a bag full of gold Rings, every
verse being one entire and distinct sentence.

God the only delight of his children.
LEt Jacob but hear that Joseph his son is yet alive, he has enough. If the
King come home with freedom, Genesis 45.
honor and safety, Ziba may keep the Land, let him take all, 2 Samuel 19. 30.
Barlow Sermon. at St. Paul's. 1616.
Mephi^oshtch is satisfied. Could but the son of Hamor match with Dina, his
Circumcision shall be endured, and though the daughters of the Country be
denied him, yet shall he be well contented. Genesis 34.
Give but Rahell children, and she will not dye; Luke 1. 29.
And let Simeon see his Savior, and he will dye. Thus let God's children enjoy
but him, the subject of their affections, tide life, tide death, come what can
come, whatsoever befalls them they are contented, he is the only object of
their love, and he it is in whom their soul principally delights, wherefore
in the enjoyment of him, they have all they would have.

A faint-hearted Christian described.
SOme freshwater Soldier standing upon the shore in a fair day, Sam. Hieron.
Sermon. of Fishing.
and beholding the Ships top and top-gallant in all their bravery, riding
safety at Anchor, thinks it a brave thing to go to Sea, and will by all means
aboard; but being out a league or two from the Harbor, and feeling by the
rocking of the Ship his stomach begin to work, and grow sick, and his soul even
to abhor all manner of meat; or otherwise a storm to arise, the wind and the
Sea, as it were, conspiring the sinking of the Vessel, forthwith repents his
folly, and makes vows, that if he but once be set ashore again, he will bid an
eternal farewell to all such Voyages. And thus there be many faint-hearted
Christians to be found amongst us, who in calm days of Peace, when Religion is
not over-clouded by the times, will needs join themselves to the number of the
people of God, they will be as earnest and as forward as the best, and who but
they? yet let but a Tempest begin to appear, and the Sea to grow rougher than
at the first entry, the times alter, troubles raised, many cross minds of
opposition and gainsaying begin to blow, -- Sed contr^ audentior ito.
they are weary of their course, and will to shore again, resolving never to
thrust themselves into any more adventures, they would have Christum, but not
Christum crucifixum, Christ they would have by all means, but Christ crucified
by no means; if the way to Heaven be by the gates of Hell, let who will, they
will not go that way, but rather sit down and be quiet.

Diligence in our callings, commendable.
PLiny relates of one Cressinus, who from a very little piece of ground
gathering much wealth, Lib. 18. cap. 6.
and much more then his neighbors could from a greater quantity of land, was
thereupon accused of Witchcraft: But to defend himself, he brought into the
Court his servants, and their instruments of labor, and said, Veneficia mea,
Dr. Worral Sermon. at St. Paul's, Land. 1624.
Quirites, haec sunt; My witch-crafts (O ye Romans) are these, these servants,
and these working tools are all the witchcraft that I know of; I say not to my
servants, go and do this or that, but come let us go do it, and so the work
goes on: Well, it is the deligent hand that makes rich, Prove. 23.
It is diligence and industry that makes any man excellent, and glorious, and
chief in any condition, calling, or profession; See thou a man diligent in
his way, he shall stand before Princes.

Different measures of Grace in different persons.
AS Abimelech's Soldiers, some cut down greater branches, some lesser,
according to the proportion of their strength. Judge. 9.
And as St. Paul's Mariners, some were saved on boards, Act. 27.
some on broken pieces of the Ship. Even so amongst Christians, some in their
approaches unto God carry a greater, some a lesser confidence; and some arive
at the Port of Heaven with one measure of trust, some with another; For as the
members of the body, Nath. Shute Fun. Ser. 1626.
are knit unto the head, but some nearer, some further off: So in Christ's
body, all draw grace from him, yet in difference of grace, in difference of
hope, yet all have anchor-hold enough to stay by, for their better support.


THe use of drinking is now so taken up in England, that the Germans ('it is
probable) are like to lose their Charter; Joh. White Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1616.
There was a street in Rome, called, Vicus sobrius, the sober street, because
there was never an Alehouse in it, which is hard to be said of any street in
England; Stultorum imo ebriorum plens sunt omnia.
The Emperor Aurelian, was ill troubled to find out one Bonosus to quaffe with
the German Ambassador, Aventin. Annal.
who yet was derided for his labor, and commonly called, Non homo sed dolium,
not a man, but a Tub of swill; yet our time affords store of these, like the
German, mentioned by Pontanus, who hearing a solemn Tilting at the Court,
applauded by the loud echoes of the people, cried out, O valiant ludi quibus
nemo bibit, farewell the game where there is no drinking; but let all men
remember this before they pour in their mornings draught; Esaias 5. 22.
Woe be to them that are strong to drink, and to such as give their companions
drink that they may see their nakedness. Hab. 2. 15.



THe case of Monica, the Mother of St. Augustine, is famous; she grieved that
her son was spotted with the heresy of the Manichees, Augustine. de moribus
Catholic^ Eccles. lib. 1. 18.
and she prayed that the Lord would bring him to the knowledge of his truth,
she prayed and prayed still, yet he, as himself confesses, continued for nine
years together so infected: It fell out afterward, that he would needs go and
travel out of Africa into Italy; his Mother being loath to part with him,
being the staff of her age, earnestly prayed that God would hinder him of that
purpose, yet Augustine went, and coming to have his ears tickled, had his heart
touched; and got Religion in to boot, with the eloquence of St. Ambrose at
Millane; whereupon, not long after, he broke out into this Confession, Confess.
lib. 5. 8.
Bone Deus, etc. Thou O good God, deep in Counsel, and hearing the substance of
my Mothers desires, did not regard what she then asked, that in me thou
might do that which she ever asked: Thus the Almighty God deals with other
of his servants, Dr. Tho. Westfield Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1619
working all things to the best, but it is at such times as he himself thinks
best; for our friends and children, the Lord knows better what is good then
we our selves can desire, yet we must pray and beg with this condition, Thy
will be done; That which we think is most dangerous, turns oft-times to our
good, and thence whence we expect our undoing, God raises our greatest
comfort; and when it is our greatest extremity, then it is his best
opportunity; If it be in him to bless and protect us, it is in him to do it
when it seems good to himself.


LUcullus a Noble Roman, being told by one, that he would build an house for
him, Plutarch. in Lucull^.
in such a manner, that none should see what he did, and yet he should have a
good prospect out of it, and see all men; the answer which Lucullus made was
this, That he had rather he could make him such a house, wherein all might see
what he did, and so know what he was: and most certain it is, that Truth,
though naked, seeks no corners wherein to hide it self, Jer. Leech Sermon. at
Paul's, Land. 1626.
and they only dwell in such houses mentioned by (...), all whose actions
being done in truth and sincerity of heart, are as it were, so many windows,
which openly show, and make known to all the world what they are indeed.

To beware of the lusts of the flesh.
WHen the Oyster opens himself to the Sun (being tickled with the warmth
thereof) then his enemy the Crab-fish steals behind him, Ambrosii Hist. ^. 8.
and thrusts in his claws and will not suffer him to shut again, B. Smith
Sermon. on Heb. 1.
and so devoureth him; The like is written of the Crocodile, Ulyss, Ald ovandi
Ornith^logia.
that being so strong a Serpent, as he is, and impregnable, yet when he is
gaping to have his teeth picked by the little bird, called, ^rochil, his enemy
the Ichneumon creeps into his body, and cease not to gnaw upon his
entrails, till he has destroyed him. Think upon the Urchin and the Snail*
whilst the Urchin keeps himself close in the bottom of an hedge, he is either
not espied or contemned; but when he creeps forth to suck the Cow, he is dogged
and chopped in. So the Snail, when he lies close, with his house on his head,
is esteemed for a dead thing, and not looked after, but when in liquorishness
to feed upon the dew that lies upon the grass, Vis adversus hoc corpus liber
esse, etc.
or upon the sweetness of the Rose-bush, he will be pearking abroad, then the
Gardener finds and pasheth him: The lesson is, we must not yield to the sweet
bai^s of the flesh, Boethius.
but we must rather mortify our members upon the earth, and ever beware that
we seek not our death in the error of our life; otherwise if we wilfully offer
our selves to be led as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a sheep to the Shambles,
What marvel if we have our throats cut, or be led away captive by Satan at his
will?

Ministers to cry down the sins of the time.
IT is observable, that our Savior never inveighed against Idolatry, usury,
Sabbath-breaking amongst the Jews; T. Fuller Ser. at St. Clem. Land. 1649.
not that these were not sins, but they were not practiced so much in that age,
wherein wickedness was spun with a finer thread: and therefore Christ
principally bent the drift of his preaching against spiritual pride,
hypocrisy, and traditions, then predominant amongst the people. Thus it ought
to be with the Ministers of the Gospel, in this thing they are to trace their
Masters steps, they are chie^ly to reprove the raging sins of the time, and
place they live in, yet with this caution, that in public reproving of sin,
they ever whip the vice, and let the person go free.

No Appeal from God's tribunal.
AMongst the Judges of the earth, upon motion made by Council, a man may have
Order for a hearing, Christ. Fonseca Sermon. Quadrag.
and re-hearing of his Cause, hearing upon hearing, a first and a second
hearing. But with God it is not so, there is no such Rule in the Court of
Heaven, The Motto that is written over that Tribunal is, Ampli^s non ero, I
shall be no more; For we may not dye twice, to amend in our second death, the
errors of our first life; There is no reversing of Judgment, no Appeal from
this Judge to that, or from one Court to another: How does it then concern us
to condemn our selves, before God condemn us, and that we kill sin in our
selves, before God kill us in our sins.

Corrections, Instructions.
I Had never known (said Martin Luther's wife) what such and such things meant,
F^neral Sermon. Nocument^* documenta.
in such and such Psalms, such complaints and workings of spirit, I had never
understood the practice of Christian duties, had not God brought me under some
affliction: And it is very true, that God's rod is as the fescue is to the
child, pointing out the letter, that he may the better take notice of it; and
to point out to us many good lessons, which we should never otherwise have
learned.


ABraham when he went with his servants to sacrifice Isaac, Jerem. Dyke Worthy
Communic^nt.
said unto them, Abide you here with the Ass, and I and the lad will go yonder
and worship, and come again to you. Thus too too many do with their sins, when
they come to the Sacrament, they do in effect say to their sins and lusts, Genesis
22. 5.
Stand you a while aside, I must go to the Sacrament, and receive the
Communion; do but stand by a while, and when the Sacrament is over, or at
farthest, as soon as the Sacrament-day is over, I will come again to you; thus
the duty once over, and the Sacrament a little forgotten, they and their sins
are hail fellow well met, upon all occasions.


A Carpenter when he is working, does see by his eye, when he applies the
square to the wood, Joh. Weemse Exercitat.
whether it be straight or not; but yet his eye (without the which he cannot
see) is not the Judge to try whether the tree be straight or not, but only the
square is the Judge: So Reason in man (without the which he could not judge) is
not the square to try what is right or wrong in ordine ad Deum, in order to
salvation, but Religion, the word of God it self, is the only Rule and square;
For instance, Reason cannot consider how faith justifies a man, or whether
works be an effect of faith or not, but Reason can conclude, ex concessis, of
things granted; If faith be the cause, and works the effect, then they must
necessarily go together, and Reason can go no higher.


A Bsolon sends once or twice to Ioab to come and speak with him, but when he
saw that Ioab would not come, 2 Samuel 14. 30. Will Barlow Sermon. at St. Paul's,
1619.
he commands his Corn-field to be set on fire, and so he fetched him with a
witness. So the children of God, when they stand off upon terms, and will not
see his face, the fire of affliction will make them seek him early and
diligently; It is the custom of our Gallants, when their horses be slow and
dull, to spur them up; If Iron grow rusty, we put it into the fire to purify
it: And so does God in our backwardness to duties, he pricks us on; or being in
our filthiness, purifies us by casting us into the hot coals of tribulation.


A Woman in travel, being delivered, if she should desire but to see the feet
only of the Babe, Joh. Mabb Afflict. man's vow.
and not the head, face and body, would she not be accounted a strange,
foolish, and wicked woman? So man being in travel and sorrow under sin, but
salvation having appeared by the Coming of Christ into the World, Is it
sufficient for him to look only upon the death of Christ, it being the last
extreme, or foot as it were of his sufferings and passion? No, it is not; he
will behold the dignity of his Nature, he being God; the pre-eminence of his
government, he being the head of his Church; the beauty of his goodness, he
having love and mercy shining in his face; the painfulness of his labor, he
sustaining and bearing all in his body.


THere are none but Beggars that desire the Church Porch to lodge in, T. Fuller
Holy State.
which others use only as a passage into the Church: So Virginity is none of
those things to be desired in and for it self, but because it leads a more
convenient way to the worship of God, especially in time of persecution and
trouble: For then if Christians be forced to run races for their lives, the
unmarryed have the advantage, lighter by many ounces, and freed from much
encumbrance which the married are subject to; who though private persons, yet
herein are like Princes, they must have their Train follow them.

The certain prevalency of Prayer.
IT is reported of a Nobleman in this Kingdom, Rob. E. of Essex.
that had a Ring given him by the Queen, with this promise, That if he sent
that Ring to her at any time when he was in danger, Joh. Preston Gods all
sufficiency.
she would remember him and relieve him. This was a great privilege from a
Prince, yet it is known to many, what that was subject unto; he might be in
such distress as the Queen could not be able to help him, or though she were
able (as she was in that case) yet the Ring might be sent and not delivered:
Now then consider what the Lord does to us; He ^ath given us this privilege,
he has given us Prayer, as it were this Ring, he has given us that to use,
and tells us whatsoever our case is, whatsoever we are, whatsoever we stand in
need of, whatsoever distress we are in, Precis justae exauditor Deus. Anselm.
do but send this up to me (says he) do but deliver up this message to me of
Prayer, and I will be sure to relieve thee: And most certain it is, whatsoever
case we are in, when we send up our prayers to God, they are sure to be
conveyed, for we send them to one that is able and ready to help us, which a
Prince many times is not willing, or not able to perform.

Infirmities to be in the best of God's children, and why so.
THe Merchants of London petitioned Qu. Elizabeth, that they might but have
liberty to level the Town of Dunkerk (a place at that time very obnoxious to
the safety of the Merchants trade) and they would do it at their own charges;
T. Fuller Ser. at St. Clem. Land. 1649.
The Queen by the advice of her Council, returns them an answer in the
Negative, She could not do it. What not suffer them to beat hers, and their
enemies? not to fire such a nest of Hornets? not to demolish such a Pyraticall
Town as that was? No, it must not be, And why? She knew well that it would not
do amiss, that they should be always sensible of so near and so offensive an
Enemy, and so be always preparing and prepared to defend themselves and the
State of the whole Kingdom, which took a right effect; for hereupon all turn
men of War, hardly a Boat but is manned out for service, which otherwise might
have either rotted in the Harbor, or ridden security at Anchor: Thus God, when
his dear children cry out unto him to be delivered from the body of sin, Romans
7. 24.
that sin may not reign in their mortal bodies, he so far grants their
requests, that by the special dispensations of his holy spirit, sin shall not
prevail over them; not but that sins of infirmity shall still cleave to the
best of his children here in this world; Romans 1. 26.
Why? because they shall be still upon the guard, in a posture of defense,
resisting the Devil, quitting themselves like men, who otherwise might live in
all security.

Man to be peacable, and why so.
MAn by nature seems to be (...), apeaceable Creature, fitter to handle the
Plow-share, Joh. Pigot Abners plea, a Sermon. at St. Mary Woln. Lomb. str. Land.
1643.
than the sword; fitter to deal with the pruning hook, than the Spear; All
other Creatures are naturally armed with some kind of weapon, wherewith (being
offended) they are able to right and revenge themselves; The Lion has his
paws, the Bull his horns, The Boar his Tusks, The Dog his Fangs, The Cock his
Spurs, The little Be his Sting, habet and Musca splenem; There is no Creature
so small, so contemptible, which has not some weapon to fight withal, only
Man, he has none of these, he comes naked, unarmed into the world, whereby
(says the Poet) even nature it self teaches us this lesson; Candida pax
homines, trux d^eet ira f^ras.
that it is for brute beasts that have no understanding, to bite, and tear, and
gore one another; As for men, they should be meek, gentle, helping, defending,
comforting one another; God has given them reason and speech, that they might
delight to live, and converse together in Cities and Families, not to hunt, and
to worry, and to kill one another.


HE that will dye a Purple in grain, B. Smith Sermon. on Psalm. 51.
does give his cloth inferior colors first, and after many dippings in many
preparative liquors, he does at length perfect the color, and gives it its
full luster: Even so the splendour of Sanctity is not attained in the first
moment of our Conversion, many a line must be drawn in our souls by the spirit
of God, before we can fully recover his Image: Not that there is any inability
in God, so that he cannot in a moment as in the Creation make us both innocent
and holy, but he is pleased by the difficulty on our part, to make us mindful
of our former unthriftiness, and careful to husband Grace better, when he is
pleased to give it.


CAnutus, Rerum Anglicar. Script.
a King of this Land, contended that the name of King, was only due to the
King crucified, Jesus Christ; so surely the name of Wisdom is due, and to be
ascribed to God only, as being only wise; It is St. Paul's acknowledgement, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Nay, the very Heathens, as arrogant as they were, have acknowledged
no less; In vita Thaletis.
Laertius writes, that certain young men of Ionia, standing upon the Seashore,
and beholding Fishermen making of a draught, agreed with them a^great for
their draught, that what they should hale up to land in their net should be
their own; Suidas.
Now it was so by the providence of God, that together with certain fish, they
enclosed a certain piece of Plate (which no Man knew when it was sunk there)
and dragged the same to land in their net. The same being claimed and seized on
by the young men, by virtue of their bargain, they cast between them how to
dispose of it: But when they could not agree about the sharing of it, they sent
to the Oracle for Resolution, they were returned answer, to send it to the
Wisest; They send it therefore to Thales their Countryman, a man of great note
in those days for wisdom; but when it was brought to him, he disabled himself,
and disdained the name of, Wise, and sent it to such a one, as being more wise
then he was; The second also, he would none of it, but sent it to a third, and
the third to a fourth, etc. And so they posted it from one to another, B. Smith
Sermon. on Jer. 9.
till seven had it; The seventh and last, Solon by name, he made no more ado,
but sent it to the Temple at Delphi, for a present to God, acknowledging him to
be, only Wise; A mavelous confession for Heathens to make, touching the
alone wisdom of God.


AS it is the eye of the Master which feeds the horse, Geo. Abbot Cant. on Jonah
so it is that also which keeps good order; If Mephibosheth cannot stir,
because he is lame in his feet, and David have other business then to examine
things to the full, Ziba will play his part, he will abuse his Prince, he will
defraud his Master: It is a remembrance to Magistrates, and men in place, that
they look on such as attend them, and suffer not their approaches to be ill
spoken of, for the behavior of those that are about them; The blind swalloweth
many a Fly, and he that knows his charge but by Relation, does swallow many a
gogeon.


A Merchant that keeps a book of Debtor and Creditor, Nath. Shute A Funer.
Sermon. 1626.
writes both what is owing him, and what he owes himself, and then casts up
the whole; But ^od does not so, his Mercy is triumphant over his Justice, and
therefore he wipes out what we owe him, and writes down that only which he
owes us, by promise; much like the Clouds that receive ill vapors from us, yet
return them to us again in sweet refreshing showers; The very consideration of
this, may be as a full gale of wind in our ^ails, to put us on to load Gods
chronicle with thankfulness, writing upon our selves, Exodus 28. 36.
by a real Profession of his service, as Aaron did, Holiness to the Lord.
Surely our Judgment is with the Lord, and our work with our God, Acts 10. 3.

Remedy for a hard heart to cure it.
THere is a story of an Earl, called Elz^arus, that was much given to
immoderate anger; Laurent. Surius in vita.
and the means he used to cure this disordered affection, was by studying of
Christ, and of his patience in suffering the injuries, and affronts that were
offered unto him; Ed. Calamy A Fast. Ser. at Westminster.
And he never suffered this meditation to pass from him, before he found his
heart transformed to the similitude of Christ Jesus. Now we are all of us sick
of a hard and stony heart, and if we ever desire to be healed of this
souldamning disease, let us have recourse to the Lord Jesus Christ, and never
leave meditating of his breakings, and woundings for us, till we find virtue
coming out of him, that the great heart-maker may become a great heart-breaker
unto us.

Grace sometimes seemingly lost to a child of God.
MEn seek for keys sometimes, Tho. Gataker Joy of the Just.
when they are in their pocket; And they think they have lost some Jewel, when
it is safe locked in their desk; yea, or as the Butcher looks about or for
the Candle, that sticks in his hat, and he carries it about with him on his
head, and seeks it by the light of that which he seeks, as if he had it not
about him, not remembering suddenly where he stuck it: So the godly are often in
their own conceit at a loss, when yet that, they deem lost, is sure and safe;
they miss many time God's grace in them, and seek for this grace by the light
of the same grace; which yet they see not in themselves, thinking that they are
out of God's way, when indeed they are in it, and out of favor with God, when
they are in as much favor with him as any.

The Scripture not to be jested withal.
IF in the troublesome days of King Edward the fourth, Ioh. Speed Chron.
a Citizen in Cheapside was executed as a Traitor, T. Fuller Holy State.
for saying, he would make his son Heir to the Crown, although he meant only
his own house, Non est bonum ludere cum sanctis.
having a Crown for the sign: How much more dangerous is it to jest with the
two edged sword of Gods word, to wit-wanton it with the Majesty of God?
Wherefore if without thine intention, and against thy will, by chance-medley
thou hittest Scripture in ordinary discourse, yet fly to the City of Refuge,
and pray to God to forgive thee.

The New Testament an exposition of the Old.
AS Numerius said, Theodoret: de curat. Grae. affect lib. 2.
that Plato was nothing else but Moses translated out of Hebrew into Greek; And
Ascham, that Virgil is nothing but Homer turned out of Greek into Latin;
Tullius ad Brutum.
And as Divines have censured Cyprian to be nothing else but Tertullian,
Evangelium, revelata lex; Lex, occultum Evangelium.
in a more familiar and elegant style: So the New Testament is nothing else but
an exposition of the Old; That difference which Zeno put betwixt Logic and
Rhetoric, Divines usually make between the Law and the Gospel; The Law like
the fist shut, Augustine. quaest super Levit.
The Gospel like the hand open; the Gospel a revealed Law, the Law a hidden
Gospel.

Interest in Christ, best of all.
IT is the fashion of many men, at Christ-mass, especially to boast of their
rich attire, Joh. Boys Ser.
great attendance, good fire, large cheer: yet (seeing Christ is heir of all
things in the world) they cannot, in their own right, they cannot so much as
enjoy a Christ-mass log, or a Christ-mass pie, till they be first ingrafted in
him: Here, upon the Earth, a man may have Evidences to show that his Land is
his own, his house, his horse, all is his own; and that he is a very thief that
takes any of these from him. But all the Men in the world cannot give the least
claim, title, or interest to Heaven, cannot endow him with these temporal
things before the living God, but his son Christ only, who is heir of all; And
therefore that our Land may be our own, our meat; our men, our money our own,
let us be Christ's, that in him we may have the good assurance of them all; so
that in the end of all, that may be pronounced to us, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
which the Apostle did to the Corinthians, All are yours, ye Christ's, and
Christ God's.


IT is observable, Ludov. Fenestella de Magistr. Romans
that the Roman Magistrates, when they gave sentence upon any one to be
scourged; a bundle of Rods tied hard with many knots, was laid before them; The
reason was this, That whilst the Beadle, or Flagellifer was untying the knots,
which he was to do by order, and not in any other hasty or sudden way, the
Magistrate might see the deportment and carriage of the delinquent, whether he
were sorry for his fault, and showed any hope of amendment, that then he might
recall his sentence, T. Fuller Ser. at St. Dunst. East, Land. 1647.
or mitigate the punishment, otherwise to be corrected so much the more
severely: Thus God in the punishing of sinners, how patient is he? how loath to
strike? how slow to anger, if there were but any hopes of recovery? how many
knots does he untye? how many rubs does he make in his way to Justice? he does
not try us by Marshal law, but pleads the case with us, Why will ye dye, O ye
house of Israel? Ez^k. 33. 11.
and all this to see whether the poor sinner will throw himself down at his
feet, whether he will come in and make his composition, and be saved.


THere is a workhouse in the inward Closet of our hearts, where we must
fructify, and lay the Foundation of those things which we do in the outward
man, all our outward deeds should be but deeds of deeds; yet we must not
content our selves only with the inward, Jac. Marehancii Hortus Pa^^orum.
we must bring forth the outward also; He that has an inside for God, and an
outside for the devil, may with his pardon be cast into bell for ever. We must
therefore show some outward evidence of the efficacy of Grace: Gregory N^ssen
sets it forth excellently; Come on you (says he) which glory in your Baptism,
In lib. de communibus noti^onibus.
How shall it appear that the mystical grace has altered you? In your
countenance there appears no change, nor in your outward lineaments; how then
shall your friends perceive you are not the same? I suppose no otherwise but by
your outward manners and deportment; they must show that you are not what you
were, when you are tempted with the same sins, whereunto you before were
subject, and yet forbear them. It is reported of one of the worthiest of the
Ancients, who before his conversion had kept company with a Strumpet, when
after his conversion she came toward him, he fled; St. Aug.
she calls after him, Quo fugis? Ego sum. Whither flyest thou? It is I. His
answer was, At ego, non sum ego, But I, am not I. This should be the true frame
of every Repentant spirit, to show by outward demonstration, the lively fruits
of inward conversion.


IT is related of Thomas Aquinas, Gaze^s Com. in Cassian.
that being a young man, he was so careful over his words, and watchful over
his tongue, that he was called by his fellow Scholars, Bos mutus, a dumb Ox;
But Albertus Magnus perceiving by his disputations, the greatness of his wit,
and thereupon judging to what his silence tended, gave this sentence of him,
Bos isle talem aliquando edet mugitum, ut sonum ejus totus Orbis exaudiat. This
Ox will at length make such a lowing, that all the world shall hear the sound
of it, Mich. Jermin Com. on Prove.
which afterward proved true in his writings: Thus where the Tongue is kept at
a bay, and shut up within the compass of a careful government, the soul is kept
from many troubles, and the mind freed from many distractions, which do usually
attend upon intemperate talkings.

Ministers to stand up for the Truth.
THeodoret in his Ecclesiastical story reports, that when Valens the Emperor,
with his Arrian opinions had bepestered much of the world, Lib. 4. cap. 24.
and by that means the flock of Christ stood in great danger, Aphrates a Monk,
a holy man of that time, contrary to his Order, and holy profession, came forth
out of his Monastery, to help to keep up the Truth; And being asked by the
Emperor, who was offended at him, what he did out of his Cell? I would (says
he) have kept it, and did keep it so long as Christ's sheep were in quiet; but
now that Tempests do come on, and storms bring them in danger, every stone is
to be turned, all means are to be sought for their safety; He goes on, If I
were daughter to any man whatsoever, and according to my Sex, as decency should
require, were kept up in a Closet, or in some secret Chamber, or in some inner
part of the house; yet if my fathers dwelling house were on fire, should I not
be very careless, if I should not come forth to help to quench the fire, or
give directions for it? So if now I should not help to teach true faith by
Christ, by coming out of my Monastery, Geo. Abbot Cant. Lect. on Jonah.
I should do much amiss: Thus Ministers, if Ignorance or Idolatry, if Heretical
doctrines, damnable and pernicious Errors, did not like the the wild Boar of
the Forest, go about to root up the Vine of our Church, or the little Foxes of
Schism and Separation pluck off her grapes, they might then cloister up their
Tongues, and lay aside their pens; but if all these and many more do fret and
daily consume like a Canker, it is high time to look about them, to stand up
for the Truth, to cry down the Diana of all such mad Ephesians, and in so
doing, they shall discharge their Consciences, and disburthen their souls, and
God himself will reward it.

Sin overthrows all.
AUlus Gellius, does tell of a goodly horse which belonged to one Seius, and
thereof had his name to be called Equus Seianus: Noct. Atticae lib. 3.
This horse was never possessed by any, Abbot. Cant. us anted.
but both himself and his family did come to naught: So Seius, his first
Master, sped, and then Dolobella, who bought the horse at a great rate,
purchased his own destruction into the bargain; Then Cassius was his owner, and
after him Antonius, and the end of both these was Ruin: So it is with Sin and
Wickedness, they fret the goods of the owner, like Eagles feathers, they
consume all, little or nothing prospers that they have a hand in* though sin
therefore be as pleasant to the flesh, and to thy fancy, as the horse of
Seianus was comely to the eye, yet better it is to leave it, then to have it,
he is the best man, and the blessed man, that is furthest from it.

Busybodies condemned.
ALdus Manutius, a public spirited man, one that was bent to enlarge the
bounds of learning, B. King Lect. on Jonah.
was so haunted with busie-body guests, (whose business at the best, for the
most part, was negotii inopia, want of employment, so that if the least wind of
seeming trouble did but wring them, their saying was, Eamus ad Aldum, Come let
us go to Aldus) that he was fain at length to prevent them, by setting an
unmannerly Watchman at the door, one that could not blush, but being as
impudent as they were impertinent, thus bespake them; Quisquis es rogat te
Aldus, etc. Whosoever thou art, Aldus does beseech thee, if thou have any
business with him, briefly to dispatch it, and presently to be gone, etc. For
neither thou, nor any other that come hither to him, could want work of your
own at home, if you did but mind it: And it is very true, that the men and
women of these times are very idle-headed, meddling with other men's matters,
Aliena cur ant and nihil quae ad ill^s ^^tinent. Terent.
neglecting their own; Physicians to other men, rather then themselves;
meddlers in any Calling, rather then that which God has enjoined them: they
will deal with the Scepters of Princes, and tell them how to rule, put on
Aarons Robes, and teach them how to preach, just like the Emperor's Steward,
cujus erat pulmenta Caesari praeparare, non Evangelium exponere, fit for a
Market-man, and to prepare broth for the emperors breakfast, yet he would be
perverting the Scripture to maintain the Arrian heresy.


ERasmus wittily lashing at Romes follies, Colloquium in Naufragio.
describes unto us this custom of their Mariners in a fear of Shipwreck: An
Englishman (says he) being there, promises no less then golden Mountains to
the Lady of Walsingham, if he came safe to Land; Another voweth to go on
Pilgrimage to St. James of Compostella, barefoot and bare-headed in a shirt of
Male next his skin, and begging all the way; A third promises unto St.
Christopher, whose vast Statu^^ (Mons verius quam Statua) a Mountain rather
then a Statua is to be seen in the great Church of Paris, that he will give him
a Wax candle as big as himself, whom one of his fellows presently checked,
saying, Though thou should ^ell all that thou have, thou coudst not perform
thy word: But he replied softly, (lest St. Christopher should hear him) Hold
thy peace fool, And. Willet Hexapla. in Levit.
do thou think that I ever meant to do it, If ever I recover shore, he gets
not so much as a Tallow candle of me: And thus many men deal with God in times
of sickness, or of any trouble, promising Mountains, but performing Mole-hills;
some to refrain one sin, some another, some every sin; and when his hand is
once off, they commit sin with greater greediness than before, John 5.
and then some worse thing justly happens unto them.


I Have stood in a Smiths forge, and seen him put a rusty, cold, dull piece of
Iron into the fire, T. Fuller Ser. at St. Clem. Land. 1648.
and after a while he has taken the same piece, the very same, numerical,
individual piece of Iron out of the fire, hot, bright, sparkling: And thus it
is with our bodies, they are laid down in the grave, dead, heavy, earthly; but
at the Resurrection this mortal shall put on immortality; at that general
conflagration this dead, heavy, earthly body, shall arise, living, lightsome,
glorious; which made Job so confident, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
with these eyes I shall see him, etc. Chap. 19. 25.


THe Israelites usually asked counsel of God by the Ephod, the Grecians by
their Oracles, the Persians by their Magi, the Egyptians by their Hierophantae,
the Indians by their Gymnosophistae, the ancient Gauls and Britains by their
Druides, the Romans by their Augures, or South-sayers; It was not lawful to
propose any matter of moment in the Senate, Tullius de Arusp. Repub. Dan. Fea^.
Sermon.
priusquam de C^elo observatum erat, before their Wizards had made observations
from the Heaven, or Sky. That which they did impiously and superstitiously, we
may, nay we ought to do in another sense, piously, religiously, conscionably,
i. e. not to embarque our selves into any action of great importance and
consequence, priusquam de Coelo observa^um est, before we have observed from
Heaven, not the flight of birds, not the houses of Planets, or their aspects or
conjunctions, but the countenance of God, whether it shines upon our
enterprises or not, whether he approve of our projects and designs or not.

Memory ought to be the Treasury of all goodness.
ALexander the great, when he had overthrown Darius, King of Persia, he took
amongst the spoils, a most rich Cabinet, full of the choicest Jewels that the
World had then seen, Sabel. hist. lib. 7. cap. 5.
and there was a dispute before him to what use he would put the Cabinet, and
every one having spent his judgment according as their fancies lead them, the
King himself concluded, That he would keep that Cabinet, to be a Treasury to
lay the books of Homer in, which were his joy; But surely the richest Cabinet
that is, Fun. Sermon.
is in the soul of man, and that is the memory, the Ark of Heavenly knowledge,
where like Mary we should lay up all that we know and hear of God; It is a rich
Cabinet indeed, and therefore the fitter for the richest Jewel, the Word of God
to be treasured up in.

The retaining of one sin, spoils a great deal of good in the soul.
AS the Philosopher says, A cup, or some such thing that has a hole in it, is
no cup, it will hold nothing, and therefore cannot perform the use of a cup,
though it have but one hold in it; Funeral Sermon.
So if the heart have but one hole in it, if it retain the Devil but in one
thing; if it make choice but of any one sin to lie and wallow* and tumble in,
it does evacuate all the other good, by the entertainment of that one evil, the
whole box of ointment will be spoiled by the dropping of that one fly into it:
By the Laws of our Kingdom, a man can never have true possession, till he have
voided all; and in the State of Grace, no man can have a full interest in
Christ, till all sin, i. e. all reigning, domineering sin, be rooted out.

Weak beginnings of Grace, not to be despised.
THough a man have a Palsey-shaking hand, yet it is a hand; A sick weak man,
that lies crying, oh, oh, that can scarce turn himself on his bed, is a man, a
living man; a poor child that is newly born, and has nothing that discovers
Reason almost, Gasp. Strezo Analys. in Romans
but the shape of a man, that poor child is a reasonable Creature: So that
faith, that begins with weak apprehensions, and faint leanings on Christ, is
notwithstanding a true faith, and therefore to be cherished: Deep godly sorrow,
and other parts of Repentance do begin many times to run in a slender channel,
yet they must not be straightned; amendment of life begins sometimes at a low
foundation, at small sins, yet there may be increase of such small grace, and a
man may be blessed for all the weakness of them; It behooves every man
therefore to take comfort in a little, and be thankful for it, and that is the
only way to get more.

How to receive benefit from the Word and Sacraments.
A Child may handle the Mothers breasts, may play with them, may kiss them, but
all this while the child is never the fuller; Dan. Dyke Worthy Communicant.
Therefore the child when it would be satisfied, lays its mouth to the breast,
gets the nipple fast, and then sucks and draws with its strength and might, and
so fetches forth the milk out of the Mothers breast. Thus the Word and
Sacraments are the breasts of Consolation, and they be full of very sweet milk
indeed, but there can be no satisfaction till there be sucking; Men may come to
the Sacrament and gaze upon the Elements, and eat and drink them, and yet not
receive the sweet of the Ordinance; but if they would have the milk out of his
breast, they must fall to sucking and drawing, with all their power and
strength: Now it is faith actuated that sucks virtue out of the Sacrament, that
sucks from Christ in the Sacrament, mortifying virtue to kill lusts, healing
virtue to cure the pollutions of the ^eart, and quickening virtue to enable to
duties, and actions of spiritual life.


AS a Ship without his ballast is tossed and rocked at Sea, Geo. Abbot Cant.
Lect. on Jonah. Solinus cap. 15.
and cannot endure the waves, so is that soul right unstable, and every hour
apt to perish, which has not faith in Temptation: It is written of the Cranes,
that when they do intend in stormy and troublesome weather, to fly over the
Sea, fearing left that by the blasts of the wind, their bodies which be but
light, should be beaten into the Sea, or be kept from the place whither they
intend, they swallow some sand, and little stones into their bellies, whereby
they are so moderately piezed, that they are able to resist the raging of the
wind. So it must be with every Christian, whilst they do cross this troublesome
world of sin and great temptation; It is faith that must be their ballast, it
is faith that must keep them upright, or recover them when they are a going.


THe Pillars of State are good Laws, B. Lake Sermon. on Plalm. 51.
and good Men; good Laws are the Pillars that bear up men, and men being so
born up by good Laws, do bear up the whole State of a Land; Licinius therefore
the Emperor spoke barbarously, when (as Eusebius reports) he said, That Iuris
cognitio, was V^rus and pestis Reipublicae; And the Jews, who (as Ambrose
observes) said, That Leges were Crimina, spoke but as Jews, Salus ^ivitatis in
legibus est. Arislot.
that is, as a Rebellious people; And the Anabaptists, that hold Laws to be
contrary to Christian liberty, do but by their doctrine give us to understand
the qualities of their lives, which is Epicurial licentiousness; but Christians
must give Laws their right, and repute them as they are, The Pillars of the
State.


GOd is the Lord of Hoasts, he is the great Commander of Heaven and Earth, he
it is that directs the conflicts, B. Lake Sermon. on Hag. chapter 2.
neither are any put to try mastery, no field pitched, on battle fought, but by
his special Order and Commission, and all for the accomplishment of his glory:
But it befalls us, as it does with them, which stand in the same level,
wherein two huge Armies are ready to engage, they conceive them to be a
disordered multitude; whom notwithstanding, if they behold from a high hill,
they will discern that they are artificially ranged, they will see how every
one serves under his own colors; even so men which behold the state of the
world, with the eyes of flesh and blood, dim by reason of the weakness of their
Judgments, and wickedness of their affections, thinks all thing are out of
order, that there is nothing but confusion, and disorder, to see men reeling in
Judgment one against the other, servants riding on horses, Princes going on
foot; bonis male, malis been, That the worse men are, the better they fare; and
they fare the worse, the better they are; But if they did but once ascend into
the Sanctuary of God, and judge of occurrents by Heavenly Principles, then they
would confess, that no Army on Earth can be better marshalled, then the great
Army of all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth, yea and of Hell too; and that
notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, all is well, and will end
well, that God, who is the God of Order, will bring light out of darkness, and
Order out of the greatest confusion, could they but have patience, and let him
alone with his own work.


CIcero makes mention of Marcus Crassus, Cicero de Oratore.
who walking one day by the Seashore, Dimidium facti qui been, etc. Exparvis
prinerpiis, etc.
saw a Boy, who had found a Boat there, but having no helps to further him to
sail, first he got Oars, then a Mast, Sails and Ropes, and then he set to Sea.
Thus from a little beginning, if a man be industrious, he may attain unto great
things, to the enlargement of a great temporal estate, to a great measure of
spiritual Grace, Judge. 8. 2.
to a great height of knowledge, especially in a knowing age, wherein the
gleanings of Ephraim are better then the Vintage of Abiezar, having such helps
as Antiquity never knew of, and sitting under the droppings of such spiritual
means as no age can parallel.

Unworthy Communicants reproved.
THe Hahassines, Brerewood's Enquiries. c. 23.
a Christian people in Prester John's Country, after the receiving of the
Sacrament, think it not lawful for them to spit that day, till the setting of
the Sun: It is no better then Superstition in them, but yet their Superstition
will rise up against the monstrous profaneness of many amongst us. Jer. Dyke
Worthy Communic.
They hold it unlawful to spit that day, And shall some out of drunkenness
spue that day, drown him in the Tavern, whom they received in the Temple? They
will not spit that day; And shall some endure the Devils drivell to fall from
their mouths that day, in ungodly oaths, and unsavory rotten Communication?
They will not spit that day, And shall some in that day spit in Gods face, as
common profane swearers do, etc?

Self-conceitedness condemned as dangerous.
IT is a natural disease of all the Sons of Ad^m, that if they have but motes
o^ goodness, B. Lake Sermon. on Mat. chapter 6.
they think they are Mountains, and presume that their actions go hand in hand
with their speculations: Little children, when they begin first to find their
feet, think they can go as well, and as far, as those that are of riper age,
and this conceit makes them catch many a fall. The case is ours; most of us are
but Babes in Christ, and our Judgment erreth in nothing more, then in taking
an estimate of our own ability, wherein we come so short of performing what we
promise to our selves, Psalm. 39.
that we may very well blush, and make this conclusion, Man, even the best of
men, is altogether vanity.

The Romanists error in the point of the Antiquity of Ceremonies
A Nobleman, who had heard of the extreme age of one dwelling not far off, made
a journey to visit him, and finding an aged person sitting in the chimney
corner, T. Puller Holy State.
addressed himself unto him, with admiration of his age, till his mistake was
rectified: For, Oh Sir (said the young old man) I am not he whom you seek for,
but his son; My Father is further off in the field. The same error is daily
committed by the Roman Church, adoring the reverend brow and gray hairs of
some ancient Ceremonies, perchance but of some seven or eight hundredth years
standing in the Church, and mistake these for their Fathers, of far greater age
in the Primttive times.

The Terrors of a guilty Conscience.
THe blind man in the Gospel, newly recovering his sight, imagined trees to be
men; Mark 8. Lib. 1. cap. 11. John Boys Postil^s.
and the Burgundians, as Comines reports, expecting a battle, supposed long
Thistles to be Lances. Thus the wicked man fears where no fear is, sonus
excitat omnis Suspensum, the guilty conscience conceits every thistle to be a
Tree, every Tree a Man, every Man a Devil, afraid of every man that it sees,
nay, many times of those that it sees not. Not much unlike to one that was very
deep in debt, and had many Creditors, -- Sonus exci^at ^mnis Suspensum, Virgil.
who as he walked London streets in the evening, a Tenterhook catched his
Cloak; At whose suit, said he, conceiving some Sergeant had arrested him; Thus
the ill conscienced man counts every Creature he meets with, a Bayliffe sent
from God to punish him.


LActantius reports of Arcesilas, that having thoroughly considered the
contradictions, and oppositions of Philosophers one against another, Institut.
lib. 3. cap. 4.
in fine, contemned them all: Et novam Philosophandi philosophiam constituit,
and set up a new way of Philosophy. Thus worldlings and Atheistically spirited
men, expending their differences of Christians in matters of Religion, have
resolved to be of no Religion; and understanding the violent contentions about
forms of prayer, Ioh. Boys Ser.
and interpretation of Scripture, use no Prayer, nor Bible, but make Lucian
their Old Testament, and Machiavel their New.


THe Disciples of Christ, as they passed through the Cornfieldsd, plucked the
ears of the Corn, Luke 6. 1. Ier. Dyke ut ante^.
and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. They did not pluck off the ears, and
eat them whole, that would have been dangerous, but they first rubbed the ears
with their hands, to fetch out the Corn, and then did eat. Thus, at the
Sacrament, we must not devour those holy things all at once, hand over head,
that will be dangerous, but we must set faith on work to rub the ears, and
fetch out the Corn that is in them for food, and then there will be comfortable
refreshing for the soul.


IT is for profit that Men rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread
of carefulness. Tho. de Trugillo These. Concionat.
The Husbandman takes much pains, plows his ground, endures many sharp storms,
and piercing Winters; Currit Mercator ad Indos, The Merchant runs diverse
hazards abroad, difficulties at home, and all for profit: So should we be
willing patiently and quietly, to submit our selves to God's dealing with us in
all conditions, humbly to apply our selves to his wise and fatherly
administrations, and take heed of murmuring, for he intends nothing but our
good, even the salvation of our souls, which is the chiefest good of all.


PHiletus, a Disciple of Hermogenes that Conjurer, coming to dispute, and
maintain an Argument with St. James the elder, Maruli Hist. lib. 2. cap. 9.
reli^d much upon his Sophistry, but the Apostle preached Christ unto him with
that powerfulness, that Philetus returning back to his Master, told him, Magus
abieram, Christianus redeo, I went forth a Conjurer, but am returned a
Christian* O the power of divine Truth! If Peter do but preach, the Jews will
cry out, Men and Bre^hren, what shall we do to be saved? Where the word goes
along with the operation of the blessed spirit, crooked things will be made
straight, Mountains will be level with the Valleys, sinners will become
Saints, and there will be a daily addition to the Church, of such as shall be
saved.


EUclide showed in himself the true symptoms of brotherly affection, who when
his Brother in his rage made a rash vow, Plutarch. de Amore frat.
saying, Let me not live, if I be not re^enged on my Brother; Euclide turns the
speech contrary way, Nay, let me not live, if I be not reconciled to my
Brother, Dan. Fe^tly Clavis mystic^.
Let me not live, if we be not as good friends as ever we were before. Shall an
Heathen thus outstrip us Christians? Nature be stronger then Grace? the bonds
of Flesh tie faster, and surer then the bonds of Grace? We call on God our
Father, we acknowledge or should do, one Church our Mother, we suck the same
breas^s of the Old and New Testament, we are bred up in the same School of the
Cross, fed at the same Table of the Lord, incorporated into the same Communion
of Saints, If these and the like considerations cannot knit our hearts in love
one to another, the very Heathens will rise up in Judgment against us, and
condemn us.

The winning of a Soul unto God, very acceptable with God.
MEmorable is the story of Pyrrhias, a Merchant of Ithaca, who on a time seeing
an aged man captive in a Pirates Ship, Plutarch. quaest. Grae. 34.
took compassion on him, and redeemed him, and with him bought likewise his
Commodity, which the Pyrat had taken from him, being certain ^arrels of pitch:
The old man perceiving, that not for any service that he could do him, Andr.
Willet Hexapla (...) Lev.
nor for the gain of his commodity, but merely out of charity, Pyrrhias had
done this, presently discovered unto him, a great mass of Treasure hidden in
the pitch, whereby he grew exceeding wealthy, having, not without divine
providence obtained an answerable blessing for so good an act of Piety. Now if
God so bountifully requite the Redemption of a poor old man, de servitute
corporea, from a corporal servitude, how much rather should every man contend
to the utmost of his power, Ministers in the Pulpit, Magistrates on their
benches, Masters in their families, every one by a good example to win a soul
unto God, Jam. 5. 20. Obad. 21. Dan. 12. 3.
to ^edeem his Brother from the thraldom of the Devil, which is to save a soul
from death. And for which they shall be honored with the name of Saviors, and
their reward shall be that they shall shine like stars, for ever and ever.

The great difficulty of forgiving one another.
IT is worthy observation, T. Fuller Ser. at St. Clem. Land. 1648.
and such as are conversant amongst little children, know it to be true, That
when they are taught to say the Lords Prayer, they are usually out at that
Petition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us, The reason is, because of the harshnesse of the sound, the reiteration of
one and the same words, the multiplicity of the Consonants, and the like. It
were to be wished, that that which they are so often out at, we could be more
frequently in at, that what is not easy for their shallow heads to conceive,
may not be too hard for our more experimental hearts to practice; But it is
hard indeed, why else did Christ make a Comment on that Petition, Mar. 6. 14.
passing by the other five, when he taught his Disciples to pray? And hence it
is that injuries are registered in sheets of Marble to all Posterity, whilst
benefits are written in the sand, ready to be dashed out by the foot of the
next that passes by.

Death is the true Christians advantage.
AS that Ass, Lucian in Piscatore.
called Cumanus Ass, jetting up and down in a Lions skin, did for a time much
terrify his Master, but afterward being descryed, did benefit him very much:
Thus Death, by the death of Christ, stands like a silly Ass, having his Lions
skin pulled over his ears, and is so far from terrifying any, that it benefits
all true Christians, Tho. Playfers Sermon.
because by it they rest from their labors, and if they be oppressed with
cares, and troubles of the world, perplexed, distracted in the midst of a
crooked and froward generation, let but death come, they have their Quietus
est, and are discharged.

The great danger of not listening to the Word preached.
THe Roman Senators conspired against Julius Caoesar to kill him; Volateran.
lib. 19.
That very next morning Artemidorus, Caoesars friend, delivered him a paper
(desiring him to peruse it) wherein the whole plot was discovered; T. Fuller
Observat.
But Caoesar complemented away his life, being so taken up to return the
salutations of such people as met him in the way, that he pocketed the paper
among other Petitions, as unconcerned therein, and so going to the Senate
house, was there slain. Thus the World, the Flesh, Propter mals auditores sermo
subtrabitur. Greg. in Ezekiel.
and Devil have a design for the destruction of Men; Ministers, such as watch
for their good, bring a Letter of advice, Gods word, wherein all the
conspiracy is revealed; but who does believe their report? Most men are so
busy, and taken up with worldly delights, that they are not at leisure to
listen to them, or read the letter, but thus alas, run headlong to their own
destruction.


WE commend Prisoners for their wisdom, who knowing they are guilty more ways
then one, Dr. Web Sermon. at Court, 1619.
desire that all the Indictments may be brought in against them before the
Verdict pass upon them, that so they might be thoroughly discharged. So he that
arraigneth himself before the Bar of God's Justice, should not leave any thing
unrepented of, whereof he knows himself guilty, nor conceal any part of his
misery that needs the help of God's mercy.


THe Surgeon that deals with an outward wound, sees what he does, and can
tell whether he can heal it or no, B. Smith Sermon. on Jer. 9.
and in what time; but he that is to make an incision within the body, be it
for the Stone, or the like disease, he does but as it were, grope in the dark,
and may as well take hold of that he should not, as of that which he would; And
the Artizan that works in his shop, and has his tools about him, can promise
to make up his days work to his best advantage; But the Merchant Adventurer
that is to cut the Seas, and has need of one wind to bring him out of the
Haven, another to bring him out to the Lands end, another perhaps to bring him
to the place of Traffic, where he would be, he can promise nothing, neither
touching his return, neither touching the making of his Commodity, but as the
wind and the weather, and the men of War by the way, and as the honesty and
skill of them whom he tradeth with, shall give him leave. Ju^^ so it fares in
matters of prudence and worldly Policy, they are conjectural, they are not
demonstrative, and therefore there is no Science of them; they have need of
concurrence of many causes that are casual, of many men's minds that are
mutable, therefore uncertain, not to be built upon.


PIso, Seneca de Ira
one of the Roman Generals, to show the bloody humor that was in him,
commanded that a Soldier should be put to death, for returning without his
fellow, Geo. Abbot Cant. Le^t. on Jonah.
with whom he went from the Camp, saying, that he had killed him. The Captain,
who had the charge to execute this poor Soldier, when he saw his fellow
coming, which had been missed before, did spare the first man's life; upon this,
Piso finds matter to take away the lives of all three: Hear his worthy reason
for it; You are a man condemned, says he unto the first, my sentence was
passed on you, and therefore you shall dye; then turning him to the second, you
were the cause, quoth he, wherefore your fellow was condemned to death, and
therefore you must dye; and to the third, You, Centurion, because you have not
learned to obey the voice of your General, shall dye also for company;
Excogitaverat quomodo tria crimina faceret, etc. He devised how he might make
three faults, because he found not one. But the just Judge of all the world
needs not do so with us, no beating of his brains to invent an accusation
against us, he needs not draw three faults into one, or find one where there is
none, there is matter enough within us, to condemn us; our thoughts, our words,
our deeds, do yield him cause enough to pronounce the sentence of death upon us.


IT is reported of Aeschines, when he saw his fellow Scholars give great gifts
to his Master Socrates, Seneca de bene^^ciis, lib. 1.
he being poor, and having nothing else to bestow, did give himself to
Socrates, as confessing to be his in heart, and good will, and wholly at his
devotion. Dr. Done Sermon. ^t St. Paul's, Land. 1629.
And the Philosopher took this most kindly, esteeming it above all other
presents, and returned him love accordingly; Even so the gracious disposition
of our heavenly Father takes in far better part, then any man can take it, the
laying down of our souls, the submitting of our selves unto his direction, the
mel^ing of our wills down into his Will; Non vox Sed votum --
The Widows two mites were welcome into his Treasury, because her heart was
full, though her purse were empty; He accounts that the best sacrifice which
is of the heart. External things do well, but Internal things do far better.

Heaven worth contending for.
IF a man were assured, Will. Pe^kins Exposit. ^n Creed.
that there were made for him a great purchase in Spain, Turkey, or some other
parts more remote, would be not adventure the dangers of the Seas, and of his
Enemies also, if need were, that he might come to the enjoyment of his own:
Well, behold Jesus Christ has made a purchase for us in Heaven, and there is
nothing required on our parts, but that we will come and enjoy it; Luke 13. 24.
Why then should we refuse any pains? or fear any thing in the way? nay, we
must strive to get in; It may be that we shall be pinched in the entrance, for
the gate is strait and low, not like the Gates of Princes, lofty, roof'd, and
arched, so that we must be fain to leave our wealth behind us, Non est ad.
astra mollis e terris via. Sen. Her^. furens.
and the pleasures of this life behind us; yet enter we must, though we leave
our skins, nay our very lives behind us; for the purchase that is made, is
worth ten thousand Worlds; not all the silks of Persia, ^ot all the spices of
Egypt* not all the gold of Ophir, not all the Treasures of bot\^h Indies are to
be compared to it: Who therefore would not contend for such a bargain though he
sold all to have it?

Adoption of God's children, known by their Sanctification.
FIre is known to be no painted, or imaginary fire by two notes, by heat, and
by the flame; Now if the case so fall out, that the fire want a slame, it is
still known by the heat; In like manner there be two witnesses of our adoption,
or sanctification; Will. Perkins ut ante^.
Gods spirit and our spirit; Now if it so fall out, that a man feel not the
Principal, which is the spirit of adoption, he must then have recourse to the
second VVitness, and search out in himself the signs and tokens of the
sanctification of his own spirit, by which he may certainly assure himself of
his adoption, as fire may be known to be fire, by the heat, though it want a
flame.

The danger of Worldly mindedness.
IT is seen by experience, that a man swiming in a River, as long as he is able
to hold up his head, B. Babington Fun. Sermon.
and keep it above water, he is in no danger, but safely swimeth and comes to
the shore with good contentment; but if once his head, for want of strength
begin to dive, then shakes he the hearts of all that do behold him, and
himself may know, that he is not far from death: So is it in this wretched
world, and swimers of all sorts, if the Lord give us strength to keep up our
heads, i. e. to love God and Religion above the world, and before it, and all
the pleasures of it, there is then no danger, but after a time of swiming in it
up and down, we shall arrive in a firm place with happiness and safety; but if
once we dive, and the head go under water, if once the world get the victory,
and our hearts are set upon it, and go under it, in a sinful love and liking of
it, O then take heed of drowning.

Gods delight in a relapsed Sinners repentance.
AS a Husbandman delights much in that ground, that after long barrenness
becomes fruitful; As a Captain loves that Soldier, that once fled away
cowardly, and afterward returns valiantly. E, Calamy, A Sermon. (...) West.
Even so God is wonderfully enamoured with a sinner, that having once made
shipwreck of a good Conscience, yet at last returns, and swims to Heaven upon
the plank of Faith and Repentance.


CHildren when they first put on new shoes, are very curious to keep them
clean, scarce will they set their foot on the ground, T. F^ller Observations.
for fear to dirty the soles of their shoes, yea rather they will wipe them
clean with their Coats; and yet perchance the next day, they will trample with
the same shoes up to the ancles. Alas, O curve in tertis (...) and coelestium
inanes. Pers. 2.
childrens play is our earnest; On that day we receive the Sacrament, we are
often over-precise, scrupling to say or do those things which lawfully we may:
But we who are more then curious that day, are not so much as careful the next
day; and too often (what shall I say) go on in sin up to the ancles, yea our
sins go over our heads, Psalm. 28. 5.


IT is the first step unto Grace, for a man to see no Grace, and it is the
first degree of Grace, Pars sanitatis velle sanari. (...)
for a man to desire Grace; as no man can sincerely seek God in vain, so no man
can sincerely desire grace in vain: A man may love gold, yet not have it, but
no man loves God but is sure to have him; Wealth a man may desire, yet be
never the nearer for it, August. in ^ Joh. 6.
but grace no man ever sincerely desired, and missed it; and why? It is God
that has wrought this desire in the heart, and he will never frustrate the
desire that himself there has wrought: Tho. Gataker Joy of the Just.
Let no man say, I have no Faith, no Repentance, no Love, no fear of God, no
sanctifying, no saving grace in me; Does he see a want of these things in
himself? yes, that is it which so grieves him, that he cannot love God, stand
in awe of him, trust in his mercy, repent of sin as he should; yea, but does he
seriously and unfeignedly desire to do thus? yes, he desires it above all
things in the world, and would be willing (as it were) to buy, even with a
whole world the least measure, or dram, or drop only of such grace; Who is it,
Bernard. in Cant. 3. 1.
let me ask him, who is it that has wrought this desire in him? Not the Devil,
he would rather quench it all he could in him; Not his own corruption, that is
naturally averse thereunto; It must needs then be the work of the Spirit of
God, and of him who affirms all them to be in a blessed plight, Phil. 2. 13.
that thus desire after grace.


A Ristotle says, a man is not a Physi^ian that knows things in the general,
in the gross, Joh* Preston Treatise.
but he that knows them in particular: This is not to be a Physician, to know
that such dry meats are good for a moist stomach, unless he also know dry
meats, and the symptoms of a moist stomach. So it is in the knowledge of the
world, and in the knowledge of God: Scientiae quis usus potest, nis^ (...)
agamus? Max. Tyrius. di^^ert. 5.
To know what Repentance is, is not enough, except we know the parts and the
signs of it in our selves; To know, that none are translated from death to
life, except they love the brethren, is not enough, except we know the brethren
and love them; To know that he that is in Christ, has crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24.
is not enough, except we know that we our selves have crucified it.


AS it is said of one, who with more industry then judegment, frequented a
College Library, T. Fuller Holy State.
and commonly made use of the worst notes he met with in any Authors, That he
weeded the Library; So it may be said of some loose Travelers, that are got
abroad too early, before they be well principled, That they weed foreign
Countries, bringing home Dutch drunkenness, Spanish pride, French wantonness,
and Italian Atheism* as for the good herbs, Dutch industry, Spanish loyalty,
French courtesy, and Italian frugality, these they leave behind them.

St. Augustine's Judgment of the time of Christ's birth.
CHrist was born when the days were at the shortest, Sermon. 22. de tempore.
ut diminuto noctis curriculo defectionem sentiant opera tenebrarum, that the
Chariot wheels of the night being taken off, the works of darkness may drive
heavily: He must increase, said the Baptist, Dr. Joh. Boys (...).
but I must decrease, John was therefore born at Midsummer, when the days grow
shorter and shorter* but Christ about the Calends of January, when the days wax
longer and longer, Ambrof c^ntr^ Marcion.
giving at once, both life to man, and length to days.

Good endeavors assisted by God.
IT much perplexed Mary, how she should roll away the Tomb stone, and so
purchase the sight of her beloved Master; Mark 16. Dr. Ioh. Boys Sermon.
but he that has given his Angels charge over his children, that they hurt not
their foot against a stone, sent a messenger from Heaven, Psalm. 91. 11. Man.
^8. ^.
to roll back that huge stone for her. Even as a loving Father, when he
carries his little child to the Town, will let him alone to walk in the plain
and fair way; but when he comes to slippery paths, he takes him by the hand,
and in dirty passages bears him in his arms, and when he comes to a style, he
gently lifts him over: In magnis voluisse sat est.
So God our heavenly Father uses his deer children, if they endeavor to go as
far as they may in the ways of his commandments, so fast as they can in the
way to the celestial Jerusalem, he will assist them in danger, and help them
over styles of discouragements, take away all rubs of offense; remove all
blocks and hindrances in their passage; and the very great stone parting Christ
and them, even whilst they least think of it, shall be rolled away.

To rejoice with trembling.
A Quail, the very same bird that was the Israelites meat in the Wilderness, as
he flies over the Sea, feeling himself begin to be weary, lights by the way
into the Sea: Pier. Moulin De la mour de Dieu.
Then lying at one side, he lays down one wing upon the water, and holds up
the other wing toward Heaven; left he should presume to take too long a
flight; wets one wing; left he should despair to take a new flight, he keeps
the other wing dry. Triftia laetis.
Thus must every good Christian do, when he holds up the wing of love toward
Heaven to rejoice for Christ, he must lay down the wing of fear upon the water,
to weep for his sins, that so his sins, that so his two wings may be answerable
to God's two wings; that as God has two wings, the one of Mercy, the other of
Judgment, so he may have two wings, the one of joy for Christ, the other of
sorrow for himself, and so to rejoice with trembling.

Magistrates to be always ready to do Justice.
A Very poor Widow was earnest with Philip of Macedon, Plutarch. ^ Apophthegm.
and in vita Demetrii.
to do her Justice, but he deferred her, and told her, that he had no leisure to
hear her; she forgetting all dutiful respect, asked immediately, Why he had
leisure then to be a King? Thus surely, if Petitioners for Justice be put back,
whose souls speak within them for it, with the answer, of not being at leisure,
they will go near to ask, Why they had leisure to be Kings, and Judges, and
Magistrates, unless they did mean to execute judgment, and do justice, which
they are bound to do at all times.

Lex Talionis.
BY the advice of the Lord Hastings, S. W. Raleigl^ Pref. to hist. World.
and a Warrant signed by Rich. 3. thereupon, the two Lords, Rivers and Gray
with others, were without trial of Law, or offense given, executed at
Pontefract in the North, and (which is very remarkable) the very self same day,
and (as near as could be ghessed) the self same hour, was Hastings head in the
same lawless manner, struck off in the Tower of London: Autorem feriunt ^^la
re^^rta suum. Auson. Ep. 71.
Here is Lex Talionis, the just Law of Retaliation, God in his eternal
providence, and divine justice subverts the wisdom oft-times of evil plots,
and irreligious imaginations, and turns them upon the very heads of the Actors
themselves, according to that passage, In fove^m, quam foderunt, etc. Psalm 7.
15.


IUnius was reclaimed from Atheism, In Vita*
by casting his eye upon the New Testament lying open in his study, and reading
the first of St. John's Gospel, In the beginning was the Word, etc. being amazed
with the strange Majesty of the style, and profoundness of the mysteries
therein contained: What should I speak of St. Augustine? who was strangely
converted by hearing a voice, saying, Toll, lege, Toll, lege, and fastening
his eyes upon the first passage of Scripture he light on, which was this, Let
us walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, etc. Romans 13.
13, 14. No sooner was the verse read, then the work of Conversion finished, and
a pious Resolution for amendment of life settled in him; Alipius certified
hereof, desires to peruse the place, August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12.
and falls upon the verse immediately following, Him that is weak in the
faith receive you: which he applying to himself, besought St. Augustine to
strengthen him in the Truth, as Christ commanded Peter, Tu conversus confirma
fratres; which task he so well performed, that with a little travel in a short
space, two twins were brought forth to the Church at one time. Thus the Word
of God, whether heard or read, Non ut sonus, non ut litera, not as it is ink
and paper, not as it is a sound or collision of the Air, but as it is an
Instrument of God, and the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16. makes the
man of God perfect, 2 Tit. 3. 17. It frames, and mouldeth the heart, it
printeth it like a stamp, melts it like wax, bruiseth it like a hammer,
pricketh it like a nail, and cutteth it asunder like a sword.

A good man's life preserved for the good of others.
RIvers of themselves would run the straightest and directest way to the Sea,
as being greedy to pay tribute unto their great Master the Ocean; Joh. Done
Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1626.
but God, in his wise disposal of all things, has set here a Mountain, and
there a hill in the way, that so by turning and winding, now this way, now that
way, and going further about, they might enrich the earth as they pass along
with fertility and abundance. Thus a good man, and a good Christian man, having
but once tasted of Gods love, O how he desires to be dissolved, Luke 22. 32.
and to be with Christ, he prays (but still with reference to Gods will) that
his hope may be turned into fruition, his faith into vision, and his love into
perfect comprehension; but God in his providence has resolved upon the
negative, that his days shall be prolonged to do good unto others, that he may
be serviceable in his place, to him and his Country.


THe Hawk flies high, Tho. Westfield Sermon. at. St. Bartholm. 1619.
and is as highly prized, being set upon a perch, vervel'd with the gingling
bells of encouragement, and carried on his Master's fist, but being once dead,
and picked over the perch, is cast upon the dunghill as good for nothing; The
Hen scrapes in the dust, not any thing rewarded when she is alive, Cuncta bonis
prosunt, quos and mors ipsa beatos Efficit, etc. Ja^. Bili^ Anthol.
but being dead, is brought as a choice dish to her Master's Table. Thus wicked
men, are commonly set in high places, and prosper in this life; and good men,
lie grovelling with their mouths in the dust, as the very underlings of the
world; but being once dead, the one is cast into the dungeon of Hell, the other
advanced to the Kingdom of Heaven; the one is into Abraham's bosom, whilst the
other is tormented with the Devil and his Angels.

Opportunities of sin to be avoided.
ST. Chr. Fonseca Ser. (...).
Augustine in his Confessions, makes mention of his friend* Alipius, that
having resolved with himself never to look upon the Fencers prizes, was, up on
a time, through the importunity of his friends, drawn along to the Theater,
where these bloody sports were performed, protesting that he would keep his
eyes shut all the while, and not so much as once open them; yet it so fell out,
that upon a sudden great shout of the people, be looked about to see what the
matter was; whereupon he became another man, and altered his former course, so
that his hatred* to the sport, was turned into love, and liking of it: It is
opportunity (we say) that makes Thieves; Look, what a clear fountain is to the
thirsty, what a shade to the scor^hed Traveller, such is occasion to a man that
is accustomed to do evil; He that walks in the Sun is su^e to be tan'd;
Delinq^end^ materi^ (...) praescindi. Cyprian ep. 2.
he that touches Pitch, shall be* defil^^* Physicians may converse with sick
men, and cure them, but if their diseases be dangerous, contagious, they will
not easily adventure on them, lest that in curing others, they should kill
themselves; Vices are of the same nature, and vitiou^ persons and places, are
alike dangerous, and therefore to be shunned.

How the good and the bad look upon death in a different manner.
A Child at School, Tho. Lightfoot* Sermon. at Uttoxeter, 1624.
when he sees one riding Post through the streets, as if he would run over
him, or tread upon him, cries out: But when he perceives that it is his
Father's man sent to bring him home from School, all the fea^ is past, then he
laugheth and rejoices. So whilst men are in the state of nature, they look
upon Death as an Enemy, as a spoyler, as one that would bereave them of all
their worldly delights; but being once the sons and daughters of God by
adoption, then they apprehend Death as their Heavenly Father's man, riding on
the pale horse, sent to bring them home from a prison on Earth, to a place of
perfect liberty in Heaven.

The confidence of much knowledge, an argument of no knowledge.
THales sent the golden Tripos, Plutarch, in S^lone*
which the Fishermen took up in their Net, and the Oracle commanded to be
given to the wisest, to Bias; Bias to Solon; and then they had but seven wise
men; and if you will but believe the times, there are now hardly so many fools
to be found * If such a thing were now to be had, we should all fight for it,
R. Burton of Melancholy.
as the three Goddesses did for the golden apple, we are so wise, We have now
women- Politicians, women- Preachers, Preaching- Soldiers, Teaching-
Tradesmen, Children- Metaphysitians, every silly fellow can square a Circle,
make perpetual motions, find out the Philosopher's stone, interpret the
Revelation of St. John, make new Theoricks, new Logic, dispute de omni
scibili; Town and Country are now so full of deified spirits, Qui se dicit
scire quod nescit, temerarius est, etc. August. in Sermon. de Ascensione.
divine souls, that you may sooner find a God than a man amongst us, we think
so well of our selves; and that is an ample Testimony, a sufficient
demonstration, that there is a great deal of folly, much ignorance, much
indiscretion to be found amongst us.

Afflictions follow the godly man close in this world.
HE that goes toward the Sun, shall have his shadow follow him, but he that
runs from it shall have it fly before him; Dr. Micklethwait Sermon. at Templ.
Land. 1631.
So he that marches with his face toward the Sun of Righteousness, that
sets himself to do the things, that may be without offense to God and Man,
-- Duris premitur justus, cum ^^oret iniquns. J. Bill.
shall be sure to have afflictions close at his heels; as for him, that has
his back upon Christ, that makes a Trade of sin, his sorrows and vexations of
spirit, like the shadow, are still before him in this world, but they will be
sure to meet him in another.


WHen Moses saw an Egyptian and an Israelite striving together, he killed the
Egyptian, Joh. Weemse Exercitat.
and saved the Israelite, Exodus 2. 12. But when he saw two Israelites striving
together, he labored to reconcile them, saying, Ye are brethren, why do ye
strive? So when we read or see the Apocryphal books, or Heathen story, or
Popish traditions, contradicting the Scriptures; As for instance, Jacob cursed
Simeon and Levi for murdering the Sichemites, Genesis 49. 7. And Iudeth blessed
God for killing of them, Iudeth 9. Here and in such like places, let us kill
the Egyptian, but save the Israelite; Omnis scnsus, qui fuerit extra
Scripturam, non est sensus. Origin. in Mat. homil. 25.
set a value on the Scriptures, but slight the Apocrypha: But when we meet
with any appearance of seeming-contradiction in the Canon of Scripture; as
where it is said, God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. 1. and God temptteth no man,
Iam. 1. 13. Here now and in many other places, we must be Reconcilers, and
distinguish betwixt a Temptation of trial, which is from God, and a Temptation
of seducement, which is by the Devil, and these two seeming-different friends
will appear to be brethren, and agree well.


I Came, Dr. Micklethwait Sermon. at Temple Chapter Land.
says Nehemiah, to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib had
done for Tobiah, in preparing for him a Chamber in the Courts of the house of
God, and it gr^eved me sore: but he rests not there, but goes further;
Therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the Chamber.
Neh. 13. 7. O poenitentia, quid de te novi referam? Omniae clausa tu reseras.
Cyprian. de laud paenit.
What should Tobiah do with a Chamber there? therefore he not only outs Tobiah
but out goes all his stuff too; Thus does Repentance, when it considers all
the evil, that Satan and corruption have done, that they have taken Chambers in
the heart, that should be the house of God, it is grieved sore, and thereupon
it outs Satan and all his stuff, neither he, nor any of his Retinew shall be
housed there any longer, not any one sin shall find the least entertainment.


IF we look up to the Heavens, we find in some part of the sky single stars by
themselves, in others a Constellation of many stars together; So, in some
passages of holy Writ, you may observe one Figure or Trope as a Membrum, or
similiter cadens; I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, etc.
Mat. 25. 35. or an Allegory, Funeral Sermons, or, House of mourning.
as, Where the body is, there the Eagles will be, Mat. 24. 28. or an
Exclamation, O that they were wise, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Or an Apostrophe, which
by a kind of Miracle, gives life to dead things, and ears to the deaf, Hear O
Heavens, Hearken O Earth! etc. Esaias 1. 2. And in other passages there is a
Conjunction of many figures, and Ornaments of speech, as in that Text; Is there
no balm in Gilead? no Physician there? Why then is not the health of my
people restored? Ier. 8. 22. Here now are four figures couched up together.

1. An Interrogation for more Emphatical conviction. 2. A Communication for
more familiar Introduction. 3. An Allegory for more lively Expression. 4. An
Aposiopesis for safer Reprehension. And the like may be observed in our
Saviors exprobration of the Jews; O that thou knew in this thy day, the
things that belong to thy Peace, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. Mat. 23. 27.
Where there is is a Posie of Rhetorical flowers.
1. An Acclamation, O si cognovisses, etc. 2. A Repetition, Jerusalem,
Jerusalem. 3. An Interrogation, Quoties volui, etc. 4. An Icon, or lively
expression to the eye, Sicut gallina congregat pullos, etc.
Where are now our A^^baptists, and plain pack-stasse Methodists, who esteem of
all ^lowers of Rhetoric i^ Sermons, Tanta est Christianarum profunditas
literarum, etc. Aug. Ep. 2. ad Volusian.
no better then sti^king weeds, and of all elegancy of speech, then of profane
spells; and so at unawars censure the holy Oracles of God, which excel all
other writings, as well in Eloquence as Science? And where too is the profane
Critic, that delights in the flesh-pot, and loathes Manna, that admires carnal
Eloquence in Poets and Heathen Orators, and taxes the Scripture for simplicity
and want of all Art and Eloquence?

God suffers wicked Men to torment his People.
THe Physician applies Horse-leeches to his distempered Patient, Mr. Goddard
Sermon. at St. Greg. Land. 1647.
the Horseleech intends nothing but the satiating and ^illing himself with
the blood of the si^k party; but the Physician has another aim, even the
drawing of the putrified and corrupt blood. -- Plerunque mali in Sanctos
saevire sinuntur. Jac. Billii Antholog.
Th^s God suffers wicked men and Devils to suck^his People, to draw out ever
their hearts blood, but it is in order to their good; It is no matter what
wicked men think, God will have his glory; and though Ashur think not so, yet
God purposes it, and aims it, and in conclusion effects it, Esaias 10. 12.

Prosperity of the Wicked, a stumbling block to the Godly.
DIogenes the Cynick, Diog. Laert. in vita.
seeing Harpalus a vicious fellow, still thriving in the world, he was bold to
say, That wicked Harpalus, his living long in prosperity, was an Argument, that
God had cast off his care of the World, that he cared not which end went
forward; Joh. Done Ser. at St. Paul's, 1624.
but he was an Heathen: yet for all that, the lights of the Sanctuary have
burnt dim, stars of no small magnitude have twinckled; men of eminent parts,
famous in their generations for Religion and Piety, have staggered in their
Judgment, to see the ^lourishing estate of the Wicked; It made Job to
complain, Chap. 24. 12. and Jeremy to expostulate with God, Chap. 12. And David
was even ready to sink, in seeing the prosperity of ungodly men, Psalm. 37. to
see the one in wealth, the other in want; the one honorable, the other
despised; the one upon a Throne, the other on a dunghill.

Time to be well husbanded.
HE that has a great way to go, and but a little money to spend, had need to
pluck up his heels; R. Sibbs Sermon. at Gray's Inn. 16^2.
If a man have much to write, and but a little piece of Paper to write in, he
must write small and thick, and as close as ever he can: So it is with every
one of us, Vtendum est aetate, (...) praeterit aetas. Ovid. 3. art.
There is not a soul of us, but we shall find so many thousand things to repent
of, so many graces to obtain that we stand in need of, so many Evidences for
Heaven to get, that are not yet sealed unto us, so many particulars concerning
a better life, that it is a wonder that any of us should find one half day to
mind any thing else, but to husband our time to the best advantage.

Better live amongst beasts, then beastly minded Men.
OUr Savior Christ hied him to the Wilderness amongst the beasts, Chr. Fonseca
Sermon. Quadrag. John 11.
and carries his Disciples thither with him, holding their fellowship to be
less hurtful and dangerous; Frater fui Draconum, says Job chap. 30. Inter
Scorpiones habitavi, says Ezekiel, Chap. 2. Thus if it go ill with any man,
that he cannot live well and quietly amongst some men, he may shun their
society, and for want of better company retire himself and live amongst known
wild beasts, than such beastly minded men.


INgenui est agnoscere, B. Lake on Psalm 51.
and imitari Benefactorem suum; There is no truer Character of ingenuity, then
an humble acknowledgment whose Creatures we are, and a careful resembling of
our Creator; Especially, seeing our Gifts, whether they be of Learning, or
Riches, etc. are bestowed upon us, non ut ornamenta sed instrumenta, not only
to recommend us, Non nobis solum nati sumus sed partem patria, parents, etc.
Tullius.
but also for the good of others; we see it in the frame of the whole world, in
Heaven, and in Earth; neither of them is more beautiful then useful; yea the
more glorious, the more commodious, are the parts of the great World, which
should make this Microcosm, this little world of ours, blush, if we use our
endowments, as many do their Garments, for pride, and not for profit, that
fools may gaze on us, and no body be the better for us.


THe Earth is a huge Globe, made to be the Nurcery of Plants, Herbs, Birds,
etc. B. Lake Sermon. on Psalm. 51,
While the Sun shines upon them comfortably: How cheerfully do all things
look? how well do they prove and prosper? but remove the Sun from it as in
winter, or Eclipse the beams thereof, how squalid is the face thereof? how do
all things languish and die? Even so fares it between our Souls and our
Bodies, according to the influence of the soul, is the true health and strength
of the body; Our bodies may be then said to be in good liking, and Summer-like,
when they be cherished by our souls; but if our souls neglect them, then they
grow Winter-like and droop.


AS the Globe of the Earth, which improperly for his great show and bigness,
John Boys Postills.
we term the World, and is after the Mathematician's account, many thousands
of miles in compa^ss, yet being compared unto the greatness of the starry
Skie's circumference, is but a Center or a little prick: Hoc est parvis
compondere magna.
So the troubles, and afflictions, and sorrows of this life temporal, in
respect of the joys eternal in the world to come, bears not any proportion,
but are to be reputed as nothing, or as a dark cloud that comes and goes in a
moment.


WIse Solomon says, B. Hall occas. meditat.
The light is a pleasant thing, and so certainly it is; but there is no true
outward light, which proceeds not from some fire; The light of that fire is
not more pleasing, then the fire of that light is dangerous; and that pleasure
does not more draw on our fight, then that danger forbids our approach: How
foolish then is that fly, Noli altum sapere.
that in the love and admiration of the Candlelight, will know no distance, but
puts it self, heedlesly into that flame wherein^ it perishes? How many bouts
it fetches, every one nearer then other, ere it make the last adventure? And
so the merciless fire taking no notice of the affection of an over-fond Clyent,
Curiosus neme est, qui non sit malevolus. Plaut* in Stic^o.
sindgeth his wings, and suddanly consumes it: Thus do those bold and busy
spirits, who will needs draw too near unto that inaccessible Light, and look
into things too wonderful for them; so long do they hover about the secret
Counsels of the Almighty, till the wings of their presumptuous conceits be
scorched, and their daring curiosity has paid them with everlasting
destruction.


Jerusalem was once finally sacked by Titus and Vespasian, Tho. Playfer's Sermon.
where besides an infinite number which were otherwise spoiled, ten hundredth
thousand Men were downright (...) by the sword altogether, Tho. Playfer's Sermon.
as Josephus a Greek Writer, and Ios^^pus an Hebrew Author ^estifie: But that
which happened o^ce to them, happens every day to us, We dye daily, 1 Cor.
15. 31.


Bethulia is in danger of Holofernes, Vide in his^.
the terror of the East, as we are (or ought to be) of the justice of God: and
as the strength of Bethulia was thought too weak to encounter him, so all our
Obedience to the Law of God is weak and insufficient to defend us; Iudeth
undertakes for the people of the City, Faith for us; B. King Lect. on Jonah.
Iudeth goes accompanied with her Handmaids, Faith with her Works; and though
the eyes of her Handmaid were ever toward her Lady to carry the Scrip, etc.
yet in performing the act of deliverance, Iudeth is alone, her Maid standing
and waiting at the door, not so much as setting her foot within the Chamber
door. Thus it is that faith goes foremost, and good works follow after; and
although our love and obedience be as attendant to Faith, as ever that servant
was to Iudeth, yet in performing the mighty Act of deliverance, acquitting the
conscience from the curse of the Law, pacifying the anger of God, and
presenting us blameless before his holy eyes (all which stands in the
apprehension of the merits of Christ Jesus, and a steadfast persuasion, that he
has assured for us) Faith is soly and wholly alon^, our VV^rks not claiming
any part in that sacred action.


APpius in the Roman story, was a very great Oppressor of the liberties of the
Commons, Coc. Sabellici hist. lib. 9.
and particularly he took away all appeals to the People in case of life and
death: Not long after this decree, he being called in question for forcing the
Wife of Virginius, found all the Bench of Judges against him, and was
constrained, for saving his life, to prefer an appeal to the people, which was
denied him with great shouts and outcries of all, saying, Ecce provocat qui
provoca^ionem sustulit; Regi^ (creed mihi) res ef^ succurrere lapsis. Ovid.
he is forced to appeal, who by barring all appeals in case of life and death,
was the death of many a man. Thus Justice revenged Mercies quarrel upon this
unmerciful man; and certainly, if we expect mercy at the hands of God, or Man,
we must show mercy; for there shall be judgment without mercy, to him that
will show no mercy* and that happens many times even in this life, when God
is pleased to reckon with hard hearted men, that have no bowels of compassion.


DO as you would be done by, is a golden Rule. If the Judge* that sits on the
Bench, the Landlord that deals with his Tenant, Matthew* 7. Ou^d sibi quis nolit
fieri, non inferat ulli.
the Tradesman that venteth his commodities, and every man that deals with
another, did square his carriage by this Rule, there would be much less wrong
in society, and much more comfort in men's consciences; for pulcher liber cor
tuum, every man bears in his own bosom a fair Table Book, engraven legibly by
the finger of nature, wherein, if he would read, B. Lake on Matthew. 22*
he might learn without any other help, what usage is fit for his neighbor;
and if men were as prompt Scholars in learning active charity, as they are
acute Doctors, and Teachers of the Passive, of that charity they expect from
others; the Moralists and Casuists might save much of their pains in
discoursing, and determining our mutual duties.


CRuelty is forbidden, Courage is commanded, we may partake the g^od of the
Lion, B. Lake Sermon. at Court.
but not the evil of the Lion; It was and is a gross mistake, a very large
conceit of Nicholas the Florentine to think that those properties of the Dove
to be without guil, have been the bane of Christendom, whilst the enemies
thereof have taken advantage of their simplicity, to ensnare them, and of their
pity to devour them. It is true, well may imprudent simplicity, and cowaraly
pity disadvantage the Prudent, -- Sapientia prima, Stultitia car^isse. ^lorat.
1. Ep. 1.
the Courageous they never can; nay, sincerity in the end overcomes
infidelity, and pity triumphs over cruelty; none ever dealt more plainly
then Christ, none was dealt withal more deceitfully; none used more pity, none
was used more cruelly: And what was the issue? he proved the wisdom of his
enemies, plain folly; and their fury turned to his greater glory: And there was
never any crafty wit, that was not unto himself a snare; nor cruel heart, whose
hands did not give himself the deadliest wounds in the conclusion.


Julian the Apostate gave for his Arms in his Scotcheon, C^l. Rhod^gin* Var.
Lect.
an Eagle struck through the heart with a flight-shaft, feathered out of her
own wing, w^t^ this Motto, Propriis configimur al^s, our death flies to us with
our own feathers, and our wings pierce us to the very heart: Dan. Featly Sermon.
The Eagle struck dead, is the Church and Commonwealth, the Arrow is the swift
judgment of God, the feathers shed out of her own wings, which carry^d the
arrow so swift to destruction, are the sins of a Church and Commonwealth; a
lamentable thing it is to hear of the ruin of any Kingdom, but when it comes
to, Perditio tua ex te, that Israel should be Isreal's overthrow, that any
Church or Commonwealth should be felo de se, that any particular man should by
sin be accessory to his own death, is a thing to be much lamented.


ALciat has it in one of his Emblems, Chr Fo^seca ut ante^.
That a dog then barketh most, when the Moon is at the fullest; whether it be
by some special influence that it then works in the dog, or whether it be
occasioned by the maculaes, or spots in the Mo^n, represented unto him in the
form and shape of another dog; let the dog bark never so much, Aspera crescit
byems, (...) etc. Ovid. 13. Met.
yet the Moon walks her station securely through the Heavens: And thus, though
Tyranny, persecution, afflictions, bark never so much at the just man, yet he
does not stay to take up a stone at every foul mouthed dog that barks, he makes
not a stand in every cross way that he meets with, but rides on through the
storm, and comes to his journeys end in safety, Opposition is no obstacle to
him.


IT was a smart and piercing speech of St. Ambrose to Theodosius, Magdeburg.
Cent. 4. cap. 6.
offering himself to the Table of the Lord, Istasne adhuc stillantes injustae
caedis cruore manus ^xtendes, etc? What, will thou reach forth those hands of
thine, yet dropping with the blood of Innocents, Jer, Dyke, ut ante^.
slaughtered at Thessalonica? and with them lay hold upon the most holy body of
the Lord? Or will thou offer to put that precious blood in thy mouth, etc? The
like may be said to many coming to the Sacrament, that instead of washing their
hands in innocence, they rinse them in the blood of In^ocents. What? will they
reach forth those hands of theirs, defiled with blood, with the blood of
Oppression, -- Procul hinc procul ef^e prophani.
those fingers of theirs defiled with iniquity, and with those hands and
fingers touch those holy mysteries? with those lips of theirs, that have
driveled out such a deal of filthy communication, with those mouths which have
drunk of the cup of devils; with those mouths and lips, will they offer to
drink the precious blood of Christ? is it not sin enough that with their sins
they have, already defiled their hands, fingers, lips, mouths, but that now
also they will needs come and defile the Lords Table? and impudently crowd in
to the Sacrament, when they come piping hot out of their sins and provocations?

Not to be children in understanding.
A Little child never thinks he shall be a man himself, and ^aintain himself,
and live in the world by his own labor, (...)
or by the Pat^mony, which at years of discretion shall be due unto him, he
cares for nothing but mea^ and drink, looks after nothing but sport and
pastime, (...)
come day, go day, God send night, that is all his care. Nomine (...) de nobis
fab^la; Most of us are even such we (...) the child's folly, Ludere iis in
rebus, in quibus (...) lib. 4.
and laugh at it, as ridiculous, yet we build houses, purchase lands, lay house
to house, land to land, and all to rais^ up a glorious name to posterity, and
to make a great shew^d the world; but for the getting of grace* for the gaining
of faith, and hope, and love, and repentance, none of our thoughts are so
bestowed; and is not this to be children in understanding? 1 Cor. 14. 20.


When a man is to travel into a far Country, R. Sibbs Sermon. (...)
a great (...), or (...) (...) back will but ^inder him in his journey; One
(...) in his hand may comfortably support him, but a bundle of s^aves would be
troublesome. Thus a competency of these outward things may happily help us in
the way to Heaven, whereas abundance may be hurtful, and like long garments to
a man that walks on in the way, will trip up our hee^s too, if we look not well
about us.

Not to continue angry.
WHat Silenus spoke of the life of man, Optimum non nasci, etc. The best thing
was not to be born, Cic. Tusculan* 1.
or being born to dye, may be fitly applied to all quarrels and contentions
amongst brethren, especially Christian brethren; it were the happiest thing in
the world, Dan. Featly Sermon.
that such dissentions, never saw light, but if they should arise, and come
into the world, that they might dye as soon as they were born, at the most,
Ephe^ 4. 26.
that they might but be like those (...), small creatures Aristotle speaks of,
whose life exceeds not a Summers day, not to let the Sun go down upon our wrath.

Hearers and not doers of the Word, condemned.
SOme say that the Weezel does aure concipere, Aristeas apud Gesn.
ore parere; conceive in the ear, and bring forth by the mouth. Sure it is that
there are many such wild conceptions amongst us, many that hear tales with
their ears, and enlarge them with their tongues; Andr. Willet in Levit.
and such there are too that are zealous to hear the Word preached, but all
their practice is only in prating of what they have heard, all their Religion
is at their tongues end, which rather should be at the bottom of their hearts.

Rich poor men.
THe Philosopher reckons the Camel amongst the beasts that are (...) which
bring forth but one at once, and generally it is observed, That among the
Creatures, Aris^ot de A^imal.
The greater do bring forth the fewest young; and so it is in the spiritual
birth, 1 Cor. 1. 16. Andr. Willet Hexapla on Levit.
Not many mighty, not many Noble, are called. It is noted, that the richest men
have fewest children, whereas the poor are most prolifical and fertile, and men
that are rich and abounding in the wealth of this world, are usually most
barren in the fruits of the spirit; Greatness and goodness seldom meet
together; Riches and Religion are very rare Companions.


A Murath the first, Emperor of the Turks, after he had got the field against
the Christians at Cassova, Rich. (...) Turks.
came to view the dead bodies, which lay on heaps like Mountains; on a sudden
one of the Christian Soldiers, that lay sore wounded amongst the dead, seeing
Amurath, raised himself as well as he could, and in a staggering manner made
toward him, falling for want of strength diverse times in the way; which when
the Captains saw, they would have put him back, but Amurath commanded him to
approach, thinking that he would have done him honor, Will. (...) Numb.
and have kissed his feet, but the Soldier being drawn nigh him, suddenly
stabbed him in the belly with a short dagger that he had under his coat, and
thus the Conqueror was conquered, and died presently. Did not the poor wounded
Chaldeans, such as were thrust through and through with the sword, (...)
gasping for life, rally again to the ruin of their enemies? And thus when God
sees his time, even a few poor despised men, wounded and half dead, even
sinking in despair of better times (at such uncertainty runs that alea Martis,
(...)
that die of War) may recover the battle that was lost, and cry Victoria having
spoiled the spoylers, stricken down the chiefest and the strongest, and the
choicest men that before prevailed, and had the upper hand.


WHen a man walks in the Sun, if his face be toward it, he has nothing
before him but bright shining light, and comfortable heat; but let him once
turn his back to the Sun, Aug. (...)
what has he before him then but a shadow? And what is a shadow, but the
privation of light, and heat of the Sun? yea, it is but to behold his own
shadow, defrauding himself of the other. Thus there is no true wisdom, no true
happiness, no real comfort but in beholding the countenance of God; (...)
look from that, and we lose these blessings; and what shall we gain? a shadow,
an empty Image; instead of a substantial, to gain an empty Image of our selves,
and lose the solid Image of God; yet this is the common folly of the world, men
prefer this shadow before that substance, whereas there is not the least
appearance of any true comfort but in God only.


IT is well worth the observation what is written of the Peach, (...)
namely, that the Egyptians of all fruits did make choice of that principally
to consecrate to their Goddess, and for no other cause, but that the fruit
thereof, (...) is like to ones heart, (...), and the leaf like to ones tongue.
What they did like Heathens, (...)
let us do like Christians; for indeed, when the heart and the tongue go
together, then is the Harmony at the sweetest, and the service best pleasing,
both to God and Man.


GOd is in Heaven, Psalm. 115. 3.
he does whatsoever he will. There is not any in the Heaven, or Earth, or Sea,
be it body or spirit, which is not at his de^otion, and waits not at his
beck, the greatest do him homage, the smallest do him service? what is greater
then the Heaven? yet if Joshua pray unto him, that ever-wheeling body shall
cease his diurnal motion, The Sun shall stand still in Gibeon and the Moon in
Ajalon. That which comes forth as a Giant, and rejoices to run his course,
Josh. 10. 12. Geo. Ab^ot Cant. ^on Jon. Psalm. 19. 5. 2 King. 20. 11. Hag. 2. 7.
to satisfy Hezekiah, and to confirm his faith shall fly back as a Coward ten
degrees at once, as then it appeared by the Dyal of Ahaz. What is ruder or more
unfit to be dealt withal then the Earth? yet at his pleasure he shakes both
Earth and Sea. What is more pure, a more excellent and subtle essence then the
Angels? yet he has bound up four of them in the River of Euphrates, and
although they be prepared at an hour, and at a day, and at a moment, and at a
year, Apoc. 9. 14.
to slay the third part of men; yet these Angels cannot stir until that they be
loosed by his special commandment: Unconceivable is his Majesty, unestimable
is his power, the highest things and the lowest, the greatest and the we^kest
do obey him.

The inconsiderate Multitude.
WE see by experience, Sir Walter Raleigh Preface to hist. of World.
that dogs do always bark at those they know not, and that it is their Nature
to accompany one another in those clamours: And so it is with the incon^iderate
multitude, who wanting that virtue which we call honesty in all men,
Daemonology* lib. 3. cap. 1.
and that especial gift of God which we call Charity in Christian men, condemn
without hearing, and wound without offense given; led thereunto by uncertain
report only, which K. James truly acknowledges for the father of all lies.

The great goodness of God in sending his Son Jesus Christ to save s^^ners.
WIcked Haeman procured letters from Ahas^uerosh, for the destruction of the
Jews, Hest. 8. 7.
men, women, and children, all that were in his dominions: this done, Hester
the Queen makes request to the King, that her people might be saved, and the
letters of Haman reversed; she obtains her request, freedom was given, Will.
Perkins Ex^esit. on Creed.
and letters of joyful deliverance were dispatched with speed to all those
provinces, where the Jews inhabited; whereupon arose a wonderful joy and
gladness amongst that people, and it is said, that thereupon many of the people
of the land became Jews. But now behold a greater matter amongst us then this;
There is that Chirographum, that handwriting of Condemnation, the Law; and
therein the sentence of death, -- Sic acceptis sima semper Munera sunt, author
quae gratiosa facit. Ovi. Ep. 16. 11.
of a double death of body and soul, and Satan as wicked Haman accuses us,
and seeks by all means to make good his charge against us; But yet behold, not
any earthly Hester, but Christ Jesus, the Son of God is come down from his
Father in heaven, and has taken away this handwriting of condemnation, and
cancelled it on the Cross, and is now ascended into Heaven, and there sits at
the right hand of his Father, and makes requests for us, and in him is his
Father well pleased, and yields to his request on our behalf, let us (then as
the Persians, the people of that Country, became Jews) in life and conversation
become Christians, turn to Christ, embrace his doctrine, and practice the same
unfeig^edly.

Wantonness in Apparel, reproved.
SUrely if it be a shame for a man to wear a paper on his hat at
Westminster Hall, B. Babington Sermon. at Court.
to show what he has done, it is then as repr^achful to wear vain garments on
ones back; As for a man to be like a fantastical Antic, and a woman like a
Bartholomew baby, Exterior superfluitas interioris vanitatis indicium est.
Bern. in Apol.
what is this but to pull all men's eyes after them, to read in Capital letters
what they are, vain, foolish, ridiculous* It were to be wished that such
back-papers (Apparel in excess) might be as odious in the eyes and hearts of
men and women, as those h^t-papers be at Westminster and elsewhere; for
certainly the one tellas foul tales as the others do, and could they but speak,
would make the wearers ashamed of their doings, and ridiculous behaviors.

The prevalency of repentant Tears.
WEeping has a voice, Lachry^^^ ^^^dera vocis habent. Ovid.
Psalm. 6. 8. And as Music upon the water sounds farther, and more harmoniously
then upon the ^and: So Prayers joined with Tears cry louder in God's ears, and
make sweeter music then when ^ears are absent. When Antipater had written a
large letter against Alexander's mother unto Alexander, the King answered him,
One tear from my mother, will wash away all her faults. Pl^tarch. in vita
Alexand.
So it is with God; a penitent tear is an unde^iable Ambassador, and never
returns from the Throne of Grace unsatisfied.


THey that are the most zealous for the introducing of useless Ceremonies in
the Church, T. Fuller Sermon.
are usually the most negligent to preach the cautions in using them; and
simple people like children in eating of fish, swallow bones and all to the
danger of choking; Besides, what is observed of Horse-hairs, that lying nine
days in water, they turn to snakes; so some Ceremonies, though dead at first,
in conti^uance of time quicken, get stings, and may do much mischief,
especially in such an age, wherein the meddling of some, have justly awakened
the jealousy of all.


IT is written of Lysimachus, that having his City besieged, and himself,
together with his whole Army, Plutarch. in Reg Impp. Apopththegm.
being in great danger of peri^hing by thirst, in exchange of a cup of cold
water, he delivered up the keys of his City to his Enemy, which cold comfort he
had no sooner tasted, but his tongue bewrayed the grief of his heart, saying; O
that in lieu of so momentany a pleasure, I should be made, of a Sovereign, a
Servant; of a King, a Captive: It were to be wished, that every one would apply
this, and meditate with Hierom, Brevis est voluptas fornicationis, and perpetua
poena fornicatoris, What shall the fornicator get, enduring an Ocean of torture
for a drop of pleasure? St. Bernardus.
Momentaneam est quod delectat, ae^ernum quod cruciat, says another; Sweet
meat must have sower sauce. O that men therefore would forget the beginning, 2
Cor. 7. 20.
and only behold the end of these delights, and consider with the Apostle,
that God is an aveng^r of such things.


IN a dark Lanthorn there is light indeed, but so shut up as if it were not,
and when the side is most open, there is light enough to give direction to him
that bears it, B. Hall occasion Meditat.
none to others: He can discern another man by that light, which is cast before
him, but another cannot discern him; Right such is, reserved knowledge; no man
is the better for it but the owner, there is no difference betwixt concealed
skill and ignorance; and when such hidden knowledge looks forth, it casts so
sparing a light, Scire tu^m nihil est, nis^ te scire hoc sciat alter.
as may only argue it to have an unprofitable being; to have ability without
will to good; power to censure, none to benefit; so that the suppression of
those gifts which God would have us to impart, is but a Thieve's Lanthorn in a
true man's hand, and therefore to be communicated.


When Orpheus went to fetch his Wife Euridice out of Hell, he had her granted
unto him upon condition, Ovid. Metam. lib. 10.
that he should not turn back his eyes to look upon her, till he brought her
into Heaven; yet having brought her forward a great way, at length his love was
so excessive, that he could not contain any longer; whereupon he lost both her
sight and her self, she suddenly vanishing out of his sight. Flexit amans
oculos, etc. Playfer's Sermon. Laudare se vanum, etc.
This is a Poetical fiction, yet the Moral is good: If we have any virtue, any
parts of learning or outward endowments whatsoever, be they never so eminent,
or admired by others, yet we must not be so blind in affection as to dote too
much upon them, or to fall in admiration of our selves for them, or to be
always gazing and wondering at them, lest by too much looking on them, or too
much liking of them, or too much remembering them, we lose them, because indeed
it may so fall out, that he that remembers his virtue, may have no virtue to
remember.

Consideration to be had in all undertakings.
POnder the path of thy feet, Prove. 4. 26.
was good counsel from a wise man. And it was an Emblem, wherewith Titus
Vespasia^us was much affected to see a Dolphin wreathed and fastened about an
Anchor, whereby he signified the stayednesse of his thoughts, before he did any
thing; and when he had well considered, then the diligence of his care in the
execution of it. Oppian. lib. 2. de natura Pi^c^um.
The Dolphin swims with as much speed in the sea, as a bird flies ^n the air;
and it is the Anchor which stays the ship, from being tossed and carried away
with the winds. Jermin. Exposit. on Prove. Bernard. homil. 13. super Missus est.
This may teach us, that consideration must stay our feet, before we go about
any thing; to look before we leap: Prudentis est animi, prius cernere, etc. It
is the part of a wise man, not to decree to do any thing, before he has
descryed and discovered, what is to be done.

Englands distractions.
IT was once said by a reverend Divine, M. Josh. Shu^e
now with God, That England was a little place, but had a great deal of Rome in
it: but it may now be said, That England is a narrow place, N. Hardy's Ser at
West. 1647.
but has a world of confusion in it. The well compacted hedge of our Laws is
broken down; so true is that Maxim, ^^ter arma silent leg^s, The voice of Law
cannot be heard, for the noise of drums. The well-wrought vestment of our
Religion, is rent (with Ieroboam's garment) into twelve, nay, into a hundred
pieces, by schismatic sectaries. Women are not more sick for new fashions,
than both men and women are for new opinions.

The Hypocrite described.
THe Army of Philopaemon, Plutarch*
a great Commander amongst the Grecians, is likened unto a man, that has legs
and feet, and no belly, because they wanted money, Joh. Walls Ser. at S. Mary's,
Oxon, 1624.
the sinews of war. And it is more than probable, that in the Church militant,
there be diverse, that have legs and feet, but no belly; they have the legs
and the feet of outward conversation, but they want the heart and the belly of
inward devotion: N^n vitae sed famae negotiat^res, (as Tertullian makes the
character) Such as negotiate and trade more for a good name, than a good life;
for a good report, than a good conscience: like Fiddlers, that are more careful
in tuning their Instruments, than composing their lives; making a show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof.

God has a peculiar blessing for his children.
ALL the sons of Jacob returned laden from Egypt, Genesis 43.
with corn and money in their sacks, only Benjamin had the Cup in the mouth of
his sack, as a singular pledge of his brother Joseph's favor. Arnold. Ponrani
Bibliotheca Concion.
Thus many there are in the world, that rejoice for the corn, and the wine, and
the oil, that have increased in the quickness of their Trade, in the
largeness of their Incomes, in the greatness of their Revenewes: O! but the
light of Gods countenance, Benjamins cup, whether it be Scyathum gratiae, a cup
of grace, with St. Ambrose; or calicem benedictionis, a cup of blessing, with
the Apostle; this silver-cup, this grace-cup, is the portion of none but
Benjamin, it is reserved only for Benjamin, for the sons of God, and the
children of his right hand, that grow and flourish under the wing and shadow of
his protection.

To be active in the service of God.
Joseph's brethren stood so long dallying, Genesis 43. 10.
and delaying, and trifling out the time, that having a journey to buy corn,
they might have returned twice, before they went once. Elizeus, He^t. Pintus in
Dan. 1 King. 19. 20.
when Eliah called him, went about the bush, and must needs go bid his father
and mother farewell, before he could follow the Prophet. But (...) every good
Christian, when he is called of God to profess his Religion, not stand, shall
I, shall I, temporizing, and circling, and consulting with flesh and blood, and
fetching a compass about; but be always pressed, and ready to act, and do the
will of God, Act. 21. 13.
and not only to be bound, but (if he be thereunto called) to die for the Lord
Jesus.


THere goes a tradition of Ovid, that famous Poet, Lib. 2. de Trist.
(receiving some countenance from his own confession) that when his father was
about to beat him, for following the pleasant, but unprofitable study of
Poetry, he, under correction, promised his father, never more to make a verse,
and made a versein his very promise; probably the same, but certainly more
elegant for composure, than this verse, which common credulity has taken up.

Parce precor, genitor, posthac non ver^i^icabo.
Father on me pity take,
Verses I no more will make.
Thus when we so solemnly promise our heavenly Father to sin no more, we sin in
our very promise; T. Fuller Medit.
our weak prayers made to procure our pardon, Exodus 12. 11.
increase our guiltiness; we say our prayers, as the Jews did eat the
Passover, all in haste. And whereas in bodily action, motion is the cause of
heat; clean contrary, the more speed we make in our prayers, the colder we are
in our devotion; so that sin is a close attendant on the best of our religious
performances.


XErxes, the Persian Monarch, Herodotus lib. 7.
having received a loss by the rage of Hellespontus himself, more mad than the
sea, caused fetters and manacles to be cast into the waters thereof, as if he
would make it his prisoner, and bind it with links of iron at his pleasure.
Seneca de Ira.
Darius did the like upon the river Gynde, who because it had drowned him a
white horse, threatened the river to divide it into so many streams, and so to
weaken the strength of it, that a woman great with child, should go over it
drie-shod. And there were people in Africa, that went out to fight with the
North Wind, because it drove heaps of sand upon their fields and habitations.
B. King lect. on Jonah.
Such is the madness of our days, if we be crossed with wet or dry, wind or
rain, fair or foul weather, we fall a cu^sing and banning, repining and
murmuring at the Creatures, like a dog, that biteth the stone, and never
looks after the hand that threw it; we cast our eye, not upon the Agent, God,
but upon the Instruments (...) Creatures, which cannot do us the least harm,
till they have a commission from him so to do.


THe best man in the voyage cannot be safe in the cabin under hatches, Paul de
Francis Orat.
when the whole ship is ready to be drowned under water; nor can the spider be
secure in his web, when the whole window is pulled down; nor the young bird be
out of danger in the nest, when the whole arm of the tree is torn off. Thus all
private men's interests are ventured in the bottom of the Commonwealth, Paries
cum Proxim^^ ardet, etc.
and all Commonwealths in the great vessel of the Earth, which was once
swallowed up with a deluge of Water, and shall be, ere it be long, with a
conflagration of fire. What folly then, or rather madness is it, for any
private man to look for safety, in the midst of a public danger; to dream of
perpetu^^^^, and certainties, and indefeizable estates, for his own particular,
when the whole is in danger of a sudden destruction?

Temperance cannot preserve a man's life, when God calls for it.
A Vessel of Wine or Beer, kept for a man's own use, Rich. Sibbs Sermon. Grays.
Inn, Land. 1619.
or his special friend, may hold out al^ng time, being moderately drank off;
but if there come in such customers, as are strong to drink strong drink, that
may be spent in a day, which would have lasted a month. So the life of man,
which otherwise, with temperance and care, might have lasted and spu^ out, to a
full length of years, that with Lessian diet, might have reached to a full
period, if God do but let in great drinkers, as agues, burning feavours,
plague, etc. it will be spent and gone on a sudden.

The sinner's care is more for his body, than for his soul.
IT is said, that Swine, especially the wild Bore, Joh, Gethards Medi^at.
are of that strange quickness of scent, that if the hunts-man mean to shoot
at him, he must take the wind of him, or else he will wind him out, and be
gone. Now on the contrary, they are not so sensible of the ill savor of a
dunghill, nor the stench of mud and mire, but rather take delight to lie
wallowing therein, O curas hominum, O quantum est in rebus inane? Perss. sat. 1.
esteeming it as a great recreation, and refreshing unto them. This is the
figure of a filthy foul sinner, who will fly a thousand miles from the perils
and dangers of his body, so that he may sleep in a whole skin, he cares for no
more; but in the mean time, takes delight and pleasures in those muckhills, and
dirty puddles, which defile his soul.

Worldly thoughts to be set aside, before the receiving of the Sacrament.
ABraham, when he went to sacrifice his son on Mount Moriah, Genesis 22. 4, 5.
seeing the place afar off, said unto the young men that were with him, Abide
you here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder and worship: He saw,
Dan Dykes Worthy Communicant.
and knew well enough, that if they had gone along with him, they would have
distracted him, troubled him, and hindered him in the sacrifice; they would have
cried out, and have made such a noise; they would have hung like so many
weights upon his arms, that with no freedom or quietness, he could have
performed the sacrifice: And therefore, when he saw the place afar off, he
prepared himself, and bad them stay behind. The like should our care be, when
we see the time afar off, that we should receive the Sacrament, especially when
we see the time draw near, and at hand, the very evening before; we then should
set aside all our thoughts and business, all worldly cares and employments,
and bid them wholly stand aside, and not suffer them not only to go to the
Mount with us, but not to go into our Closets and secret Chambers with us, but
shut them out to doors, make them dance attendance there, that we may perform
the duty with more comfort and freedom.

Gods care of his Children, notwithstanding their several aberrations.
TRees, R. Holdsworth Sermon. 1627.
if the root run too deep into the Earth, they must be cut shorter; if the
branches spread too far, they must be lopped, and if the Canker or Caterpiller
once infect, and cleave to them, then they must be blased and smoaked; Thus the
children of God, when they be too much rooted by their affections in the things
of this world, and with their great and large boughs of their ability, wrong
and impoverish their poor neighbor, or let their coin, like the Canker, eat
into their souls, God will give them many a cutting, lopping, and smoking; And
as they cannot but naturally do the one, so God intending to heal them
spiritually, will do the other his care will be still for them, notwithstanding
their several failings.


THe Quail rages at the rising of the Sun; Lib. 5. cap. 8. Chr. Fooseca Sermon.
Quadrage^^ma.
And Pliny says of the Athlantes, a people in Aethiopia, that they curse the
Sun both at his rising and setting, with a thousand curses, because it p^rcheth
their ground, and burns up their grass; And those that fish for whales curse
the day, Job 9. And he that is asleep is offended when the light awakeneth him.
Qui male agit, odit lucem. Thus many are offended, that the glorious light of
Jesus Christ should discover their sins, many shut their eyes and will not see;
Ulis. Aldrovand. Ornith^log. lib. 3.
It is one of the saddest things in the world, and much to be deplored, that
light being come into the world, men love darkness better then light, but
there is reason for it, though not a good one, because their deeds are evil.


AS the Circles made by a stone cast into the water, Dan. Featly Clavis mystica.
not only multiply, but much enlarge themselves, The first is a narrow Circle
about the stone, the next fetches a bigger compass, the third a greater and
more capacious then that, the fourth so large, that it touches the banks of
the River. In like manner the first of brethren in Scripture is confined to one
house and bed, one womb, as Jacob and Esau were natural brethren; the second
extends it self to all of one family or lineage, thus Christ and James were
brethren and kinsmen; the third to the whole Nation or Country, thus Peter and
the Jews were brethren and Countrymen; the fourth and last, to all the utmost
bounds of the Earth, whether spiritually as all Christians, or carnally all Men.


PLutarch writes that the Amphictiones in Greece, a famous Council of twelve
sundry people, In lib. Moral.
wrote upon the Temple of Apollo Pythius, instead of the Iliads of Homer, or
songs of Pindarus (large and trying discourses) short sentences, and
Memoratives, as, know thy self, use moderation, beware of suretiship, and the
like. Thus doubtless, though every Creature in the world, whereof we have use,
be a Treatise and narration unto us of the goodness of our God, and we might
weary our flesh, and spend our days in writing books of the inexplicable
subject, B. King. lect. on Jonah.
yet that one short ^independent Apothegm of Jonah comprehends all the rest,
Salvation is the Lord's; Not King, nor Parliament; not Army, or any assistance
abroad, nor any help at home whatsoever; not any of these, nor all of these
together, can put an end to our unnatural divisions. Salvation is the Lord's.


Jeroboam being in the head of ten Rebellious Tribes, Nath. Mardy Ser. at Westminster.
thinks it not safe that they should go up to Jerusalem to worship; his
suspicious heart, no doubt, told him that Religion is a friend to Loyalty, and
if they continued still to worship the true God, they would ere long have
embraced their right King: What then? Rebellion against the King must be
attended with defection from God, 1 King. 12.
his politic brain finds out two nearer, and, as he pretonds, fitter places
within their own Territories, Dan and Bethel, there he sets up golden Calves
for them, makes wodden Priests, Nolite contemnere Venialia, quia minima sunt,
sed timet^ quia plura. Aug. de 10. chordis.
and invites the people to worship them. Thus one sin ushers in another, one
lesser draws on a greater; Cain's anger is seconded with murder; Ahab's
covetoufness attended with cruelty; Peter's denial backed with an Oath; And
Ieroboam's rebellion with Idolatry.

The great power of Envy.
AS an Earthquake arises from a tumultuous vapor shut up in the Cav^^^s and
bowels of the earth, Arn. Pon^an. Biblioth. concion.
where it tosseth and tumbleth, until it break out, and overturn all that
stands in the way of it: So envy is a pestilent vapor which lies in the
bowels of a man, Fuge invidiam, quae non solum alienos, verum multo magis eum,
quem postederit, etc. Am. (...). de. fug^ se^u^i.
where it boyleth and fretteth, until it find occasion to vent it self, and
then it tumbleth and throws down all that stands in the malttious eye of
it; Houses and Trees stand firm against a Tempest of lightning, or a flood of
rain, and men stand out against the cruelty of (...) ^ath, and rage of a man's
lasting anger: but what house or Tree, stands against the force of an
Earthquake; and who is able to stand before the force of Envy? Prove. 27. 4.

Listening after vanity, reproved.
THere is a story of Demosthenes, Mich. Jermin on Proverbs.
who speaking to the Athenians in a very serious matter, and finding them ^ot
to regard his words, interrupted himself, and told them that he had some
special thing to relate, to which he would have them fain to attend: Diog.
Laert. in vita.
whereupon silence being made, that which he told them was this; Two men (says
he) having bargained for the hire of an Ass, were traveling from Athens to
Megara, in a very hot day; and both striving to enjoy the shadow of the ass,
the one said, that he hired the ass, and the shadow too; the other said, that
he did but hire the ass, and not the shadow; Thus leaving them as strife,
Demosthenes went away; But the Athenians calling him with great eagerness to
come back, and to end the tale: Upon his return, that which he said, was this;
Oye Athenians, will ye attend unto me speaking of a ^hadow and an ass, and will
ye not attend unto me speaking of most important things and affairs? Now how
justly may this be the reproof of many in our days? such as tithe mint,
annise, and cummin, and let pass the more substantial points of the Law, such
as have an ear for vanity, but not for Truth; that attend to things of folly,
but not to the words of Wisdom; hence it is, that Wisdom cries out in the
streets, and few regard it, but if folly once appear, there will be many
auditors.

Knowledge and Practice must go together.
THe Samaritan woman did not fill her pitcher at the Well, Joh. 4. 7.
to spill it by the way, but to carry it home full of water, Genesis 30. 15.
and there to use it as an occasion served: and Rachel, that other holy woman,
did not desire the Mandrakes so much to hold in her hand, or to smell to, Tho.
Playf^^^ Sermon.
as to be made apt thereby to bring forth the fruit of her womb: And we must
not come to the Wellspring of life, and when we have filled our pitchers,
spill all presently on the ground; nor we must not so much labor to know the
Word, that we may subtly dispute, or discourse of it, as to practice it, that
we may show the fruit of it in the amendment of our lives and conversations.

Dullness and drousiness in the service of God, reproved.
IT is reported of Constantize the great, that when divine service was read, he
would help the Minister to begin the prayer, Eusebius de vita (...). lib. 3.
cap. 17.
and to read the verses of the Psalms interchangeably; and when there was a
Sermon, if any place of special importance were alleged, that he would turn
his Bible, to imprint the place the better in his mind, both by hearing and
seeing it, and being as it were revished with those things which he heard, he
would start up suddenly out of his Throne, and Chair of State, and would stand
a long while to hear more diligently, and though they which were next him did
put him in mind to remember himself, yet he heard the word so attentively, that
he would not give any ear at all unto them: How wonderfully should this
confound us, that are every way inferior, Tho. Playfer's Sermon. Luke 24. Cant.
5. and 8. 13.
when we hear Emperors and mighty Kings show such a good heart in hearing of
the word of God, to be so cheerful in the service of God; and we in the mean
time to have such lumpish and dull spirits,, as to be never a whit moved or
affected with the same; that though Christ talk with us never so comfortably in
the way, yet our hearts are not so much as warmed within us, though he puts
his hand to the hole of the door, yet we will not list up the latch to let him
in, and though our well-beloved speak, yet we will not hearken unto him.


SPring water smoaketh, Iof. Shutes Sermon. at Paul's, 1628.
when all other waters of the River and the Channel are frozen up, that water
is living whilst they are dead; All experience teaches us, that Well-waters
arising from deep springs, are hotter in Winter than in Summer, the outward
cold does keep in, and double their inward hear: Such is a true Christian in
the evil day; his life of Grace gets more vigor by opposition; he had not
been so gracious, if the times had been better; I will not say, He may thank
his Enemies, but I must say, He may thank God for his Enemies.


CHrist is not unfitly compared to an Eagle, in three respects. First, because
as the Eagle fluttereth over her young ones, and safeguards them from any that
would annoy them; Ambros. in lib. de Solomone. Math, 16.
so does Chris carefully protect his Church, that the Gates of Hell nor the
deepest Counsels of her Enemies shall not prevail against her: Secondly, as
the Eagle stirs up her nest, and takes up her young ones, enforcing them to
look toward the Sun, thereby trying her generous and degenerating brood; even
so does Christ make trial of true and counterfeit Christians, he rejects them
as counterfeits that have but owl light, B. Lakes Sermon. on Mat. chapter 22.
such as hate the light; but those which can look upon the Sun of
Righteousness, and delight in beholding of him, they go for true Christians:
Thirdly, Genesis 2.
The Eagle hates the Serpent, and wheresoever he sees him, renteth him with
his Beak: And Christ the seed of the woman did break the Serpents head.


THere are a sort of Men that call themselves Christians, profess that they
know God, and that their hope is in Heaven, but no sooner does any vanity come
in the way, B. Lakes Sermon. at Court.
any temporal commodity present it self, but their hearts quickly betray where
their Treasure is; just like the Iuglers Ape of Alexandria, which being attired
like a reasonable Creature, and dancing curiously to his Masters Instrument,
deceived all the Spectators, until one spying the fraud, threw a handful of
Dates upon the Stage, Simia ^imia est, etiamsi aurea gester insig nia. Era^^^.
in adag.
which the Ape no sooner espied, but he tore all his Vizard, and fell to his
Victuals, to the scorn of his Master; which gave an occasion to the Proberb, An
Ape is an Ape though he be clad never so gaily. And most sure it is, that an
Hypocrite will at last show himself an Hypocrite, for all his specious show
and goodly pretenses.


St. Paul resembles the different conditions of the Church under the two
Testaments, to the different conditions of a child, when he is in his nonage,
though he be heir, Gal. 4.
and when he is come to his full age. While he is in his nonage, Prima sius in
locum.
though he be heir, yet he is kept in awe, and under a Pedagogue; but when he
comes to full age, his Father affords him a more cheerful Countenance, and a
more liberal maintenance: Even so under the Law, the Church was kept under and
scanted of Grace; but under the Gospel she is more free, and endued with a more
plentiful measure of Gods holy spirit.

The Kingdom of Heaven an everlasting Kingdom.
MOrtal Kingdoms are not lasting, Jean Bodin. de Repu^.
and while they last they continue not uniform; Are not everlasting, they have
their Climacterical years, and commonly determine within certain periods: The
Politicians write of it, Bodine by name, and he out of others; and the stories
are clear, and experience daily shows it to be so: Justin has calculated the
three first Monarchs. but Sleidan all four, and we see their beginning and
ending: And as they are not lasting, so while they last, they continue not
uniform; The Planters of great States are commonly Heroical men; but the
Proverb is, Heroum ^ilii noxae; Magna Imperi^ limits suos habent quo cum
venerunt, siftunt, retroeunt, (...). Ex Cent. 8. ad Belg. ep. 31. 2 Samuel 7.
The Parents were never so beneficial, as the children are mis^h^evous,
oppressing by Tyranny, or wasting by Vanity; worldly peace breeds plenty,
plenty breeds pride, and pride breeds war, wherewith comes Ruin: This being
the condition of mortal Kingdoms, how blessed is that Kingdom of Heaven which
shall have no end; the words are short, but they are full, The Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it; this is typified in David and Saul, the Kingdom
of the one was temp^rall, of the other eternal: The Angel repeats the same
promise; Luke 1.
The Psalms do often urge it; so do the Prophers, Psalm 45. and 72. and 89. Isa.
9. 7.
Esaias especially, they all concur in this, that it shall have no end.

Gods Laws obeyed, are the support of a Commonwealth.
IT fares with the body politic, J. Bodin de Repub, ut anted.
as it does with the body natural, if the humors keep their proportion, we
have health; no sooner do they swerve from it, but they begin a disease, which
makes way to pu^refaction, and so to dissolution; wherefore we apply physic
to reduce them again into a due temper. Even so, while good Laws sway, Leges
perquam egregiae res sunt. etc. Menander in Androgyno.
our carriage toward our selves, toward our neighbors, each man does well,
the Commonwealth does prosper; but no sooner does the Subject break these
bonds, but a civil putrefaction enters, which makes way to the ruin of a
State, whoreth every man's particular interest is hazarded with the whole, the
remedy where of is the work of judgment, but it must be attended with Justice
also; not the Kings affections, but his Laws must moderate his Judgment, and
the medicine must be fitted to the Disease; otherwise if the scales of Justice
do not firft weigh the merits of the cause, the Judgment will as much disquiet
the State, as discontent the party judged.

All have not the same measure of Christ.
CHrist has the fullness of Grace, B. Lake on Math. 26.
we but every one his proportion, according to our capacities; even as from the
Sun, every man receives a beam of the same kind, though not the same beam; or
from a tree every Man gathers an apple, though not the same apple; or out of
a River, every Man drinks a draught of the same water, but not the same
draught of water; Even so all do partake of the same Christ, but not in the
same measure; And no Man whole Christ, by whole, I mean totum Christi, though
every man does receive him whole, that is totum Christum; Every man has Christ
alike intensive, though extensive all have him not alike, Exo^* 16. 18.
and yet extensive too every Man has his full measure, as it was in Manna, He
that gathered more had not too much, and he that gathered less had enough.


A Discreet Schoolmaster does not only teach his Scholars Grammar rules,
whereby for example true Latin may be made; J. Prestons Sermon. at Camb.
but he teaches them also to make true Latin, according to those Rules;
neither does he think his pains bestowed to any purpose till his Scholars can
do that: Even so, a discreet Minister must teach his people not only how to
know, but how to do their duty, to turn their Science into Conscience, Gal. 5.
1.
so to learn Christ as to become Christians, Christians in S. Paul^ sense; For
certainly he is a very trewant in Christ's School, 1 Cor. 3. 2.
whose life does not express his learning, that is not a doer as well as a
hearer of the Word.


TRavailers write ( Nath* Chytreus by name) that in Padua, Ponderat haec
causas, percutit ille reos.
Iustic^ (...) in a public place, between a pair of scales and a sword
(a^cording to the old manner) with these two Verses proceeding from her mouth,
Reddo cuique suum, sanctis and legibus omne
Concilio mortale genus, ne crimine vivat.
The Verses are but clowter-like, (unworthy such an University as Padua is
renowned to be) but the sense is good, and for the shortness of them, they may
be the better remembered; I give (says Justice) to every man his own; I pr^cure
and win all men to be subject unto godly Laws, left otherwise they should
prove criminal, that is, grievous transgressors: Were it otherwise, Servants
would be on horseback, Isai. 24.
and Masters, even Princes on foot. Like People, like Priest; Like Buyer, like
Seller; Eccie. 10.
Like Borrower, like Lender, (as Esaias again says). Nay then no buyer, no
seller, Isai. 59.
or borrower, or lender, but all upon snatching and catching, and rifling, and
plundering, and rapine, and wrong, and blood touching blood.


THe Minister's labor whether it hit or miss, August. in l^b. 1. contra
Cresconium.
is accepted of the Lord l For as he who persuades to evil, be it Heresy or
Treason, is punished accordingly, although he do not prevail, because he
intended it, because he did labor it: So he that does his best to win Men to
Heaven, Geo. Abbot. Cant. lect. on Jonah.
though he effects not what he desired, though he has labored in vain, and
spent his slrength in vain, yet he shall be accepied, and his reward shall be
with his God.


WHen we pluck down a house, Chrysoft. in 2 ad Corinth. Homil. 1.
with intent to new build it, or repair the ruins of it, we warn the
Inhaditants out of it, least they should be soyled with the dust and rubbish,
or offended with the noise, and so for a time provide some other place for
them; but when we have new trimmed and dressed up the House, then we bring them
back to a better habitation: Thus God, when he overturneth this rotten room of
our flesh, Resurgent Sanctorum corpora sine ullo viti^. etc. Aug. Enchirid.
calls out the Soul for a little time, and lodges it with himself in some
corner of his Kingdom, but repairesh the bracks of our bodies against the
Resurrection, and then having made them decent, yea glorious and incorruptible,
he does put our Souls back again into their acquainted Mansions.

The Popes policy to advance his Holiness.
ONe Psapho dwelling in the parts of Lybia, Maximus Tyriu^.
desirous to be canonized a God, took a sort of prating birds, and secretly
taught them to sing this one note; Psapho is a great God, and having their
lesson perfectly, let them fly into the woods and hills adjoining; where
continuing their song, other birds by imitation learned the same, till all the
hedge-rowes rang with nothing but Psapho's diety; The Country people hearing
the Birds, but ignorant of this fraud, thought Psapho to be a God indeed, and
began to worship him: The same is the Popes practice, desirous to effect his
ambition, and show himself to be a God, he maintains a sort of discontented
English fugitives in his Seminaries, John White's Sermon. (...) Paul's Land. 1610.
as it were in so many cages, where dyeting them for the nonce he easily
teaches them what tune he pleases; and having so done, takes off their b^lls
and sends them home again, where filling every hedge and outhouse with their
tunes, no marvail if other birds of the samefeather, and as wise as themselves,
by conversing with them, do the like.

The power of Faith reviving the deadly sin-sick soul.
When the Israelites were in burying a Man, 2 King. 13. 21.
for fear of the Soldiers of the Moabites, Will. Perkins on Creed.
they cast him for haste into the sepulcher of Elisha; Now the dead Man as soon
as he was down, and had touched the body of the Prophet, he recovered and stood
upon his feet; So, let a Man that is dead in sin, be cast into the grave of
Christ, that is, let him by faith but touch Christ dead and buried, it will so
come to pass, that he shall be raised from death, and bondage of sin, to
become a new man.

To sin against the mercies of God, is to double our Sins.
HE that sins against the mercies of God, fights against God with his own
weapons, Edm. Calamy Sermon. at Westminster. 1645.
which must needs provoke God; Suppose a Man should come into a Smiths shop,
and take up the Smiths own Hammer, and knock him on the head, this were to
commit a double sin, not only to kill the Smith, but to kill him with his own
Hammer: Such a double sin are they guilty of, who the more wit they have, the
more they plot against God; and the more wealth, and health, and honor they
have, Qu^m cito m^rtalibus Bene^icium perit, and a^ missum depre. henditur.
Sophocles in A. jace flagif.
the more they despise God and his Commandments with their wealth and honor:
If a Surgeon should freely bestow his pains and charge to cure a Man of a
lame hand; and he should as soon as ever he were cured, kill this Surgeon
with his cured hand; this were an horrible ingrati^ude and provoking sin; And
thus do they, that when they are delivered from sickness, and made whole,
released out of prison, and set at liberty, fall presently to sinning again
with that health, and that liberty which God bestowed on them.

A true sense of wanting Grace, is an argument of having Grace.
A Young Scholar, when he has gotten his Seton or his Ramus once by heart,
Th. Gatakers loy of just.
thinks he has as much Logic as his Tutor can teach him, but when he comes
to understand things, he sees his own error; And so the raw Students at
Athens, when they were but yet fresh-men, Plutarch de perfect.
they thought that they moved in a Circle of knowledge, they would be called
Sophoi, Wise men; but having spent some time at their Books, they found
themselves at a loss, and thought it a great honor to be called Philo-sophi,
Lovers of wisdom; And last of all, having made some good progress through the
Arts and Sciences, they accounted themselves Moroi, mere Ignoramuses that
understood nothing at all; the more knowledge they had, the more they
discovered their own weakness and ignorance: So the more men believe, the more
they come to see and feel their unbelief; the further they wade on in the
study and practice of Repentance, the more they find out and discover their own
impenitency, and complain of the hardness and untowardnesse of their own
hearts; the more they labor and make progress in found Sanctification, the
more they come to apprehend, and see their own corruption; And this very sense
of wanting Grace, is an argument of Grace; It is a sure sign of Grace, to see
no grace, and to see it with grief: Math. 5.
For Christ says, Blessed are the poor, as well as pure in spirit, the one
shall see God, and the other has a present right to the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is the same in effect.


REmigius, a Judge of Lorraigne tells this story, That the Devil in those
parts did use to give money to Witches, Joh. Prestons 4 Trea^ises.
which did appear to be good coin, seemed to be current at first; but being
laid up a while, it then appeared to be nothing but dry leaves: So the Devil
deceives men now in these days of so large Professession he makes them to do
outward actions which have a fair show; but when they need them, Augustine in
Psalm. 65.
then they appear as they are, to be nothing but dry leaves, mere dead leaves,
because there is no life in them; they hear, they pray, they read, they sing
Psalms, but they turn not the man's to spiritual nourishment, there is not a
principle of spiritall life in them.


AMongst the Sons of Men, a Courtier, J. Preston on Sacrament.
a Favorite in the Court gets more by one suit it may be, then a Tradesman, or
Merchant, or Husbandman gets with twenty years labor, though he take much
pains, rising up yearly, going to bed late, and eating the bread of
carfulness; Orati^ pura, coelos penetrans vacua non redibit. Aug. in Sermon.
for one request may bring in more profit, may make a Courtier richer, than so
many years labor and pains: So in like case, a faithful Prayer put up to God,
may more prevail with him, we may obtain more at his hands by it, than by many
years labor, or using much means in another way.


MEn of extraordinary tallness (though otherwise little deserving) are made
Porters to Lords, Tho. Fullers Holy State.
and those of unusual littleness, are made Ladies Dwarfes; whilst men of
moderate stature may want Masters: Thus many, notorious for extremities, may
find Favorers to prefer them, whilst moderate men in the middle truth may want
any to advance them: But what says the Apostle, If in this life only we had
hope, we are of all men the most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19.


EUtychus in the Acts, Act. 20. 9. 10. P. du Moulin del'amour de Dieu.
is an Emblem of a Christian in Temptation, he fell from an high lo^t, and was
taken up dead, and so reputed of all that were then present; but Paul laid
himself upon him, and found embraced him, and life in him, and set him on his
legs again; So though a Man fall high from Heavenly Grace, to the very pit of
Hell (if it were possible) yet he may be raised again by some skillful Paul,
some painful, preacher, applying the comforts of the Gospel, and showing that
his life is not altogether extinguished, but ^id only with God in Christ Jesus.

Anabaptisticall zeal, condemned.
THere is a story in Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 8. chapter 5.
how two Goats meeting on a Bridge, non vim sed viam fec^re, they did not make
away each other, but made way one for the other (as Mutianus an eyewitness
tells the tale) The one lying down on his belly, suffered the other to pass
over his back, Procopius de bello Gotho^um. lib. 2.
and so both escaped the danger of the ditch: And in the time of the Go^his^
Wars, it may be read, That a Roman Soldier and a Barbabarian, casually falling
into the same pit, as they marched along the Country, were so far from
contending with each other, as that they both agreed mutually to relieve each
other, and so Nec^ssity making them friends, they were both drawn out of the
pit and delivered, It were to be wished, that the separating Anabaptist in this
case, had so much wit as the Goat, Ioh. Boys Postils.
or else so much good will as the Goth, they would not then hold dissoluteness
a resoluteness, the breaking of Ecclestasticall Orders a point of devotion. If
their zeal were but half so good to the Gospel, as Mary's was to the Law, at
the time of her Purification, they would rather wring themselves in the
part^cular, then wrong the Church in the general.

Grace in the heart may be a long time concealed.
LOok upon a Coal covered wi^h ashes, there is nothing appearing in the heap but
only dead ashes; B. Halls Occas. meditat.
there is neither light, nor smoke, nor heat, and yet when those Embers are
stirred to the bottom, there are found some living gleads, which do but contain
fire, and are apt to propagate it: Many a Christian breast is like this Hearth,
no life of Grace appearing there for the time, either to his own sense, or the
apprehension of others; whilst the season of Tempta^ion lasts, all seems cold
and dead; yet still at the worst, there is a secret coal from the Altar of
Heaven raked up in their bosom, which upon the gracious motions of the
Almighty, does both bewray some Remainders of that divine fire, and is easily
raised to a per^ect flame; Let no man therefore deject himself, or censure
others, for the utter extinction of that spirit, which does but hide it self
in the Soul for a glorious advantage.

How to prevent wavering mindedness.
IT is observable, that the Be being to fly home to her Hive, and fearing
least she should be taken by the way with the wind, Ambros. de Virginitate.
and so might be tossed up and down in the air, cou^terpoiseth her self with a
little stone, and so flies straight home: This may teach us what we ought to
do; Tho. Playfere ut ante^.
we must not be wavering, and carried about with the blast of every doctrine,
like a Reed shaken in the wind, but as the Be is balanced with a little
stone, so we must be built upon the chife corner stone, and grounded upon a
Rock, and stablished with Grace, that however the rain fall, or the floods
arise, or the winds blow, Act. 9. 11.
or what times soever come, yet we may stand fast in the street which is
called, Straight, always following Christ directly to the mark.

Parents care, only to enrich their Children, reproved.
OF the Ostrich it is said, Aristor. de Animal. lib. 4. c. 14.
That she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and warmeth them in the Dust. It is
the benefit of the Earth only that she gives unto them; And such surely is the
only care (worthily to be reproved) which too too many Parents have of their
Chrildren; Job 39. 14.
it is only concerning the things of the Earth, that they may be rich, and
noble, and great Men in this present world; as for Heavenly things, the
eternal good of their souls, they are not so much as once thought of.


THere were some amongst the Philosophers of old, Qui jactabant solaecismos
suos esse lauds and gemmas Philosophiae, Nath. Hardy 's Sermon. at Westminster. 1647.
Who accounted their rude Barbarisms, as Ornaments of Philosophy: Such are all
self-conceited men, our new Opinionists, who present their vain fancies as the
exquisite patterns of God's mind; How are the Pulpits made Stages for every Man
to act his humor in? and the Printing-Presses Marketplaces for men to vent
their false wares and counterfeit Doctrines? they pretend fair to build the
Lords house, but it is Babel, not Bethel, if one may ghess by the division of
their languages; and whilst they pretend to depart from a mystical Babylon,
they run into a liter all one, that of confusion.


THe Mariners sailing with S. Paul, M. Goddards Ser. at S. Greg. Land. 1642.
bare up bravely against the Tempest, whilst either Art or Industry could be
friend them; finding both to fail, and that they could not any long bear up to
the wind, they even let the Ship drive. Thus many have endeavored in these
distempered times, to hold up their spirits, and to steer them steddily: Act.
26.
happy Peace was the Port whereat they desired to arrive; but now since the
storm grew too sturdy for the Pilot, all the skill they will hereafter use, is
no skill at all, and even let the Ship sail whither the wind will send it, but
with the hope and comfort, Megna tamen spes est in boni (...) Dei. Ovid.
that the most weather-beaten Vessel cannot properly be seized on for a wrack,
which has any quick cattle remaining therein; 1. Pont. 7.
and their spirits are not as yet for feited to despair, having one lively
spark of hope in their hearts, because God is even where he was before.


When Vedelius Pollio a Roman, at a Supper provided for Augustus the Emperor,
would have thrown his Servant into his Fish Pond, where he kept his Lampreys,
Plutarch.
because he had broken a Cup of Crystal; the Emperor withheld him, and
controlled him with these words, Homo cujuscunque generis, etc. A Man of what
condition soever he be, Morney de Relig: cap. 16.
if for no other cause, yet because he is a Man, is more to be valued than all
the Cups, and Fish Ponds in the world: What a shame is it then for Christians?
How are they to be condemned, when an Heathen Emperor shall exceed them in the
principles of Humanity; How is our Gold become dross? our blood so stained?
What is more rare amongst Men, than to find a Man? i. e. -- fer a regnat
Erinnys. Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.
Amongst Men how many beasts are there for want of using Reason? and for not
using it well, how many Devils? whose hearts are so bound with sinens of Iron,
that they are no more moved with the life of a Man, than if a dog had fallen
before them.


THe Camelion when he lies on the grass to catch flies and Grasshoppers, takes
upon him the color of the grass, Uly^. Aldrovandus de Serp^^tibus.
as the Polypus does the color of the Rock, under which he lurketh that the
Fish may boldly come necre him without any suspicion of danger: In like manner
Satan turns himself into that shape which we least fear, and sets before us
such Objects of temptation, as are most agreeable to our Natures, R. Holdsworth
at S. Pet. Poor Land. 1617.
that so he may the sooner draw us into his Net; he sails with every wind, and
bows us that way which we incline of our selves through the weakness of
Nature; Is our knowledge in matter of faith deficient* He tempts us to error:
Is our Conscience tender? He tempts us to scrupulosity, and too much
preciseness: Has our Conscience like the Ecliptic line, some latitude? He
tempts us to carnal liberty; Are we bold spirited? He tempts us to
Presumption; Are we timorous and di^irustfull? Dia^olus, quando decipere
tentat, prius naturam unins cujusque intendit, and inde se app^icat, etc. Hugo
de S. Vict. lib. 2.
He tempts us to Despera^ion; Are, we of a flexible disposition? He tempts
us to Inconstancy; Are we stiff? He labors to make obstinate Here^icks,
Shcismaticks, or Rebels of us; Are we of an austere temper? He tempts us to
cruelty; Are we foft and mild? He tempts us to Indulgence and foolish pity;
Are we not in matters of Religion? He tempts us to blind zeal and
superstition; Are we cold? He rempteth us to Laodicean lukewa^meness: Thus does
he lay his traps in our way, that one way or other he may cnsare us.

All things come from God, who is therefore to be praised.
MAny are the Symbols, Joh. Donne's Sermon. at Paul's 1626.
and Emblems of true thankfulness, and grateful acknowledgement; As in the
Sun-dyal, with all the hours thereon by distinct figures, the Motto; In umbra
de^ino, To the Sun only I owe my motion and being; As likewise the Shell full
of Pearl, lying open to the Sun and the dew of Heaven, with this word, Rore
divino; As also of the Olive amidst the craggy clifts without rooting or
moisture, with this wreath coming our of it, A coelo; And thus must every good
Christian acknowledge, That it is in God that he lives, and moves, and has
his being; that without the divine dew of heavenly Grace, there is no virtue in
himself, and that all his happiness is from Heaven only; that all the gifts
of fortune falsely so called, as Riches and Possessions, etc. all the graceful
endowments of the body, Omnia dat nihit accipit. Trismegistus
as agility, strength, comeliness, etc. all the goods of the mind, as virtue,
wit, learning; all these, and all other beside these, descend from God above,
who gives (...) to all, all things, Act. 17. 25. no silver in Benjimins sack
till Joseph put it in; no good in Man, except the Lord bestow it; What have
thou, that thou have not received?

Sanctification wrought by degrees.
SAnctification is not perfect in an instant; Eph^. (...) Sermon. at St. Aug.
1636.
As wounds are easily taken, but not easily cured; so are sins quickly
contracted, but not quickly purged; Sins are compared to scum, Ezel. 24. 6. and
meat will ask some good boiling before all the scum be out of it; to Dross,
Isai. 1. 22. and Metals, and they must be long in the fire before they be
refined: and lastly, to spots and stains, Jud. 12, which if they be deep in a
Garment, will not be fetched out but with the Fullers soap; neither are such
Garments scoured without a great deal of toil, that which is bred in the bone
will hardly be got out of the flesh: Sanctification therefore is wrought by
degrees, there must be many a sigh, many a tear, many a groan, before we come
to a full height and stature in Christ Jesus.

To be thankful unto God at all times, especially in Prosperity.
IT was a fault both noted and condemned in the Carthagenians, that whereas
they were sprung from Tyrus, Diod. Siculus. lib. 20.
and used yearly to send then Tenth or Tithe of their incomes, to Hercules the
peculiar God of the Tyrians; which custom they observed whilst their
commodities were small, but neglected after wards (when they grew to be Masters
of greater matters) to send at all, and so by little and little to condemn that
Hercules their God. In the service of the true God, let this be never said of
Christians, that they should so far forget themselves, that when God has
raifed them out of the dust, Dr. Prideaux Sermon..S. Mariea Ox. 1625.
and set them on the Thrones of Justice, when he loadeth them with benefits,
that they should load him with unthankfulness; but rather, as their riches do
increase, to honor him with that substance; and as they rise in temporal
preferment, so to raise themselves up unto Him by an humble acknowledgement,
from whom only, and by whose blessing it is, that they enjoy what they have so
received.


IT is (methinks) a very preposterous course that many Men take in the World,
W. Perkins on Creed.
Those that have children, are very careful and diligent to bring them up (as
it is fit they should) under some Man's tuition; And if they have Cattle, Sheep,
or Oxen, they provide Neat-heards and shepherds to keep them, but in the mean
time, unum necessarium, for the good of their own souls they have no care at
all, they may sink or swim, or do what they will; A strange blindness or
madness, like the Gadarens, Luke 8.
to have more mind of their hoggs, then of Christ, more thoughts of their
Cattle, Mat. 26. ^
then of their Souls; Learn we therefore of Christ to commit our souls into
the hands of God.


THere is a story of a certain Man, Specul. Exemplorum.
pursued by an Unicorne, who in his flight falls into a Dungeon, and in his
fall he takes hold, and hangs by, the arm of a Tree growing on the side of the
pit or dungeon; Now as he thus hangs looking downward, he sees two w^rms
gnawing at the root of the Tree; and as he looks upward, he sees an Hive of
most sweet honey, whereupon he climbes up unto it, and sitting by it, feeds
thereon; In the mean season whilst he is thus sitting, the two worms gnaw in
pieces the root of the Tree, which done, down falls both Tree and Man, and all,
into the bottom of the Dungeon: Now, this Unicorne is Death, the Man that flies
is every man living; the pit over which he hangs, is Hell; the arm of the Tree
is life its self; the two worms are day and night, the continuance whereof is
the whole life of Man; the hive of honey, is the pleasures, and profits, and
honors of this world, Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
to which when Men wholly give up themselves, not considering their ends, till
the root, that is, this temporal life be cut off, they plunge themselves quite
into the gulf of Hell: Preparation therefore for death is not to be deferred
till the time of death, but rather we must be ready every day to entertain it.


MAster Cambden reports of one Redwald, King of the East Saxons, the first
Prince of this Nation that was baptized, Britannia. page 465.
yet in the same Church he had one Altar for Christian Religion, another for
that of the Heathens: And many such false worshippers of God there are to be
found amongst us, such as divide the Rooms of these Souls betwixt God and the
Devil, that swear by God and Malcan; that sometimes pray, Greg. dela Naza.
Tract. Eva. Zeph. 1.
and sometimes curse, that halt betwixt God and Baal, mere Heteroclites in
Religion; Ezekiel. 43. 8.
But God cannot endure this division, he will not have thy threshold to stand
by his threshold; he will have all thy heart, he cares not for half, if it and
the Devil have the other.

A good Sermon not to be so much questioned as practiced.
AS it is no good manners for him, that has good Venison set before him on the
Table, Tho. Fullers Holy State.
to ask from whence it came, but rather fairly fall to it; So a good Christian
hearing an excelllent Sermon, he never enquires whence the Preacher had it, or
whether it were not before in print; but at every point that concerns himself,
he turns down a leaf in his heart, and falls aboard to practice it.

Gods goodness ought to procure Man's thankfulness.
THe Patriark Jacob, R. Hold^w. Sermon. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1634.
pondering in his mind Gods exceeding great care to him in his Pilgrimage, Genesis
32.
breaks forth into this excellent Confession, I am not worthy of the least of
all thy mercies, and all thy truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for
with my staff came I over this Jordan, and now I have gotten two bands. Even
so may many a Man say with Jacob, I came to such or such a place, in a poor
leathern suit, with a stick in my hand only, destitute of means and money, yet
Almighty God has so blessed me, Tempora mu. tantur.
that I now possess two bands, Wife, Children, and servants; and for further
employment, I that was scarce worthy to sit with the Dogs of the flock, am now
taken out of the dust, Job 30. 1.
and lifted out of the mire to sit mith Princes of the People; Blessed be the
name of the Lord.

Strange sins, strange punishments.
HAd any man beheld Sodom in the beauty thereof, and had the Angel told him,
that the same should be suddenly destroyed by a merciless Element, he would
certainly have concluded, Tho Fullers Meditat.
that Sodom should have been drowned, led thereunto by these considerations:

First, It was situated in the plain of Jordan, a flat, low, level Country.

2. It was well watered every where; Genesis 13. 10.
and where always there is water enough, there may sometimes be too much.

3. Jordan had a quality in the first month, Chron. 12.
to overflow all his banks. But not one drop of moisture is spilt on Sodom, it
is burnt to ashes; How wide then are our Conjectures when they ghess at Gods
Judgments? How far are his ways above our apprehensions? Especially, when
wicked men with the Sodomites, wander in strange sins, Nova peccata nova
supplicia.
out of the road of common corruption, not once coming within the compass of a
rational suspicion; so true is it, that strange sins, have and ever will be
attended with strange and unheard of punishments.

The souls* delight once set upon God, hardly to be removed.
HE that lets down a Bucket to draw water out of a deep well, as long as the
bucket is under the water, Jet. Borroghs on Prove. ^0.
though it be never so full, he may get it up easily; but when he begins to
draw the bucket clear out of the water, then with all his strength he can
hardly get it up; yea many times, when it is at the very highest, breaks the
Iron chain, and falls violently back again: After the same sort a Christian
heart, so long as it is in Him wherein is a well of life, is filled with
delight, and with great joy drinks in the water of comfort, out of the
fountains of salvation, but being once haled, and pulled from God, it draws
back, and as much as it can possible, resists, and is never quiet till it be
in him who is the very Center of the Souls happinss.


IT is observable, Nath. Hardy Sermon. at Westminster. 1647.
that in the time of the great sweating sickness in England, the sick persons
when they were beaten on the face with sprigs of Rosemary, by their friends,
would cry out; O you kill me, you kill me; whereas indeed they had killed them
in not doing it; for had they slept, they had dyed: So those, whom the sickness
of Error has surprised, if you but go about to suppress them, you shall
presently hear them exclaim, and say, Oh you persecute us, you persecute us;
whereas indeed it is not such a persecution as lets out the heart-blood, but
such a persecution as lets out the corrupt blood: Oquam detestandus est error
hominum. Aug.
And they will one day acknowledge, though now they may stiffly stand it out,
that to be a happy violence which pulled them out of the fire, blessed bonds
that tied them to Christ, and comfortable fetters which kept their feet in the
way of peace.


POpe Boniface the Ninth, Bapt Platina in vita.
at the end of each hundredth years, appointed a Jubilee at Rome, wherein People
bringing themselves and money thither, had pardon for their sins: But Centenary
years returned seldom, Popes were old before, and covetous when they came to
their place; few had the happiness to fill their Coffers with Iubilee coin:
Exam. Conc. Trid. p. 736. col. 2.
Hereupon Clement the sixth reduced it to every fiftieth year; Gregory the
eleventh to every three and thirtieth; Paul the second, and Sixtus the fourth,
to every twenty fifth year, as now it is; some overtures have been to bring it
lower, and would have succeeded, had there not been opposition: Just thus, we
serve our prayers unto God, as they their Jubilees; perchance they may extend
to a quarter of an hour, when poured out at large; but some days we begrutch
this time as too much, Tho. Fullers Meditat.
omitti^g the Preface, with some passages conceived less material, and
running two or three Peitions into one, so contracting them to half a quarter
of an hour; Not long after, we fall to decontracting, and abridging the
abridgement of our prayers; yea (be it confessed to our shame and sorrow that
hereafter we may amend it) too often we shrink up our Prayers to a minute, to a
moment, to a Lord have mercy on me.


JOseph and Mary left their Son at Jerusalem, Silv. de Pry ri^. our. rosa.
and went but one days journey from him, but they sought him up and down three
whole days, and that with a great deal of sorrow too, before they could ^ind
him; They are therefore deceived, which think it an easy matter speedily to
return unto God, when they have long been straying from him, that are gone with
the Prodigal child in Regionem longinquam, into a far Country, far from the
thought of death, and consequently from the fear of God, yet promise themselves
a quick return unto him.


THere was a Judge in Poland, Salom. Neuge^averi Hist. Polon.
called Ictus, who a long time had stood for a poor beggar the Plantiffe,
against a very rich man the Defendant; but in the end, took a Fee of the
Defendant, a considerable sum of money, stamped according to the usual stamp of
the Country, with the Image of a Man in complete Armor, and at the next
Sessions in Court, judged the cause in favor of the Defendant; But being taxed
for it by his friends in private, she wed them the coin he received, and
demanded of them, Quis possit tot armatis resistere? Who is able to stand
against such an Army as this is? Dan. Featley ut ante^.
Steel Armor is indeed Musket proof, but nothing except the Grace of God, is
gold or silver-proof; Nothing can keep a Judge, or a Magistrate from receiving
a Reward in private in a colorable cause, but the grace of God, the eye of the
Almighty, who sees the corrupt Judge in secret, and will reward him openly, if
not here, hereafter.

God both powerful and merciful.
GOd showed the Israelites in the spectacle of Thunder and Lightning, Tacir.
Annal.
at the delivery of the Law, what he could do, and what they deserved; so that
what Caesar sometimes said to the Questor, who would have hindered him from
entering into the Treasury at Rome, B. Lake ut ante^.
shaking his sword; It is easier for my Power to dispatch thee, then for the
goodness of my Nature to be willing to strike thee; may much more truly besaid
of God; his Power makes him merciful, and his Mercy does manage his power.
The Author of the Book of Wisdom opens this at large, chap. 11.

The excellencies of Christ are theirs that are in him.
AS thew ^e communicates in her Husbands honor and wealth, Jer. Leech Sermon.
1624.
the branches partake of the fatness and sweetness of the root, and the
Members derive sense and motion from the head: So Christ our King is not like
the bramble that receives all good, and yields none to the State: but he is
like the Figtree, the Vine, the Olive; they that pertain to him, are all the
better for him, they are conformable to him, if he have any excellency they
shall have it also.

The best improvement of worldly sorrow.
WHen a Man by extreme bleeding at the nose is brought in danger of his life,
Nath. Shutes Ser. at S Paul's 1628.
the Phys^tian gives order to let him blood in another place, as in the arm,
and so turns the course of the blood another way to save his life: And thus
must we do, turn our worldly sorrows for loss of goods or friends, to a godly
sorrow for our offenses against God.

Flesh and Spirit, their opposition.
ANselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, as he was passing on the the way, espied a
boy with a bird tied in a string to a stone, Lib. similitudin.
the bird was still taking wing to fly away, but the stone kept her down, the
holy Man made good use of this sight, and bursting out into tears, said; Even
so it is betwixt the flesh and the spirit; the Spirit is willing to mount
upwards in he a venly thoughts and contemplation, but the Flesh keeps it
down, and (if possible) would not admit of the least thought of Heaven.

The conversion of great ones to be endeavored for examples sake.
AS it is in the exquisite mystery of Printing, Edm. Calamy Fast. Sermon.
the great difficulty lies in the composing and working of the first sheet, for
by that one many thousands are easily printed: So the great work of the
Ministry is to convert Great men; if they were once converted, hundreths would
follow their Example, L. Florus in Hist.
In uno Coesare multi insunt Marii, In one great Man are many Inferiors
contained; when the great wheel of the Clock is set a moving, all the
inferior wheels will move of their own accord; How zealous was S. Paul about
the conversion of Sergius Paulus, Act. 13. 10.
the Deputy of the Country; He knew well enough, that to take such a great
fish, was more then to catch many little ones, though the least of all is not
to be despised.


IN Merionith-shire, Gyraldus Cambrens.
in Wales, there are high Mountains, whose hanging tops come close together,
that Shepherds on the tops of several hills may audibly talk together, yet
will it be a days journey for their bodies to meet, so vast is the hollowness
of the Valleys betwixt them: Thus upon sound search we shall find,
notwithstanding some Pontifician Bridgemakers over the great gulf, Franc. de
S. Clara, and alii.
betwixt Papists and Protestants, that there is a grand distance betwixt them,
which at the first view may seem near, and tending to an accommodation.


A Bull which is baited at the Ring, as soon as he gets any breathing, be it
never so little, Tho. Playfer's Sermon.
turns him straight ways toward that place by which he was brought in,
imagning, that by how much the more he is nearer to the stall, by so much the
more he shall be further from the stake: In like manner, a faithful heart being
baited, and towsed in this world with many Dogs that come about it, Psalm. 22.
16. always has an eye to that place from which it came, it pants and
breathes, and never is at quiet till it return to him from whence it was fet at
first.


THere are three sorts of Answers (says Plutarch) that men usually make to a
Demand: Lib. de garrulitate.
The first, if you ask, Whether Socrates be within, tells you faintly, and
unwillingly, He is not within, perhaps he answers by a Laconism^^ Not; The
second with more courtesy, and to the sufficient measure of the demand,
willing to instruct the ignorant; He is not within, but at the Exchange, etc.
The third, running over with loquacity, knows no end of speaking; He is not
within, but at the Exchange, waiting for strangers out of Ionia, in whose
behalf Alcibiades has written from Miletum, etc. Now the Answers of God to the
prayers of his People, are neither so sparing or restrict as the first, leaving
the Soul in a manner as doubtful and perplexed as he found it by granting too
little; nor so idle and superfluous as the last, to bring a loathing to men by
surcharge of his benefits, but they are in the middle sort, tempered with good
moderation, full of humanity, kindness, and grace, giving enough, and happily
more then asked, and sending the heart away joyful for that which it has
obtained.


SOlinus reports of a River in Boetia, Solinus Poly. Hist.
That it turns the color of the sheep that are washed in it, in such sort,
that if they were before black or dunne, they became presently as white as
milk. That may be a Fable, but this is Gospel, That such is the virtue of the
consecrated water in Baptism, wherein Christ's Lambs are usually washed, Dan.
Featley Sermon. at Court, 1622.
through divine Benediction upon that holy Ordinance; that though they were
never so black or ^oul before, yet after they come out of that laver, they are
most clean and white, and so continue till they plunge themselves into the mire
of worldly desires, and fleshly lusts,

The folly of Youth, discovered and reproved.
THe Ancients painted a Young man, Joh. Pieri. Hieroglyphica.
stark naked, his eyes veiled, his right hand bound behind him, and his left
hand left at liberty, and Time following him close at the heels, and ever and
anon pulling a thread out of the vail. He was so drawn, in a naked posture, to
show, with what little secrecy he had used his delights and pleasures; with his
right hand bound behind him, to express, that he did not do any thing right;
Iuvenilibus annis Luxuriant animi. Ovid. Fast.
his left hand free and at liberty, signifying, that he does all things
awkardly and untowardly: he was pourtrayed blind, because he does not see his
own follies; but Time behind him, opening his eyes by little and little, so
bringing him to the knowledge of his errors, and that if he go on in such a
course of life, he is no other then as a broken ship, which leaks and draws in
water at a thousand places, and will not be long ere it sink; as a house,
whereinto the rain does fall, and drop in so fast, and at so many places, that
it must speedily fall without recovery.

To shun ill Company.
IT is better, T. Fullers good thoughts.
safer I am sure it is, to ride alone, than to have a thief's company: And such
is a wicked man, who will rob thee of precious time, if he do thee no more
mischief. The Nazarities, Numb. 6. 3.
who might drink no wine, were also forbidden to eat grapes, whereof wine is
made. So, we must not only avoid sin it self, but also the causes and
occasions thereof, amongst which, bad company (the lime-twigs of the devil) is
the chiefest, especially to catch those natures, which like the
good-fellow-Planet Mercury, are most swayed by others.

Hearing the Word, and not meditating thereon, dangerous.
IF a man have the Lienteria, a disease so called, so that his meat passes
from him, Rich. Baxters Saints eve^lasting Rest.
as he took it in; or he vomit it up as fast as he eats it, what strength and
vigor of body, and senses is this man like to have? Indeed, he may well eat
more than a sounder man, and the small abode that it makes in the stomach, may
refresh it at the present, and may help to draw out a lingering, languishing,
uncomfortable life. Thus many hearers there are, that are sick of this disease;
what they hear, is many times in at one ear, out at the other; perhaps they
hear more than otherwise they needed, and the clear discovery, and lively
delivering of the truth of God, may warm and refresh them a little, whilst they
are hearing, and perhaps an hour or two after; and it may be, may linger out
their grace, in a languishing uncomfortable life: But if they did hear one
hour, and meditate seven; if they did as constantly ruminate and digest their
Sermons, as they hear them, and not take in one Sermon, before the other be
well concocted, they would soon find another manner of benefit by Sermons, than
the ordinary sort of many forward Christians do.

Outward formality only, in the service of God, condemned.
MEn put on clean linen, their best cloths, and how often do they look in a
glass, B. Lakes Ser. on Exodus 19.
to see that all be handsome, before they show themselves in the Church to
their neighbors; and it is hoped, that they which will not come slovenly
before their neighbors, will not appear sordidly before the Lord of Heaven and
Earth; and withal remember, that that God that approves this outward decency,
requires the inward much more* He will have us lift up to him, not only
clean, but pure hands also. A neat outside, and a slovenly inside, is like a
painted Sepulcher, full of dead men's bones. And it is to be feared, that most
of our Churches in the time of Gods service, are full of such Tombs. There are
a generation that are clean in their own eyes, Prove. 30.
but are not washed from their filthiness.


LIttle children, Will. Perkins on Galath.
of whom ^ travail again in birth, etc. says the Apostle, Gal. 4. 19. until
Christ be formed in you: So that conversion is not wroug^t, simul and semel,
but by little and little in process of time. In the generation of Infants,
first the brain, heart, and liver are framed; then the bones, veins, arteries,
nerves, and sinews; and after this, flesh is added; and the Infant first begins
to live the life of a plant, by growing and nourishing; then it lives the life
of a beast, by sense and motion; and thirdly, the life of a man, by the use of
reason. Even so, God outwardly prevents us with his Word, Nemo repent fit
optimus.
and inwardly he puts into us the knowledge of his will, with the beginnings or
seeds of faith and repentance, as it were a brain and a heart; from these
beginnings of faith and repentance, arise heavenly desires; from these desires
follow, asking, seeking, knocking. And thus the beginnings of faith are
increased, and men go on from grace to grace, from one degree of virtue unto
another, till they be tall men in Christ Jesus.


ST. Augustine in his Confessions, Lib. 8.
relates an excellent story of one Victorinus, a great man at Rome, that had
many great friends that were Heathens; but it pleased God to convert him to the
Christian religion, and he came to one Simplicianus, and tells him secretly,
that he was a Christian. Simplicianus answers, Non credam, nec deputabo te
inter Christianos, etc. I will not believe thee to be a Christian, till I see
thee openly profess it in the Church. At first, Victorinus derided his answer,
and said, Ergone parietes faciunt Christianum? What! do the church-walls make a
christian? But after wards, remembering that of our Savior, He that is ashamed
of me before men, etc. Mar. 8. 38. he returns to Simplicianus, and professes
himself openly to be a christian. Edm. Calamy Ser. at Westminster.
And let this Text of Christ always sound in our ears also; Rev. 22. 15.
and that of the Revelation, where the fearsul, such as Nicodemus, nocturni
adoratores, such night-walkers in religion, such as are faint-hearted in the
profession of Christ, are put in the forefront of those that shall go to hell,
before murderers, whore-mongers, adulterers, etc.


IT is to be observed, Cosm^gra^ia del Mondo.
that the farthest Islands in the world are so seated, that there is none so
remote, but that from some shore of it, another Island or continent may be
discovered; as if herein Nature invited Countries, to a mutual converse one
with another. Why then should any man court and hug solitariness? why should
any man affect to environ himself, T. Fuller, ut anted.
with so deep and great reservednesse, as not to communicate with the society
of others? Good company is one of the greatest pleasures of the nature of Man;
for the beams of joy are made hotter by reflection, when related to another,
Were it otherwise, gladness it self must grieve, for want of one to express
it self to.

Ministers, to live according to that Doctrine, which they teach others.
THere was a ridiculous Actour in the city of Smyrna, which pronouncing O^
Coelum, Casp. Barthi^ adversar.
O Heaven! pointed with his finger toward the ground; which when Polemo, the
chiefest man in the place, saw, he could abide to stay no longer, but went from
the company in a great chafe, T. Playfers Sermon,
saying, This fool ^ath made a solectsm with his hand, he has spoken falls
Latin with his finger. And such are they, who teach well, and do ill; that,
however they have Heaven at their tongues end, yet the Earth is at their
fingers end; such as do not only speak falls Latin with their tongue, but
false Divinity with their hands; such as live not according to their preaching.
But He that sits in the Heavens will laugh them to scorn, and hiss them off
the stage, if they do not mend their action.

Englands Ingratitude to God.
SCipio Affricanus the elder, had made the city of Rome, being at that time
exanguem and moriturum, Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 3.
in a deep consumption, and ready to give up the ghost, Lady of Afric: At
length being banished into a base country-town, his will was, that his Tomb
should have this Inscription on it, Ingrata patria, ne ossa mea quidem habes;
Unthankful country, thou have not so much as my bones. Thus many and mighty
deliverances have risen from the Lord to this land of ours, B. Kings lect on
Jonah.
to make provocation of our thankfulness; yet, Ingrata Anglia, ne ossa mea
quidem habes, may the Lord say: Ungrateful England, thou have not so much as
the bones of thy Patron and Deliverer; thou have exited him from thy thoughts,
burried him in oblivion; there is scarcely a footstep of gratitude, to witness
to the World, that thou have been protected.

The Papists blind Zeal discovered.
RHenanus reports, that he saw at Mentz in Germany, two Cranes, standing in
silver upon the Altar, Lib. de rebus Germ.
into the bellies whereof, the Priests by a device put fire and frankincense,
so artificially, that all the smoke and sweet perfume came out of the Cranes
heaks: A perfect emblem of the Peoples devotion, in the Romish Church; the
Priests put a little fire into them, they have little warmth of themselves, or
sense of true zeal: Dan. Featly, ut anted.
and as those Cranes sent out sweet perfumes at their beaks, having no smelling
at all thereof in themselves; so these breathe out the sweet perfumed incense
of prayer, and zealous devotion, whereof they have no sense or understanding at
all, because they pray in an unknown tongue.

Saints in glory, what they hear and see:
ST. Auguctine was wont to wish three things: First, that he might have seen
Christ in the flesh. Rich. Baxters Saints eternal Rest.
Secondly, that he might have heard St. Paul preach. Thirdly, that he might
have seen Rome in its glory. Alas, these are small matters, to that which
Austin, and all the Saints in glory, do now behold; there they see not Christ
in the form of a servant, but Christ in his Kingdom, in majesty and glory; not
Paul preaching in weakness and contempt, but Paul, with millions more,
rejoicing and triumphing; not Persecuting-Rome in fading glory, but Jerusalem
which is above, in perfect beauty and splendor: And there they hear too, not
Eliah, Esaias, Daniel, with all the Prophets of old; Peter, John, James, Jude,
Apostles of the new Testament, preaching to an obstinate people in
imprisonment, persecution, and reproach; but triumphing in the praises of their
God, that has thus advanced them.


CAnutus, Hen. Huntingtons hist.
a King of this Land, when flatterers magnified his power, and did almost
deifie him, to confute them, caused his chair to be set by the seashore, at
the time of the flood; B. Lakes Ser. on Esa. 9. ^
and sitting in his Majesty, commanded the waves, that they should not approach
his throne: But when the Tide kept his course, and wet his garments, Lo,
(says he) what a mighty King I am by sea and land, whose command every wave
dares to resist! Here now, was weakness joined with might. It is otherwise
with God, he is a mighty God. It appears in the Epithet, that is added unto
EL, which is Gibbor, importing, that he is a God of prevailing might, whom the
winds and seas obey. In Daniel he is called EL ELIM, the Mighty of Mighties.
Whereupon Moses magnifying his might, Exodus 15.
says, Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? Which words being
abbreviated, the Maccabees in their wars against their enemies, did bear in
their standard, and there-hence, (as the Learned have observed) did take their
name of Maccabees. Certainly, this Epithet is a just ground of that, which
King David persuades, Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye mighty, ascribe unto the Lord
glory and strength, Psalm. 29.


THere is a complaint in Pliny, B. Smiths Ser. on Ephesians. 5.
for the time present and past, Latifundia per^diderunt Italiam, Italy is
undone by large severalls. We may take up the like complaint against drinking,
Multifundia, that is, multum infundendo, the pouring in of much liquor is the
shame of England already, and will be (if not reformed) the utter undoing of it.


THere is an excellent story of a young man, (...)
, that was at Sea in a mighty raging tempest; and when all the passengers were
at their wits end for fear, he only was merry; and when he was asked the
reason of his mirth, he answered, That the Pilot of the ship was his father,
and he knew his father would have a care of him. The great and wise God, who is
our Father, has from all eternity decreed, what shall be the issue of all
wars, what the event of all troubles: He is our Pilot, he fits at the stern;
and though the Ship of the Church or State be in a sinking condition, yet be of
good comfort, our Pilot will have a care of us. There is nothing done in the
lower house of Parliament on earth, but what is first decreed in the higher
House in Heaven. All the lesser wheels are ordered and overruled by the upper.
Are not five sparrowes (says Christ) sold for a farthing? Luke 12. 16.
One sparrow is not worth half a farthing. And there is no man shall have half a
farthing's worth of harm, more than God has decreed from all eternity.


IT is reported of the River Dee, Guil. Cambd. Britannia.
in Merionith-shire in Wales, that running through Pimble Mere, it remains
entire, and mingles not her streams with the waters of the Lake. So, if against
thy will, the tempest of an unexpected occasion drive thee amongst the Rocks of
ill company, though thou be with them, be not of them; keep civil communion
with them, but separate from their sins; and know for thy comfort, thou art
still in thy calling, and therefore in Gods keeping, who on thy prayer will
bring thee off with comfort.

Greatness and Goodness, well met together.
SImeon the Son of Onias, Tho. Playfers Sermon.
was as a fair Olive Tree, that is fruitful, and as a Cypress-tree, which
grows up to the Clouds: A Cypress-tree is high, but bar^en; an Olive Tree is
fruitful, but low: So a Christian is (or ought to be) not only a Cypress-tree,
Eccle. 5. 15.
reaching high in preferment, and worldly honor, but he must also be low as
the Olive Tree, bringing forth fruit with patience, like Simeon, neither low
nor barren; though an Olive, yet as high as the Cypress; though a Cypress, yet
as fruitful as the Olive Tree.

Prosperity of the wicked, destructive.
THe King of Egypt blessed himself for having any thing to do with Polycrates
King of Samos, B. King on Jonah.
because he was over- fortunate; for having a massy and rich Ring, Heredotus.
he cast it into the Sea to try an experiment in despite of fortune, he found
it again at his Table in the belly of a Fish which was brought f^r a present
unto him; The thriving estate of the wicked is set out at large, Their Bullock
gendreth, and miscarrieth not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her cal^e,
etc. And they come not into misfortune as other men. Job. 21. Psalm. 73.
What? no misfortune? Even the greatest in this, that they are so fortunate;
Surely it were good for men not to be acquainted with such engrosers of
Prosperity, and much less to be partakers of their unhappy happiness.

Gods people meet with many discourgements in the World.
Tiberius Constantinus, Joh. Donnes Pseudo-martyr.
in the year of our Lord 577. commanding a golden Cross set in Marble to be
dug up, that it might not be trod upon, found under it a second, and under
the second a third, and under the third a fourth; So the dearest servants of
God in this world, digging for the hidden treasure of the word, and putting
themselves into aframe of Gospel obedience, find but hard dealing in the world,
cross under cross, and loss ^upon loss, and sorrow after sorrow: Look how the
waves in the Sea ride one upon the neck of another, and as Jobs messengers trod
one upon the heels of another; so miseries and calamities, and vexations in the
course of this life, follow close one upon the other.

The great comfort of heavenly meditation.
PHaroahs Butler dreamed, Genesis 4. 10. R. Baxters Saints etern. rest
that he pressed the ripe Grapes into Pharoahs cup, and delivered the Cup into
the Kings hand; it was a happy dream for him, and signified his speedy access
to the Kings presence: But the dream of the Baker, that the birds did eat out
of his basket on his head, the baked meats prepared for Pharaoh, had an ill
omen, and signified his hanging, and their eating his flesh: Thus when the
ripened grapes of heavenly meditations are pressed by a good Christian into the
cup of affection, and this put into the hands of Christ by delightful praises,
it is a true Argument of real comfort, that that Christian in ^o doing, shall
be shortly taken from the prison of this flesh where he lives, and be set
before Christ in the Courts of Heaven, and there serve up to him that cup of
praise (but much fuller and much sweeter) for ever and ever; but if the
ravenous b^rds of wandering thoughts do devour these Meditations intended for
Heaven, it is hard to say, but that so far as they intrude, they will be the
death of that service, if not of that soul they thus infest.


NOn solet deus subrepere etc. says Chrysostom. B. Lake on Hag. ^.
God when he does any great work in the world, steals not upon the world, he
gives a warning piece before he discharges his arming piece; so did he before
he brought on the flood, before he delivered his People out of Egypt, before he
gave the Jews over unto the Babylonian captivity; We cannot read these
stories, but we must needs find in them Gods palpable Harbingers; so that if
men be surprised, it is not because they are not forewarned, but because they
will take no warning.


IT was an arrogant act of Hubert, Math^ Paris.
Archbishop of Canterbury, who when King John had given his Courtiers rich
Liveries, gave his servants the like, wherewith the King was not a little
offended: But what shall we say to the riot of our age, wherein as Peacocks are
more gay than the Eagle himself, every ordinary subject out-vies his
Sovereign; what fancies and fantastical habits are daily seen amongst us.


JEr^boam the Son of Nebat, Ephr. Udalls Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1637.
is never mentioned in the Scripture, never read or heard of in the Chronicles
of Israel, but he draws a tail after him like a blazing Star, who made Israel
to sin; A sick head disordereth all the other parts, and a dark eye benights
the whole body: It is said Facile transitur ad plures, People are apt to flock
after a Multitude; And it is as true, Facile transitur ad majores, Men are apt
to imitate great Authority whether good or bad; Evil behavior in Men of high
degree corrupts as it were the air round about, which the People drawing in
over-hastily, are made like to themselves in all manner of lewdness.


When a Man takes a heavy Trunk, Th. Tailors Sermon. at S. M. Alder.
full of Plate or Money upon his shoulders, it makes him stoop, and boweth him
toward the ground; but if the same weight be put under his feet, it lifts
him up from the ground: In like manner, if we put our Wealth and Riches above
us, preferring them to our salvation, they will press us down to the ground, if
not to Hell with their very weight; but if we put them under our feet, and
tread upon them as slaves and vassals to us, and quite contemn them in respect
of Heavenly treasure, they will raise us up toward Heaven.


CArdanus tells of one that had such a Receipt, R. Baxters Saints eternal Re^^.
as would suddenly and certainly dissolve the Stone in the bladder; and he
concludes of him, that he makes no doubt but that he is now in Hell, because he
never re^ealed it to any before he dyed. This was something a hard sentence,
but what shall we think then of them, that know of the remedy of curing souls,
such as have receipts for hard and stony hearts, yet do not reveal them, nor
persuade Men to make use of them* Is it not Hypocrisy to pray daily for their
conversion, and salvation, and never once endeavor to procure it? And if
Hypocrisy, then what is the reward of hypocrisy, there is none so ignorant but
knows it.

How the Gospel propagateth it self.
AS the scope of the Sun is in all the World, B. Lake on Esaias 9.
and yet at one time the Sun does not shine in all the parts thereof, it
begins in the East, and passes to the South, and so to the West; and as it
passes forward, bringing light to one place, withdraws from another: So it
is in regard of the Sun of Righteousness, the sunshine of the Gospel, he has
jus ad omnem ^e^ram; but he has not at the same jus in omni terra: the
Propriety of all is his; but he takes possession of it all, successively, and
by part^s the Eastern Churches, the Southern have had his light, which now are
in darkness for the most part; and we that are more Northerly, do now enjoy the
clearest Noontide; but the Sun begins to rise to them in the West, and it is
too to plain, that our light begins to grow dim, it is to be feared that it
hastes to their Meridian, and whether after their noon it will set, God
knows; yet the cause hereof is not (lest we mistake) in the Sun of
Righteousness, as the cause why all have not light at one time, is in the
corporal Sun; The corporal cannot at one time enlighten all, the Sun of
Righteousness can; But for the sins of the People, the Candlestick is removed,
and given to a Nation that will bear more fruit; We interpose our Earthliness
between our selves and the Sun, and so exclude our selves from the beams
thereof.

Englands distractions to be Englands peaceable directions.
AUlus Gellius tells of certain Men, that were in a ship ready to perish, by
reason of a great Tempest, Noct. Atticae.
and one of them being a Philosoper, fell to asking many trifling questions; to
whom they answered, (...), we are a perishing, and do thou trifle? So it may
be said of us, Is England a sinking, and is this a time to be raising of
unnecessary Disputes, to be wrangling in Controversies about points of
Church Government, when God knows whether we shall have any Go^ernment either
in Church or State at all, when there is Hannibalad portas, a generation of Men
crying out, No Governors, no Church, no Ministers, no Sacrament. As Elisha
said to Gehezi, Is this a time to receive money? so it may be said again, 2
King. 5. 26.
^e^us sic stantibus, Is this a time to divide? Is such a time as this, a time
to trouble England with new opinions? Is this a time to divide? Nay is it not
rather a time to unite, and to have quiet hearts, and peaceable dispositions
one toward another, that so the God of peace may delight to dwell amongst us?

Deformity of body not to be contemned.
AN Emperor of Germany coming by chance on a Sunday into Church, found there a
misshapen Priest, Gul. Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 10.
poene portentum Naturae, insomuch as the Emperor scorned and contemned him:
But when he heard him read these words in the Service, For it is he that made
us, not we our selves, the Emperor checked his own proud thoughts, and made
enquiry into the quality and condition of the man, and finding him on
Examination to be most learned and devout, he made him Archbishop of Colen, T.
Fullers Holy State.
which place he did excellently discharge: Mock not at those then who are
misshapen by Nature, there is the same reason of the poor, and of the
deformed, he that despises them, despises God that made them: A poor man is a
Pictture of Gods own making, but set in a plain frame, not gilded; And a
deformed man is also his Workmanship, but not drawn with even lines, and lively
colors; The former not for want of wealth, as the latter not for want of
skill, but both for the pleasure of the Maker, and many times their Souls have
been the Chapels of Sanctity, whose bodies have been the Spitals of deformity.,


THe Prophet Esaias (chap. 58. 1.) is willed to lift up his voice like a Trumpet;
there are many things that sound louder than a Trumpe^, Math^ Styles Sermon. at
St. Paul's 1626.
as the roaring of the Sea, the claps of Thunder, and such like; yet he says
not, Lift up thy voice as the Sea, or lift up thy voice as Thunder, but lift up
thy voice as a Trumpet; Why as a Trumpet? Because a Trumpeter, when he sounds
his Trumpet, he winds it with his mouth, and holds it up with his hand; And so
every faithful heart, which is as it were a spiritual Trumpet to ^ound out
the praises of God, must not only report them with his mouth, but also support
them with his hand; When Profession and Practice meet together, quam been
convenient What a Harmony is in that Soul? When the tongue is made Gods
Advocate, and the hand, Executor of Gods will, then does a Man truly lift up
his voice like a Trumpet.


When the Emperor Constantius came to Rome in triumph, and beheld the
Companies that entertained him, he repeated a saying of Cyneas the Epirote,
Homo staturae parv^ caput incurvabat etc. Bapt. Platina in vita F^^ieis jecundi.
that he had seen so many Kings as Citisens: But viewing the buildings of the
City, the stately Arches of the Gates, (so lofty, that at his entrance, he
needed not to have stooped like a Goose at a barn-door) the Turrets, Tombs,
Temples, Theaters, Aquaeducts, Baths, and some of the work so high like Babel,
that the eye of Man could scarcely reach unto them; he was amazed, and said,
That Nature had emptied all her strength and invention upon that one City; He
spoke to Hormisda, the Master of his works, to erect him a brazen horse in
Constantinople, like unto that of Trajan the Emperor which he there saw;
Hormisda answered him, that if he desired the like horse, he must then provide
him the like stable; All this and much more in the honor of Rome: At length he
asked Hormisda, What he thought of the City, who told him that he took no
pleasure in any thing there, but in learning one lesson, Ammian Marcellin. l.
16.
That men also dyed in Rome, and that he perceived well, the end of that Lady
City (which in the judgment of Quintilian, was the only City, and all the
rest but Towns) would be the same with all her Predecessors; the ruins whereof
are even gone to Ruin; O jam peri^re ruinae. Lucan.
this is the doom that attends both Men and Places, be they never so great
and stately. The consideration whereof, made a learned Gent. close up that his
admirable History of the World in these words, Sr. Gualth. Raleigh* Hist. in
fine.
O eloquent, just and mighty death, whom none could advise, thou only have
persuaded; what none has dared, thou have done; and whom all the world has
flattered, thou only have cast out out of the world and despised; Thou have
drawn together all the far-stretched greatness, all the pride, cruelty, and
ambition of Man, and covered it over with these two narrow words, HIC JACET.


IN that famous battle at Leuctrum, where the Thebans got a signal Victory,
but their Captain Epaminondas, Plutarch. Pausani^^ in Boeticis.
his deaths wound: It is reported, that Epaminondas a little before his death,
demanded, whether his Buckler were taken by the enemy, and when he understood
that it was safe, and that they had not so much as laid their hands on it, he
dyed most willingly and cheerfully: Such is the resolution of a valiant
soldier of Christ Jesus, Dan. Featly, (...) anted.
when he is wounded even to death, he has an eye to his shield of faith, and
finding that to be safe out of the enemies danger, his soul marches
courageously out of this world, singing S. Paul's triumphant ditty, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.

Nothing but Christ to be esteemed, as of any worth.
AS the Jews use to cast to the ground the book of Esther, Steph. Menochius.
before they read it, because the Name of God is not in it: And as St.
Augustine cast by Tullies works, R. Baxters Saints eternal Rest.
because they contained not the Name of Christ. So must we throw all aside,
that has not the Name of Jesus on it. If honor, riches, preferment, etc. come
not in the ^ame of Jesus, away with them, set them by, as not worth the taking
up; give them no entertainment, further than as they have reference to Christ
and Eternity.

Humility, the way to Glory.
WE say in our Creed, Ephr. Udalls Sermon. at Mer^. Chap. 1640.
that Christ descended into hell, descendit ut ascendat: He took his rising
from the lowest place, to ascend into the highest. And herein Christ reads a
good lecture unto us, he teaches us, that humility is the way to glory, and
the more we are humbled, the more we shall be exalted. Adam, and those once
glorious Angels, Prim^s ascenti^^is gradus, est (...). Ber.
were both ambitious, both desired to climb; but they mistook their rise, and
so in climbing, both had grievous falls. If we then would climb without harm,
we must learn of Christ to climb; so shall we be sure to tread the steps of
Jacob's ladder, which from earth will reach even to the highest heavens.

A Kingdom divided within it self, cannot long stand.
MElanchton persuading the divided Protestants of his time, Edm. Calamy a f^st
S^rm. at Westminster. 1644.
to peace and unity, illustrateth his argument, by a notable parable of the
woolves and the dogs, who were marching onward to fight one against another:
The woolves, that they might the better know the strength of their adversary,
sent forth a master-woolf, as their scout: The scout returns, and tells the
woolves, That indeed the dogs were more in number, but yet they should not be
discouraged; for he observed, that the dogs were not one like another; a few
m^stiffs there were, but the most were little currs, which could only bark,
but not bite, and would be afraid of their own shadow. Another thing also he
observed, which would much encourage them, and that was, That the dogs did
march, as if they were more offended at themselves, than with us, not keeping
their ranks, but grinning, and snarling, and biting, and tearing one another,
as if they would save us a labor. And therefore let us march on resolutely, E^
qui discordi^ civ^^ Per^^xit miseros! Virg. Ecl^g.
for our enemies are their own enemies; enemies to themselves and their own
peace; they bite and devour each other, and therefore we shall certainly devour
them. Thus, though a Kingdom or State be never so well provided with Men, Arms,
Ammunition, Ships, Walls, Forts, and Bulwarks; yet notwithstanding, if
divisions and heart-burnings get into that Kingdom, that State, or that City,
like a spreading gangreen, they will infest the whole, and like a breach made
in the walls of a city besieged, they will let in the enemy to destroy it. Nay,
though there should be a Kingdom of Saints, if differences and distractions get
within that Kingdom, they will, like the worm in Ionah's Gourd, eat up all the
happiness of it in one night.


THe English, Stows (...).
by command from William the Conqueror, always raked up their fires, and put
out their candles, when the Curfew-bell was rung; some part of which laudable
custom of those times, remains yet, in the ringing of our eight or nine a
clock bell. Ephesians* 4. 26.
Let it then mind us thus much, that the Sun go not down upon our wrath; let it
not carry news to the Antipodes, in another world, of our revengefull nature,
but rather quench all sparks of anger, rake up all heat of passion, that may
arise within us.


WHen Cyneas, Plutarch. in ^ita Pyrthi.
the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, after his return from Rome, was asked by his
Master, What he thought of the City and State? He answered and said, Hic locus
est, quem, (...) verbis a^dacia detur, etc. Ovid.
That it seemed to him to be Respublica Regum, a State of none but great
Statesmen, and a Commonwealth of Kings. Such is Heaven, no other than a
Parliament of Emperors, a Commonwealth of Kings: every humble faithful soul
in that Kingdom, is Coheir with Christ, has a Robe of honor, and a Scepter
of power, and a Throne of majesty, and a Crown of glory.


HE is not worthy to be a Member of a State, Wolfg. Lazius (...) reb. gest. Romans
by whom the State is no whit bettered: The Romans well understood this, when
they instituted their Censors, to enquire into every man's course of life, and
to note them, carbone nigro, with a character of infamy, that could not give
some good a^count of their life. It is a thing pitiful to consider, how many
there are in this Land of ours, whose glory is their shame, the very drones and
cumber-grounds of their country, the Chronicle of whose life, was long since
summed up by the Poet, Nos numerus sumus, and fruges consumere nati; no better
than ciphers, if you respect the good they do* But let them know* that God will
have no mutes in his Grammar, no blanks in his Almanac, no dumb shows on his
Stage, no false lights in his House, no loyterers in his Vineyard.


AS Socrates told a lazy fellow, Erasm. Apophthegm. lib. 3.
that would fain go up to the top of Olympus, but that it was so far off. Why,
said he, walk but as far every day, as thou do about thine own house, and in
so many days thou shall be sure to be at Olympus. Thus, let but a man employ
every day, R. Baxters Saints eternal Rest.
so many serious thoughts upon the excellent glory of the life to come, as he
now employeth daily on his necessary affairs in the world; nay, as he loses
daily on vanities and impertinencies, and his heart will be at Heaven in a very
short space.


IMagination, T. Fullers Holy State.
the work of fancy, has produced real effects; sad and serious examples of
this truth may be produced, but a merry one by the way. A Gentleman having led
a company of children beyond their usual journey, they began to be weary, and
jointly cried to him to carry them; which because of their multitude, he could
not do, but told them, he would provide them horses to ride on: then cutting
little wands out of the hedge, as n^gs for them, and a great stake, as a
gelding for himself; thus mounted, fancy put metal into their legs, and
they came cheerfully home.

The heavenly Conqueror, the happy Conqueror.
IN the several Kingdoms of the world, P. Mexi^ Theater.
there are several Orders of Knights, as of Malta, of the Garter, of the
golden fleece, of S. John of Jerusalem, of S. Savior, of S. James, of the Holy
Ghost, and diverse others; and most of these have been found (...),
white-liver'd Soldiers, carpet-Knights, that either never drew sword, Dan.
Featly Sermon.
nor saw battle, or fled from their colors. But in the Kingdom of Christ,
there is found but only one sort of Knights, and that is the Order of S.
Vincent* such as stood their ground, such as never returned from battle,
without the spoil of their ghostly enemies; such, whose Motto was here below,
Vincenti dabitur, and now they are more than conquerours in heaven above. Rev.
2. 7.


Ignorance of Gods mind, will not excuse at the last.
THe people of Siena having wilfully rebelled against Charles the fifth, Paul
Jovii. hist. lib. 34.
their Emperor, sent their Ambassador to excuse it; who when he could find no
other excuse, (...).
thought in a jest to put it off thus: What, says he, shall not we of Siena be
excused, seeing we are known to be fools? To whom the Emperor's Agent replied,
Even that shall excuse you, but upon the condition, which is fit for fools;
that is, to be kept and bound in chains. Ehe^ quam ^iseros tramite devio
Abducit ignorantia. Boethius 3. 8.
Thus shall it be with those, that sit under plentiful means of grace, rich
Gospell-dispensations, so that it is but opening the casements of their hearts,
and the light of Gods countenance will fully shine upon them; yet remain
unfruitful, barren, empty-saplesse, livelesse christians, and think, that
ignorance shall at the last excuse them.

Preposterous Zeal reproved.
WE choose the best Lawyers for our causes, B. Lakes Sermon. (...) Wells.
the best Physicians for our bodies; but to supply the defect of our souls, to
guide our judgment and conscience aright, in the ways of God, we trust we know
not whom. The humor of such cannot be better resembled, than to the
distempered appetite of girls, that have the green-sicknesse; Hoc est zelum
Dei habere, sed non secundum (...).
their parents provide for them wholesome diet, and they get into a corner, and
eat chalk and coals, and such like trash: So they that may have in the Church
grave and sound instructions for the comfort of their souls, in Conventicles
feed upon the raw and indigested meditations, of some ignorant tradesman.

The danger of Stage-plaies.
ZEuxis, Plin. hist. lib. 53. cap. 10.
the curious Painter, painted a boy, holding a dish full of grapes in his hand,
done so livelily, that the birds being deceived, flew to peck the grapes: But
Zeuxis, Fulgosus.
in an ingenious choler, was angry with his own workmanship: Had I (said he)
made the boy as lively as the grapes, the birds would have been afraid to touch
them. T. Fullers Holy State.
Thus, two things are set out to us in Stage-plaies, some grave sentences,
prudent counsels, and punishments of vicious examples; and with these,
desperate oaths, lustful talk, and riotous acts, are so personated to the
life, that Wantons are tickled with delight, and feed their palats upon them.
It seems, the goodness is not pourtraied out, with equal accents of
liveliness, as the wicked things are; otherwise, men would be deterred from
vicious courses, with seeing the woeful success that follows after. But the
main is, wanton speeches on Stages, are the devils ordinance, to beget
badnesse. But it is a a question, whether the pious speeches spoken there, be
Gods ordinance, to increase goodness, as wanting both his institution and
benediction.


IT was the usual demand, Cic. in Verre.
of one of the wisest amongst the Roman* Judges, Cossius (surnamed the Severe)
in all causes of doubt, in matters of fact, about the person of the Delinquent,
Cui bono? who gained by the bargain? on whose side lay the advantage? assuring
himself, that no man of understanding, would put himself into any dishonest, or
dangerous action, without hopes of reaping some fruit by it: As also, that
there can be no enterprise, so beset with difficulties and dangers, which some
men, for apparent hope of great gain and profit, would not go through with. And
it is very true, no arguments conclude so necessarily, in the opinion of the
greater part of men, Dan. Featley ut anted.
as that which is drawn, ab utili; Profit is the great god of the world: Haec
omnia tibi dabo, was the Topic place the devil made use of, above all other,
when he tempted our Savior. Profit is a bait, that all bite at. Hence is that
Maxim of the Parthians, Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat. Ovid.
Nulla sides, nisi prout expedit, No faith or keeping touch with any thing, but
as it makes for advantage. Justice and honesty, religion and conscience, may
be pretended; but that which turns the balance, and carries the greatest
sway in all concernments, is the matter of profit and emolument.


AS a man, T. Cartwright in Eccles^ast.
that in some of the Courts is over-powerd in a just cause, by a strong hand,
yet keeps up his hope, so long as he has liberty to make his appeal to a
higher Court, especially if he be confident of the sincerity of the Judge, to
whom he is to make his appeal. So, those that are here oppressed, rejected,
distressed, are not therefore to be discouraged, if at man's hand they receive
little or no relief: Why? Because they may appeal unto God, and they are sure
to prevail with him, according to the equity of their cause; with him there is
no respect of persons, no accepting of bribes: He is one, who, as he will not
be corrupted, so he cannot be deluded. And that the poor may not always be
forgotten, Psalm. 9. 18.
nor the hope of the oppressed perish for ever, has set down a certain day,
wherein he will without fail, and without further delay, if not before, hear
every man's cause, right every man's wrong, and do justice on every wrong-doer.


THe first Christians, after the rage of persecution was over, how open-handed
were they, in erecting and providing for places and persons, dedicated unto
Christ his service? And as in other Countries, so the good Christians of this
Island, have left honorable memorialls, in their magnificent foundations, and
munificent endowments thereof, many Millions have been that way expended; at
the foot of which account, as a Schedule thereunto annexed, is a bank of a
million of money, And. Willet Synopsis Papismi.
(not perfectly audited, but flenderly cast up by an unskilful hand in matter
of account) bestowed in the City of London, and the two Universities, in the
last Century of years, setting the rest of the Kingdom aside; All these
followed the rule of Gods law, whatsoever they offered ^^to him was (...) of
the (...)* But by the way it may be observed, That the flood of our Ancestors
liberalities rose not to so high a pitch, but their posteritic's sacrilege
has taken it down to as low an ebb; And a saying of William Ru^us, a great,
though no good King of this Island, pleases too* many that live on the spoils
of the Church, Christ's bread is sweet.

Covetousness and Contentment, inconsistent.
IT is one property, Jos. Shu^e a Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1619.
which (they say) is required of those who seek for the Philosophers Stone,
that they must not do it with any covetous desire to be rich, for otherwise
they shall never find it: But most true it is, that whosoever would have the
Jewel of contentment, (which turns all into Gold, yea want into wealth) must
come with minds divested of all ambiti^us and covetous thoughts, else are they
likely never to obtain it.


IT is observable, that Xerxes bare a strange affection to the Plane tree which
he hung about with chains, Herodotus.
and decked with Jewels of greatest price; A fond and foolish affection as
being to a ^reee, and such a tree as is good for nothing but to shade one out
of the Sun: This folly of so great a Monarch, very well resembles all those
who are not guided by the spirit of God into the ways of Truth and Life, but
are led by the spirit of error, or by the error of their own spirits to
ungodly and sinful courses, the very beaten paths to Hell and Death; The Tree
they are in love with, and adorn, and spend so much cost upon, is the forbidden
tree of sin, altogether unfruitful as that of Xerxes, Dan. Featley* ut ante^
it has neither fair blossoms, nor sweet fruit on it, only it is well grown,
has large arms, and broad boughs, and casts a good shade, or to speak
properly, a shadow of good, a noisome or pes^ilent shade, making the ground
barren, and killing the best plants of Virtues, by depriving them of the
sunshine of Gods grace; Not. Hist. l. 12
yet as diverse Nations in the days of Pliny, paid Tribute to the Romans for
the shade of these Trees; so do these Men pay for the seeming delight and
pleasure of sin (being indeed but a shadow of vanity) to the Devil, the
greatest Tribute that can be paid, even the Tribute of their most prectous
souls.


IF a Man be sick, B. Lakes S^r. at Court.
wear he never so stately Roabs, he minds them not; have he never so dainty
fair, he rellisheth it not; lay him in never so soft a bed, yet he cannot rest,
his diseased body feels nothing, but the afflicting peccant humor* Even so
when the remorse of Conscience works, Nihil est miserius quam hominis anim^s
conscius Plau^us in Captivis
all our gi^^s and parts be they never so great, appear not: Riches, though in
great abundance, satisfy not; Honors, Preferments, though never so eminent,
advantage not; though we have them all for the present, yet we have not the use
of them; we see, we hear, but we feel nothing but sin; as Experience reaches
them that have been distressed in this kind.


We read of an Earl of Oxford, Sir Franc. Bacons Hen. 7. p. 211.
fined by King Henry the seventh, fifteen thousand Marks for having too many
Retainers: But how many Retainers has Time had in all ages? and Servants in
all Offices? and Chaplains too upon occasion, doing as the Times do, not
because the Times do as they should do, but merely for sinister Respects, and
by ends to ingratiate themselves.

Calling.
AS the Sons of the Husbandman in the Fable, Conr* Zuingeri theatrum him.
vitae. Bromiardi sum Praaicant.
who being told by their Father lying on his Deathbed, that he left much Gold
buried under the ground in his Vineyard, fell a delving and digging all about
the Vines; and though they found no gold, yet by stirring the mould about the
roots of the trees, gained a great Vintage that year. Even so it falls out in
in the labor of our Calling, though by them we reap not always that which we
expect, and the world so much looks after, Riches, Preferment, etc. yet thereby
we may manure (if I may so say) the ground of our hearts, and gain great store
of those fruits, peace of Conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, the blessing of
God, such as the branches that are grafted in the true Vine, Christ Jesus, bear.


St. Paul gives the name of Pillars to Peter, James, Orat. 21.
and John, Gal. 2. Nazianzen says of Athanasius, that he was (...); and of
A^talus, Nicephorus says, that he was (...). Neither is this true only of the
Worthies of the Church, but of the Commonweal also; Joseph is not only called
Pastor, but Petra Israelis; the like is of Eliakim, the son of Helkiah, of whom
God says, I will fasten him as a Nail, etc. Esa. 22. And indeed there is no
good Man, on whom the Land does not rest; for as the World was made for them,
so they bear it up, B. Lakes Sermon.
and when God removes them, the World grows so much the weaker; that any man
enjoyes his Estate, that one friend has society with another, they are
beholden to the good; they think (poor Souls) that when they break Laws, and
persecute good Men, themselves fare the better, and their Posterity is the
greater; but fools they are, and therein prove their own foes, for they
overturn the Pillars both of Church and state, whereupon themselves do lean:
And whereas there is that care in unreasonable Creatures, of the preservation
of the whole, Natura sui conservatrix. Arist.
that every part will hazard it self to prevent the common ruin; only Men
forgetting, that themselves must perish when the Commonwealth goes to wrack,
to satisfy their own lusts, continually push at, and would overturn the
Pillars that bear them, and Sampson-like, though not with so good a will as
Sampson, nor in so good a cause, (for themselves are more like Philistims)
endeavor the ruin both of others and themselves.

A contented Mind, suits with all Conditions.
ONe observes (how truly, Relat. de Giov. Botero.
I dispute not) that the French naturally have so elegant and graceful a
carriage, that what posture of body soever in their salutations, or what
fashion of attire soever they are pleased to take on them, it does so beseem
them, that one would think nothing could become them better: Thus contentment
makes men carry themselves gracefully in wealth, and in want, in health, and in
sickness; in freedom and fetters, in what condition soever God allots them.

To be thankful unto God in all Conditions.
FAbritius told Pyrrhus, Plutarch in vita.
who one day tempted him with Gold, and the next day sought to terrify him
with an Elephant, Jer. Borough's True Content.
a beast that he had never seen before; Yest^rday I was no whit moved with your
Gold, nor to day with your Beast: So let neither abundance transport us, not
wants dismay us, nor Adversity deject us, but both incite us to bless God; in
Prosperity to praise his bounty, and in Adversity his Justice; and in both, his
provident and fatherly care over us.

Church-spoilers, condemned.
IN the end of an old Latin Verse are reckoned up three great wonders of
England, B. Hall Contemplat. Pool of Bethesda.
Eccl^sia, foemina Lana. The Churches, the Women, and the Wool; Foemina may
pass still, who may justly challenge wonder for vanity: As for Lana, if it be
wonderful alone, most sure it is, that it is ill joined with Ecclesia: The
Church is fleeced, and instead of wool, De Ecclesia qui aliquid furatur, Iudae
praditori comparatur: August. in Joh.
has gotten nothing but a bare pelt upon her back: And as for Ecclesia, either
Men have said with the Babylonians, down with it, down with it even to the
ground; or else in respect of the maintenance, with Judas, Ut quid perditio
haec? Why was this waste? they would have the Church put to board wages, the
Ministers like S. Paul, to labor with their hands, rather then to be
troublesome; but they will not in the mean time like those good primitive
Christians, lay down all they have at the Apostles feet, Act. 4. 35.

Wicked Men, instrumental for the good of Gods Children.
SOlinus writes of Hypanis, Cap. 20.
a Scythian River, that the water thereof is very bitter as it passes through
Exampius, yet very sweet in the Spring; So the Cup of trembling, which is
offered to the children of God, is often very bitter at the second hand, as it
is ministered unto them by profane Persons, Pier du Moulin de l'a mour de Dieu.
such as are haters of God, and despisers of goodn^sse; yet is it sweet at the
first hand, as it is sent them from Heaven; What Christ spoke to Pilate,
vaunting of the Power and Authority that he had over him, the feeblest
Christian may reply to the greatest Potentate on Earth, Thou could have no
power at all against me, unless it were given thee from above; the wicked may
have a will to hurt them, but power they have none, Joh. 19. 10.
unless it be given them from above by God, who can and does usually execute
his judgments by unjust Ministers, by the very worst of Men, and let them
intend never so much evil, plot never so much mischief against his servants,
yet he will turn it to their good.

Riches, Honor, etc. the Devils bait.
IN some Fenny places in England, where they are much troubled with gnats, they
use to hang up duing in the midst of the room, Tho. Fullers Meditat. Opes
irritamenta malorum.
for a bait for the ignats to fly to, and so catch them with a Net provided for
the purpose* Thus the Devil ensnareth the souls of many Men, by alluring them
with Riches, Honors, Preferments, the muck and dung of this World to undo
them eternally.


IT is observable that amongst the worst of Men, Turks, and the worst of Turks,
the Moors, B. Hall (...).
it is a just exception against any witness by their Law, that he has not
prayed six times in every natural day; It being usual with them, That before
the day break, they pray for day; when it is day, they give thanks for day; At
noon they thank God for half the day past; after that, they pray for a good
Sun^set; after that, they thank God for the day past; and lastly, pray for a
good night after their day. Nec de^^cias oratione, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 65.
Shall not such as these rise up against many Christians amongst us? who suffer
so many Suns and Moons to rise and set upon their heads, and never lift up
their hearts to their Creator, to ask his blessing, or to acknowledge it, such
as rush into the affairs of God, and of their calling, and thrust themselves
into actions either perilous or important, without ever lifting up their eyes
unto the God of Heaven, as if they made good that slanderous speech which
Surius the Jesuit cast upon Mart. Luther, In Chron.
Nec propter deum haec res coepta est, nec propter deum ^inietur? etc. This
business was neither begun for God, nor shall be ended for him.


When the Master of the House fails, the Family is out of order, and at the
point of dissolution: So miserable will be the condition of base Time-servers,
when their great Master is taken from them, and the Angel has sworn, That Time
shall be no longer, Rev. 10. 6. It is best therefore ser^ing of him who is
Eternity, a Master that can ever protect us.


THe manner of the Psylli, (which are a kind of People of that temper and
constitution, Plin. lib. 28.
that no venom will hurt them) is, that if they suspect any child to be none
of their own, they set an Adder upon it to sting it, and if it cry, and the
flesh swell, they cast it away as a spurious issue: but if it never so much as
quatch, nor be the worse for it, then they account it for their own, and make
very much of it: In like manner Almighty God tryes his children, by enduring
crosses and afflictions, he suffers the old Serpent to sting them, and bring
troubles and sorrows upon them; Nath. Shutes Sermon. at St. Paul's Land. 1622.
and if they patiently endure them, and make good use of them, he offers
himself to them, as to his own children, and will make them heirs of his
Kingdom: but if they fall a roaring, and crying, and storming, and fretting,
and can no ways abide the pain, he accompteth them as bastards, and no
children, Heb. 12. 8.


THe Emblem of King Henry the seventh, B. Hall Contemplat. Christ's (...).
in all his buildings (in the windows) was still a Crown in a bush of Thorns,
wherefore, or with what historical allusion he did so, is uncertain; but
surely it was to imply thus much, That great places are not free from great
cares; that no man knows the weight of a Scepter but he that swayes it; This
made Saul, hide himself amongst the stuff, when he should have been made a
King; Many a sleepless night, many a restless day, 1 Samuel 10. 22.
and many a busy shift will their ambition cost them them that affect such
places of eminency; besides, Aulae culmen lubricum, High places are slippery,
and as it is easy to fall, so the ruin is deep, and the recovery difficult.

God wills not the death of a sinner.
SHould a prisoner led to execution, Dan. Featlyes Sermon.
hear the Judge or Sheriff call to him, and say, Turn back, put in sureties for
thy good behavior herea^ter, and live: would he not suddenly leap out of his
fetters, embrace the condition, and thank the Judge or Sheriff, upon his bare
knees? And what can be thought, if God should send a Prophet, to preach a
Sermon of repentance to the devils, and say, Knock off your bolts, shake off
your fetters, and turn unto the Lord, and live: would not Hell be soon broke
loose, and rid, before the Prophet could make an end of his exhortation? Such a
Sermon the Prophet Ezekiel now makes to all sinners: As I live, says the
Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that he turn from his
ways and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, etc. Ezekiel. 33. 11, 18,
30, 31. Shake off the shakles of your sins, quit the company of the prisoners
of death, and gally-slaves of Satan, put in sureties for your good behavior
hereafter, turn to the Lord your God and live; yea, l^ve gloriously, live
happily, live eternally.

Married men, better Common-wealths-men than Batchelers.
It Is the policy of the Londoners, T. Fullers Holy State.
when they send a ship into the Levant, or Medi^erranean sea, to make every
Mariner therein a Merchant, each seaman ^^ven^uring somewhat of his own, which
will make him more wary to avoid, and more valiant to undergo dangers. Thus,
married men, especially if having posterity, are the deeper sharers in the
State wherein they live, which engaget^ their affections to the greater
loyalty. And though Batchelers be the strongest stakes, yet married men are the
best binders in the hedge of the Commonwealth.

One foul sin spoyleth a great deal of grace.
WOuld it not vex a Scrivener, Dan. Featlyes Sermon.
after he had spent many days, and taken much pains, upon a large Patent or
Lease, to make such a blot at the last word, that he should be forced to write
it all over again? Yet so it is, that one foul and enormous crime, dasheth and
obliterateth the fairest copy of a virtuous life; it razeth all the golden
characters of divine graces, printed in the soul. As one drop of ink colors
a whole glass of clear water, so one sinful and shameful action, staineth
all the f^rmer good life. All our fastings and prayers, all our sufferings for
righteousness, all the good thoughts we ever conceived, all the good words we
ever uttered, all the good works we ever performed, are lost at the very
instant of our recidivation.

The benefit of keeping close to good Principles.
HE that intends to meet with one in a great Fair, T. Fullers Holy State.
and knows not where he is, may sooner find him by standing still in some
eminent place there, than by tr^versing it up and down. Thus, having taken thy
stand upon some ground in Religion, and keeping thy station in a fixed posture,
never hunting after the times, to follow them; it is a hundred to one but they
will come to thee once in thy lifetime. Do but fear God, and reverence thy
Superiors; stick close to the principles of obedience to the one, and ^^^pect
to the other, and it is more then an ^even lay, that such as are given ^a^rd^
ch^nge, such as have betaken themselves to new lights, in the ways of God,
(...) dispense with their engagement to him, that is set over them, will come
about, and begin to see at the last, how they have been deluded.


BAlthazars quaffing in the Church-plate, Dan. 5. 10.
proved a fatal draught unto him. Korah, Dathan, Numb. 16.
and Abiram had no sooner opened their rebellious mouths against Moses, but the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up quick. Ananias and Saphira had no
sooner told a lie, Act 5.
and stand to it, but they are struck dead to the ground. Herod had scarcely
made an end of his Oration to the People, Act. 12. 22.
and received their applause, but the Angel of the Lord smote him, and made an
end of him. On that ^i^ners of all sorts, blasphemous swearers, bloody
murderers, unclean adulterers, and sacrilegious Church-robbers, when the
devil eggs them on to any impiety or villainy, Dan. Featlyes Sermon.
would but cast this rub in their way, and say to themselves, What if God
should take me in the manner, and strike me in the very act, and cast me into
the dungeon of hell, there to be tormented with the devil and his angels for
evermore? Do I not provoke him to it? do I not dare him? has he not threatened
as much? has he not done as much? That which is one man's case, may be any man's
case, etc.


THe grand Signior, Ioh. Bodin. de Repub. lib. cap. 20.
when he perceived with what acclamations of all the people, his son Mustapha
was entertained, upon his return from Persia, he commanded him presently to be
slain before him, and this Oracle to be pronounced by the Priest, Nulla fides
Regni sociis, ^mnisque potestas. Impatiens consortis erit.
Unus in coelo Deus, unus in terris Sultanus: One God in Heaven, one Sultan on
the Earth. And it is true, that two Suns in one Hemisphear, have ever been
portentous. The Crowns of Kings and Princes will not admit of Rivalls. That
Kingdom can never stand, where are two supreme and uncontrolable commanders.


WHen Francis the first, Pier. d' Ancre Of the uncertainty of things. lib. 2.
did. 4.
King of France, was consulting with his Captains, how to lead his Army over
the Alps into Italy, whether this way, or that way, Amarill his Fool sprung out
of a corner, where he sat unseen, and bad them rather take care, which way they
should bring their Army out of Italy, back again. Thus, it is easy for one to
interest and embarque himself in another quarrel, to be engaged for another
debt, facilis de^^ensus, etc. But how to be disengaged, how to come off, hic
labor, ho^ opus est; there lies the difficulty.


WHen Cyrus came near Babylon with his great Army, Dan. Featlyes Sermon.
and finding the River about it, over the which he must pass, so deep, that it
was impossible to transport it that way, he suddenly caused it to be divided
into many chanells, whereby the main river sunk so on the sudden, that with
great facility he passed it over, and took the City. That Maxim in Philosophy,
Omne divisibile est corrup^^bile, holds in all States and Societies. Discordia
ordinum Reipub. venenum. T* Livius.
The divisions amongst the Trojans, brought in the Grecians; the divisions
amongst the Grecians, bro^ght in Philip; the divisions of the Assyrian
Monarchy, brought in the Persian; of the Persian, brought in the Macedonian; of
the Macedonian, brought in the Roman; of the Roman, brought in the ^urk.
Lastly, the divisions among the Britans of this Nation, brought in first the
Saxons, next the Danes, and last of all the Normans; and who shall come next,
invited by our uncivil civil dist^actions, God knows. So true is that Axiom
of Christ, Marth. 12. 25.
A Kingdom divided within it self, cannot stand.

When sins are at the height, then comes destruction.
A Fisherman, W. Strong Ser. at Wo^tm. 1640.
when in a clear water he sees a fish come to his hook, nible at the bait,
bite it, and swallow it down, then he gives a jerk with his anglerod, and
strikes him. So Almighty God oft-times, permits wicked purposes and
enterprises to hold on, till they come to a straight line, till they are upon
the very height; and then he turns, and overturns them. In fori^as ^^ydram, he
breaks the pitcher at the door, cutteth down the ear of corn when it is ^ull,
launceth the sore when it is ripe. When the sins of the Amorites are full, then
comes judgment; when the sins of a People or Nation are at the height, then
comes destruction.

The Tongue is the Hearts Interpreter.
THe strokes in music answer to the notes that are pricked in the rules. Cic.
de O^^t. l. 3.
The Anatomists ^each, that the heart and tongue hang upon one string. And
hence it is, that as in a Clock or Watch, when the wheel is moved, the hammer
strikes. So the words of the mouth, answer to the motions of the heart; Dan.
Featly, ut ante^.
and when the heart is moved with any perturbation or passion, the hammer beats
upon the bell, and the mouth sounds, Psalm. 45. 1. Romans 10. 10. Luke 6. 45.
The reason, why so many are tongue-tyed in their devotions to God, is, because
they are hide-bound in their hearts; they cannot bring forth without, because
they have no s^ock within; their words stick in their mouths, because they have
no form in their hearts.

Gods Power, Wisdom, etc. To be seen in all the Creatures.
IT is most strange, yet most true, T. Fuller, ut anted.
which is reported, that the Arms of the Duke of Rhoan in France, which are
Filsills or Lozenges, are to be seen in the wood or stones, throughout all his
Country, so that break a stone, or lop a bough of a tree, and one shall behold
the grain thereof (by some secret cause in Nature) diamonded, ^r streaked in
the fashion of a Loz^nge. Yea, the very same in effect, is observed in England;
for the resemblance of Stars, Cambd Bri^an.
the Arms of the worshipful Family of the Shugburies in Warwickshire, are
found in the stones, within their own Manor of Shugbury. But what shall we
say? the Arms of the God of Heaven, namely, Quae li^e^ ^erba Deum.
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, etc. are to be seen in every creature in the
world, even from Worms to Men, from sensible to insensible creatures; there is
not the least pile of grass that a man can tread upon, but sers out a Deity
unto us, and tells us, There is a God of power, wisdom, and goodness, etc.

Great safety, in attending to the Ministry of the Word.
ALl the Adventurers in the great ship, called Argonavis, Ovid. Metam.
bound for Colchis, to fetch the golden Fleece, when they were assaulted by the
Sirens, endeavoring to enchant them with their songs, found no such help in
any thing against them, as in Orpheus's pipe. We are all adventurers for a
golden Crown in Heaven; and as the Grecians, so we are waylaid by Sirens, the
world, the ^^esh, and the devil, evil spirits, and their incantations, from
which we cannot be safe, but by attending to the Word of God, by listening to
the Preachers of the Gospel; who, when they pipe unto us out of the Word, our
hearts should be so taken up with that celestial music, that nothing else
whatsoever should have the least entertainment.


OTtocar King of Bohemia, refused to do homage to Rodolphus the first,
Pantaleon. in vita Rodolphi.
till at last, chastised with war, he was content to do him homage privately in
a Tent; Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 4.
which Tent was so contrived by the Emperors servants, that by drawing a cord,
Bonfin. lib. 8. decad. 2.
all was taken away, and so Ottacar presented on his knees, doing his homage to
the view of three Armies, then in the field. Thus, God at last shall uncase the
closest dissembler, to the sight of Men, Angels, and Devils, having removed
all veiles and pretenses of religion and piety: W. Strongs Set. at Westminster. 1650.
No goat in a sheep-skin, shall steal on his right hand. Here it is, that men
may go with their cloaks muffled over their faces, but then they shall be
dismantled; here the graves are covered, but then they shall be laid open; here
the glossing hypocrite may pass for a real honest man, but there he shall be
discovered, and made known what he is indeed.


CHarles the Emperor, Phil. Nepos. Imperat. vitae.
when the Spanish soldiers would have dug up the bones of Luther, Sinite
ipsum, inquit, quiescere ad d^em resurrectionis and judicia omnium, etc. Let
him rest, says he, till the resurrection, and the final judgment; if he were
an h^retick, Erasmi Ad^gia. Franc. S^lis. Intro^uct. a la vi^ devote.
he shall then have an heretick's reward. Humanity, that forbids the rifling of
a grave, bids forbear him that is shut in it, and cannot answer for himself. De
mortuis nil nisi bonum, was the saying of old; to speak well of the dead, is a
thing both commendable and christian: and much to blame are they, that not
contented to abuse the bodies, besmear the memories, but also quarrel at the
salvation of the souls of men departed.


IT is an observation amongst the Mariners, T. Fullers Holy State.
that as the Sea grows daily shallower and shallower on the shoars of Holland
and Zeland, so the channel of late waxes deeper and deeper, on the coasts of
Kent and Essex. It is much to be feared, that as Drunkenness ^bbs in Holland,
it flows in England; that it has gained in the Island, what is lost in the
Continent.


WHen children meet with primroses, M. Styles Ser. at S. Paul's. 1628.
nuts, or apples in the way, then they loyter on their errands, bring night
home, and so get the displeasure of their parents; whereas those that meet with
dangers, or some affrights by the way, make haste in their journey, and their
speed makes them welcome with commendations. Thus, God has sent all of us
abroad into the world, and we are every day travailing homeward; Sedem
pr^peramus ad unam.
if we meet with miseries and vexations in the way, discretion should teach us
a religious haste in our journey; and if we meet with pleasures, they should
only pleasure us, by putting us in mind of those pleasures, which are at Gods
right hand for evermore; or else to scorn them, as worse than trifles, and to
look upon them as pull-backs, in the ways of God and goodness.

The great danger of Lawsuits.
IT is the Relation of a Gentleman, that seeing a Ier-falcon let fly at a
He^^^, Ant. Warwick resolved Medi^^.
he observed with what clamor the Heron entertained the sight and approach of
the Hawke, and with what winding shift he strove to get above her, laboring
even by ^emuting his enemies feathers to make her flag-wing^d, and so escape;
but at last when they must needs come to a necessitated encounter, resuming
courage out of ^ecessity, he turned face against her, and striking the Hawke
through the gorge, both fell down dead together. This fight does much resemble
some great suit in Law, where one trusting more to his Cause's Potency, than
his Cause's equity, endeavors to disinherit his stubborn Neighbor by
colorable title to his Land; -- Sic cedit viribus aequum.
Here you may hear the clamourous obloquies of the wronged, and fee the many
turnings, and winding Meanders of the Law, Ovid. de Trift.
sought out to get above his Adversary; And then when the issue must come to
trial, oftentimes in the grapple they both sink to beggary, whilst lawfully
they seek to get one above the other.

Conscientious Preachers, not to be slighted.
IT was a memorable passage, that fell some years since from a godly Man,
preaching before the King; Dr. Web.
I observe (said he) that the Ambassadors that come from Placentia, are
welcome to this place, whereas these that come from Verona are slightly set
by; but it will hereafter be found true, Joh. Stow ^h^on.
that one Dr. Latimer with his downright English, will be worth a thousand Dr.
Shawes, who in a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, by the command of the then Duke of
Gloucester, lost both his wits and his honesty together: The Sermon being ended,
E. of Dorset.
an eminent Courtier having observed the Preacher, to have been an ancient
Chaplain, constant in his Attendance, religious in the performance of his duty
to God and the King, asked a great Prelate then at Court, How it came to pass,
that so grave, so religious, so conscientious a Preacher, did not rise (he
meant by way of preserment) in all that time: Truly (said this great man) let
me tell you, G. Walker, ^ Ser. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1629.
that I verily think, he will never rise till the Resurrection. Thus was Amos
slighted, Amos 7. 13. Micaiah clapped in prison, 1 King. 24. 27. John the
Baptist, beheaded, Math. 14. 10. St. Paul counted an enemy by the Galathians,
because he told them them the truth, Gal. 4. 16. by all which it appears, what
cheap Markets are made of Conscience, and how little conscientious Preachers
are set by; but had men their wits about them, they would make much of such
Preachers, and hug such Doctrine, that lays hold upon their Consciences, that
tells them what Christ is, and what Christ has done and suffered for them, and
what returns they have made, that whereas he has loaded them with blessings
and benefits, they have laden him with their sins and transgressions.

The benefit of self-Examination.
IT is reported of Sextus, that every night before he slept, he asked of his
own heart, Seneca de Ira. lib. 3.
What evil have thou this day amended? What vice have thou shunned? What good
have thou done? In what part art thou bettered? Thus must every good Christian,
do, there is nothing more pleasant then this con^uetude, for a man to exami^e
himself, to commune with his own heart, to call himself to an account, Hen.
Mason Tribun. of ^onscience.
how he has passed the whole day, what good he has omitted, what had he has
committed, closing up all with prayer and praises to God; then will his
Conscience be at quiet, his sleep both sweet and comfortable.


WHen the Larker spreads out his Day-net in a fair morning, Ant. Warwick
reso^ved Med.
and whirls about his artificial motion, it is easy to observe, how by the
reflecting of the Sun on the wheeling Instrument, not only the merry Lark, and
fearful Pigeon are dazzled, and drawn with admiration; but stouter birds of
prey, the swift Merlin, and towering Hobby are enticed to stoop, Stat meretrix,
parvo culvis mer cabilis ^re.
and gazing on the outward form lose themselves: Thus Harlots and lewd women,
Ovid. 1. An.
the very night-nets of the Devil, are spread out for the sons of men in the
vigor of their youth, who with roling eyes draw on the lustfulness of
affection, and betray the wantonness of the Heart, and with their alluring
glances, too too often make to stoop within the danger of their fatal snare,
not only the simple and careless, but others also, Men of known parts, men
otherwise wary and wise; who coming within the pull of the net, lie at the
merciless mercy of that treacherous Fowler the Devil, to their certain and
inevitable danger.


LOok but upon two Sawyers working at the Pit, A. W. ut antea.
the one casts his eyes upward, whilst his main action tends down-wara; the
other stands with a countenance dejected, whilst his work is to draw the saw
upward: Thus the Pharisee and the Publican; the real Professor and the
rotten-hearted Hypocrite, the one looks up toward Heaven, whilst his actions
tend to the pit in^ernal; the other casts down his head, whilst his hand and
his heart move upwards; the one seems better than he is, the other is better
than he seems; the one has nothing but form, whilst the other has the power
of Godliness.


LOok but upon a gallant Ship, A. W. ut antea.
well rigged, trimmed and tackled, manned and munition'd, with her top and top
gallant, and her spread fails proudly swelling with a full gale in fair
weather, putting out of the Haven into the smooth Main, and drawing the
Spectators eyes with a welwishing admiration; but soon after to hear of the
same Ship, splitted against some dangerous Rock, or racked by some dysasterous
Tempest, or sunk by some leak sprung in her by some accident; this were a
sudden change: Brevis e^t magni fortuna favori^s. Silius Ital.
And just such is the Court Favourit's condition, to day like S^^anus, he
dazleth all men's eyes with the splendour of his glory, and with the proud and
potent beak of his powerful Prosperity cutteth the waves, and plougheth
through the prease of the vulgar, scorning to fear any Remora at his keel
below, or any cross winds from above; and yet to morrow, in some storms of
unexpected dis-favour, springs a leak in his honor, and sinks on the Syrtes of
disgrace, or dashed against the Rocks of displeasure, is splitted and wracked
in the Charibdis of infamy, and so concludes his voyage in misery and
misfortune.


THere is a story of a Countryman of ours, Neubrigens. Hist.
one Kettle of Farnham, in the time of K. Henry the second, who had the faculty
to discern spirits, by the same token that one time, he saw the Devil spitting
over the Drunkards shoulders into their Pots, at another time laughing at a
rapacious Usurers elbow, S. Athanius Alexand. in vita ejus.
whilst he was piling up Gold in his Coffers; the same faculty is reported of
Anthony the Hermit: And Sulpitius reports the same of S. Martin; These were
the wonders of those dark times; B. Hall Contemplat.
but there is no such matter of admiration in these ill-spirited times of ours
to see, 1. Tim. 4. Atque hi sun^ manes quos patimur.
and clearly discern both De^ils, and divellish minded men, Hell may now seem
to be broken loose; What natural Man is free? One has the spirit of error,
another the spirit of sornication, Hos. 2. another the spirit of fear, 2 Timothy
1. another the spirit of slumber, another the spirit of giddiness, all spiritum
Mundi, the spirit of the World, every man is haunted with one ill spirit or
other.

Want of Maintenance, the waste of Religion.
ONe asked sometimes how it was, S. Ben. Rydiard speech in Parliam. 1625.
that in Athens so good and great a City, there were no Physicians; to whom
this Answer was made, because there are no Rewards proposed to them that
practice Physic: The same Answer may be made for our times; the cause why the
Church of God is so forsaken, why Religion and the profession thereof is so
much undervalued, is, because of the want of zeal in them that should either
for their courtesy, or for their ablility, be fosterers of Learning, and
increase the Livings, Impropriators.
where occasion is, and give hope and comfort to learned Men; What said I?
increase? Nay, the Livings and Provisions which heretofore were given, are now
quite taken away, so that he which ^eedeth the flock, has least part of the
Milk; and he that goes a warfare, has not half his wages; and he that
labors and sweateth in the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, has his hire
abridged and abated; hence it is that scandalous livings make scandalous
Ministers, and scandalous necessitated Ministers, make the Ordinances of God
vilipendious.

Spoilers of Church and State, condemned.
WHen Augustus had beautified Rome, with setting up many fair buildings, he
said, Phil. Nepos in vita Augusti. In (...) Carleolensis.
In^e^^ lateritiam, marmoream reliqui, I found it made of brick, but I leave it
made of Marble: Such was the Inscription set upon the Cathedral at Carlisle,
(as relating to Dr. Robinson, then Bishop of that See) Invenit destructum,
reliquit extructum, he found it ruined, but left it repaired: Here was a good
exchange, Marble for Brick, Reparations for Ruin. But O the sad inversion of
late times, as concerning both Church and State, the ruins of the one, and
dilapidations, nay the extirpations of the other, where Religion was become
Rebellion, Faith faction, Reformation deformation; where Temples were turned
into Stables, Princes Palaces into guards of unruly Soldiers; Monarchy into
Anarchy, and the well compacted body of Government both in Church and State,
into a licentious looseness of life and conversation.

God regards and rewards his People.
WHen Ahasuerus read in the Book of the Records of the Chronicles, and there
found how Mordecai had discovered a plot of Treason against his Person, Esther.
6. Jos. Caryll Ser. at Westminster.
he did not lay the Book aside, and slightly passed by such a piece of service,
but enquires, What Honor, and what Dignity had been done to Mordecai? It seems
if the King had thought on, or read him sooner, he had rewarded him sooner: But
God has ever in his eye all the Records and Chronicles of his Peoples actions,
he reads their journalls every day, and where he meets with any that have done
or spoken any thing aright for him; Deus absolut^ ^onum perpetu^ beneficus.
Athego^as. in legal. etc.
the enquireth what honor, what dignity has been done for this Man? If none
has been done, he will do it himself; if any thing has been done, he will do
yet more: Not a sigh, not a tear, not a thought for the glory of Christ, shall
fall unregarded, unrewarded.


IT is a great burrhen to wait upon a ^ool; but we can easily stay for the
Resolutions of the wise, Dr. Micklethwaites Sermon. at Temple, 1634.
who we are sure have the compass of a business in their heads, and are
skilled in timing and ordering every circumstance thereof. How blessed then are
they, who while they work for things below, can attend upon the great God both
of Heaven and Earth, whose Moderation, and Judgment, and Wisdom are such, as
will not suffer them either to do any thing before the set, appointed, fit time
come; nor to stay the doing of it, one minute after; never any man repented his
waiting patiently upon Gods disposal of him.


IT is recorded of the K. of Navarre, then a Protestant, Melch. Adamus in vita
Bizae.
being pressed by Beza, to appear more in the cause of God, and to own Religion
to the purpose: He makes answer to this effect, That he was their friend, but
he resolved to put no further to Sea, then he might get to shore if a storm
should arise* he resolved not to hazard his hopes of the Crown of France, and
it is well known what became of him: So when men will make Religion as Twelve,
2 Timothy 4. B. Potters Sermon. at St. Mary Spittle Land, 1640.
and the World as Thirteen, it is no marvail if with Demas, they forsake the
cause of God, and embrace the world; and with those Potters in 1 Chronicles. had
rather work with the King for good wages, than build up the house of the Lord.


UPon the Dyall-peece of the Clock, R. Wingfeild Mount Tabor.
in the College Church of Gloucester, are pourtrayed four Angels, each of them
seeming to say something to those that look up to see what a Clock it is, the
whole inscription being made up of two old Latin Verses after the riming
manner.

1. An labor, an requies. 2. Sic transit gloria mundi: 3. Praeterit iste dies,
4. Nescitur origo secundi
Which may be thus Englished, Whether we rest or labor, work or play,
The world and glory of it pass away.:
This day is past, or near its period grown,
The next succeeding is to us unknown.


And most sure it is, Labitur (...), falli^que volubilis ^tas. Ovid. Met. l. 10
whether we sleep or wake, the Ship of our life goes on; whether we do well or
ill, live frugally or prodigally, our time with the whole World and glory of
it, is transitory, and continually wheeling about like the minutes to the hour,
or the hours to the time of the day in the Clock; so that time past, is
irrecoverable, time to come uncertain; and all the time we can reckon of, is
the present time, this moment of time, whereupon depends Eternity.

Mortalitie's Memorandum.
THe noble Lord Chancellor, R. Wingfield Mount Tabor.
Egerton, coming down the stairs at York-house, to go to Westminster Hall, in
the Term-time, observed to be written upon the wall, (belike by some one or
other, that feared oppression by some mignty adversary) these three words,
Tanquam non reversurus, as though he should never return again; hinting thereby
unto his Lordship, to do justice. And it may serve for a good memorandum to all
good Christians, to make them the more wary and watchful of their actions,
when they go abroad out of their houses, chambers, Non est (creed mihi)
sap^entis dicere, Vivam. Martial. 11.
or lodgings, even for this reason, because they may happen, not to return
again: there would be condiscension in the Plantiff's heart, reconciliation in
the Defendant, truth in the Lawyer, conscience in the Judge, plain dealing in
the Tradesman, in every man and woman's heart, an avoiding of evil doing, Did
they but think on these few words, Tanquam non reversurus, and consider,
whether they would speak or do thus and thus, if they were presently to die; or
whether thus and thus behave themselves abroad, if they were not to return
again to their homes.

Worldly men are easily taken off from the service of God.
THere is a pretty story of a company of People, Strabo. Geograph. lib. 14.
that met at the market together; amongst whom there was one, that played
excellently upon the Harp, so that all crowded to hear him, as being ravished
with the music: But no sooner did the market-bell ring, but they were all
gone, only one stayed behind, that was thick of hearing, to whom the Harper
was much beholding, Mr. Andrews Ser. at. S. Jam. Clark. Well by Land. 1619.
and told him, that he much honored his music, by staying to hear it, when
the rest were gone, at the ringing of the market-bell. What! the market-bell!
has that rang? said the deaf man, Nay then farewell, I must be gone too. Thus
it is with too too many of us, If the Exchange-bell, or the Market-bell ring
but once, yet at the sound of them, what running is there? happy is he that can
get thither first; but for the Church-bell, that may ring again and again, yet,
nondum venit tempus, Mul^i vocem Pradicatoris audiunt, sed post vocem vacui
recedunt Greg. in Ezekiel.
much ado there is to get men and women to Church; and when their bodies are
wrung in thither, it is a thousand to one, but their minds are roving abroad in
the world. Let the Charmer charm never so sweetly, the Preacher instruct never
so comfortably* their ears, the spiritual ears of their souls, are like the
deaf Adder, so stopped, that they will not listen at all to his Doctrine,
though never so sound and Orthodoxall.

The reverence of Man more than God, a true sign of a decaying State or
Kingdom.
AMyris being sent by the Sybarites, Suidas in vita.
to the Oracle of Delphos, to consult, how long their Commonwealth should
stand, it was answered, That it should continue ever, until they reverenced
man more than the gods. He seeing one day a slave beaten by his Master, and
flying to the Al^ar of Refuge, yet his Master spared him not there; Mr. Goddard
Ser. at S. Greg. Land. 1652.
then the slave fled to the Tomb of his Masters father, and then his Master
spared him: Which when Amyris perceived, presently he went, and sold all that
he had, and went to dwell at Peloponesus: For now I see, said he, that, men are
more reverenced than the gods. But certainly, if that the reverence of Man more
than God, be a true sign of a decaying State or Kingdom, then this of ours
must needs be in a sinking condition: What crying up is there of the Acts and
Ordinances of men? and in the mean time, what sleignting and contempt of Gods
Word and Commandments? What mean those base complyances with men, when God is
set by, Melius est obedire Deo, quam hominibus.
as not worthy of our notice? What? but to bring down heavy judgments upon such
a People or Nation.


THere is a story, Gerv, Markhams Decad. of honor.
how the Castle of Truth being (by the King of Jerusalem) left to the guard and
keeping of his best servant, ( Zeal): The King of Arabia (with an infinite
Host) came against it, begirt it round with an unresistible siege, cuts off
all passages, all reliefs, all hopes of friends, meat, or ammunition. Which
Zeal perceiving, and seeing how extremity had brought him almost, to shake
hands with Despair, Joh. Theutonici Sylva similit^^inum.
he calls his Council of War about him, and discovers the sadness of his
condition, the strength of his enemy, the violence of the s^ege, and the
impossibility of conveying either messages or letters to the great King his
Master, from whom they might receive new strength and encouragement. Whereupon
(the necessity of the occasion being so great) they all conclude, there was no
way but to deliver the Castle (though upon very hard terms) into the hands of
the Enemy. But Zeal staggers at the resolution, and being loath to lose Hope, as
long as Hope had any thread or hair to hold by, he told them, he had one friend
or companion in the Castle, who was so wise, so valiant, and so fortunate, that
to him, and to his exploits alone, he would deliver the management of their
safety. This was Prayer, the Chaplain to the great King, and the Priest to that
Colony. Hence Prayer was called for, Et dominum mundi fle^tere vota valent.
Martial. ep. ad. Domitian.
and all proceedings debated* He presently arms himself with Humility,
Clemency, Sincerity, and Fervency; and in despite of the enemy, makes his way
through, came to the King his Master, and with such moving passions, enters his
ears, that presently forces are levied, which returning under the conduct of
Prayer, raise the siege, overthrow the King of Arabia, make spoil of his
Camp,, and give to the Castle of Truth her first noble liberty: Which
performed, Zeal crowns Prayer with wreaths of Olive, Oak, and Laurel, sets him
on his right hand, and says for his sake, Divinity shall ever march in the
first rank of honor. And certainly, Ministers of Gods Word, such as apply
their spirits most to the glory of God, and the public good; especially such
Divines, as are Timothies in their Houses, Chrysostoms in their Pulpits,
Grandis dignitas* Sacerdotum, etc. Hieron. in Ezekiel.
and Augustins in Disputations; such as are just in their words, wise in their
counsels; such as are vigilan^, diligent, and faithful, in the execution of
their place. Who (that is not Royal) should seek in honor to precede them?


IF a General of an Army, And. Harwoods Sermon. at S. Alphg. Land. 1649.
laying siege to some great Fort or Castle, and being upon the storming of it,
the guns from off the walls playing fiercely upon him, should do abundance of
execution; were it not madness in him, upon goining of the place, to cast away
those guns? It were so. What does he then? He lets fly at the gunner that
fired them, but preserves the guns, as serviceable for himself. Thus must we
deal with our enemies: They abuse us, they evilly entreat us, they spitefully
use us, Bellum cum vitiis, sed pax cum personis. Isidor.
they seek to destroy us, and utterly to ruin us: What, shall we hate them,
abuse them again? No, we must love them, and do good unto them; preserve the
guns, but destroy the gunner; love their persons, they may be afterward
isntrumental to Gods glory; but hate their vices, that will be the undoing of
our souls. This is that perfect hatred, wherewith David hated his enemies,
Psalm. 139. 22.


IT was the saying of Socrates, Diog. Laert. in vita.
that every man in this life had need of a faithful friend, and a bitter
enemy; the one to advise him, the other to make him look about him. In dealing
with a friend, a man is often deceived; but if he have to do with an enemy,
Josh. Shute Sermon. at S. Paul's. Land. 1622.
then he is wary of his proceedings, and places his words discreetly. Hence is
it, that much good comme^h by enemies, and a good use may be made of them* They
are the workmen, that fit us, and square us for God's building; they are the
rods, Mulio^ inimiiciti^ illustr^runt qui ob scurmansissent, etc.
that beat off the dust; and the skullions, that scour off the rust from our
souls. Were it not for enemies, F. Petrarcha Dialog.
how could we exercise those excellent graces of love and charity, of patience
and brotherly kindness? Had it not been for enemies, where had been the crown
of Martyrdom? Yet further; Enemies are the fire that purges, the water that
cleanses the dross and filthiness of our hearts. Much every way is the good
that comes by enemies, if we make a right use of them.

Prayers for the Dead, unavailable.
LOok but upon one, D. Wincop Ser. at S. M. Spittle, 1627.
that plays a game at bowls, how no sooner than he has delivered his bowl,
what a screwing of his body this way and that way, what calling does he make
after it, that it may be neither short nor over, nor wide on either side; but
all in vain, the bowl keeps on his course, and reaches to the place, not
where the mind, but the strength of the bowler sent it. Thus it is with those
that pray for the dead, they pray, and call unto God, and sing Requiems and
Diriges, for the souls of men departed, that they may be sent into Purgatory,
not Hell; a course altogether unwarrantable, unavailable: For, as the body is
laid down in the dust, so the soul is gone to God that gave it, there to
receive according to the deeds done here in the flesh; whether it be to life or
death eternal.

Knowledge without Practice, reproved.
IT is by some observed, Ulyst. Aldrovand. hist. de serpent.
that the Toad, though otherwise an ugly venomous creature, yet carries a
precious stone in his head, which for the excellent virtues thereof, is worn in
gold-rings, and otherwise. Such Toads, such ugly creatures, are most of men;
they have the excellent jewel of Knowledge in their heads, they can speak
well: O, but they act ill, they live not according to that knowledge, their
life and conversation is rotten, and infectious to the whole neighborhood
about them.

Blamelessnesse of life, enjoined.
A Certain Roman, R. Clerk Ser.
the windows of whose house being so very low, that every one which passed by,
Marc. Drusus.
might easily see what was done within, being proffered by a workman, Vell.
Pater^.
at such a rate, to make his windows higher, and so more private, replied,
Integer vit^^ ^celerisque purus, etc. Horat, Ode. 22. lib. 1.
I had rather give thee as much again, to let them alone; for I do nothing in
my house, but what I care not, who knows it. And such an one ought every good
Christian to be, so to carry himself, as that he need not blush, to tell his
very thoughts, if he were asked of them; and so to demean himself, as if he had
pectus fenestratum, a glasse-window in his bosom, that every one might read his
mind there.

The tedious length of Lawsuits.
AS Joshua said of the building of Jericho, Joh. Squire Sermon. at S. Leona^d
Shorditch. 1637. Josh. 6. 16.
He shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son
shall he set up the gates there of: So there may be a Suit at Law, commenced in
the birth of our firstborn, and yet our youngest son shall not see the gates
thereof, that is, the end of it.


When the Grecians had won Troy, Da^res. Phryg. de bell^ Trojano.
before they fell to plunder it, they gave every man leave to bear his burden
out, of what he would: and first of all, AEneas marched out, carrying his
household gods; which when they saw, and that he did them no great damage
thereby, they bad him take another burden, Jacob Merchantii Hortus Pastorum.
which he did, and returned with his old father A^chises on his back, and his
young son Ascanius in his hand; which the Grecians seeing, passed by his house,
as Joshua did by the house of Rahab, saying, That no man should hurt him, that
was so religious. And thus, that man that has his mind set on his God, shall
receive no hurt by his enemy: When his ways please the Lord, Prove. 16. 7.
his very enemies shall become his friends. Nay, he shall be in league with the
stones of the field, and the beasts of the wood shall be at peace with him. And
which is yet more, Job 5. 23.
God will break the bow, Hos. 2. 18.
and the sword, and snap the spear assunder: He will make all those terrible
instruments of war, so unserviceable, that they shall lie down quietly by him,
not offering the least hurt that may be.


SUppose a man be cast in prison for some notorious crime, Phil. Diez. Summa
praedicat.
and is thereupon sentenced to death, he sends for one of his friends,
entreating him to sue to the King for a pardon. He answers, He cannot do it.
This he will do for him, he will give him a winding sheet, and a coffin. Then
he sends to another, Pictas ad omnia utilis.
he tells him, All that he can do for him, is, to see him buried. But a third
goes to the King, and gets a pardon for him. Even so, riches, they can do
nothing for us, but give us a winding sheet, and a coffin; and our friends,
they can only see us buried: But Godliness is the true fast-friend, at a dead
lift* 1 Timothy 4. 8.
that gets us a pardon for our sins, having the promise both of this life, and
that which is to come.


AS long as the Hedgehog lies on the dry ground, Will. Strong, ^ Ser. at Westminster.
1651.
she shows nothing but her prickles; but put her into the water, then she
shows her deformity. Thus an hypocrite, so long as he is on the dry ground of
prosperity, then he is humble and patient, and shows nothing for a time, but
the prickles of repentance; but let him be thrown into the waters of
affliction, or the fire of persecution, then he shows himself what he has in
him, which before was kept close.


IT is observed, Uly^^. Aldrovandi Ornithologi^.
that when the beak of the Eagle is grown so big, that she cannot eat any meat,
so that thereupon the becomes very poor and bare of her body, she goes to a
rock, and there she dasheth her beak so long against it, till she have broke
off the end of it; and then she feeds with much more ease, and so recovereth
her strength again. Thus, when we have lost our taste, and cannot relish that
heavenly M^nna, Honorii Ser. de Circumcisio^e.
the precious food of our souls, we must repair to the rock Christ Jesus, and
there knock off all those domineering lusts, and disordered affections, that
irregularity of our wills, and perverseness of our judgments; and then, and not
till then, shall we taste, how good the Lord is, and come to our selves again.

The joys of Gods Children, invisible.
IT is St. Augustines own relation of a certain Gentile, that showed him his
Idoll-Gods, saying, Here is my God? Where is thine? then pointing up at the
Sun, In lib. Con^es.
he said; Lo, here is my God, where is thine? so showing him^ diverse
Creatures, still upbraided him with, Here are my Gods, where are thine? But as
the Father answered him, I showed him not my God, Tho. Whi^es Sermon. at St.
Giles Crippleg. Land. 1653.
not because I had not one to show him, but because he had not eyes to see him:
Thus the joys of a Christian, though they cannot be seen with bodily eyes,
though the wicked cannot so much as discern them, yet is there nothing so
delightful, so comfortable as they are; witness that Peace of Conscience, that
joy in the Holy Ghost which is so unspeakable, such as eye has not seen, nor
ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of Man to conce^^e them
as they are.

Gods trial of his Children by Afflictions.
THere is a custom amongst the Germans, Sebast. Munster Cosmagraphia.
that they might know whether their Children were bastards or not, to throw
them in Fluvium Rhenum, into the River of Rhine; if they floated above, then
they acknowledged them to be their own; but if the water carried them away,
then they esteemed of them but as bastards: So God casts his Children into
^^u^^ina afflictionis, Imposuit te alto Fortuna, etc. Ovid. ^d Laurum.
floods of afflictions; those that swim to Christ by a true and lively faith,
them he acknowledges as his; but those which by the violence of lust are sunk
and drencht in sin, he looks upon them as bastards, not as Sons.

The silent coming of Gods spirit into the heart of Man.
RIvers that at first run out of the Sea are not heard, because of the
extraordinary noise of the Ocean, they run out no Man hearing them, nor seeing
the place where the main brancheth its self into Rivolets: Jerem. Leech Sermon
at St. Mary le Bow, Lon^. 1619.
but as they run back into the Sea, being swelled with the new access of
Land-waters, make a great noise in their return: Even so is the Spirit of God,
it comes quietly and silently into the heart of Man, so that the Man that has
it, knows not when it came to him, of the day and hour knows he nothing;
yet at the return thereof unto God that gave it, there is a voice of praise and
thanksgiving.

Gods trial of his Children by cleansing their hearts.
When the Queen of Sheba came to hear the wisdom of Solomon, 2 Chr. 10. the
more to scarch out the same, J. Plantavitii, Florileg. Rabbini^uin.
as the Rabbines do observe, she dressed Boys in Women's apparel, and Girls in
Men's apparel, asking of him which were the Boys, and which the Girls;
whereupon he bids them all to wash their hands and their faces, and those which
he perceived to wash the more, them he judged to be boys, the other girls:
Thus the Lord makes a difference to be seen betwixt his children, the children
of light, and the children of darkness, by how much the more his children do
purify and cleanse themselves, to be kept unspotted of the world; it is not a
little smearing will serve the turn with them, but rather than they shall seem
not to be sufficiently cleansed, they will cry out with (...), Amplius lava me
Domine, Lord wash me thoroughly, etc. Psalm. 51.


SUppose a Travailer in a stormy night, Arn. Pontani Biblioth^c. concion^.
should take up his lodging in some Cave in the Woods, where are nothing but
Serpents and Adders, and such like venomous Creatures, he because he sees them
not, sleeps as soundly as if he were at home in his own bed; but when the
morning comes, and he sees what companions are about him, he uses all the
means possible, and makes all the haste he can to get away: In the same case
is every impeni^ent sinner, beset with as many Serpents as he has sins, though
he cannot see them, and therefore fears them not, but sleeps as soundly as if
he were in Solomon's bed, Nemo securus esse debet in vita ista etc. Augustine de
lib. arbit. l. 2.
about which was a guard of threescore thousand valiant Men, of the valiant of
Israel, Cant. 3. 7. but when it shall once please God to open his eyes, then he
sees the dangerous condition of his Estate, and labors to get out of it as
fast as he can.


THe Philosopher being asked, which was the best member of the body, answered,
The Tongue; Laert. Diog. in vitis ^hilos.
And being asked again, Which was the worst, answered, The Tongue; if good, the
only Trumpet of Gods glory; if bad, a very Firebrand of Hell: So if it were
asked, Prae ^mnibus malis, homo est pessimum malum etc. Chrysostom.
Which Creature of God were the best, the answer would be, Man in honor before
his fall; And what the worst Creature, Man in his fall, which has not
understanding, but is compared to beasts that perish.


MAn was once the mirror of all understanding, the Hieroglyphick of wisdom; G.
Goodman Glocestrens. Fall of man.
but now quantum mutatus ab illo? there is a great alteration; we see that the
tallest Trees first dye at the top, and the highest Cedars have the greatest
lapse: So it has happened in this; Man of Men, who at his Creation was Cedrus
Paradis^, Gods sweet wood; but now aspiring up, not only through folly lop'd
off from what he was, but even cut down to the ground; so that as it was said
of the Philosopher, Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae, etc. Ovid 1.
Met.
Aristotelem in Aristotele; and of Rome, Roman in Roma quaerere; So may we say
of Man, Hominem in Homine quaerere, and quaerentes non invenire; for what was
Imago dei, the very Image of Heaven is now larva Diaboli, the vizard of Hell,
he that was gloria terrae, the glory of the Land, is now inutile pondus, the
very burden thereof; He that was entitled Dominus mundi and ^delitiae
Domini,. the Worlds Lord, and the Lords darling, is now captivated and made a
servant; He that was Master of knowledge, Heu tristis and lacrymosa mutatio
etc. Bern. in Cant Ser. 25.
and wonder of Understanding, perfect in the science of all things, is now
grown sottish and senseless; not only as Calvisius, forgetting those things
which he was well acquainted withal, but even losing the knowledge of
himself; he that to whom before all the beasts of the Forest, and every
living Creature came (as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon) to admire his wisdom,
must now go to the beasts, and birds, and creeping things, to learn several
lessons for instruction; to the Pisemire for providence, Prove. 6. 6. to the
St^rk, and to the Swallow, for to make a right use of time, Jer. 8. 7. to the
Ox, and to the Ass for knowledge, etc. Esaias 1. 3. to the Fouls of the Air for
confidence, Matthew. 6. etc.

The sloathful Christian, reproved.
MAjor Lepidus, a loose Roman, whilst his Camerades, upon a very hot day were
exercised in the Army, Ph. Bosquieri Ara Coel^.
he laid himself down in the shade, saying, Utinam hoc esset laborare, I would
this were all the duty that I were to do: So it may be said of many idle,
sloathfull Christians amongst us; such as with Balaam, wish to dye the death of
the Righteous, but they will not take any care to live the life of the
Righteous; they would fain enter in at the straight Gate, but they would be
loath to crowd for it; they have longing desires to be in the Church
triumphant, which is in Heaven, but care not whether they ever make a step or
nor into that which is militant here upon earth.

Prosperity of the wicked, destructive.
PRosperity to the wicked is as wind to a bladder, Tho. de Prugillo, Thesaur.
concion.
which swells it until it burst, like a Ship when she is top and top gallant
soonest cast away; like a Spider in a Kings house, soonest swept down; When a
wicked man is at the highest, then he is nearest his fall; and usually when he
is in the ruff of all his bravery, God so orders it, that he is humbled on a
sudden.

Gods acceptance of Sinners through Christ.
THemistocles on a time having highly offended K. Philip, and not knowing how
to regain his favor, Plutarch in vita.
goes and takes young Alexander his Son in his arms, and so presents himlsef
before the King; which when he saw, and perceiving the young child to smile
upon him, his wrath was soon appeased toward him; Thus we have all of us
highly offended and provoked the King of Kings, God himself; Hier. Drexelii
Zodaicus Christianus.
What shall we do to regain his favor? No way so ready as to take his Son
Christ Jesus in our arms, and upon the bended knees of our hearts, to prostrate
our selves before him, and then we shall find to our comfort, that as one
looking through a green or red glass, all things will seem to be of the same
color; so God looking through his Sons Righteousness upon us, will for his
sake accept us for Righteous, and so be reconciled unto us.

The Christians heart never quiet till it be in Christ.
THe Needle's point in the Seamans Compals never stands still, R. Clark. Sermon
but quivers and shaks till it come right against the North Pole; The Wisemen
of the East never stood still, till they were right against the Star which
appeared unto them, and the Star it self never stood still, till it came right
against that other star which shined more brightly in the Manger then the Sun
did in the firmament: Math. 2. 9.
And Noah's Dove could find no rest for the soal of her foot, all the while she
was fluttering over the flood, till she returned to the Ark with an
Olive Branch in her mouth: Genesis 8.
So the heart of every true Christian, which is the Turtle-dove of Jesus
Christ, can find no rest all the while she is hovering over the waters of this
world, till it have silver wings of a Dove, and with the Olive Branch of faith,
fly to the true Noah which signifies, Rest, till Christ put forth his hand out
of the Ark, and taking it in, receive it to himself.


EVery kind of living Creature, Phil. Diez Sum. Pradicant.
has a kind of food proper to it self; offer a Lion grass, and he will have
none of it, but give him flesh and he ears it; Fodder is for the herds, and
the flocks of the field; but flesh for the beasts of the Woods that hunt for
their prey: Thus offer a Christian heart all the Kingdoms of the world, and the
glory thereof, which is but as the flower of the grass, they will not down,
there is no relish in them; but give it Christ, who says, My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, then it falls to very eagerly, and makes
a comfortable meal thereof


IT is said of the precious stone Diacletes, Vine. Burgund Biblioth. mundi.
though it have many excelling So^eraignties in it, yet it loses them all if
it be put into a dead man's mouth: And certainly Prayer, which is the only
Jewel of a Christian, though it have many rare virtues in it, many excellencies
belonging to it; yet it loses them every one, if it be put in a Man's mouth who
is dead in sins and trespasses.


WE would think that beggar intolerably impudent, Bernandin* Sen^nsis.
that coming to our doors to ask an Alms, and when we have bestowed on him some
broken bread and meat; yet, Psalm. 59. 15.
(like those impudent persons the Psalmist speaks of, that grudge and grumble
if they be not satisfied, if they have not their own will, and their own fill)
Quam (...) Mortalibus beneficium perit? Sophocles in A^^jace.
he should not hold himself contented, unless he might have one of our best
dishes from the Table: But this is the case of very many amongst us, We come
all as so many beggars to Gods mercy seat, Quantumvis dives, dives Dei mendicus
est; Annon mendicus, qui panem petis? says S. Augustine, And God gives us
abundance of many good things, as life, liberty, health of body, etc. yet we
cannot be quiet, nor think our selves well, unless we be clothed in Purple,
and fare deliciously every day as such and such do, not considering in the mean
time, many that are below us, and above us too, wanting those things which we
comfortably enjoy.


A Little rope suffices to hang a great Thief; Phil. Bo^kieri Codrus Evang.
a little dross abaseth much Gold, a little poison infecteth much wholesome
liquor; a little Heresy corrupts much sound doctrine, a little fly is enough
to spoil all the Alablaster box of ointment: So the smallest sin, the least
peccadillo without Gods mercy, is sufficient to damn our souls to all eternity.


THe Lark as long as she sits on the ground, Berchor. Moralitat.
is very silen^ and still, but being once mounted up into the air, hovering in
the golden beams of the delightful Sun, then she se^s up her pretty little
throat, and chants it out merrily: It is just so with worldly minded Men,
whilst their thoughts and affections are le^ out upon the things of the world,
Mundus mundan^ quarit^*
they are faint and dull, and as even dead to all good works; but when their
minds are raised up to higher things, and their thoughts set upon Heaven, then
their notes are changed, they are put into such a tune, as is both sweet and
pleasant to God himself.

The great power of fervent Prayer.
IT is Martin Luther's saying, In Catech. ma^jore.
That Prayer is bombarda christianorum, the christians gunshot. As then a
bullet out of a gun, so prayers out of the mouth, can go no further, then the
Spirit carries them: if they be timidae, put out faintly, they cannot fly far;
if they be tumidae, hollow-hearted, then they will not p^erce much: only the
fervent, humble, active devotion, hits the mark, and pierces the walls of
Heaven, though like those of Gaz^, made of brass and iron, etc. Esa. 45. 2.

University-Learning, to be countenanced by men in Authority.
THe University of Cambridge has for her Arms, Mr. Millers Sermon. at St. Paul's,
1627.
A Book clasped, between four Lions; and Oxford, a Book open, between three
Crowns; hereby signifying, That Englishmen may not only study the liberal
Arts, closely and quietly, but also profess them publicly and openly, being
guarded with the Lion and the Crown, protected thereby, and encouraged
thereunto, by royal Charters, and princely privileges. And thus the
University of Heidelbergh has for her Arms, a Lion holding a Book in his paw,
Theophrast. Eres. de Plantis.
intimating, that persons in authority, ought to be favorers of all good
literature. Hence it comes to pass, that Universities are the Nurseries of all
sorts of learning, like the Persian tree, which at the same time buds, and
blossoms, and bears fruit; some there are ripe for the Church, others drawing
on to maturity; some in the flower, others in the bud of hope; all advancing
themselves for the service of God and their Country.

The life of Man, miserable*
THe life of man may very well be resembled to a River, Chr. Fonseca Ser.
Quadrages.
which as it comes from the Sea, so it returns thither again: And thus the
beginning and ending of our days, Nascimur in lacrymis, etc. Anonymus.
may be said to be full of salt water, full of crosses, full of misery; our
first voice a cry, our last a groan. There may be happily some fair, fresh,
clear water in the way, some lucida inter valla, some seeming delights and
pleasures in the middle age of our life; but it passes away so swiftly, that
it is no sooner seen, but gone. Job 4. 14.

Ministers, of all men, to be painful in their Calling.
ARt thou put to be a preacher of the Gospel, thou art a labourer. Elders that
rule well, are worthy of double honor. In his Sermon. before K. Edward 6.
Many (says Bishop Latimer) can away with praesunt, but not with been, if that
been were out of the Text, all were well. If a man might eat the sweet, and
never sweat, it were an easy matter to be a preacher, if there were not opus,
but bonum, all were well too. But every Clergyman is, or ought to be, Pensate
fratres, quanta damnationis est sine labor, etc. Hie^on.
(...); that, as St. Augustine says, is nomen operis; to be a steward and
overseer in Gods house, is an office of great employment. Well, art thou a
student in any profession? then, as Cato said of Scipio, thou must be least
idle, when thou art most idle; thou must read diligently, confer often, observe
daily. Reading makes a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact
man.


AS an able workman, Pet. Aba^lard, in Romans
being to build an house, would not have too many windows, left thereby he
should weaken the house too much; nor too few, left it should darken it too
much: So should no man be overjoyed, upon the access of some prosperous
fortune, P^ne modum L^tis. Stat. 2 Theb.
nor overmuch transported upon the income of some happy tidings; left his too
much outward joy should weaken his inward rejoicing: Neither must he not
rejoice at all, left his spirit become dull and stupid. But as the windows of
the Temple were broad without, yet narrow within; so in the matter of joy, he
must be full within, but somewhat contracted without.


HE that has a Garden-plot, Joh. Spencers Ser at Sepulch. Land. 1616.
does as well sow the pot-hearbs as the marjorom, as well the leeks as the
lilly, as well the whole some hysope as the sweet carnation gilliflowre; the
which he does to this intent, that he may have wholesome herbs, as well to
nourish his inward parts, as sweet flowers, to please his outward senses; as
well fruitful plants, to refresh his body, as fair shows to please his mind.
Even so, Theolegia est d^ctrina necessaria homini, etc. Th. Aquin p. 1. q. 1.
art. 10.
he that has a capacious brain, a pregnant wit, a fancy that is luxuriant; let
such a headpiece apply it self as well to the sacred knowledge of Divinity, as
to Philosophy, to a Creator-knowledge, as well as a creature-knowledge, that so
he may reap, not only pleasure, but profit; not only contentation in mind,
but quietness and peace of conscience.


AS in Noah's Ark were to be numbered all sorts of creatures; or, Joh. Camero
de Script.
as in eodem prato, in the same meadow, the ox may lick up grass, the hound
may find a hare, the bird may pick up seeds, the virgins gather flowers, and a
man find a pearl: So in one and the same Scripture, are varieties to be found,
for all sorts of conditions: In them, the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant swim,
children may be fed with milk, and meat may be had for stronger men; there is
comfort for the afflicted, ease for those that are weary and heavy laden, etc.


AS in building of a house, To. Willan Visitat. Sermon. in Essex, 1622.
first, there must be a respect had to the situation; next, to the foundation;
then, to the superstructures, the contriving of lights, and several rooms;
lastly, the covering, to keep all dry. So every Minister is to consider the
situation of his Text, Qui ad vera praedicationis verba se praeparat, necesse
est etc. Greg. in. Moral.
what is the coherence, what is the context; and then omitting the working of
curious cobwebs in the top of the house, he must lay the foundation of sound
doctrine, raise it upon strong pillars of reason, glaze it with natural
demonstration; and lastly, to cover all with useful application.


IT is reported of a great person, Pier. Charron. de la sagesse.
that being desirous to see the sword wherewith Scanderbeg had done so great
exploits, when he saw it, replied, He saw no such great matter in that sword,
more then any other sword. It is truth; (quoth one standing by) you see the
sword, but not the arm that wielded it. So, Nisi Spiritus sanctus (...) cordi
legentis, etc. Greg. in Evang.
when we look upon the Scriptures, the bare word, whether printed in our
Bibles, or audible in the Pulpit, we shall find no such business in it, more
then in other writings; but when we consider the arm of Gods power, that joins
with it, when we look upon the operation of his holy Spirit, working therein,
then we shall change our thoughts, and say, Nec vox hominem sonat, O Deus
certe! as Jacob did of Bethel, Surely of a certain, God is in this Word.

The falls of good Men, presage the Nation's ruin.
WHen a man cuts down his chiefest timber trees, Lud. Carbo Interior hom^.
it is an argument, that he intends to part with his land. And has not God of
late cut down many of the tallest Cedars, in this our Lebanon? And what can we
expect, such and so many are our wickednesses, but that he will either part
with, or depart from, this sinful Nation of ours? It is high time therefore to
lay hold upon him by faith, saying, Help Lord, for there is not one godly man
left, etc. Psalm. 12. 1.

Neutrality in Religion, dangerous.
THere is mention made of a kind of bastard-Eagle, Plin. Not. hist.
that has one leg like the Goofe, close at the foot; the other open, and armed
with talents, like that of the ordinary eagle: with the close foot she swimmeth
on the water, Ulyss. Aldrovandus ^^^itholog.
and dives for fishes there; with the open foot she soareth into the air, and
seizes on her prey there. But so it is, that participating thus of two
several natures, her strength is weakened, and she her self made at last a
prey to every ordinary crow. Thus fares it with all Neuters, Andr. Harwoods
Ser. at S. Alphag. Land. 1649.
all Hermophrodites, all Ambo-dexters in Relig^on; such as have one close foot
for sea and land, for the world and worldly things; and another open-foot for
the air above, for heaven and heavenly things: so that they may not be seen to
float on the sea of this world altogether, they take themselves to their wing,
and will seem to be religious, and make some small fluttering up of their
hearts toward Heaven, but all in vain; for being divided in their thoughts,
the act of their souls being not set upon the only object, God, and the powers
and faculties thereof not contracted to Himward, no marvel, if they wax faint
in their duty, and weak in all holy performances; so that the devil, like the
ordinary crow, set upon them, conquer them, and lead them captive at his will.

The Devil most busy in time of Prayer.
IT is an usual custom, Joh. Ferus Conciones.
that two being at law together, when the suit comes to trial, the Plantiff by
his Counsel, labors all that he can to hinder the Defendant, that the Judge
may not hear him speak out, what he is to say in his own defense. So the
devil, the common plantiff and accuser of all mankind, when he sees us upon
our knees in addresses unto God, who is the Judge of all the earth, pleading
for our selves by prayer, and seeking the favor of God, in the remission of
our sins, by the merits of his Son Christ Jesus; then does he stir most to
interrupt us, by weakening our evidence, by throwing strange thoughts into our
hearts, so distracting our devotions, that we may not be heard in what we pray
for.

Sense of sin, is from God only.
AS when the pool of Bethesda was troubled, Paul de Palatio in Matthew.
the poor Cripples that lay there for cure, did absolutely conclude, that it
was not any natural motion of the water, Joh. 5. 2.
but an Angel that came down at a certain season, and did it: So when the
heart of a sinner is troubled for his sin, let him know for his comfort, that
this shaking of his soul, Natura sui conservatriae.
arises not from any principle of corrupt nature, that will defend it self;
nor from the devil, he will not destroy his own Kingdom; but from some seeds
of grace, sown in the heart, which the Spirit of God greatly breathing upon,
the soul is thereby made sensible of sins and transgressions committed.


Lewd debauched Ministers, whose doctrine and lives are as distant, To. Willan
Sermon. at Visitat. in Ess^x. 1627
as the two Polar Lines, cosmographically described on the Globe terrestrial,
are like those statuae Mercuriales on the road, that point out unto a man which
is the way to London, but move not a foot thitherward themselves; like those
Carpenters, that built the Ark to save others, Qui Curios ^imulant, and
Bacchanalia vivunt.
and were drowned themselves; or like Porters of great men's gates, that let in
others, but lodge without themselves. So that what was said of Christ falsely
and maliciously, may be spoken of them really and truly, He saved others,
himself he cannot save: For (...) as another by his good life, Qui sana docet
and turpiter vivit, etc. Greg. Nazian.
sets a seal to his doctrine, he by his bad life, puts a lie upon the truth; his
words prove unprofitable, because his life is abominable.


A Certain Heathen making an Oration, Phil. Bosquler. Tab. naufragii.
as he was sacrificing to his god, in the midst of his devotion, word was
brought him, that his only son was dead: whereat being nothing at all moved,
Anaxagoras.
he made this answer, Scio me genuisse mortalem, I did not get him to live for
ever, and so went on with his business. Thus when we are entering into the
sight of Gods favor, it may so please him to try us by afflictions, there may
news come of a ship wracked at sea, of a chapman broke in the country, Gabr.
Inchini. Scala c^^li.
of the death of friends and allies, etc. Yet ought we not for all this, to
leave off our course in the service of him, but rather whatsoever comes cross,
make it as it were a Parenthesis, an ornament, not remora, an hinderance, in
our progress to Heaven.


THe Phrygian Fabulist has a story, De Vulpe and Cato.
of a Fox and a Cat, as they were discoursing their evasions in the midst of
danger: I (says the Fox) have many holes to earth in, if hindered of one, I
have another to run to. Let me alone to shift for my self, to save my life, and
sleep in a whole skin. Well, (says the Cat) I must do as well as I can. I have
but one way to save my life, and that is to climb for it. As they were thus
conferring, the toiles were laid, the dogs began to open, the hunt was up, and
the Fox for all his cunning, for all his tricks and devices, was torn in pieces
by the hounds; whilst the Cat getting up into a tree, secured her self from
danger. Thus, there may seem to be many ways to Heaven, Andr. Harwoods Ser. at
S. Alphage Land. 1647.
but there is one only true safe way. There Is many a man in these days, that
thinks to go to God by the way of two Religions, one at home, another abroad;
one public, another private: And whilst he is thus divided, and halting
betwixt two, the Hunt is up, that roaring Lion the devil lays hold upon him,
and devoures him: Whereas the true, real, well-affected Christian, cleaving
close unto one God, one Faith, one Baptism, gets upon that scala coeli, and so
by prayer and meditation, climbs up to Heaven, where the enemies gunshot shall
never be able to reach him.

Love of the World, enmity to God.
There Is no one sublunary thing in the World, can make an Eclipse of the body
of the Sun, but the interposition of the Earth, Jac. Acontii Str^^gem. Satanae.
betwixt it and the Moon: So there is nothing can eclipse the Sun of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus, but the Earth, the love of earthly things, the
love of this world being Enmity to God; Mundi amor and Dei, pariter in uno
cord habitare non possunt, etc. Cyp.
If then our Conscience tell us, that the love of some worldly matter hinders
our confidence, darkens our knowledge, and clouds our understanding, so that we
cannot see God as he is; let us remove it, and stand up from the dead, that
Christ may give us light.

The Papists abuse of Scripture by Traditions etc.
IT was a very malicious plot of the Philistines, to stop the Wells of Abraham,
Fr. Whites Way to the true Church.
and to fill them up with earth, that so the memorial of them might be quite
damned up, whereby Isaac his Son might not have the least inkling that ever they
belonged to his Father, and so they make a challenge to them as their own. Thus
the Papists have (as much as in them lies) stopped up the veins of the springs
of life, Genesis 26. 18.
which flow every where in the sacred word of God, with the earth of their own
Traditions, false glosses, and unfit Allegories; all this to Monopolize the
Bible to their own use, shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven, neither entering
themselves, nor suffering others to enter therein.

Who fit for Government in point of temporal estate.
When Servius Sulpitius Galba, and Aurelius the Consul, Val. Max. lib. 6. 14.
did strive in the Senate, which of them should be sent into Spain against
Viriatum; the Senators differing amongst themselves, and waiting which way
Scipio would incline, he said; I give my voice that neither of them be sent:
his reason was this, alter nihil habet, alteri nihil sat est, the one has
nothing, and the other will never have enough; intimating thereby, that it was
a dangerous thing to put the Government either into the hands of a rich wretch,
B. Smith Sermon.
or a wretched poor man: And most true it is, that the balance of Justice,
whether it be in the hands of a covetous rich man, or a man of a low estate, it
will be very apt to tite on one side; Necessitas cogit ad turpia, poverty is a
great temptation to corruption, and Riches an incentive to oppression: one
therefore qualified like Agur in his prayer, that has neither Poverty nor
Riches, but a competent estate, is fit for the management of great affairs,
Prove. 31.
and the most likely to do justice according to the merits of the cause before
him.

The unthankful Husbandman, condemned.
THe Heathens when they went to plow in the morning, Joh. Wheems Ceremon. Law.
they laid on one of their hands to the stilts of the plough, and they lifted
up the other to Ceres, the Goddess of Corn; this did they do by the dim light
of Nature: What a sad thing then is it in such times of light, that so many
Husbandmen manuring the ground, Vivite contenti casulis and collibus if^is.
Juvenal. 14.
should be but as so many fungi, (...), sprung up out of the ground, like
Toad-stools, affixi glebae, filii terrae, having their minds fixed to the
Earth, never elevating them higher then the Ox which labors with them? but
had they hearts to look up to God, and to eye him in the ways of his
providence, O beat^s Agricolas, how happy would they be?


WHen Lazarus was dead, Newsham's Sermon. at Fun. of Sr. F. Vincent.
his two Sisters, Martha and Mary came to Christ with a doleful noise, and
pitiful complaint, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed,
(says one); Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed, (said the
other) Ioh. 11. 21, 32. And is not this the note and common language of the
world, when a Man is dead? if such a Physician had been here, if he had been
let blood, if he had not taken such a potion, or eat of such meat, or lived in
such a ^oggy air; Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur, etc. Hieron. in Ezekiel.
if he had not done thus or thus, or so and so, he might have been a live man
to this day; not considering with Job, that the days of Man are determined,
and his bounds appointed which he cannot pass, the time, the place, and every
circumstance of his dissolution is decreed from all Eternity, that one Man dies
in the field, another in his bed; one at Sea, another on the shore; one in this
manner, another in that; this, and all this, it is foreordained in Heaven, the
hand of God is in all, and he it is that having brought us into the World at
his pleasure, will take us hence at his own appointment.


IT is said of Mr. George Herbert that divine Poematist, Preface to his Poems.
that to satisfy his Independency upon all others, and to quicken his
diligence in Gods service; he used in his ordinary speech, when he made mention
of the blessed name of Jesus, to add, my Master; And without all doubt, if men
were unfeignedly of his mind, their respects would be more to Christ's command,
to Christ's will, to Christ's pleasure; could they but lift up their eyes to
God, to him that dwells in the Heavens; then as eyes of servants look unto the
hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hands of her
Mistress, Psalm. 12. 32.
so would their eyes wait upon, and their hearts be in a dutiful frame of
obedience unto the commands of Christ their Lord and Master.


PLutarch in his Moralls, Plutarch. Moral.
tells us of a Laconian, who seeing a Collector going about, and gathering the
Peoples devotions for the use of their Gods; O says he, I will now make no
more reckoning of the Gods, so long as I see them go a begging, and to be
poorer then myself: And this will be the case of the service of the great God
of Heaven, if ever we live to see that the Ministers maintenance shall depend
upon the Peoples courtesy, or that ever the off alls of any repining Labans
revenues, or churlish Nabals purse, become the stay of the Ministerial
function: This may be so by Gods permission, yet, great pity it is that ever
it should be so; but if it must needs be so, then take another story by the
same Author, of one Philippus, a Priest amongst the Heathen, Tho. Adams Sermon.
so poor, that he begged for his living, and yet he would go about and tell how
happy he should be; When, quoth one, will this be? When I am dead, says he;
Then poor fellow, quoth the other, thou art too blame thou dyest not quickly,
that thou may be happy; And thus it will be with the poor, despised,
distressed Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; The Lord is our portion,
(say they) and we shall be happy; Ecclesiam frudare sacrilegum est. Hieron* ep.
31.
but when? says the World; When we dye, say the Ministers; Why then, says the
World, ye are too blame that ye^ dye not quickly to be happy in Heaven, whom
the World has taken an order with, never to he happy upon Earth; this will be
the voice of the Sons of Belial, who have an evil will at Sion, and had rather
put a Church into their purse, then any way empty their purse toward the
Churches maintenance.

God to have the glory of all.
THat Martial King Edward the third outwent his fame, Polyd. Virgil. lib. 19.
and was accounted to have done things more commendable then his Victoryes; for
having vanquished the French King by force of battle, he put off from himself
the whole glory, and gave it devoutly to God, causing to be sung Non nobis
Domine, non nobis Domine, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, Lord, but unto thy
name be the glory given, etc. Psalm. 115. 1. And thus must every one do, be his
achievements never so great, whether private or public, let God have the
glory of all; for it is no less then blasphemy in Man, to attribute either the
strength or the glory of success unto himself; St. Paul's omnia possum had been
over- presumptuous, had he not added, by him that strengthens me. Phil. 4.

How it is that one Man censureth another.
THat divine Spaniard in his pleasant, Page 1. lib. 3. cap. 5.
but useful fictions of the life of Gusman makes his Rogue wittily discourse of
the unconscionable^^ss of the Genowayes, and their prying into, and censuring
of other men's lives; That when they are young, and go first to School, they
play away, and lose their Consciences, which their Master finding, R. Burton of
Melancholy.
he lays them up carefully in a Christ; but because he has the keeping of so
many, and they mixed one with another, he gives to his Scholars when they go
away, such Consciences as come first to hand, which they take to be their own,
but are indeed somebodies else; Whence it comes to pass, that no man bearing
his own Conscience in his own bosom, every Man looks and pryes into that of
another Man's: The truth of this story may be questioned, but the Moral is true
without all question, and we have need sometimes of such pleasant passages to
tell us the truth, Aliena judicantes melius quam ^ua. Terence.
that we may understand our selves the better: There Is hardly the Man to be
found, that is not curious in other Men's faults, blind in his own, partial to
himself, never without matter against others, still complaining of the badnesse
of the times, the decay of Trade, the ripeness of sin, but will not be
persuaded that he is any way the occasion of the same.

To be thankful to God as well in Adversity as Prosperity.
THemistocles was wont to tell his ungrateful Countrymen the Athenians,
Plutarch in vita.
that they used him like a shady Tree, under which when a storm happened, they
would run and take shelter; but when the storm was over, they would be ready to
cut it down and burn it: When there were any Tumults or uproares in the
Commonwealth, who but Themistocles? all the People would flock to Themistocles
for succor; but when there was a calm in the State, and all things at peace
through his good advice and industry, then who more base? Who more contemptible
then poor Themistocles? And is not this the case of many at this day? they will
pray unto God in time of Adversity, but they will not praise God in time of
Prosperity, While the corn is growing, Joh. Preston of Mortification
the hedge is well fenced, but when it is in'd, the fields are thrown open;
when they stand in need of any blessings, then they are all upon the spur,
somewhat careful to please God; but when they have caught what they fished
for, Si ven^rint mala, been dicite, etc. Chrysostom, in Symb.
then they let the reyns slack, and are not so forward in the ways of
obedience; so that it is a great blessing of God that we are kept in want of
one blessing or other, were it otherwise, he were likely to have but a little
of our company.


WE may read of a Woolfe taken in a snare, which when a Man went about to kill
with his hunting spear, Joh. Alsted Theol. not. p. 2. cap. 28. p. 556.
the Woolfe breathed in his face, and poisoned him in such a manner, that he
presently began to swell all over his body, and was very hardly recovered
again: Such is the contagion which the soul of the Hearer receives by the
poisoned breath of Seducers doctrine; if so be that coming near such kind of
Vermin, R. Abbots Sermon. at Cranburn in Kent.
a Man do not wind them, that is, not draw up into his Soul the sweet
breathings of the Spirit, it is great odds but that he is totally infected
thereby to the irreparable loss both of soul and body together.


When we receive summons from any supreme Authority, Dr. Laurence Sermon. at
Court, 1629.
the Messenger or Offi^^^ of the Court, seeks us not in idling places, he
pursues us not into the fields, neither does he come to our sports to warn us,
but to our houses, and there reads his message as if we were there, because we
should be there, and then without any further enquiry, departs, fastening the
script or writ upon the door* In like manner the Ministers of the Gospel are
Gods Ambassador, and Gods Messengers: God supposes every Man to be at home, 2
Cor. 5. 10. Mal. 2. 7.
and so do they, because at hours and times set apart for his worship, they are
presumed to have no houses but his house, whom they shall meet no where, nor
more certainly find than there; there it is that more especially when two or
three are met together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, there he
will teach them his ways, and there he will give them grace too, Hist. lib. 1.
cap. 15.
to walk in his ways; nor can a Sermon have any influence upon such as are not
there; so true is that of venerable Bede, That he that comes not willingly to
Church, shall one day go unwillingly to Hell.


IN a great Festival, when the expectation was not less then the concourse,
both very great, Gill^bert in vita ejus.
St. Bernard having preached a very eloquent Sermon, (as that heavenly tongue
was able beyond expectation) while the People admire and applaud, the Abbot
walks sadly with a mind not ordinarily dejected: The next day he preaches a
lively Sermon full of profitable truth, plain, without any Rhetorical dress,
whereupon his meaner capacited Auditors went away very well contented, but
curious itching ears were unsatisfied, but he walks cheerfully with a mind more
then usually pleasant. The people wonder why he should be sad, when applauded;
and when not, R. Holdsw. Sermon. at St. Paul's Land. 1626.
merry; but he returns this answer, Heri Bernardum, hodie Iesum Christum,
yesterday I preached Bernard, but to day Jesus Christ: It is the same with all
Preachers of Gods word: There can be no feast within, when a Man is conscious
to himself of dallying with God; Integrity is that which furnishes out the
sweet banquet and heavenly repast of joy: That Preacher shall have m^st
comfort, that preaches most of Christ; Franc. Godwinus de Praes. lib. Angliae.
and so shall he too that lives most to Christ, when a rotten-hearted Wolsey,
whose Conscience tells him, he served the King his Master better then God his
Maker, shall languish away in discontent, and vexation of spirit.

God afflicts his Children for their good
IT is the observation of an excellent Preacher yet living, who passing by on a
dark night in the streets of London, T. F. in a Ser. of Assurance.
and meeting a youth who had a lighted Link in his hand, who being offended
thereat, because it burnt so dark and dim; and therefore the better to improve
the light thereof, he beat, bruised, and battered it against the wall that the
weike therein might be spread out, and the pitch with other combustible matter
(which before stifled the light with its over-stifness,) Aurem cordis
tribulatio aperit quam saepe prosperitas claudit. Greg. in moral.
might be loosened, which presently caused the link to blaze forth in a bighter
flame: Thus God deals with our Souls, that they may shine the brighter before
Men, he buffets and afflicts us with several Temptations, to give us occasion
to exercise those graces, which otherwise would lie dormant within us, and such
corrections will in fine greatly add to our spiritual light and luster.

The Godly Man is Gods favorite.
LUther was known to pray often with intention of mind, Joh. Sleidain. Comment.
and zealous fervency, that so long as he lived, Germany might be quiet, and
had often professed that he firmly believed it would be so, that so Gods word
might have a little Freedom and space to spread it self; Whereupon one Nich.
Mark, a Citizen of Francfort, was wont as often as he heard of any rumors of
War, to say; I fear it not so long as Luther lives; this was the esteem that
Luther had of all good Men, they thought that God would deny him nothing: Ephr.
Udall's Sermon. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1634
And certainly the Godly man is Gods favorite, God will hear him in a time of
trouble, it is he that must stand in the gap to prevent, and that must stand up
to take off the hand of God when it lies heavy upon a sinful Nation or People,
be the Judgment near or afar off, imminent or ^^cumbent, it is the godly man
(if any) that must be isntrumental for delivery.

Christians and their Knowledge, to be communicative.
THe Naturalists do observe, that the Pismires, Plin. not. hist.
which are reckoned amongst the most sagacious creatures; and the Bees, which
are amongst the most useful; and the Elephants, Tho: Muffety Hist. Insectorum.
amongst the potent, are for communion, and do gather and keep together: And
the excellency of other creatures, lies in the communication of themselves, the
Sun raying out his warm and cherishing beams, the Fountain bubling out his
purling streams, the Earth yielding forth sovereign herbs and plants, all for
the benefit of others. Such are all true Christians, they are then in their
excellency, when they are communicative and useful; nay, they increase by
communicating, and gain by giving away, Pet. Mart. hist. Indiae occident.
and imparting their gifts. There is a story, of some mountains of Salt in
Cumana, which never diminished, though carried away in much abundance by the
Merchants; but when once they were monopolized, to the benefit of a private
purse, then the salt decreased, till afterward all were allowed to take of it,
it had a new access and increase. The truth of this story may be uncertain,
Reyn. de Pisis Pantheologia.
but the application is true, He that envies unto others the use of his gifts,
decaies them; but he thrives most, that is most diffusive.

The ways of Hypocrites, not easily traced.
AN horse may be known by the track, and where a cart has gone, you may
perceive by the print of the wheel: but we know not the way of a ship, though
Hondius, Mercator, and others, have delineated in their Maps, the several
voyages of Captain Drake, Cavendish, Scouten, etc. yet the mariner can see no
such path upon the fea, Sam. Torshel Hypocrisy unmasked.
as they have drawn out. Such are the ways of all hypocrites, though a man may
have some directions and marks to follow them, yet may he miss of them at the
very last: you may search all the rooms of their hearts, and yet be at a l^sse;
they have secret and back doors to go out at, they are cunning to keep their
secrets, Vincent. Specul. l. 25. c. 10
as an harlot does her lover. The sister of the Emperor Henry the third, when
a great snow fell, carried her lover upon her shoulders, that the fact might
not be discovered; the lover is entertained, ^ntus Nero, foris Cato.
but nothing can be seen but the print of the Ladies feet; and the hypocrite
harbors his lust, but there is nothing to be found but the steps of the
upright in heart. It is harder to discover the rottenness of his soul, than
the tricks of a horse-courser, in the open market of Smithfield.


THere is a Fable, Sam. Torshel ut ante^.
how that Inconstancy would needs have her picture drawn, but none would
undertake it, because her face and shape altered so often: But at length, Time
took a pencill in hand, and because he had no other Table to do it upon, he
printed her picture upon Man: And most true it is, that all men and women since
that time, have had too much of her resemblance, and too too many men have her
very face to the life; H^rod^s devotionem promittit, sed gladium acuit.
Chrysostom.
they will be religious, and they will not be religious; there is no body knows
what they will be, nor what to make of them; they are constant in nothing but
inconstancy, they have their gales of devotion, their breathings of love, one
while; at another time, when the fit is upon them, then there is nothing but
lumpishnesse of spirit, and dullness of affection; now, faithful to their
promise; anon, fallen off, for one by-respect or other.


THere was a Nobleman, Abrah. Musculus in (...) patris.
one Reinard, at Rotenburgh, that much loved Wolfg. Musculus, and was very
tender of his safety, as knowing that he had many enemies, because of his
revolt from Popery: and perceiving that he was gone abroad (as his use was)
into a village to preach, he disguising himself, because he would not be known,
and taking many of his Horsemen with him, came rushing in at the Church-door,
and in a threatening manner bids him come out of the Pulpit; Musculus thinking
they had been the servants of a Popish Bishop, Sam. Torshel ut (...).
who was his violent Adversary, desired he might have leave to finish his
Sermon, and then he would go with them whithersoever they would carry him; And
so he went on being nothing at all daunted, exhorting the People to constancy
in the faith; and withal to pray for him, who was now (as he thought) in his
Enemies hands: When Sermon was done, the Nobleman discovers himself, hugs him
in his arms, admires his courage, tells him he did it to try his spirit, and
withal to warn him how easily he might be endangered: See here the courage of
sincerity, how the Righteous are as bold as Lions; -- hic m^rus a^en^us esto,
Nil con^cire ^^bi, etc. Vigil.
It is a gracious God and a good cause that supports them; but on the other
side, How do the wicked fear? even where no fear is, he has nothing at all
left to sustain him, nothing to cover his head when the Cloud breaks in upon
him, yea before the appearance of any actual trouble, he creates both fears
and jealousies to himself, sonus excitat omnis suspensum, he trembles at every
motion.

To make God our Counselor.
AN ancient able Divine, reports it of Sir Thomas Thin a Religious western
Knight, M. Ber^ard of Barcomb.
that he would undertake ^o business before he was fully persuaded of the
lawfulness of it, both by clear Texts of Scripture, and approbation of the
Learned; he made scruple of committing not only the least known sin, but of
embarking into any action which was questionable amongst those that love the
truth in sincerity; This was in him a good frame of spirit, and it were
heartily to be wished, that Men's actions were suitable to their professions;
Quicquid vel dicious vel facimus, id testimonio Script^rae confirmari debet.
Basil. in Reg. mon.
that they would consult with God in all things, that as they carry a Bible in
their hand, so they would make that their Master to direct them, not listening
to the close whisperings of the Jesuit in one ear for matters of Religion, or
to Nicholas the Florentine at the other ear in point of Policy; but in all the
changes and chances of this mortal life* commit themselves to Gods guidance,
and so they shall be sure to prosper.

Minding of the great day of Judgment, a means to live Godlily.
WHen Sapores King of Persia raised a violent persecution against the
Christians, Usthazanes an old Nobleman, a Courtier, Pet. Pizarus de r^bus
Per^^cis.
that had Sapores Government in his minority, being a Christian was so
terrified, that he left off his profession: But he sitting at the Court-gate,
when Simeon an aged holy Bishop was leading to prison, and rising up to salute
him, the good Bishop frowned upon him, and turned away his face with
indignation, as being (...) to look upon a Man that had denied the faith:
Usthazanes fell a weeping, went into his Chamber, put off his courtly attire,
Nihil est quod mag is proficiat ad vitam ^onestam quam ut credam^s Christum
judicem etc. Ambros.
and brake out into these or the like words; Ah, how shall I appear before the
great God of Heaven whom I have denied, when Simeon but a Man will not endure
to look upon me; if he frown, how will God behold me, when I come before his
Tribunal? The thought of Gods Judgment seat wrought so strongly upon him, that
he recovered his spiritual strength, and dyed a glorious Martyr: Thus, did but
Men consider that they must one day stand before the bar of Gods Tribunal, B.
Winui^^e's at Court, 1637.
they would then be casting up how things stood betwixt him and their own
Souls; Would any man loyter away the day, when he knows that he must show his
work to his Master at night? Let every Man then in all his doings remember his
end, and so he shall never do amiss; remember that all must come to a reckoning
in that great day, and that though here in this world, a Man may wear white
gloves upon foul hands, and a crooked body may be bolstered under a silken
gown; yet when they shall consider that these gloves shall be plucked off in
that day, and the body be showed naked before God, with whom they shall then
have to do, it will be a means to order and regulate their lives, so that
their appearance may be with comfort.

The great power of faith seated in the heart of Man.
THe Philosoper when he would persuade the King to settle his Court and place
of residence in the heart of his dominion, Joh. Bodin. de (...).
laid before him a Bull hide ready tan'd, upon which when he stood upon any one
side of it, and so kept down that, the other side would rise up; when he
removed to the side that rose up and kept down that, Quid non inveniat fides?
Attingit inaccessas, deprehendit ignotas. etc. Bern. in Cant.
then the side he came from would rise as high; but when he stood in the
middle, he kept down all alike: Thus Faith is this great King, which being
seated in the Heart, makes provision against every Rebellion, keeps down every
mutiny, marshals and orders every action and affection, takes a Man off from
all servile dependances, and by-respects, and makes him profess Gods name
boldly, evenly, and without halting; it cleanses the whole heart, seasons
every affection, alters the taste of every appetite, strengthens every
propension to good, and fortifies the Soul against all evil.

Blasphemous language condemned.
CAto being very much struck in years, T. Fullers Sermon. at St. Clem. Land. 1647.
would by all means study the Greek tongue, and being asked by one, Why in his
old age he would set upon such an exotic language; O (said he) I am informed
that the Greek is a copious and fluent tongue, and withal, such a tongue as
the Gods speak in; I would therefore learn it, that I may be able to converse
with the Gods in their own Dialect: Non minus pec^ant, qui blasphemant Christum
regnantem in coelis, quam qui crucif^xerunt ambulantem in terris. August.
This was Catoes conceit in those darker times of Nature; but there is a
generation amongst us in these clearer times of Grace, Ranters, Roaring boys,
such as are great proficients in all manner of blasphemous language, such as
belch out nothing but oaths, and direful execrations, in the very face of
Heaven; What can this else be, but to practice here on Earth, what by a sad
Prolepsis they are sure to come to hereafter, that is, to be roaring boys and
girls in Hell to all eternity.

Prayer to be avoided.
IT is reported of Queen Katharine, Nich. Caussin la Cuan. seincte.
Dowager of King Henry the eighth, that in her devotions to God, she was
poplite flexo nudo etc, on her bended knees, naked upon the bare floor; it was
without doubt that she might be the more watchful over her heart, Sit oration
pura fervida, etc. Prosper.
which otherwise might be apt to slumber, and take a nod in the performance of
so holy a duty: It is not hereby meant, to take away the use of Cushions, but
to mind us that we do not lay cushions of sloth under our knees, nor pillowes
of idleness under our elbowes, nor to be drowsily devoted, but to be active and
sprightly upon the bended knees of our hearts, when we approach unto God in the
spiritual exercises of Prayer and heavenly meditation.

true faith, rewarded.
A Man having many Children, Joh. Gor^^ Ser. at St. Peter's Cornhill Land. 1631.
and one amongst the rest a small undergrowth, a very weakling; Does he cast
off this child? does he cease to be a Father therefore? No, his bowels are the
more enlarged, he provides for it, supports it, cherishes it more than all the
rest, till in some measure it be enabled to help it self: Thus God, if we be
weak in faith, though we be but as younglings of Christ's flock, we must not
therefore be discouraged, he will take care of us, not cast us off, he has a
Crown for the least works; Rev. 2.
if there be but singultus fidei, a sob or a sigh of faith; nay which is less,
if but a pant of faith present it self, Surgam dicit Dominus, etc. I will up
(says the Lord) help them and set them at rest: Psalm. 2.
yet further, which is the least of all, though the pulse of faith beat not at
all, though David be like a deaf Man, that hears not, or as one that is dumb,
not opening his mouth; yet God will look down from his Sanctuary and make
deliverance for David, Psalm. 102.
as he did also for the poor Man sick of the Palsy, Mat. 19. 2.

Hypocrisy, the generality of it.
THe Emperor Frederick the third, Imperat. vitae. Plutarch Apophthegm.
who when one said unto him, he would go find some place where no Hypocrites
inhabited; he told him, He must travel then far enough, beyond the Sauromatae,
or the frozen Ocean; and yet when he came there, he should find an Hypocrite,
if he found himself there: And it is true, Esa. 19. 15.
that omnis homo Hypocrita, every Man is an Hypocrite. Hypocrisy is a lesson
that every Man readily takes out, it continues with age, it appears with
infancy, Sam. Torshel ^t ante^.
the wise and learned practice it, the duller and more rude attain unto it; All
are not fit for the Wars, Serpit hodie putrid^ (...). by hypocri^^^, etc.
Berna^d.
Learning must have the picked and choycest w^^s, Arts must have leisure and
pains, but all sorts are apt enough, and thrive in the mystery of
dissimulation; The whole throng of Mankind is but an horse-fair of Cheaters,
the whole world a shop of counter^eit wares, a Theater of Hypocritical
disguises.

The justice of God what it is, and how defined.
IN the Reign of King Edward the first, Th. Walsing. ham. Hist.
there was much abuse in the alnage of all sorts of Drapery, much wrong done
betwixt Man and Man, by reason of the diversity of their measures, every Man
measuring his cloth by his own yard, which the King perceiving, Ephe. 1. 5.
being a goodly proper Man, took a long stick in his hand, and having taken the
length of his own arm, made Proclamation through the Kingdom, that ever after
the length of that stick should be the measure to measure by, Tho. Fullers
Sermon. at St. Clem. Land. 1647.
and no other: Thus Gods Justice is nothing else but a conformi^y to his being,
the pleasure of his Will; so that the counsel of his Will, is the standard of
his Justice, whereby all Men should regulate themselves as well in commutative,
as distributive Ius^ice, and so much the more Righteous than his Neighbor
shall every Man appear, by how much he is proximate to this Rule, and less
Righteous as he is the more remote.

Justification by Christ, the extent of it.
AS the Sun by his beams does not only expel cold, Reyn^ de Pisis
Pantheologia.
but works heat and fruitfulness also: Thus in the Justification of a sinner
repenting, there is a further reach then ^ollere peccata, the taking away of
sin, there is also infusion of grace and virtue into the sinners heart. The
father of the Prodigal did not only take off all his Sons rags, but put on
the best he had, and a Ring on his finger; And to say truth, our Justification
does not consist only in the taking away of sin, but in the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness and obedience; for though the act be one, yet for the
manner it is twofold: 1. By priva^ion. 2. By imp^tation.

How is it that the proceedings of God in his Justice, are not so clearly
dis^erned.
TAke a straight stick, and put it into the water, then it will seem crocked,
Why because we look upon it through two mediums, T. Fuller ut ant^a.
air and water, there lies the deceptio visus, thence it is that we cannot
discern aright: Thus the proceedings of God, in his Justice, which in
themselves are straight without the least obliquity seem unto us crooked; that
wicked men should prosper, and good men be afflicted; that the Israelites
should make the bricks, and the Egyptians dwell in the houses; that servants
should ride on horseback, and Princes go on foot; these are things that make
the best Christians stagger in their judgments* And way, R. William's Sermon. at
Fun. of L. Bayning 1629.
but because they look upon Gods proceedings though a double medium of Flesh
and Spirit, that so all things seem to go cross, through indeed they go right
enough: And hence it is that Gods proceedings in his justice are not so well
discerned, the eyes of Man alone being not competent jugdes thereof.


John Duke of Saxony, Cyriac. Spangenberg. in chron.
who might have had the World at will, if he would not have been a Christian,
resolved rather to pass by much difficulty, nay rather death it self, then ^o
desert the cause of God, which afterward he did heroically maintain against all
opposition in three Imperial Assemblies; And when it was told him that he
should lose the favor of the Pope, and the Emperor, and all the world
besides, if he stuck so fast to the Lutheran cause; Here are two ways, said
he, I must serve God or the World, and which of these do you think is the
better? And so put them off with this pleasant indignation: Neither would he be
ashamed to be seen which way he chose to go; for when at the public Assembly
of the States of the Empire, it was forbidden to have any Lutheran Sermons, he
presently prepared to be gone, and professed boldly, He would not stay there,
where he might not have liberty to serve God: Jer. Whitakers Ser. at Westminster.
1644.
Thus must every good Christian be thoroughly resolved for God, and for the
truth which he takes up to profess, Resolution must chain him as it did Ulisses
to the Mast of the Ship, must tie him to God that he leap no^ overboard, and
make shipwreck of a good Conscience, as too too many have done; It is
Resolu^ion that keeps Ruth with her Mother, it makes a Man a rocky promontory,
that washes not away, though the Surges beat upon him continually; Resolution
in the ways of God is the best aggio^ta of a Christian, and a resolved
Christian is the best Christian.


IT is reported of Vultures, Ulisses Aldro. vand. Or^itholog.
that they will fly over a Garden of sweet flowers, and not so much as eye
them, but they will seize upon a stinking carrion at the first sight; In like
manner Scarabs and F^yes will pass by the sound flesh; but if there be any
galled part on the horses back, there they will settle. Thus many there are
that will take no notice at all of the commendable parts and good qualities of
others; Sam. Torshel H^pocrite discovered.
but if the least imperfections shall appear, there they will fasten, them they
will be sure to single out of the crowd of Virtues, and censure; but let such
know, that Aquila non capit muscas, the Eagle scorns to catch at flies, so that
they discover what dunghill breed they are come of, by falling and feeding upon
the raw parts of their brothers imperfections, without any moderation at all.


THe mad Athenian standing upon the shore, To. Willam's Sermon. at Visita^. in
Essex, 1627.
thought every Ship that came into the Harbor to be his own: Pythagoras
Scholars were so trained up to think all things were constituted of Nombers,
that they thought they saw Nombers in every thing: Thus prejudice in judgment,
and prejudicate opinions, like colored Glass, make every thing to seem to be
of the same color, when they are looked through; And it is most true, that
when Men have once mancipated their Judgments to this or that error, then they
think every thing hits right, whether pro or con, that is in their fancy; all
the places of Scripture that they read, all the doctrinall parts of Sermons
that they hear, make for their purpose; and thus they run into monstrous
absurdities, and dangers inevitable.


HYpocrites are like unto white Silver, but they draw black lines? they have a
seeming ^anctified outside, Erasmi. Similia
but stuffed within with malice, worldiness, intemperance; like window cushions
made up of Velvet, and perhaps richly embroydered, but stuffed within with Hay;
Sam. Torshel Hypocrite cured
Or like some mockbegger halls, or houses in the Country that are built with
lofty Turrets, that are presently in the Travailers eye; and if they draw
nearer to view, they find them built with stately Porches, neat Galleries, fine
Stair-cases, curious Gate-houses, but not one convenient lodging Chamber, nor
any Hospitality at all; They have much to entertain the Passenger, Herodes
devotionem promittit, sed gladium acuit.
and the Viewer; they will entertain you with fine notions, choice discourses;
but if ye dwell with them, ye shall find very ill accommodation, ye shall hear
of them as ye ride through the Country, they have the name amongst Professors,
they carry it away from others: Chrysostom. in Math. 2.
but you shall experience it, that they are not such as are spoken, they are
not furnished indeed to be Hospitable to the weary Christian, they cannot close
with any godly spirit, because they move by a clean contrary Principle.

The policy of Tyrants, in doing many good things for the public.
RIchard the third, that great Master of mischief, as Sir Walt. Raleigh styles
him, having made his way to the Crown through an Ocean of innocent blood, by
the advice of his Parliament, In praefatione, Hist. mund.
enacted many good Laws, (as yet unrepealed) for the benefit of the People, as
the settling of Trade, damning the grievous tax of Benevolence, V^ltu tyrannus
est quidem (...)
rectifying the credit of Jurors, etc, Thus have done all Tyrants from time to
time, they knowing that their actions stink in the nostrils of God, and the
World, do so perfume them with favors, and spice them with acts of grace, that
the People can hardly scent them, and by this means ingratiate themselves in
such manner, they that work their own safety.

To make good use of Opportunity.
IN times of dearth, the poor Man picks up every grain of Corn that falls
besides; O says he, Quirin. Salazar. Com. in Proverb.
it is dear, none must be lost: but he that should in the time of Famine give
his corn to the Hogs, were worthy to be hanged at his own barn-door: So are
they worthy to lose the reward of weldoing, that lose the opportunity thereof;
Let no Man omit to do seasonable courtesies, because the least crum of time
wherein a man may have occasion to do good, is not to be lost, the salve must
not be deferred, -- data tempore prosunt. Ovid.
till the s^re does putrify, nor the potion kept back till the patient be
endangered; A penny given now, may do more good then an hundredth pounds
hereafter, sero d^t qui roganti dat, those benefits are slow of foot, that come
not till they are called for.

Not to talk of our good Deeds.
A Friend of Caesar's had preserved a certain Man from the Tyranny of that
Triumvirate proscription, Tacitus.
but he did so talk of it, that the poor Man was enforced to exclaim, Read me
Caesari, Prithee restore me up to Caesar again, I had rather undergo a thousand
deaths, than to be thus continually upbrayded by thee with my life: And to say
truth, the frequent commemoration of a benefit does wrack the mind of him that
does receive it. Eximi^ est virtus praestare ^^lentia rebus.
We must not therefore make our selves the trumpet of our benevolence, nor
enter our liberalities upon Record, or in a Calender register the days of our
good deeds; the Ovid. l. 2. ar^
but let them be like John Baptist, the speaking son of a dumb parent, speak to
the necessity of our brother, but dumb in the relation of it to others; Dan.
Tuvills Essays.
It is for triobolary Empiricks to stage themselv^s in the Market, and recount
their cures, and for all good Christians to be silent in their cha^itable
transactions.


THere happens sometimes in England such Assizes as are called the
Maiden-Assizes, Tho. Fullers Sermon. at St. Clem. Land. 1650.
that is, when the offenses brought to the bar, do not reach to the taking away
of life, so that there is not any Execution: Whereupon the high Sheriff of the
County presents the Judges at their departure with white Gloves, to wear in
commemoration of the mercies then showed to offenders, which perhaps by the
strict rule of Justice might have been cut off: Such an Assizes as this God now
keeps, Quid est peccatum ad Dei miserecordiam? Tel^ ^rane^^, etc. Chryso^t. in
Psalm. 50.
we sin daily, we offend hourly, and therefore guilty of death eternal; but
God woes, and entreats us to come in, promises life eternal, nay binds it
with an Oath, As I live, says he, I will not the death of a sinner. Let us
then return unto him, white han^s, candid thoughts, clean hearts, and then rest
assured that he will look upon us, neither black with revenge, nor red with
anger, but with a smooth brow, and smiling countenance, receive us into mercy:


A Certain Rustic having blamed Antigonus while he lived, Conr. Lycosthenes
Apoth^^^
grew after some trial had of his successor, to recant his error, or to recount
his crime; and digging one day in the field was questioned, What he did there?
O said he, Antigonum refodio, I seek Antigonus again: Dan. Tuvill ut ante^.
And is there not many a Man at this time, that would be glad to delve and dig
for Peace, if he might have it? would be joyful to see order and decency both
in Church and State restored* but Saturnus periit, perierunt and sua jura;
Sub Jove nunc mundus, jussa sequare Iovis.


Thus Englished, Saturn is dead, his Laws are all decayed,
Jove rules the World, and Jove must be obeyed.


What then is best to be done? (...) Horat 1. ep. 17
seeing the day grows cloudy and over-cast, let every Man betimes withdraw
himself to shelter, and there remain till the storm be past, not complaining
of the violence of the tempest, because it may be followed with a worse, not to
repine at the present Government, but take it as it is; and since he cannot
reform it, by no means be induced to provoke it, leaving all to Gods good will
and pleasure.


AUgustus Caesar being present at a public prize, with his two Daughters,
^^via and Iulia, Sue^. in vita.
observed diligently what company came to court them, and perceived that grave
Senators talked with Livia, but riotous and wanton youths with Iulia, whereby
he discerned their several humors and inclinations, according to the Italian
proverb, Dimmi con chi tu vai,
Et sapro quel che fai.
Tell me with whom thou go,
I Will tell thee what thou do*


And most true it is, that Custom and Company are Cousin-Germans, and that
manners and meetings for the most part sympathize together; he that walks in
the Sun is sure to be tan'd, Dan. Tutevils Essays.
and he that touchet^ pi^ch shall be defiled, or at least he shall be thought
so; Simi^is (...).
for all flesh will resort to their like, and every Man will keep company with
such as he is himself, says the Wiseman, chapter 10. v. 15.

A Man full of talk, full of Vanity.
A Prating Barber asked King Archelaus how he would be trimmed, Plutarch de
g^rrulitate, Owen Feltham's Resolves.
the King replied, Silently: Surely in much talk there cannot choose but be much
vanity, Loquacity is the Fistula of the mind, ever running and almost
incurable; Let every Man therefore be a Phocion or Pythagorean, to speak
briefly to the point or not at all; In ga^rulo, v^^borum ^^umen, mentis gutt^.
Stobaeus.
let him labor, like them of Crete, to show more wit in his discourse then
words, and not to power out of his mouth a fl^ud of the one, when he can hardly
wring out of his brains a drop of the other.

How to read with profit.
AS it is not the best way for any that intends to make himself a good
Statesman, to ramble and run over in his travells many Countries, J. Downham^
Christ's (...)
seeing much, and making use of little for the improving of his knowledge, and
experience in State Policy; but rather stay so long in every place, till he
have noted those things which are best worthy his observation: So is it also in
the travels and studies of the mind, by which if we would be bettered, in our
judgments and affections, it is not our best course to run over many things
slightly, taking only such a general view of them, as somewhat increases our
speculative knowledge; but to rest upon the points we read, Hoc leg^ quo^
Possis dic^re jure, me^m e^^. Martial. ^0.
that we may imprint them in our memories, and work them into our hearts and
affections, for the increasing of saving knowledge; then shall we find, that
one good Book often read, and thoroughly pondered, will more profit, than by
running over an hundredth in a superficial manner.

The several expressions of God in his Mercies, and why so?
AS Lawyers in this captio^s age of ours, when they draw up any Conveyances of
Lands, Tho. Fuller* ut ante^.
or there writings of concernment betwixt party and party, are fain to put in
many aequivocall terms of one and the same signification, as to have and to
hold, occupy and enjoy, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Profits, Emoluments;
to remise, release, acquit, discharge, exonerate of and from all manner of
actions, suits, debts, trespasses, etc. and all this to make sure work, so that
if one word will not hold in Law, another may: Thus God when he shows himself
to his People in love, he varies his expressions as he did to the Israelites,
Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercies for thousands, forgiving
iniqui^y, transgression and sin, etc. Here Is an homonomy of words, all
Synonymaes; And why so? to raise up the drooping soul, to bind up the
brokenhearted, that if it chance to stumble at one expression, it may be
supported by another; if one word will not reach, another may; his mind is that
the poor soul may rather leave then lack, when it comes to draw comfort out of
the breasts of Mercy.


A Man upon the way having accidentally lost his Purse, H. Peter's Ser. at Merc.
Chap. Land. 1651.
is questioned by his fellow-Travailler, where ^e had it last; O, says he, I
am confident that I drew it out of my pocket when I was in such a Tow^, at such
an Inn; Why then (says the other) there is no better a way to ^ave it again,
Psalm. 4.
then by going back again to the place where you last had it. This is the case
of many a Man in these loose unsettled times, they have lost their love to
Christ and his truth, since their corn and wine and oil have increased, ^ince
outward things are in abundance added unto them; they have slighted the light
of Gods countenance, the love of Christ is defective in their souls; but when
they were poor and naked of all worldly comforts, then they fasted and prayed,
then they sought Gods face both early and late, nothing was more dear and
precious unto them than the truth of Christ, O how they loved him! What then is
to be done, to recover this lost love of Christ? back again, back again,
directly where you last had it, to the sign of the broken and contrite heart,
there it was that you drew it out into good words and better works, and though
it be since lost in the crowd of worldly employments, there and no where else
you shall be sure to find it again.


IT is said of King Edward the sixth, Sir Joh. Heyward in vita.
that he knew all the Ports, Havens, Harbors, and Creeks, in and about the
English coasts, together with the depth and shallowes of the water, as also the
several burdens of every ship that could ride therewith safety; yet this was
but a puny knowledge in that young King; when we look upon the general
knowledge of God. He knows all things, all Creatures, nothing is hid from his
knowledge, he knows the thoughts of Man afar off, he knows what he will think
many years hence if he live to it; Tho. Fullers Sermon. at St. Clem. Land. 1650.
he knows the stars by their names, whereas our eyes are dim, they small, the
distance great, yet his infinite essence is a vast Nomenclator of them all;
such and so general is the knowledge of our all-knowing God, that he knows all
things, also Simul, semel, and uno intuito, all at once, both things past,
present, and to come.


IT is storyed of a certain King, Specul. Ex^mplorum.
that fighting a desperate battle, for the recovery of his daughter injuriously
stolen from him, found but ill success, and the day utterly against him; till
by the valor of a strange Prince, disguised in the habit of a mean Soldier
(that pitied his loss, and bore love to his daughter) he recovered both her
and victory: Not long after, this Prince received some wrong in the point of
houour, Tho. ^ Kempis Sermon.
which he deservedly prized: He made his complaint to the King, desires
Justice; the forgetful King puts him over to a Judge: The Prince replies* Know
this, O King, when thou wast lost, I stood betwixt thee and danger, and did not
bid another save thee, but saved thee my self, Ecce vulnera! behold the scars
of those wounds I bore to free thee, and thy state from ruin inevitable: And
now my suit is before thee, do thou shuffle me off to another? Such was our
case, Sa^han had stolen our dear daughter, Greg* Nuza tract. (...).
our Soul, in vain we labored a recovery; Principalities and Powers were
against us, weakness and wretchedness on our side; Christ the Son of God took
pity on us, and though he were an eternal Prince of peace, disguised himself
in the habit of a common Soldier, Induens formam servi, putting on him the
likeness of a Servant, Ingratitudo est hostis gratiae, i^imica salutis. Bern
de 7. mis^re^ordiis.
undertook the War against our too strong Enemies, set himself betwixt us and
death, bore the w^unds in his own person, which should have light upon us: Now
his glory is in question, his honor much concerned in the transactions of
these times; We stand by, and behold it, he appeals to our censure, remembers
us of the wounds, passions, sorrows, he endured for us, we put off from one
another, and let the cause of him that saved us fall to the ground; W^o shall
plead for our ingratitude? Heaven and Earth, Sea and Stars, Orbs and Elements,
Angels and Devils, will cry shame upon us.

The right use that is to be made of Dreams.
THere are many People that find out more mysteries in their sleep, Guil.
Malmsburiens. Hist.
than they can well expound waking; The Abbot of Glassenbury, when Ethel^^ld
was Monk there, dreamt of a Tree, whose branches were all covered with Mo^ks
cowles, and on the highest branch, one cowle that out-to^t all the rest, which
must be expounded the greatness of this Ethelwold: Somnia fallaci ludunt
temeraria (...). Tibul. 3. 4.
If they dream of a green Garden, then they shall hear of a dead corpse; if they
dream that they shake a dead man by the hand, then there is no way but death:
All this is a kind of superstitious folly, to repose any such confidence in
Dreams; but if any man desire to make a right use of dreams, let it be this;
Let him consider himself in his dreaming, to what inclination he is mostly
carried, and so by his thoughts in the night, he shall learn to know himself
in the day; Not. Shures Sermon. at St. Mildr. Poultrey, Land. 1633.
Be his dreams lustful, let him exam^^e himself, whether the addictions of his
heart run not after the byas of Conc^piscence: Is he turbulent in his Dreams,
let him consider his own contentious disposition; be his dreams revengefull,
they point out his malice; Run they upon gold and silver, they argue his
covetousness: Thus may any Man know what he is by his sleep, for lightly Men
answer temptations actually waking, as their thoughts do sleeping.

Consultation with flesh and blood, in the ways of Heaven, is very dangerous.
LOok upon a Man somewhat thick-^ighted, B. Potters Sermon. at St. Ma^y Spittle
Land. 1641.
when he is to pass over a narrow bridge, how he puts on his spectacles to
make it seem broader, but so his eyes beguile his feet that he falls into the
brook. And thus it is that many are dro^^ed in the whirle-pool of sin, by
viewing the passage to Heaven, only with the spectacles of (...) and blood;
they think the bridge^ broad, which indeed is narrow, the Gate to be wide,
which indeed is straight, and so ruin^ themselves for ever.

The sad condition of adding sin to sin.
Mr. Fox in his Martyrology, Page 1404.
has a story of the Men of Cock^am in Lancashire: by a threatening command from
Bonner, they were charged to set up a Rood in their Church; accordingly they
compounded with a Carver to make it; being made and erected, it seemed it was
not so beautiful as they desired it, but with the hard visage thereof scared
their Children; Hereupon they refused to pay the Carver: The Carver complained
to the Justice; the Justice well examining and understanding the matter, Tho.
Adams ^xposit. on (...). 2. Pet.
answers the Townsmen: Go to, pay the Workman, pay him, get you home, and mark
you Rood better; if it be not well-favoured to make a God, it is but clapping a
pair of horns on it, and it will ^erve to make an excellent Devil: Thus when
any man adds one sin to another, when they add superstitious dotage, covetous
oppression, Montibu^ accumulant (...), and^. Ovid. Me^.
and racking extortion to their worldly desires, whereby they gore poor Men's
sides, and let out their very heart-bloods, they shall find no peace of God to
comfort, but Devil enough to confound them.


IT is observed by those that go down into the deep, Pet. Nonius de art
^avigandi.
and occupy their business in great waters that when they see the Constellation
of Castor and Pollux appear both together, then it is the happy omen of a
successful voyage; but if either of them appear single, actum est de
expeditione, there is small hope of thriving: Thus it is, that when Preaching
and Prayer do meet together, and like Hippocrates's two twins, live arm in arm
together, not all praying, and little or no preaching, as some would have it;
nor all preaching, and little or no praying, as others would have it, then is
offered up that Sacrifice which unto God is made acceptable: Dr. Mart. Day
lect. at S. Paul's 1619
For, praying and no preaching, would not so well edify his Church, because
where Visions fail the People perish; Quam been convenient?
and preaching without pr^yer would not well beseem his Church, which is called
an house of prayer, Romans 12. 1.
but both together will do exceeding well, Prove. 29, 18.
the one to teach us how to pray, Mat. 21. 13.
the other to fit us how to hear.


HOunds that are over-fleet, often outrun the prey in the pursuit, or else
tired and hungry, M. Goffe Ser. at St. Mary Spittle, Land. 1626.
fall upon some dead piece of carrion in the way, and omit the game: Thus Man,
who only has that essential consequence of his Reason, Capacity of Learning;
though all his time he be brought up in a School of Knowledge, yet too too
often lets the glass of his days be run out, before he know the Author he
should study; hence it is, that the greatest Epicures of Knowledge (as Children
new set to School, Librorum helluon^s.
turn from their lessons to look upon Pictures in their Books) gaze upon some
hard trifle, some unnecessary subtilty, and forget so much as to spell God; How
great a part of this span-length of his days does the Grammatical Critic
spend, in finding out the Construction of some obsolete word; or the principal
verb in a worn-out Epitaph, still ready to set out a new book upon an old
Criticisme? How does the Antiquary search whole Libraries, to light upon some
ancient Monument, whilst the Chronicles of the Lord, who is the Ancient of
days, are seldom looked into? all of them so wearying the faculties of their
understandings before hand by over-practising, Dan. 7. 9.
that when they come at the race indeed, where their knowledge should so run
that it might attain, it gives over the course as out of breath, I Cor. 9. 24.
before it have begun.


LIvia wrote to Augustus Caesar, Sueton. Octa. Augustus.
concerning some ill words that had passed of them both, whereof she was
over-sensible; but Caesar comforted her; Let it never trouble you, that Men
speak ill of us, for we have enough that they cannot do ill to us: And to say
truth, Convitia quis facile tole^at etc. Greg. lib. 3. moral.
above Hell there is not a greater punishment, then to become a Sannio, a
subject of scorn and derision: Ill tongues will be walking, neither need we
repine at their violence; R. Holdsworth Sermon. at Me^c. Chap. Land. 1627.
we may well suffer their words, while God does deliver us out of their hands:
Let it never trouble us that Men speak evil of us, for we have enough that
they can do no evil to us: And withal, whilst that the Derider dasheth in a
puddle, the dirt flies about his own ears, but lights short of Innocence; the
Mocker, Multi cum aliis maledicunt, sibi (...) conviti^ faciunt. Sen. ep. 76.
that casts aspersions on his brother over night, shall find them all on his
own clothes next morning.

How to be truly Humble.
EPaminondas that Heathen Captain, Plutarch. Apophihegm.
finding himself lifted up in the day of his public triumph, the next day
went drooping, and hanging down the head; but being aked, What was the reason
of that ^is so great dejection, made answer; Yesterday I felt my self
transported with vain glory, therefore I chastise my self for it to day; thus
did Hezekiah; thus David; thus Peter, and many others: And so must it be with
every truly humbled Man; 2 Chronicles. 32. 25
If he have not the proposed or fore-humility, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
to level all his thoughts at the glory of God in the suppression of all
self-conceit, nor the opposed or mid humility, Dan. Cawdry Sermon. at S. Ann
Black^^y. Lon. 1624*
to banish all selfe-confedence and presumption upon his own strength, let him
be sure to double the imposed or after-humility, making Pride it self to
humble him the more; Psa. 115* 1.
And thus it was, that the Psalmist doubles, nay trebles his words, Non nobis
Domine, non nobis Domine, etc. feeling some thought of Pride (like some fly)
alighting upon his Soul, he beats it away with a Not unto us O Lord; If it
lights a second time, he flaps it off again, Not unto us O Lord; Erubescant
elati, ubi credunt locum habere superbiam etc. Cassiodo^ in Luc. 2.
but if it comes the third time, he kills it dead with the next word, Sed
nomini tuo, but to thy Name give the glory; This is the exercise of a threefold
Humility, and if in any of these there be a failing, the best of our actions
will be so far tainted, that there will be no remedy to supply that defect, but
with doubling our after-humility, that as Pride grew up out of Humility, so
Humility may spring out of pride again.

Men of other Callings, not to meddle with that of the Ministry.
BY the Laws of the Land, Ferdinand.
a person occupying the craft of a Butcher, Poultons abridgm. title Brewers,
^utchers etc.
may not use the occupation of a Tanner; and a Brewer may not deal in the
occupation of a Cooper; none prescribe Physic, but such as are Doctors, at
least Practitioners in the faculty; None plead at the Bar, When a Ha^^er Will
go smatter in Philosophy, Or a Peddler Wax a medler in Theology.
but such as are learned in the Law: It must needs then be a great fault (as
Hierom complains in an Epistle to Paulinus) when every ordinary Mechanic takes
upon him exact knowledge in Theology, and will teach both Clark and Priest what
they should say, what they should do; when artless Men will judge of Art, nay
enter upon the work of the Ministry, instructing others, Sir T. Moore inter
juvenilia.
when they have need to be instructed themselves.

Charity mistaken.
IT is reported of those Indians in Iamaicai who refusing to furnish Columbus
that Genoese, Gasp. Ens. Sam. Purchase Voyages.
(the first discoverer of that new American world) with provisions; but he
seeing the People idolatrously devoted unto the Moon, and foreseeing her
Eclipse by his Ephemerides, Hacluitus ^osthumus.
told them; that if they did not speedily supply him, the Divine anger would
suddenly consume them, a sign whereof they should see in the darkened face of
the Moon within two days; They, silly wretches, being ignorant of the cause,
were so terrified at the beholding of the Eclipse, that they came to beg pardon
of him, Assentatori decemtalenta scor to talentum, sed Phil^sopho triob^^um.
Laert. in vit^C ratis.
and brought him provision in abundance; He made use of their ignorance,
supplied his own necessity, and engaged them much unto us: Thus, many there are
to be found amongst us simple men and silly women, ignorant of the wiles of
their seducing Teachers, laying down all they have at their feet, thinking
nothing good enough, all too little to throw upon them; when (such is their
preposterous zeal) they will not willingly part with a penny that is due, 2 Timothy 3. 6.
to maintain him that is more Orthodoxall.


WHen S. Paul undertook to make the Corinthians know who was the Lord God, M.
Goffe. Ser. at St. Mary Spittle. Land.
he professed a wealthy variety of much other knowledge besides the Scripture,
and thanks God for it, that he spoke with tongues (...), more then they all
did; Romans 14. 18.
he cites their own Poets amongst the then learned Athenians, and applies a
Satirical verse out of Epimenides, 1 Tit. 12. Acts 14.
to reprehend the lying and bestiall manners of the Cretians; so powerful was
his language amongst the Lystrians, that he gained the repute of Mercury; And
questionless, the sitting so long at the feet of Gamaliel, made him vas
electionis, a Vessel fit to hold that divine treasure, which the Holy Ghost
powered into him: It is but folly then for any one to be transported with the
pangs of so indiscreet a zeal, Mat 3. 3.
as to extinguish those first lamps of knowledge, polite and numane studies;
for they are like the Crier in the Wilderness before our Savior, to prepare
his way; and though they do not directly teach us to know God, yet are the
fittest spectacles for unripe years, and tender sights to put on, 2 Cor. 12. 2.
who are not able to endure at the first, vehemens sensibile, so excelling an
object as God is: It is true, that S. Paul was wrapped into the third Heavens,
but God leads Men now with a more apprehensive and ordinary hand, then either
by taking them up, or sending down lights and visions from himself, to make
his Spirit to be at the command of every obstreperous, Nam videas in Ecclesia
imperitiss^mos quosque etc.
unlettered Extemporist, who will undertake to teach before themselves have
learnt, whereby it often falls out, that whilst such Ignaroes are about to make
known the knowledge of God, though their bodies be confi^'d within the compass
of the Pulpit, yet is their straggling invention fain to wander for matter, 1 Samuel 9.
as Saul did over the Mount Gilboa, and many other Mountains to seek his
Fathers Asses, and yet never found them.


IT is reported of a Prince, Tonc. Zuinger theat. hum. vitae.
with whom a mighty neighbour-King used to pick quarrels by making impossible
demands; otherwise threatening War and ruin to him: Amongst the rest one was,
that he charged him to drink up the Sea; which a Counselor hearing, advised
him to undertake it; The Prince replied, How is it possible to be accomplished?
The Sage answered, let him first stop up all the Rivers that run into the Sea
(which are no part of the bargain) and then you shall perform it. T. Adams
exposit. on 2 Pet. Nemo ^ine crimine vivit.
Much more impossible is it for our selves to consume and dry up all the Ocean
of Sin in us, so long as lusts remain like so many Rivers to feed it: For still
sin breeds lusts, and lusts increase sin, as the sea sends forth springs that
run into Rivers, and those Rivers return to the Sea again; So that to bid a Man
clear his heart from all sin, is to impose upon him opus Dei, the peculiar work
of grace omnipotent: Prove. 20. 9.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean? That can I, says the proud Pharisee;
and that can I, says the Popish Iustitiary, Non ^abeo Domine quod mi^i
ignoscas, Psa. 130. 3.
I have nothing Lord for thee to pardon, said Isidore the sinful Monk; J^b 9.
30.
but so could neither David, Job, Romans 7. 15.
nor St. Paul say, for in many things we sin all.


LIvy said of Hannibal, Plutarch. in vita Paul. A^mil. Erasm. Adag.
that he never stood to his promise, but when it made for his profit; And
Antigonus was called Doson, in the future tense, as being about to give, yet
never giving: whereupon grew the Proverb upon him that promised much and
performed little, that he was a Doson: The World is at this time surely full of
many such, such as one would think were born in the Land of Promise, who feed
their Prisoners of hope with future promises, as Ephraim with wind; Hos. 12. 1.
Math. 4. R. Senhouse Sermon. at Court, 1617.
mere Alchymists whose Promises are gold, payment but dross, putting off, as
the trick is, either with improbable rever^ions, or Promises of Promises, like
the Devils omnia dabo, imaginary and delusory; whilst their Patients, like
that Man of many years infirmity in the Gospel, fainting by the pool, and none
to put him in, lie languishing at Hopes Hospital, Joh. 5. 7.
like a hungry man dreaming of meat, and when he awaketh his soul is empty;
Esaias 29. 8.
or like Men in a swoon, cheared with strong water, they revive only to
beweary their eyes with further expectation, and to witness the fallibility of
Promise.

Partial Hearers of Gods word, reproved.
IT is observable that in great Fayrs and Markets, the Pedlar and the Ballad
singer are more thronged than the wealthy ^radesmen* Auris bona est quae
libenter audit u^ilia, etc. Bern. in Epist.
Children and Fools hang upon them who sell toys, and neglect those who have
their shops furnished with rich and Merchantable commodities: And such is the
partiality of many Hearers of Gods word, that they will crowd to hear a Sermon
abroad, when they may hear one (perhaps a better) at home, and that too with a
great deal more ease; and herein they wrong both God, Mat. Styles D. D. at St.
Greg. Land. 1631. Mat. 24. 5.
his Word, and his Ministers; God, to whom only Judgment belongs in this
case, for though some may judge of the Minister eloquence, many of his
industry, yet none of his faithfulness, which is the chief thing required in a
Steward. His word, in having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, in respect of
persons, Iam. 2. 5. Lastly, They offer indignity to the Preachers of his word,
in overvaluing one man, and too much sleighting another.

Afflictions happen both to good and bad, but to several ends.
THe stalk and the ear of Corn, Hect. Pintus in Dan.
fall upon the threshing floor under one and the same Flayl, but the one
shattered in pieces, the other preserved; from one and the same Olive, and from
under one and the same press, is crushed out both oil and dregs, but the one is
tuned up for use, the other thrown out as unserviceable; And by one and the
same breath, In eadem afflictione mali Deum detestantur, and blaspemant; boni
autem precantur and laudant. Aug. de civit* De^. l. 1. c. 8.
the fields are perfumed with sweetness, and annoyed with unpleasant favors.
Thus Afflictions are incident to good and bad, may and do befall both alike,
but by the providence of God not upon the same account; Good Men are put into
the Furnace for their trial, bad Men for their ruin; the one is sanctified by
Afflictions, the other made far worse then before; the self-^ame Affliction is
as a Load^stone to the one, to draw him to heaven, as a Millstone to the other
to sink him down into hell.

The study of School Divinity, not altogether necessary.
THere is an Italian Tree mentioned by Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 16.
called Staphylodendron, whose wood is fair and white, like our Maple, the
leaves broad and beautiful, the fruit sweet and pleasant; In vita ejus
prae^ixa operibus.
yet Dodone^s, a good Herbalist, says of it, that it is good for nothing: Such
is the study of School Divinity, (I will not say good for nothing) but as Dr.
Whitaker, a learned Man in his time, said; That Schoolmen had plus argut^arum
quam doctrinae, plus doctrinae qu^m usus, a goodly kind of learning that
whetteth the wit with quaint devices, Dr. Holdsw.
and fills the head with nice distinctions: Multa dicunt sed nihil probant,
Mr. Moss Ser. at S. P. 1619.
said another learned Man; yet giving them Christian freedom, we may use them
as sweet meats after a feast, rather to close the stomach, and to delight with
variety, then to satisfy the appetite, or support Nature.


PRotagoras Abderites, Laert. Diog. in vita.
because he began his Book with a doubt, De Diis, neque ut sint, neque ut non
sint, habeo dicere, was banished out of Athens, and his Books solemnly burnt to
ashes. And the same Athenians committed Anaxagoras to prison, and but for
Pericles had put him to death, for but writing a book of the Moon's Eclipses,
after they had received her for a Goddess. Then, do we find such jealousy of
the Heathens over their fained Gods, Non est cum Dei hostibus societas coeunda.
Zonar. in Gratiano.
and shall the denial and disparagement of the Honor of the one true and
ever-living God be tolerable among Christians? No, let us know that Atheism is
the main disease of the Soul, not only pestilent to the person in whom it is
harbored, but to the whole Land where it is permitted.


IT is observable, that whereas Abraham gave gifts to the Sons of his
Concubines, and so sent them away, Genesis 25.
yet the Heritage he reserved for his son Isaac, in whom the Covenant was
established, the Son of Promise: So if God (as oftentimes he does) give secular
things, Marc. de Pise Theolog. moralis.
common gifts unto bastard-children; yet the Inheritance of Heaven, the Crown
of life, he preserves for them, who after the manner of Isaac are children of
promise, Romans 9. 8.
as St. Paul speaks, to his Isaacs, his laughters in whom he takes pleasure,
Jam. 1. 12.
to those that love him, says St. James; to those that love his appearing, ^
Tim. 4. 8.
says another; all which hinteth thus much, that Heaven is the proper
inheritance of Gods children.


LOok upon the revolution of the Heavens, Tho. Hering Panacea Christian^.
how every Planet moves in its proper Orb, their motions are not all alike but
various, nay opposite each unto the other; Hence those different Conjunctions,
Oppositions, and Aspects of the Planets; yet by the wheeling round of the
Primum mobile, they are brought about to one determinate point: Or, do but
observe well the wise and politic carriage of a provident Governor, who
meeting with opposite factions in the State, while each man takes his own way,
one seeking to undermine another; he serves his own ends of both, so wisely
managing the good, so powerfully over-awing the bad, that all turns to the
common good: Thus it is, that though many and sundry Agents are found in the
world, whose course and scope, whose aims and ends, and actions, are not the
same, Providen^^^ Dei omnia gubernantur and quae putatur poena medicina est.
Hieron. in Ezech.
yea diverse; nay adverse, one thwarting and crossing the other; yet the
overruling providence of God so swayes all subordinate and inferior
instr^ments; that in the midst of their mutual jars, they conspire in a sacred
harmony, as if they were entered into an holy league, or some sacred combination
for the good of his chosen; wherever the Enemies be in respect of their
places, whosoever they be in regard of their persons, Romans 8. 28.
howsoever dis-joynted in regard of their affections, all their projects and
practices tend and end in the good of his Elect.


IT is observed by the Mineralists, Hect. Pin^us in Dan.
such as dig for treasure, that the surface of that Earth is most barren, where
the bowels are most rich, that where veyns of Gold and Silver swell the
biggest, the body of that Earth (as if the treasure had eaten out all its
fatness) is made so poor, that it is not capable of the least improvement:
Thus it is (not always) but most usual with rich Men, they have full purses,
Quid prodest arca plen^ si inanis fit conscientia? etc.
but empty souls; great Incomes of wealth, but small stocks of Grace; Judas
carried the bag, he was good for nothing else; and a rich Man laden with thick
clay, having outward things in abundance, is good for no body but himself; so
true it is, Augustine.
that as Greatness and Goodness, Joh.* 13. 29.
so Gold and Grace ^eldom meet together. Hab. 2. 6.


To beware of erroneous Doctrine.
IT is recorded by Theodoret, Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 20.
that when Lucius an Arrian Bishop came and preached amongst the A^tiochians,
broaching his damnable errors, the People forsook the Congregation, at least
for the present, having indeed been soundly taught before by worthy Athanasius:
Thus it were to be wished, that the People of this age had their wits thus
exercised to distinguish betwixt truth and falsehood, J. Denisons Sr. at S.
Paul's.
then false doctrines would not thrive, as they do now amongst us; and Errors,
though never so closly masked with a pretense of zeal, would not so readily be
received for Truths, as now they are by the Multitude, nor so much countenanced
by those that make profession of better things.

Atheism punished.
IT was somewhat a strange punishment, Wolfg. Lazius de Magist. Romans
which the Romans inflicted upon Parricides; they sewed them up in a mail of
leather, and threw them into the Sea; yet so, that neither the water of the Sea
could soak through, nor any other Element of Nature, earth, air, or fire
approach unto them. And certainly every Creature is too good for him that
denies the Creator; nor can they be further separated from Heaven, or pitched
deeper into Hell, than they deserve, that will believe neither; The God they
deny shall condemn them, and those Malignant spirit^ whom they never feared,
shall torment them, and that for ever.

Truth beloved in the general, but not in the particular.
AS the Friar wittily told the People, Ph. Bosquier. Cod. Evang.
that the Truth he then preached unto them, seemed to be like Holy Water, which
every one called for a pace; yet when it came to be cast upon them, they turned
aside their face as though they did not like it. Just so it is that almost
every Man calls fast for Truth, commends Truth, nothing will down but Truth,
yet they cannot endure to have it cast in their faces; R. Senhouse Ser. at S.
Paul's 1618.
They love Truth in universali, when it only pleads it self, and shows it
self, but they cannot abide it in particulari, when it presses upon them, and
shows them themselves; they love it lucentem, but hate it redarguentem; they
would have it shine out unto all the world in its glory, but by no means so
much as peep out to reprove their own errors.

The confident Christian.
THe Merchant adventurer puts to Sea, Tho. Hering Panacea Christiana.
rides out many a bitter storm, runs many a desperate hazard upon the bare hope
of a gainful return: The valiant Soldier, takes his life into his hands, runs
upon the very mouth of the Cannon, dares the Lion in his Den, merely upon the
hope of Victory: Every Man hazards one way or other in his Calling, yet are but
uncertain venturers, ignorant of the issue; But so it often falls out, that the
greedy Adventurer seeking to increase his stock, Confidentia semper est cau^a
and circumspecta, nec ideo minus
loses many times both it and himself; The covetous Soldier gaping after
spoil and Victory, finds himself at last spoiled, captivated: But the
confident Christian, the true child of God, runs at no such uncertainty, he is
sure of the Goal when he first sets out, (...) Paschal. in Eth^. 1 Samuel 17. 37.
Judge. 7. 15.
certain of the day before he enter the field, sounds the Trumpet before
victory, and when he puts on his harness, dares boast as he that puts it off;
witness David's encounter with Goliath, Gedeons march against the Midianites,
and the christian resolution of those three Worthies, Dan. 3. 17.


IT was a curious observation of Cardinal Bellarmine, R* Bellarm. de As^entione
grad. 7.
when he had the full prospect of the Sun going down, to try a conclusion of
the quickness of its motion, took a Psalter into his hand: And before, says
he, I had twice read the 51 Psalm the whole body of the Sun was set, whereby he
did ^onclude, that the Earth being twenty thousand thousand miles in compass,
the Sun must needs run in half a quarter of an hour, seven thou^and miles; and
in the revolution of twenty four hours, six hundred seventy two thousand miles,
a large progress in so short a time. Temporibus semper cautus servire memento.
Phocilides.
And herein, though the Cardinal's compute (as well as his doctrine in debates
Polemicall) does very much fall short of truth; yet his experience in this,
gives some proof of the extraordinary swiftness of the Suns motion. Is then
the course of the Sun so swift? is time so passant? then let time be as
precious, lay hold upon all opportunity of doing good, labor while it is day
for night will come, and time will be no more. The Sun was down, before the
Cardinal could twice read the Psalm, Miserere mei Deus; and the light of thy
life (such is the velocity thereof) may be put out, before thou can say once,
Lord be merciful to me a sinner.


THe first and highest Heaven draws by its motion the rest of the Planets, R.
Gardener Sermon. at St. Paul's.
and that not by a crooked, but by a right motion; yet the Orbs of the planets
so moved, move of themselves obliquely. If you enquire whence is the obliquity
of this motion in the Planets? Certainly, not from the first mover, but from
the nature of the Planets. Thus in one and the same manner, Man aims at one
end, God at another; the same that man works sinfully, Haeremus cuncti
superis. Lucan.
God works most holily; and therefore they work idem, but not ad idem. The
motion of our wills do exceedingly vary from Gods will, and seem to drive a
contrary end, than that which God aims at; yet are they so overruled by his
power, that at last they meet together, and bend that way where he intends.


THere is a story of one, T. Stapleton in vita Tho. Mori.
that being often reproved for his ungodly and vicious life, and exhorted to
repentance, would still answer, That it was but saying three words at his
death, and he was sure to be saved; perhaps the three words he meant, were
Miserere mei Deus, Lord have mercy upon me. But one day riding over a bridge,
his horse stumbled, and both were falling into the River, Caepta mal^ infaelix
exitus usque mane^. Ovid.
and in the article of that precipitation, he only cried, Capiat omnia
diabolus, Horse and man and all to the devil: Three words he had, but not such
as he should have had; he had been so familiar with the devil all his life,
that he thinks of none else at his death. Thus it is, that usually a wicked
life, has a wicked end: He that travells the way of hell all his lifetime, it
is impossible in the end of his journey, he should arrive at heaven. A worldly
man dies, rather thinking of his gold than his God: some die jeering, some
raging, some in one distemper, some in another. Why? They lived so, and so they
die. But the godly man is full of comfort in his death, because he was full of
heaven in his life.

The telling of Truth, begets batred.
AS the Turk taunted some Christians at Constantinople, Phil. Bosquier Orat.
(...) sancte.
who said, That they came thither to suffer for the Truth, tells them, That
they needed not to have come so far for that; for had they but told the truth
at home, they could not have missed suffering for it: Telling truth needs not
travel far for enmity, enmity will encounter it at home, Loc. Com.
wheresoever it be. Hence is that definition that Luther made of Preaching,
Praedicare nihil est quam derivare in se furorem, etc. That to preach, and
preach home, as he did, was nothing else, but to stir up the furies of hell
about their ears. Mr. Dering telling Queen Elizabeth in a Sermon, that it was
once Tanquam ovis, but now it was Indomita juvenca, was never suffered to
preach more at Court. Tell a Politician Papinian's truth, that, That Is the best
reason, which makes most for Religion; that the best policy, that makes most
for piety: Why, this truth crossing his projects and purposes, the teller may
take his bill, and sit down quickly, and write enmity. Tell a covetous man St.
Paul's truth, that the love of money is the root of all evil, you offer him
loss, you touch his freehold, you are a trespasser to his trade, an enemy. Tell
the luxurious man that Theorem of truth, that Temperance is the razor of
Superfluities, and the rule of necessaries, and that this whole lif^ ought to
be a kind of a Quadragesimal abstinence: Away with your threadbare Scholars
posies, Obsequium amicos veritas odium parit. Terence.
what, do you bring us into the Wilderness to starve us? You are an enemy.
Thus, let the truth-teller never dream of comfits and sweetmeats, but make
account to eat his Passover with sour herbs; let him never feed himself with
vain expectation, that the trade of truth-telling is a plausible, winning,
welcome profession, R. Senhouse Sermon. at Court. 1620.
An expectas ut Quintilianus ametur? Let him rather account himself to be born,
as Jeremy, a contentious man, one that striveth with the whole earth, a
troublesome companion, an enemy.

Men not repairing to the Church of God, reproved.
THe renowned Captain Huniades, when he felt himself in danger of death,
desired to receive the Sacrament before his departure, R. Knoles Turk. hist.
and would in any case (sick as he was) be carried to the Church to receive the
same, saying, That it was not fit, that the Lord should come to the house of
his Servant, but the servant go rather to the house of his Lord and Master.
Psalm. 24. 7.
David's desire was, to dwell there; and Nicodemus (though a Ruler) did not send
for Christ, but go unto him: Whose modesty condemns many amongst us, Joh. Boys
Postills.
who will not vouchsafe to come to Christ, (if he will be served) Christ must
come to them, the Supper of the Lord must be brought to their table, the
Ministers of Christ must Church their wives at home, baptize their children at
home; vainly imagining, that they do God a great favor, when they tread in his
Courts, and a grace to his Ambassadors, when they lend their ears to an hours
audience.

Grace seemingly lost in the Soul.
THe two Disciples talked with Christ, yet knew him not; Mary with her
blubbered eyes, Luke 24. 16.
mistakes Christ for the Gardener; Hagar, in the very midst of her distress,
Joh. 20. 2^.
had a fountain of water before her, F. Bellers Ser. at S. Paul's.
yet could not see it, till God was pleased to open her eyes, Genesis 21. 19.
Thus, the least cloud of Gods displeasure may, as it were an Ecliptic li^e,
seem to darken the splendor of his graces within us: Christ may so hide
himself from our hearts, that knowledge or faith shall not be able to reach
him, and much of the Spirit may be so darkened, that though a man have Christ in
the promise, O strange detention, yet he shall not be able to discern him.


THere is mention made in the Ecclesiastical story, Hist. tripartita.
of a silly woman, that must needs spit in the Emperor's face, that so she
might suffer Martyrdom. And it is said of the Lion, that to provoke himself to
anger, when there is none to hurt him, he beats himself with his own tail.
But thus must no good Christian do, we must take heed that we do not wilfully
run our selves into troubles, J. Downham Guide to Godliness.
but rather use all lawful means to prevent them before they come, and to be
freed from them when they are come: For he shall have sorrow that loves it, and
he that runs into danger, Non est nostrum persecutiones arripere, sed illatas
ab aliis, etc. Hieron. super Ioh.
shall perish in it, and he that voluntarily lays a cross upon his own
shoulders, when he needs not, has no promise that God will take it off. It is
true, that we must drink of this bi^ter cup, but we must stay till God put it
into our hands; otherwise we cannot say, that we are chastised by him, but that
we scourge our selves with whips of our own making.


ONe of the Persecutors in Queen Mary's days, Joh. Fox Act. and Mo^.
pursuing a poor Protestant, and searching the house for him, charged an old
woman to show him the Heretic. She points to a great chest of linen, Lex
divina tanquam in specula peccata monstrat. Augustine.
on the top whereof lay a fair Looking-glass. He opens the chest, and asks,
where the heretic was. She suddenly replied, Do you not see one? meaning,
that he was the Heretic, and that he might easily see himself in the glass.
And thus, God's Law is the glass, that shows us all our spots, let us hold it
right to our intellectual eye; not behind us, as the wicked do, they cast Gods
word behind them; Psalm. 50. 17.
not besides us, like the rich worldling that called to Christ; not to turn the
backside of the glass toward us, Matthew. 19. 18.
which is the very trick of all hypocrites; Luke 18. 11.
nor lastly, T. Adams on 2 Pet.
to look upon our selves in this glass, when we are muffled, masked, or cased,
for under those vails, we cannot discern our own complexions. But let us set
the clear glass before our face, and our open face to the glass; and then we
shall soon perceive, that the sight of our filthiness, is the first step
toward cleanness.


IT was the great praise of learned Fulgentius, Lib. de Orthod. fide.
upon young Donatus, that being set upon by the Arrians, though he had not the
skill to defend the truth with his tongue, yet he had a will to maintain the
truth in his heart; though he could not unloose all their cunning tricks, he
could yet hold fast the conclusion, Truth: And he that (for he could neither
write nor read) could not clerkly subscribe his name to Truth's confession,
Acts and Monuments.
could yet manly draw blood of himself, wherewith to set his mark to it. And he
that for want of learning, could not dispute Christ's cause, could yet be
content to die for it: And were every hair of my head a man, I would burn them
all, R. Senhouse Sermon. at Court. Gal. 4. 16.
said a third, rather then go from Truth. Thus it is to be wished, that as this
was the first Nation, that universally received the truth of the Gospel, so to
the last it may continue constant for the truth; that every man would stand up
for the truth, fight and die for the truth; and happiness it will be found in
the end, thus to suffer for so good a friend as truth is, to continue truth's
friend, who ever he be that shall become an enemy therefore.

Kingdom of Christ, a peaceable Kingdom.
A Captain sent from Caesar unto the Senators of Rome, Plutarch.
to sue for the prolonging of his Government abroad; understanding (as he stood
at the Councill-chamber-door) that they would not condescend to his desire,
clapping his hand upon the pummel of his sword; well, said he, seeing you will
not grant it me, this shall give it me. So when the Citizens of Messana,
despising Pompeys jurisdiction, alleged ancient orders in old time granted to
their Town, Pompey did answer them in choler; what, do you prattle to us of
your Law, that have swords by your sides? Calv. Turciam lib. 1. cap. 4.
And thus it is that Mahomet dissolveth all Arguments by the sword, and thus
all Tyrants and Potentates of the World end all their quarrels, and make their
Enemies their footstool by the sword: But the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom is
not a sword of steel, but a sword of the Spirit; He rules in the midst of his
Enemies, and subdueth a People unto himself, Romans 1. 16.
not by the sword, but by the word; for the Gospel of peace is the power of his
arm to Salvation.

Recreation, the necessity thereof.
IT is reported of a good old Primitive Christian, S. Joh. Evang
that as he was playing with a Bird, two or three youths as they were passing
by, observed it; and one of them says to the other, Laur. Surius, in vita
Rhemi^^^
See, how this old man plays like a child with the bird; which the good Man
over-hearing, calls him to him, asks him what he had in his hand? A bow, says
he; Joh. Cassion, col. 24. cap. 21
What do you with it, and how do you use it? said the other; whereupon the
young Man bent his bow, and nock'd his Arrow as if he had been ready to shoot,
then after some short time unbent his bow again; Why do you so, said the holy
Man? Alas, says the young Man, If I should always keep my bow ready bent, it
would prove a slug, and be utterly disabled for any further service; Is it so,
said the good old Man? Then, my son take notice, that as thy bow, such is the
condition of all human Nature, should our thoughts and intentions be always
taken up, and the whole bent of our minds set upon the study of divine things,
the wings of devotion would soon flagge, and the arrows of Contemplation fly
but slowly toward heaven: And most true it is, that there is Otium as well as
Negotium, -- Nec semper Cnossicus arcu Destinat, exempto sed laxat cornua
nervo. Lucan. Tho. Fullers Holy State. Major post o^ia virtus. Sil. Ital.
a time of taking pleasure, as well as a time of taking pain, neque semper
arcum tendit Apollo, the bow that stands always bent will become
unserviceable; And let but the frame of this body of ours want its natural
rest, the roof will be soon on fire; Recreation is a second Creation; when
weakness has almost annihilated the spirits, it is the breathing of the Soul,
which otherwise would be stifled: Lawful Recreation (such as that (...) of the
Philosophers) strengthens labor, and sweetens rest, and the blessing of God
may be expected therein as well as in doing the work of our Calling.

The great benefit of Devotion at bed time.
OVens that have been baked in overnight, are easily heated the next morning;
The Cask that was well seasoned in the Evening, Jo. Downhams Guide to Godliness.
will smell well the next day; The Fire that was well raked up when we went to
bed, will be the sooner kindled when we rise: Thus, if in the Evening we spend
our selves in the examination of our hearts, how we have spent the time past,
Sera serio.
and commit our selves unto the good guidance of God for the time to come, we
shall soon find the spiritual warmth thereof, making us able and active for
all good duties in the morning, and by adding some new fuel to this holy fire,
we shall with much facility and comfort cause it to burn and blaze in all
Christian and religious duties.


THe Censurers of the World, by way of Apologue, being met together, consulted
about the redress of diverse enormities. J. Walchrius decas ^ab.
One with the countenance of Heraclitus, was ever weeping for the disorders:
another with the face of Democritus, was ever laughing at the absurdities: a
third, of a more pragmatical spirit, was busy where he had no thanks: They all
studied, and plotted how to reform the ataxie of things, and to bring the World
into some peace and order: Princes were implored, Philosophers consulted,
Physicians, Soldiers, the eminent in all Professions were convented; many
stratagems were devised, still the more they projected to still the worlds
troubles, the more troublesome they made it: One would have it this way,
another that, the next differs from both, a fourth opposes them three, a fifth
contradicts them all: Scinditur incertum studia in contraria, etc.
So that there was nothing else but crossing one another, Physicians with their
Recipes, Commanders with their Precipes, Jesuits with their Decipes, all the
rest with their Percipes, could do no good at all; At last a Grandfather in a
religious habit, presented them an hear^ of such sovereign virtue, that when
every one had tasted of it, they were all calm and quiet presently: The herbs
name he called Bulapathum, the herb Patience. And let but this be our diet
continually and we shall find a strange alteration in our selves; T. Adam^ on
ep. 2 Pet. Gaudet patientia dur^s. Lucan.
No troubles abroad, nor discontents at home shall break our peace, if we be
but armed with patience; The Church and People of God are thrown upon sad
times: Blessings are not denied, though they be not presently granted: Some
while God is not fit to give, the time for his greater glory is not yet come:
Another while, we are not fit to receive, the time of our preparedness and
capacity is not yet come. The Lord looks to be waited on, Psalm. 27. 14.


THe Boar in the Fable being questioned, Why he stood whetting his teeth so,
when no body was near to hurt him, wisely answered, That it would then be too
late to whet them, when he was to use them, and therefore whetted them so
before danger, that he might have them ready in danger; Thus as Demosthenes
advised the Athenians, R. Senhouse Sermon. at Court.
(...), that they would not expect till evil came, but prevent it; and to deal
with dangers as Men do with Serpents and vipers, of which though happily they
never have been stung or bitten, yet seeing any of them, Venienti occurrite
morb^.
they tarry not till it sting or bite, but before harm done, forthwith seek to
kill it, to crush the Scorpion at the first appearance; not waiting and gaping
after event (the Schoolmaster of fools) as Fabius calls it; In poemat.
but ante bellum auxilium, and ante tubam tremor, to be affected with what is
not yet effected, wary before they be wounded, and prudent in seeing a danger a
far off and shunning it, Prove. 22. 3.


THat Carryer must needs be taken for a fool, Joh. Boys Postills.
who being to go a far and foul journey, will lay the heaviest pack upon the
weakest horse: So that Christian cannot be held any of the wisest, that lays
the great load of Repentance upon his faint and feeble dotage, whereas in the
chiefest strength of his youth he cannot lift it easily, but is ready to
stagger under it.

Watchfulness of life, rewarded.
THat famous Apollonius, Philostratus in vita.
held in his time for an Oracle of the World, coming very early in the morning
to Vespasians Gate, and finding him awake, conjectured thereupon, that he was
worthy to command an Empire, and said to his Companion that went along with him
(...), undoubtedly, this Man will be Emperor, because he is so watchful.
Psalm.* 63. 1.
Thus whosoever thou art, that with David, do seek God early, and with those
three women that looked after Christ very early in the morning; Mark. 16. 2.
Vigilare decet hominem, Qui vult sua tempori confer officia. Plaut.
thou that remembrest thy Creator in the days of thy youth, that art
circumspect in walking, careful of thy life and conversation, diligent in thy
way, be assured that thou shall stand before Princes, that thou have not
labored in vain, nor spent thy strength for naught, for thy judgment is with
the Lord, and thy work with thy God, who will fully reward thee.

How to behave our selves in the hearing of Gods word.
IT were a great unmannerliness for a Man that is invited at a solemn feast, I.
Downhams Guide to Godliness.
to rise before the Table is taken away, unless in case of sickness, weakness,
or some important affair: And it were an high contempt even to the most
inferior Judicature, that a man being lawfully summoned thither, would depart
without license, till the Court were risen. And shall Men dare to sneak out of
the Church before the Sermon be ended? or make haste away after the Sermon be
ended, rushing out (like Prisoners or Schoolboys, when the doors are open)
without craving a blessing of God, or attending the blessing from God by the
mouth of his Minister: If this be not a contempt of Gods word* and
Commandments, let any man judge.

Learning and Honesty to go together.
FRanciscus Petrarcha, that Scholarium Tetrarcha, a Man famous in his time, was
put upon the scrutiny of Men's judgments; In vita proefix o^^ per. per. Hieron.
Scharzafichum
Four Men undertook the task: One had no Learning, the other had a little, a
third not much, the fourth somewhat, but intricate and perplexed: (Good Man! he
was not tried by his Peers). All their opinions were sum'd up in this sentence,
Petrarcha sine literis, vir bonus, Petrarch an illiterate good Man. The King
stormed at this sentence; the Nobles fretted, his friends were vexed, and
almost all Men threatened revenge upon such saucy Judges; But Petrarch himself
applauded their judgment, saying; O utinam non vere dixerunt, etc. Vita bona
^ine doctrina gratiam habet, doctrina ^ine vita integritatem habet. Glos. in
ep. ad Philippens.
The end of all my study was to be a good Man; if Learning came in upon the by,
I did not refuse it; but now seeing by their sentence, I may without Learning
have goodness; what a comfort is this to me, and thousands more of no better
knowledge? And most true it is, that of two unhappy dis-junctions, it were
better to see an honest Man without Learning, then a Learned Man without
honesty: but quam ben^ convenient? when Learning and honesty meet together;
Where Learning is as the sowing of the ground, and virtuous and holy life is as
the Harvest; Where knowledge is but for breed, but being married to Grace,
brings forth a glorious issue, a race of Heavenly fruits, a posterity of good
Works.

Carnal Security reproved.
IT is observable of the Smiths dog, R. Senhouse Sermon. at Court, 1623.
that neither the noise of hammers by him, nor the sparks of fire flying about
him, nor some that light upon him, do any whit awaken him, but he snorts and
sleeps on securely: Saint Paul speaks of men (...), Ephesians. 4. 19. Prove. 23.
35. and 7. 22.
such as are past all ^eeling: And Solomon brings in one so insensible, that if
he were stricken, he was not sick; if beaten, he felt it not: Another going like
a fool to the stocks, not knowing of the danger that he was running into. Such
are they, that dally and fool with dangers, even spiritual dangers, the
harlotry of sin; so that whether it be, that they are besotted with carnal
security, or engrossed with covetous secularity, Matter negligentiae solet esse
securitas. Greg. in Pastore.
or deafed with the durdam of wordly vanity; Nescio quid teneros fascinat, one
thing or other so stupifying and deadning the faculties of their souls, that
they are as it were benumbed with careless security, that they have little or
no sense of any spiritual hazard at all.


ALmighty God ever required in his service the first fruits, Joh Boys Postiils.
Exodus 3. 19. and the first born, Exodus 13. 2. The firstlings are his darlings,
Genesis 4. 4. the fa^ttest lambs are fittest for his facrifice. If the King of
Babel would have young men, well favored, without blemish, and such as had
great ability, to stand before him, Dan. 1. 4. shall the God of Israel, Honor
adolescentum est, timorem Dei habere, etc. Ambros. de ^fficiis.
even the King of Glory, have none to stand in his Courts, but the halt, lame,
and blind, such as the soul of David hated, 2 Samuel 5. 18. Ye shall not see my
face, says Joseph to his brethren, except you bring your younger brother with
you, Genesis 43. 3. And how shall we behold the face of our blessed Jesus, if we
do not remember him in the days of our youth, if we dedicate to the devil our
lovly young years, and offer unto him nothing else, but the dregs of our
loathed old age.


ALexander being much taken with the witty answers of Diogenes, Lae^t. Diog. in
vita.
bad him ask what he would, and he should have it. The Philosopher demands
the least proportion of Immortality. That Is not in my gift, says Alexander.
No, quoth Diogenes? Quocunque mod^ rem. Nemo sibi perire diem, and nunquam
rediturum causatur. Bern. ad Scholares.
then why does Alexander take such pains, to conquer the World, when he cannot
assure himself of one moment to enjoy it? What the Cynick said to this great
Conqueror, may very well be retorted upon many in our age; How do many men
turmoil themselves, in the pursuit after riches, honors, and preferments, per
fas and nefas, no matter how they come by them; yet when all is done, they
cannot add one cub^te to their stature, not one minute to their live, wherein
he may take comfort in them.


THe strings of a Lute let down and remitted, J. Downhams Guide to Godliness.
do sound sweeter, when they are raised again to their full pitch: And fields
being every year sowed, become at length very barren; but being sometime laid
fallow, repay the Husbandmans patience with double increase. Vires instigat
alitque Tempestiva qui es. Stat.
So our bodies and minds, if they have no remission from labors, will make but
dull music; and if we do not sometimes let them lie fallow, and give them a
summer-tilth of seasonable recrea^ion, they will soon become barren and
fruitless.


THe intemperate man now sucks the grape of Orleance, T. Adams on ep. 2 Pet.
anon that hotter fruit of the Canaries, then he is taken with the pleasant
moisture of the Rhenish plants, sometimes the juice of the pressed apples and
pears delights him, which he warmeth with the Irish Usquebath; Been vivere loco
positum est. Senec. in epist.
and then quenches all with the liquor made of English barley. Thus, a man not
well principled in his Religion, is unstable in all his ways, he reeles like a
drunkard from place to place; he has put so much intoxicating scrupulosity
into his head, that he cannot stand on his legs: A drunkard indeed, not so much
for excess, as change of liquors; for his soul does affect variety of
Doctrines, more than the intemperate body does variety of drinks: He takes in a
draught of Religion from every Country, so much of Anabaptism, as may make him
a rebel; so much of that loving Family, as may make him an adulterer; so much
of Rome, as may make him a traitor; so much of Arrianism, as may make him a
blaspheamer: Only he will stand to nothing, as the drunkard can stand at
nothing: He knows what he has been, he knows not what he will be, nay, he
knows not what he is.

The want of Zeal in the cause of God, reproved,
IN the sacking of Troy, Homer.
Aeneas is said first to have exported (...), then (...), to have carried out
his gods, even before his dearest father. Look upon the Turks eagerness, In
Alcoran.
in defending and propagating that their Law, Non disputando, sed pugnando, as
Mahomet their Prophet has taught them: Or if Christian instances may be more
operative, look upon the Romanists, their Jesuits own expression, shall
evidence their earnestness: Campian in his Epistle to the Council of Queen
Elizabeth, Quandiu unus quispiam ^ nobis supererit, qui Tiburno vestro fruatur,
etc. says he, B. Senhouse Sermon. at Court.
That so long as there was any one Jesuit of them remaining, to enjoy Tiburn,
any one of them left for the gallows, torment, and imprisonment, they had
vowed never to desist, Si videris Ethnicum vitae temperatae, etc. Bas. Sermon. de
Zel^.
endeavoring to set up that Religion in the Nation. Shall Turks then, and
Heathens, and Papists, solicit their bad cause so earnestly, and we our good
cause, our Go^'s cause, so faintly? O let it not be said, Acri^s ad pernitiem,
quam nos ad salutem, that they should drive like Iehu, fiercely, and we like
Egyptians with their wheels off, heavily; they clamor out for their wooden
and breaden god, and we by our sluggishnesse, prejudice and betray the cause of
our great and glorious God.

How Faith alone may be said to justify.
JUdith cut off Holofernes's head alone, Chap. 13. 3. J. Boys Posti^s.
the commands all her attendants, as well great as little, to stand without
her Tent, and to go forth of her presence; but when once the deed is done, when
the Serpent's head is broken, and trodd under foot, her whole troop runs to
her, and stands about her. Thus, albeit Faith, apprehending Gods sure mercy,
for the full and free pardon of sins, is in our justification sola, yet in our
conversation it is not solitaria, but ever accompanied with cleanness of
hands, which is ready to do that which is right; and with a graciousnesse of
tongue, Bucer, Moller, Calvin, Ballarmin, Genebrard. etc.
which is ready to speak that which is true, neither deceiving our neighbor,
nor blaspheming God, by lifting up his soul unto vanity; i. e. taking his Name
in vain, as some Divines expound it.

The Commandments of God, the reasonableness of them.
THere is mention made of one, J. Cassian. de Institut. renunciant. lib. 4. c.
24.
who willingly fetched water, near two miles every day, for a whole year
together, to pour upon a dry dead stick, upon the bare command of a Superior,
when no reason could be given for so doing. How ready then should every one be,
Pater adsum, impera quid vis. Plau^.
to do God service, to be at the command of Jesus Christ, whose service is
perfect freedom, whose commands are backed with reason, and whose precepts are
attended with encouragements. Never did any man serve him in vain, never was
any man's labor, in, or for the Lord, forgotten: Nay, as he does not let
Obedience go unrequited, Luke 6. 38.
so does he not require it with a little, or measure out his rewards by inches
or scantlings, but such as shall be pressed down, shaken together, and running
over.


AN Arrow, Jos. Hall Contemplat. Wom. of Canaan.
if it be drawn up but a little way, it goes not far, but if it be pulled up to
the head, it flies strongly, and pierces deeply. Thus Prayer, if it be but
dribled forth of careless lips, it falls down at our feet; It is the strength
of ejaculation that sends it up into Heaven, and fetches down a blessing
thence. The child has escaped many a stripe, by his loud cry; and the very
unjust Judge cannot endure the widow's clamor. Heartlesse motions do but be
speak a denial, whereas fervent suits offer a sacred violence both to Earth
and Heaven. It is not the Arithmetic of our prayers, how many they are; nor
the Rhetoric of our prayers, how eloquent they be; nor the Geometry of our
prayers, how long they be; nor the Music of our prayers, the sweetness of our
voice; nor the Logic of our prayers, and the method of them; but the Divinity
of our prayers, which God so much affects: He looks not for any James, with
horny knees, through assiduity of prayer; nor for any Bartholomew, Non ch^rdis
^usica, sed c^r.
with a century of prayers for the Morning, and as many for the Evening; but
St. Paul's frequency of praying, with f^rvency of spirit; that is it which
avails much, Iam. 5. 16.


THere is a true story of a rich oppressor, J. de Wann Ser. deTempore.
who had stored up a great mass of wealth for his only son: This man falling
into sickness, and thereby into some remorse, called his son to him, and told
him, how abundantly he had provided for him; withal asking him, whether he did
truly and really love him. The son answered, That nature (besides his paternall
indulgence) bound him to that. The father being now in his sick bed, further
puts him to it; How he would express his love to him. The son answered and
said, In any thing that he should command him. Hereupon his father charge
him, to hold his finger in the burning can^le, but so long as he could say one
Pater noster, without removing it. The son attempted it, Quocunque modo^em.
but could not endure it. Yet, says his father, to get thee wealth, and a
large estate upon Earth, I have hazarded my soul to Hell; for the vvelfare of
thy body, I have ventured my soul: Thou can not suffer the burning of a
finger for me, I must burn body and soul for thy sake; thy pain is but for a
minute, mine must be unquenchable fire, even torments for ever. By this
consideration, being melted into repentance, he re^^ored all the gains of his
injustice, made the poor partakers of his riches, abandoned all worldliness,
and was recovered both in soul and body to the Lord. As this man has many
followers in his base avarice, so it were to be wished of God, Mal^ parta
mal^ dilabunt^r.
that he had some in his gracious repentance. Little do gripulous fathers
think, that what was forty years a gathering, should be spent in a few days
revelling. And so it comes to pass, (as by daily experience may be seen) that
when men are over careful to provide for their own, by taking away another
man's, vix gaudet tertius haeres; He that buies a Patrimony for his child, with
the loss of his own soul, has but a dear purchase, a very hard bargain.


MEmorable is that christian resolution of Martin Luther, Joh. Sleidan Com.
lib. 3.
that he would enter into the City of Worms in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
though there were as many devils, In epist.
as tiles to cover the houses. And that of Calvin, Ne december quidem maria, etc.
That it would not grieve him to sail over ten seas, about an uniform draught
for Religion. And the blessed Apostle was not only ready to be bound, but to
die also, Act. 21. 13.
for the Name of the Lord Jesus. And thus must ever good Christian do, be
zealous in the cause of God, contend for the truth of his Word, Phil^. Jud. de
(...) contemplat.
spare no cost, leave no stone unmoved. Ubi de Religione, ibi quoque de vita
agitur, holding even their very lives to hold upon Religion, serving God with
all their might, and, as is commanded, ready to run through fire and water,
for their holy profession.

Christ to be received into our hearts by Faith.
IN the Gospels history we find, Joh. Boys Postills.
that Christ had a fourfold entertainment amongst the sons of men; some
received him into house, not into heart, as Simon the Pharisee, Luke 7. 44.
who gave him no kiss, nor water to his feet; some into heart, but not into
house, Matthew. 8. 34.
as the graceless swinish Gergesites; some both into house and heart, Joh. 11.
15.
as Lazarus, Mary, Martha. And thus let every good Christian do, endeavor that
Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.
that their bodies may be fit Temples of his holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
that now in this life, whilst Christ stands at the door of their hearts,
knocking for admission, they would lift up the latch of their souls, and let
him in. For if ever they expect to enter into the gates of the City of God
hereafter, they must open their hearts, the gates of their own City, to him
here in this world.

Sermon not done, till practiced.
IT is reported of a good man, Ph. Goodwin Evang. com.
that coming from a public Lecture, and being asked by one, whether the
Sermon were ended, made this answer, fetching a deep sigh, Ah! it is said, but
not done. And to speak truth, the Sermon cannot be said to be done, till it be
practiced: But herein, the Lord be merciful to most of us, Audire, est
obedire. Isidor.
we are apt to think, that when a Sacrament day is over, all the Sacrament
duties are over too; when the discourse from the Pulpit is finished, the Sermon
is finished; as if when the Ordinance were at an end, there were an end of the
Ordinance, and of us with the Ordinance also.

Christ, the poor man's Object, as well as the rich man's.
A Low man, Jos. Hall Contemplat.
if his eye be clear, may look as high, (though not so far) as the tallest; the
least Pigmee may from the lowest valley, see the Sun or Stars as fully, as a
Giant upon the highest Mountain. He that stands by, may see as far into the
millstone, Zacheus.
as he that picks it. Christ is now in Heaven, it is not the smalnesse of our
person, nor the meannesse of our condition, can let us from beholding him; the
soul has no stature, neither is Heaven to be had with reaching: If God be but
pleased to clear the eyes of our faith, we shall be high enough to behold him.

Ministers to be encouraged and protected against the plots of wicked men, and
why so?
PHilip of Macedon besieging Athens, Plutarch in vita Demosthenis.
sent Legates to the City, conditioning with them, that if they would deliver
into his hands ten of their Orators, such as he should choose, whom he
pretended to be the disturbers of the Common weal, he would raise his siege,
and be at peace with them. Justinus ex Trogo.
But Demosthenes smelt out his plot, and with the consent of the Athenians,
returned him this apologeticall answer: The Woolvs came to treat of a league
with the Shepherds, and told them thus; All the feud and discord betwixt you
and us, arises from a certain generation of Dogs, which you maintain against
us, deliver up those dogs, and we will be good friends with you. The dogs were
delivered up, the Peace was concluded, the shepherds (as they thought) secure.
But oh the woeful massacre that was presently made amongst the poor Lambs, they
were all devoured, the shepherds undone, and all by parting with their dogs.
Thus, if the Popish or the Peevish party, could but once get the Ministers of
the Gospel to hold their peace, or procure them to be muzzled by Authority, or
to be delivered over to their woolvish cruelty, vvo were it to the souls of
the poor people; error would then play Rex, darkness triumph, hell make
play-day, truth would languish, and all goodness fall flat to the earth: As
little as they are now regarded, men would then miss them, and wish for
them, and be glad to protect them, if they had them.


PEter Waldo, Flac. Illiric. Cat. Test. verit.
a rich Merchant of Lions in France, being invited to a great supper, where one
of the company fell suddenly dead at the table, he was so taken with the
sight, that he forsook his Calling, and fell to study the Scripture, trading
for the Pearl of the Gospel, whereby he became an excellent Preacher, and the
first founder of those ancient Christians, called Such as lately suffered in
Savoy, Anno 1655.
Waldenses. Such is the benefit that comes by the meditation of death. Let
but a man behold the bones of the dead, and make a Christian use thereof, he
must needs fall into a patheticall meditation within himself; as thus, Behold
these legs, that have made so many journeys; this head, J. Potter at Fun. of L.
Seamour.
which is the receptacle of wisdom, and remembereth many things, must shortly
be, as this bare skull, and dry bones are. I will therefore betimes bid
worldly things adieu, betake my self to repentance, and newness of life, and
spend the rest of my days in the service of my God, and thoughts of my
dissolution. Away then with that sad, and too too usual expression, Ipse jubet
mortis te meminisse Deus. Chilo per Ausonium.
I thought as a little of it, as of my dying day: Let Otho think them cowards
that think on death, but let all good men think and meditate on death, what it
is unto all men by nature, what unto good men, what unto bad; and great will be
the comfort arising thereupon.


IT is reported of Hearts, S. Augustine in Psalm. 41.
that being to travail far by herds on the land, or else to pass over some
great water, then they go behind one another; and when the foremost is weary,
then he rests his weary head upon the hindmost; and so mutually bearing one
another burden, Plin. hist. not. lib. 8. cap. 32.
they come happily to the place where they would be. Thus, as the souls of holy
men long and thirst after God, with whom is the well of life, Psalm. 42. 1.
like as the Hearts desire the waterbrooks, let them as Deer support the sick
head, and heavy heart of one another, bear up a Brother which is falling,
Concors sic praestat uterque. Alciati Emblem.
rear up a Brother which is fallen, strengthening one another in the way of this
earthly pilgrimage, until they all rest upon Gods holy mountain, where they
shall be satisfied with the pleasures of his house, Psalm. 36. 8.
drinking out of the comforts thereof, as out of a River.


ST. Chrysostom suffering under the Empress Eudoxia, Epist. 125. ad. Cyriac.
episcop.
tells his friend Cyriacus, how he armed himself before hand, (...), etc. I
thought, Psalm. 24. 1.
Will she banish me? The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Take
away my goods? Job. 1. 21.
Naked came I into the world, and naked must I return. Will she stone me? I
remembered Stephen. Act. 7. 59.
Behead me? Mark 6. 24.
John Baptist came into my mind, etc. Thus it should be with every one that
intends to live and die comfortably, they must (as we say) lay up something for
a rainy day, they must stock themselves with graces, store up promises, and
furnish themselves with experiences of Gods loving kindness to others, and
themselves too, that so when the evil day comes, they may have much good
coming thereby.

Man since the fall of Adam, subject to the Creatures.
ACteon in the Fable, Ovid. Met. l. 2.
goes abroad a hunting, but unhappily lights upon Diana in the midst of his
game, as she was naked bathing her self in a fountain; The Goddess is angry,
and transforms him into the shape of a Heart, the dogs not knowing their Master,
being thus changed, hunt him down, and tear him all in pieces. Thus Man, before
his fall, was Gods Vicegerent over all his Creatures, they did homage and
fealty unto him, as their liege Lord and Sovereign, but since Satan has
obliterated the Image of God, wherein he was first created; and drawn his own
in the room; Hieron. Drexelii Zodaicus.
the Creatures seeing him thus altered, one snaps, another snarls at him; nay
the weakest of all the Creatures are able to undo him, as the spider to poison
him, and the (...) to choke him; But for our comfort, we may recover our selves
by the second Adam, Christ Jesus, get but an interest in him, and then that
Lion which tore the Prophet in pieces, shall do us no more hurt, than he did
Daniel when he had him in his Den; 1 King. 13. 24.
and those Dogs which eat up Iesabell, Dan. 6. 10.
shall lick up our sores, as they did those of Lazarus; no Creature shall have
power to hurt us without Gods especial dispensation.

To trust in God only.
THe Forresters knowing that the Elephant uses to sleep leaning against some
Tree, T. Adams Seron ep. 2. Pet.
are wont to cut the likeliest Tree with a Saw so deep, that the unsuspecting
beast thinking to rest upon it, falls down with it, and so is surprised by
them: Thus they that put their trust in Man, or in any other Creature, shall
soon find him hewn down by Death, and then there lies all their hope in the
dust: It is ill sticking to any thing but God, all other props will fail us: we
are sheep apt to wander; we shall not, if we keep to our shepherd: There Is no
trust but in God only, Psalm. 33. 18.

Insensibility of Death, reproved.
IN a good Pasture where many good Oxen are, the Butcher comes and fetches
away one and kills it; Alphons. ab Avenden. Com. in Matthew. c. 6.
next day he fetches away another, and kills that too: Now those which he
leaves behind, feed and fat themselves, till they are driven to the slaughter,
not considering what is become of their fellows, or what shall become of
themselves: So when Death coming amongst a multitude of Men, here taking one,
and there another, we pamper up our selves till he overtake us also; We live as
though like Adam and Abel, we never saw a Man dye before us, whereas every
Churchyard, every age, every sickness should be a Preacher of Mortality unto
us.

Men to bear with one another Infirmities.
A Blind Man, and a lame Man (as it is in the Fable) meeting upon the way; the
lame Man said, Aesop^s in fabula de caeco and claudo.
If thou will be feet unto me, then I will be eyes unto thee; so the blind Man
carrying the lame, and the lame guiding the bind, both arrived at their
journies end in a good hour: Thus it is that Men, especially Christian men,
must bear with one another, yea bear and forbear; If a brother in his unadvised
anger use thee roughly, rudely, bear with him, and thou bear his burden; If
thou be too silent in thy conversation, and thy brother on the contrary too
full of prattle, bear thou with his loquacity, Primasius. Anselm. in Gal. 6. 2.
that he may bear thy pertinacy. A Magistrate in the Commonwealth, and a
Master in his Family, must have patience to see many things, and not to see
them; hence is that Motto of Frederick the first, Qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit imperare, Reusneri Symbola.
may be digested easily with a little salt; For when small faults are winked at
in time and place wisely, Sovereign and Subject, Master and Man, one and
another according to that Apostolical injunction, may be very well said to bear
one another burden, Gal. 6. 2.


General Norris, Tho Fullers Sermon. at St. Clem.. Land. 1650.
one of the Ancients of that Noble Family, having (as he thought) received a
slight wound in the Wars of Ireland, neglected the same, presuming belike,
that the balsome of his own body, without calling in for those other
Auxiliaries of Art, would have wrought the cure; but so it was, that his arm
gangrened, and both arm and life were lost together: Thus it was with him in
the body natural, and thus it will be too in the body spiritual; the least of
Sin therefore is to be avoided, the least growth of sin to be prevented, the
Cockatrice must be crushed in the egg, Principiis obsta.
else it will soon become a Serpent; the very thought of sin, if not thought
on, will break out into Action, Action into custom, custom into habit, and
then actum est de Corpore and Anima, both body and soul are ^recoverably l^st
to all Eternity.


IT came so to pass, S. Fawcers Ser. at S. Alphage, Land.
when Men began to multiply upon the face of the Earth, and daughters were born
unto them, That the Sons of God (Men well qualified) saw the daughters of men,
(very lewd ones) that they were fair (that is all they aimed at) and therefore
they took them wives (hand-over head) of all which they chose; but being not of
Gods providing, they had better been without them, Genesis 6. Thus when Men send
out lusts to seek them wives, and unclean spirits to woo for them; Sic dos non
uxor amatur. Juvenal. Sayr. 6.
When Men send out Ambition to make their houses great, and Covetousness to
join house to house, and land to land; When Men send out flattery, lying and
deceiptfull speeches, and do not send out Prayers and loud cries unto Almighty
God, to direct them in their choice, they may thank themselves, if they meet
with wives, but not such meet helps as God otherwi^e intended for them-


QUeen Ann Bullen, S. R. Baker Collect. of hist. of Engl.
the Mother of the blessed Q. Elizabeth, when she was to be beheaded in the
Tower, thus remembered her thanks to the King; From a private Gentlewoman, he
made me a Marquess, from a Marquess a Queen, and now he has left no higher
degree of earthly honor for me, he has made me a Martyr: Here was Patience in
the highest degree, such a Patience as had its perfect work, and came up to its
full growth; Gaudet patientia duris. Lucan.
when punishment becomes preferment; when for Christ's sake and his Gospels,
persecution shall be held an honor, and misery a dignity, ipsamque crucem,
coronam, and the very Cross a Crown; This is the Patience of the Saints.


JUstin Martyr confesses, Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. cap. 8.
that he left Philosophy, and became a Christian Scholar, through the
admiration that he had to behold the innocent and godly lives of the Primitive
Christians, hearing them pray unto God, for the good and welfare of those, Qui
sanctum v^rum imitatur, etc. Isid. de sum. bono. I. 1. cop. 11.
who to the utmost of their power, endeavored and wrought their ruin. Thus
forcible, thus effectual, thus prevalent is the Example an holy life; When Men
and Women live so chastely, walk so circumspectly, and order themselves so
holily, so meekly, so blamelesly, that Men that are even strangers to a godly
life, are strongly wrought upon, 1 Pet. 2.
and very much affected with, and won to Christ by their religious and gracious
conversation.

Faults in manners, and Errors in Doctrine, to be distinguished in the matter
of Reproof.
IT is observable, P. Mart. lo. com. p. 1. c. 17.
that Almighty God, has in old time dispensed with some precepts of the second
Table concerning our duty to Men, as in bidding Abraham to kill his Son Isaac,
Genesis 23. 2.
contrary to the sixth Commandment; and in suffering the Fathers to have many
Concubines, contrary to the seventh Commandment; and in advising the Children
of Israel to rob the wicked Egyptians, Exodus 2.
of their Jewels, contrary to the eighth Commandment: But he who cannot deny
himself, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 2. 13. never dispensed with any Precept
of the first Table, concerning his own true honor, worship, and holiness:
Thus it is that there must be a difference put betwixt Faults in manners, M.
Lutheri lo. com. tit. de Zelo.
and Errors in doctrine; for principles of faith are like a Mathematical
point, which admits of neither ademption, nor addition; Prove. 9. 11.
to be patient in suffering a private wrong, only concerning our own Persons
is commendable, Discamus exexemplo Christi etc. S. Chrysostom. in Mat.
yea Noble. But when once the quarrel is made Gods and the Churches, injurias
Dei dissimulare nimis est impium, it is too great impiety for any man to bear:
In such a case the Prophet Eliah called for fire from Heaven upon his Enemies.
2 King. 1.
In such a case St. Paul in the sight of the whole Church of Antiochia, Gal. 2.
11.
withstood Peter to his face: In such a case (God assisting me says Luther) I
am and ever shall be stout and stern; In vita ejus per Anonym.
herein I take upon me this title, Cedo nulli, Answ. to Hardings pref.
I give place to none; And in such a case renowned Jewel, sweetly to the same
purpose, I deny my learning, I deny my Bishopwrick, I deny my self, only the
faith of Christ, and truth of God I cannot deny; with this faith, and for this
faith, I trust I shall end my days.

Judgement-day, the terrors of it to the wicked.
IT is reported of Zisca, Hist. persec. Eccles. Bohem. Dubravius. lib. 36.
that valiant Captain of the Bohemians, that he commanded, that after his
decease, his skin should be flead from his body to make a drum of it, which
they should be sure to use, when they went out to battle, affirming that as
soon as the Hongarians, or any other of their enemies should come within the
sound of that Drum, they would never be able to abide it: Now if Zisca's Drum,
and the beating thereof was so terrible to the poor Hongarians, how fearful
shall the sounding of the last Trumpet be to the wicked, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels to judge the quick and
the dead? Saul was astonished, when he heard Jesus of Nazareth but calling unto
him. Act. 22. 8.
Herod was affrighted, when he thought that John Baptist was risen again. Mark.
16. 6.
The Carthagenians were troubled, when they saw Scipio's sepulcher: The Saxons
were terrified, Hollingsheds Chron.
when they saw Cadwallon's image; The Philistims were afraid, 1 Samuel 21. 9.
when they saw David's sword: The Israelites were appalled, when they saw Aarons
rod: Dion. lib. 44.
The Romans were dashed, Numb. 7. 10.
when they saw Caesar's bloody robe. Judah was ashamed, Genesis 38. 2.
when he saw Thamars signet and staff: Baltazar was amazed, when he saw the
handwriting on the wall: Dan. 5. 9.
And all the Enemies of God and goodness, Heu miser peccator, quo fugies, etc.
look they never so high, Anselm.
wax they never so big in this World, shall be then confounded, when they
shall see Christ appearing in judgment.


AS a King in his progress coming to some great City, Iudaei legi students
quasi candelae assistentes etc. Chrysostom. hom. 54. in Genes.
diverse of his train ride before him, and many more come after him, yet all
come to the same place; but those that are before, do not see what
entertainment is made in the way, so well as they that come behind: Thus it is
that Christ is seen more clearly under the Gospel, than under the Law; The
Patriarks, and the Israel of God, saw somewhat of Christ as they were before
him, but not one half which we see that are behind; Moses was then under a
cloud, but his face is now unveyled; It was a good observation of an acute
Preacher (now with God) then lying on his deathbed; Dr. Holdsw.
O how happy, said he, are the Peopl of this age, that see more of Christ than
ever their Predecessors did, more than the Patriarks and People of old, They
had only Moses, Psalms, and the Prophets, but we the Books of the new
Testament, setting out Christ before us.


WHen a Pagan beheld Christians receiving the blessed Sacrament, T. Adams Ser.
on ep. 2. Pet.
and observed with what reverence and devotion, they demeaned themselves in
that holy business, he was inquisitive what that action meant: It was answered
by one of them; That God having first emptied their hearts of all their Sins,
as pride, envy, Conrad. Zuingeri the atrum hum. vitae.
covetousness, contention, luxury, and the rest, did now enter into them
himself, with a purpose to dwell there. He was silent for the present; but
followed and watched them, whom he saw to be Communicants in that action, for
two days together: And perceiving some of them to fall into quarrels,
uncleanness, rapacity, and drunkenness so soon, he declared his censure of them
with this exclamation, I confess that your Religion may be good, your devotion
good, your Profession good; but sure your hospitality is stark naught, Apud
quos ne Deus quidem biduo commorari permittitur, that you will not give your
God two days lodging: Here now was a sad occasion given for the Enemies of God
so to judge of them, that seem to make profession of his holy name: This the
shame of Christians, the disparagement of Religion, when it is forced against
the nature of it, to encourage lewdness; This an abuse of the promises of
Grace, Scandalum Proximo nec in vita nec in doctrina ponendum est. Beda.
of the Covenants and pledges of Grace, which are the Sacraments, when
encouragements to evil, are derived from so merciful Indulgence: Again, it is
a dishonor done to the honor of Grace and Godliness, when from the Sermon
which forbids such a sin, we shall immediately run into the sin forbidden by
the Sermon, 2 Pet 2. 3.
and so give an unhappy occasion for weak ones to be offended.


GAlinus the Emperor, when tidings was brought him of the loss of Egypt; Well
said he, Imperator vitae per. Phil. Nepotem.
let it go, Cannot we live without the Flax and hemp of Egypt? And when he had
also lost France, two great and mighty Countries: What, said he, Cannot the
Land stand sine sagis trabeatis, Fl^^ius Vopiscus in Hist.
without those Soldiers Cassocks which France does send us? Mat. 9. 36.
This was a piece of Heathenish stupidity: But if ever it shall come to pass
(quod avertat Deus) that the Ministers of the Gospel should be driven into
corners; Esaias, 40. 1, 2.
let no good Christian make slight of it but be deeply affected, Act. 4. 36.
and affectionately taken with the loss; 1 Cor. 4. 16.
For, they are such as watch for our souls, the comforters of Sion, the Sons of
Consolation, Esaias 58. 12.
spiritual fathers, repairers of the breach, such as stand in the gap of Gods
anger, Ezekiel. 22. 30.
spiritual Physicians, Jer. 8. 22.
Romans 10. 13.
Doves which bring the Olive leaf of peace to the troubled soul, and what not?
They are sanguis mundi, when they dye or fail; a Man may justly fear the
World's a dying; they are the butteresses and pillars to uphold it from ruin
and confusion, grievous then must it needs be, and matter of great concernment,
when such are taken away.

The secure Worldlings sudden ruin.
LOok upon a weary Traveller, T. Stapleton Prompt. moral.
scorched with the heat of the Sun, how he rests himself under the shady
leaves of some fair spreading Tr^^, and there falls asleep so long, that the
Sun coming about, heats him more then formerly, so that he is ready to faint,
his head aches, and all his body is as it were, stewed even in its own sweat:
Saepe men's dum virtutis suae securitate resolvitur, insidian^e adversario etc.
Greg. in moral.
Thus it fares with the Men of this World, such as having wearied themselves in
heaping up the things thereof, lie down and sing a foolish Requiem to their
Souls, mean while the course of their life runs on, the Sun comes about, Death
overtakes them, and instead of a comfortable shade to refresh them, they may
easily perceive the fire of Hell, if God be not the more merciful, ready to
consume them.

A child of God preserved by God, though never so much slighted by the World.
THey that work in Gold or Silver, S. Fawce^s Sermon. at St. Alphage. Lon. Mundus
Dei officina. Aug.
let fall many a bit to the ground, yet they do not intend to lose it so, but
sweep the shop, and keep the very sweepings safe, so that that which they
cannot at present discover, the Finer brings to light: Thus, the World is Gods
Workhouse, many a dear child of God, suffers and falls to the ground by
banishment, imprisonment, sorrow, sickness, etc. but they must not be lost
thus, God will search the very sweepings, and cull them out of the very trash
and preserve them; Psalm. 68. 13.
What though they be slightly set by, here in this world, and lie amongst the
pots, no better accounted of-than the rubbish and refuse of the Earth? God will
find a time to make them up amongst the rest of his Jewels, Mal. 3. Ult.

True knowledge never rests on the Creature, till it center in God the Creator.
AS the Legend speaks Historically (which is only true Symbolically) of St.
Christopher, T. Adams Ser. on ep. 2 Pet. Surius in vita. Aloys. Lippoman in
vitis Fatrum.
that before he was converted to the faith, he would serve none but the
strongest; He had for his Master, a Man of great strength and puissance, but a
King subdued him; Him he forsook for that King, but finding him to be overcome
by a Neighbor, he betook himself to that other Pagan Conqueror: This
Conqueror was also tyrannized over by the Devil, to whom he was a mere
slave, doing all his base commands: This he could not endure, but entered into
service with the Devil; For awhile he admired the power of his new Master, and
what a dominion he exercised over the sons of Men, but in a short space he
found out his weakness also: so feeble and fearful was he of a piece of Wood,
he durst not pass by the Cross; but when that stood in his way, he must by all
means back again: Now the weary servant longed to know what this Cross meant,
that he might find out a more potent Lord; It was told him, that Christ was the
Lord of that Ensign, Haec tota scientia hominis, scire, q^ia ipse nibil est,
etc. Aug. super. Psalm. 70.
and that the Cross was his Banner; Thither then he flies, and there he found
out a most mighty, yea an Almighty Master. So true knowledge never rests on the
Creature, till it center in the Creator, aims at none but the highest, and
climbs from strength to strength, from height to height, till it appear before
God in Zion; higher than Riches in their Treasury, then Princes on their
Thrones, then stars in the Firmament, fetching all her light and comfort from
God in Christ Jesus.


BErnardinus Senensis, Tom. 2. in Dom. 2. Quadragesimal. Sermon. 17.
a devout man, tells of a stripling in Catalonia, being eighteen years of age,
that having been disobedient to his parents, fell to robbing; and being hanged
on the Tree, and there remaining, for a spectacle to disobedient children; on
the next morning, a formal beard and gray hairs appeared on him, as if he had
been much struck in years; which the people hearing of, and wondering at the
suddenness of the change, Cunctis slat terminus ae^i.
urging how young he was at his death: A grave reverend Father of the Church
being then present, said, That he should have lived to have been so old, Silius.
as he then appeared, had he not been disobedient. The devout man (it is
probable) may be out in the story, but the other was in at the application:
For, Stat sua cuique dies, every man's days are determined, the number of his
months is with God, Job 1^. 15.
he has appointed him his bounds, that he cannot pass; Psalm. 39. 4.
there is a measure of his days, in respect of Gods prescience and providence:
But in respect of the course of nature, the thread of life which might have
been lengthned, 1 Samuel 3. 33.
is cut off by Gods command for sin, as in the Family of Eli, and the People of
the Amorites, Genesis 15. 16.
not living half their days, Psalm. 55. 23.


HE that intends to have his picture drawn to the life, T. Stapleton Prompt.
moral.
must not wrest and writhe his body this way and that way, but sit still, with
a composed settled countenance, having his eye fully set upon the Painter;
otherwise the resemblance will be false, and the work much misshapen. So, he
that would have the image of Christ truly stamped on his soul, must eye Christ,
as he is the perfection of all graces; do as the Prophet did by the Shunamites
child, 2 King. 4. 34.
lay his mouth to his mouth, his eyes to his eyes, his hands to his hands; say
as he said, do as he did, Sic oculos, sic ille manus; Virgilius in lib. 2.
Aeneid.
propose him as a pattern in all things imitable: Otherwise, if he gaze upon
the vanity of the creature, and spread his thoughts at large upon earthly
things, there will be much of Mammon, but little or no likeness of Christ
appearing upon his soul.


WHat a deal of do did the Pharisees make with the poor man, S. Faw^et Ser. at
S. Alphage Land. 2644.
that was born blind? Ioh. 9. first, his neighbors, they begin with him, How
were thine eyes opened? verse. 10. then the Pharisees asked him, How he had
received his sight? verse. Joh. 9.
15. The poor ^an tells them, That one called Jesus made clay, and anointed
his eyes, etc. After many questions, they bid him give God the praise, for they
knew that that man Jesus was a sinner, verse. 24. Well, (says the poor man)
whether he be a sinner or not, that is more then I know; but so much I know for
certain, that whereas I was blind, now I see: It mattered not with him, what
the man was that cured him, nor the place where, nor the time when; this he
took notice of, that he was blind, but now he did see. So the question is not,
When, or, How any man is called of God; but the main will be, Whether he is yet
called. A woman with child, if the babe stir in her womb, she takes no thought,
when it was that the child first quickened, but is glad that it is quickened. If
a man can but see marks and signs of salvation within him, and perceive that
the blessed Spirit of God, has wrought wonderfully on his soul, he may
certainly conclude, that he is called, let the time, place, and manner be never
so uncertain.

Without Faith, impossible to please God.
OF all the Virgins presented to Ahasuerus, T. Adams Expo^^t. on ep. 2 Pet.
none was so pleasing as Hester, Let the maiden that pleases the King be
Queen, in stead of Vashtai. When that Decree was published, what strife, what
emulation (may we think) was amongst the Persian Damosells, Hest. 2. 4.
that either were, or thought themselves fair? every one hoped to be a Queen.
But so incomparable was the beauty of that Iewesse, that she was not only
taken into the Persian Court, as one of the selected virgins, but had the most
honorable place in all the Seraglio allotted unto her: The other virgins pass
their probation unregarded: When H^sters turn came, though she brought the same
face and demeanor, Sine fide nemo ad filiorum Dei numerum pervenire potest,
etc. Aug. de fide ad Petrum.
that Nature had cast upon her, no eye saw her without admiration; the King was
so delighted with her beauty, that contemning all the other vulgar forms, his
choice was fully fixed upon her. Thus, Faith is that Hester, to which God holds
out his golden Scepter: He is pleased with all graces, hot zeal, and cool
patience please him; cheerful thankfulness, and weeping repentance please
him; charity in the height, and humility in the dust please him: Heb. 11. 6.
but none of them are welcome to him, without faith in Christ Jesus.

All alike in Death.
AS Trees, Alphons. ab Avendano. Moralitat. in cap. 5. S Matthew.
while they grow, are apparently known by their fruits, by their several
kinds, and so are commonly called by their names; but when once the Ax comes
amongst them, that they be felled, fired, and consumed, none can distinguish of
their ashes. So when men, whilst they live, do very much differ in office,
title, Aeqvo pede p^^sat pauperum tabernas, etc. Horat.
place, and power; but when they be dead, and resolved into cinders, their dust
admits of no separation, it can by no means be divided: As there is the like
ashes of the Shrub and the Cedar, so the like dust of the King and the Beggar.
Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. Death is the head of the Levelling party, makes
all men alike, the mightiest have no more privilege, than the meanest.

Ingratitude reproved.
AN empty bucket that is let down into a well, T. Stapleton Prompt morale.
does, as it were, open its mouth, to receive the water; but being drawn up
full, shows his bottom only to the well that gave it: The sea receives her
moisture from Heaven, sweet and pleasant, but returns it salt and brackish: The
clouds by the power of the Sunbeams, are exhaled from the earth; Adverte
homoquia limus es and non fis superbus, etc. Beza.
but being once mounted, they darken that air, and obscure that Sun that
raised them: The frozen Snake in the Fable, stingeth him that refreshed it.
Thus it is with all unthankful men, men ungrateful to God; he ladeth them
daily with benefits and blessings, Psalm. 68. 19.
and they lade him with sins and trespasses. God would have them to be
righteous, Eccles. 7. 29.
but they will not part with their inventions: So ungrateful, so swinish are
they, that having acorns to feed on, mercies to encourage them, promises to
support them, they will not so much as look up to the Tree, not be thankful to
God, that has so richly provided for them.

Gods fundamental love of Election, and actual love of Adoption, how
distinguished.
IT so falls out sometimes, S. Fawcet Ser. at S. Alphage Land. 1645.
that a great person of quality, has a purpose to marry a poor kitchin-maid;
he provides her cloths and all things suitable for such a state: She (poor
wretch) little dreams of any such matter, is in the kitchen about her drudgery,
and it cannot be said, but that he loves her still: Here now is an intentionall
love, a virtuall and fundamental affection; but there will be another manner
of love, when she comes to be his wife, and lie in his bosom. Thus wretched
sinful Man, he is under wrath, a very bond-slave of Satan, in a sad condition
by nature, has nothing in him that may deserve love; yet God intending to
adopt him for his son, looks after him, and treasures him up in Christ Jesus.
The poor sinner all this while knows little of it, he is not justified,
because he is not called; Romans 8.
but when God shall be pleased to manifest himself, by the operation of his
blessed Spirit, the love of Election, which was virtuall and fundamental from
all Eternity, will break out, and he shall be actually adopted, a child of God,
and heir of eternal salvation.


THe root of a tree is a ragged and a jagged thing, T. Adams Exposit. on ep. 2
Pet.
no shape, no proportion, no comeliness in it, and therefore keeps it self in
the earth, as unwilling to be seen; yet all the beauty that is in the tree, the
straightness of the bulk and body, the spreading fairness of the branches,
the glory of the leaves and flowers, the commodity of the fruits, proceed from
the root, by that the whole subsisteth. So Faith seems to be but a sorry
grace, a virtue of no regard: Devotion is acceptable, for it honors God; Fides
radix est omnium virtutum, and quod sup^r hoc fundamentum, etc. Ambros. de Cain
and Abel.
Charity is noble, for it does good to men; Holiness is the Image of Heaven,
therefore beauteous; Thankfulness is the tune of Angels, therefore melodious.
But, ad quid fides? what is faith good for? Yes, it is good for every good
purpose, the foundation and root of all graces: All the prayers made by
Devotion, all the good works done by Charity, all the actual expressions of
Holiness, all the praises founded forth by Thankfulness, come from the root
of Faith, that is the life of them all. Faith does animate Works, as the body
lives by the soul. Doubtless faith has saved some without works, but it was
never read, that works saved any without faith.


THere is mention made of a sort of people, Coelius Rho dogin. Var. elect
called Gastromantae, such as speak out of their belly, so hollow, that a
stander by would think, that some body else spoke, in the next room unto them.
Just such are those byas'd Ministers, the trencher Chaplains of our days, that
when they speak of sin, (especially in great ones) Dan. Featly Ser. at S. Paul's
Land. 1621.
they may be said to speak out of their bellies, not out of their hearts; a
dinner, or a great parishioner, or a good Dame, will make them shoot the
reprehension of sin, like pellets through a Trunk, with no more strength, than
will kill a sparrow. Hence is it, that there are so many no-sins, so many
distinctions of sins, that with a little of Iesabels paint, Adams weakness, in
regard of his wife, is called tenderness; Abraham's lie, equivocation; Lots
incest and adultery, good nature; Noah's drunkenness, the weakness of age; Aaron
and Solomon's idolatry, policy; oppression, justice; treason, religion; faction,
faith, madness, zeal; pride, handsomeness; and covetousness, good husbandry:
whereas sin should be set out in his right colors, and the sinner pointed out,
as Nathan did David, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7.


IF a man should at his own proper cost and charges, T. Stapleton Prompt. moral.
build a fair Bridge, upon some River, in a convenient place thereof, leading
the ready way to some City or Market Town; can it be thought amiss, if he
should demand a small kind of tribute or pontage, for horse or man, that should
pass over, whether it were to keep the Bridge in repair, that so posterity
might have the benefit thereof; or for the acknowledgment of so great a
benefit, or for the satisfaction of the builder? Surely it could not. Thus,
Christ Jesus, our blessed Savior and Redeemer, has with the price his own
most precious blood, built a bridge of mercy to pass over, and is himself
become a new and living way for all repentant sinners to walk in, there being
no other way, Dis^e ad singula dona gratias agere. Bern. super Cantic^.
no other bridge for passage into Heaven; It is but just then, that something
should be done on our parts, not that he has any need, but because he looks
for it; some tribute, something by way of acknowledgement, something as a
Toll-penny for the relief of his poor distressed Members, with this assurance,
That Eleemosyna, Viaticum in Mundo, thesaurus in Caelo, What we lay out in this
world by way of Charity, shall be doubled in the next by way of Retribution.

Regeneration, the necessity thereof.
ONe bargained with a Painter, to paint him a Horse running as it were in a
full careere; R. Skinners Sermon. at St. Greg. Lo. 1623
The Painter having done his work, presents it with the heels upward; Why, said
the Man, I bespake the Picture of a running Horse, but thou have brought me a
horse kicking up his heels; O but (quoth the Painter) turn the frame, set the
picture right, and then you shall find it to be a running horse, such an one as
you bespake. Such is every son of Man in his natural condition, his head and
his heart is all downward, grovelling on the Earth, whilst his heels are kicking
at Heaven; but let the Table be once turned, let but God come into his Soul by
the operation of his blessed spirit, then there will be a renewing of the mind,
then that Tongue which ere-while was set on fire in Hell, -- Sunt res non
tempora re rum Observanda tibi. Mant.
will become a Trumpet of Gods glory; those hands which were once reached out to
do wickedly, will now work that which is honest; those feet which were swift to
shed blood, will now walk in the paths of peace; instead of an itching ear,
there will be an attentive ear; instead of a wanton eye, there will be a
covenanting eye not to look upon a strange woman; there will be a new will, new
affections, new qualities, a new disposition, all new.

A man of Learning speaks little.
When a Rabbi, little learned, and less modest, usurped all the discourse at
Table; T. Adam^ e^posit. on ep. 2 Pet.
one much admiring him, asked his friend in private, Whether he did not take
such a Man for a great Scholar: to whom he plainly answered, For ought I know,
he may be learned, but I never heard Learning make such a noise. So when a
modest Man gave thanks to God with a low and submiss voice, an impudent
critical Gallant found fault with him, that he said Grace no louder: but he
gave him a bitter reply, Make me but a fool, and I shall speak as loud as you,
but that will mar the Grace quite. Vir, lequitur qui pauca, sapit.
Thus it is that the Sun shows least, when it is at the highest; that deep
waters run most silent; But what a murmur and bubling, yea sometimes what a
roaring do they make in the shallows? Empty Vessels make the greatest sound,
but the full ones give a soft answer; Profound knowledge says little; and Men
by their unseasonable noise are known to be none of the wisest, whereas a Man
of parts and learning says little.

Death, the end of all.
MAn is, as it were, a Book, his birth is the Title Page, his Baptism the
Epistle Dedicatory; Charles Fitz-Geffery Sermon. at a Fun. 1622.
his groans and crying, the Epistle to the Reader; his Infancy and Childhood,
the Argument or Content of the whole ensuing Treatises; his life and actions
are the subject; his sins and errors, the faults escaped; his Repentance,
the Correction; As for the Volums, some are in folio, some in quarto, some in
Octavo, etc. some are fairer bound, some plainer; some have piety and
godliness, for their subject; othersome (and they too many) mere Romanees,
Pamphlets of wantonness and folly; Mors utima linea rerum est. Horat. 1. ep. 16
Eccles. 7. 2.
but in the last page of every one, there stands a word which is, Finis, and
this is the last word in every Book: Such is the life of Man, some longer, some
shorter, some stronger, some weaker, some fairer, some coorser, some holy, some
profane; but Death comes in like Finis at the last, and closes up all; for
that is the end of all.

incorrigible Sinners stupidity.
IT is reported of Silkworms, Th. Stapleton. Prompt. morale. Ulys. Aldrovandus
Hist. de Insectis. l. 2.
that at the noise of Thunder, they are oft-times even terrified unto death,
insomuch that they which keep them, use to beat a drum amongst them, that they
being accustomed to the softer noise of the drum, may not be daunted with
louder claps* of Thunder. Thus it is with incorrigible sinners of all sorts,
they are so affected with the whisperings of wordly pleasures, so taken up with
the jingling noise of Riches, so delighted with the empty sound of popular
applause, Consuetudo pec candi tollit ^ensum peccati. Isidor.
and secular preferments; so sottish and besotted are they, that they are not
sensible of Gods anger against them, the very custom of sin has taken away
the sense of sin; that they do not so much as hear that which all the world
besides hears with trembling and amazement, the dreadful voice of Gods
wrathful and everlasting displeasure.

Regeneration the only work of Gods spirit.
IT is said of the Bear, Ulys. Aldrovan. lib. de Quadruped. Gesnerus.
that of all Creatures she brings the most ugly and misshapen whelps, but by
licking of them, she brings them to a better form, yet it is a Bear still. Thus
all of us are ugly and deformed in our inward man: It Is true, good breeding,
learning, living in good Neighborhood, may lick us fair, and put us into a
better shape, but shall never. change our nature, without the operation of the
blessed Spirit: A Man may be able to discourse of the great mysteries of
Salvation, yet not be changed; Nulla in discen^ do more est, ubi Spiritus.
doctor adest. Beda. hom. 9. in Luc.
may repeat Sermons, yet not renewed; partake of the Ordinances, yet not
regenerated; not any of these, nor any of all these put together, will stand in
stead till it has pleased God to square them, and fit them, and sanctify them
unto us by the blessed assistance of his holy Spirit.

Scripture-comforts, the only true comforts.
IT is storyed of an ancient and Reverend Rabbi, T. Adams Exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
who that he might by some demonstration win the People to look after
Scripture-knowledge, put himself into the habit of a Mountebank, or traveling
Aqua-vitae man; and in the Marketplace made Proclamation of a sovereign
Cordial, or Water of life that he had to sell: Diverse call him in, and desire
him to show it; Nihil in hac vita dulcius sentitur, nihil avidius sumitur etc.
Hug. lib. de anim.
whereupon ^he opens the Bible, and directs them to several places of comfort
in it. And to say truth, there is the greatest comfort to be had, being the
word of the everliving God; The waters of life, which are to be thirsted after,
whereby we may learn to live holy, and dye happy.

deaths of friends and others, not be slighted.
THe Frogs, in the Fable, desire a King; Jupiter casts a stock amongst them
which at the first fall made such a plunge in the water, Aesopus.
that with the dashing thereof, they were all affrighted, and ran into their
holes; but seeing no further harm to ensue, they came forth, took courage,
leapt on it, and made themselves sport with that which was first their fear,
Charles Fitz-Geffery Sermon. at a Fun. Lon. 1622.
till at length Jupiter sent a Stork among them, and he devoured them all. Thus
it is that we make the death of others, but as a Stock that somewhat at first^
affects us, but we soon ^orget it, until the St^rk come, and we our selves
become a miserable prey. Do they who close the eyes, and cover the faces of
their deceased friends, consider that their eyes must be so closed, their faces
thus covered? Or they who shroud the Coarse, remember that they themselves must
be so shrouded? Miser hom^, quare omni ^ora te non disponis? etc. Bern. in Sermon.
Or they who ring the knell, consider that shortly the bells must go to the
same tune for them? Or they that make the grave, even while they are in it,
remember that shortly they must inhabit such a narrow house as they are now a
building? Peradventure they do a little, but it takes no deep impression in
them.

Prayers to be made unto God in Christ's name.
JOseph gives strict command unto his brethren, Th. Stapleton Prompt. morale.
Genesis 43.
that if ever they looked for him to do them any good, or to see his face with
comfort, they should be sure to bring the lad Benjamin their brother along with
them. Thus if ever we expect any comfortable return of our Prayers, we must be
sure to bring our elder Brother Christ Jesus in our hearts by faith, and to put
up all our requests in his Name, They of old called upon God, using the names
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, three of Gods friends. Genesis 48.
Afterward, they entreated God for his servant David's sake: Others drew up
Arguments to move God, Esaias 3^.
drawn from the Creation of the World: and from his loving kindness. Job 10.
These were very good ways then, and very good to engage the great God of
Heaven to us; Psalm. 79.
But unto us is showed a more excellent way, Esaias 63.
by how much the appellation of an only begotten Son exceeds that of friend
and servant; ler. 31.
and the benefit of Redemption excells that of creation and favor: 1 Cor. 13.
21.
Dulce nomen Christi, Ioh. 14.
O the sweet name Jesus Christ! no man ever asked any thing of God truly in
that Name, but he had his asking.

To be mindful of Death at all times.
THere was once a discourse betwixt a Citizen and a Mariner; My Ancestors
(says the Mariner) were all Seamen, S. Fawcet Ser. at S. Alphage, Lon. 1646.
and all of them dyed at Sea; my Father, my Grandfather, and my
Great-grand-father, were all buried in the Sea; Then says the Citizen, what
great cause have you then, when you set out to Sea, to remember your death, and
to commit your soul to the hands of God; yea but, says the Mariner to the
Citizen; Where, I pray, did your Father and your Grandfather dye? Why, says
he, they dyed all of them in their beds; Truly then, says the Mariner, What a
care had you need to have every night when you go to bed, to think of your bed
as the grave, and the clothes that cover you, as the Earth that must one day be
thrown upon you; for the very Heathens themselves that implored as many Deities
as they conceived Chimaera's in their fancies, Cael. Rhodogin. var. lect.
yet were never known to erect an Altar to Death, because that was ever held
uncertain and implacable. Sera nimis vita est crastina. Martial. Sic mors ipsa
q^um venerit vincitur, etc. Greg. l. 4. mor.
Thus whether it be at Sea or Land, that Man is always in a good posture of
defense that is mindful of death, that so lives in this World as though he
must shortly leave it, that concludes within himself, I must dye, this day may
be my last day, this place the last that I shall come in, this Sermon the last
Sermon that I shall hear, this Sabbath the last Sabbath that I shall enjoy, the
next Arrow that is shot may hit me; and the time will come (how soon God knows)
that I must lay aside this clothing of Mortality and lie down in the dust.


Musical Instruments, D. Westfields Sermon. at St. Batth. (...). 1^17. Me pl^s
didicit qui plus facit. Hieron. i^ Psalm. 22.
without handling, will warp and become nothing worth; a sprightly horse will
lose his Metal, by standing unbreathed in a Stable, Rust will take the sword
that hangs by the walls; The Cynick rather then want work, would be still
removing his Tub: Thus it is not Gods meaning, that any Grace should lie dead
in us, much less the knowledge of divine Truth, that should break out into
practice; for happiness is not entitled to those that know, but those that do
what they know.


PLiny makes mention of a silly Bird, Ph. Edlin Ser. at St. Mich. Bashshaw.
Lon. 1653.
that if she can but get her head into a hole, she thinks no body sees her, and
that all is safe, whilst she becomes a miserable prey to her common Adversary.
And this is the folly of many Men amongst us, such as would be counted wiser
than indeed they are; Lipsius in Plinii Paneg. Aug. super
close Politicians, that dig deep in their Counsels, and draw the Curtains
over their deeds of darkness; subtle Machiavillians, that spin their
mischievous design as fine as a Spiders web, Matthew. 7.
and many times under the veyl of Religion too; Painted Hypocrites, that under
the pretense of gravity think they dance in a Net, Prove. 7. 14.
unseen of all Men, Prostitute strumpets, Matthew. 23. 14.
that first sacrifice and then commit lewdness; foul Dissemblers, that under
the pretense of long Prayers devour Widows houses; And such as with demure
looks think to deceive Christ Jesus himself. Jonah 1. I King. 14. 6. Deo nihil
est (...), Comin. lib. 4. de bello Neopolitano.
But let such know, that God can find Jonah in the bottom of the ship, and
Ieroboams wife in her disguise; he sees and knows of the diversity of Weights
and Measures in Tradesmens shops and Warehouses, the least dash of an erring
pen in the matter of Accounts, the least sin of looseness; And on the other
side, our Alms, though perhaps they make no great noise in the World, are in
debentur with him; he has a bottle for our tears, Psalm. 36.
a book for our deeds, whether good or evil; The whole world is to him as a
Sea of glass, Corpus diaphanum, a clear transparent body: There is nothing hid
from his eyes, Rev. 4. 6.
so that find but out a place where he sees not, then sin and spare not.


IT was wittily painted by way of Emblem upon the Dutch Ambassadors Coach.
Mine Her. Paw An. 1652.
A woman sitting in a forlorn posture, close to the body of a Tree, on the
shady side; the Sun shining out in the strength of its heat, with this Motto,
Trunco non frondibus; intimating thereby, that she was more beholden to the
Trunk, then the leaves of that Tree for succor: Thus it is, that all good Men
make God only to be their support in the midst of danger, their refuge in time
of trouble, the Rock of defense, (...) hic (...), finis dubious exitus
horribilis, etc. Pet. Bles.
and their strong Tower, whereas others cleave close unto the leavy Creature,
trust in uncertain Riches, put their confidence in an arm of flesh, and bear
themselves high upon their friends in Court, their preferments in the State,
and such like miserable comforters, which will nothing avail them in the day of
wrath, when they should have most need of them.


IT is written of Martyrius, Salp. Sev. Hist. Sacra.
that being on his Deathbed, he desired that God would be pleased to release
him out of the miseries of this sinful World; but his Auditors standing by,
said, What will become of us, and our poor souls, when you are gone? your loss
will be a great prejudice to us, you cannot conceive, what hurt we shall
receive by your death. Well, says he, if my life may be profitable to Gods
people, I will do any thing that he will have me to do. S. Faweet Ser. at S.
Alphage Land 1646.
He desires to live, so as it may stand with Gods good pleasure. And a man may
wish to die, for it is good or sinful so to do, as the the grounds are,
whereupon the desires are settled. It is an expression of faith to be freed from
sin, and to have a more near communion with God. Thus it is, that the Bride in
the Revelation says Come, and the Spirit says Come; and both the Spirit and
the Church take hands together* Rev. 22.
and say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. No man, says Christ, can see may
face, Nonne mori satius, vitae quam far pudorem? Claudian.
and live: O then, says the Church, let me die, that I may see thy face. But
such is the frailty of man, that even strong desires, and unadvised wishes, are
to be found amongst the people of God, such as wish for death, in regard of
carnal ends; 1 King. 19. 4.
thus Eliah, because of Iesabels frowns, cries out, Lord take away my life,
etc. and Jonah, Jon. 4.
in a pettish humor, thinks it better to die than to live, not considering,
that Patience is the daughter of Hope, and grandchild of Faith; so that he that
believes, makes no^ haste. There is Heaven, says Hope; It is mine, says
(...); Yea, but says Patience, I will wait till Gods appointed time come.

Knowledge in Political affairs, very uncertain.
THe Surgeon that deals with an outward wound, T. Adams Exposit. on ep. 2
Pet.
can tell whether he can cure it, and guess in what time; but the Physician
that undertakes the cu^e of a feavour, can neither see the time of his patients
recovery, nor assure him, that he shall be recovered at all: Ince^^^ quo ^ata
fera^t. Virgil.
The Artizan, with his convenient shop and tools, can make up his days work,
if he be not hindered; but the Merchant Adventurer can promise to himself no
such matter; he must have one wind to carry him out of the Haven, another to
carry him about to the lands end, and perhaps another to drive him to the place
of traffic; so that he can promise nothing, neither for the time of his
return, Anceps eventus (...). Aul. Gellius. Horatius.
nor the vending of his commodity; but as the wind, and the weather, and the
mariners, and the Seas, and the time of trade, will give him leave. Thus, the
uncertainty of our knowledge, in secular and political business does appear,
the most wise God has hidden from us the event of things, Caliginosa morte
premit. All politic successes are conjecturall, not demonstrative, they stand
in need of the concurrences of many things and causes, which are casual; and
of many men's minds, which are mutable; and of many opportunities, which are
accidental, so that we cannot build upon them. There Is no policy so provident,
no providence so circumspect, but is subject to error and much uncertainty.

Sacramental Bread and Wine, how differenced from others.
AN Instrument, Ph. Edlin Ser. at S. Mich. Ba^s^shaw. L^nd. 1652.
or Conveyance of Lands from one party to another, being fairly engrossed in
parchment, with wax fastened unto it, is no more but ordinary parchment and wax;
but when it comes once to be sealed and delivered, to the use of the party
concerned, then it is changed into another quality, and made a matter of high
concernment. Thus, the Elements of Bread and Wine, are the same in substance
with the other bread and wine, before and (...) the Administration is past; the
same in quality, the bread dry, the wine moist; the same in nature, the bread
to support, the wine to comfort the heart of man: But being once separated,
(not by any Spells, Accedit verbum ad elementum and fi^ sacramentum, etc, Aug.
tract. (...). in Io^
or signing with the sign of the Cross; not by any Popish carnal, sensual
Transubstantiation, nor any Lutheran Consubstantiation) from a common to a holy
use: when Christ's Name is set on them, in regard of Institution, consecration,
operation, and blessing attending on them; then they become Christ's Bread, and
Gods Wine, and the Table Gods Table too: not the bread of the buttery, but of
the Sanctuary; not the wine of the grape, but of the Vine Christ Jesus sealing
unto us the pardon and remission of our sins. So that in the right receiving
thereof, we must make it a work, not dentis, but mentis; not so much to look on
the Elements what they are, but what they signify; look through the bush, and
see God; through the Sacrament, and see Christ Jesus to our comfort.


AMongst many other significant devices, Hollanders at Amstered.
some, beyond the Seas, have the picture of a man, with a full blown bladder on
his shoulders, another standing by and pricking the bladder with a pin; the
Motto, Quam subito? hinting thereby, the sudden downfall of all worldly
greatness. Res nullae stabiles sunt, quae cum fluxu hujus temporis
confluxibiles sunt. Aristor.
How soon is the Courtiers glory eclipsed, if his Prince do but frown upon him?
and how soon the Prince himself become a Peasant, if God give way unto it? How
soon are the windy hopes of sinful men let our, upon the least touch of Gods
displeasure? Riches, honors, preferments, if God be but pleased to blow upon
them, are suddenly reduced to nothing.


IT was a piece of good counsel that Mordecai gave unto Hester; D. Votier Ser.
at S. Paul's, 1619.
she was fearful to go in to the King, because he had made a Law, That
whosoever came into the inner Court without his leave, should be put to death.
But what says Mordecai? What is it that troubles thee? He^t. 4. 14.
why do thou shrink for fear? Who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom
for such a time as this? So it may be truly said of all Magistrates, of all
that are in place of Government, whether it be in Church or Commonwealth, that
they are in their places for such a time as this, that occasiones Dei nutus,
Preachers travells.
occasions are Gods beckonings: As it is said of a King of Persia, that he
would many times alight off his horse, Non differends judici^m, q^ousque
marsupia eorum qui c^nsantur exhauriant. Isidor de sum bono l. 3.
only to do justice to a poor body; a good copy for Magistrates to write by,
to be ready to do justice and judgment at all times, upon all occasions, while
they have time, that is, while they have season. They may have time to live in,
but they may outlive the season to do good in, to work for God, and act for
Christ, to relieve the oppressed, and therein not to be over-poysed by any
power, or byas'd by any respects whatsoever.


AMong the Romans, Caecilius.
Nasica was called Corculum, for his pregnancy of wit; among the Grecians,
Diog. Laert.
Democritus Abderita was called, not (...), but (...); not Wise, Joh. Baleas de
Script.
but Wisdom it self: among the Britans, Gildas was called Gildas sapiens,
Gildas the sage: among the Jews, Aben Ezra was called Hechachan; they said of
him, That if Knowledge had put out her candle, Joh. Plantavitii Biblie theca
Rabbinica.
at his brain she might light it again, and that his head was the throne of
wisdom. Before him among the Israelites, Achitophel was the man, 2 Samuel 16. 23.
his counsel an Oracle. Here now was a pack of wise men, but why Nilus should
overflow in the Summer, Dum cognitionem universalem ^abemus, decipimur
particulari. Arist. l. 2. de Resolut.
when waters are at the lowest; or why the Loadstone should draw Iron ^o it, or
incline to the Pole Star; which of them with all their knowledge, can give a
reason of either? And as in human, so in divine knowledge, the most acute and
judicious, have, and must acknowledge their ignorance, and deplore their
errors in diverse points; We know but in part. Then if he that learned his
Divinity among the Angels, 1 Cor. 13. 9.
yea to whom the holy Ghost was an immediate Tutor, did know but in part, it is
well with us, if we know but part of that part.

To be deliberate in our Prayers unto God.
IT is observable, ^. White Se^. at S. Giles Cripplegate Land. 1644.
that when a man is to swim over some River, having thrown himself into the
water, he passes as far as he can, by the strength of his first stroke, and
then being as it were at a stand, he fetches another stroke, and so a third,
and a fourth, till he come to the place where he would be. So in the marter of
prayer, Act and Mon.
in our addresses unto God, we must do, as that godly Martyr of Christ, Mr.
John Bradford was said to do, not to ramble from one petition to another, till
he had brought his heart into a perfect frame of prayer, Non erga Deum
afficitur qui aliud cogitat, aliud rogat. Thryveri Apoph. 75.
so that every passage of prayer had its full work. As for instance. In the
Lords prayer, when a man shall say, Thy kingdom come, and then shall be
thinking with himself, O, but if it should now come, what a case am I in, that
am thus unprovided? Then in the midst of these thoughts, say, Thy will be done
on earth, as it is in heaver, letting the tongue go on, whilst the heart is on
somewhat else; this is an error, a green wound easy to be cured, being one
good thought in stead of another, which is to be done by serious and deliberate
attendance, and careful dwelling on one particular, till another be presented.

Merit-mongers confuted.
THose of the old World, J. King B. Land Ser. at S. Paul's before K. Jam.
to get them a name upon earth, made Brick of their own devising, and built
them a Babel, a Tower that must reach up to Heaven; and when they had all done,
they had but brick for stone, and slime for mortar, and the end was confusion.
Genesis 11.
And such there are, who to get them a name, and an opinion of being more holy
than other men, Si vis excidere gratia, jacta tua merita, Aug. in Psalm. 31.
(Touch me not, I am of purer mold than thou art) make brick of their own pure
naturalls, and inherent righteousness, to build up a Babel of Merit, that
shall gain them the Kingdom of Heaven: And when they shall have all done, it is
but the brick and slime of mortal corruption, and they can prognosticate to
themselves no fairer end, than that of Babel was, Confusion.

Humility occasioned, by the consideration of our former and present condition.
JAcob humbles himself, S. Fawce^ Ser. at S. Alphage Land.
when his brother Esau came against him; he knew himself to have been poor, and
in a low condition: O Lord, says he, I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, and of all thy truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant: For
with my staff I passed over this Jordan, Genesis 32. 10.
and now I am become two bands. And are there not many in this great City, that
came hither with a stick in their hands, a freez-coat on their backs, and a
little spending money in their purses; poor servants then, God wot! Tanto
quisaque debet esse humili^r, etc. Greg. homil. 9. in Matthew. 15.
but now they have gotten two bands, wife and children, money and trading. The
consideration of these things, how God has dealt with them from time to time,
in the time of ^icknesse and sorrow, in the time of health and prosperity; how
he has brought them from one condition to another, from a condition of want,
to a condition of plenty; and from a condition of abundance, to a condition of
want again: I say, the consideration of these things, (if they have any grace)
is matter enough to humble them.


IT is commonly seen upon those Bells, T. Adams Ser. at S. Greg. Lon. Anna 1619.
that hang out for signs, Exodus 28. 34.
upon the one side is written, Fear God; on the other, Honor the King. Aaron
the high Priest had upon his vestment Bells, as well as Pomgranats. O that
those bells might strike on both sides, with an holy profession, which is one
stroke; and an holy conversation, that is another stroke. While we only say, We
fear God, and glorify Christ, Omnis virtus in action consistit. Cicero de
Officiis lib. 1.
all this while the bell does but toul, it strikes but on one side. But when we
come to honor the King, to do good to all men, which is the practice and
exercise of ^oly works, then the bell rings out to Gods glory; if otherwise, we
shall be no better then dissolute Choristers, that sing Gloria Patri in the
Queer, but chant Carmina Bacchi in the Tavern. And indeed, to have a good heart
to God, as some speak, and a lewd life to the world, as some suppose they may.
And that, Intus si rect^ non laborandum, if all be well within, they need care
for no more; so they wear holiness next their skin, no matter what profane
stuff their lives be made of. This is not to join profession and practice
together.


IN the Country, Ez. Culverwel Time well spent.
if a man have a thousand acres of ground, he can then spare so much of it to
lie waste, so much for a bouling-green, so much for a tennis-court, so much for
a courtyard, and so much for his mansion house, with the appurtenances
thereunto belonging: But let a poor man have but an hemp-pleck, a small
burgage, or garden-plot, Vtendum est ^tate, cito pede tabitur aetas. Ovid. 3.
Art.
he cannot spare one foot of it, but looks to it, and husbands it to the best
advantage: And so ought we to make much of that little time, which we have in
this world, Hoc est momentum. Eternity rides upon the back of Time, then not to
squander that little time away, aut male, aut nihil, aut aliud agendo; so that
the candle of our life burning low, we play it (like foolish children) out, and
then go darkling to bed, comfortless to our graves.


WHen the body of slaughtered Azahel was left in the highway side, 2 Samuel 2.
Genesis 37. Sueton in vita Caesaris.
there was not a man which came by, but stayed. When Jacob had the sight of
Joseph's bloody coat, he mourned, and would go down into the grave after him,
refusing to be comfort. The showing of Caesar's bloody robe in the marketplace,
set all the Romans in a tumult. And is it possible, that any true hearted
Christian now living, Tu quibus ista legas, incertum est, lector ^cellis.
can with dry eyes behold the scissures and maimes, which every corner both
of Church and State are subject to? to see the tattered rags and relics of a
wounded, bleeding, dying Church; to see Churches made dunghills, and the Temple
a stable for horses; Ipse quidem siceis scribere non pot^i. Ovid.
Horresco referens. The stories of the Ancients, are full of examples of this
nature; and, which is to be lamented, we were not, till of late years,
unfurnished therewith.


A Prisoner standing at the Bar, J. Squire Ser. ^t S. Le^nard. Shord.
Middlesex. 1639.
in the time of his trial, seemed to smile, when heavy things were laid
against him; one that stood by asked him, Why he did smile? O, said he, it is
no matter what the Evidence say, so long as the Judge says nothing. And to
speak truth, it is no matter what the world says, so long as Conscience is
quiet; no matter how cross the wheels go, so as the Clock strikes right;
unspeakable is the comfort of a good Conscience, unconceivable is the joy,
(...) b^na, h^rtus Deliciarum, thesa^rus Regis, aula Dei etc. Hugo. l. 2. de
(...)
when God and a good Conscience smile upon a Man in the midst of Reproach and
trouble, and false Imprisonment; for those cannot be scandals where a good
conscience speaks fair; that cannot be a Prison where a good conscience is the
Keeper; but that is a sad case, when there are clamours abroad, and a noise
within, when a Man is outwardly smitten with bitter things, and inwardly
tormented with a guilty conscience.

Active Christians, the only Christians.
EPhorus, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
an ancient Historian, and Scholar to Isocrates, had no remarkable thing to
write of his Country, and yet was willing to insert the name of it in his
History, and therefore brings it in with a cold Parenthesis: Athens did this
famous thing, and Sparta did that; Cicero de cl^r. Or atoribus and ad Attic.
And at that time my Conntry-men the Cumins did nothing: God forbid, that
England and Englishmen should be so recorded in Ecclesiastical story, as to
have their names put in with a blank; Quintilianus Victorius. l. 18. var. lect.
c. 4.
Such a Church did thus nobly, and such a People suffered thus pitifully, and
at that time the Men of England did just nothing: to be more particular, such a
Man did so much, and such a Man gave so much for the glory of Christ, Convenit,
omni ratione and art Amantes patriam salutem ejus moliri. Euripid.
and succor of poor Christians; and at that time thou did nothing, thou
gave nothing; Thou professest thy self to be a Christian, be an active
Christian: There be not only walls upon Earth, but a Book in Heaven wherein
the names of Christian Benefactors are written, let it be thy care of find thy
name there, otherwise it will be no more honor for thee to be put into the
Chronicle, than it was for Pontius Pilate to have his name mentioned in the
Creed.

Sin not consented unto, excusable before God.
IN Moses Law it is provided, Ba^^lius Monnerus de Matyim.
that if a woman being in the field, shall be forced by a Man against her
consent, if she cry out, the Man shall be adjudged to death^; but she shall be
free, ^. King. lect. on Jonah.
as having done nothing worthy of death. As it was well observed upon the Rape,
committed by Tarquin upon Lucretia that gallant Roman dame, Duo fuerunt, De ut.
22. 25.
in actu etc. there were two in the act, and but one in the Adultery: So that
sin, Hand est nocens, quicunque non sponte est nocens. Sen. Hercul.
which a Man abhors from his heart, and consents not unto, but so far
forth as infirmity and weakness of flesh gave way, cannot properly be called
his sin but the Devils sin, it being the Devils Rape upon the precious Soul;
for being tempted, he cries out unto the Lord for help, his heart smites him
speedily, and he falls to Repentance immediately, Romans 7. 23, 24.
so that it is no more He, but sin that dwells in him, that (...) that other
Law in the Members^, Ann^tat. Minist Land. in locum.
that (...), that body or remains of sin, according to which he is confident,
that God will not judge him, but according to the better and sounder part,
which is that of the Spirit most prevailing within him.

Humility advanced.
THat little humi repens, Royal-Exch^ in London.
the Grasshopper, (the silliest of all Creatures) is for all that advanced in
the principal City, and in a principal street of that City, and a principal
building of that street, Excel^^ est patra, humilis est via; Ergo qui quarit
patriam quid recusat viam? Aug. ad Di^scorum.
and in a principal place of that building, as a golden object of Magnificence
to be gazed on: Such a thing is Humility, that like the Violet, is poor in
show, grows low by the ground, and hangs the head as willing to live unseen,
yet is never out of the way of preferment, is still upon the advance, as may be
seen in the lives of Joseph, Moses, Mordecai, and many others in all succeeding
ages.


IN the twelfth Chapter of St. Lukes Gospel, S. Fawcets Sermon. at St. Alphage,
Land 1626.
you shall find Christ preaching an excellent Sermon; one would think, that
when he preached, all should be ready to hear; One of the company in the midst
of the Sermon, thought him too long, his mind being on something else; Whilst
Christ was encouraging his Disciples that in the discharge of their dudy, they
should not fear the face of Man, he runs upon his face with an impertinent
demand; Luke 12. 14.
Master, says he, speak to my brother, that he may divide the Inheritance with
me, as if he had said, My Father dyed, and left me a portion, I would have thee
to set all down, and be an Arbitrator betwixt us; The motion was good; and
might in all likelihood have wrought with Christ at another time, but now in
the midst of an Heavenly Sermon, to talk of an Earthly Inheritance, was that
which Christ reproved: Thus there are many that though they do not ask
downright questions of the Minister, yet they sleep, or gaze and prate out the
Sermon, Matthew. 21. 12
they sit on their seats in the Church, but their hearts are rambling out of
the Church; Nec retinent patulae commissa fideliter aures.
like those that were buying and selling in the Temple; they, whilst the
Ministe^ is proposing the best bargain, the Riches that are to be found in
Christ Jesus, are trading with the D^ vill about worldly contentment, and
earthly vanities; Ho^at. ep. 18.
And that's the reason they benefit so little by what they hear, and have so
little comfort in the performance of all other religious duties.


THe Philosopher being asked in his old age, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2. Pet.
Why he did not give over his practice, and take his ease, answered, When a Man
is to run a Rrace of forty furlongs, would you have him sit down at the nine
and thirtieth, and so lose the prize? We do not keep a good fire all day, and
let it go out in the Evening when it is coldest, but then rather lay on more
fuel, that we may go warm to bed: Thus he that slakes the heat of zeal in his
age, Non progredi est regredi.
will go cold to bed, and in a worse case to his Grave; To continue in giving
glory to Christ, is no less requisite, than to begin; Though the beginning be
more then half, yet the end is more then all; The God of all perfection looks,
Finis coronat opus.
that our ultimum vitae, should be his optimum Gloriae, that our last works
should be our best works, that we should persevere in goodness to the end.


IF a Man lose all his Personal Estate, Th. Whites Sermon. at St. G. Cripple.
gate, Land. 1652.
and save his real; If he be robbed of al his Goods, and save his Lands, he may
buy more goods, and supply the loss with the Income of his Rents: Or suppose
one that being an able Penman, should by his writing get fifty pounds per
annum, and lending his supposed friend such a like sum, should lose it, he
would in a short time make it up again; but if his hand were cut off, there
would be small hopes of any further earnings: Thus Prayer is as it were the
Right hand, the only means to supply all defects, it gets all, and makes up
the loss of all; Omnes medici pecuniis, Deus autem sola oratione placatur.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. a.
As a poor Woman said in her distress, I have no friend, but I have a Prayer,
that will get favor with my God, so long as I can find a praying heart, God
will I am sure of that, find a pitying heart, and a helping hand; And thus it
is that when all outward comforts fail, and sorrows multiply on all sides, then
it will be found that great is the benefit of Prayer.

The faithful Servants of God, well Rewarded.
WHen a Man has spent himself in some great Man's service, Tho. Sutton
Military Sermon. 1617.
either he will not do him the good he can, or cannot do him the good he would,
or if both willing and able, yet is ignorant what is best to do; Mordecai wears
the Kings apparel, rides upon the Kings Horse with a Royal Crown on his head,
Esth. 8,
what could be done more? Yes, all this and much more shall be done to him that
serves God, he shall be sure to have whatsoever is good. Imagine the
happiness of Haman in his Princes favor, the contentment of Sampson with his
Delilah, the comforts of Eliah preserved by Ravens, Psalm. 34. 10
the joy of Paul and Stlas visited by Angels, the honors of David, Jud. 14. 7.
advanced to a Crown; such honors, such pleasures, such comforts, such inward
joys, 1 King. 17. 6.
such and infinitely greater, Acts 16.
lasting and everlasting happiness will God bestow upon all those that
faithfully serve him.

Sins of infirmity, how to be known from other sins.
A Traveller in his journey, 2 Samuel 5. 3.
thinks of nothing so much as his journies end, if he stumble by the way,
that is against his will, and more then he intended; T. Westfields Sermon. at St.
Barthol. great Land. 1628.
And if he chance to get a fall, or to go out of his way, he rests not till he
be up, and in again. So look but upon a Hunter, he has no design to follow his
way at all, whether in the way or out of the way, his mind is upon the game; An
Archer bends his how, delivers his arrow, and though it fall short or over, on
one side or other, his aim was at the mark: Thus it is with the Children of
God, their aim is at Heaven, their thoughts upon Zion, Jer. 50. 5.
their looks toward Jerusalem, and their facc^^ thitherward; and if there be
any aberrations, or turning aside, it is no more they, but Sin that dwells in
them: Romans 7. 17.
Non sic Impii non sic, it is not so with the ungodly, they have no such design
at Gods glory, the desire of their hearts is the satisfaction of their lusts
and sinful pleasures, they aim at nothing else but Sin, and so in the end reap
the wretched fruit of their own wicked ways.

Christ the only object of the devout Soul.
A Stationer being at a Fair, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 P.
hung out the pictures, or small printed counterfeits of Men famous in their
kinds; among which he had also the picture of Christ diverse Men bought
according to their several fancies; The Soldier buys his Caesar, the Lawyer
his Justinian, the Physician his Gallen, the Philosopher his Aristotle, the
Poet his Virgil, the Orator his Cicero, and the Divine his Augustine, every Man
after the addiction of his own heart; The picture of Christ hung by still, of
less price then the rest; A poor Chapman, that had no more money then would
purchase that, bought it, saying; Quando quisque Deum abstulit suum, etc. Now
every one has taken away his God, let me have mine, Thus whilst the Covetous
repair to their Riches like birds to their nests; Nihil aliud desiderat anima,
nihil aliud a Deo quaeritquam Deum ipsum. Bern. Sermon. de d^versis affect. anim.
and the Lustful to their Brothels, like flesh-flyes to the Larder: the
Ambitious to their honor, like Butterflyes to a Poppey; the strong to their
holds, as Snayls creep into their shells; the Learned to their arts, as Bees to
their hives; Atheists to their sensual refuges, as Dogs to their kennels; and
Politicians to their wits, as Foxes to their holes, the devout Soul will know
no other Sanctuary, ^ix upon no other object but Christ Jesus, not pictured in
her Chamber, but planted in the inner Chamber of her heart.


AS the Lion has his paw to imprison, John Daltons Ser. at S. Paul's Ulys.
Aldrovand, Plinius.
his voice to terrify, and his teeth to tear his prey, yet satis est
prostrasse, commiserateth the woes of the prostrate, and suffers no ravenous
beast to devour that which he has protected: The Eagle has his talons to
strike, and his wings to shadow from danger: The Leopard has comely spots, but
an ill-favored countenance: The Panther has a sweet-scented breath, but a
rotten deceiptfull heart: Thus God is just as well as merciful, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, that can as well encounter his foes with terror, as entertain
his friends with peace; He that threats to chastise, and favors to encourage;
A terrible countenance to beget a dread of his might, and variety of Mercies to
breed a delight in his Majesty; And whomsoever the beams of his bounty cannot
warm in affection, the flames of his fury shall pursue to destruction.


IT is reported of the Nobles of Polonia, Abrah. Bucholcer. in Chronol. Anno
965.
that when the Gospel is read, they clap their hands upon their swords, and
begin to draw them out; intimating that by that Ceremony their resolution to
defend the faith, and willingness to hazard their lives for the Gospels
safety: Qui animarum curam pro Domino suscipit, ut errantes doceat, etc. Glof.
super Prove. 11.
Thus God has given every Minister a sword to slay Agag and all his Cattle,
original impurity, and all his droves of unhallowed thoughts; he must maintain
the Faith, by preaching truth, and confuting error; by commending virtue, and
disparaging vice; by confirming the weak, and confounding the obstinate; by
proving of Orthodox conclusions, approving Innocence and goodness, improving
labor and pains, reproving sin and profaneness; If he do otherwise, he is
not Praeco but Praedo, not a Pastor but Impostor; not a keeper, but a deceiver
of the People.


PAul and Barnabas continued a long time in the work of the Ministry together,
S. Fawcets Ser. S. Alphage, Land. 1647. Acts 15.
at last they fell out about a motion to visit the Churches, where they had
formerly preached; Barnabas will by all means have Mark along with him; No,
says Paul, that shall not be, because he was not at the planting of the
Churches; One will not go without him, and the other will by no means go with
him; The Contention at last grows so high, that it comes to a Non-communion,
they departed asunder one from the other; S. Augustine. Dissociantur isti, sed
ea occastone plures invisuntur, and confirmantur in do^^rina. Gualth. in locum.
one went one way, and the other went another, and by this means the knowledge
of God was more spread abroad, the Gospel of Jesus Christ further dispersed; O
faelix contentio etc. (said a good old Christian) O happy falling out of two,
that was the falling in of so many unto Christ: And thus God, when his own time
is, can bring good out of evil, light out of darkness, and order out of
confusion, in making up the breaches, and composing the differences both in
Church and Commonwealth.


When one accused the Comicall Poet, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
that he brought a lewd debauched Ru^^ian on the Stage, and so gave bad example
to young Men: He answered; True, I brought such a Man on, but I hanged him
before he went off, and so gave good example to young men: Thus it is to be
supposed, that he that goes to see a Play, intends not to see a Truth, but a
Fable, a Moral presented to his eye, that should convey some profitable
document to his heart. Lucianus de saltatione.
But that any man should say, He can learn as much good at a Play, as at a
Sermon, this is a wretched blasphemy, able to rot out the tongue of him that
speaks it. Again, when a Tyrant objected to a Player his sauciness, that he
durst personally tax men on the Stage, he made him this answer, In omni ^o
^inis and intentio spectari de^et. Polyb. lib. 1.
Be content; for while the people laugh at our foolery, they never mind your
villainy. Thus, there are some that seek to defend Stage-playing, saying, Cities
are populous, and where are many men, are most commonly many lewd men; if
their time were not spent so, it might in all likelihood be spent Worse. But
this is no argument, to defend sin by sin, to prevent an evil not allowable,
by allowing an evil that is preventable. In a word, that which makes a man
evil, is his own evil mind.

Ministers to be painful, in the discharge of their duty.
THe Waldenses, in an apology of theirs, ^ac. Usserius de Eccles. Christ. statu.
make mention of a better kind of Abbey-lubbar, Qui ex sacerdote, agricola
factus est, that of a Priest, became a Husbandman; Genesis 3.
and his reason was, because he found it written, In the sweat of thy brows
shall thou eat thy bread: a strange humor. Had he so diligently discharged his
calling as he ought, Vos quoque abesse procul jubeo, discedite ab aris. Tibul.
2. 1.
he never should have needed to have turned Husbandman; he might have eaten his
bread in the sweat of his brows, and his brains too. But, as happily he, so a
number there are, that live with such dry brows in the Ministry, that dry
bread in another calling would yield them more comfort and content, then all
their fullness in the Ministry, because they make no conscience to fulfill
their Ministry.

Danger of distracted Prayer.
AS long as Dinah stayed at home in her fathers house, Genesis 34. 2.
she remained a chaste and beautiful Damsel; T. Fletcher Ser. at S. Mich.
Bassishaw. Lon. 1649.
but when a gadding fit came upon her, that she must range abroad to see
fashions, Shechem, Prince of that Country, met with her, and forced her
virginity. This is the right condition of every prayer, that men put up unto
God Almighty; so long as we commune betwixt God and our own hearts, and keep
close unto him, there will be a comfortable return made, of that we pray for;
Despiciuntur orationes leves, saecuti curae anxiae, etc. Ambros. in Psalm.
but if Dinah-like, our hearts must needs be roving after vanity, and taken up
with the thoughts of worldly things, then it is no wonder, if the devil, that
Prince of the air, seize upon us, and lead us captive at his will: so that it
were better not to have prayed at all, then to have offered the sacrifice of
such foolish and distracted devotion.

The danger of Self-confidence.
IT is storied of two men named Denton and Wolsey, J. Fox Act. and Mon.
that the one was very fearful that he should deny the cause of Christ, were
he but called to make profession thereof. The other, which was Denton, showed a
great deal of confidence, as being able to stand upon his own legs: But being
both cast into prison, and put to the trial, Wolsey stands up for the cause of
God, and having no other foundation, but what was laid in Christ Jesus, Expedit
mult^ been timer e quam male timere, etc. Aug. de sing. Cleric.
suffers Martyrdom: whilst Denton, for all his great show, played the Renegado,
and turned like a weathercock with the time. But it so fell out, that he which
would not willingly burn for religion, was afterward unwillingly burned, in
the saving of his own house then on fire. Thus, it is a very dangerous thing
for any man, to rely upon his own strength, the danger of self-confidence is
very great, it has but one foot to stand on, and therefore apt to stumble, and
catch a fall: whereas a child of God, just like a little child, will desire the
hand of Gods good guidance, if he be to pass over the bridge of any difficulty
whatsoever.


SAd was the condition of the Israelites, 1. Sam. 13. Phil. Edlin Ser at St.
Mich. Bas^ishaw Land. 1653.
under the tyrannical government of the Philistines, when they voted, that
there should be no smith in Israel, lest they should make them swords and
spears; nay, when the lawful use of plowes, coulters, axes, and mattocks,
instruments of husbandry, were to be laid aside, except they would come to
their forges to wh^t them. Such is and has been the Devils policy, and of his
instruments, such as Qui Christianorum si^iis literarum cultu interdixit, etc.
Sozomen. l. 5.
Julian, and the like, in all ages, to put out (if possible) the eyes of
Learning, and to dam up the fountains of good literature, left men should make
them swords and spears, furnish themselves with arguments and reasons, to
confute and convince the Jesuitical doctrines, the Athesticall practices, and
Schismatic opinions, of such as are the grand sticklers and promoters of his
diabolical Kingdom.


ERnostus Duke of Luneburg caused a burning Lamp to be stamped on his coin,
Rerum Germ. Scriptores.
with these four letters, A. S. M. C. by which was meant, Aliis Serviens
Meipsum Contero, By giving light to others, I consume my self. Now if he
thought this to be the duty of a secular Prince, Act. 13. 2.
how much more of a spiritual Prophet, one that is set apart for the holy
f^nction of the Ministrey, to spend his strength in Gods service, 2 Timothy 4.
to preach in season and out of season, never to give over, but to run the race
with cheerfulness, being constant unto the end; knowing, that his labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord.


A Pollodorus dreamed one night, Plutarchi Moralia. Plura machinatur cor uno
moment^. etc. Hugo de anima. lib. 1.
that the Scythians took him, and flayed off his skin, with an intent to boil
him; and as they were lifting him into the Caldron, his Heart said unto him,
(...), It is I that have brought thee to this sorrow, I am the cause of all the
michief that has befallen thee. And it is most true, that the heart of man is
the forge, where all our actions are hammered out at large: It is out of the
abundance of the heart, that the mouth speaks, either good or bad. The
Centurion had not readier servants at command, then the heart has upon all
occasions; the eye, ear, tongue, hands, feet, knees, all of them move, and are
at the hearts devotion.


IT is said of a prisoner, S. Fawcer Ser. at S. Alphage Land.
that standing at the Bar indicted for Felony, was asked by the Judge, what he
could say for himself. Truly, my Lord, says he, I did mean no hurt when I
stole; it is an evil custom that I have gotten, I have been used to it ever
since I knew any thing. Why then, says the Judge, if it be thy custom to
steal, it is my custom to hang up thieves. So, if it be any man's custom to
swear upon every slight occasion, Nil consuetudine pejus. Ovid Art. lib. 2.
it is Gods custom not to hold them guiltless, that take his Name in vain: Is
it any man's custom to whore and be drunk? it is Gods custom to judge them.
Whatsoever the sin be, there is no pleading of custom to excuse it, as that they
meant no harm, it was against their will etc. All the fig leaves that can be
gathered, and sewed never so close, will not hide their nakedness from the
eyes of Heaven* God will certainly bring them to judgment.

Peoples ingratitude to their Minister, condemned.
WHen Homer had spent many lines, R. Skinner Ser. at S. Greg. Land. 1628.
in dispraising the body of Thyrsites, he briefly describes his mind thus, That
he was an enemy to Ulysses, a wise and eloquent man. And there can be no more
said of a bad man, than this, That he is an enemy to his Pastor, that is enough
to brand him. Vaeilli qui minxerit in Fo^tem, There is a curse pronounced
against him, that shall pollute the fountain, cast aspersions on the Minister;
1 Samuel 16. 23.
who, like David, is tuning his Harp, to drive away their melancholy, and
they, like Saul, dart their Javelins the whilst at his body: Whilst he is
studying to apply the warm blood of Jesus Christ to their hearts, Occasiones
ingratitudinis investigantes. Bern. in die Iejunii.
they are endeavoring to vex the best blood in his heart; he is taking care
how to save their souls, and they, ungrateful men! are troubled, how they may
vex and perplex his very thoughts, which are merely intended for their good.

Self-seeking men reproved.
IT is said of Hadrian the sixth, David Pareus in ep. 1. ad Cor. cap. 3. ver. 6.
that having built a stately College at Lovain, he set this Inscription on the
front, in golden letters, Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium rigavit, sed Caesar
dedit incrementum: Utrecht planted me, for there he was born; Lovain watered
me, for there he was bred; but Caesar gave the increase, who from the ^erula
brought him to the Crosier, of a Schoolmaster, made him Pope of Rome. A merry
Passenger reproving his folly, under-wrote, Hic Deus nihil secit, Here was no
room for God to do any thing. Thus God may be said, not to be in all the
thoughts of self-seeking men, Psalm. 10. 4.
they do not with those Ancients, preface to their works, (...), Cael.
Rhodogin. ex Pausania.
but intervert a great part of the price, with that ill couple, turning Gods
glory into shame, loving vanity, seeking after lies; such as (in the Original)
will deceive their expectations; Act. 5. 2.
of which sort, by a specialty, is that smoke of popular applause, Psalm. 4.
which the higher it mounts, the sooner it vanishes, and comes to nothing.

The true cause of Christian thankfulness.
PLato looking through the dim spectacles of Nature, Mars. Ficinus in vita.
gave thanks unto God for three things: First, That God had created him a Man,
and not a Beast. Secondly, That he was born a Grecian, not a Barbarian.
Thirdly, That not only so, but a Philosopher also. But Christians, that are
better bred and taught, turn the stream of their thanks into another manner of
channel: First, That God has created them after his own Image. Secondly, That
he has called them out of the common crowd of this world, and made them
Christians. Thirdly, and more especially, That amongst those that bear the name
of Christ, 2 Timothy 1. 19.
he has made them faithful ones; like a few quick-sighted men, amongst a
company of blind ones; Joh. Baily Spi rit. Marriag a Ser. ut Westminster.
like the light in Goshen, when all Egypt was dark besides; or like Gideons
fleece, only watered with the dew of Heaven, Exodus 10. 22.
whilst the rest of the earth was dry, Judge* 6. 40.
and destitute of his favor. Great cause of thankfulness indeed.

Perjury attended by Gods Judgments.
ULadislaus King of Hongary, one that professed Christ, Rich, Knol^s hist. of
Turks in the life of Amurath 2.
covenanteth with Amurath Emperor of the Turks; Articles are drawn up betwixt
them, a Peace is concluded for ten years; Uladislaus swears to the agreement,
signs it as his act and deed, and delivers it to the Emperor. But the Pope
Eugenius not well liking the business, dispenses with the Kings oath:
Whereupon provision is made for war, the Turk is met with a great Army, the
Battle is joined, the service grew hot on both sides, and the Turk is worsted
at the first: which Amurath their Emperor perceiving, draws the Articles out
of his bosom, spreads them in the face of Heaven, with these words, O Jesus
Christ, these men call themselves Christians, and they have sworn in thy Name,
not to have war upon us for ten years. If thou be Christ, as they say, and we
dream, show thy self upon this People, in the breach of their Covenant. Dii
sunt perjuriorum vindices Just. hist. l. 14.
Whereupon the Battle turned, and there were eleven thousand Christians slain
upon the place in that day. Thus it is, that perjury has ever been attended
with Gods judgments, who will not part with his honor, though it be in the
midst of a company of Infidells. Can a perjured man prosper? Was it ever neard,
that any false, forsworn, perjured wretch did prosper? (and if he did, all that
he got by it, Ezech. 17.
was put into a bag with holes) witness Zedechiah. Where was it that the
flying Role of curses light? Jer. 34.
where? where but in the house of him that swearesh falsely. Zach. 5.
Perjury may be carried off smoothly here in this world; and walk up and down
with an impudent face; In prolem dila tarunt perjur^^ patris. Claudian.
but yet for all that, judgment dogs it at the very heels, so that one may
casily read the fathers fault many times, in the sons punishment, even to the
ruin of posterity.


AFter the defeat of that great Armado in 88. T. Adams Ser. on ep. 2. Pet.
the Duke of Ossuna presented himself to the King of Spain, with a distaff at
his side, and a spindle at his back, in stead of a sword and dagger; the King
hereby understanding, that Dux foemina facti, a Woman had foiled them, hastily
stepped to the Altar, and taking a silver candlestick up in his hand, swore a
monstrous oath, That he would waste all Spain, yea his whole Indies, to that
candlestick, but he would be revenged on England. But, praised be God, those
high words were but the effects of his malice, without Englands ruin: An
Regini R. Jac. 1.
And had not a seasonable Peace not many years after been concluded, he might,
for all his far streich'd greatness, have been reduced to a Kingship of
Oranges and Lemons. Praeterostentationem and ventosam jactantiam nihil habent
superbi. Piin.
And thus the swelling big words of wicked men are not to be regarded. It were
no living for any good man, if the hands of foul mouthed men were as bloody as
their hearts. Men and devils are under the restraint of the Almighty, neither
are their words more high, or their designs more lavish, than their
atchievments be vain, and their executions short; like the reports of
Ordinance, they blaze, and crack, and smoke, and stink, and vanish away.


IT was a sweet and savoury saying of Oecolampadius, Melch. Adamus in vita.
Nolui aliquid loqui vel scribere, etc. I should be loath to speak or write any
thing, that Christ should dsiallow; he is that Master, to whom every man must
stand or fall; one good look from him is beyond all vulgar acclamation,
according to that of the Apostle, Not he that commends himself 2. Cor. To.
ult.
(nor he whom the world commends) is approved, but he whom the Lord commends.
Reprovable then are the Gnostics of old, who gloried in themselves, Iren l. 1.
c. 24.
and our modern Jesuits, who vaunt, that the Church is the soul of the world,
Sr. Edwin Sands Relation of West. Relig.
the Clergy of the Church, and they of the Clergy. And many amongst our selves,
that have (as our English Seneca said) Eve's sweet tooth in their heads, would
be more then they are, (...), or ^, the man, or some body; such as are never
well, but when they are setting their good parts a sunning, Jos. Hall Exon
to gain the applause and admiration of the world; such as turn the
Perspective-glasse, see themselves bigger, others lesser then they are, Hab. 1.
16.
sacrificing to themselves, as those Babylonians, and setting up, and serving
themselves of Christ and his service, as Judas and his successors, that rob him
of his rents, and run away with his glory.

Good Christians always thankful unto God.
IT was an ancient custom amongst us (though now much slighted) upon every
New Years day, G. Buchananus Poemat.
mutually to give and receive Gifts, as lucky pledges of an hopeful year to
come, according to that of the Poet, Mos vetus est Iani dare mutua dona
Calendis,
Annus ut auspicio prosperiore flua^.
yet good and faithful Christians are not contented to give thanks unto God
only on the first day of the year, Ad singula dona gratias agunt. Bern. in
Cant.
the first month of the year, the first week of the Month, the first day of
the week, or the first hour of that day; but always, at all times, upon all
occasions, they do but, A Motto often reiterated in Mercers Chap. Land.
Think and Thank; God lades them ^ayly with benefits, and they press him daily
with thanks; Be it Prosperity, they look upon it as a pledge of his favor; be
it Adversity, they entertain it as a trial of Patience, still thankful.

Parents to be careful what they say in presence of Children.
ELiah was taken up to Heaven in a fiery Charior, and having left Elisha behind
him in his room, S. Faweets Ser. at S. Alphage, Land.
there was no want of mockers and jeerers in Israel, that were ready to laugh
at any goodness, such as made themselves sport with the Prophets of God,
saying, that Elisha should be taken up into Heaven too; and this they did in
the hearing of their Children; No sooner was Elisha come to Bethel, but a
company of Children meet him, saying, Goup thou bald pate, go up thou bald
pate; do as thy Master did, thou must be in his room forsooth, then thou may
mount as he did; The Propher hearing this, turned back and looked on them (it
had been better for them, if he had looked another way) and cursed them,
whereupon there came forth two she-bears out of the woods and tore forty two of
them asunder, 2 King. 2. 24. Here was a company of ill-bred Children; Their
Fathers had in their hearing abused the Prophet, Corrumpunt vitiorum extmpla
domestica. Juvenal.
and they like ready Scholars, were not long in taking our such a lesson,
though they paid very dear for their learning; Let Parents therefore be
careful what they say or do in presence of their Children, it cannot be
imagined what large ears such slender pitchers have, how apprehensive, how
imitable they are, especially in that which is bad.

To beware of Relapses in sin.
THe Workmans first care is to lay the foundation sure ne corruat, left it fall
like the house built on the sands: the next, to perfect the roof, T. Adams
exposit. ep. 2 Pet.
ne perpluat, that it do not rain through and rot the principals: The Poet did
put no less virtue into Tueri, than into Quaerere; nor will the Lawyer pass a
Conveyance with a mere Habendum, but he will have a Tenendum too; The Physician
ends not the cure of his Patient with the cure of his disease; but after all,
minds the preventing of a Relapse: And so must we, though we stand, take
heedlest we fall, beware of Relapses in sin; St. Peter's Cavere ne excidatis, is
but an exposition of his Masters, Memores estote, both as fortifications
against Recidivation: we may fall, therefore let us look to our standing, 2.
Pet. 3. 19.
we may be lead away, Luke 17. 32.
the Devil will ventureto try us; therefore let us not budg, nor give him one
foot of ground, but if he beckens one way, be sure to take the other; He
labors to trip up our heels, and it must be our care to take heed of falling:
And as we desire to have our faith blessed into vision, our hope changed into
fruition, our love into perfect comprehension, our Repentance comforted with
pardon, our Charity crowned with glory, If* Bargraves Sermon. at Court, 1627.
and all our services rewarded with eternal life; let us keep the Graces of
Gods holy spirit ever in breath and motion, always in the Ascendent, Omnis in
a^tione virtus consistit Cic. 1. offic.
climing higher and higher, till they come to the top of immortality: And as
when Rivers toward their end approach near unto the Sea, then the Tide comes
and meets them; So when the course of our Piety draws near to the end of our
life, God comes and meets us, comforts us with a taste of Heaven before our
death, and gives us after death the everlasting possession of it through Jesus
Christ.


EUripides (says the Orator) has in his well-composed. Tragedies more
sentences then saying; Cicero.
And Thucidides has so stuffed every syllable of his History with substance,
that the one runs parallel along with the other; Lysias his works are so well
couch't, that you cannot take out the least word, but you take away the whole
sense with it; Plurarch in vita Demosth Plato de leg. lib. 1.
And Phocion had a special faculty of speaking much in few words; The Cretians
in Plato's time (however degenerated in S. Paul's) were more weighty then
wordy; Tit. 1. 12. Xenophon. memorabil. l. 1.
Timanthes was famous in this, that in his Pictures more things were intended,
then deciphered; And of Homer it is said, that none could ever peer him for
Poetry: Then how much more apt and apposite are these high praises to the book
of God, rightly called, The Bible? As if it were, as indeed it is, both for
fitness of terms, Com. in Genesis can. 19.
and fullness of Truth, the only Book, to which (as Luther says) all the
Books in the World are but waste-paper; It is called, the Word; by way of
eminency, because it must be the But, and boundary of all our words; And, the
Scripture, Major est Scripturae outhoritas etc. Aug. in Genesis
as the Lord Paramount above all other words, or writings of Men collected into
Volums, there being (as the Rabines say) a Mountain of sense hanging upon every
tittle of it; whence may be gathered flowers and phrases to polish our spceches
with, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
even sound words, that have a healing property in them, far above all filed
phrases of humane ^locution.


THey that put on the Lord Jesus are clothed with a fourfold garment; First,
With a Garment of Christ's imputed Righteousness. 2. John Baylies Sp. Marrriage,
Sermon at Westminster
With a Garment of sanctification. 3. With a Garment of protection. 4. With a
Garment of Glory. The first Garment may be called a winters Garment, quia
tegit, because it covers us. The second, a summers Garment, quia ornat, because
it adorns us. The third, a Coat armor, quia protegit, because it keeps us
safe. The fourth, a Wedding Garment, quia admittit, Luke 14.
because there is no admission to the supper of the Lamb without it. The first
three may be called our work-aday suits, because we must put them on all the
days of our lives; Psalm. 84. 6.
but the fourth our Holiday-suit, because we must not put it on till the week
of our Pilgrimage in Baca be ended, and the Saboth of our eternal rest in the
new Jerusalem begun.


IF a Man should come to a Merchant, Chrysostom. ad popolum. Antiochen. 38.
Pretiosa mors tanquam ^inis laberum, vitae janua etc. Bern super Cant.
and of two stones laid before him, the one false and counterfeit, the other
true and precious, and laying down the price of the worser should get the
better; Would ye think the Merchant had dealt hardly with him? No, he could
not, but would rather admire his love and courtesy in the bargain: In like
manner there are two lives proposed to all Men, the one temporal, the other
eternal; both these he sets to sale, but he sels us the eternal: Why then,
like silly Children, are we sad, because we have received the best, it being a
great favor to be taken from the evil to come?

Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc. the generality of them amongst us.
THere is a tale of St. Bridget, Cat. test. verit. tom. 2.
that she heard the blessed Virgin say to her Son, Rome is a fruitful Land; to
whom he answered, sed zizaniae tantum, only fruitful of tares: And as Hugo
Cardinalis said of Innocentius, when he departed from Lions in France; That
whereas there were four stews at his coming thither, he had left them but one,
Mat. Paris in vita. Hen. 3.
urbs tota lupanar, that one reached from one end of the City to the other.
Thus it is, that Drunkards were heretofore as rare as Woolvs in England, now
they are as common as Hogs: Whores were like Owls, only night-birds; now they
keep open house, Seb. Munsters Cosmograph.
pay scot and lot with their honest Neighbors: Heretofore we had but some
Families of Papists, Schismatics, and Sectarians; now there is whole Colonyes,
Streets, Lanes, and Parishes of the brood of that spotted, Harlot, and crooked
Generation.

Ministers to preach plainly as well as learnedly, to the capacity of their
Hearers,
IT is observable, that the profoundest Prophets accommodated themselves to
their Hearers capacities, as of Fishes to the Egyptians, droves of Cattle to
the Arabians, Trade and traffic to the Tyrians; So our blessed Savior tells
his Fishermen, that they shall be Fishers of men; And after many plain Parables
to the People, (as if the father, the essential word, had been at a loss for a
fit word, familiar and low enough for our dull and shallow apprehensions);
Whereunto, says he, shall we liken the Kingdom of Heaven? Mark. 4. 30.
Yea, the Evangelists spoke vulgarly many times for their Hearers sakes, Ioh.
17. 2.
even to a manifest incongruity. In after ages (those two great lights of the
Church) St. Augustine, Rev. 1. 4.
and St. Ambrose, Beza in locum.
the one confesses that he was fain to use some words sometimes to those Roman
Colonies in Africa, Edw. Brerew. Enqu. into Languages.
where he preached that were not Latin, as ossum for os, dolus for dolor,
floriet for florebit, to the end they might understand him; And the other
remembering that he was a Minister, stood not always upon the pureness of his
style, Lud. Vives. lib. 2. and 3. de tradend. disciplinis. Debent ad
infirmitatem audientium descendere etc. Greg. moral. super. Job 29.
but was far more solicitous of his matter, then of his Words: Thus as
Children use money to jingle with, and Men use flowers for sight and scent, but
Bees for honey and wax, not to gild their wings as the butterfly, but to fill
their Combs, and feed their young; In like sort there are those that tip their
tongues and store their heads, some for show, and some for delight; but
Ministers above all men, have these talents in trust, that therewith they may
save themselves, and those that hear them, they must condescend to the
capacities of their Hearers, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
stoop to the apprehensions of the meanest, become all things to all Men, 1
Cor. 9. 22.
in S. Paul's sense, that they may win some. Hence was that saying of a reverend
Bishop, Arth. Lake Bath.
Lord send me learning enough, that I may preach plain enough.

The Sinners wilful blindness, condemned.
THe Lioness will not company with the Lion, after her commixtion with the
Leopard, Ulys. Aldro v. de quadruped.
till she wash her self in water, unwilling that her Adultery should be
manifested by her scent: And the Viper is so wise, that before its copulation
with the ^ish Muraena, Oppian. de piscat: and venat.
it first vomits, and casts out all the pernicious and venomous poison that is
within it: But O the wilful blindness of poor sinful Man! by nature more
adulterous than the Lioness, o pectora caeca. Lucret. lib. 2. de not. rerum.
more venomous than the Viper, going a whoring after every sort of vanity, full
of hatred and malice, suffering strange Lords to tyrannize over him without
repugnancy, yea and such cowardly Lords, that if but resisted would flee from
him; yet he gives way to them, not fearing that his disloyalty shall be
perceived, and revenged by his Righteous Lord and Master, whose patience will
at last break out into fury, and break him too into a thousand pieces:


A Bijah the Prophet meets with Jeroboams wife, 1 King, 14. 6.
and tells her that he was sent with heavy news, R. Stocks Sermon at L.
Harringtons (...).
and with that especially, Thy child shall die: And which might add the more
unto her sorrow, Thy child shall die as soon as thou enterest thy foot into the
City, so that she could not so much as speak to him, or see him alive; And it
was so, which was the occasion of a National mourning, there being in him
bound up the hopes of all Israel: And thus it is, that many judge it very heavy
tidings, to hear of the early, untimely deaths of friends and acquaintance,
that like grapes, they should be gathered before they be ripe, and as Lambs
slain before they be grown. But why should they judge so? Why take on so with
grief and sorrow? It is true, (...) tollito luctum. Horat. ode 16.
that Tears are suitable to an house of mourning, so that Moderation lends a
Napkin to dry up the excess of weeping: Consider then that nothing has
befallen them, but that which has done, may do, and often does betide the best
of Gods dear Children. No Man grieves to see his friend come sooner then
ordinary, more speedily then usually others do, to be Rich and Honorable, or
to see his friend or child outstrip others in learning and wisdom, to have
that in a short time which others long labor for: Why then should any Man be
troubled, Illi deplorandi sent in morte, quos miseros infernus ex ^ac vitd
recepit etc. (...). 3. de sum. bon^.
but rather count it matter of joy, when their Children or friends by death
obtain so speedily such a measure of spiritual Riches, and such a height of
heavenly glory in so short a time; besides, they have this benefit before those
that live longer, they are freed from the violence of the Wine Press that
others fall into, and escape many storms that others are fain to ^ide through.


THere is a story of one that gave a young Gallant a curious Ring, Theod.
(...). 27.
with a Deaths head in it, upon this condition, That for a certain time, he
should spend one hour every day in looking and thinking of it; He took the Ring
in wantonness, but performed the condition with diligence, it wrought a wonder
on him, and of a desperate Ruffian, he became a conscionable Christian. It were
to be wished, Nihil (...) frequens mortis meditatio. Aug. lib. ex^ortat.
that Men of all sorts would more think of death then they do, and not make
that the farthest end of their thoughts, which should always be the nearest
thought of their end; but to spend some time fixedly every day on the
meditation of death, and then by Gods grace, they would find such an alteration
in their lives and conversations, that there would be gladness in the Church,
peace in their own souls, and joy before the Angels in heaven for their
Conversion.


IT is very remarkable, T. Cartwright in (...).
how God himself, the greatest Master of speech, and maker of it too, Exodus 4.
11. When he spoke from Heaven at the Transfiguration of his Christ, our Jesus,
made use of three several texts of Scripture in one breath, as in Mat. 17. 5.
This is my beloved Son, Psalm. 12. 7. In whom, I am well pleased, Esaias 42. 1.
Hear ye him, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. No doubt, but God could have expatiated as he
pleased; but this may reprove the curious quea^inesse of such nice ones, Joh.
Malcolmus in Acta. Qui vere praedica^ necesse est u^ omne quod laquitur ad
divinae authoritatis fundamentum revocet, and in ea aedificium locutionis
firmet. Greg. lib. 8. Moral.
as disdain at the stately plainness of the Scripture, and to show of what
authority Scripture Phrase is with God. Happy then is that man, that Minister,
that can aptly utter his mind in pure Scripture Phrase, in that heavenly
dialect, the language of Canaan. It is not the froath of words, nor the
ostentation of learning, (though useful in its time and place) nor strong
lines, that will draw men up to Heaven; but strong arguments, and convincing
^own-right truths, drawn out of the treasury of Gods Word; as when a Sermon is
full of the ^owells of Scripture, so that God and Christ may (as it were) seem
to speak in the Preacher.

Conversion of a sinner, painfully wrought.
IF a woman cannot be delivered of her child, Step. Denison Ser. at S. Paul's.
which she has carried but nine months in her womb, without pain and peril of
life, though she conceived it in great pleasure; we must not think then to be
delivered of sin, which is a man, an old man, a man that we have carried about
in our hearts, ever since we were born, Psalm. 51.
without any spiritual pain at all. The conversion of a sinner is no such
easy matter, there must be the broken heart, the contrite spirit, the mourning
weed, the pale countenance, Str angulat inclusus dolor atabque; cor aestuat
intus.
the melting eye, and the voice of lamentation; pain for sins past, pain for
the iniquities of the wicked, pain for the abominations of the land and place
where they live, Ovid. trist. 5.
pain to see the distractions both of Church and State, and finally pain for
their absence from their heavenly country. These are the pangs and throws of
the second birth, the dolours that attend the conversion of a sinner.

The Hypocrite characterised.
THere is mention made of a Beast, Deuteronomy. 14. 5. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap.
18.
called by the best Translators Chamois, by some others Camelo-pard, a kind of
Camel, that has an Horses neck, an Oxes foot, a Camells head, and is spotted
like a Panther or a Leopard. Just such are all hypocritical wretches, they
have many shapes, wherein to act the part of their deep dissimulation: If you
look upon their devotion, Corn. ^ lapide in Deuteronomy.
they appear to be Saints; in their dealings, you shall find them Devils:
Oracles in their discourse, Goats in the bed, snares at the board, heavy
censurers of others for slight faults, boasters of their own goodness; the
beating of whose pulse in matters of piety is unequal; In public actions,
hard, strong, and quick; in private matters, weak, soft, and dull; shrinking in
persecution, for painted faces cannot endure to come nigh the fire.

Scripture-knowledge and Scripture-practice to go together.
ERasmus, in a Dialogue, Des. Erasmi colloquia.
makes mention of a swaggering Ruffian, that would be thought a good Christian,
whom he calls Cyclops Evangeliophorus, and says of him, that he had hanging at
his girdle on one side, a new Testament, fairly gilt and bossed; on the other
side, a bottle of rich Sack. To convince him, he is asked, What if he were tied
to carry that bottle always at his girdle, Egens benignae Tantalus ^emper
dapis, Horat. Epod. 17.
and never to taste of it; or to taste it only, and never to drink it down;
were not this a punishment as real, as that of Tantalus was poetical? But what
if he did (as his manner was) drink soundly of it, would it not then warm his
heart, quicken his spirits, and cheer his countenance? Yes. But much more would
that Book do so, if he would but spiritually feed thereon, concoct, digest, and
turn it into nutriment in his life and conversation. Otherwise, it was but a
poor use and benefit, that he made of his Bible, when one day in a rage he
broke a fellows head with it, that inveighed against the Gospel. Thus, alas,
to carry a Bible in our hands, and not to have a lesson of it in our hearts,
not to be mindful of the doctrine in our practice, were but to be like that
Ass, that carries rich burdens, and feeds upon thistles. In effect, (...)
a man knows no more than he does. Two things are the Esse of a Christian,
Profession, and Practice of the truth. The best argument of our conversion, is
our good conversation. The Apostles did not only preach heavenly Sermons, but
did gracious deeds, and thereupon a whole Book was written of them, called, The
Acts of the Apostles.


IT was certainly a great fault it Spyridon, Theod. Beza in locum. Niceph.
^i^t. lib. 8. cap. 42.
Bishop of Cyprus, (though otherwise a very godly man) that when Triphilli^s
his brother Bi^hop (more eloquent happily then himself) was preaching on that
Text of the Paralytick, Take up thy bed and walk, Mar. 2. 4. where in stead of
(...), he read (...), (the words being synonymous) not brooking that he should
vary the least tittle of the Text, though for another of the self-same
signification, said unto him, What, art thou better than Christ himself, that
used the word (...)? And thereupon rose up off his seat, Rostra disertus amat.
and departed in great discontent. This was somewhat too much; for certainly,
there is some latitude, some Christian liberty left, wherein to expatiate.
Eloquence, without all doubt, is a singular gift of God, if not affected,
idolized, abused; and becomes no man better then a Divine, whose part it is, by
the tongue of the Learned, Esa. 5. 4.
to time a word, and to set it upon its circumferences, to declare unto a man
his Righteousness, Prove. 25. 11.
when not one of a thousand can do it like him; to seek to find out acceptable
words, Job 33. 32.
such as have goads and nails in them, Eccl. 12. 10, 11.
being neither lecta, nor neglecta, too curious, nor too careless, because
that Gods holy things must be handled, sancte magis quam scit^, with fear and
reverence, rather then with wit and dalliance.


WHen we see an Image stand still without motion, Hen. Lesly Ser. at Court.
1627.
be it the effigies or portraiture of any Emperor or King, or (if possible to
be contracted within the bounds of humane limits) the picture of some
Commonwealth, exquisitly graven in metal, or painted out in lively colors;
we know, that for all the eyes, and mouth, and nose that it has, it has no
life in it. So, when we see professors of religion, without the powerful
practice of godliness; and supreme Officers of State, without the
administration of Justice, we know, and can safely conclude, that the life of
God is not in them, that they are not acted by any divine principle within, but
are mere Idols, and Images of vanity.


THe Sea works, T. Bowyer Ser. at S. Lawrence Jury Land. 1631.
the Heavens move, the Fire is active, only the Earth stands still. Thus, the
heart of man is always in motion, and never rests, sleeping or waking; it
fancieth more in a moment, then all the men in the world are able to compass
in many years: Lust enticeth it, vanity possesses it, curiosity leads it away,
anger disquiets it, concupiscence polluteth it, pleasure seduceth it, envy
torments it, sorrow and sadness vex and molest it. Atque hisunt manes quos
patitur; for having set it self upon the right object, Christ Jesus, it is
despersed and scattered through many things, seeks for rest, and finds none,
till it return back unto him that is the true rest indeed.

A b^sie-body described.
THe Squirrell (as Naturalists say) is a witty nimble creature, Ol^u^. Mag.
lib. 18. cap. 18.
and some write of her, that because she cannot swim well, when she would
cross a brook, she gets a piece of the bark of a Tree, puts it into the water,
and her self into it, as in a b^at, Aliena c^rand^, and quae ^ihil ad illum
pertinent. Terent.
and then holds up her bushy tail, instead of a sail, that so the wind may
drive her over: A busy active creature it is. And thus the pragmaticall
b^sie-body, has an ^ar in every man's bo^t, an eye on every man's window; is
here, and there, and every where, but where he should be; is still busy, but
never has any thanks for his labor.

God rewarding the least of faithful service done unto him.
NEbuch^dn^^^^r the tyrant, J. Trapp. G. Love-^^kens.
going upon Gods er^and, shall have Egypt as his pay, for his pains at Tire;
and Simon of Cyrene, for that involuntary service he did our Savior, in
carrying his Cross, Ezekiel. 29. 18.
shall not only himself, but his two sons also, Mar. 15. 21.
Rufus and Alexander, have a nail and a name in Gods house, Theod. Beza in
locum.
better then that of sons and of daughters. How much more then will God
gratify, graciously accept, and liberally reward the small offerings of his
w^ak ^ervants, when he sees them to proceed from great love? He takes goats
hair from some hands, as well as Jewels; and two ^^tes from a mean body in as
good part, Ante Dei oc^los (...) (...) e^t m^n^s a m^nere, etc. Greg. Mor. Mal.
1. 10.
as two millions from those that are more able, to note* that a ready heart
^ets an high price with him, upon a low present. Does Job serve God for naught?
chap. ^. 9. Does any so much as shut the door, or kindle a fire upon his Altar,
unrewarded? They do not. God is a liberal play master, and all his re^^ib^^ions
are more then bountiful, even for the least of service that can be done unto
him.

God accepts the meanest of Graces.
ABel offers unto God the firstlings of his flock, Genesis 4.
and God had respect unto Abel and his offering; though the earth was but newly
curfed for the sin of man, yet God accepts the first fruits thereof, well
knowing they were no such things, as were in the offerers power to perform,
Hen. Lesly Ser. at Court. 1627.
but that which he had commanded the earth to yield. So shall those mean graces
that are in us, be accepted of God, though too too much they savor of the
^aughtinesse of our nature: And why so? but because they proceed from his
special blessing, and are the work of his Spirit. A great comfort for such, as
feel in themselves reluctancies, and spiritual assaults, by reason of the
corruptions and imperfections, that ^leave unto the best things they do:

The Name of God to be had in reverence.
JEHOVAH is a Name of great power and efficacy, D. Raiment Ser. at S. Olaves
So^thw. 1630.
a Name that has in it five vowells, without which, no language can be
expressed: A Name that has in it also three syllables, to signify the Trinity
of Persons, the Eternity of God, One in Three, and three in One: A Name of such
dread and reverence amongst the Jews, that they tremble to (...) it, and
therefore they used the name Adon^i, Lord, in all their devotions. And thus
ought every one to stand in ^we, and sin not, by taking the Name of God in
vain, Psalm. 4. and 148. 13.
but to sing praises and honor, to remember, to declare, to exalt, to praise
and bless It; for holy and reverend, only worthy and excellent is his Name.


IT is Aelians observation, how that men being in danger to be stung by
Scorpions, In var. hist. Ephr. Udall Ser. at S. August Land. 1639.
use to place their beds in water, yet the politic Serpents have a device to
reach them; they get up to the top of the house, where one takes hold, the next
hangs at the end of him, a third upon the second, a fourth upon the third; and
so making a kind of Serpentine rope, they at the last wound the man. And thus
it is, that amongst scandalizers and slanderers, one begins to whisper, another
makes it a report, Inimici famam non i^a, ut nata est, ferunt. Plaut.
a third enlarges it to a dangerous calumny, a fourth divulgeth it for a
truth: So the innocent man's good name, which, like a Merchants wealth, got in
many years, and lost in an hour, is maimed, and so secretly traduced, that it
is somewhat hard to find out the villain that did it.


JAcob, when he saw the Angels ascending and descending, Genesis 28. 13.
enquired who stood at the top of the ladder, J. Trapp G. Love tokens.
and sent them. David, though he knew the second cause of the famine that fell
out in his days, 2 Samuel 21. 1.
to be the drought, yet he enquired of the Lord, what should be the cause of
that judgment. And Job could discern Gods arrows in Satan's hand, and Gods
hand on the arms of the Sabaean robbers, chap. 1. So should we do in like case,
see God in all our afflictions: In the visible means, I^^a ferenda tibi est,
sic erat in fatis. Ovid fast 1 Samuel 6. 9.
see by faith the invisible Author, and not look so much upon the malice of
men, or rage of devils, as if either of them were unlimited; not upon chance,
as if that idol were any thing in the world, or that things casual unto us,
were not fore-appointed by God, even to the least circumstance of the greatest
or least affliction, to the falling of a hair off from our heads, Matthew. 5. 37.


WHen Calice was taken from England by the French, Imperatorum vi^^ per Ph.
Nepotem.
in the time of Charles the fifth, one asked the English by way of scorn and
derision, When they would win Calice again? A wise Captain hearing it, made
this answer, Cum vestra peccata erunt nostris majora, When your sins shall be
greater than ours, then there will be large hopes of gaining Calice again. And
what then can we expect in this sinful Land of ours? Joh. Hampton a Sermon. at
S. Paul's. 1626.
Were but our forefathers alive, they would bl^sh to see such a degenerate
posterity; their sins were ignorance, ours presumption; theirs omission, ours
commission; they were righteous in respect of us, their hospitality is now
converted into riot and luxury, their frugality into pride and prodigality,
their simplicity into subtlety, their sincerity into hypocrisy, their charity
into cruelty, their chastity into chambering, Ingentia flagitia, ingentia
supplicia, etc. Augustine.
their modesty into wantonness, their sobriety into drunkenness, their
Church-building into Church-robbing, their plain-dealing into dissembling,
their works of compassion into works of oppression. It is almost (if not
altogether) out of fashion, to be an honest man. Such and so great, so
transcendent, so superlative, so ripe are the sins of this Nation, that it is
high time for the Angel to put in his sickle, and reap; for God to pour down
the heaviest of his judgments upon us.


IT is (though somewhat fabulously) Laurent. Surius in vita S. Ang. 28
recorded, that when St. Augustine was writing of the blessed Trinity, walking
by the Seaside, he saw a little child digging a hole in the ground, and taking
water with a spoon out of the Sea, powered it into the hole; S. Augustine
demanded of the Child, why he did so, and he answered; that he would lade the
whole Sea into it; The Sea, said he, is too great, and the hole, the spoon and
the (...) too little* To whom the Child replied thus; Just so art thou, to
write of the holy Trinity, and so vanished: Thus, Whosoever thou art, Can
thou empty the Ocean of this great mystery into thy Oyster-shell? Can thou
define, how the Begetter should not be before the Begotten? Can thou dream
how Generation and Proceeding differ? How there should be a Trinity in unity,
and unity in Trinity, Three in One, and One in Three? This is a mystery of
mysteries, not far to be dived into; Inquirere de Trinita^e perve^ sa
cuirositas est; sed credere and tenere (...) sancta Eccle^^^, ^^des and
securitas est. Bern. in separat. Sermon.
It is impossible to sound the bottomless depth of such divine mysteries with
the plumme^ of our short lived and short ly^'d Reason, or think to pierce the
Marble hardness of Gods secrets, with the leaden point of our dull
apprehension, yet so far as the Scriptures have revealed necessarily to be
understood, we may look into it; And to be sure, He that has two or three
walks a day upon Mount Tabo^, and with holy Moses, converseth with God in three
Persons, on the Horeb of both ^estaments, shall find the peace of God the
Father, the love of God the Son, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, to his
eternal comfort.

A Man to be wise for himself as well as for others.
When an Orator, with great store of Wisdom, had bitterly declaimed against
folly, T. Adams exposit. ^n ep. 2. P.
and somewhat abused his Auditors; it was afterward replied upon him by one of
them; Sir, your discourse of folly may well be divided into three parts: One
part you have declaymed against in all Men, one part you have bestowed upon us,
and the other part you have kept to your self; Here was some wit in this; But
when a Man shall commend wisdom to all his Hearers, and keep no part of it to
himself, Hoc non est parta tueri.
for his own exercise, Is it not great madness? For a Man to have a full
brain, and an empty heart; a Library of Divinity in his head, and not so much
as the least Catechism in his Conscience, is, as if one were to tell heads, and
to number the company, and should forget to reckon himself: When an
Inheritance is be divided among many Children, will any Coheir set out the
portions of the rest and forget his own? We say for temporal things, When a
Man spends or gives away all, it was but his kind heart: But in the
distribution of things spiritual, Bonum sui diffu^^vum Arist.
to leave our selves none, argues not a kind but a stupid heart; Heavenly
knowledge is not lost by communicating, we may give all and keep all; Lord
enable us therefore to give so much as may make others rich in grace, and yet
keep so much as may make our selves rich in glory.

To be Patient under Gods afflicting ^and, And why so?
SAmuel having told Eli of the destruction of his house, 1 Samuel 3. 18. J. Trap
Gods l^ve (...). Psalm. 39.
he said; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, says David, because it was thy doing. He knew that Gods
hand should be no further stretched out to smite then to save; that as he might
do what he pleased with him, so he would not overdo: Pater est, si Pater non
esset; this cooled the boiling rage of the young Man in Terence. Thus let every
Man sit down with the like consideration, and say within himself; Componite
mentes Ad magnae virtutis opus magnosque labores. Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 9.
Shall I not drink of the Cap that my Father has put into my hands? stand
under the Cross, that he has laid on my shoulders? sto^p unto the yoke, that
he has laid on my neck? Bears and Lions take blows from their keepers, And
shall not I do the like from the keeper of Israel? If I contend with my Maker,
worse will come of it; I cannot ward off his blow, nor grott my self up against
his fire, I will therefore with meekness and silence, buckle and bow under his
hand, and not make my crosses heavier than he has made them by frowardness and
impatience.


When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty strong wall about his Palace for
his own security, Ced^^ni Annals.
in the night time he heard a voice, crying out unto him, Felix criminibus
nullus erit diu Ausoni^s.
(...) etc. O Emperor, though thou buildest thy wall as high as the Clouds,
yet if sin be within, it will o^erthrow all. And most true it is, that all
sin is of a destr^ctive nature; What though our Nation be in as good a
posture as heart can wish, out Navy ready, our Ports and Block-houses well
fortified, our Coasts guarded, Jos. Shute Ser. Anno 1630.
all our Beacons wa^ched, all our Castles repaired, all our Men armed and our
Land environed with a wall of Iron about it, yet if sin be within, if
Bribery, Oppression, self-interest, ^atred, malice, etc. be in the midst of us,
like those Traitors in the Trojan horse, any one of them will do more hurt in
one night, then ten thousand open Enemies in ten years.


OF Adams three Sons, Genesis 4. J. Simson Ser. at S. Olaves Hart-street. Land.
Cain the eldest was extreme wicked. Of Noah's three Sons, the youngest was
wicked; of Terahs three Sons, the middlemost was wicked. Thus it is neither the
elder, nor the younger; neither birth nor parentage; age or condition, that can
claim any interest in Heaven, except they be elected of God before the
beginning of the world; Happiness is not entayled upon any worldly Relation,
but he that has made his Election sure is a happy Man.


Pharaoh ascribes much to Joseph, but Joseph quickly rids it off from himself,
and sends it away to the right owner. Genesis 41. 16.
So Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, He blesses God for the knowledge he has, and so
does not deny it, Dan. 2. 23.
but he returns the praise to him that gave it. In vita ejus l. 3. cap. 6.
David had his Non nobis Domine. And it is writthen of St. Bernard, that having
done many wonders in France, he did thus put off all glory from himself; I have
learned in the Scriptures (says he) that signs are done, Haud equidem tali me
dignor honor. Virg. Diog. La^rt. in vita.
vel per fictos, vel per perfectos, Ego nec ^^^tionis, nec perfectionis mihi
conscius sum, Let them have a good opinion of me, but give all the praise to
God: Thus it is the greatest and the highest part of divine Wisdom, to give God
the glory of all our actions; It is his own, why should he not have it? As when
Thales Milesius had imparted to some other Philosopher an admirable discourse
of Heaven, he freed his Scholar from all reward but this; That whenever he
divulged this secret, Tibi non ascripseris, sed me ejus repertorem
praedicaveris; The Invention it self, he was willing to communicate to others,
Q^id habe^ quod non recepisti? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
but the honor of the Invention, he would keep to himself, Ubi mea legis, me
agnosce. We have received all our Wisdom, strength, honor, and wealth from
God, he requires no more but that we acknowledge the Author, Bern. in Sermon.
Ubi meis uteris, me agnosce, Take thou the comfort of them, give me the glory.
To do this, summa ratio docet, and Christianos decet; The whole world is a
great book of Gods mercy, every benefit is a lesson, and wheresoever we read
it, let us be surethat he may have the glory.

Children to be begged of God by prayer.
IT is a Rabbinicall observation, that there are four special keys, which the
Lord reserveth in his own power; J. Plantavir. Fl^rileg. Rabbinicum.
First, the Key of rain, Deuteronomy. 27. 12. Secondly, the key of food, Psalm. 104.
28. Thirdly, the key of the Grave, 1 Samuel 2. 6. Fourthly, the key of the heart,
Acts 16. 4. To which may be added, the key of the womb, Genesis 30. 22. Hence is
it, that Abraham being Childlesse, made his moan unto God; Isaac prayed for
his wife, because she was barren; Hannah, Samuels mother poured out her Soul,
Genesis 15.
when she had no child. This is the true course, this is the right way; Genesis
25. 21.
first to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 10
then to the means; and let all those that desire (...) blessing of increase,
seek it of God; It is he that opens and shuts the womb, Psalm. 127. 3. and
113. 9.
the fruit of the womb is his Reward, he makes the barren woman to dwell with
a Family, and to be a joyful Mo^her of Children.

Parsimony in times of public danger, condemned.
WHen that Imperial City of Constantinople, R. Knoles hist. of T^rks.
was besieged by Mahomet the great, the good Emperor did what he could to the
utmost of his power for the defense of the place, sold the very Church-plate,
and all his own Jewels to pay the Soldiers; then with tears in his eyes,
besought his covetous subjects to lend him supplies; They pleaded poverty,
protested they had it not, that they were grown poor for want of Trade; And
thus for want of what they might have well spared, both they and their City
were lost, a City of that great wealth, that it is a Proverb amongst the Turks
at this day, if any Man grow suddenly rich, He has been at the sacking of
Constantinople: R. Willan. Eliahs wish.
Such was the State of Constantinople then, and such will be hereafter the
condition of any place, or People; when like silly Passengers, they shall more
regard their trifling Fardels, then the Ship they go in, fortius diligentes res
suas, qu^m seipsos, loving their wealth more then themselves, more then their
lives, their wives, their children, their country, nay more then the Gospel it
self, keeping their goods, for their Enemies to make merry withal, refusing
to part with any thing for their just defense; it is just with God that they
should be exposed to all sorts of misery.

The Devils policy to defile the Soul with Sin.
IT is said of the Badger, Bartholomaeus de proprietat. rerum.
otherwise called a Brock, or a Gray, that the Fox and he cannot agree together
by any man's, for the Fox will have him out of his hole, and what he cannot
compass by might, he does it by slight; The Badger is no sooner gone out of his
Den to seek his food, but the Fox goes in and pisseth there; whereupon the
Badger returning, and smelling out the Foxes baseness, leaves his Den to him,
who enters and brings up all his Cubs there: such is the policy of the Devil
to defile the Soul of Man, he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour, his main design is to throw Christ out of the Soul, which is Gods
Den, Ph. Edlin. Ser. at S. John Zachary, Land. 1640.
Gods Temple, Gods House, and Gods dwelling place; but because he cannot put
him out by force, he therefore deals craftily, by defiling the Soul with
noisome lusts, such as are a stink in the nostrils of God, whose pure eyes can
endure no uncleanness; so that he departing thence, the Devil enters therein,
bringing forth sin upon sin, till all be brought to shame upon shame, and in
the end confusion of face for ever.


A Runnagate Son, leaving his Father, and living in foreign Countries, was
brought to want; and finding little charity among strangers, he was driven to
work for his living; Industry brought in gains, and the sweetness of gain
whetted on Industry; soon he grew Rich, became a Merchant, and dealt in
Traffic with diverse Nations; and among the rest, with some of that Nation
where his Father lived, hearing news how potent and opulent his Father was
grown, of his wealth and Authority in the City, Paul Wanns Ser. de tempore
he resolves to steer his course thitherward: Four businesses he put into his
head; One was to congratulate with his friends and Allies, another to be merry
with his old companions, the third to gather up his debts, the last and
principal, to be reconciled to his Father: Being arrived there, he follows his
three former employments close, he fails in none of them; but these did so
wholly take up his time, that he quite forgot the main, the Reconcliation to
his Father; The Mariners on a sudden call aboard, the Tide tarries no Man,
presently he must be shipped, and so leaves that business utterly undone. (...)
we are all strangers on Earth, Vnum necessarium saepissime oblitum.
our Father is the Almighty King of Heaven; we are charged but with four
businesses here in this World; First, Honestly to provide for our selves and
families: Secondly, To perform all just duties to our Neighbors: Thirdly, To
solace our hearts with the sober and thankful use of Gods Creatures: Alphons.
ab Avendano in Matthew.
Fourthly, and chiefly of all, To serve our Maker in all holy obedience, to
acknowledge our sins with humble penitence, to get his pardon through the
merits of his Son Jesus. Now so it is, that we are diligent in the rest; Marc.
de Pise Encyclopaedia mo^alis.
we heap up Riches, we sa^e our selves with Pleasures, we are indalgent to our
bodies; But for the matter of most moment, that of greatest concernment, The
pleasing of God, the saving of souls etc. we are as negligent as if they were
not things considerable; Multi sunt qui minus diligenda magis diligunt, etc.
August.
Death calls us aboard, carries us away in his deep bottom, and the main
business we came about is left un^ffected; We cannot but confess all this,
let us then amend it; and whatever become of our Riches, of our Pleasures, of
our bodies, let us be sure of our Reconciliation made with God in Christ Jesus.


HIerom reports out of Senec^, S. Hieronim. l. 4. adver. Iovinian. circa
finem.
of one that was so uxorious that when he went broad he would gird himself
with his Wives hose-garter, and could not ^ndure her out of his sight; and must
by all means drink of that side of the cup, that she drank of, as the Poet said
of Paris, Et qua (...) biberas, hac ego part bibi; Where thou laist thy lips,
there will I drink also: but the good old Father concludes thus; Sapiens ^ir
judicio debet amare non affectu, A wise man must not love by fancy and
affection, Nunquam ^perte^ virum sapientem^ muli^riremittere frae^um. Cant. 5.
9.
but by judgment and discretion. Thus (as the Proverb is) A Man may love his
house well, but not ride on the ridge of it, he may delight in the beauty, and
accept of the person of his Wife, and say of her as the friend of the Spouse in
the Canticles, O thou fairest among women; but he may not idolize her, he must
not be so uxorious as Sampson was, that was so besotted with foolish fondness
to his wife, that he opened unto her the secrets of his heart to his own
confusion.


THere is a story of a Man, Speculum Ex^mplorum.
that gave much Alms to the Poor, who walking one day very solitary, an Angel
met him in likeness of a Man, and walking along with him, brought him at last
to a deep valley, where was a pit burning with fire and brimstone, Anton.
Dauroltii Catech. historialis.
and therein three gibbets, upon one of them did hang a man by the tongue, upon
another a man by the hands, on the third hung no man at all. The good man much
marvelling at the strangeness of such a sight, asked the Angel, what the men
were, that hanged in those tormenting flames? He told him, that he which hanged
by the tongue, was his grandfather, which purchased the land and house wherein
he now dwelt, by false oaths, lying, and perjury, and was therefore hanged by
the tongue; and that the other was his own father, who by strong hand, kept
that which his father before him had wickedly gotten; and that the third
gallows was prepared for him, unless he made restitution; and so the Angel
vanished. The man being left alone, went sadly home, and the next day sent for
the true owners, and restored the lands unto them; whereat his wife and
children were much amazed, saying, That he would make them all beggars. O,
says he, it is better to beg a little while in this world, than to burn for
ever in the world to come; better to lose house and lands here, than to be
deprived of God and goodness hereafter. This may be a story, Ephr. Udall Sermon.
at Merc. Chap. 1640. Vivitur ex rapto. Ovid.
but the Moral is good, and sets out unto us, that ill-gotten goods never
prosper in the end, and that there is a necessity of restoring, what has been
unjustly taken away. There are many stolen goods abroad, but few brought home
to the right owners. Men's hands are like the fishers flew, yea, like hell it
self, which admits of no return. But let all men know, that ill gotten mettalls
are a strong bar, to bolt Heavens gates against them; but when they are
dissolved by a seasonable beneficence and restitution, those gates of glory fly
open, to their eternal comfort.

Riot and excess, condemned.
THere is an old Apologue, T. Adams Exposit. on 2 Pet.
how Honestum, Utile, and Iucundum, would needs keep house together; Honestum
was to govern all, Utile to provide for all, and Iucundum to dress or prepare
all: They had a very great household, yet maintained their charge, relieved, the
poor, and laid up somewhat for their posterity. All things went sweetly on,
while Cheerfulness was the Cook, Thriftin^sse the Caterer, and Honesty the
Steward. If any of the Family were disordered, Honesty reformed them; if any
lavish and unthrifty, Frugality recovered them; if any melancholic, Iucundum
revived and cheered them. But after a while, this Iucundum getting a little
head, begins to exceed in mirth, and falls out with Utile for short provision;
he had invited a number of Fiddlers, Jesters, Players, Tumblers, Dancers, and
must have extraordinary cheer for them. Utile refused to allow it, Iucundum
would have it, and the quarrel grew hot. While Honestum was called to moderate
the matter, this rabble came in, took Iucundums part, snatched the keys out of
Utile's hands, ransacked the coffers, exhausted the treasures, turned Honesty
and Thrift out of doors, sung, danced, and drunk, and threw, as they say, the
house out at the windows. Genetrix virtutum frugalitas. Justin. lib. 3.
Thus the Family broke, for just as Honestum and Utile went out, Beggary came
in; only these two erected a new house, and repaired their estates; to whom
not long after Iucundum came a begging, but might not be admitted as one of the
Family, only was sent for, some times to make them merry, and lived on their
alms. The Moral is easy, Frugality is the best fuel of Hospitality; riot
and excess are condemned, whereby many a good Family has been ruined; let all
the rest take warning.

How God may be said to will and nill the death and punishment of a sinner.
A Mariner in a storm would very fain save his goods; Jac. Merchantii. Hort.
Past.
but to save the ship, he heaves them overboard. A tenderhearted mother
corrects her child, whereas the stripes are deeper in her heart, then in its
flesh. As it was said of a Judge, that being to give sentence of death upon an
offender, Bonum quod nolo, facio, I do that good which I would not. Thus God,
more loving then the careful Mariner, more tender then the indulgent Mother,
and more merciful then the pitiful Judge, is willingly unwilling, that any
sinner should die; He punishes no man as he is a man, but as he is a sinful
man; He loves him, yet turns him over to Justice. It is Gods work to punish,
but it is withal his opus alienum, his strange work, Esa. 28. 21.
his strange and foreign act, not his Eudochia, his good will and pleasure, his
nature and property being to have mercy on all men.


ST. Origin going to comfort and encourage a Martyr, Th. de Trugillo Thesaur.
C^nci^nat.
that was to be tormented, was himself apprehended by the Officers, and
constrained either to offer to the Idols, or to have his body abused by a
Blackamore, that was ready for that purpose; of which hard choice, to save his
life, he bowed unto the Idol: But afterward making a sad confession of his
life, he said, That he went forth that morning, Orati^ matutina cl^^is diei,
etc.
without making his prayers unto God, which he said, he knew assuredly to be
the cause of his falling into evil. And to say truth, he that commits not
himself to Gods good guidance in the morning, may very well be without Gods
good blessing all the day after. The first thing that a man does, is to seek
God, never think himself dressed, till that be done, Let his soul have a mornings
draught, as well as his body, I mean, a morning prayer, to fence it against the
infectious air of the world; P^ov. 27.
Solomon tells the reason, Who can tell what a day (a big bellied day) may bring
forth, whether judgment or mercy, good or bad. Therefore to make sure work,
pray to God in the morning, and then come what will come, all shall be for the
best.


A Gentleman having but one servant, Mr. Goddard Ser. at S. Greg. Land. 1651.
thought him over-burdened with work, and therefore took another to help him;
now he had two, and one of them so trusted to the others observance, that they
were often both missing, and the work was not done: Then he chose another, now
he had three, and was worse served then before; therefore he told his friend,
When I had one servant, I had a servant, when I had two, Quaeque domus servis
est plena superbis. Juven.
I had but half an one; now I have three, I have never a one. Thus God has
many servants, but little good service done; men do so trust, and thrust his
work one upon another, that still it is not done: They say, That many hands
make light work; but it is usually seen, that many hands make slight work.
Gods holy Name is blaspheamed, the Hearer says, Let the Magistrate look to it;
the Magistrate says, Let the Minister reprove it; the Minister says, Let the
Hearer reform it; the Company says, Let the Offender himself answer it; the
Offender says, Curet nemo, Let no man mind it. God has so many seeming
servants, that when his business comes to be done, not one of them can hardly
be found, that is faithful.


THere was never yet to be found any occasion lawf^ll, Lib. ^. de Virginitate.
for the changeable use of men and women's garments, but one, and that St.
Ambrose speaks of; thus it was. A certain Virgin of Antioch being condemned to
the St^ws, because she would not sacrifice to the Idols, prayed thus unto God:
Lord, thou which couldes^ stop the mouths of Lions against Danie, thou also
can bridle the raging lusts of men. Rich. de Medi^vill^ Clavis c^li.
And having thus prayed, there came in a Soldier, and changed garments with
her, using these words, Quasi adulter ingressus; si vis, Martyr ^gre^^ar; I
came in as an Adulterer, and if thou will, will go out as a Martyr; Let us
change garments, thy vesture shall make me a true soldier, mine shall keep
thee a ^irgin: take thee an habit, which shall hide thy womanhood, and
consecrate my Martyrdom* And by this means, the virgin escaped, and saved her
virginity. But such occasions as this seldom fall out. And certainly, for women
in Masks and Shows, to be apparel'd as men, and men as women, has been
always a thing distasteful to them which are more sober minded, lib. de
Idolatri^.
as Tertullian condemns it directly, Nullum cultum a Deo maledictum invenio,
etc. I find no apparel (says he) cursed of God, but a woman's in a man,
according to that of Deuteronomy. 22. 5. especially in Shows and Plays; lib. de
spectac^lis.
further adding, out of another place, Non amat f^lsum Author veritatis, etc.
The God of verity loves not falsity; every thing that is counterfeit before
him, is a kind of adultery.

Sorrow that is true, is for the most part silent.
ST. Bernard bewailing Gerhardus the Monk, Ser. 26. in Cant.
and his dearest brother, says; At his death my heart failed me, sed feci vim
animo, with much ado I dissembled my grief, lest affection should seem to
overcome religion; and whilst others wept abundantly, Ille dolet ver^qui sine
test dolet. Ovid.
Secutus ego siccis oculis invisum funus, my self followed with dry eyes the
happy Hearse; bystanders with watery cheeks admiring, whilst they did not pity
him, but me that lost him. Indeed, whereas tears and words fail, the blood
leaves the cheeks to comfort the heart, and speech gives place to amazement.
They are small miseries, when he that has them can presently tell the world of
them. S. Ambros. Ser. 46.
Sorrow that is true, is for the most part silent. That observation of St.
Peter is good, Flevit sed tacuit, he wept, but was silent, as if his eyes would
in some sort tell, what his tongue could in no sort utter.

The known Law of any Nation, to be the rule of Obedience.
IT was the observation of a wise (but unfortunate) Peer of this Nation, Tho.
Wentworth E. S^^^ff^rd. An. 16^1.
at the time of his Trial, before an honorable Assembly, That if a man should
pass down the Thames in a boat, and it be split upon an Anchor, and a Buoy
being not set as a token, that there is an Anchor there; that party that owes
the Anchor should, by the Maritime Law, L^x a legendo quia public debet leg^.
Isidor.
give satisfaction for the damage done: But if it were marked out, then he
must come upon his own peril. And thus it is, that the known Laws of a
Nation, are made the rule of obedience to the People; the plain Law and Letter
of the Statute, that tells where and what the crime is; and by telling what it
is, and what it is not shows how to avoid it: For were it under water, and not
above, skulking only in the sense of some musty record, and not divulged, no
human providence could avail, or prevent destruction.

No true cause of Rejoicing in this world.
THere is a story of a certain King, Dr. La^rence Ser. at S. P^^ls 1624.
that was never seen to laugh or smile, but in all places, amongst all persons,
at all times, he was very pensive and sad. His Queen being much troubled at his
melancholy, requested a brother of his, that he would ask him, what was the
cause of his continual sadness. He did so. The King put him off till the next
day for an answer, and in the mean time caused a deep pit to be made,
commanding his servants to fill it half full with fiery coals, and then causes
an old rotten board to be laid over it, and over the board to hang a two edged
sword, by a small slender thread, with the point downwards; and close by the
pit to set a table, full of all manner of delicacies. His brother coming next
day for an answer, was placed on the board, and four men with drawn swords
about him, and withal, the best music that could be had, to play before him.
Then the King called to him, saying, Rejoice and be merry, O my brother, eat,
drink, and laugh; for here is pleasant being. But he replied and said, (...)
aspicio nihil est ni^^, etc. Ovid de trist.
O my Lord and King, how can I be merry, being in such danger on every side?
Then the King said, Look how it is now with thee, so it is always with me; for
if I look about me, I see the great and dreadful Judge, to whom I must give an
account of all my thoughts, words, and deeds, good or evil. If I look under
me, I see the endless torments of hell, wherein I shall be cast, if I die in
my sins. If I look behind me, I see all the sins that ever I committed, and the
time which unprofitably I have spent. If I look before me, I see my death every
day approaching nearer and nearer unto my body. If I look on my right hand, I
see my conscience accusing me, of all that I have done, and left undone in this
world. And if I look on my left hand, I see the creatures crying out for
vengeance against me, because they groaned under my iniquities. Now then, cease
hence forward to wonder, why I cannot rejoice at the world, or any thing in the
world, but continue sad and heavy. Thus, Miscentur tristia laetis. Ovid
did but men consider their estates, then would they find small cause to
rejoice at any thing, which the world shall present, as a thing delectable, but
rather employment enough for Argus his eyes; yet all little enough to weep for
the miserable estate wherein they stand, by reason of sin and wickedness.


ON the Tombstone of the learned, Sr. Henry Wotton, late Provost of Eaton
College, it is thus inscribed; Hic jacet hujus sententiae Author, Pruritus
disputandi fit scabies Ecclesiae.

Here lies the Author of this sentence:
The itch of Disputation becomes the scab of the Church.
And very true. W^lter Curle Winton. Ser. at Court. 1632.
How is Religion in a manner lost, in the controversies of Religion? For who is
there, that had not rather seem learned in the controversies of Religion, then
conscionable in the practice of Religion, and that sets not more by a subtle
head, then a sanctified heart; that had not rather disputare quam been vivere,
dispute well, than live well? So that distraction in Religion, becomes
destruction of Religion.


SEneca tells of a Sextius.
Roman, that kept his soul as clean, as the best housewife keeps her house,
every night sweeping out the dust, and washing all the vessels, examining his
own soul, Quod malum hodie sanasti? qua part melior es? What infirmity have
thou healed? what fault haste thou done and not repented? in what degree art
thou bettered? Then would he lie down with, O quam gratus somnus, quam
tranquillus! With how welcome sleep, and how quiet rest, do I entertain the
night! T. Adams Exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
And it were to be wished, that all men would do the like, to keep a day-book
of all their actions and transactions in the world; to commune with their own
hearts, and not to sum up all their words and works in the day passed, with an
Omnia been, (as Churchwardens were wont to do, when they gave up their
presentiments) then would their nights rest be quiet, and then might they lie
down in safety, for God himself would keep them.

Repentant tears purging the Heart from pollutions of Sin^ e.
THere is mention made of a certain King that had an Oxe-stall, De^. ^rasmi
A^^g. chil. 2. Cent 4. A^gi^ b^^ile. Luci^n^s in Pse^domante.
which had not been cleansed in many years, and at last was grown so foul, that
it was thought all the industry of Man could not clean it in a life time; The
King perceiving that, considered with himself, that if he could bring the
River, which ran hard by his house, to run through it, that then it would
quickly be emptied; No sooner was this conceived thus in his mind, but he sets
upon the work, and after much expense both of labor and money, brought the
River to run through the Ox stall with a very sw^ft curren^, Rich. de
Mediavilla. Clavis Caelt. Lavant lachrym ae delictum. Aug. super Luc. lib. 9.
so that in three days the house was cleared, and all the filth removed: Thus
the heart of Man, like that Augaean stable, is filled with rottenness and
pollution, but if true repentant tears do but run through it with a forcible
current, they will drive down all putrefaction and uncleanness before them;
they are of such a purging nature, that as Rain distilling from the clouds,
clarifies the air, so they purify the Heart, insomuch that if the Men of this
world were truly persuaded of the great benefit of true Repentant tears, they
would not by any means be hindered from weeping.

Scandalous and seditious Books and Pamphlets fit for the fire.
Agesilaus, Xenophon.
when he saw the Usurers bonds and bills set all of a light fire, said; Nunquam
vidi ignem clariorem, I never saw a brighter or a better fire in all my life.
And it were heartily to be wished, that of all such scandalous, blasphemous,
seditious Books and Pamphlets, that are daily vended amongst us, such as are
fraught full of nothing but pestilent and bitter malice, Walter Curle Winton
Ser. at Court, 1631.
and the most shameless desperate untruths, that the Devil, the father of
lies can help to invent, there were a fire made of them, as was of the Books of
curious Arts, Act. 19. the flames whereof perhaps might expiate some part of
the Authors offenses, which otherwise would one day help to increase their
torment in Hell fire.

Men easily drawn by their own Natural corruption.
CAlista the Strumpet thus bragged against Socrates; A^lian Var. hist. lib. 13.
All thy Philosophy cannot alienate one of my Lovers from me, but my beauty can
fetch many of thy Scholars from thee: He made her this answer, No wonder, for
thou temptest Men to the pleasing path of perdition, but I persuade them to the
troublesome way of virtue; And it is observed, that Philosophers of diverse
sects turned to the Epicures, but never did any Epicure accept of any other
sect of Philosohpy. Vnicuique dedit vitium Natura creato. Propert. lib. 1.
eleg. 23.
Thus it is that Men are easily drawn by their own natural corruption; Men are
naturally disposed to be evil, to be holy and good is the difficulty; We are
all of us born sinners, there is much ado to make us Saints: For corrupt Nature
to adhere unto a doctrine that holds out carnal liberty, facilis descensus,
there is no more wonder in it, then for stones to fall downward, or sparks to
fly upward; but to mortify our Earthly members, to deny our selves, to forsake
this present world, and cleave unto God, hic labor hoc opus est, this goes
against the hair, fain we would be Saints, but we are loath to be holy.


St. Bernard makes mention in one of his Homilies of an old Man, who when he
saw any Man to sin, Homil. de Resurrect. Do^. Regia res est miseris succu^bere
(...).
wept and lamented for him; Being asked, why he grieved so for others,
answered, Hodie ille, cras ego, He fell to day, I may fall to morrow: Thus if
Men could be but affected with the falling of others into sin, it would rather
draw blood then joy from their hearts, Dr. Laurence Ser. at S. Paul's 1624.
not knowing how soon God may withdraw his Grace from them, and suffer them to
fall as foul as any other; besides there is no greater sign of a Reprobate,
then to laugh at sin and sinners; for he that can make wickedness his
chiefest pastime, and the faults of others his gr^atest joy, is no better then
the Devil that rejoices at the failings of Gods children.


THe Eagle a Princely bird, C. Jansen. harm. Evang. cap. 123.
of a piercing sight, a swift and lofty flight mounts upwards, setting light by
the things that are below, never condescending to any of these inferior
things, but when Necessity compells, not when superfluity does allure; Ulys^es
Aldrovand. Ornitholog.
Such an Eagle was Zacheus, that left his Extortion, Matthew his Tollgathering,
Peter all, such as used this world as if they used it not, wherewith to supply
their necessary wants and no further: O happy change! when Men leave all for
him that is worth more then all; S. Bernard in pr^fat. affix. lib. de consil.
ad Eugen.
though Riches increase, yet they set not their hearts upon them, though their
Estates be changed, yet they are not changed, their desire is not to be rich
unto this world, but unto G^d; their bodies are be low, but their hearts are
above; their lives here, but their Conversa^ions in Heaven.


IT is a worthy observation what Paulinus a good Man, S. Augustine. ep. 8.
answered to Sulpi^ius Severus, when he wrote unto him to send him his Picture,
Erubesco pingere quod sum, non audeo pingere quod non sum, modestly dispraising
his own feature; I must blush, said he, to picture my self as I am, and I
scorn to picture my self as I am not: Here was a modest Man, and a modest
disposition well met; Modesti^ san^ dece^ omnes omnium ordinum homines. P.
Comin. l. 1. T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 P.
And it were heartily to be wished, that the like frame of spirit were in the
p^ffe-paste Titulado's of our times, rather to confess the unworthiness they
have, then arrogantly to boast the worthiness they have not, pretending
sanctity at the root of the Tree, when no fruit but wickedness is seen on the
branches, flattering themselves that their garments are of the holy fashion,
their goings of the holy pace, their language of the holy style, and their hair
of the holy cut, whilst their heart is all this while of an unholy metal.


IT is related of that valiant Commander Sr. H^race Vere, Triumphs of Nassau.
J. Shute.
late Baron of Tilbury, that when in the Palatinate, a Council of War was
called, and there being debate, whether they would fight or not; some Dutch
Lord said, that the Enemy had many pieces of Ordinance planted in such a place,
and therefore it was dangerous to fight; he replied, My Lords, if you fear the
mouth of a Cannon, you must never come into the field. Thus it is that in the
service of God, Men must not shrink or give back, because of difficulties in
the way; and though it oftentimes so falls out, that Men fall into diverse
Temptations, and those great ones too, as to despair of Gods mercies, and so to
lay violent hands upon themselves; D. Rogers Ser. at Cant. 1633. Superand^
omnis fortuna ferend^ est. Vir. Aeneid. lib. 5.
yet a Christian courage must not be daunted at any crosses or afflictions, but
endure constant to the end; for God is faithful and just, and will not suffer
any Man to be tempted above what he is able to endure, nor lay any more upon
him then what he shall be able to bear.

The Law bringing Mento the sight of themselves.
THe Swans of Thames and Po, beholding with a retorted neck their goodly
feathers, think themselves Rarae aves interris; but when their black legs and
feet are become the object of their sight, then they find that they are nigris
Cygnts simillimae: So when Men behold their lives in what they are commendable
or tolerable, the Pharisee himself is not more proud then they, when they hear
of the two Tables of Gods Commandments, they can carry them as easily, as
Sampson did the Gates of Azzah. Judge. 16. 1.
But when they look into the glass of the Law of God, they find their strength
to be but as other Men's, Lo. Com. tit. Antinom.
then goes the hand to the breast, and the word from the mouth, O God be
merciful to me a sinner; Away then (as Luther once said) with those Antinomian
conceits, that the Law need not be taught in the times of the Gospel; Romans 10.
4. S. Augustine. contra advers. legis. l. 2. c. 7.
It is confessed That Christ is the end of the Law. What end? Finis perficiens
non interficiens, an end not consuming, but consummating, as himself said, I
came not to destroy the Law, but to teach and do it, Mat. 5. 17.

The painful Preachers poverty, the idle Impropriators plenty.
BEes make the honey, D. Valentines Sermon. at St. Paul's* 1633.
and drones suck the Hive, It is said in Job, chapter 1. v. 14. The Oxes were
ploughing, and the Asses feeding by them. What? Oxen plough the ground and
Asses reap the Harvest. This is somewhat preposterous, yet so it is; That
laborious Oxen, -- Aselli Ornantur phaleris dephalerantur equi.
painful Preachers; spend their time in plowing and preaching; and lazy Asses,
idle Impropriators eat up all their labors, being always feeding; Great
revenues belong to the contemplative covent, while the devout and active
Preacher is a Mendicant, the diligent Preacher lives in want of necessaries,
whilst the lazy Impropiator swells in all abundance.

Every Man to be persuaded of his own death.
TWo Ships meeting on the Sea, D. Rogers Ser. at Cant. 1633.
the Men in either ship think themselves stand still, and the other to be swift
of sail, whereas they both sail onwards toward the Port intended, but the one
faster then the other, Even so, Men are as Ships; see we an old Man with a
staff in his hand stooping downward? Alas, poor old Man, say we, he cannot
live long: Hear we a Passing Bell toll? There Is one going out of the world:
Ante omnia cogita fragalitatem propriam. ^ern. in Sermon. Joh. 20. 4.
Visites we a sick^friend? We think he can hardly live till morning: Thus we
think all other Men are a dying, and we only stand at stay; Whereas, God knows
it, they may go a little before, and we are sure to follow after; John out-runs
Peter to the Sepulcher, but Peter is not far behind him. Let every Man then be
thus persuaded of himself, that he shall and must dye; None can be so sottish
as to be persuaded that they shall never dye, yet (which is a sad thing) there
is none so old, but thinks he may live one year longer, and though in the
general he say, All must die; yet in the false numbering of his own particular
days, he thinks to live for ever.


MAny Planks well pinned and calk'd, Sam. Buggs at S. Paul's 1624 Suetonius.
make the Ship to float; one and but one leak not stopped will sink it, One
wound strikes Goliath dead, as well as three and twenty did Caesar, 2 King. 4.
40. Genesis 2.
One Dalilah will do Sampson as much spite as all the Philistines, One wheel
broken, spoils all the whole Clock, One vein's bleeding will let out all the
vitals as well as more; One fly will spoil a whole box of Ointment, One bitter
herb all the pottage, 1 Samuel 14. 33.
by eating o^e Apple Adam lost Paradise, One lick of honey endangered Ionathans
life, Josh. 7.
One Ac^an was a trouble to all Israel, One Jonah if faulty, is lading too
heavy for a whole ship: Thus one sin is enough to procure Gods anger, and too
much for one Man to commit; And if God then take an account of one sin, let Men
have a care of all sin.


DIog^^es warned the Bastard, Laert. Diog. in vita.
when he saw him throwing stones at random among the People, to take heed he
did not hit his own father. Such is the condition of all cursing Men, such,
whose tongues run with great speed on the Devils errand, whose Maledictions
are shot out of their mouths, just like fools bolts, not regarding where they
light, whereas many times they fall upon their friends, their children, and
very often upon themselves; or like ill made pieces, which while Men discharge
at others,. -- nec enim lex justior ulla est.
they recoyl in splinters upon their own faces, so that if every curse should
stick a visible blister on the tongue, as it does insensible ones, on the Soul;
How many Men's tongues would be too big for their mouths, and their mouth sas an
open Sepulcher full of rottenness and putrefaction.


IT is reported of Sir John Burgh, D. Rogers Ser at Cant. 1633
a brave Soldier, and a Gentleman of a good Family, who receiving a mortal
wound in the Isle of Rees, and being advised not to fear Death, Ann^ 1617.
but to prepare himself for another world; answered, I thank ^od, I fear not
Death, these thirty years together, I never rose out of my bed in the morning,
that ever I made account to live till night: Vive memor mortis, uti memor sis
and salutis. Auson.
A religious and Christian-like practice well worthy imitation, that every day
when a Man awaketh, he should commend himself to Gods protection, whether he
live or dye; for at the Evening none knows, whether that nights bed shall be
his grave, or that nights sleep shall be his death; Therefore before his eyes
do sleep, or his eyelids take any slumber, or the temples of his head takes
rest, make his peace with God for all his sins, that whether he live or die,
he may live and dye to the Lord, and Jesus Christ may be to him advantage.


COmets and Meteors that hang in the air, so long as they keep aloft in the
firmament of Heaven, Joh. Gore Ser. at St. Paul's, 1632.
they glitter and shine, and make a glorious and caelestiall luster in the eyes
of all beholders; but if once they decline from that pitch, and fall down to
the Earth (as many times they do) they vanish and disappeare, and come to
nothing; Such is the case betwixt a Man and his God, as long as a Man holds in
good terms with God, and sets his affections upon things above, Col. 3. 1.
Phil. 2. 15.
so long will God cast his favor upon him, and he shall sbine as a light in
the midst of a crooked and perverse generation: But if once he decline from
that pitch, and fall down from a godly conversation, into an earthly, idle,
ungodly disposition; 2. Pet. 2. 2^.
it is a venture, but his prosperity will fall away, and his latter end grow
worse than his beginning.

The madness of Ministers, Magistrates, etc. not to be guided by that Counsel
they give to others.
IT is fabled of a madman, Oath. Melandri I^co seria.
that talking with a lean meagre Cook, he understood from him, what dainty
dishes he dressed for his guests; and hearing that they were all fat, and fair
liking, and thrived with it, he asked him, Why he did not feed on those meats
himself, that he might be fat too? The Cook answered, That for his part, he had
no stomach. But the madman replies, Take heed how thou come near Bedlam, Turpe
est doctot ri cum culpa ^edarguit ipsum.
if the Corrector find you, your punishment will be very sharp; for certainly
you are madder, then ever I was. Thus, it is no better then madness for
Ministers, Magistrates, and others in place of eminency, to give light to
others, and walk themselves in darkness; to distribute portions of meat to the
Family, and starve their own souls; to rescue others from the enemy, and suffer
themselves to be taken; to forwarn others of the pit, whereinto themselves run
headlong; to give good counsel to others, and not to be guided by that
counsel themselves.

Christ nothing but Love all over.
IT is the observation of Sr. Walter Rawleigh, Preface to Hist. of World.
that if all the pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince were lost in this
world, they might all again be painted to the life, out of the story of K.
Henry the eighth. But on the other side, the Jews had such an high esteem of
Esdras, I. Plantavitii Florileg. Rabbini cum.
that if mercy, love, and knowledge had put out their candle, at his brain they
might light it again. Behold yet a greater then Esdras, Christ Jesus himself:
If all our love were extinguished, at his love we might easily rekindle it:
Christus amor is amor. Jac. Billius in Antholog. sacra.
Not a word that he spoke* not a work that he did, not a passion that he
suffered, but was an argument, a character of his love: He brought love, he
bought love, he exercised love, he bequeathed love, he died in love: He is all
love.

Needful Requisites, to make up a profitable Hearer of Gods Word.
IT is said of that Princely Josiah, Acts and Mon.
King Edward the sixth, that his carriage in the public service of God was
such, that he constantly stood up at the hearing of Gods Word, took Notes,
which he afterward diligently perused, and wrought the Sermon upon his
affection, by serious meditation. Thus, it is not a bare sitting under the
Ordinance, I. Trap. on Prove
a mere formal hearing of the Word, thinking, (as too many do) that when the
Sermon is ended, Auris b^na est, quae libenter audit u^ilia, etc. Bern. epist.
all is done: But there must be attention of body, intention of mind, and
retention of memory, which are indispensably required of all Wisdom's
scholars, and are the most needful requisites, to make up a profitable hearer
of Gods Word.


THe men of Tire and Sidon (two rich and ancient Cities of Phoenicia, Joh. Gore
Ser. (...) S. P^^ls. 1633.
on the costs of Syria) when they heard that Herod was displeased with them,
and intended to make war upon them, they made friendship with Blastus the Kings
Chamberlain, and sought by all means possible to get into favor with him
again: Act. 12.
And why? Bec^^se, said they, our lan^s are nourished by the lands of the King.
And this is our case; Omni^ h^bemus in (...), etc. Ambros. Psalm. 78. 40.
our lands, our lives, our liberties, and all that we have, are nourished and
sustained by the King of Heaven; therefore when we know that he is displeased
with us, as justly he may, for (as David says) we provoke him every day, then
let us do as they did; as they made a friend of Blastus, so let us make
friendship with Jesus Christ, and desire him to help us into Gods favor and
protection.


SAbellicus, T* Adam^ (...). on ep. 2 Pet
in his History, brings in C. Flaminius playing upon Philoxomenes, that he had
pulchras manus, and pulchra crura, sed ventrem non habuit, he had goodly arms,
and strong thighs, but he had no belly: He meant, that Philoxomenes had brave
and valiant soldiers, fair Troops of Horse and foot, but wanted that which is
the sinews of War, Tit. Livius. O si, Osi, (...).
he had no money to pay them. It may be inverted upon us, for we are all belly,
full of appe^i^e and desire to happiness; but we have neither hands nor feet,
we will neither move nor labor to attain to that happi^ess^; we have fat
desires, but lean endeavors; fain we would be in Heaven, but we will take no
pains for it, Non (...) mollis e terris Vi^ S^n. H^re f^r.
nor seek the way to it; we make account to go up to Heaven in a whirlwind, or
as Passengers at Sea, be brought to the Haven sleeping; to win Heaven without
working, to be crowned without striving, to dine with the Devil, and sup with
Abraham, Isaac, and Iacobin the Kingdom of Heaven; by all means we must die the
death of the righteous, but by no means live the life of the godly; nay, if
death do but offer to prefer us to Heaven, we will none of it, Mortem (...),
malum, tim^re pej^s. Sen. Oedip.
we thank him heartily, we refuse him with deprecations, and fortify our
sel^es against him with antidotes and preservatives: So that it may very well
be put to the question, Where is our desire for Heaven, when we rather die,
necessitatis vinculo, quam voluntatis obsequio; instead of looking for it, we
look from it, and then only pre^end a faint desire to it, when we can make no
other shift, but that we must needs vent^^e on it.


THe Jews at this day, ^. Plantavi^ Florileg. Rab.
though outed their own Country, and destitute of a Leviticall Priesthood, yet
those that will be reputed religious amongst them, distribute the tenth of
their increase unto the poor, being persuaded, that God does bless their
increase the more; for their usual proverb is, Decima, ut dives ^ias, pay thy
Tithes, that thou may be rich. Philo d^ Sacerdot. (...) lib. 2.
Nay, says Philo the Jew, They came so willingly to give up their Tithes unto
God, as if they had been to have received a gratuity from men. If then there be
such devout Jews, that having neither house nor home, (...) semper clemente^
p^rrige dextram. Eccles. 7.
Priest or Temple, and without Christ in the world, so charitable to the poor,
then how much more suitable will it be for Christians, that live in
Gospell-times, to relieve the poor members of Jesus Christ, to honor the Lord
wi^^ their substance, freely expending it in pious and charitable uses, whereby
their barns shall be filled, and they made great gainers in the end.

Why God suffers the dearest of his Children to want outward things.
IT is written of the Pine Tree, Theophr^st. de Pl^^tis. li^. 3
that if the bark be pulled off, it will last a long time; else it rots. So God
sees, that many a man, if he had his bark (...) him, if he had the wealth of
the world about him, (...)
a penny in his purse, and a friend at Court, it would rot him, corrupt him,
and make him worse; therefore God is fain to bark him, and peel him; to keep
him naked, and bare, and poor, that his so^l may prosper the better: For
indeed, many times it so falls out, and a man shall find it so, that his soul
prospers best, when his body prospers ^orst.

Men to be compassionate one toward another.
IT was an act of Licinius, Coccius S^belli^^s lib. 8. En. ^. P. Laetus de
Repub. Romans
one of the Roman Tribunes, whether more cruel or foolish, let the world
Judge, that when Christians were put to their torture, he forbad all the
lookers on to show the least pity toward them, threatening the same pains to
them that did show it, which the Martyrs then suffered. His malice was greater
then his power; for he could not hinder those from suffering with them, Rich.
de Mediavilla Clav. Davi^.
that daily suffer in them. And this is the way that all good Christians are to
walk in; Si doles condol^o, etc. Bern. de cons^l^^. ad Eugen.
if they cannot, through disability, relieve others with their goods, which is
the mercy of contribution* yet what can hinder their confortable words to them,
which is the mercy of consolation; or their prayers and tears for them, which
is the mercy of intercession; or their pity and sensible sympathy of their
grief, which is the mercy of compassion.

The impartiality of Death.
IN the reign of K. Henry the sixth, Guil. Halli Chron, in vita Hen. 6.
there is mention made of Henry Bea^^ord, that rich and wretched Cardinal,
who lying on his deathbed, and perceiving his time to be but short,
expostulated with himself thus: Wherefore should I die, being thus rich? If the
whole world were able to save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or
by riches to buy it. Fie, fie, said he, will not death be hired? will money d^
nothing? No, such is the impartiality of death, Ri^i^^m jus est and inevitabile
mortis. Ovid. ad Livi^m.
that ready money will do nothing; there is no protection against the arrest of
death. So true is that, which one writes vvittily of the Grammarian, of every
son of Adam, that being able to decline all other Nouns in every Case, he could
decline Death in no case. Never was there Orator so eloquent, nor Monarch so
potent, that could either persuade or withstand, the stroke of death, when it
came.

Unhappy prosperity of the wicked.
IT is David's observation, Psalm. 37. 35.
that the wicked are in great prosperity, and flourish like a green bay tree,
J. Gore Sermon. at S. Paul's. 1633.
which is well known to be green all the vvinter long, when Oak-trees and
Apple Trees, and all other far more profitable and fruitful trees do wither,
decay, and shed their leaves, stand naked and bare, and look as if they were
rotten and dead; Prosperum (...) foelix scel^s. Sen.
then it is, that the Bay Tree looks as fresh and green, as it were in the
midst of the Spring. So fares it with all wicked men, in such vvinter-times of
the world as we are now in, Ple^ caec^ men^^s tume factaque crura sec^ndis.
Silius (...) 1.
they prosper, and God sends them no cross, nor disease, nor judgment, to
interrupt them, but lets them take their svving in the very height of their
rebellions against him* when many a ^oor Christian is fain to fast and fare
hard, and go with many a hungry meal to bed: then it is, that God suffers a
company of flagitious villains, such as ar^ Mercatores humanarum calamitatum,
that make merchandise of poor men's miseries, to have their will without
control, and to thrive, and have a great deal of outward unhappy prosperity.


JOnathan and his Armor-bearer, being upon their march against the Philistines,
1 Samuel 14. 4. T. Adams Exposit. on 2 ep. Pet.
were to pass betwixt two rocks, the one called Bozez, which signifies dirty;
the other called Seneh, which signifies thorny; a hard passage: But on they
went (as we say) through thick and thin, and at last gained the victory. The
Israelites were first brought to the bitter waters of Marah, 1 King. 19. 11.
before they might taste of the pleasant fountains, or the milk and honey of
Canaan. And in vain shall any man expect the River of Gods pleasures, before he
has pledged Christ in the cup of bitterness: When we have pledged him in his
gall and vinegar, then he will drink to us in the new wine of his Kingdom. Luke
22. 18.
He that is the Door and the Way, has taught us, Ioh. 10. 7.
that there is but one way, one door, one passage to Heaven, and that a strait
one; Matthew. 7. 13.
through which, though we do pass with much pressure and tugging, having our
superfluous rags torn away from us here, Itur ad aetherea^ per magna* pericula
seeds. Verinus.
in the crowd of this world; yet we shall be happy. He that will be Knighted,
must kneel for it; and he that will enter in at the strait gate, must crowd for
it; a gate made so on purpose, narrow and hard in the entrance; yet after we
are entered, wide and glorious, that after our pain, our joy may be the sweeter.


IT was simply done of Cardinal Bobba, Ang. Roccha descript. Bibliothec.
Vaticanae.
who speaking in commendation of the Library at Bononia, (which being a very
spacious room, has under it a victualling house, and under that a wine-cellar)
thought he had hit it, in applying that text, Prove. 9. 2.
Wisdom has built her house, has mingled her wine, and furnished her table.
The rudeness of this application, did not in the least become the gravity of a
red Hat. Procul hinc, procul este prophani. Ovid.
But let all such know, that non est bonum ludere cum sanctis, there is no
jesting with edge-tools, no playing with the two-edged sword of Gods Word. Is
there no place but the Font, for a man to wash his hands in? no cup but the
Chalice to drink healths in? Th. Fuller Holy State.
Certainly they were ordained for a better use, and the Scriptures penned for a
better end, then to be played withal.


A Man that stands in lubrico, Ioh. Gore Ser. at Merc. Chap. Land. 1634.
in a slippery place, as on Ice or Glass, shall have much ado to keep himself
upright, though no body touch him; but if one should come upon him unawares,
and give him a sudden justle, or a sudden rush, he has no power in the world
to uphold himself, but must fall, and that dangerously. And this is the case of
wicked wealthy men, Tu, quoque fac timeas and quae tibi laeta videntur, Dum
loqueris, fieri tristia posse puta. Ovid
such as are laden with ease and honor; such as are blessed, like Esau, with the
dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth. Such graceless Ruffians, as feast
without fear, drink without measure, swear without feeling, live without God,
thinking that they are (...), unmovable, and fastened on a Rock, that never
shall be moved: But they are deceived. God, that knows their standing, tells
us, he has set them in slippery places, Psalm. 73. 18.
and it will not be long, ere he send some death, some judgment, some evil
Angel or other to give them such a sudden justle, such a sudden rush, that
without great mercy on ^is part, and great Repentance on their part, they must
fall irrecoverably into the pit of Hell for ever.

Atheism will unman any Man.
TAke a Dog, and mark what a generosity and courage he will put on, when he is
maintained by a Man, who is to him instead of a God, or at least melior Natura,
Gab. Inchini ^cala Caeli.
whereby it is manifest that the poor Creature, without the confidence of a
better Nature then his own, could never be so courageous: Thus it is with Man,
Psalm. 14. 1.
when he roleth himself upon God, and rests on his divine protection, then
he gathers a force and ability, which humane nature it self could never
attain; But when with the fool, he shall say in his heart (though he believes
otherwise) that there is no God, then he destroys the Nobility of Man; for Man
is a kin to the beasts by his body, and if he be not a kin to God by his soul,
he is a base and ignoble Creature; Atheism will unman any Man, and deject any
thing that is the advancement of humane Nature.

Riches ill gotten, never prosper.
IT is related of Tecelius, J. Trap. Com. on Proverbs.
the Popes pardon-monger in Germany, that having by sale of Indulgences scraped
together a vast sum of money, and returning for Rome, was met and eased of his
cash by an odd fellow, who being afterward apprehended, and prosecuted as a
fellon, produced a Pardon not only for sins past, but sins to come granted
unto him by Tecelius himself, and being thereupon acquitted by the Judge,
enjoyed the booty, which being ill gotten was as wickedly spent: And thus it is
that ill gotten goods seldom prosper, they have a poysonfull operation in
them, Job 20. 15.
bringing up the good food together with the ill humors. He that has any
such, has but locked up a Thief in his closet, that will rob him of all that he
has; Job 27. 16.
He may heap up silver as the dust, and prepare Raiment as the clay; he may
prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the Innocent shall divide the
silver. For when a man out of a covetous desire of gain, De male quaes^tis vix
gaudet, etc.
shall make a Marriage with Mammon, and give a bill of divorce to Jesus Christ,
care not which way nor how he scrapes up wealth, so as he have it, then it is
just with God to blast his hopes, and blow upon his estate that all shall come
to naught.

God only hears and answers the Prayers of his People.
IT is a pretty observation, Luke 11. Joh. Gores. Sermon. S. Peter Cornhill,
Lon. 1634.
that St. Augustine makes out of the Parable proposed by our Savior, where he
that knocked at Midnight to borrow bread of his Neighbor, found all the whole
family asleep, only the Master of the house was awake, and he answered and
opened, and gave him that he craved, though it was an unseasonable time, Nullus
de Ianitoribus respondit, none of all the Porters, none of all the Servants,
none of all the Children made him any answer, they were all asleep, Precis est
justae exauditor Deus solus Menand.
only the Master was awake, and heard when he called: Just so it fares with us
when we knock and call at the doors of Heaven for any Mercy, none of all the
Prophets or Apostles, none of the blessed Saints departed make us any answer,
Alas they hear us not, they sleep in peace, and are at rest from their
labors, only God Almighty, who is the Master and Maker of that blessed
Family, he and only he does hear and answer at what time soever we cry unto
him; call when we will, he is always awake to hear us.


St. Augustine has the story of an Histrionicall Mountebank, T. Adams
exposi^^n (...). 2. P.
that to get Spectators and money by them, promised to tell them the next day
what they most desired: The Theater being full of People, and their minds full
of expectation, What was the device? Vili vultis emere, and chare vendere, you
would all buy cheap, and sell dear; But by Mr. Mountebank's leave, this holds
not; for the good Man in a famine will buy corn dear, Qui deum habet, habentem
omnia habet. Aug.
and sell it to the poor cheap; And on the other side, the unthrift will sell
his Inheritance cheap, and buy vanities at a very dear rate: Now if he had told
them, Beati vultis esse, you would all be happy, this had been a full
satisfaction: Blessedness is every Man's desire; Now whosoever has the Sun,
has the light of the Sun; He cannot want water that has the fountain, and he
that has God, shall be sure of blessedness; It is therefore every Man's part,
to cleave to this blessed God, who will deliver him from sin and hell, which is
blessedness begun, and bring him to salvation and Heaven, which is
blessedness consummate.


PHilip Duke of Austria, David. Parei hist. prophan. medul. Hect. Boethii hist.
Scot.
paid the Ambassadors of Charles the fourth (who had betrayed their trust) in
counterfeit coin: whereof when they complained, it is answered, That false coin
is good enough for false Knaves; James the first, King of Scots, was murdered
in Perth, by Walter Earl of Athol, in hope to have the Crown, and crowned he
was indeed, but with a Crown of red hot Iron clapped upon his head, being one of
the tortures wherewith he ended at once his wicked days and devices; In his
examination before the L. L. of his Majesty's council, M. S. Psalm. 2.
And Guy Fawkes that Spanish Pyoneer, should have received his Reward of five
hundred pounds at an appointed place in Surrey, but instead thereof he had been
paid home with a brace of bullets for his good service, if Justice had not come
in with a halter by way of prevention: Thus Traitors have always become
odious, though the Treason were commodious; Let those Kill-Christs, and those
State-Traytors, I. Trap Com. on Proverbs.
Sheba, Shebna, etc. all disturbers of present-Government, be never so
industrious in contrivance, never so confident in the effecting of their
treacherous designs, ^quam brevibus pereunt ingentia causis Imperium tanto
quaesi tum sanguine etc. Claud. 2 Ru^.
let them plot on, whet their wits, beat their brains, associate, confederate,
take counsel together, break vows, promises, and Covenants, swear and
forswearr, yet all shall come to naught, toto errant Coelo, they are Heavenly
wide, quite out, they shall miss of their purpose, and meet with
disappointment, and the just judgments of God upon them and their Posterity in
the conclusion.


St Augustine out of the Parable concerning the Man that fell amongst Theives
and was wounded and left half dead, Luke 10. 30.
notes of him, that he was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, M. Gores Ser.
at St. Paul's 1634.
from the Church, I warrant you; Jerusalem was the Church of God, Psalm. 87. 3.
the holy City: Jericho was a cursed place, branded with an ancient curse since
the days of Joshua, Josh. 6. 17.
and thither lay his journey; Whereupon St. Augustine notes, Si non
descendisset, fortasse in latrones non incidisset, Had he not been descending,
and going downward from God, and from his Church, peradventure he had not
fallen into the hands of Thieves; Templa petas supplex and ven^rare Deum. G.
Lilius de moribus.
God would have protected him, the Lord would have safe-guarded him, that no
evil should have betided him; But because he was going from the Church to a
cursed place, and like enough about a naughty business, therefore God gave him
over; As many therefore as desire Gods protection, and blessing, let them
resort to the Church to serve and seek him.

Conversion of a Sinner, not wrought all at once.
SUppose it now Midnight, and the Sun with the Antipodes; He does not
presently mount up to the height of our Heaven, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 P.
and make it Noonday, but first it is twilight, then the day dawns, and the
Sun rises, and yet looks with weaker eyes, before he shine out in his full
glory: We do not to day sweat with summer, and be shaken with the fury of the
Winter to morrow; but it comes on with soft paces, the day grovvs shorter, the
Suns force weaker, cold dewes and white frosts precede the extremity of
hardness. Now it is most true, that Christ is able in a moment, of Sinners on
earth, to make men Saints in heaven, as he wrought upon that dying Male^actor:
Luke 23. 43. and 19. 5.
Some may make sudden leaps, and of furious sinners become zealous professors
in a trice; Of such we may be charitably jealous, yet Non ad altum per sal^um,
chapter 4. 6.
Holiness shoots not up like Ionahs Gourd in a night, God is the God of order,
not of confusion, and Nature is not suffered to run out of one extreme into
another, but by a medium; Tres modi sunt conversorum, inchoatio, medietas,
atque perfectio, etc. Greg. 24. mor.
That ordinary way whereby Men walk from the state of sin, to the state of
Glory, is the state of Grace; So our Conversion is by soft and scarce- sensible
beginnings, albeit no part after part, yet degree after degree; in every part,
by gentle soakings in of goodness; in every degree, by growing up to maturity
and ripeness.

Not to answer one angry word with another.
ADrian the Emperor, Dio. in vita Adriani.
gave the Crier great thanks, who when he was bidden to quiet the tumultuous
People with an imperious (...) Hold your tongues, Xyphilin.
he held out his hand only; And when the People listened with great silence (as
the manner was) to hear the cry, Hoc vero, inquit, Princeps vult, This is that,
said he, the Emperor requires of you, viz. To be silent: And this is the ready
way to make all quiet, Prove. 15. 1.
A soft answer pacifies wrath. It was Abigails gentle Apology that disarmed
David's fury; 1 Samuel 25. 32. Judge. 8.
and Gedeons mild and modest answer that stilled the hot and hasty Ephramites.
Lay but a flint upon a pillow and you break it easily, but hard to hard will
never do the deed: male cuncta ministrat Impetus. Stat. 8. Theb.
It is not the vying one angry word with another; grievous words stir up
strife, harsh and angry words cast oil upon the flame, set the Passions afloat,
and then ^ertur equis auriga, there is no hope, not one wise word to be expected.

The compleatest armed Man of War, naked without Gods protection
IT is said (Exodus 32. 25.) That Moses saw the People were naked after their
great sin. Franc. Junius in locum.
How naked? Non vest sed gratia and praesidio Dei, they were naked not so
much for want of clothes, arms, and other furniture of War, as for want of
Grace, favor and protection of God Almighty, and no doubt (as J. Ferus.
one very well observes) Si tunc irruissent hosts, if their Enemies had then
fallen upon them, they had most shamefully foiled them: Sed quod dolendum est,
quaeritur belli exitus, non causa. Sen. Herc. fur. Protegente Deo, been armatus
est homo. Aug.
Then let those that are Soldiers, and Men of War, if they desire that their
warfare should prosper, and that God should cover their heads in the day of
battle, let them be sure of the goodness of their cause, that their quarrel
be proveris and licitis, for things true and lawful, that they seek to God,
before they set upon their Enemies; For let a Man be never so well clothed,
never so well armed, and weaponed, if he be stripped of Gods protection, by
sin, he lies naked and open to all dysasters whatsoever.

Works of Mercy, very rare to be found amongst us.
THere are a kind of Almanacks, R. Harris Ser. at S. M. Spittle 1642.
(such as Stationers call blanks) full of letters red and black on the one
side, but on the other side there is fair paper, a waste empty page to write
whatsoever a Man pleases, though seldom it is that any word of God be there
inserted: Such are the Day-books that most Men keep; On the one side you shall
find, Item so much spent upon Pride and so much played away at Game, ^terras
Ast^^^ reliquit. Ovid.
so much upon Revenge, so much upon Hawks, so much upon Hounds, and so much
upon something else, that sounds somewhat near that way; But when it comes to a
work of mercy, what has been done for God, what for Christ, what for his poor
distressed Members, Philosoph^ triob^lum* Erasm adag.
what for the advancement of Religion, or any pious work or service; O then the
Book appears blancatus quasi lilius, a mere blanck, Ciphers, or little else to
purpose are to be seen in it.


EDward Duke of Buckhingham being dispatched with instructions from the Court,
Sr. T. More, in vita.
came to the City of London, and there at a common Hall spoke largely on the
behalf of that Usurper Rich. the third; but all the commendations that he got
for his labor, was; That no man could deliver so much bad matter in so goods
words and quaint phrases, Eloquentiae satis, sapientiae parum, that he showed a
great deal of wit, but little wisdom in so doing: Thus it is that the tongue
was given to a better purpose; `twas Davias glory, and he used it accordingly.
Eloquence wisely ordered is very commendable and avails much, Prove. 15. 2. T.
Cartwright in locum. Optima est eloquentia, quae non ostentat ingenium docen^is
sed rem optisst^ne etc. Aug. in simil.
The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright.i. deals kindly with her, offers
her no abuse by venting her unseasonably, and making her over-cheap and little
set by; But eloquence abused, fits the Pulpit rather with words then matter,
and makes others, that (more is the pity, might better improve their
education) instead of Christian Lawyers, become Heathen Orators; so that it may
well be termed the Attorney general, that makes a good cause seem bad, and a
bad far better then in truth it is.

Debitors comfort.
THere came a Man of God to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9.
and forbids him, that by no means he should take the Ephramites into the
battle against the Edomites, because God was not with them; O, but then, says
Amaziah, What shall I do for the hundredth Talents which I gave them for their
help, (every Talent of silver being worth 375 l. and that of gold 4500 l. a
very considerable sum) No matter, says the Prophet, Cannot God give thee
more then this? So it may be said to all that tremble at the inundation of debt
that is upon them, that are perplexed and entangled* in a labyrinth of
engagements, so that they can see no outgate, no passage, no way to escape; God
if he be truly sought unto, Providebit Deus
can give a happy issue, more then the debt comes to, can do more then they are
a ware of; when they know not how to be delivered; In mon^e videbitur Jeb^ua^
when they know of no evasion, nor have any means or power in their view, let
but earnest prayer be joined with frugality, skill and industry, and they are
sure to be delivered.

Works of mercy, not to be put off from one to another.
IT is usual, that when men meet together at a Tavern or Alehouse, upon some
occasions, R. Harris Ser. at S. Mary's Spittle 1642.
by way of kindness, to drink or feast together, then happy is that man, when
the reckoning is brought, that can be rid of ^is money first: I Will pay, says
one; I Will pay, says another; you shall not pay a penny, says a third; I Will
pay all, etc. and so i^ grows sometimes very near unto a quarrel, because one
man cannot spend his money before another. Thus in works of kindness, and merry
meeting: But come to a work of mercy, Quum nemini ^btrudi potest itur ad
inferiores.
how is it then* Is the money upon the table? is every man ready to throw down,
and make it a leading case to the rest of the company? No such matter, one puts
it off to another: Alas, I am in debt, says one; I have no money about me,
says another: Then every finger is a thumb, and it is such a while, before any
thing will be got out, that it would trouble any one to behold it. Then the
question is not, Who shall be first? but, Who shall be last? A sad thing! that
in way of courtesy any man should be thus free, and when it comes to a work of
mercy, thus bound up.

God, to be ^eared in his Judgments.
IT is said of Queen Elizabeth, Guil. Cambdeni Elizab.
she was so reserved, that all about her stood in a reverent awe of her very
presence and aspect; but how much more of her least frown and check, wherewith
some of them, who thought they might best presume of her favor, have been so
suddenly daunted and planet-strucken, that they could not lay down the grief
thereof, but in their graves: One of these was, Sr. Christopher Hatton, Lord
Cnancellor, who died of a flux of urin, with grief of mind; neither could the
Queen, having once cast him down with a word, raise him up again, Amos 3. 8.
though she visited and comforted him in the time of his sickness. O! but when
the Lion roars, Esa. 26. 10.
shall not the beasts of the forest tremble? Shall the judgments of God be
abroad in the world, and the people not learn righteousness? Shall the frowns
of any mortal Wight be matter of discontent, and shall the angry countenance
of the immortal God, be passed by unregarded? It must not be. He that was,
Esa. 9. 6.
and is Wonderful, the Counselor, made it out for comfortable advice, Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
fear him, which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell, Matthew. 10. 28.

Conscience to be looked on, as a Register of all our actions,
IT is recorded of that reverend Martyr, Acts and Mon. M. Carpenter Ser. at
Taunton Assizes. 1628.
Bishop Latimer, that he took especial care in the placing of his words before
Bonner, because he heard the pen walking in the chimney, behind the cloth,
setting down all (it may be more) then he said. So ought we circumspectly, to
look to all our sayings and doings; for Conscience, as a Scribe or Register,
sitting in the closet of our hearts, with pen in hand, makes a Diurnall of all
our ways, sets down the time when, the place where, the manner how,
Conscientia est codex in quo peccata qu^tidiana scribuntur. Bern. in Cant.
things were performed; and that so clear and evident, that go where we will,
do what we can, the characters of them shall never be cancelled or razed out,
till God appear in judgment.


IT is observable, that the Athenian Commonwealth prospered, so long as the
People were in action and employment; but when they once tasted the pleasures
of Darius Court, and brought home Persian gold, then they fell to wantonness,
and so to nothing. 1. Nash. Qu^ternio.
Whilst the Assyrians did set forth themselves, they flourished; but when
Sardanapalus (whom Boccace would have to be the first, that brought idleness
into the world) began to invert the course of Nature, by turning days into
nights, and nights into days, in riot and excess, then the Commonwealth began
to decline. Ingenuas didicisse ^ideliter arts, Emollit mores, nec sinit esse
feros. Ovid.
And such was the condition of the Roman State, when they had vanquished the
Carthage^ians. It was therefore the great prudence of our forefathers, to find
out the knowledge of the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and to institute
Mechanical Trades and Occupations, well knowing, that it is Action which gives
a well-being to every living creature, that Industry has raised the most
flourishing Commonwealths out of the dirt, and Idleness levelled them with
the dust, and brought them to nothing.


JOhn Denly, Acts and Mon.
one of the Martyrs in that Marian persecution, being set in the fire, with the
burning flames about him, sang a Psalm: Whereupon Doctor Story commanded one of
the Tormentors, to hurl a faggot at him; but being hurt therewith upon the
face, that he bled again, he left his singing, and clapped both his hands upon
his face: Truly, said the scossing Doctor to him that threw the faggot, thou
have marred a good old song. Yet so it happened, that this Story, after the
coming in of Queen Elizabeth, being caught in a mouse-trap at Antwerp, was
hoisted away for England; and being questioned in Parliament for many foul
crimes, and particularly for persecuting and burning the Martyrs, he denied
not, (still keeping up his jeering humor) but that once he was at the burning
of an Herewig at Uxbridge, where he cast a faggot at his face, and set a bush
of thorns under his feet to prick him. But he was hanged at Tyburn for all his
flamming, (being just then new built three square, after the manner of his
three cornered cap) and so made good that Proverb of Solomon, He that is glad
at calamities, shall not go unpunished. Chap. 5. 5.
And thus, he that rejoices at the afflictions of others, is sick of the
Devils disease, (...); and such were the Edomits, Ammonites, Philistines, and
others of Sions enemies, Lam. 1. 21.
that heard of her trouble, and were glad of it. Such were David's adversaries,
Psalm. 40. 15.
that wished him evil, and cried, Aha, aha; and such the Jews, Matthew. 26.
that scoffed at Christ on the Cross. Chap. 31. 29.
But Job was of another spirit, he rejoiced not at the destruction of him that
hated him; and so must all good Christians be; otherwise, he that sits in
the heavens, will have them also in derision, and laugh when their fear comes.


IT was, H. King, cicestrensis, In^ugurat. Sermon. at Court. 1640.
no doubt, a sad experience, that wrung those words from Caesar's mouth, when
you would name a mass of cares and crosses, Cogita Caesarem, Think upon
Caesar. Ah! little do the shrubs, and they that live in the humble valley of a
private life, take notice of the loud tempests, or feel those incessant storms,
which beat upon the Cedar, whose exalted top raise him nearer to the lightning,
and rage of the upper Element; they look only upon the glittering matter of a
Diadem, and the luster of the Jewels set in it, and so apprehend somewhat,
that may delight the eye; but could they understand, how many cares are lodged
and concentred, Hen. 4. R. Angliae.
within the pale and circle of that Crown, (as a great King said once) They
would scarce take it up for their wearing, though it lay in their way. What are
dignities, Honos onus.
but difficulties? and the rent of labor considered, the good man has but a
hard bargain of his honor. No wonder then, if the wise man be, as it were,
haled out of his privacy to such preferment; for he weighs the charge as well
as the credit, the danger more then the gain, and knows his chayr of State to
be as tickle, Sub te^ni membrana dignitatis, multum latet mali. Sen, ep. 115.
as Eli's stool, from which he may easily break his neck; that he must drink
wormwood in a cup of gold, and lie in a bed of Ivory, upon a pillow of thorns;
so that he may well say of his glory, as one said of his roab, O nobilem magis
quam felicem pannum! or as Pope Urban said of his Rochet, That he wondered it
should be so heavy, being made of such light stuff.

Prayer, turning Earth into Heaven.
IT is said of Archimedes, Th. Venatorius in epist. ad Senate. Norimberg.
that famous Mathematician of Syracuse, who having by his Art framed a curious
Instrument, that if he could but have told how to fix it, it would have raised
the very foundations of the whole Earth. Such an Instrument is Prayer, which if
it be set upon God, and fixed in Heaven, it will fetch Earth up to Heaven,
change earthly thoughts into heavenly conceptions, turn flesh into spirit,
metamorphose nature into grace, and earth into heaven.

To pass by the offenses of our Brethren.
DAvid was deaf to the railings of his enemies, Psalm. 35.
and as a dumb man, in whose mouth were no reproofs. Socrates, Varinus.
when he was abused in a Comedy, laughed at it; Phavorinus.
when Polyargus, not able to bear such an indignity, went and hanged himself.
Aelian.
Sueton in vita
Augustus slighted the Satyrs and bitter invectives, which the Pasquills of
that time invented against him; and when the Senate would have further informed
him of them, Ex^^timandus ille praestantissimus, Injurias qui far novit
plurimas.
he would not hear them. Thus, the manlier any man is, the milder and readier
he is to pass by an offense, as not knowing of it, or not troubled at it; an
argument, that there is much of God in him, (if he do it from a right
principle) who bears with our infirmities, and forgives our trespasses,
beseeching us to be reconciled. Si vindicare vis, file, and funestam dedisti
plagam. Chas. in Matthew.
When any provoke us, we use to say, We will be eeven with him; but there is a
way, whereby we may not only be even, but above him, and that is, forgive him.
We must see and not see, wink at small faults especially. Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit vivere, may with some grains of allowance pass current, He
that cannot dissemble, is not fit to live.

Kingdoms and Commonwealths, their successions from God.
THe Romans closing in with that permanent error of Mankind, to mistake the
Instruments and secundary Agents in Gods purposes, Eutropii hist. lib. 7.
for the main Efficient, were wont variously to distinguish the derivation of
their Empire; Fenestella de Mogist. cap. 4.
as by force, so Julius Caesar was invested; by the Senates election, so
Tiberius; by the Soldiers, so Severus; and by Inheritance, so Octavius
Augustus. But most true it is, that to what means soever they imputed their
Emperors, were it Birth or Election, Conquest or Usurpation, it is God who
gives the Title to Kingdoms and Commonweales by the first, and it is he also
that directs and permits it by the last.


SOme great King or Potentate, T. Stapletons Prompt. Morale
having a mind to visit his Imperial City, the Harbinger is ordered to go
before, and mark out a house suitable to his Retinue; and finding one, the
Master of that house desires to have but some small chamber, wherein to lodge
his wife and children: It is denied. Then he entreats the benefit of some
by-place, to set up a Trunk or two, full of richer goods then ordinary. No,
says the Harbinger, it cannot be; for if your house were as big again as it
is, it would be little enough to entertain the King, and all his royal train.
Now so it is, that every man's body is a Temple of God, and his heart the
sanctum sanctorum of that Temple. 1 Cor. 5.
His Ministers are sent out into the world to inform us, 2 Cor. 6.
that Christ is coming to lodge there, and that we must clear the rooms, that
this great King of glory may enter in. O, says the Old man, carnal yet, but
in part renewed, give me leave to love my wife and children. No, it cannot be;
having wife and children, 1 Cor. 7. 29.
he must be as having none. Then he desires to enjoy the pleasures of the
world, verse. 31.
That Is denied too; he must use this world, as if he used it not: not that the
use of these things is prohibited, not that the comfortable enjoyment of our
dearest relations, is any way to be infringed; but the extraordinary affection
to them, when they come into competition with the love that we owe unto God:
For he will have the whole heart, COR. Civitas Omnipotentis Regis.
the whole mind, the whole soul, and all little enough to entertain him, and
the graces of his holy Spirit, which are attendant on him. 1 King. 3.
Nec mihi nec tibi, sed dividatur, was the voice of a strange woman; and such
is that of this present world: But God will take nothing to halfs, he will have
the whole heart, or nothing.


MArtin Luther perceiving the cause of the Church to go backward, Abrah.
Shulteeti Annals.
puts pen to paper, and writes to the Elector of Saxony, where amongst other
expressions, this was one; Sciat Celsitudo tua, and mhil dubitet, etc. Let your
Highness be sure, that the Church's business is far otherwise ordered in
Heaven, than it is by the Emperor and States at Norimberg. And, Gaudeo quod
Christus Dominus est, etc. I am glad that Christ is King, for otherwise, I had
been utterly out of heart and hope, Joh. Calvini ep. and resp. p. 53.
(says holy Myconius, in a letter to Calvin) upon the view of the Church's
enemies. Thus, it staggers many a good Christian at this day, to see Sion in
the dust, the Church under foot, the hedge of government and discipline broken
down, all the wild beasts of Heresy and Schism crept in, such as labor to
root out true Religion, to dethrone Christ, and to set up the idle fancies, and
enthusiasticall conceits of their own phanatick brains; some crying out against
the Church with those Edomites, Psalm. 137:
Down with it, down with it even to the very ground; others casting dirt upon
her harml^sse ceremonies. But let the Churches friends rest assured, that God
sees, and smiles, and looks, and laughs at them all; that the great counsel of
the Lord shall stand, Psalm. 2.
when all is done; that Christ shall reign in the midst of his enemies, Prove.
19. 21.
and that the stone cut out of the mountains without hands, shall bring down
the golden Image with a vengeance, and make it like the chaff of the summer
floor, Dan. 2. 35.


IT was a just complaint of Draco's Laws in Lacedemonia, that their execution
was as sanguin, as their character, for they were written in bloody letters:
And the Romans lamented the cruelty of those Tribunalls, where the cheap
proscription of lives, Esaias 29. 21.
made the Iudgement-seat little differ from a Shambles; A Man made Offender for
a word, H. King.
Poor Men sold for shoes; Or as the Turks at this day sell heads, In^^gur.
Sermon. at Court. Anno 1640.
so many for an Asper: Such is the condition of People under Tyrannical
government, under such as make low account of Men's lives, that destroy where
they might build hopes of amendment, A^os 2. 6.
and down with root and branch, where they need but pare the leaf; such in
discharge of their place, are governed more by Custom then Conscience, who
take dark circumstance, and lame surmise for evidence, rashly giving sentence,
and as precipitately proceeding to Execution.

Graces of Gods spirit not given in vain.
THe Husbandman, T. Stapletoni Prompt. mor.
the more he improves his ground, the greater crop he looks for; the completer
the Soldier is armed, the better service is required of him; The Scholar that
is well instructed must show great fruits of his proficiency: Thus the Earthly
part of Man soaks in the sweet showers of Grace that fall upon it. Heb. 6.
The bleffed Spirit of God puts upon us that Panoplia, that whole Armor of
God. Ephesians. 6.
And the same Spirit teaches us all things, leads us into all Truth, and
brings all things to our Remembrance, which Christ has spoken for our good:
Shall we then being thus manured, Joh. 14. 16.
thus armed, thus instructed, not bring forth fruits in some measure answerable
to so great Indulgence? Shall such blessings of God be received in vain? It
must not be; we may read these and the like expressions in Scripture, Occupy
till I come, Luke 19. 13. and 16. 2. 12.
Give an account of thy s^ewardship, To whom much is given, much is required;
What Is the meaning? Cum crescunt dona, rations etiam crescunt donorum, We must
give an account as well of Graces received from God, Greg. hom. 9. in Evang.
(Whether they be those summer Graces of Prosperi^y, Joy and Thansgiving; or
those winter Graces of Adversity, Patience and Perseverance; or the Grace of
Humility, which is always in season) as of Sins of what kind soever committed
against him.

Sacrilege justly rewarded, to take heed of committing it.
IT was a sudden and sad end that befell Cardinal Wolsey, whilst he sought
more to please his Sovereign, Acts and Mon^.
then his Savior; And the revenging hand of God pursued his five chief
Agents, that were most isntrumental for him in his sacrilegious enterprise;
One of them killed his fellow in a Duel, and was hanged sor it; a third
drowned himself in a well; Abrah. Schult^ti Annals tom. 2.
a fourth fell from a great Estate to extreme beggary: Doctor Allen, the last
and chiefest of them, being Archbishop of Dublin, was cruelly slain by his
Enemies, Utinam his and similibus exemplis etc. says the Author of this story,
I would men would take heed by these and the like examples, how they meddle
with things consecrated to God: for if divine Justice so severely punished
those that converted Church-goods (though not so well administered, -quis enim
laesos impune putar^t
to better uses doubtless) And why, but because they did it out of selfish and
sinful self-interested Principles and ^nds; Esse Deos?
What shall become of such as take all occasions to rob God, Lucan.
that they might enrich themselves? Spoliantur Ecclesiae and Scholae, Com. in
Genes. cap. 49.
etc. was Luthers complaint of old, Parishes* and Churches are polled and
robbed of their maintenance, as if they meant to starve us all.

The comfortable Resurrection of Gods poor despised People.
WHen we see one in the streets, Walt. Balcanquels Sermon. at St. M. Spittle,
1623.
from every dunghill, gather old pieces of rags and durty clouts, little would
we think, that of those old rotten rags beaten together in the Mill, there
should be made such pure fine white Paper as afterward we see there is: Thus
the poor despised Children of God, may be cast out into the world as dung and
dross, may be smeared and smooted all over with lying amongst the pots, Par
est, ut ^icut omnis creatur^ lugubre doluit, etc. Aug. in Ser. de Pasc.
they may be in tears, perhaps in blood, both brokenhearted and broken-boned;
yet for all this they are not to despair, for God will make them one day shine
in joy, like the bright stars of Heaven, and make of them Royal, Imperial
Paper, wherein he will write his own name for ever.


IT is observable, Genesis 21.
that Abraham, made a feast at the weaning of his Son Isaac, not on the day of
his Nativity, T. Stapletoni Prompt. moral.
not on the day of his Circumcision, but on that day when he was taken from his
Mothers breast, from sucking of Milk to taste of stronger meat; This made a
festival in Abraham's family, and may very well make a feast in ever true
Repentant sinners heart: Nascimu^ car^ales allactamur spirituales; We are all
of us conceived and born in sin, Majus de peccatore conver ^o, quam de justo
stante gaudium, etc. Greg. hom. 34.
and with our Mothers milk, have sucked in the bitter juice of corrupt Nature;
but when it comes so to pass, that by the special illumination of Gods holy
Spirit shining into our hearts, that we are weaned from the things of this
World, and raised up to those things which are at Gods right hand, that we are
new Creatures, new Men, etc. This has always been matter of great rejoicing
to the Angels of Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and must needs be the like to every sinner that is so converted. Ephesians. 5. 24.



IT is reported of the Hearts of Scythia, that they teach their young ones to
leap from bank to bank, Ulys. Aldrov. de quadruped.
from Rock to Rock, from one turfe to another by leaping before them, which
otherwise they would never practice of themselves, by which means when they
are hunted, no Man or beast can ever overtake them: So if Parents would but
exercise their Children unto Godliness, Si parents boni been instituent
filios, ipsos servabunt.
principle them in the ways of God whilst they are young, and season their
tender years with goodness, dropping good things by degrees into their
narrow-moutn'd vessels, and whetting the same upon their Memories by often
repeating. Chrysostom. in Heb. Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
Satan that mighty Hunter, should never have them for his prey, nor lead them
captive at his Will, they would not be young Saints, and old Devils (as the
profane Proverb has it) but young Saints, and old Angels of heaven.


St. Augustine tells us, Dionis Carthusian. de, 4. novissim. part. 4. a^t. 10.
in fine.
that one day while he was about to write something upon the eighth verse of
the Thirty sixth Psalm; Thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy
Pleasures; And being almost swallowed up with the Contemplation of Heavenly
joys, one called unto him very loud by his name, and enquiring who it was, he
answered; I am Hierom, with whom in my life time thou had so much conference
concerning doubts in Scripture, and am now best experienced to resolve thee of
any doubts concerning the joys of Heaven; but only let me first ask thee
this question, Art thou able to put the whole Earth, and all the waters of the
Sea into a little (...)? Can thou measure the waters in thy fist? and mete
out Heaven with thy span? or weigh the Mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance? If not, no more is it p^ssible, that thy understanding should
comprehend the least of those joys: And certainly, The joys of Heaven are
inexpressible, so says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The eye may see far, it may
reach the Stars, but not the joys of Heaven; the ear may extend it self a
great deal further then the eye, as to know the glory of all the Monarchies
that are past, the glory of all things that now are, and all the things that
are foretold shall be, and yet our ears have never heard of any thing like th^s
joy; Hic loeus est quem Re. Ovid Met. lib. 1.
but the understanding apprehends things that are and are not, and by a
divine power calls things that are not as if they were, Disputat de quolibet
ente and non ente, it imagines Mountains of Gold, and Heaven to be a place of
infinite joy, and yet the heart of Man cannot comprehend this joy; Such are the
great expressions of the impossibility of expressing it at all.

Love to be preserved with all Men.
When the King of Babylon sacked Jerusalem, 2 Match. 1.
it was observable, that whereas the Priests might have had what they pleased,
yet they preserved only the fire of the sanctuary, Dilige and fac quicquid
voles. Aug. de verb. D^m.
and hid that in a pit, because this fire (as its said) came down from Heaven
upon the first Mosaicall Sacrifice, and was kept to that day, Thus must we do
with Love, (that divine spark of a far greater flame, which streaming from
God, has by the illumination of his holy Spirit from the beginning of the
world warmed the Sons of Men); Above all these things (says the Apostle) put
on Charity, Col. 3. 14.
Love Friends, love Enemies, love all, Amicum in Domino, inimicum pro Domino,
S. Augustine Confess. l. 9. c. 4.
Love our friends in the Lord, our foes for the Lord; So that whatsoever else
we do amiss, as in many things we sin all, admit the opinions and ^udgements
of Men be different from ours, yet let not us differ in affection, but keep up
and maintain love one toward another.

Every Man to labor that he may be a new Creature.
WE look upon Guns and Printing as new inventions; Joh, Funccii Chron^logia.
the former found out by Birchtoldin the Monk, Anno 1380; the other by one
Faustus a Friar, Anno 1446. Others say that John Guthenburg a German, was the
first inventer thereof; Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rerum
But for certain the first Press was set up at Mentz, and the first book there
imprinted, was Tullies Offices; afterward one ^onradus set up a Press at Rome;
Con^ Zuinger theatrum hum. vitae.
Nicholas Ienson added much to the art; and William Caxton a Merchant, free of
the Company of Mercers^, London, propagated the same in England, in the Reign
of K. Edward the fourth, having his Workhouse in the Sanctuary, near the Abbey
of Westminster; Belgic Com. Wealth. p. 57.
Now the Author of the Belgic Commonweal, will have one Laurence Ians, a Rich
Citizen of Harlem in the Low Country, to precede all these, and sets out the
manner how; That he walking forth one day into the neighboring Woods for
Recreation, began to cut in pieces of wood the letters of his Name, printing
them on the back of his hand; which pleasing him well, he cut three or four
lines which he beat with Ink, and printed them upon Paper, wherewith he was much
joyed, and determined to find out another kind of Ink more fastening, and so
with his Kinsman one Thomas Peter's, found out another way to print whole
sheets, but of one side only, which are yet to be seen in the said Town; Yet
for all this, It is said, that the Chinese had the use both of Guns and
Printing long before we in these Western parts had any notice of them. Why then
should Christians so eagerly hunt after Novelties, when Solomon by the Spirit
of God sends a peremptory challenge to all Mankind, Eccles. 1. 10.
Is there any thing whereof it may be said, l. Trap. Com. on Ecclesiast.
Esa. 62. 2.
This is new. Let every one then labor to get spiritual eyes, to behold the
beauty of the new Creature, Ezekiel. 4. 36.
the bravery of the new Jerusalem, get into Christ that he may be a new
Creature, Ephesians. 2. 14.
and so he shall have a new Name, a new Spirit, new Alliance, Psalm. 91. 11.
new attendance, new ways, Esa. 62. 11.
and new work, 1 Ioh. 2. 8.
a new Commandment, Heb. 10. 20.
a new way to Heaven, Joh. 14. 2.
and new Mansions in heaven.


A Clock, Rich. Carpenter Sermon. at T^unton Assizes 1623.
let it be of never so good metal and making, will not strike orderly and
truly, but much therein will be out of frame and fashion, if the lesser wheels
as well as the greater, keep not their due and regular motion: So in the
curious Clockwork of Justice, there will be many exorbitances (albeit the
chief Agents and movers therein be never so sound in their integrity) if the
under-agents and Instruments of Justice, (as witnesses in proving the Action,
Counselors in pleading and prosecuting the cause, Jurymen in sifting and
censuring the Evidences and allegations) do not also take care, and make
Conscience in discharge of their several duties.


THe Naturalists observe, Pliny hist. lib. 3. cap. 10.
that the Eagle building her nest on high, is much maligned by a kind of
venomous Serpent, called Parias, which because it cannot reach the nest, makes
to the windward and breathes out its poison, that so the air may be infected,
and the Eagles Chickens destroyed; But by way of prevention, the Eagle out of a
natural instinct, Spartam nactus hanc orn^.
keeps a kind of Agath stone in her nest, which being placed still against the
wind, preserves her young ones from infection: Thus with the like care and
industry, we must labor to preserve the honor of any good work that we do,
keep up the credit of any religious act that we perform; And least the Devil
should taynt them, and make us famam aucupari to hunt after the applause of
Men, (...)
we must place Christ and the glory of God betwixt our good Works and the
noisome breath of Man's flattery and commendations.


IT is reported of a wretched Rich Man, Jer. Burroghs in a Sermon. on Psalm. 17.
14.
who when he heard that his sickness was deadly, sent for his baggs of Money,
and hugged them in his arms, saying, Oh must I leave you? oh must I leave you?
And of another, who when he lay upon his sickbed, called for his baggs, and
laid a bag of Gold to his heart, and then oad them take it away, saying; It
will not do, it will not do: A third also being near death, clapped a
Twenty-shilling piece of Gold in his mouth, saying, Some wiser then some, I Will
take this with me however. Now if these men's hearts had been ripped up aster
they had been dead, Neh. Rogers Treat. of Love.
there might have been certainly found written in them, The god of this present
world; a sad condition, wherein may be seen the corruption of nature
discovering it self: When men are so wedded to the things of this world, that
they do as it were incubare divitiis, sit hatching upon their riches, as the
Partridge upon her young, Ier. 17. 12. Res suas cum moritur di^as, etc. Greg.
^om.
(especially if gotten by their own industry) then they think much to be
divorced from them by death, and to leave them to others, to whom many times
they know not, and usually to them that will never give thanks for them.


IT was a good saying of one, Secretary ^eoil.
that in those days was known to be an able speaker, when he was to make his
reply to some, that had unjustly maligned him: I will rest (says he) hence
forward in peace, in the house of my own conscience; and if I do any good
deeds, it is no matter who knows them; if bad, knowing them my self, it is no
matter from whom I hide them; they will be recorded before that Judge, from
whose presence I cannot flee: If all the world applaud me, Hic murus abeneus
este. Nil conseire ^ibi. Virg.
and he accuse me, their praise is in vain. And thus let every man, in all his
intents, projects, and ends, as a conscionable Christian, look to the Lord, as
the searcher of his heart, and regarder of his work; not caring for the houling
of dogs, the slanderous reports of lewd and wicked men, so as the little bird
within sings clear; not discouraging himself at whatsoever men think or speak
of him, and his doings, so as God and his conscience do approve them; nor
contenting himself with men's approbation, when the testimony of Gods Word and
his own conscience, gainsaies them.

All sin to be repented of, and the reason why.
IF seven thieves shall enter a man's house, Th. Stapletoni Prompt. morale.
six of them being overcome, and the seventh lie lurking in some secret corner,
the Master of that house cannot but sleep in danger. A Bird falling into a
snare, or a Mouse being taken in a trap; if the one be but held by the claw, or
the other by the end of the tail, they are both in as much danger, as if their
whole bodies were surprised. Thus it is, that all sin, and the least sin, Exodus
10.
must be repented of. Pharaoh being smitten with many plagues, is willing at
last to let the People go, so as they would leave their sheep, and their cattle
behind them. No, says Moses, that cannot be; all the flocks and herds shall
go along with us, ne ungula quidem, not a hoof shall be left: And Satan, like
Pharaoh, would keep something of sin in us, which may be as a pledge of our
returning to him again; though sin be taken away, yet he would have the
occasions of sin to remain: Leave gaming, (says he) but let not the cards and
dice be burnt; thou may cease to be a fornicator, but do not pull out thy
wanton eye; thou must not hate thine enemy, yet what necessity is there, that
thou should love him? This is the voice of Satan. But God be speaks the
sinner after another manner, he will have all sin to be repented of; non
remanebit ungula, not so much as the occasion of sin shall remain; which if it
do, Satan will make a re-entry, and then the end shall be worse then the
beginning.

Public Worship of God, not to be entered upon, without due preparation.
AMongst many other rites and ceremonies of the Jews, Ant. Margarita de
ritibus Iudaeorum. Steph. Menochius de Rep. H.
it is related, that before the doors of their Synagogues, they have an iron
plate, against which they wipe and make clean their shoos, before they enter;
and that being entered, they sit solemnly for a season, not once opening their
mouths, but considering who it is, with whom they have to do. Thus it was of
old. But of late, though they come to the Synagogues with washen hands and
feet, Edwin Sands Relation of R^lig. in West. parts
yet for any show of devotion, or elevation of spirit, they are as reverend
(says one that was an eye witness) as Grammer-boyes are at a School, when
their Master is absent. This is the Jewish garb of outward devotion, and it is
to be wished, that Christians were not faulty therein. As to the matter of
preparation, how do most men and women rush into the public service of God,
tanquam in haras sues, as Hogs into their styes, Eccles. 5. 1.
without any preparation at all? Keep thy foot (says Solomon) when thou
enterest into the house of God; that is, Keep thy senses and affections with
all manner of custody, from the mire of wicked and worldly pollutions; take up
some time to trim up thy soul, and rush not out of the crowd of worldly
employments, into the Church of God: Come thither with the first, and stay
there till the last, Psalm. 84. 10.
as door-keepers use to do, which in David's estimate, was an office of high
preferment. And then, when thou art there, let thy deportment be, as in Gods
presence, being ready to hear and obey, what shall be proposed for thy souls
good.


THe members of the body were made to do one another service, Sam. Buggs
military Sermon. at Coventry. 1618.
the stones in an arched building were to support each other, and woman was
made to be a meet help to man, mutually communicating and participating weal or
woe, for better or for worse. Aristotle.
So should each man be one to another, (...), and not (...), a rational, not a
wrangling creature, to bear and forbear one another, to cast his garment over
his brothers nakedness, and not to turn that sacred ditty, Homo homini Deus,
into that hideous voice, and balefull croaking, Homo homini Demon; instead of
helping one another, to destroy each other.


PLutarch, Polyznus l. 2.
in the life of Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia, makes mention, how that being
to draw his Army into the field, and the better to embolden them to fight, with
a certain juice wrote this word Victoria, in the palm of his hand; and
afterward, being at his devotions, as the manner of the Heathens then was, he
laid his hand so written, closely and secretly upon the heart of the sacrifice,
and printed on it the said word Victoria, and immediately showed the same to
his Captains and Soldiers, as if it had been written by the gods: The simple
soldiers not understanding the policy, and thinking the whole matter had been
wrought by minacle, grew full of courage, not doubting, but that their gods,
Joh. Jewel against Harding in preface.
that had written victory, would also give them victory. By the like policy,
and to the like purpose, do the Papists and Sectaries deal with their miserably
seduced followers: what they cannot do by strength, they make out in craft; and
what they want in reason, they make up in words: Let Scripture be never so
clear, Arguments never so full, and Authorities of Fathers, Councills, and
Learned men, never so pat against them, they cry Victoria, all is on their side,
it must be as they say; so that there is no truth like their gloss, and no
presumption like their invention, whereby their followers are foully abused,
whilst victory, not truth, is the thing that they contend (...).


IT is said of Alcibiades, Plutarch in vita.
that he was (...), one that could talk much, but speak little; but, O quam
multa quam paucis! Oh how much in a little! said Tully of Brutus his Epistle.
On the other side, Corniculas citius in Africa, etc. That Jack-dawes are sooner
to be found in Africa, then any thing of worth in the writings of Turrianus,
Lib. 2. cont^^ Turrianum.
was the censure of Berengarius. So may we say of the Publicans prayer, much
more of the Lords prayer, set in flat opposition to the Heathenish Battologyes,
and vain repetitions of some, that would be held good Christians. Non tam
multum, sed tam been.
It is not the length, but the strength of Prayer, that is required; not the
labor of the lip, but the travel of the heart* that prevails with God. The
Baalites prayer was not more tedious, then Eliah's short, yet more pitthy then
short. Let thy words then be few, Eccles. 5. 2.
(says Solomon) but full, Hos. 14. 2.
to the purpose. Take unto you words, says the Prophet, neither overcurious,
nor over-carelesse, but such as are humble, earnest, direct to the point,
avoiding vain ^ablings, needless and endless repetitions, heartlesse
digressions, tedious prolixities, wild and idle impertinencies: such
extemporary petitioners, as not disposing their matter in due order by
premeditation, (and withal being word-bound) are forced to go forward and
backward, just like hounds at a loss; and having hastily begun, they know not
how handsomely to make an end.

Division, the great danger thereof.
IF two ships at sea, Sam. Buggs military Sermon. at Coventry. 1618.
being of one and the same squadron, shall be scattered by storm from each
other, how shall they come in to the relief of each other? If again they clash
together, and fall foul, how shall the one endanger the other, and her self
too? It was of old the Dutch device, of two earthen Pots swimming upon the
water, with this Motto, Pra^gimur si collidimur, If we knock together, we sink
together. And most true it is, that if spleen or discontent set us too far one
from another, In dissentione nulla salus conspicitur. Caes. Com. lib. 5.
or choler and anger bring us too near, it cannot be, but that intendment or
design, whatsoever it be, like Ionah's gourd, shall perish in a moment,
especially, if the viperous and hateful worm of dissension, do but smite it.

Desperation, the Complement of all sins.
THere is mention made in Daniel's prophecy, J. King on Jona^.
chap. 7. of four beasts, the first a Lion, the second a Bear, the third a
Leopard, but the fourth without distinction of either, kind, or sex, or name,
is said to be very fearful, and terrible, and strong, and had great iron
teeth, destroyed and brake in pieces, and stamped under his feet, Desperare,
est in infer^^^ descendere. Isid. de sum (...).
and had horns, etc. Such a thing is desperation; others sins are fearful and
terrible enough, and have as it were the rage of Lions, and Bears, and
Leopards, to spoil and make desolate the soul of man; but desperation has
horns too, horns to push at God with blasphemy, at his brethren with injury,
and at his own soul with distrust of mercy. Thom. quaest. 2. art. 3.
Desperation is a complicated sin, the complement of all sins: The greatest
sins are said to be those, which are opposed to the three Theological Virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity; infidelity to faith, desperation to hope, hatred to
charity; amongst which, infidelity and hatred, the one not believing, the other
hating God, are in themselves worse; but in regard of him that sins,
Augustine.
desperation exceeds them both, in the danger that is annexed unto it; for,
Quid miserius misero non miseranti seipsum? What can be more miserable, what
more full, then for a poor miserable wretch, not to take pity of his own soul.

A covetous man never satisfied.
IT is said of Catiline, Sueton. Cicero pra Coel^o.
that he was ever alieni appetens, sui profusus, not more prodigal of his own,
as desirous of other men's estates. A ship may be over-laden with silver, Semper
av^rus eget Horat. ep. lib. 2.
even unto sinking, and yet compass and bulk enough to hold ten times more. So
a covetous wretch, though he have enough to sink him, yet never has he enough
to satisfy him, like that miserable Cariff, mentioned by Theocritus, first
wishing -- Mill me is errent in montibus agni, That he had a thousand sheep in
his stock; and then when he has them, Pauperis est numerare pecus, He would
have cattle without number. J. Trapp com. on E^clesiast.
Thus a circle cannot fill a triangle, so neither can the whole world (if it
were to be compassed) the heart of man; a man may as easily fill a chest with
grace, as the heart with gold. Non plus (...) cor a^ro quam ^orpus aura, The
air fills not the body, neither does money the co^^^tous mind of man.

A true child of God, half in Heaven, whils the is on Earth.
TEnorius, Joh. Lorinus prefatio c^m. (...) Eccles.
Archbishop of Toled^, making question, whether Solomon were saved or damned,
caused his picture to be drawn in his Chapel, half in Heaven, and half in
Hell. Now what was painted of Solomon imaginarily, may be said of Gods children
truly, though they dwell upon Earth, yet their Burgesship is in Heaven. Phil.
3. 20.
Earth is patria loci, but Heaven patria juris; just like Irishmen, that are
dwellers in Ireland, but Denisons of England; half in Heaven, and half on
Earth; Sam. Bugg^ Ser. at S. Paul's.
in Heaven, by their godly life and conversation; in Heaven, by reason of their
assurance of glory and salvation: But on Earth, by reason of that body of sin
and death which they carry about them, having the flesh pressing with
continual fight, and oppressing with often conquest.


FAmous is that history of Cynegirus, Plutarch.
a valiant and thrice renowned Athenian, who being in a great sea-sight against
the Medes, cap. 1. paral.
spying a ship of the Enemies well manned, Justinus lib. 2.
and fitted for service, when no other means would serve, he grasped it with
his hands to maintain the fight; Sabellicus lib. 4. cap. 6.
and when his right hand was cut off, J. King on Jonah.
he held close with his left; but both hands being taken off, he held it fast
with his teeth, till he lost his life. Such is the hold-fast of him that hopes
in God, dum spirat sperat, as long as there is any breath he hopes. The voice
of hope is according to her nature, Spes mea Christus God is my hope. In the
winter and deadest time of calamity, Hope springs, and cannot die; nay, she
cries within her self, Magna tamen spes est in bonitate Dei. Ovid. de Pont.
Whether I live or die, though I walk into the chambers of death, and the doors
be shut upon me, I will not loose my hope; for I shall see the day, when the
Lord shall know me by my name again, righten my wrongs, finish my sorrows,
wipe the tears from my cheeks, tread down my enemies, fulfill my desires, and
bring me to his glory. Whereas the nature of all earthly hope is like a sick
man's pulse, full of intermission, there being rarely seen sperate miseri on the
inscription, but it is subscribed, Cavete foelices.


THere is a place in Wiltshire, Guil Cambdeni Britannia
called Stonage; for diverse great stones lying and standing there together: Of
which stones it is said, That though a man number them one by one never so
carefully, yet that he cannot find the true number of them, Cujus virtus totum
posse. Cujus sensus totum nosse. Hildebert Poemat.
but finds a different number from that he found before. This may serve to show
very well, the crring of man's labor, in seeking to give an account of divine
wisdom and knowledge; for all his Arrows will fall short, if he have no other
Bow but that of Reason to shoot in; though his diligence be never so great, his
learning never so eminent, M. Adamus in vita.
and his parts never so many, in making up the reckoning, he will be always
out, and not be ever able to say, as Martin Luther, when he had been praying in
his closet, for the good success of the consultation about Religion, in
Germany, Vicimus, vicimus, We have prevailed, we have prevailed; but rather cry
out with the Apostle, (...) etc. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! Romans 11. 13.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!


IT is reported of the Turks, Timberlake Travells.
now inhabiting the (sometimes famous) City of Jerusalem, and having an old
prophecy, that the City shall be retaken and entered at the very same place,
where formerly it was assaulted and conquered, have in or near that breach,
immured all passage, and prevented all probability of entrance again. Ictus
piscator sapit, The burnt child dreads the fire. And a child of God, Exiguo
per^^ssus ^nlminis ict^.
who by Satan's malice, and overreaching policy, is brought into sin, and by
Gods mercy brought out again, does pass the remainder of his time more warily;
Fortior ut possis etc. Ovid.
so that if Satan, his mortal enemy, have heretofore made assault upon his
soul, be it at the privy door of his heart, by sinful imaginations, he will be
sure to keep his heart with all diligence; Prove. 4. 23.
if at the too too open door of his lips, by filthy communication, Psalm. 141. 3.
he will not fail to set a watch before his mouth; if at the ears, which often
prove careless sentinells, Psalm. 38. 13.
by admitting and entertaining idle talk, and slanderous reports, he will rather
become a deaf man, and hear not, then ever that raging and malicious enemy
shall soil him at the like advantage.

Riches, Beauty, Wisdom, etc. in comparison of God, are lying vanities.
AUlus Gellius writes of a vain Grammarian, Noct. Attic. lib. 18. cap. 4.
that made himself very skillful in Salusts works: Apollinaris to try his
skill, met him on a day, and asked him, What Salust meant, (if he were so
expert in his writings, as he professed himself to be) by saying of C.
Lentulus, that it was a question, Whether he were more foolish or vain? The
Interpreter made answer, The knowledge I take upon me, is in ancient words, not
those that are common and worn threadbare, by daily use. For he is more
foolish and vain then Lentulus was, who knows not, that both these words note
but one and the same infirmity. B. King on Jonah.
Apollinaris not satisfied with this answer, makes further enquiry, and
thereupon concludes, that they were called foolish vain men, not such as the
people held to be dullards, blockish, and foolish, but such as were given to
lying and falsehood, such as gave lightness for weight, and emptiness for that
which has not true substance. Thus it is, that all the things of this world,
described in that Triumvirate of S. John, 1 Ep. chap. 2.
whether they be pleasures, riches, honors, etc. if they once come into
competition with the honor of God, they are not only foolish, Job 31. 24.
but lying vanities, such as the covetous man's wedge of gold, the arrogant man's
industry, Hab. 1. 6.
the politic States-mans brains, the confident man's strength, the ambitious
man's honor, Ezekiel. 28. 4.
or any thing else that displaceth God of his right, Esa. 37. 24.
and carries out man's heart and hope after it, is a lying deceitful vanity,
Hest. 6.
empty as the wind, and as fleeting as the mist in the air.

Joy in the midst of Affliction.
IT is storyed of Andronicus, R. Knoles Turk hist. page 164. citat e Niceph.
Gergor. hist.
the old Emperor of Constantinople, that all things going cross with him, he
took a Psalter into his hand, to resolve his doubtful mind, and opening the
same, as it were of that divine Oracle to ask counsel, he lighted upon Psalm.
68. 14. When the Almighty scattered Kings, they shall be white as snow in
Salmon; and was thereby comforted, and directed what to do for his better
safety. Sin. de Muis in locum.
Now it is to be understood, that Salmon signifies shady and dark, so was this
Mount, by the reason of many lofty fair-spread Trees, that were near it, but
made lightsom by s^ow that covered it. Hence, to be white as snow in Salmon,
is, to have joy in affliction, light in darkness, mercy in the midst of
judgment; as for instance. In sorrow shall thou bring forth, says God to the
Woman; Genesis 3.
she shall have sorrow, but she shall bring forth, that is the comfort. Many are
the troubles of the righteous, that is the sadness of their condition; but the
Lord will deliver them out of them all, there is their rejoicing. There is no
sorrow, no trouble, no temptation, that shall take any godly man, Dol^r hic
tibi proderit olim.
but he shall be as snow in Salmon; God will not suffer him to be tempted,
Ovid. Amor. 10.
above that he is able, but will with the temptation also make a way to ^scape,
that he may be able to bear it.


ADaman in Bid tells, Hist. ge^^. Ang. lib. 5.
in his discourse of holy places, from the mouth of a Bishop who had been
there, that in a Church erected in that place, from whence our Savior
ascended, there rushed annually in those times, asilent gale of wind from
Heaven upon Ascension day, which forced all those it found standing, to fall
prostrate on the earth. The story may not be justifiable, yet it is ancient; and
it were to be wished, that when we enter into the house of God, we needed no
wind to blow us upon our knees, but that falling down by the dejection of our
bodies, we may rise up again by the exaltation of our souls. D. Lawrence Sermon.
at Court. 1630.
Besides, let all men take notice, that he which comes thither, as he is
without preparation, goes away as he was, without a blessing; and he that
prays, as if God were not there, when he has prayed, shall find him no where.
We must enter all ear, while God speaks to us; all heart and tongue, whilst we
speak to him; because if the heart go one way, and the tongue another; Josephi
antiquitat. l. 13. c. 16.
if we turn Gods house into an Exchange or Stews, by thinking on our gains and
lusts, we defile not the Temple, as Antiochus did, by painting unclean beasts
on the doors without, but by bringing them within, into the body of the place.


PHilip threatened the Lacedaemonians, S. Walt. Raleigh Hist. of World.
that if he invaded their Country, he would utterly extinguish them. They sent
him no other answer back again, but this word, If; meaning, that it was a
condition well put in, because he was never likely to appear against them. 1
Cor. 1.
Thus St. Paul promised the Corinthians, to come by them in his way to
Macedonia, and did it not; for he evermore added in his soul that condition,
which no man must exclude, If it stand with the pleasure of God, and he hinder
me not. Jam. 4.
So that according to the old Verse: Si, nisi, non ^sset, perfectum quidlibet
esset.

If it were not for condition and exception, B. King Sermon. on Jonah.
every thing would be perfect; but that cannot be: therefore every man has his
reserve of Gods good will and pleasure, to back him in all his promises and
undertakings, in a good way. So that he which speaks with concition, as
relating to Gods mind, may change his mind, without suspicion of levity.


IT is said of Johannes Mollius, ^. Trapp Com. on Matthew.
whenever he spoke of the Name of Jesus, his eyes dropped: M. Welse Act. and
Mon.
And another reverend Divine being in a deep muse, after some discourse that
passed of Jesus, and tears trickling down abundantly from his cheeks, before he
was aware, being urged for the cause thereof, confessed ingenuously, it was,
because he could not draw his dull heart to prise Christ aright. Mr. Fox never
denied beggar, that asked in the Name of Jesus Christ. And religious Bucer
never disregarded any, (though different in opinion from him) in whom he could
discern aliquid Christi, any thing of Jesus Christ. None but Christ, says John
Lambert at the stake: And, My Master, says Mr. Herbert, that divine Poet,
Poems in preface.
as often as he heard the Name of Jesus mentioned. How then should our hearts
rejoice, and our tongues be glad? and how should we be vexed, at the deadness
and dullness of our naughty natures, that are no more affected with the
sweetness of the Name Jesus? a Name above all names. (...), Phil. 2. 9. Cicero
in Verrem.
Such a word, says the Heathen Orator, and so emphaticall, that other tongues
can hardly find a word to express it.

To attend upon God in his Ordinances.
IT is usual for ships to ride a long time in a road-steed, Joh. Brinsley
Sermon. at ^armouth.
when they might be in the Haven; and wherefore do they so? wherefore, but that
they may be in the winds way, to take the first opportunity that shall be
offered, for their intended voyage. Even thus should all good Christians do,
anchor, as it were, in the house of God, even then when they seem to be
becalmed, that they cannot stir and move themselves about holy duties, as they
were wont to do; yet even then, ride it out, hearken what God will say to their
souls, wait upon him in the use of Means; not in an Anabaptisticall phrenzy,
refusing to attend upon duty, till the spirit move them; but look up unto God
for life, and seek it from him, in their attendance upon his holy Ordinances.

To see a necessitated Minister, matter of great grief.
ANtigonus seeing Cleanthes, a learned Philosopher, Diog. Laert. in vita.
and a painful student at his book, as he was helping a Baker to grind corn at
the Mill, said unto him, Molis tu Cleanthe? What, Cleanthes, do thou grind
corn? I, says he, I do so, or else I must starve for want of bread; If I do
not labor, I must not eat. Antigonus by this answer, noted a great indignity,
that those hands should be galled at the Mill, J. King lect. on Jonah.
wherewith he wrote such excellent things, of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. And it
must needs be then matter of greater grief, to any good Christian, to see able
Ministers in necessity, to see what shifts they are driven to, (almost like the
Popish Priests of old, that said dirges for their dinners) who are otherwise
able to labor in the Word, and do the work of right good Evangelists: Idque
vitae sustentandae causa, not to grow rich thereby, but to put meat in their
mouths, and in the bellies of their distressed families.

Baptism renounced, by the lewdness of life and conversation.
THe Spanish Converts in Mexico, Edw. Brerewood Enquiries.
remember not any thing of the promise and profession, they made in Baptism,
save only their name, which many times also they forget. Jos. Acostae I^dia
occident. Abbots Geography.
And in the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, the Portugalls at their first
arrival, finding the People to be Heathens, and without God in the world, did
induce them to a profession of Christ, and to be baptized in great abundance,
allowing of the principles of Christian Religion, till such time as the Priests
pressed them, lead their lives according to their profession, which the most part
of them in no case enduring, returned again to their Gentilism. Such Renegadoes
are to be found in the midst of us at this day, such as give themselves up to
Christ, quoad Sacramenti perceptionem, by external profession; but when it
comes once advitae sanctificationem, to holiness of life, there they leave him
in the open field, forsaking their colors, renouncing their baptism, and
running away to the enemy; so that Baptism is not unto them the mark of Gods
child, Eccles. 5. 3.
but the brand of a sool, that makes a vow, and then breaks it. And better had
it been, that Font-water had never been sprinkled on such a face, that should
afterward be hatched with such impudent impiety, Ier. 3. 4, 5.


A King of the Saracens by his Ambassador, Max. Tyrius.
demanded of Godfrey of Boloign, then in the holy War, how he had his hands,
^am doctas ad praeliandum, so able to fight; Despiciuntur o rations leves,
diffidentes, inanes, etc. Aug. in Matthew. 6.
who returned him this answer, Quia manus semper habui puras, etc. Because I
never defiled my hands with any notorious sin. Thus is it, that men prosper not
outwardly, because they look not to themselves inwardly; they pray, and speed
not; Joh. Squire
they lift up their voice, but not holy hands: They pray, but they do not with
the Ninivites, Sermon. at St. Paul's, 1637.
turn every one from the evil of his way, and from the wickedness that is in
his heart: 1 Timothy 2. 8.
So that regarding iniquity in their hearts, God will not hear their prayers.
Jer. 3. 8.
The Loads^one loses its virtue, besmeared with garlic, and our prayers with
sin; Psalm. 66. 18.
that is the only Remora, that stops our prayers, under full sail, to the
throne of grace.


MEmorable is that passage betwixt Elisha the Prophet, 2 King. 13.
and Ioash the King of Israel; J. King lect. on Jonah.
he directed the hand of the King of Israel to shoot, and the arrow of Gods
deliverance followed thereupon; and then, so often as he smote the ground, by
the appointment also of the Prophet, so often, and no longer, he had likelihood
of good success. Nulla in discendo more est, ubi Spiritus sanctus doctor adest.
Even so, the Spirit, that is it that must direct our tongues and hearts, in
all that proceeds from them; for where that cease to be as a guide, Psalm.
73. 22.
there will that of the Prophet certainly be verified, Every man is a beast by
his own knowledge. Hence was it, that the good old Christians sang, Come holy
Ghost eternal God, Beda hoin. 9. in Luc.
comforter of us all, etc. and so must we, if ever we look for Gods assistance,
to go along with our endeavors.


IN the stories Ecclesiastical, Socrat. hist. lib. 3. cap. 16.
there is mention made of one Theodorus, a Martyr, put to extreme torments by
Julian the Aposta^e, and dismissed again by him, when he saw him unconquerable.
Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 36.
Ruffinus, in his history, says, that he met with this Martyr a long time
after his trial, and asked him, Whether the pains he felt were not
unsufferable? He answered, that at first it was somewhat grievious, but after a
while, there seemed to stand by him a young Man in white, who with a soft and
comfortable handkerchief, wiped off the sweat from his body, (which through
extreme anguish, was little less then blood) and bad him, Be of good cheer;
insomuch as that it was rather a punishment then a pleasure to him, to be taken
off the Rack, since when the Tormentors had done, the Angel was gone. Thus it
is, that the blessed Angels of God have ministered from time to time to his
People, in the days of their distress, it may be, bringing food to their
bodies, 1 King. 19. 5.
as once to Eliah; but certainly, comfort unspeakable to their souls, as to
Jacob, J. Trapp expesit. on Matthew. Angeli ad minist erium pro nostr^ salute
semper mittuntur.
Hagar, Daniel, Zecharias, Joseph, Cornelius, Paul, etc. and to our modern
Martyrs, in their prisons, at the stake, and in the fire: They pity our human
frailties, and secretly suggest comfort, when we perceive it not; they are as
ready to help us, as the bad Angels are to tempt us; always they stand looking
on the face of God to receive orders, Greg. hom.
for the accomplishment of our good, which they no sooner have, Dan. 9. 21.
than they readily dispatch, even with weariness of flight.

Men are apt to be unthankful in Prosperity.
IT is said to be the saying of Frederick the Emperor, I. Squier's Ser. at St.
Paul's 1636.
concerning Siginbird Flisk, after wards called, Innocent the fourth, advanced
by him to the Popedom; I have lost a Cardinal a friend, and have gotten a Pope
a foe: It is to be feared, that God may say the same of many Men, so long as he
kept them in a mean estate, they sought unto him, and he had humble thank^ull
Servants of them; but so soon as he raised them to Prosperity, they kicked, and
became unworthy thanklesse wretches, forgetting themselves and the Rock from
whence they were hewn, even God their great and bountiful Benefactor.

How it is that the strength of Imagination prevails so much in matters of
Religion.
IT is observable, Sam. Torshels design to Harmonize the Bible
that when some Men look up to the rack or moving clouds, they imagine them to
have the forms of Men, of Armies, Castles, Forests, Landkips, Lions, Bears,
etc. where as none else can see any (...) things, nor is there any true
resemblance of such things at all; And some again there are, that when they
have somewhat roules and tumbles in their thoughts, Ioh. Fienus de viribus
imaginations.
they think that the ringing of bells, the beating of hammers, the report that
is made by great guns, or any other measured, intermitted noise, does
articulately sound, and speak the same which is in their thoughts: Thus it is
that a strong Imagination or fancy, becomes very powerful as to persuasion in
the matters of God and Religion; Hence it is therefore, 1 Pet 3. 16.
that most of those that are unlearned and unstable, wrest the Scriptures,
thinking they find that in them which indeed is not there to be found,
persuading themselves that the Scripture represents to them such formed
opinions, such and such grounded tenets, when (without all doubt) they do but
patch and lay things together without any reason at all; Aug. Philastrius de
haerestbus Jude 8.
from whence have proceeded the senseless dotages of Heretics, visibly
recorded by the Ancients in elder times; and of late the whimsicall conceits of
some Dreamers, that have flown about in their most ridiculous papers, wherein
they bring Scripture with them, but no sense, fancying the holy word of God to
strike, to ring and chime to their tunes, to echo out unto their wild
conceptions, and answer all their indigested notions.

Submission to the Will of God in all things enjoined.
APersonage of some note, lying on his deathbed, was desired by some of his
friends then standing by, Ia. Cranfords Sermon. at St. Antholines, Land. 1649.
to speak some observable sentence, to throw out himself in some one good
passage or other, to leave behind him one remarkable saying or other; so that
when he was dead and gone, they might remember both it and him; After a while
he spoke unto them in the words of St. Peter, ep. 2. chapter 5. ver. 6. Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; An
excellent saying, and worthy to be received of all Men; That in all strairs,
under all pressures whatsoever, Men should lie down in the dust, submit
themselves to the good will of God, and humble themselves under his mighty
hand; and then without all doubt, he will (not, when they think it a fit time,
but) in his own due time, when it shall be most suitable for his glory, and most
advantageous for their eternal welfare, ease and exalt them.


PUt the case that one Man should give unto another many loaves of bread,
Alphons. ab Ave^dano in Math. cap. 24.
conditioned that he should every day eat one; but if the party should come to
know that in one of them lay hid a parcel of deadly poison, yet in which of
them it was he should be utterly ignorant; O how careful would he be in
tasting any of them, lest he should light upon that which might prove his
fatal destruction. Thus it is that God has given unto us many days, to some
more, to some less, but in one of these he has, unknown to us, Mors in olld.
conveyed the bitter sting of Death, and it may so fall out, that in the very
day of jovissance, in the day of our greatest rejoicing, a deadly cup of poison
may be reached out unto us; Death like an unbidden guest may rush in upon us,
and spoil all our mirth on a sudden; O how watchful, how diligent, should the
consideration of these things make every one of us to be* to look upon every
day as the day of our death, every breathing the last breathing we shall make,
to think upon the ringing of every passing bell, that ours may be next; upon
hearing the Clock strike, that there is one hour less to live in, and one step
made nearer to our long homes, the house appointed for all living.


IT is said of Lot, Genesis 19. 30.
that he removed from Zoar to a neighboring mountain, and dwelt in a cave
therein, Caelum non animum mutant.
which is shown to Travellors at this day; Now it was that a hole in a hill
could hold him and all his Family, whose substance formerly was so great, Genesis
13. 7.
the whole Country could not afford room for his flocks and heardmen, without
striving with those of his Uncle Abraham. And here it was, that he was made
drunken by his Daughters practice upon him, with whom he committed incest; So
that it is Grace, not place, can secure Men's souls from sin; seeing Lot
fasting from lust in wanton and populous Sodom, surfeited thereof in a solitary
cave, and whilst he carefully fenced the Castle of chastity, even to make it
impregnable against the battery of foreign force, he never suspected to be
surprised by the treachery of his own family.


IT is St. Paul's saying of himself, That he was alive without the Law, i. he
had great quietness and ease of mind, Ant. Burges. Sermon. on Joh. 8. 54.
all things went well with him, he was Cock a hoope, sound and safe, he thought
himself in a sure and s^fe way; but alas, this was his ignorance, his
blindness; just like a Man in a Dungeon, that thinks himself safe, Petrus
dormit securus.
when there are Serpents and poisonous Creatures round about him, only he does
not see them: Or as a Man in a Lethargy, feels no pain though he be at the
self same time near unto the gates of Death. And such is the condition of many
persons, They thank God they have no trouble, their Soul is at much ease and
quietness, they doubt not of Gods favor and love unto them; hence in the
midst of their afflictions, when they are (but as it were) peeping into the
furnace of trial, Nihil hic nisi ^erba supersunt.
they will say; I thank my good God, this is his doing, I will submit
thereunto, etc. When (alas) here is nothing but words, no assurance; and it may
be said of such, as Christ of the Jews, You say he is your Father, but you have
not known him; so they know nothing powerfully and practically, concerning the
Mercies of God in Christ Jesus.

True comfort in the Word of God only.
SEneca going about to comfort his friend Polybius, Fas tibi non est de fortuna
(...) conqueri, salvo Caesare.
persuades him to bear his afflictions patiently; And why, but because he was
the Emperors favorite, and tells him, That it was not lawful for him to
complain, while Nero Caesar Seneca de consolatione ad Polybium.
Caesar was his friend; cold comfort was this, a poor Cordial (God wot) to
raise up a drooping spirit; Good reason too, For Caesar himself a little while
after was so miserable, so destitute of all outward comforts, that he had not a
friend to relieve him in the midst of his greatest extremity, much less was he
able to help his friend: O but the sure word of God affords a better Cordial,
Edm. Calamy Godly man's Ark ep. ded.
that which is true comfort indeed; It bids every true Child of God, not to be
overmuch dejected under the greatest of afflictions, because he is Gods
favorite, Gods Jewel, Gods child, Gods Inheritance; It tells him that it is
not lawful for him to complain, Fas tibi non est conqueri, salvo Deo and
promissionibus ejus.
while God is his friend, his refuge, his Rock of defense, his safeguard, his
What-not in the way of relief and succor; and the Promises of God are his
rich portion and inheritance: so that like Job, though he lose all that he
has, yet he loses nothing, because he loses not his God, in having of whom
he has all things.

God afflicting his Children for the improvement of their Graces.
IT is reported of the Lioness, Ed. Wottonus de different. Animal.
that she leaves her young whelps, till they have almost killed themselves with
roaring and yelling, and then at last gasp when they have almost spent
themselves, she relieves them, and by this means they become more courageous:
And thus it is that God brings his children into sadness, sorrow, nay even
into the very deeps of distress, Jonah 4.
he suffers Jonah to be three days and three nights in the belly of a Whale,
Psalm. 69. 3.
David to cry out till his throat be dry, his Disciples to be all the night in
a great storm till the fourth watch; and then it is that he rebukes the
winds, Matthew. 14. 25.
and relieveth his children, by which means he mightily increases their
Patience and dependence upon him, improveth their Graces, and enlarges their
faith and hope in Christ Jesus.

The readiness of God to pardon poor Repentant Sinners.
IT was a custom amongst the ancient Romans, Ascon. Pedianus in orat. pro
Milone.
that when the Judges absolved any accused person at the Bar, they did write
the letter A upon a little Table provided for that purpose. i. Absolvimus, We
absolve him; If they judged him guilty, Alex. (...) Alexandro. Ien. dierum.
lib. 3. c. 14
they writ C. i. Condem^amus, We condemn him: And if they found the cause
difficult and doubtful, they writ N. L, i. Non Liquet, We cannot tell what to
make of it; not much unlike unto the term, Ignoramus in our Common Law, which
the grand inquest writes upon a bill of Indictment, when they mislike their
Evidence as defective, or too weak to make good the presentment: But it is
otherwise with the all-knowing God, Esaias. 63. 16.
with whom we have to do, he cannot be said to be ignorant of the many sins
wherewith we provoke him daily; Abraham may be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not, but he knows us and all things else, he knows us to be
wretched and miserable, so that he may well write Condemnamus, and doom us to
perpetual torments with the Devil and his Angels; yet such is his mercy to
poor Repentant sinners, that he invites and woes them to come in, that they may
be saved, and so ready to pass by offenses, that instead of Condemnamus, Psalm.
85. 5.
he takes up the Pen and writes Absolvimus, My Son be of good cheer, Luke 7. 48.
thy sins be forgiven thee.


AS the Husbandman, Ant. Burgess Sermon. on ler. 23. 22.
though he should be never so laborious in ploughing, sowing, and fitting the
ground; though he be never so careful to provide precious and good seed,
Augustine. in Psa. 58. coat. 2.
yet it the nature of the ground be barren, as it will bear no seed, or cause
it to degenerate into Cockle, all the labor is in vain; Or as the Gardener,
though he water and dress never so carefully, yet if the Tree be dead at the
root, it is all to no purpose: So though the Ministers of God are very earnest
in praying, preaching, informing, rebuking; yet when the ground is barren, the
Tree dead at the root, if the People be of a froward and indisposed temper, if
the God of this World has blinded their eyes, that they do not see, nor
understand, nor feel the power of God working upon their souls; What hope is,
or can there be of such a People?


FIrst, Io^. Howes Christ God-Man a Sermon. at Northampt. 1656.
because his eternal generation is like the production of a Word; For as a
word is first conceived in the mind, and proceeds thence without any carnal
operation: So the Son of God had his conception in the understanding of the
Father, and proceeded thence without any corporeal emanation. Gr. Nazanz.
Orat. 2.
2. As a word is immateriall and invisible (for no Man can see verbum mentis,
Id. in orat. 36.
the Word of our thought:) So Christ is immateriall and invisible, 1 Cor. 1. 24.
in regard of his divine Nature, for no Man has seen that at any time. Hier.
Zanchius de 3. Elo^im lib. 5. cap. 8.
3. As a Word (if you take it for verbum mentis, Ioh. 1. 18.
cannot be separated from the understanding, but as soon as there is (...) the
Understanding, there must be (...) the Word:) So Jesus Christ, the second
person in the blessed Trinity, cannot be separated from the Father, but soon as
even there was a Father (if it may be so spoken of Eternity) there was
necessity of a Son, Ioh. Ferus in Ioh. 1. 1.
and so he is co-eternall with him. 4. As a Word is not expressed till it be
clothed with Air, and articulated by the Instrument of speech: So the Word of
God which is the second person in the ^rinity, was not manifested to the Sons
of Men, until he was clothed in flesh, and born of the Virgin Mary.


LOok where you will in Gods Book, Io^. Hall Exon. Sermon. at Westminster. 1634.
you shall never find any lively member of Gods Church, any true Christian
compared to any but a fruitful Tree; Not to a tall Cypress, the Emblem of
unprofitable honor; nor to the smooth Ash, the Emblem of unprofitable Prelacy,
that does nothing but bear keys; nor to a double-coloured Poplar, the Emblem
of Dissimulation; nor to a well-shaded Plain, that has nothing else but form;
nor to a hollow Maple, nor to a trembling Asp; nor to a prickly Thorn; nor to
the scratching Bramble, nor to any plant whatsoever, whose fruit is not useful
and beneficial; but to the fruitful Vine, the fat Olive, the seasonable
Sapling planted by the Rivers of waters. Psalm. 82. 8. and 1. 1.
Yet it is most true, that the goodly Cedars, strong Elms, fast-growing
Willows, sappy Sycamores, and all the rest of the fruitful Trees of the Earth.
i. all fashionable and barren Professors whatsoever, Arbores sylve ad
fructi^^candum steriles, etc Ad fructum velut ad ultimum finem omnes ^onae
arboris parts ordinantur. Pet. Berchor.
they may shoot up in height, spread ^ar, show fair, but what are they good
for? Yes, they may be fit for the forest, the ditches, the hedge-rowes of the
world; not for the true saving soil of Gods Israel, that is a soil of use and
fruit, that is a place for none but Vines, for trees of righteousness,
fruitful trees, fruitful Christians. He that abides in me, brings forth
much fruit, says our Savior, Ioh. 15. 5.

Christ making himself and all that be has over, to the good of his Church and
People.
WE read in our Chronicles, Sam. Daniel hist. of Eng. l. 1.
that Edward ^irnamed Ironside, (in whom England was lost) and Knute, the first
Danish King, after many encounters, and equal fights, at length embraced a
present agreement, which was made, by parting England betwixt them two, and
confirmed by Oath and Sacrament, putting on each others apparel and arms, as a
ceremony, to express the atonement of their minds, as if they had made
transaction of their persons, each to other; Joh. Trap Exposit. on Zech. cap. 3.
Knute became Edmund, and Edmund, Knute. Even such a change (as it may be said)
is of apparel, betwixt Christ and his Church, Christ and every true repentant
sinner; he takes upon him their sins, and puts upon them his
righteousness: He changes their rags into robes, their stained clouts into
cleaner clothing: He arraies them with the righteousness of the Saints; that
twofold righteousness, imputed and imparted; that of Justification, and the
other of Sanctification; that is an under-coat, this is an upper; that clean
and pure, this white and bright; 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and both from himself, who is made unto them, not only Wisdom, but
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Sanctification, and Redemption. Yet further; He puts upon his Church, his own
comeliness, decks his Spouse with his own Jewels, as Isaac did Rebecca;
clothes her with needle work, and makes her more glorious than Hester ever was,
in all her beauty and bravery; rejoices over her, as the Bridegroom over his
Bride; Cant. 4.
yea, is ravished in his love to her, with one of her eyes lifted up to him in
prayer and meditation, with one chain of her neck, that very chain of his own
graces in her.

How it is, that every man has one darling sin or other.
IT is a Maxim in Philosophy, Ven. Bedae Axiomata Philosophica.
That though all the Individualls of one kind, agree in one specificall Nature,
yet every one has a particular difference, whereby it is distinguished from
another, which is called Hecciety. And so it is, that though Original sin be
the seed of all kind of wickedness, and there cannot be an instance given of
any horid crime in the world, but this would carry a man unto it: Yet this
poison in every man, Trahit sua quemque volupta^. Virgil.
vents it self rather in one way, then another; so that there may be many sins
acted in common by all, yet several men have their several particular
corruptions, their Dalilahs, their beloved sins, which like the Prince of
devils, Ant. Burges Ser. on Ier. 18. 11.
command all other sins. As in every man's body, there is a seed and principle
of death; yet in some there is a pronenesse to one kind of disease more then
other, that may hasten death. So though the root of sin and bitterness, has
spread it self over all, yet every man has his inclinations to one kind of sin
rather then another; and this may be called, a man's proper sin, his evil way,
which unrepented of, will inevitably draw down vengeance upon his head, that
has it.

How to make a right use of Gods Promises.
IT is said of Tamar, Edm. Calamy Godly man's Ark. 1657.
that when Judah her father in law lay with her, she took as a pledge his
signet, bracelets, and staff; and afterward, when she was in great distress,
and ready to be burned as an Harlot, she then brought out her staff, and
signet, and bracelets, Obsignatis again dum est tabulis. Terentlus.
and said; By the man whose these are, am I with child; and thereby she saved
her life: So must all of us do, in the time of health, study our interest in
the promises of the Gospel; and in time of sickness, live upon that we have
so studied: Then it is, that we must bring forth the staff, the signet, and the
bracelet, produce our Evidences, rely and make use of the Promises, as so many
spiritual props and butteresses, to shore us up, and keep us from falling into
despair of Gods mercies and love unto us in Christ Jesus.


THere is much waste ground in the world, Jos. Hall Exon Sermon. at a Fast before
the L. L. at Westminster. 1634.
that has no owner; our Globe can tell us of a great part, that has no
Inhabitant, no name, but Terra incognita, unknown: But a Vineyard was never
without a possessour. Come we into some wild Indian Forest, all furnished with
goodly Trees, we know not whether ever man were there; Gods hand we are sure
has been there, perhaps not man's: But if you come into a well dressed Vineyard
or Garden, there you may see the hillocks equally swelling, the stakes pitched
in a just height and distance, the vines handsomely pruned, the hedge-rowes
cut, the weeds cast out: Now we are ready to conclude, (as the Philosopher did,
when he found figures) Here has been a man, and a good husband too. Thus it
is, that as Gods Israel, Gods Church, is a Vineyard, so we may safely conclude,
that it is Gods vineyard, Gods Church, God's in a more special manner. It is
true, that there is an universal providence of God over all the world, (...),
etc. Sophocles Cant. 8. 11.
but there is a more especial hand and eye of God over his Church; in it, God
challenges a peculiar interest. Solomon may let out his Vineyard to keepers,
but God keeps his Church in his own hands; he may use the help of men, Ecclesia
quae per omnes gentes crescit in srumentis Dom. conservate est. Aug. in ep. 48.
but it must be as tools, rather then as his agents; he works by them, they
cannot works but by him; so that in spite of the gates of hell, his Church, his
Vine, shall flourish. Even so, return O God of hosts, look down from heaven,
and visit this Vineyard of ours, thy Church, which thy right hand has planted,
and the branch which thou have made strong for thy self.


IT is said of Antoninus, In summa (...) de manifest. Vsurariis.
Archbishop of Florence, that after he had heard the confession of a wretched
Usurer, he gave no other Absolution than this: Deus miseratur tui, si vult; and
condonet tibi peccata tua, quod non credo, etc. God be merciful to thee, if he
please; and forgive thee thy sins, which I do not believe; and bring thee to
eternal life, which is impossible: i. rebus sic stantibus, if God does not
wonderfully work a strange conversion in his heart. And such and so sad is the
condition of every unregenerate man, Romans 9. 22.
every impenitent sinner, they are no other then bondslaves of Satan,
firebrands of hell, Ephesians. 2. 12.
vessels of wrath, men without God in the world. No wonder then, that as long
as they continue in such a wretched estate, God cease to be merciful unto
them, deny them forgivness of sins here in this life, and admission into his
Kingdom of glory hereafter.


NOthing so cold as Lead, Joh. Trap Exposit. on Zach. cap. 1.
yet nothing more scalding, if molten; nothing more blunt then Iron, and yet
nothing so keen, if sharpened: The air is soft an^ tender, yet out of it are
engendered thundrings and lightnings; the Sea is calm ana smooth, L^sa patientia
fit furor.
but if tossed with tempests, it is rough above measure. Thus it is, that mercy
abused turns to fury: God, as he is a God of mercies, so he is a God of
judgmen; and it is a fearful thing to fall into his punishing hands: Psalm. 2.
and 90. 11.
He is loath to strike, but when he strikes, he strikes home: If his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, woe be to all those on whom it lights; how much more,
when he is sore displeased with a people or person: Who knows the power of ^is
anger, says Moses? Let every one therefore submit to his Justice, Heb. 10.
and implore his Mercy. Men must either burn or turn; for even our God is a
consuming fire.

Promises of God, the excellency and comforts that are to be found in them.
IT is said of Mr. Bilney, Joh. Fox Act. and Mon.
that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus, that being much wounded in conscience, by
reason of the great sin he had committed, in subscribing to the Popish errors,
M. Adamus in vita.
he was much comforted, by reading those words, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, etc. Thus was Beza supported under his troubles, by the
words of Christ, Ioh. 10. 27, 28, 29. Mention is also made of R. Bolton of
Kettering in Northampt.
one, that was upheld under great affliction, and comforted from that of Esaias,
chap. 26. 3. of another in the like condition, from that of the same Prophet,
chap. 57. 15. of a third, a young Maid, upon the knowledge of a Mr. Edm. Calamy.
reverend Divine yet living, that went triumphantly to Heaven, by the
refreshing she found in that well known Text, Math. 11. 28. Many also are the
drooping spirits, that have been wonderfully cheared, by reading the eighth
Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans; and by that Text of St. John, in
his first Epistle, chap. 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life,
etc. And thus it is, that great is the excellency, transcendent the comforts,
that are to be found in Gods Promises, they are the good Christians Magna
Charta for Heaven, Promissa sunt pabulum and anima fidei. Aug
the only assurance that he has to claim by. There is no comfort, no true,
real, virtuall comfort, but what is built and founded upon a
Scripture-promise; if otherwise, it is presumption, and cannot properly be
called true comfort. The Promises are pabulum fidei, and anima fidei; the food
of faith, and the very soul of faith: They are a Mine of rich treasures, a
Garden full of choice flowers, able to enrich the soul with all celestial
contentments, and to sweeten the sourest of conditions. The truth is, there is
no promise of God, but if he be pleased to illighten unto us, and show us our
interest in it, will afford a plentiful harvest of everlasting joy, and that
which is true and real contentment indeed.

The griping Usurer and his Broker, characterised.
IT is commonly known, M. Powell Positions of Usury page 48.
that the nether Millstone stands or lies still, and stirs not: So the
wretched, rapacious, griping Usurer sits at home, and spends his time in a kind
of diabolical Arithmetic, as Numeration of hours, days, and moneys;
Substraction from other men's estates, and Multiplication of his own, until he
have made Division between his soul and Heaven, and divided the Earth to
himself, and himself (if God be not the more merciful) to a worser place. And
for his Broker, he is not much unlike the upper Millstone, (without which, the
nether may seem to be unservicable) that is quick, stirring, and runs round;
so he is still in action, like the Iackall, yelping before the Lion for a prey,
ever contriving how he may bring grist to the Mill, money into the Usurers bank,
and sorrow to his own soul. Esa. 3. 15.
Hence is that phrase of the Prophet, Grinding the faces of the poor, who like
corn are ground to powder betwixt them. But let all such know, that it were
better for them, if they endured all temporal punishment whatsoever, Mat^h.
18. 6.
that a millstone were tied about their necks, and so cast into the bottom of
the sea, than that both body and soul should be cast into hell fire for
evermore.


CLemens Alexandrinus has a story, In admonit ad Gentes.
that the first who found out fire, was a Satyr, a wild man; and perceiving it
to be a creature beautiful and resplendent, like a hot suitor, he offers to
kiss it: But the fire speaking to him, said, Take heed, Ambros. de poenit. l.
1. c. 13.
Satyr, come not near me; for if thou do, I shall burn thy beard. The meaning
is, that unclean lust being a fire, which l^st f^ll be arts have found out they
a^e told, if they meddle with it, they are sure to be burnt by it. Can a man go
upon hot coals, and not be burnt? take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not
be consumed? go in unto a strange woman, Edax libidinis flamma, etc. Bafil:
Iib. de Virginitate.
and be innocent? come near such a she-fire, and not be sindg'd? He cannot, it
is impossible: He may tread upon coals, thinking to tread them out, Homo and
m^lier ignis and palea. Hierom. in ep. ad Dam.
but he will first tread the fire into his own feet; he may think to take fire
in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt; to embrace the conversation of a
strange woman, and his chastity, the pure white garment of human nature, not be
defiled; but he may withal think as well, to fall into the bosom of hell
fire, and there not be tormented for ever more.


MEmorable is that ingenious and honest contrivement, Tit. Livius in hist. Romans
of Pacuvius Calavius, a wise Magistrate in Capu^, who perceiving the people to
be much bent against the present Government, and ready to break out into some
outrage, made the Senate acquainted therewith; and having thoroughly terrified
them, by laying open the danger hanging over them, he promised nevertheless to
deliver them all, and to set things at quiet, if they would freely put
themselves into his hands, offering his Oath, or any other Assurance, that they
should demand for his faithful meaning. They all agreed. Then shutting the
Court, and placing a guard of his own followers about it, that none might enter
in, or issue forth, without his leave, he called the People to assembly; and
speaking as much ill of the Senate, Sr. Walt. Raleigh hist. of the World. l.
16. c. 13.
as he knew they would be glad to hear of, he told them, that these wicked
governors were surprised by his policy, and all fast, ready to abide what
sentence they would lay upon them: Only thus much he advised them, as a ^ning
which necessity required, that they should choose a new Senator, before they
satisfied their anger upon the old. So rehearsing the names of one or two
Sena^ors, he asked, What their judgment was of those: All cried out, They were
worthy of death. Choose then, Scinditur in certum studia in contraria vulgus
said he, first of all, some new ones into their places. Hereunto the
Multitude, unprovided for such an election, was silent; until at last, some
one or other ad^entured to name whom he thought fit. The men so nominated, were
utterly disliked by the whole Assembly, either for some known fault, baseness,
and insufficiency; or else because they were unknown, and therefore held
unworthy. This difficulty in the new election appearing more and more, whilst
more were to be chosen, (the fittest men to be substituted having been named
amongst the first, and not thought fit enough) Pacuvius entreated, and easily
prevailed with the People, that the present Senate might at this time be
spared, in hopes of amends hereafter, which (doubtless) they would make,
having thus obtained pardon for all offenses past. Henceforth, not only the
People, as in former times, honored Pacuvius, and esteemed him their Patron,
but the Senate also were governed by him, O fortunatos nimi^m, bona si sua
norint, etc.
to whem they acknowledged themselves indebted, for saving all their lives.
Here now was a prudentiall piece of policy, such as the sage and prudent some
years since amongst us, might have well improved, to the curing of many
distempers, composing of much difference, and preventing of great disorders,
whereby we were then become even so distracted, that England was called the
Bedlam of Europe, and London the Bedlam of England.

How it is that Age becomes truly honorable.
PHilo the learned Jew notes, that although many in the beginning lived to a
great length of time, Philo in locum.
so that they more then trebled the years of Abraham, yet none is mentioned,
and named to have been an old Man in the Scripture, until Abraham, of whom it
is said, That he dyed in a good old age, Genesis 25. 8. Whereof Philo conceives
the reason to be, because though his years were fewer, his virtues were more;
Canities tunc est venerabilis quan do ^a gerit, etc. Chrysostom.
and because he was gone farther in the way of Righteousness, though his
course were shorter in way of life: And this it was, Prove. 16. 31.
that made his old age to be good, this it was that made it to be a Crown of
glory; for it is a Reproach to be able to prove our old age, only by numbers
of years, and not by increase of knowledge and goodness; it being so, that Age
will never become truly honorable, nor the hoary head as a Crown of glory,
till it be found in the way of Righteousness.

To commit our selves to God in all things, and to be thankful to his holy
Name.
IN the play at Tennis, Vnus jacit alter vero refert pilam. Chrysostom. orat. 8.
it is observable, that the one tosseth the ball, the other tosseth it back
again, and so long it is that the sport hanlomly continues, as the ball tossed
to and fro between the hands of both, does not fall to the ground; And he is
said to be the best player, that does not only skilfully and readily take the
ball, but nimbly and expertly sends it back again: Thus it is, that all of us
are to reveal our works unto the Lord, Seneca de benefic. l. 2. c. 17.
to cast or tumble our works before the Lord, Prove. 16. 3. to put them over to
the Lord; and whatsoever we do well, let him have the praise and the thanks for
it, not to let the ball of benefits fall to the ground, but bandy it back with
a speedy return of submissive acknowledgement; Nich. de Lyra in Prove. 16. 3.
for the true comfort of that which we have received, will be happily continued
so long as we shall return thanks for things which we have so received; And
then it is too, that we shall be looked on as good and worthy receivers, when
we cast back praise and glory unto God, and speak good of his holy Name.

The good of Quietness, and evil of Contention.
LOok but upon a pleasant Pond, full of sweet Fish, how do they sport
themselves up and down in it, Mich. Iermin, exposit. on Prove. 16. 3.
and multiply continually unto a great increase? But let the sluice be once
taken up, the Fishes are quickly gone, the waters stay not till they be gone
also, and nothing but mud and mire is left behind. So it is that in a quiet
life, the affairs and endeavors of Men do prosper, and their estate is
increased to plenty and abundance, so that they even bathe themselves in the
comfort and contentments that they find therein; Greg. de cura past. part. 3.
a^m. 15.
but let the waters of strife break in, the gap of Contention be opened, all
comforts fleet away, and usually the estate sinks lower and lower, until it be
dried up to beggary and misery: Dimittens a quam caput jurgiorum. Ambr. ep.
lib. 3.
Such is the good of Quietness, and the evil that attends upon contention,
I is therefore good Counsel to make up all breaches as soon as they do appear,
or rather by watchfulness keep all so firm, that no breach may appear, for the
evil of contention is a great deal better prevented then remedied.


IT is mentioned of Frederick Duke of Saxony, that being offered a great mass
of Gold by the Agents of Archduke Charles, Erasmus in A pophthegmat.
even after he had given his voice to be Emperor (and indeed made him
Emperor) he would not so much as look upon it; And when they were instant upon
him, at the least to give them leave to bestow a largess upon his Gentlemen
and followers; his answer was, That they might take something if they would;
but I tell you, and I tell them, (said he) That not one of them that takes a
penny, shall stay one day in my house: This was now a worthy Heroical mind in
him, Lib. 4. de considerat.
but sooner praised then followed: and as St. Bernard said in another case,
exemplum alterius s^culi, an Example fitter for a less corrupt age, than this
wherein we live; It is well now, if nothing be given or promised before hand;
The Rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye, Hos. 4. 13. The Judge asks for a
Reward, Mich. 7. 3. Many are the Gehezies that run after Rewards: Many like
Samuels two Sons turn aside after lucre, Acceptio ^^unerum causa pervertendi
judicii. Oreg. in ^ocum.
and takes bribes to pervert Judgment, 1 Samuel 8. 3. But where is the Man, that
like Samuel, can say, Whose Ox, have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or
whom have I defrauded, whom have I oppressed, or of whose hands have I received
any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith, 1 Samuel 12. 3?


IT was the wisdom of Sulpitius Severus, who being deceived by the Pelagians,
and acknowledging the fault of his loquacity, In catalogo virorumillustrium
was careful of silence afterward unto his death, and good reason too, says
St. Ierom; Ut peccatum quod loquendo contraxerat, tacendo penitus emendaret,
That the sin which he had committed by overspeaking, might be amended by
holding his peace ever after: Thus it may be, and often is the infirmity of the
wisest, to be too hasty in speech, to be somewhat too forward in their
expressions; it must therefore be their wisdoms to shut the doors of their
lips, to be wary of what they say, and to be more silent and watchful over
themselves for the time to come.


IT is said of Nero's Quinquennium, Aurel. Victor. Sueton in hist.
that it was such, that in the excellency thereof, as to the point of
Government, few of his Predecessors did ever equal him; yet at last, that which
glistered so much, did not prove to be true Gold: He fell into courses most
exorbitant, and amongst the rest, so shameless in his bribery and extortion,
Procul differ cunctos Frincipes, etc.
that he could not pass an Office, but he must be well paid for it, before
the Seal was gotten, and then as a Trumpet of his own baseness, cry out to the
party; Scis quibus sit opus, Thou know what I have need of: And thus it is,
that when Men are distempered with sin, habituated, and, as it were, rooted in
sin, they are not very easily cured; It is a difficulty to be weaned from the
sweet breasts, where Sin has a long time sucked; or to be divorced from those
criminal courses to which a Man has once espoused his affections; Vitia mores
^iunt. Greg.
Vices oft-times become Usages, and a practiced sinner is even incorrigible,
Ier. 4. 14. Ezck. 13. 27.

Men to stand up for the credit of their places.
LEwis the 11th of France, desiring to thrust an Abbot injuriously out of his
place, In vita ejus.
commanded him Cedere, to give up his Right, and to yield up the possession to
one that he should nominate; the Abbot thinking the King to have no absolute
power to dispose of Church-rights, without some high crime, or the Parties
voluntary consent, resolutely told him; That he had been forty years learning
the two first letters of the Alphabet, A. B. Quadraginta annis vix priores
duasliteras Alphabeti A. B. percepi, etc. Aegid. Corrozetus de dictis memorabil.
that is, how to be made an Abbot and he should be forty years longer before he
should learn the two next letters, C. D. by which he meant C E D E, that he
could not understand how to yield up an Abbo^ship so easily: Thus it is that
the greater Men are, the greater care ought they to have in keeping up the
credit of their places; be as great as their Parentage and Pedigrees, Ties and
Titles; be as great as their great Crea^or has made them to be; and as God
has had the bringing of them forth, let not the Devil have the bringing of
them up; Tho. Reeve, Gods plea for Ningveh.
as they tender their dignities, leave them as dignities, lose not a cubit of
their stature, embesell not their stock, lose their birthright, nor be
inferior to themselves, as some in these days are, that have such a Lethargy,
Vertigo, or palpitation of the heart, that they have forgotten every thing that
should be near and dear unto them, and even tremble to be their own
Propugnators.

The great mystery of the Hypostaticall union in Christ, shadowed out by way of
Similitude.
MAny are the similitudes used by both ancient and modern Writers to illustrate
the mysterious Union of God and Man in one Person of Jesus Christ our Mediator.
As that of the Body and Soul, Just. Mart. in exposit. Fidei. Bazil in Nativitat.
making but one Man; Of the primordiall light in the first Creation, Alex.
Alens. sum. Theolog. p. 3. q. 7. mem. 1. art. 1.
and of the body of the Sun, in which that light was afterward seated, both
making one Luminary; Of a sword fired and enflamed; Of one Man having two
accidental forms or qualities, as skill in Divinity and Physic; Of a Cion or
branch grafted into a Tree: But these and some others have been long since
noted as defective in one part or other, That therefore of the Misletoe in the
Oak, or in the Apple Tree, seems to hold out the best: For,

First, Damascen. de fide orthodox. lib. 3. cap. 11.
The Apple Tree and Misletoe, are two perfect and different Natures in one
Tree, the Misletoe wanting no integrall part that belongs to Misletoe: So the
Godhead and Manhood are two perfect and different Natures in one Person, in
one Christ our Lord.

Secondly, R. Field of she Church. l. 5. c. 12
The Misletoe never had a separate and distinct subsistence of its own, but
only subsist^th in union with the Apple Tree, which susteyneth and main^aineth
it: So the humane nature of Christ never had any distinct and separate
subsisience of its own; but, from the first conception, subsisted in union with
the divine subsistence.

Thirdly, The Apple Tree and Misletoe are so one Tree, that their two different
Natures are neither confounded together, nor changed one into another to make
up a third Nature, but are so individually unitea, that retaining their
different Natures, they are but one Tree; So the two Natures of Christ, are
without confusion or commutation united in one person, and yet still retain
they real differences.

Fourthly, Fr. Roberts, my sterium and medulla Biblierum. l. 4. c. 6. Aphor^^m.
2. Po^it. 1.
The Apple-trce and Misletoe though one Tree, yet having different Natures,
bear different fruits, as Apples and berries: So the Godhead and Manhood of
Christ, though but one Person, yet being different Natures, perform disinct
actions peculiar to each of them.

Lastly, As we may truly say by reason of this union, This Apple Tree is a
Misletoe, and this Misletoe is an Apple Tree; and consequently, This Misletoe
bears Apples, and this Apple Tree bears Berries: So we may truly say by
reason of the personal union in God and Man, in Christ; This Son of Mary is
the Son of God, and this Son of God is the Son of Mary; the Son of God was
crucified, and the Son of Mary created Heaven and Earth.


IT was the saying of Chrysostom, Erasmus in vita Chrysostomi.
to Gaynas the Arrian Bishop, Cogita quo cultu transieris Histriam, and quibus
nunc utaris vestibus etc. Bethink thy self in what poor attire thou did once
pass through Histria, and how richly thou art now apparelled: So let all such
as are advanced in the worlds eye, such as are arrived at great estates, such
as heretofore not worthy to sit with the Dogs of the flock, are now seated
with Princes; consider the simple weeds, perhaps that were once upon their
backs, and now God has given them change of Apparel; What a small stock they
had once to begin withal, Quantum muta tus ab illo.
and how God has conveyed unto them hidden Treasures; What Minums they were
once in the World, and what Grandees they are now become; That whilst others
have poverty, they have prosperity, Whilst others are empty, they are full;
whilst others have a narrower border, theirs is enlarged; whilst others have
neither means nor meat, their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous: Io^l 2.
28.
When therefore they eat in plenty, and are satisfied, let them praise the name
of the Lord their God, which has done wonderfully for them, and say with
David, All that we enjoy, comes of thine hand, and all is thine own, 1 Chronicles.
29. 6.


IT is said of Alexius Comnenus, Nicetae hist. l. 1
that when upon the day of his Inauguration, he subscribed the Creed in a slow
trembling manner; it was an ominous sign to all, What a wicked Man he would
prove, and, how nigh the ruin of the Empire was at had: And when Philip, the
last King of Macedon, a little before the great battle which he fought with
Flaminius, Plutarch. in Flaminio. ^
stepped up upon the top of a Sepulcher to make an Oration to his Soldiers, it
foretold a sad event of the issue of the battle: Thus we which have violated
the faith, and are come to such a sloathfulnesse and lukewarmnesse in
performance of Religious duties, it does presage that our very inwards are
corrupted, and the foundations of our Welfare shaking; We that have trod upon
the heads of so many famous Martyrs, which first conveyed unto us our faith and
worship, Tho. Reeve, Gods Plea for Nineveh.
it is a kind of Prediction, that this at last will be fatal to our Church;
There is time yet to amend, but how long God knows; It is to be hoped that our
sins have not yet made God to abhor the excellencies of Jacob, nor left us
naked before the Lord: We have yet much in our keeping, all is not gone; let it
be our care to preserve what is left, and be thankful for what we have in the
present enjoyment.


WHen God revealed to Nehuchadnezar, how little a while his Empire was to last,
Dan. 3. 4.
he showed him a statue of diverse metals, the head of Gold, the breast silver,
the belly brass, the legs iron, the feet clay, and a little stone descending
from the Mountains dash't the Statue in pieces: But instead of taking this as a
fore-warning of his end, Nazianzen.
and to have it still before his eyes, he made another statue of Gold from top
to toe, which is held to be a durable and lasting metal; so that the more God
fought to undeceive him, the more was he deceived with his vain hopes.
Congestum cespite culmen.
And this is a fit resemblance of that, which daily happens unto us; for God
advising us, that in the midst of all our magnificent structures, and costly
edifices, that of our body, our best building, is but reared up of a little
dirt, Tanquam mors nulla sequatur.
an house of clay, that daily moulders away, and will be ere long reduced to
little or nothing; yet our idle thoughts, and vain hopes, imagine it to be of
gold, to be built of strong and lasting materials; Palvis and umbra sumus.
which cannot be, when as man's life is so short, that it is no more, then to go
out of one grave into another, out of the womb of our particular Mother* into
that of the earth, the common Mother of us all. Dust we are, and to dust we
must return, Genesis 2.

How it is, that a prudent man may lawfully comply with the Times.
IT is said of the Yeale, Plinii not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 21.
a certain wild beast in Aethiopia, that he has two horns, of a cubit long,
which he can in fight move as he list, either both forward, to offend; or both
backward, to defend; or the one forward, and the other backward, to both uses
at once: So should wise men apply their counsels and actions to the times, Non
cursum cundem sed portum, etc. Lips. polit. lib. 4.
and either to put forth the horns of their power, or pull them in, as occasion
offers; yet, with this caution, that as the Mariner changes his course, upon
the change of the wind and weather, but still holds his purpose, of getting
into the harbor* so should all prudent men, Statesmen especially, as upon
every new occasion they alter their sails, and veer another way, they should
still make their course to the point of the public good and safety, not once
minding their own private benefit or advantage.

The difference betwixt a good and bad Memory.
AS the stomach is the storehouse of our corporal food, Basil in Bibl. S. S.
Patrum. Tom. 1. Sermon. 2.
and keeping therein our present meat, the body takes from thence its
sustenance, whereby its life and being is maintained: So the memory is the
stomach and magazine of the soul, and sets before our eyes the obligation,
wherein we stand, the good which we lose, and the hurt which we gain; and
representing thereunto the species and shapes of things past, Chr. Fonseca Ser.
in die Cine rum.
they sometimes work that effect, as they would have done, had they been
present themselves; whence is engendered the love of God, which is that good
blood wherewith the soul is nourished. And then again, as from the disorder and
disagreement of the stomach, painful diseases do arise, and diverse infirmities
hang upon the body; so from the forgetfulness of our memories, rise those
manifold disorders and distempers in the soul, such as deaden the graces of the
Spirit, and flat the motions thereof, bringing the soul into a labyrinth of
perplexity, until God be pleased to bring such things into mind again, as may
relieve it.

Oath, or Covenant-breakers, not to be trusted.
THe Laws divine and human, Summum creed nefas, etc. Juvenal sat. 10.
have left no such bond of assurance, to tie and fasten one to another, as that
of an Oath or Covenant, which are to be taken in sincerity, and kept
inviolably: But seeing the deprivation of our nature has perverted these
Laws, and abused this lawful act, by equivocations, and mental reservations,
making it like a Gypsies knot, fait or loose at their pleasure; or like a
Tragedian buskin, Fronum est sup^ros contemnere test^s. Id. sat. 13.
equally fitting each foot. The Law of State prescribes us this remedy, to
trust no man of noted falsehood and duplicity, but upon good caution; and good
reason too: For he that has passed the bounds of modesty, and made no Religion
of Oath or Covenant, for his proper advantage, never after makes scruple in his
cauteriate conscience, to offend in like sort, as often as like occasion shall
be offered.


THe River Novanus in Lombardy, Plin. not. hist. lib. 2. cap. 103.
at every Midsummer Solstice, swells and runs over the banks, but in
mid-winter Solstice, is clean and dry: Such is the nature of men unresolved, to
several fortunes; they swell in the Sunshine of their prosperity, and look big
in the days of their advancement; but when storms of danger and troubles
arise, O vere galeati lepores, etc. Homer.
they are dried up with despair, and hang down their heads like a bulrush: For
a mind unprepared for dysasters, is unfurnished to sustain it when it comes;
he that soareth too high in the one for^une, sinketh too low in the other.
Insolent braving, and base fear, are individual and infeparable companions:
But the resolved man is ever the same, even in the period of both fortunes.


THe Getulian captive (as Pliny relates the story) escaped the danger, Not.
hist. lib. 8. cap. 16.
of being devoured by many Lions, through her humble gesture, and fair
language, as saying unto them, That she was a silly woman, a banished fugitive,
a sickly, feeble, and weak creature, Regia res est succurrere lopsis. Ovid.
an humble suitor, and lowly suppliant for mercy. As therefore the Lion is the
most noble of all the beasts of the Forest, who never shows his force, but
where he finds resistance; satis est prostrasse, do but yield, and he is quiet:
Such is every truly noble soldier, every generous soldier, (the most
honorable of all other professions) who holds it as great a glory to relieve
the oppressed, as to conquer the enemy that is in arms against him.


IT is usually so, Foeli^que mantb^.
that the vainglorious man looks upon himself through a false glass, Quis
neget hoe? Ovid.
which makes every thing seem fairer and greater then it is; and this flatulous
humor fills the empty bladder of his vast thoughts, with so much wind of
pride, Sr. Rob. Dallingtons Aphorisms.
that he presumes, that fortune, who has once been his good Mistress, should
ever be his handmaid: But let him know, that the wings of self-conceit,
wherewith he towreth so high, are but patched and pieced up of borrowed
feathers, and those imped too, in the soft wax of uncertain hope, which upon
the encounter of every small heat of danger, will melt and fail him at his
greatest need: Et tantum constans in levitate s^a est.
For fortune deals with him, as the eagle with the Tortoise, she carries him
the higher, that she may break him the casier. It would be therefore good
advice, that in the midst of his prosperity, he would think of the worlds
instability, and that fortune is constant in nothing, but inco^stancy.


DO but set the eggs of diverse fouls under one Hen, Daily observations by a
Person of honor.
and when they are disclosed, the Kite will be ravenous, the Dove harmless,
the Duck will be padling in the water, and every one will be prosecuting its
natural inclination and condition. Or take the youngest Woolf-whelp, employ
the greatest art, use the utmost skill that may be, Naturam expellas furca
licet usque. etc.
to make it gentle and loving, and you shall find it but labor lost, a thing
altogether impossible; for it will never be forced or entreated from its
natural curstness and cruelty. Thus it cannot be denied, but that education
has a considerable power to qualify, breeding in a good family may civilize,
but never nullify the proper nature of any thing or person. It is therefore
the duty of Parents, earnestly to pray, that God would be pleased to infuse
such souls into their children, as may be endewed with sweet and gracious
inclinations; if otherwise, to use all fit means to temper the worst, not
presuming to effect an absolute extirpation thereby, but by the miraculous
power of him, who can make from bitter fountains, to deflow sweet and pleasant
waters; from the worst of nature, the best of grace and goodness.

The different conditions of men in the matter of Society, laid open.
Diverse and sundry are the conditions of men in society, L. Capells observat.
divine moral, etc.
but three are most remarkable i. e. The open, the concealed, and the
well-tempered betwixt these: As for the first, they are of so thin a
composition, that a man by a little converse, may see as easily through them,
as if they were made of glass; for in every discourse, they are ready to
unbosome their thoughts, Nec retinent patul^, etc. Vox fa^cibus h^eret.
and unlock the very secrets of their hearts. The second sort are so tenacious,
so reserved, and closely molded, that they seem like those coffers, that are
shut so fast, that no discovery can be made, where they may be opened; so
close, that as they are of less delight for society, Opportun^ loquitor.
so of less hazard to be trustud. But the last and best composed, and like
some ^abinets, that are not with difficulty unclosed; and then discover unto
you many things, pleasant and profitable; but yet so cunningly devised, so
artificially contrived, that there will be some secret box, that neither your
eye nor wit can take notice of, wherein is deposited a most proper and
incommunicable treasure, something that will give grace and much advantage, to
those that hear it.

Ministers to be accountable unto God, for what they have received.
AS by the Law of Nature, Joh. Gee Holdfast, a Ser. at S. Paul's 1624.
Read depositum, does bind every such fiduciary, engage every such Trustee,
not to use the pledge deposited, as his own proper goods, but to be accountable
for it, and restore it when it shall be called for; if otherwise, he is guilty
of injustice, and violating those dictamina rationis, the very principles of
natural reason. Libere enim and juxt a veram fidem Christum praedicantes, etc
S. Ambros. super 1 Cor.
So it is with the Treasures of Gods truth, committed to the hands of his
Ministers, they must acknowledge themselves to be but deposi^arii, trusted as
pledge-keepers, not as proprietarii, Lords and Masters of it; for they are to
be responsible in that great day of general Audit, how they have discharged
their trust.

How it is, that the People, as to the generality, are incompetent judges of
the Preacher and his Doctrine.
IT is related of a ^ertain Bishop, Th. Granger Crown of Rejoicing, a Sermon. at
S. Fauls, 1616.
that a Visitation preached a very godly Sermon, and withal so learned and
plain, that the descended to the capacity of the meanest hearers: He was
thereupon very much commended, for his grave gesture, for his distinct and
sober delivery, for his fatherly instructions, speaking plainly and familiarly,
as a father to his children, not so earnest; and vehement, and hot, as many
young Novices are, etc. For their Minister, he was but a youngling, and as good
as no body, in comparison of him; and if they had but such a Preacher, they
would give I know not what, to enjoy him.

This great and general commendation was signified to the Bishop in private,
who, to make trial of the peoples judgment, came the next year after in the
attire of an ordinary and poor Minister, offering himself to be their Preacher,
it being noysed abroad, Populus maledicentia deleetatur. Pindarus.
that their own was upon his remove to another place. The Bishop having gained
the Pulpit, purposely chose another Text, differing from his former in words,
but not in matter; so that in a manner, he preached the very self-same Sermon.
But the same persons, that did so much commend him before, did now as much
discommend him, and said; That he had no good gesture, but a heavy kind of
moving (...) body; that he bended too much forward, and stood not upright; that
he was nothing ripe and ready in his delivery; that he could be no Scholar,
because he was so plain spoken; that almost any man might make as good a
Sermon; that it differed little from ordinary talk; S^vitque animis ignobile
vulgus. Virg I. Aencid
that he enforced nor followed his exhortations, with vehemence and
earnestness of spirit; and that his words had no life in them, to stir up the
attention, or move the affections of the hearers; that none of them would give
a penny for his maintenance; and that they would have another kind of Preacher
than he, or they would have none. Here now was the same Sermon preached, (...)
ex incerti^^^^^ sumit anim^^. L^ vii decad. 1. l. 6.
but here not the same People that heard it; the first Sermon Cried up, the
second cried down, yet still the same Sermon; the Preacher much commended at
the first delivery, and as much discommended at the second, yet still the same
Preacher. Hence is it, that the generality of the people are not to be looked
on, as fit and competent judges, of the Preacher and his Doctrine, for they are
usually led by passion, not by discretion, so that oft-times they commend they
know not what, and discommend they know not whom.


AS when that gold or silver is cast into the furnace, T. Draxe Ser. at St.
Paul's 1612.
and so tried in the fire, the substance remains, but the dross is that
which only perishes: So in the last day, the fire of the Judgment shall
consume and abolish the corruptible and drossy quality of the Creature, but the
substance (being subtilized and refined) shall abide and continue. I Cor. 7. 31.
What though that (...), the fashion of the world pass, and be skowred away,
by the fire of that general conflagration; yet the matter and substance shall
remain: The heavens indeed shall pass away with a noise or rushing, or shrink
together like a skroul of parchment; the Elements like lead, shall melt with
heat, and the earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Yet the
World shall not be consumed to nothing, Psalm. 102.
but only trans-changed into a new form, and converted to a Sabbaticall and
better use. God, out of the very ashes of it, will produce a new world, even a
new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness, 1 Pet. 3. 13.


AS some School masters have used that discipline, Joh. Done Sermon. at Court
1625.
to correct the children of great persons, whose personal correction they
find reason to forbear, by correcting other children in their names, and in
their sight; and have by this means so wrought upon good natures, that they
have amended what was amiss at present, Exodus 2.
and taken more care for the future: Thus the Jews were by God corrected, in
the punishment of the Egyptians; for, the ten plagues of Egypt were as Moses
ten Commandments to Israel. And so it is, that other men's harms ought to be
our arms: Every judgment that falls upon a another, - alien^ pericula ca^tum.
should be as Catechism to us by way of instruction; When Judgments are abroad
in the world, shall not the People learn Righteousness? Shall the Lion roar,
and the beasts of the Forests not tremble? Shall Gods hand lie heavy upon
others, and we stand by as idle spectators, nothing at all minding what is
done? Shall our very next Neighbors house be on fire, - pa^ies cum proximus
(...).
and we look on as Men unconcerned in the danger? It cannot, it must not be;
there is without all doubt, the same combustible stuff, the same (if not
greater) sins lodged in our hearts, and the same punishments hovering over our
heads, it is therefore high time to look about us.

Repentance not to be put off till old Age.
WInter-Voyages are very dangerous and uncertain, by reason of the North Wind,
Hen. Kings Sermon. at Court, 1626.
which is then let loose upon the Earth; And sure, he were not wise, that might
take his journey in the Summer; yet by delaying his opportunity, would expose
himself to the durty deepnesse of the way, and inclemency of the weather in
winter: Now so it is, that old Age is man's Winter, witness that Snow which
covers his head, Periculosum est and interitui vicinum. Ambr. l. de poenitent.
more cold and lasting then the Russian frosts, which the raging Dog Star can
scarcely thaw; And Youth is his Summer, wherein the better temper of the air,
the clearness of his sky, wherein are fewer clouds, less storms to hinder his
prospect to Heaven, promise a successful voyage: Can it be thought then that
God, who preceded all time, will take it well at our hands, to be put back unto
the last minute of time? How can he that requires the first frui^s of our
Lands, be content with the latter harvest of our lives? How can he that expects
a sacrifice of sweet smell, but distaste our unsavory zeal, when for a fragrant
flower, Poenitentia sera raro vera.
we present him with a dry stalk and withered branch, the lees of our old age
for the vintage of our youth? yet by the way, this is not to prejudicate a
gray headed Repentance, though the younger must needs be preferred; That may be
true, but this more safe; A Man may hope well of the one, but believe better of
the other.

In all Deliverances spiritual and temporal, to give God the Glory.
THeodosius* being told of the wonderful overthrow of the Usurper John his
Adversary, Templum ^ratorium.
he, and all his followers, resorted to the Temple where they passed over the
day with praise and thanksgiving, Socratis hist. Eccles. l. 7 c 23
acknowledging that God by his arm had cast down that Tyrant: And Fl. Heraclius
being delivered from Cos^oe, the King of the Persians, and Kingdom freed from
Tyranny, did in the height of his Triumph at Bizantium, Reusner in Symbol.
Coes. Romans clas. 2.
openly praise God for his delivery, And the more to show his thankfulesse, did
cause to be stamped on his coin with his own Image, these words, (...), etc.
Glory be to God in Heaven, because he has broken the Iron doors, and has
delivered the holy Kingdom of Heraclius. And thus must all of us do, if we be
freed from persecution, from a sword-power, from a Government Tyrannical;
Plalm. 3. 8.
let us confess with David, that Salvation is of the Lord; If we be brought
from the jaws of death, and the gates of the grave, or recovered from some
mortal disease, let us say with Hezekiah, The Lord was ready to save me; Esaias
38. 20.
Or if, like so many brands suatch'd out of the fire, we be brought from the
deep of destruction, Jonah 2. 9.
the very gulf of Hell; let us acknowledge with Jonah, That Mercy and Salvation
is of the Lord; In all deliverances spiritual and temporal, let God still
have the glory.


IT was in the Leviticall Law so ordered by God, Levit. 21. 19.
that he which had a blemish of white in his eye, Will. Lo, bliss of
brightest beauty, 1614.
was debarred from the Priesthood, and compared to the Owl, of whom the
Naturalists yield the reason, that she cannot see in the daytime, Prove. 30. 12.
because of the exceeding great whiteness she has in her eyes, Esaias 24.
which so scatters the sight, that the Optics thereof cannot perfectly
discern the objects: And such are all those that are self-conceited of
themselves in matters of Religion, that are pure in their own eyes, wise and
pru^ent in their own sight, yet are not washed, In li^. ad Novation.
from their filthiness, that stink in the nostr^lls of all that come near
them; such as the Novatians, of whom St. Cyprian speaks, qui aurum se
pronunciant, that pronounce themselves to be pure gold; But if they be gold
(says he) it is then that gold in quo delicta populi Israelis, etc. Ulys.
Aldrovand. Ornitholog
in which the sins of the People of Israel are denoted; they are but golden
Calves, or rather golden Asses; It it better therefore to be at Sea tossed with
a tempestuous storm in the ship with those that humbly profess themselves to
be Sinners, than on the shore with the rabble of those that justify
themselves, and are so self-conceited of their own graces, that they think no
one, good enough to be their fellow.


SEasonably and timely came in the provision of Abigail, I Sam. 25. 18, 19, 20.
when for her Husbands churlish behavior, David in his wrath had girded his
sword upon his thigh, and threatened destruction to his whole household; she
delayed not the time, but made haste and went out to meet him with Asses laden
with frails of Resins, bottles of wine, and sheep ready dressed to appease his
wrath, which David took so kindly at her hands, that he forgot his anger, and
gave order that she should be returned in peace and safety to her husband and
family: So it is that David's Son according to his Humanity, Tho. Cheast's Ser.
at S. Paul's 1609.
and David's Lord according to his Divinity, even David the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, the great God of Heaven and Earth is angry with every Son of Man
for his unthankful and ungrateful behavior toward him; He has bent his bow,
and whetted his arrows, girded his sword on his thigh, and (which is much to
be feared) has already drawnit out to punish us; In tribunal mentis tuae
ascend contra t^, etc. Aug. in lib. de utilitat. agend. ponit.
let us then by a seasonable and timely Repentance, go out and humbly meet him
in the way; And as Abigail had her Asses laden with fruit, so let us have our
bodies laden with Repentance and contrition, even these bodies of ours, which
have been too too long Porters to carry the heavy burden of Sin and
wickedness; And as she had her bottles of Wine, so let us have our eyes as two
bottles, nay rather two fountains of tears to bewail the sadness of our lost
condition; And as she had her sheep ready dressed, so let us have our hearts
ready prepared and addressed to serve the Lord, and then the Lord will say unto
us, as David to Abigail, Return again unto your houses in peace, be of good
cheer, your Sins are forgiven you.


IT is observed by Physiognomists, Aristot. Ethic. ad Nicoc. etc. (...).
that the most courageous and discreet Men, have not the speediest pace, but
rather a quiet, decent and settled kind of gate; whereas an hasty pace is looked
on as a certain sign of a rash, foolish and illiberall Man: Thus it is that
rashness is not altogether so hurtful in other business, as it is most
dangerous in Gods service, and the duties of Religion; All rashness must be
banished from Gods service, it must not be any sudden work; yea rather it is
such a business as requires our exactest care, Adamant. Phis^ogn. I. 2. c. 28.
our greatest attention, our bestwits, nay wisdom it self to go about it; the
greatest care we can take is not enough; Ephcs. 5. 15.
Hence is that charge of the Apostle, I These. 4. 12.
(...), (...) to it have a care take heed that you walk (...) circum spectly,
exactly, warily, Romans 13. 13.
not as fools, but as wise.i. to do the service of God advisedly, J. Brownings
Sermon. of reverence in Gods house. 1636.
to walk decently and orderly, (...) with a comely pace, and that with another
caution too, (...) as in the day time, when all Men see us, that so we may not
be ashamed of what we do.

Faith, though weak, yet rewarded; And why so?
THey that did look on the brazen Serpent but with one eye, yea, but with half
an eye, were as well and as fully cured of the deadly stings of the fiery
Serpents, P. Ba^ne Mirror of Gods mercy, on Joh. 3. 16.
as those that beheld it with both: And again, suppose that a Prince be
disposed to bestow on sundry and several Malefactors, a pardon of grace, or
some precious Jewels, (as signalls of his civil respects) unto mere beggars;
Is not the one as fully acquitted from his offenses, and the other made as
actually rich by the possession of such Jewels, though but received with a
palsie-shaking hand, as they that receive them with one that is more strong and
lusty: Even so the case is here; Have thou (whosoever thou be) but a dimmish,
Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides. Ovid. epist. 16.
darkish faith, a weak, waterish eye of faith; yet, for thy comfort, if it be
such an one as does look up to Christ, and only to him, for Salvation; such a
hand as does reach out unto Christ, and the pardon of lins offered in and by
him; and do clasp it about him with all thy feeble strength, Make not doubt
but that thou art justified in the sight of God, and do stand clearly
acquitted from all thy sins, and shall be healed from the deadly stings
thereof; for it is the possession of the Jewel, not the strong holding of it,
that made those beggars rich; and the Kings pardon relieveth none but such as
are willing to accept of it, and plead to it; and so it is not our strong or
weak faith, that is our Righteousness, and full discharge before God, but
Jesus Christ and his obedience, that is it that does all; This only is required
on our part, that we accept of Christ offered in the Gospel, and rely on him
for full Righteousness and Redemption; all which a weak and feeble faith does
as truly and entirely (if not more) as the strongest; Non opus est ver bis,
credit rebus ait. Ovid. 4. Fast.
Nay, which is yet more for the comfort of such as are weak in faith, and
cannot yet in an express and explicit manner believe on Christ; they have
Christ, and enjoy him unto Righteousness, and the pardon of all their sins
and transgressions committed.

All must dye.
THe Heathens usually compared the Sons of Adam, to Counters, the game at
Chesse, and Stages-playes, because that Counters have their several places and
use for a time, but in the end they are jumbled into a heap; In a game at
Chesse, some are Kings, Rob. Harris, Sam. Funeral. 1612.
some Bishops, some Knights etc. but after a while, they go all into one and
the same bag; On the stage one is in his rags, another in his robes; One is
the Master, another is the Man, and very busy they be; but in the end the Play
ends, the bravery ends, and each returns to his place: Such and no other is the
estate of Man, either weeds or flowers, and both wither; whether Trees good or
bad, both die; as dies the wise, so the fool; Rich Men dye, and poor too;
Death is unavoydable, life and death take turns each of other; the Man lives
not, that shall not see death, Longius out propius mors sua quemque manet.
Prop^rtius.
be he a King with Saul, a Prophet with Jeremy, a wise Solomon, a foolish
Nabal, a holy Isaac, a profane Esau; be he of what rank soever, he must dye;
Nay, let there be a concurrence of all in one; let Samuel, both a good Man, a
good Minister, a good Magistrate, have as many privileges as are incident to a
Man, yet can he not procure a protection against Death; his Mother may beg
his life, but none can compound for his Death; so sure it is that all must lie
down in the dust and dye.


IT is written of that Moses Atticissans, Plutarch in Apophtheg^^.
that when he did give Alms to a poor profligate wretch, his friends were much
admired that (...) Plato, the great divine Philosopher would take pity on such
a wretched Miscreant; but he like himself, in such misty days as those were,
made answer, Humanitati non homini, I show mercy on the Man* Sanguinis
conjunctio devincit h^mines charitate. Tull. Gal. 3. 28.
not as he is wicked; but as, and because he is a Man of my own nature. His
answer was good and warrantable; for if we consider our first Parents, we shall
find our selves bound, (though ^ longinquo) by the same obligation to do good
unto all men; There is neither Jew or Grecian, bond nor free, Male or Female,
but all are one in Christ Jesus; neither Indian, whether of the East or West,
neither Barbarian of Morocco, nor Inhabitant of Monomotapa, but all are
brethren, whom, as we have opportunity, we must embrace with Charity; such as
are true Saints, Arch. Symnier sp. Posie for Sion, 1629.
with joy for their Sanctification; those that are not such, in the judgment
of Charity, with hearty and earnest supplications to the great God of Heaven
and Earth for their true and timely conversion to the faith, that is to be
found only in the Lord Jesus.


SUppose a Man, by birth Noble, and by revenues Rich, that as travailing
homewards through a foreign Country, P. Bain M^racle of Gods love on Joh. 3.
16.
he should be waylaid, fall into the hands of Thieves and villains, and by
them be robbed of his Money, and stripped of his rich and Courtly apparel, and
besides that have many indignities and base unworthy affronts put upon him, and
yet should pass by all as little or nothing concerned in the business; And
why so? but because he considers, that he is not in his right Ubi, he has no
long time to abide with such wretched People; and that if he can but make some
shift for a time, (...) famus dulcis.
till he came to his own Country, and place of abode, there he should have his
friends about him, moneys and all things necessary to supply his want and
necessities: The same is our case, Why should any of us grieve and be troubled
at the worlds discourtesies, at the Reproaches and wrongs that are put upon us
by the World and worldly Men; -manet altera C^lo.
For (have we but so much faith as to believe it) we have an Heavenly home, and
an eternal life by Christ prepared for us; at the which when we once arrive,
we shall be sure to meet with friends enough, even God, his blessed Saints and
Angels, who will honor us; Riches and treasures inestimable, that will store
us; joy and glory unspeakable, that will for evermore refresh us.


IF a Man lay a crooked stick upon an eeven level ground, the stick and ground
ill suit together, S. Augustine. in Psalm. 44. 6.
but the fault is in the stick; And in such a case, a Man must not strive to
bring the even-ground to the crocked stick, but bow the crooked stick eeven
with the ground: So is it between Gods will and ours, there is a discrepancy
and jarring betwixt them; But where is the fault, or rather, Where is it not?
Not in the will of God, but in our crooked and corrupt affections, in which
case we must not like Balaam, seek to bring Gods will to ours, but be contented
to rectify and order the crookedness of our Wills, by the rectitude and
sanctity of the Will of God, which must be the Ruler and Moderator of our
wills; for which cause we are to cry out with David, Teach me, O Lord, to do
thy will; and with the whole Church of God, Psalm. 143. 10.
in that pattern of wholesome words, ^iat voluntas tua, Thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven; never forgetting that too of Christ Jesus himself,
in the midst of his agony and bloody sweat, Non mea sed tua siat voluntas,
Father, Not my will, but thine be done, Luke 22. 42.

To appear before God in all humility, how high soever our condition be.
IT is observable of Rebecca, Rudinius in Genesis 24.
that all the way of her journey, she was mounted on a Camel, and rode amongst
the Servants; but when she had once set her eye upon Isaac, then she lighted
down from the Camel, and put her self into a posture of all humble and low
obeisance. So must the men of this world do, however it be, Templa petas
supple^.
that many of them bear up their heads on high, stand upon the upper ground of
riches and preferment, and are therefore bold and careless, not so much as
once minding those that are below them; yet, when they come into the Lords
presence, J. Smith on L. Prayer.
and are to deal with the great God of heaven and earth, then they are to come
down from their Camells, fall down and kneel before the Lord their maker, and
be as humble, lowly, and vile in their own eyes, as possibly may be.

How it is, that Faith is the first act of Repentance.
AS a prisoner, R. Stock Doctrine of Repent.
that lies in hold for debt, if a man should come unto him, and promise him,
that he would take order to pay his debt, and thereby discharge him of his
imprisonment; he first believes, that he is both able and willing so to do it;
then he hopes for it; and lastly, he is as it were dissolved into love,
ravished with the thoughts of such an unexpected relief; Nemo recte possit
poenitentiam agere nisi qui speraverit, etc. Ambros. de poenit l. 1. c. 1.
and therefore seeks to do all things that may please him. So is it with a
repenting Convert, he first believes, that God will do what he has promised,
that is, pardon his sins, and take away his iniquities; then he rests, that
what is so promised shall be performed; and from that, and for it, he leaves,
sin, forsakes his old course of life, which was displeasing, and for the time
to come makes it his work, to do that which is pleasing and acceptable in his
sight.

The comfortable art of spiritualizing the several occurrences of the world
and observing God's providence therein.
IT is storied of Mr. Dod, T. Whit^ Treat. of the power of Godliness.
(a painful Preacher in his time) that intending to marry, but being troubled
with fears and cares, how he should be able to live in that condition, in
regard that his Incomes were but small, enough only to maintain him as a
single man; looking out of the window, and seeing a Hen scraping for food, to
cherish her numerous brood about her, thought thus with himself, This Hen did
but live before it had the chickens, and now she lives with all her little
ones. Upon which, he added this thought also: I see the fouls of the air
neither sow, nor reap, Matthew. 5.
nor gather into barns; and yet my heavenly Father seeds them. Thus did he, and
thus many of S. Augustine. Estie, Dering, Bolton, etc.
Gods servants have done before him; and thus did our blessed Lord and Savior
himself, who took occasion of the water fetched up solemnly to the Altar, from
the well of Shilo, on the day of the great Hosanna, to meditate and discourse
of the water of life: And so must all of us do, get this sweet and comfortable
art of spiritualizing the several occurrences in the world, and observing the
providence of God therein, drawing, like the Be, sweetness from every
flower, and turning every thing that we hear or see into holy meditation; the
omission whereof cannot be, without the neglect of God, his creatures, our
selves: (...) Hall Art of divine Me^i^^tion.
The Creatures are half lost, if we only employ them, not learn something of
them; God is wronged, if his creatures be unregarded; We most of all, if we
read this great volume of the Creatures, and take out no lesson for our own
instruction.


IT is reported of the King of Morocco, Pet. Heylin Cosmography.
that he told the English Ambassador, in King John's time, that he had lately
read St. Paul's (...), which he liked so well, that were he to choose his
Religion, he would embrace Christianity: But, says he, every one ought to die
in the faith wherein he was born. So it is with many amongst us, they are
persuaded they ought, and are resolved they will live and die in those customs
and ways, Ade^ a teneris assuescere multum est. Virg. Georg. lib. 2.
wherein they were born: and so they may do, nay, so they must do; provided
that such customs and forms, whereunto they seem to be so fast glued, be
according to the pattern in the Mount, the revealed will of God: But it is to
be feared, that such are more addicted to Customs then Scriptures, choosing
rather to follow what has been, though never so absurd and irregular, then
consider what should be, though never so orthodox and uniform.


THere is a story of an Elephant, Aeliani varia hist.
who being fallen down, and unable to help himself, or get up again, by reason
of the inflexiblenesse of his legs; a forrester coming by, helped him up,
wherewith the Elephant (a creature otherwise docible enough, by the very
instinct of nature) was so affected, that he tamely followed the man up and
down, would do any thing for him, and never left him till his dying day. Magnes
am^ris amor.
Now so it is, that if there be such love expressed by bruit beasts, to those
which have done them any good, should not we much more love and prise Christ,
that has done so much for us? For we were fallen, and could not recover or
help our selves; and Christ has lifted us up, and redeemed us with his own
most precious blood, when we were even lost and undone: Let us then think
nothing too much to do, too great to suffer, too dear to part withal, for such
a Christ, such a Savior, that thought nothing too much to do, or too grievous
to suffer, Christ. Love Wrath and Mercy, a Sermon. on 1 These. 5. 9.
that so he might accomplish the work of our Redemption: He left Heaven for us,
let not us think much to lose Earth for him; He came out of his Fathers bosom
for us, let not us be unwilling to leave father, or mother, or friends, or any
thing else, for him; He underwent sufferings, reproaches, afflictions,
persecutions, yea, death it self, for us, let not us repine at, or be impatient
under, any trouble or misery we shall meet with here in this world, for h^s
sake, but still be praising, blessing, and magnifying the love of God in Christ
Jesus, who has done so much for us.


IT is observed, Ulys^es Aldrovand. de Serp. Serpens minium curat si corp^s
incidatur etc. Chrysostom. homil. 24. in Matthew.
that the Serpent is of all things most careful of his head, because he well
knows, though he be cut and mangled never so much in the body, or any part of
it, yet if his head be but whole, it will cure all the wounds of the other
members. And such wisdom ought all of us to have, to labor above all things to
keep our head, our faith, whole and sound, to make sure of that, whatsoever we
do; because if any thing else receive a wound, if any other of our graces have,
as it were, even lost their spiritual strength and vigor, faith will renew
them again; but if this once suffer shipwreck, it will cost many a sigh, many a
tear, many a groan in the spirit, before it be recovered again: for, without
it, all other graces decay and perish, are as in a winter-condition of
barrenness without it; yet, if it do but appear, there will be a springtide
of all spiritual blessings whatsoever.

Troubles and vexation of spirit, not to be allayed by wrong means and ways.
IT is said of Cain, that being in trouble of mind, and terror of conscience,
for his bloody sin of fratricide, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
he went to allay it, by building a City, Genesis 4. And there was no way to drive
away Readiness melancholy, but by David's tuning of his Harp. Thus it is with most
of people, when they are under trouble of mind, or vexation of spirit, they use
sinful and wrong means to quiet themselves; they run to merry meetings, to
music, to building, to bargaining, to buying and selling; but they run not to
God on the bended knees of their hearts, who is the only speedy help in such a
time of need. It cannot be denied, but that a merry meeting, music, or the
like, may allay the trouble of mind for a while, but it will recoil with more
terror then before: A sad remedy, not much unlike to a man in a seavou^, that
lets down cold drink, which cools for the present, but afterward increases
the more heat; or like a man rubbing himself with Nettles, to allay the sting
of a Be; or not much unlike to one, that has his house a falling, and takes a
firebrand to uphold it, whereby the building is more in danger.

Prosperity will discover what a man is.
IT is said of Pius Quintus, Vix ^ius intus.
so called, because that when he was a mean man, he was looked on as a good
man; but when he came to be a Cardinal, he doubted of his salvation;
Magistratus indicat virum.
and when a Pope, he dispaired of it: So hard a thing is it for a good man, to
use a prosperous estate well. Prosperity is that which will tell you, what a
man is, it will soon find him out; give him power, and he will soon show what
grace is in him; put him into an Office, and he will presently be seen in it.
Hence it is observable, Non fa^ile est aequa commoda mente pati. Ovid. 2 Art.
that the same word that signifies prosperity, (...), schalvat, in the Hebrew,
is rendered by the Arabic, Investigatio; and by the Septuagint, (...),
Inquisition, or Examination, to make a strict search, or to examine thoroughly.
So that whereas Adversity tries but one grace, that is, Patience; Prosperity
will try all graces; it will try a man's love, whether he love God or the world;
it will try his zeal, whether at a dead lift he will venture Christ or his
estate; it will try his hope, whether it be on Heaven or Earth; it will try his
charity, whether it be at home or abroad; it will try the whole Man, and
suddenly discover to the world, what metal he is made of.

Gods ends, and man's ends, as to the persecution of his Church, the vast
difference betwixt them.
A Physician lets a man blood, Jer. Whitaker Ser. at Westminster. 1647.
by the application of Leeches, and they suck much blood from him; but the
Physicians ends are one thing, and the Leeches ends are another thing; the
Leech draws blood from the man, only to satisfy it self; but the Physi^ian
lets the man blood, to cure his distemper. Such is the difference between
Gods ends, and wicked men's ends, in the persecution of his own people; God, by
suffering his own Church and People to be persecuted, it is for to purge a way
their evil distempers of sin and security, or whatsoever it is that may
offend, that thereby he may make his people better by their afflictions; but
wicked and ungodly men, by troubling the Church, it is for to destroy them, and
root them out, that they may be no more a People, to accomplish their own
wicked designs, and to satisfy their rage and malice upon them, in their
utter ruin and overthrow. These are their ends, Saepe tulit lassis uccut
amaru^ opem. Ovid.
but God has other ends; as Joseph said to his brethren, You did intend me
hurt, but God did intend me good; Amor.
so it may be said concerning all ungodly wicked men, they do intend evil
against the Church and people of God, Genesis 45.
but God intends his People's good; they intend to persecute and destroy, but
he intends (maugre all their contri^ments whatsoever) to preserve, Magne est
veritas and praeval^bit.
keep, and continue his Church, to the end of the world. Let the Church's
enemies plow never so deeply, and make furrows on the backs of Gods people
never so long; yet Gods ends are grace, and mercy, and peace, to do them good
in the latter end.


IT is related of St. John the Evangelist, Eu^ebius in historia. l. 3. c. 22.
that being upon his return from Pathmos to Ephesus, after the death of
Domi^ian, he was set upon by a company of Thieves, amongst whom was a young man
their Captain; to him St. John applied himself, by way of wholesome counsel and
advice, which took so good effect, that he became a new man, Olim meminisse
dolebit.
and was converted, and went thereupon to all his fellow thieves, and besought
them in the Name of Jesus Christ, that they would not walk any longer in their
former wicked ways. He told them withal, that he was troubled in conscience
for his former wicked life, and earnestly entreated them, that as they tendered
the eternal welfare of their own poor souls, they would now leave off their
old courses, and live more conscionably for the time to come. The counsel was
good, and well taken, so that many of those great Robbers, became great
Converts. Thus it is, Numen confessis aliquod patet. Ovid.
that one Sinners confession of his faults to another, may happily prove the
conversion of one the other. Hence is it, that the meaning of that Apostolical
precept, Confess your faults one to another, Iam. 5. 16. is made out by some
Interpreters to be, That those that have been partners together in sin, they
should go one to another, and seriously confess their sins each to other: He
that has been a drunkard, let him go to his companion, and tell him, that he
is troubled in mind, because of his former excess: And let the unclean person
go to her partner in sin, and tell her, God has troubled his conscience for
his lust; and it may be, this may awaken her conscience too, so that she may
bethink her self of her wicked courses, and be converted.


IT is worth the taking notice of, Rev. 7.
how that when the holy Ghost does reckon up the Tribes of Israel for their
renown; as, Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of
Reuben were sealed twelve thousand, etc. But if you mark the enumeration, you
shall find one Tribe left out, and that is the Tribe of Dan: And why is it so?
Much ado there is to find out the reason of Gods omission of that Tribe; one
reason is, and that a true one too, because this Tribe made a defection from
the true worship of God, Judge. 18. 30.
and fell to Idolatry: Another reason there is, (and that probable enough)
because they did not lay to heart the calamities of Gods Church; for when the
other Tribes were jeoparding their lives in the highest places of the field,
they remained in ships, let the rest of the Tribes shift for themselves, they
would not lose their trading so, they would follow their Merchandising. And for
this it was, that God sets a brand of obloquy upon them, in not allowing them
so much as a name amongst their brethren and companions. And thus, E terra
spectantes naufr^gium and de mars judicanses Achivos. Erasm. in Adag.
reprovable are all they too, that lay nothing of the Church's calamities to
heart; let Religion sink or swim, the Gospel stand or fall; the Church of God
prosper or prosper not; they are but as so many Gallio's, they care for none of
all these things, like the Tribe of Dan, they remain in their ships, at their
trades, at their bargaining, buying and selling; though the Church's sorrows
come on never so fast, they look on as altogether unconcerned, not in any way
contributing to the support thereof.

Heaven, the poor Saints comfortable inheritance.
VAlens the Emperor threatened S. Basil, That let him go whither he would, yet
he should neither by Sea nor Land, Niceph. in hist. Eccles.
be safe from his power; Well, said the good man, be it so; For all the
Emperor's rage, I shall be either in Heaven, or under Heaven; And in the like
manner, there was a Cardinal threatened Luther, That there should not be a
place left for him in all the Empire of Germany, Joh. Sleida^ in Com.
wherein he should be free from danger; O (says Luther smilingly) If Earth
cannot keep me safe, Heaven shall: Thus it is that many of the dear servants of
God, such as perhaps have no place in the World wherein to put their heads, or
such as heretofore had better accommodations, Locum virtu^ habet inter astra
Se^. Hercules.
but are now glad to live in poor Cottages, smoaky houses, etc. or such (as it
may be) are driven to and fro by Sea and Land, as having no abiding place of
rest or safety, where to repose themselves; yet here is their hope, here their
comfortable assurance, that maugre the malice of Men and Devils, they shall be
either in Heaven, or under Heaven; though they have no abiding place on Earth
below, yet they have one prepared for them eternally in the Heavens above.

The not growing in Grace, reproved.
LOok but upon a company of Ants, or Pismires, how busy they are about a
Molehill, Chr. Love, Growth in grace
how they run to and fro, and weary themselves in their several movings, yet
never grow great, but as to the slender proportion of their bodies are still
the same: And such are many Christians in these days, many Professors in our
times, who go from one Ordinance to another, and yet make little progress or
increase in Religion; 2 Pet. 3. ^18.
such as run from one Church to another, from one Preacher to another, and it
may be from one opinion to another, but never grow up to the true Grace; and in
the true knowledge of the Lord Jesus.

Whilst we are here in this World to provide for Heaven hereafter.
THere is mention made of a Nation, Sparta.
that use to choose their Kings every year, and whilst they are in their annual
government, they live in all abundance of State, have all the fullness their
hearts can wish; but when the year is once over, all their pomp and glory is
over too, Implentur veteris Bacchi etc.
and they banished into some obscure remote place for ever: One King hearing
this, being called to rule over that Nation, made such use of his time, that in
the year wherein he reigned as King, he was not lavish in spending his
Revenues, but heaped up all the Treasure he could get together, and sent it
before him to that place, whither he should be banished; And so in that year of
his Government, made a comfortable provision for all his life time afterward:
-- se casus componit ad ^mnes, Quum viderimus aliq^em servum Dei providere etc.
Aug. in lib. de Sermon. Dom. in mon.
Thus it is that God has given to every one of us a time to live here in this
world, and but a little time at the most, it may be not a week, not a day, not
an hour; It will be then the greatest part of our wisdom, that whilst we are
here in the way to salvation, and suck at the breasts of those Ordinances that
may feed us to eternal life, and draw at those Wells, called in Scripture, The
wels of Salvation; now to lay up for the time of our banishment, before we go
hence and be no more seen; and be sure that whilst we are in this world, to
provide for Heaven hereafter.


ALexander the great, (...)
when he was invited to run a Race amongst the common Multitude, He gave them
this answer; Were I not the Son of a King, I did not care what company I kept;
but being the Son of a Prince, I must employ my self in such company, as is
s^table to my birth and breeding: Thus stood he then upon the honor of his
Family, and would not disgrace his Princely nature so far, as to be familiar
amongst the vulgarrabble; And thus must every one of us do; We have each of us
a race to run, Non ^ati sed facti sumus Christi^ni.
for so the ways of Christianity are called; We are as Alexander was, Kings
and Princes in all Lands: Now so it is that Sin, as a Vagabond and loose
Companion, would seek to converse with us; The Devils aim is that we should
mix our selves with such lusts and such sins as he presents unto us;
Delinquend^ materia debet praescindi. Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 2.
Lust would have our hearts, and Sin would have our affections, both of them
strive to be familiar with us; But let us answer them from a noble and generous
mind as Alexander did: That we will not so abase and dishonor our selves, as
to mix or join our selves with the base and common things of this World, Phil.
3. 14.
but stand upon the honor of our spiritual birth, and do nothing that may any
way be dishonorable to the excellency of our high Calling in Christ Jesus.


IT is observable, Bernardin. Sen^nsis, de more glorioso.
that if Merchants venture a great, or most part of their Estates at Sea, where
there may be hazard in the voyage, they will run speedily to ensure a great
part of their Commodities; And thus should all of us do, ^his body of ours is
the ship, the Merchandise and freight in this ship is no less then our most
precious soul^s; Glory caelestiall is the Port, whereat she would arrive, but
many dangers there are in the way, storms and Tempests of Temptations are on
every side, she may chance to run upon the Rocks of Presumption, or sink into
the quick sands of ^ispair, What is the^ to be done? By all means go to the
ensuring Office, (...)
let us run to the Testimony of Christ's spirit in our own spirits, by the Word
to evidence, and make it out clear unto us, That the Ship shall be safe,
Meander.
the Commodity brought secure to the Haven, that ship, body and soul and all,
shall anchor safely in Heaven, there to rest with Christ in glory for evermore.


IT was the speech of Mr. Greenham (sometimes a painful Preacher of this
Nation) That when the Devil temp^ed a poor soul, R. Greenham in his Works.
she came to him for advice, How she might resist the Temptation, and he gave
her this answer: Never be idle, but be always well employed; For in my own
experience I have found it, when the Devil came to tempt me, I told him that I
was not at leisure to hearken to his Temptation, and by this means I resisted
all his assaults: Thus must all of us do, when the Devil comes to tempt any of
us, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse etc.
say; I am not at leisure to lend an ear to thy Temptation, I am otherwise
employed, I am in the work of my God, busied in the work of my lawful Calling,
and taken up with the thoughts of Gods blessings thereupon, then he will never
be able to fasten upon thee; for so it is that he never gets advantage of any
Man or Woman, but either when they are out of Gods way, In p^omptu causa est
de^idiosus erat. Ovid.
or idle, or have their hands in some sinful action, then it is that they do
even tempt the Tempter to tempt them, and lay themselves open to a world of
sin and wickedness.

Action, the very life of the Soul.
WHilst the stream keeps running* it keeps clear; but if it comes once to a
standing water, Hier. Dre^elii Zodiacus Christianus.
then it breeds Frogs and Toads, and all manner of filth: The Keys that Men
keep in their pocke^s, and use every day, wax brighter and brighter; but if
they be laid aside and hang by the walls, they soon grow rusty; Thus it is that
Action is the very life of the Soul; Whilst we keep going and running in the
ways of Gods Commandments, we keep clear and ^ree from the Worlds pollutions;
Emolli^ otium vires, sicut rubigo ferrum.
but if we once flagge in our diligence and stand still, Oh, Wha^ a puddle of
sin will the Heart be? How rusty and useless will our Graces grow? How
unserviceable for Gods Worship, how unfit for Man's, by reason of the many
spiritual diseases that will invade the Soul? Just like Scholars that are for
the most part given to a sedentary life, whose bodies are more exposed to ill
humors then any others; whereas they whose livelihoods lie in a handicraft
Trade, are always in motion and stirring, Omnis virtus in action consis^it.
Cic. 1. offic.
so that the motion expells the ill humors that they cannot seize upon the
body: So in the Soul, the less any Man acts in the matter of its concernment,
the more spiritual diseases and infirmi^ies will grow in it; whereas the more
active and industrious Men are, the less power will ill distempers have upon
them.

The true Repentant sinners encouragement, notwithstanding all his former
wickedness.
IT is very observable in the Genealogy of Christ, that there are but four
women mentioned (it being not usual to mention any) and the blessed Spirit of
God sets a mark of infamy upon them all; Chr. Love, Zealous Christia4. Mat. 11.
12.
The first is Thamar, Mat. 1. 3. She was an incestuous Woman, for she lay with
her Father in law, Genesis 38. 38. The second is Rahab, verse. 5. she was an
Harlot, Heb. 11. 31. The third is Ruth, verse. 5. she came of Moab, the Son of
Levi by incest, begotten of his own Daughter, Genesis 19. 37. The fourth is
Ba^hsheba, verse. 6. she was guilty of Adultery: And why was this so done, --
suprema pericula semper, Dant veniam culpae. Claudian 2. Eutrop.
but for the comfort of the most infamous Sinners to come in to Christ, and to
take notice for their better encouragement, that though they have been above
measure sinful, yet by their conversion to God, and aversion from Sin by a
serious and hearty Repentance, all infamy of their ^ormer ways is quite taken
away, and their names entered in the book of life and eternal Salvation.

Not to be troubled at the Prosperity of the Wicked; And why so?
Would it not be accounted folly in a Man, that is Heir to many thou^ands per
annum, Lud. de Carbone, Interior homo.
that he should envy a Stage Player clothed in the habit of a King, and yet
not heir to one foot of Land? Who though he have the form, respect and apparel
of a King or Nobleman, yet he is at the same time a very beggar, and worth
nothing: Thus wicked Men, though they are arrayed gorgeously, and fare
deliciously, wanting nothing, and having more then heart can wish, yet they are
but only possessors, the godly Christian is the Heir; What good does all their
Prosperity do them? Prospera hujus mundi ^speritatem habent veram. S* Aug. in
Matthew. Sermon. 29
It does but hasten their ruin, not their reward; The Ox that is the
laboring Ox, is longer lived then the Ox that is put into the pasture, the
very putting of him there does but hasten his slaughter; And when God puts
wicked Men into fat pastures, into places of Honor and power, it is but to
hasten their ruin; Let no Man therefore fret him because of evil doers, nor be
envious at the Prosperity of the wicked; For the Candle of the wicked shall be
put out into everlasting darkness, they shall soon be cut off, and wither as a
green herb, Psalm 37. 1, 2.


AS it is with two Children, Gab. Inchini. seal Caeli.
the one forbears to touch a coal because it will black and smut his hand; the
other will not by any means be brought to handle it, because he perceives it to
be a fire-cole, and will burn his fingers: Thus all wicked and ungodly Men,
they will not touch sin, because it will burn; They may be and often are
troubled for sin, Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
but their disquietnesse for sin arises more from the evil of punishment, the
effect of sin, then from the evil that is in the Nature of sin, They are
troubled for sin, but it is because sin does destroy the soul, and not
because sin does defile the soul; because God pursues sin, not because he
hates sin; more because it is against Gods justice that is provoked, then
because it is against the Holiness of God, which is dishonored; because God
threatens sin, not because God does forbid sin; because of the Hell for
sin, not because of the Hell in sin: Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
But now on the other side, all good and godly Men, they hate and loath sin,
because it is of a smutting and defiling nature, because it is against the
nature of God, because God loathes and hates it, more because it is aagainst
Gods command, then because God does punish it; not because of the damning power
of sin, but because of the defiling power of ^in, etc.


LOok but upon a Youth when he comes first to be an Apprentice to some
Artificer, Obad. Sedgw. Sermon. at Westminster. 1644.
or Handy-craft Trade, his hand is tencer, and no sooner is he set to work but
it blis^ers, so that he is much pained thereby; but when he has continued some
time at work, then his hand hardens, and he goes on without any grievance at
all: It is just thus with a Sinner, before he be accustomed to an evil way,
Conscience is tender and full of Remorse, like a queazy stomach, ready to keck
at the least thing that is offensive: O, but a continued Custom, and making a
Tr^de of sin, that is it that makes the Conscience to be hard and brawny, able
to feel nothing; As it is in a Smiths forge, Consuetudo pecc^^di tollit sensum
peccati.
a Dog that comes newly in, cannot endure the fiery sparks to fly about his
ears; but being once used to it, he sleeps securely: So let wicked men be long
used to the Devils Workhouse, to be slaves and Vassails to sin, the sparks
of Hellfire may fly about them, and the fire of Hell flash upon their souls,
yet never trouble them, never disturb them at all; and all this arises from a
continued custom in a course of evil.


IT is well known, that if a Land lord take a great Fine at the first coming
into the house, Hier. Drexelii Gymnasium paenitent.
he does take the less Rent for the future: Thus as Landlords deal with their
Tenants, so God with his people, He puts them to a great Fine at the first, he
makes Sin cost them many a ^ear, many a nights trouble, many a days disquiet,
-- d^l^r hic tibi prod^rit olim.
many a ^igh, many a groan in the Spirit; but here is the comfort, The greater
the Fine, the lesser the yearly Rent; the more a Man is troubled for sin at
the present, the less fear and perplexity shall be his portion hereafter; for
he shall have the joy and comfort of believing, he shall have the more perfect
peace at his death, so that when he comes to dye, he shall have little else to
do, but to lie down and dye, committing his Soul into the hands of a faithful
Creator and Redeemer.

How it is that the singling out of one beloved Sin, makes way to a full sight
of all sin.
When Christ went about to bring the woman of Samaria to remorse and sorrow
for sin, he singled out one sin amongst all the rest, and t^ld her, Thou art an
Harlot; Joh. 4. 7.
and the Scripture gives us this hint, That the singling out of that one sin,
so far opened her eyes, that she saw all other sins, whereupon she said;
Lo, behold the Man that has told me all that ever I did, and yet Christ told
her only of her Adultery: verse. 9.
So let every one of us take notice, that the singling out of one beloved sin,
makes way to the full sight of all sin; Let us examine then, What is that
Dalilah, that darling sin that we play withal, and hug so much in our
bosoms; single but out that, and the coast will be so clear, the mists and
fogs of darkness so much expelled, that we shall have a distinct view of all
the sins that ever we committed; not a general and confused apprehension of
sin, which only brings in a general humiliation of sin, and has, without the
great mercy of God, been the undoing of many a precious Soul for ever.

Assured Christians, must be patient Christians.
IT is mentioned, that in the time of that Marian persecution, there was a
woman, Joh. Fox, Acts and Monuments
who being convened before Bonner, (then Bishop of London) upon the trial of
Religion; He threatened her that he would take away her Husband from her; says
she, Christ is my Husband; I will take away thy Child; Christ, says she, is
better to me then ten Sons; I will strip thee, says he, of all thy outward
comforts; yea, but Christ is min^, ^aith she, and you cannot strip me of him:
The thoughts of this bore up the woman's heart: spoil her of all, and take away
all, yet Christ was hers, and him they could not take away. Thus when the soul
lives in the assurance of Gods love, In tor^^en^is beatus est sapiens. Lactant.
Instit. lib. 3.
and of its calling to Grace and glory, it cannot but make a Man very patient,
to endure with cheerfulness whatsoever of opposition he shall meet with here
below; There is a remarkable phrase in that of the Prophet, Esaias 33 24.
The Inhabitants of Sion shall not say, I am sick, the People that dwell
therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: A strange passage! He does not say,
They were not sick, but the Text says, They should not say so; And what is the
reason? Why should the People forget their sorrows, Saepe levan: paenas, etc.
and not remember their pains? This was it that did it, The Lord has forgiven
them their iniquities; The sense of pardon took away the sense of pain; And
thus should all of us walk to show, that trouble can not daunt us, nor any any
way startle us, but as assured Christians to be patient under all sufferings
whatsoever.

Worldly-mindednesse, a great ^inderance to the comfortable enjoyment of
spiritual graces.
WHat the Philosophers say of the Eclipse of the Sun, Aristot^les. ^ypr. Lect.
Joh. Magirus Mundi amor and Dei pariter in uno cord habitare non possunt.
Cyprian. de 12. Abus.
that it is occasioned by the intervening of the Moon, between the Sun and our
sight, is true in this case; If the World get between Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness and our sight, it will darken our sight of Jesus Christ, and
bring Eclipses upon our comforts and Graces: Again, those Men that dig deep
into the bowels of the Earth, they are oft-times choked and stifled by damps
that come from the Earth: So it is with Christians, those that will be ever
poring and digging about the things of this World, it is a thousand to one,
that if from worldly things a damp does not arise to smother their Comforts,
and quench their Graces: Lastly, A Candle, though it may shine to the view of
all, yet put it under ground, and (though there be not the least puff of wind)
the very damp will stifle the light of the flame; and so it is that Men may
shine like Candles in their comforts, yet bring them but under the Earth,, and
a clod of that will stiflle their Candle, will damp their spiritual comforts,
and bereave them of those joys that are in themselves unspeakable.


IT is reported of one Mrs. Honywood, R. Boltons Instruction for comforting
af^licted Consciences.
a famous professor of Gods truth, and one that for many years together, lay
under the burden of a wounded Spirit, and was much troubled in mind for the
want of her Assurance as to the matter of Salvation; At length there came a
Minister to her, who endeavored to settle her hopes and comforts in Jesus
Christ; and urging Promises of the Gospel unto her, she took it with a kind of
indignation and anger, that he should offer to present any Promises to her, to
whom (as she thought) they did not belong; And having a Venice glass in her
hand, she held it up, and said; Speak no more to me of Salvation, for I shall
as surely be damned, as this poor brittle glass shall be broke against the
wall, Qui nihil protest, sperare, de^peret nihil. Sen. Medea.
throwing it will all her force to break it: But it so pleased God, that by a
miraculous Providence, the Glass was preserved whole; The Minister seeing this,
made a happy use of the accident, took up the Glass, and said unto her; Behold,
God must work a miracle for you before you will believe; And from that day
(says the story) she was a woman very strong in the Assurance of Gods love and
favor. -- dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virgil.
Thus did God indulge the infirmity of his poor dispairing servant at that
time: and rather than that any of his People now or heareafter, shall live or
dye without assurance of their salvation, he will work it even by a Miracle, or
some unusual, extraordinary way to them altogether unknown.


AS the Air is sometimes clear, Christ. Love, withdrawing of the Spirit. on
Genesis 6. 3.
and sometimes cloudy; THE Sea sometimes ebbing, sometimes flowing; ebbing in
our comforts, as well as flowing in our Graces; Or as the Trees of the ^ield,
sometimes flowring, green, and growing; another time naked, withered, and as it
were even dead; So are all Christians in the feeling of their Graces, Rob.
Abbot, contra Pet. Bertium de amissione gratiae.
their apprehension of Graces is subject to much change, though their Graces be
not so, for Grace in it self is certain and unchangeable; All the Devils of
Hell cannot pluck one Believer out of Gods hand; Those whom thou have given me,
Joh. 17. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
I will keep (says Christ) and none shall take them from me; The foundation of
God stands sure, though our knowledge, that we build upon that foundation be
not sure to us: The Lord knows who are his, though we do not; And hence is
it, that though Grace itself be an unshaken foundation, yet our feeling of
Grace is not so, but subject to many alterations and changes.

The great danger of taking up a false persuasion of our effectual Calling.
AS a Man that is in a pleasant sleep, Lud. de Carbo de sui-ipsius cog^nitione.
l. 2. c. 3.
dreams that he is a King, has loyal and obedient subjects about him, a large
Revenue, with a Treasury full of gold and silver; yet when he awakes, behold
the Man is a very Beggar, and has nothing: Just such is a Man that takes up a
false persuasion of his effectual Calling, when (God knows) he is not called
at all: Or like a Man that is asleep upon the Mast of a Ship, Jerem. 7.
he is in a golden dream, and his thoughts are all upon Kingdoms and thousands
which he seems to have already in possession; Prove. 1^.
but happily, or rather unhappily, in that very moment, wherein he solaceth
himself in his imaginary happiness, a storm arises, the Ship is in danger to
be overwhelmed, and the Man is tumbled into the Sea, Aureos s^bime^ips^s
pollicentur montes.
and so drowned: Thus it is with many Men and Women, they nourish golden
dreams, and have very strong hopes, that Heaven is theirs, and Christ theirs,
When as (alas) they do extremely befool themselves, being all this while upon
the very brink of Hell, and so are tumbled in before they be aware.

Sin committed with deliberation, premeditation, etc. greatly provoke the
Spirit of God.
AS it is with a Friend, Rich, de Mediavilla in progress^ c^^^esti.
if you give him a blow at peradventure, or strike him by chance, though he may
be very angry, and take it ill at the first; yet when he shall understand that
it was done against your will, he is soon pacified; but if he perceive that you
plot and contrive his death, that makes him look about him, and resolve that he
will never come into your company any more: Thus it is with the blessed Spirit
of God, when he sees thee fall into sin unadvisedly and inconsiderately,
Peccati velut areem facti^iam Jos. ^angius, in Polyanthea.
he will not withdraw from thee for this; but if he perceive that thou do
way-lay him, do deliberate and contrive sin; this highly provokes him, if not
for ever, yet for a long departure from thee: Hence it is, that a deliberate
will to sin without the Act, is more sinful then the Act of sin without a
deliberate Will; as in the case of St. Peter, That Man does worse who purposes
to deny Christ, though he never do it, Tale erit opu^ tuum, qualis fuerit
inten^io ^ua. Isidor. in folioquiis. lib. 2.
than St. Peter that did actually deny Christ, and never intended it; Let every
Man therefore look to his purposes and deliberations; for if he sin
deliberately and advisedly, the Holy Ghost is highly provoked, and he is upon
the very next step to the sin of those, against whom the Prophet prays, Lord,
be not merciful to those that sin maliciously.

A Reprobate and Regenerate Man, their different enjoyment of the motions of
the holy Spirit.
WIcked Men (says one) partake of the Spirit, as Cooks do of the meat they
dress, Rob. Bol^on on Psalm. 1. Heb. 6. 3. Summis tantum labris pi^issare.
they taste as much only as will relish their palates, but do not eat so much
as will fill their bellies, whereby Nature may be strengthened and refreshed;
But the Regenerate are as the invited guests, and they not only taste the meat
prepared, but also make a full meal thereof: Wicked Men, they have but a taste
only; They are just like Men going by an Apothecaries shop, they may smell the
sweet scents of his Pots, but it is the sick Patient that gets benefit by his
Cordials: Thus it is with the wicked, God may and does give them tastes of his
Spirit, but they have not so much as will do their Souls good thereby; Phil.
1. 11.
It is only the Godly, that have the saving participations of Grace here, and
shall be sure of the fullness of Glory hereafter.

motions of Gods Spirit in wicked Men, tend to outward formality.
IT is reported of one that could fast seven days in a Monastery, In speculo
Exemplorum. Herodes devotionem promittit sed gladium acu^it, etc. Chrysostom. in
Matthew. 2.
but not half a day in the Wilderness, and being asked the reason, He gave
this answer; When I fast in the Monastery, I feed upon vainglory and the
applause of Men, but not so in the Wilderness: It is just so with many
Professors, The motions of Gods Spirit in them are such as tend to formality,
such as put them upon outward and visible good, but never upon inward and
secret duties, as to examine their hearts to watch over their ways, Ulys.
Aldrovan^ di Ornithologia.
and to keep close communion with God in secret; As it is said of the
Nightingale, that if it see a Man listen to her, it will sing the more sweetly;
So they are better to Men then they are to God, and devouter in the Church,
then they are in the Closet; they are for good things done in public, not in
private; so as Men applaud them, they care not what or who it is that
disallowes them.


THe Sun that is in the firmament, we use to say is in such a part of the
house, or in such a window; P. Charron, trois verites.
but when we say so, we do not mean, that the body of the Sun is there, but
only that the light, heat, or influence of the Sun is there: So, though the
Scripture tells us, Spiritus Dei habitat in nobis, quia regit gubernat and
sanctificat.
That the Holy Ghost, or Spirit dwells in us; the meaning is not, that the
Essence or Person of the Holy Ghost is in us, (as the Familists would have it)
but only the Motions and Graces of the Spirit are there, guiding, governing,
and sanctifying our Words and Works, which otherwise of themselves would be but
vain and foolish; D. Pareusin locum.
The meaning therefore of those two places in the Apostle, Ye are the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and the Holy Ghost dwells in you, 2 Timothy, 1. 14.
are not literally but Metaphorically to be understood, as many other
expressions of the like kind in the Book of God, are to be.

smaller sins, as bringing on greater.
THere is a story of a young Man, Christ. Love Withdrawing of the Spirit.
that was tempted by the Devil, and his own wicked heart, to commit three
sins, as to kill his Father, lie with his Mother, and to be drunk: The two
former he would by no means do, as being things abhorrent to Nature; but
(thought he) I will yield to the last, because it was the least, which was
enough; for being drunk, he killed his Father, and ravished his own Mother:
Here now were two horrid ugly sins, Murder and Incest ushered in by one that
was not of so deep a dye; It concerns us then to take heed of falling into
lesser sins, they being as in lets to greater; A little Thief put in at the
window, may open the doors for stronger and greater to come in; Noli contemn
re^venialia qui^ minima sunt, etc. Aug. de december. chordis.
A wedge small and thin in one part, makes way for a greater, and little sins
will draw us on to greater; our own hearts will prompt us to all sin at
first, but will labor to draw us on by degrees from lesser sins to greater;
from sins l^sse obnoxious, to sins more scandalous, until we be become
abominable therein, and so without Gods mercy perish everlastingly.

Corruption of Nature, left even in the most Regenerate Men to humble them.
GOd has so ordered it in Nature, that Creatures of the greatest excellency,
should have some manifest deformity, Ulys. Aldrov. Ornithologia. Cont. Gesnerus
de Quadruped.
Whether it be in Birds or Beasts; Among birds, the Peacock, a bird of the
gayest feathers, yet it has the foulest feet; The Swan, a bird of the whitest
feathers, yet of the blackest skin; The Eagle, a bird of the quickest sight,
and of the highest flight, yet the most ravenous among birds; And among Beasts,
the Lion, the goodliest of all the woods, yet the most fierce and cruel; The
Fox, most subtle, yet a Creature of the foulest smell: Thus God has ordered it
even amongst the Creatures irrational; and thus it is with his own People in
respect of Grace, though they have many excellent endowments and gifts, yet he
suffers some corruptions of Nature in them, to humble them; So that Humiltty,
Superbia etiam in recte factis est cavenda. Aug. de Natura and Gratia.
the best of Graces, comes from the worst root, our Sin; And Pride, the worst
of sins comes from the best root, our Grace, which caused that saying of Mr.
Fox the Martyrologist, That his Graces hurt him more then his sins, meaning,
That many times he was proud of his gifts, but humbled by reason of his sins
and natural infirmities.

Not to consult with Gods secrets, but his revealed word.
IT was a good saying of Mr. Bradford, that famous Martyr of Christ Jesus: That
a Man should not go to the University of Predestination, The Martyrs Letters*
until he were well grounded in the Grammer-school of obedience and
Repentance: And most sure it is, that we are not to consult with Gods secret
decrees, but with his revealed Word; Secret things belong to the Lord our God,
but revealed things to us and our Children for ever, Quae Deus ^culta esse
voluit non sunt scrutanda. Pro^per. de vocat. gent.
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. We are not to look to the decrees of God, and upon them, either
do or not do our duty; but we are to look to his revealed will, which bids us
to be conversant in holy duties of Religion and Godliness; We are not to
search the secret Records of Heaven, but the revealed will of God, which is
able to make us wise to salvation.

The consideration of Mercies formerly enjoyed, an excellent means to bear up
our spirits under present Afflictions.
THere is a story of a Man, aged fifty years, Christ. Love, Withdrawing of the
Spirit.
or there abouts, who lived forty eight of that time, and never knew what
sickness was* but so it was, that all the two last years of his life, he was
sickly, and impatient under it; yet at last he reasoned the case thus with
himself: The Lord might have given me forty eight years of sickness, and but
two years of health, yet he has done the contrary, I will therefore rather
admire the mercy of God in giving me so long a time of health, -- neque enim
ignari sumus ante malorum, O passi graviora, etc. Virg. 1. Aeneid.
than repine and murmr at him for giving me so short a time of sickness: And
thus must all of us consider, that we have had more Mercies in our life to
cheer us up, than we have had crosses to discomfort us; What though the Lord
does now visit us with sickness, we have had more years of health then we have
had of sickness: What though this or that comfort be taken from us, yet we
have a great many more left us still: Hence is that advice of the Wiseman,
Eccles. 7. 14.
In the day of Adversity, consider: What must we consider? That God has set
the one against the other, (that is) Though we are in Afflictions now,
Meminisse ^uvabit.
yet he has given us Mercies heretofore; and, it may be, will give us
Prosperity again; he has balanced our present Afflictions with former
Mercies; so that if we should set the Mercies we have enjoyed, against the
present Afflictions we suffer, we should soon find the tale of our Mercies to
exceed the number of sufferings* be they of what Nature or quality soever
imaginable.


IT is related of a Minister of Gods word, Christ. Love, Christi^^s Directory.
that visiting a Neighbor (whose child lay a dying) he endeavored to comfort
her; but she being much grieved and dejected with sorrow, would by no means be
comforted; The Minister said unto her, Woman, Why do you sorrow so much,
pacify your self* If your Child should live, it may be so, that God might
make it a scourge and vexation to you, by taking wicked and sinful courses: She
answered, that she did not care, if her Child did recover, though he were
hanged afterward. This Son of hers did recover, and was afterward executed for
some villainy committed: Now let any one judge, whether it had not been a
greater mercy, and a thousand times better for her, to have seen him buried
before her, then that he should have come to such an unhappy end: Thus it is,
that that comfort, M^^igat vim dolorts considerata (...) feritentis. Greg. in
mor
which any of us all shall so excessively mourn for the want of it, may be
would have proved a greater cross and trouble, should but God have continued it
still unto us; whether it be the l^sse of life or estate, of a lo^ing Wife, or
an only Son, 2 Samuel 12. 16.
as it was in Rachels case, Genesis 30. 5. and in David's, that if God had given
him the life of his Child, it would have been but a living Monument of his
shame, and all that knew the Child, might have said, Yonder goes David's
Bastard: The consideration whereof should allay and take off the edge of all
excess of sorrow, for the loss of any temporal comfort, any worldly
enjoyment whatsoever.


SUppose a Man very much in debt, and in such need of Money, that he knew not
well how to subsist, P. Moulin de l'amour de Dieu.
without throwing himself upon the sa^ charity of others, that might (if they
had but hearts) possibly relieve him, should go to some especial in^imate
friend, and make known unto him the lowness of his condition, and crave relief
accordingly: Now if this friend of his (which is somewhat strange) should go
presently to his Ch^st, and take out a considerable bag of Money, and throw it
at him, and in the throwing of it break his head, or give him some slight
scar; Can it be imagined that he would take it unkindly? No, certainly; Thus it
is that every Affliction that God is pleased to lay upon us, Genesis 45.
shall work for our good: We may say as Joseph did to his brethren, Though you
intended all this for my hurt, Post afflictiones, vit^ tranquilli^r. Nazianzen
in orat. de Cypriano.
yet God intended and turned it for my good, and will work benefit and
advantage to me by it, and promote my spiritual good; that as Afflictions do
abound, my Consolations in Christ shall abound much more: Every Affliction,
like Ionathans rod, having honey on the top, and therefore let us bear them
patiently.


WHen a Man is brought to a low Condition, and a great decay in the world, so
that his Trade is quite fallen, and his stock spent: Now if such a Man be more
troubled for his sin that brought him to so low an ebb in the World, then for
the Affliction and trouble it self; Rich* de Mediavilla. Clavis David.
then he will not commit a fin to repair and make up his losses, though he did
know assuredly, that the committing of such a sin, would make up all again; As
in the story of a Nobleman, whose Son and Heir was supposed to be bewitched,
and being advised to go to some Wizard or Cunning-man, (as they are called) to
have some help for his Son, that he might be unwitched again; He answered; O,
by no means, I had rather the witch should have my Son, then the Devil: But i^
a Man make no Conscience to avoid, or remove an Affliction; If he will break
the hedge of a fair Command, to avoid the foul way of some heavy Affliction, it
is a sign that he mourns more for the cross that lies upon him, then for his
Sins and Trespasses, and that he never grieved so much for his corruptions, as
for his corrections.

Worldly-crosses turned into spiritual advantages.
AS little Children, when they see a heap of beautiful and sweet Roses lying
upon a Table before them, Christ. Love, Christians Directory.
and their Mother goes and pus them in a Mortar, and therein beats them all to
pieces; The children cry out, and think the Mother spoils them, though she does
it merely to make a Conserve of them: that they may be more useful and durable:
Thus it is, that we think we have comforts like beds of Roses; yet when God
takes them from us, and breaks them all to pieces, we are apt to conceive that
they are all spoiled and destroyed, and that we are utterly undone by it;
Whereas God intends it to work for our greater benefit and advantage, Romans 8.
28.

How to become true Possessors of Riches.
POssessions and Riches of this world, are like a Rose in a Man's hand, if he
use it gently, Aurum erog^re bonum est repon^re inalum, etc Per. Raven. in Ser.
Psa. 62. 10
it will preserve its favor, and its scent, and color, a great while; but if
he cr^sh it, and handle it roughly, it loses both its color and its
sweetness: Thus if a Rich man, use and employ his Wealth well, he will
possess it the longer; but if he set his heart too much upon it, he will
quickly lose it; He may possess it, but by no means must he let his Wealth
possess him; If Riches increase, he must not set his heart upon them; his eye,
or hand, or tongue may be upon them, but not his Heart; Seneca in lib. de
beneficiis.
His Money must come no nearer his heart then his hands; Hence was that saying
of the Heathen, Rebus non me trado sed commod^, I may lend my self, but I will
not give my self to my Wealth; And so must all of us do, if ever we intend to
become true possessors of worldly riches and endowments.

All Wordly comforts, transitory.
IT was a Custom in* Rome, that when the Emperor went by upon some grand day
in all his Imperial pomp; Wolfg. Laziu^ Com. Reip. Romans
there was an Officer appointed to burn flax before him, crying out; Sic
transit gloria mundi, which was purposely done to put him in mind, That all his
honor and grandeur should soon vanish and pass away, like the nimble smoke,
raised from that burning flax. And it was a good Meditation that one had,
standing by a River side; says he, The Water which I see, now runs away, and I
see it no more; and the comforts of this world are like this running water,
still gliding and running away from us: So, most true it is, that all Men, and
such as do most indulge themselves with those bitter sweets that the World
does, Fallax est hic mundus, ^inis dubious exitus horribilis. Pet. Blesensis.
or can present; they are but like smoke, that soon vanishes away, transitory,
either ebbing or flowing, never at any certain; but fleeting and fading, coming
to us with Sparrows wings, slowly and with much difficulty; but flying away
with Eagles wings, hardly discoverable which way, or how they took their flight
on such a sudden: It must therefore be our care so to use this world as if we
used it not for the fashion of it passes away; 1 Cor. 7. 31.
and seeing we cannot enjoy the comforts thereof any long time, let us use them
well to Gods Glory that gave them, and not abuse them to our own prejudice.


IT is a good observation that is made upon that place of Job 38. 22. where God
thus challenges Job, Joh. Calvinus in locum.
Have thou entered into the Treasures of Snow, or have thou seen the treasures
of the Hail? Where the Observator notes out, That all the Comforts of this
world are but like the treasures of Snow; Do but take a handful of Snow, and
crush it in your hands, it will melt away presently; but if you let it lie upon
the ground, Ante oculos tibi pone Deum, sedesque beatas; Sic Mundi su bito
fracta cupid^ ruet.
it will continue for some time: And so it is with the things of this world, If
you take the comforts of this life in your hands, and lay them too near your
hearts in affection and love to them, they will quickly melt and vanish away
from you; but if you leave them in their proper place, and do not set an
inordinate affection upon them, they will continue the longer with you; As if
you should line a garment with linen* it would do very well; but if you line
it with pitch or glue, that will stick fast to the body, and in all likelihood,
spoil both the garment and the Man that wears it; So when the world is glewed
to your hearts, it spoils the comforts of all the Mercies that you enjoy; Ja^.
Billius in Antholog. sacra.
and so it may be said, that the otherwise lawful use of them is abused, when
they are either used too afflectionately in making Gods of them, or being too
eagerly bent in the gaining of them, Iam. 4. 13.


IT is an observable note, Aloys. Lippomannus in Catena Pat.
that a learned Man has upon the names of the two first Men that ever were
born into the World, Cain and Abel; Whence, says he, we may learn a very good
lesson, and that from the very interpretation of their Names; Ca^n signifies,
Possession; and Abel, Vanity; to show that Adam and Eve, who had all the World
before them, did see nothing but vanity in all their possessions: And it were
well, if the Sons and Daughters of Adam, that have a great ^eal less of the
World then Adam had, would not set their hearts so much upon the vanities and
uncertainties thereof, Col. 2. 22. Ecce mundus, qui diligitur fugit. Greg. in
homil.
being such as perish with the using, such as are gone before we have almost
any hold of them; like a flock of Birds, that no Man can say they are his own,
though they sit in his yard; so vain, uncertain, flitting, ading are all the
thing, all the comforts of this world, be they whatsoever they are, whatsoever
they can be.

Present occasion of Time to be made use of.
THe Sun by its annual Revolution, Arch. Symmer* Spirit. posie for Sion.
makes the day and the year: The Moon by her ^unary course, draws up the Months
and quarters: The Pleiades and Hyades, make the Seasons of the years, and the
Dog Star brings in the heat of the Summer: And all of these do labor by their
ordinary passages, to show us that Orient Ovall, Plin. not. hist. lib. 37. cap.
9.
that precious Pantaur, (...) the present occasion of Time, this very moment
which is yet ours, and ought to be made use of accordingly; extreme
sottishness were it therefore to defer the practice of Wisdom till the next
opportunity, and to procrastinate Repentance upon the groundless hope of a few
uncertain days; Toll moris semper nocuit differr^ Lucanus.
yet for our comfort, there* is this privilege in the Nature of Time, that
though that which is past cannot be recalled again, yet it may be redeemed by
the double diligence of the wise, Ephesians. 6. 15. Hence it is that the penitent
Redeemer of Time, may be lively set out in Medea, with two contrary affections
appearing in his face; on the one side sorrow for the lamentable loss of that
occasion which is past, and on the other side, joy for the Redemption of
opportunity present.

The sick Man's sorrow.
AS a Traveller that rides a tired horse is utterly disappointed, and cannot
reach but with much difficulty the end of his journey: R. Harri^ Hezeki^hs
recovery.
And so by sickness, this body of ours is deprived of all cheerfulness and
activity; and our Souls so far ^rustrated, that they can neither receive that
good, nor do that good which otherwise they would perform; Such is the
sick-mans sorrow, that no Man knows it, but he that feels it; what a
disadvantage it is to the Soul, to be so ill lodged in a ruinous body, Quam
m^le con veniunt.
being even stifled within its self for want of motion, and move it cannot for
want of Organs but very lamely, because the understanding is clouded, Memory
weakened, Judgment dazzled, fantasy distracted, Affections distempered; and in
brief, Malum contristivum; affectus vitiant actionem Galenus.
the whole frame of nature dis-joynted, that like broken bones, it can neither
rest nor move; Nor is the stroke only upon natural actions, but upon Moral
also; In diseases chronicall, the Body becomes lazy, listlesse, neutrall, that
it has no mind to pray, no stomach to food, no heart to do any thing for it
self; And in diseases more acute, is so taken up and transported with pain and
anguish, that it minds nothing but what cannot be had, Diogenes.
as sleep, ease, etc. Hence may be put that difference betwixt sick and jound,
as the Heathen put between poor and rich; The healthful Man may walk when he
will, eat when he will, sleep when he will, work, play, ^ast, feast, ride, run
when he will; But the sick-man must travel, Atque hi sunt Manes quos patitur.
eat, drink, sleep, when ^e can, He is not his own to command, he is deprived
of himself, He has wit, but not the use of it; Memory, but not the benefit of
it, so that he is almost turned into an image; he has eyes and scarcely sees;
ears, and hears not; mouth, and speaks not; feet, but walks not: Nay, which is
more, those senses and parts, which let in comfort to the sound, occasion the
^ick Man's trouble, the sight of his Cups, Glasses, Boxes, make him sick: the
smell of his meat sick, Mill mali species, etc. Ovid.
the taste of his drink sick; the least noise offends him, the lest air
pierces him, his bed tires him, his chayr troubles him, his friends disquiet
him, their absence offends him, so does their presence, their silence troubles
him, so does their talk; somewhat he would have, but he cannot telll, What; to
be short, he is not well, and therefore nothing is well about him.

True saving faith, though never so weak, is all in all.
AS a dim dazeling eye, that looked on the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness,
was of more avail to a poor Israelite, (then stung with a fiery Serpent) than
any use that could possibly be made of all his other Members; little could the
swiftness of his feet, strength of body, Paul Bayne, Mirror of Mercy
nimblenesse of hands, volubility of tongue, quickness of the ear, or any
thing else have prevailed, had there not been an eye to have looked on it: So
without faith, Epes. 2
we lie dead in sins and tresp^sses, and cannot but perish of the mortal
stings, which Satan has blistered us withal; so that had we perfect
Repentance, sound knowledge, and sincere Love, not one of them, nor all of them
together, Fides est radix vir^utum omnium Ambros. in lib. de Cain and Abel.
could possibly cure us, if there were not faith to apprehend Christ for our
satisfaction, and a propitiation for all our sins: It is only faith in Christ,
a true faith (though a weak dim-sighted faith) that looking up to the typified
Serpent Christ Jesus, can cure our wounded sin-sick souls, and make us here to
live unto God, and hereafter in all happiness with him.


THe Poet describing the manifold miseries of Aneas that Trojan Prince, Virgil.
Preci^ites me^us acer agit, etc
in his long and weary voyage, shows the great peril that he and his Company
were in, and the great speed they made to escape the danger of the cruel
Cyclops, who together with his Gigantick Army mustered on the shore, as strong
as so many sturdy Oaks, and tall as lofty Cedars, whose very Countenances
threatened death and destruction to all that came near them: It was then no time
for them to stay there, ^validis incumbere remis.
but high time to hoist up the sayls, nimbly to betake themselves to their
Oars, and rather then the Giants should offer violence to them, to lay violent
hands on their Tackle, and so quit a dangerous coast that could promise nothing
but mischief: So the only way that we have to prevent any eminent danger,
A^^dera Teiorum pulchra colonia.
which by our sins we draw upon our heads daily, and such as are even at the
shore ready to assault us; nay such as have already even boarded these our
poor brittle barks of Mortality, is, swiftly to sail away in the waters of
unfeigned Repentance, and every Man of us to betake himself speedily to the
Oars of true contrition and invocation to Almighty God, Strabo. in lib.
Geograph.
and to row painfully in the Sea of our sinful hearts, seeking and never
giving over till we are upon the Rock of our defense, and have found the God of
our salvation.


IT is said of the Pelican, ^lys. Aldrov. in Ornit^olog.
beholding her young ones to be slain by the Serpent, much thirsting after
their blood, she is so much grieved, that she beats her sides with her own
wings in such a manner, that the blood issues abundantly, which being as yet
warm, falls upon the young ones so slain, and restores them to life again:
Thus the soul of Man, being the true bird of Paradise (for there was her nest
first built by God) having (as it were) her lively blood sucked out by that old
Serpent the Devil; Christ became that Heavenly Pelican, that with the wings of
his Love and Mercy, shed out of his most precious side, his dearest
heart-blood, to revive us that we might live for ever.


IT is said of Zeuxis and Parrasius, Fulgosus lib. 8 ^^p. ^1. ex Plin
that the one deceived his fellow Painter with the picture of a sheet, and the
other deceived birds with his counterfeit grapes: Thus the Hypocrite, Quid
magis est vanum quam j^sti nomen habere, etc.
whose devotion is like a shadow, something in show, but nothing at all in
substance, deceives himself with a sheet, or shadow of Holiness, thinking that
to be current which is but counterfeit, and those to be true Grapes, which are
but mere pictures of Grapes: And thus going about to seek the Lord with
outward Holiness, Antholog. Jac. Billii.
and external behavior, not with internal purity and sanctity of the Heart,
Genesis 4. 3.
he may well be said to offer sacrifice with Cain, and yet have no good zeal; 1
Reg. 21. 9. 1
fast with Iezabel, and yet not leave his sins, humble himself with Ahab, yet
have no true repentance: 1 Reg. 21. 27.
lament with the tears of Esau, yet not be sorry for his sins; kiss Christ
with Judas, Matthew. 26. 49.
yet have no love in his heart; pray with the Pharisee, yet have no devotion;
Luke 18. 11.
present an oblation with Ananias, yet keep the best part from God which is his
heart: Act. 5. 2.
And thus after all his seeking, find God in justice to condemn him, not in
Mercy to save him.

Men covering their Sins with specious pretenses, reproved.
AS when Adam had tasted of the forbidden Fruit, Genesis 3.
he espied his own nakedness, poverty, and how that he was miserably fallen;
For remedy whereof, he went about to hide it with Fig Leaves, and to shroud
himself amongst the Trees of the Garden: Prodigus vult se credi liberalem,
avarus diligentem, temerarius sortem, etc.
So it is, that too too many of Adam's sons now living, go about to cloak their
Sins with the Fig Leaves of their foolish inventions, and to hide their
treacherous designs in the thicket of their wicked imaginations, covering their
Vices with the cloak of Virtue; And hence it comes to pass, that Murder is
accounted Manhood; Prosper. de vita contem. lib. 4.
Pride looked on as Decency; Covetousness as Frugality; Drunkenness as good
Fellowship, etc.

Miseries attendant on the Haters of Gods People.
AS in Princes Courts, P. Baine Mirror of Mercy.
they are looked on but as silly, shallow-brain'd Men, that profess open and
mortal hatred to the greatest Favorites of the King; Nay, in so doing, they
take the right way to ruin themselves and Families; Whereas such as are
politiquely wise, and intend to raise themselves a Fortune, will be sure to
observe the Favorites, love them, and insinuate into their acquaintance: So it
is a most sottish Folly in Men of the World to hate Gods People, in whom his
Graces are most apparent; For the Lord will look upon them as Enemies to
himself, so that they shall want many a blessing from the King of Heaven, which
the prayers of the Godly would otherwise obtain for them; yea, many plagues,
much sorrow will light upon them in this respect; But if they ever intend to be
wise for their Souls and bodies too, it is their best way to love and embrace
with all kindness such as are the Lords People; which if they do, God will
take it as a token of Love to himself, and they shall be sure to have their
reward in the Kingdom of Heaven.

All out of Order.
IT is observed of the Romans, Wolfgang. Lazius de Rebus gestis Romanorum.
That in the time of their Civil Wars, some followed Caesar, and they were the
weakest; some Pompey, and they were thought the Wisest; some Crassus, and they
were accounted the worst of all: So now it is, that some follow the Flesh, and
are led by the corrupting allurements thereof; some are Favorites and Minions
of the World, carried away with its glittering preferments: some are mere
Factors for the Devil, fulfilling his crafty and cruel designments; -- Terras
Astraea reliquit Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
All of them set on work under the command of this cursed Triumvirate, and that
so intently, that every where there is a Consumption of Grace, through the
corruption of Sin; Piety complains, that she is sick, Charity very near dead;
good Works buried, Prayer and Preaching neglected; B. Carpenter conscionab^e
Christian.
Honesty and Sobriety derided, Justice and Equity abandoned, Truth and plain
dealing imprisoned, Faith and a good Conscience banished: As for Religion,
Malunt disputare homines quam vivere.
Men delight rather to argue and discourse of it, then seriously to reduce the
principles thereof into practice and action; much form of Godliness there is,
but little power thereof amongst us, Totus Mundus in maligno positus, All is
out of Order.


AS water that runs through Mines, Jos. Simonds Case and cure of a deserted
Soul.
has a tincture and touch of them; Or as a Vessel that is seasoned with some
exquisite liquor, will a long time after retain the scent, and smell of that
which was poured into it: So sorrow that is for Sin, meets with much in us, by
which accidentally it becomes hurtful; but as it is in it self, is, as all
other Graces, for the perfection of Nature; and so far from being an oppression
of it, -- dolor hic (...) pr^de^it.
that, in the judgment of some Wise Men, it is not altogether improbable, but
that it shall be in Heaven; For if our Memories abide there to recollect the
ways of this life, and our Understanding and Will be fully taken up in the
sight and fruition of God, then it is considerable, that since a little sight
and taste of God in the World do work sorrow for Sin, whether an abundant sight
and full taste will not also do it in Heaven, when a Man shall remember his
sins against so good a God, which he has offended.


AS one that is a Suitor to a Woman, T. Watson Unum necessarium.
and being very earnest in the prosecution of his love, another should come and
tell him, that he knows something of the Woman by way of ill report, some
impediment or other; the Man hearing this, is presently taken off, and the suit
cease; So it is with many a Man, who begins to be a suitor to Religion, fain
he would have the match made up, and he grows very hot and violent in the
suit, and falls a working his Salvation, but then there comes some of his old
consorts, Melius esthabere malorum odium quam consortium. Bern.
and they tell him, that they know something by Religion, that is of ill
report; As that there must be much of strictness and Mortification, that he
must never see good day more, and hereupon he is discouraged, and the Match
broken off; So that evil Company like the water in a Smith's forge, quenches
the Iron, be it never so hot, and cools the affections to Godward, be they
never so ardent.


IT is observable, That in the Courts of Kings and Princes, children and ruder
people are much taken with pictures and rich shows, and feed their fancies with
the sight of rich hangings, and fine things; but the wise and grave Statesman
passes by such things, Discite in hoc mundo supra: mundum esse ^t si corpus
geriti^, voli^et in vobis ale, interior. Ambros. de Virginis.
as not worthy taking notice of, his business is with the King. Thus it is,
that in this World, most Men stay in the out-rooms, and admire the low things
of the World, and look upon them as pieces of much excellence; but the
Spiritually-minded Man, whose eye, desire, and ways are unto God, looks over
all these things that are here below, his business is with his God; let them
dote upon the World that are in love with it, Whom has he in Heaven but God?
and there is none upon Earth that he desires besides him, Psalm 73. 25.

Parents to be careful in the education of their Children.
JUlian the Apostate had two great Scholars, Mardonius and Maximus to his
Tutors, Ennapp^us in in Maxim. Sozomen. lib. 5. c. 6. Prove. 23. 15.
but being profane Heathens, and scoflers at Christian Religion, they laid the
foundations of that desperate Apostasy, whereby he fell from Christ to the
Devil. Thus he that begets a Fool, or by careless breeding makes one, has
been the Author of his own sorrow, and his child's also, who may have just
occasion to cry out at the last day, Parents sensimus Parricidas, Our Parents
have been our Parricides: Probum parentem esse opo^^et qui gnatum ^uum
p^obiorem, etc. Plaut.
It must therefore be the care of all Parents so to provide for the breeding up
of their Children unto Wisdom, as that they forget not the chief thing, to have
them seasoned with the knowledge and fear of God, which is the only true
Wisdom, Job 28. 28.

Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, above all humane Learning
whatsoever.
THemistocles, Augustine. in epist. 36.
though he was ignorant of Music, yet knew he how to govern a State. And a
Believer, though he be ignorant of all other Learning, yet by the knowledge of
Christ only will be a blessed Man; whereas all the Learning in the World
without, Quid mihi proderit ingeni^m per ^llas doctrinas, agil^, etc. Aug.
con^ess. lib. 4. cap. 16. lib. 1* cap. 8.
will leave a Man miserable: To know the whole Creation, and to be ignorant of
the Creator; to know all Histories and Antiquities, and to be unacquainted with
our own hearts; to be good Logicians to other purposes, and in the mean time to
be cheated by Satan with Paralogisms in the business of our own Salvation; To
be powerful Orators with Men, and never to prevail with God; To know the
Constellations, motions, and influences of Heavenly bodies, and have still
unheavenly Souls; To know exactly the Laws of Men, and be ignorant and
rebellious against the Laws of God; To abound with worldly Wisdom, and be
destitute of the fear of God, which makes wise to Salvation, is all but a
better kind of refined misery; The Devils have much more then all this comes
to, and yet are damned. We must study therefore to improve our Learning unto
the use and furtherance of Holiness, Ed. Reynolds Sermon. of humane Learning,
etc. 1657.
to better our minds, to order our affections, to civilize our manners, to
reform our lives, to adorn and render our Profession the more amiable, to
consecrate all our other endowments as spoils unto Christ, to lay our Crowns at
his feet, and make all other abilities and acquirements Handmaids unto his
glory: When Learning is thus a servant unto Godliness, Godliness will be an
honor unto Learning.

How it is that we must follow the things that make for Peace.
AS Christ is set forth in the Scripture to be a Leader, Romans 12. 18.
a Man of War, a Captain, a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Heb. 2. 10.
the Victorious Tribe; so is he as a Prince of Peace too; Mich. 5. 2.
Honored at his birth with the style of Immanuel, a name of Peace; Crowned in
his Baptism, Exodus 15. 3.
with a Dove, the Emblem of Peace; being in the building caput anguli, Rev. 5.
5.
a Cornerstone, the place of Peace; Iud. 1. 2.
coming into the World with a song of Peace; Esaias 9. 6.
going out of the world with a Legacy of Peace; in one word, Ephesians. 2. 14.
a perfect Moses, the meekest Man, Matthew. 1. 25. and 3. 16.
and yet the mightiest Warrior; a true David, Romans 10. 15.
a man much versed in battle, and yet made up all of Love, sending a sword in
one place, Luke 2. 14.
and sheathing up a sword in another; careless of offending in case of Piety,
and tender of offending in case of liberty. Thus He, and thus his Church too,
Salem, a place of Peace; Jerusalem, a vision of Peace, and yet therein a Fort,
and an Armory for shields and bucklers, Cant. (...) And such must all of us be,
Pax cum personis, bellum cum vitiis.
like Nehemiah's builders with a trowell in one (...) but a spear in the other
hand; to be at Enmity with the vices, but at Peace with the persons of all Men;
to be sure to distinguish concerning Persons, and concerning things; Gal. 5. 1.
As to compassionate the weak, but withstand the obstinate. And for things,
though the Heathen man spoke truly; Nihil minimum in Religione, yet we know our
blessed Savior distinguished between Mint or Cummin, Val* Max.
and the Great things of the Law; Matthew. 23. 23.
And the Apostolical Synod, between things necessary, and unnecessary; Act. 15.
2^.
And S. Paul between meats and drinks, and the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11.
and at another time between the Foundation and superstructures of Religion:
And this is the only right way to follow the things that make for Peace.


IT is recorded of Meletius, Epiphan. Haeres. 68.
and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, both Confessors of the Christian Faith, both
Martyrs designati, and condemned ad metalla for their Profession, who upon a
very small difference, touching the receiving of the lapsi into Communion,
Conr. Zuingerus in theat. hum. vitae.
fell unto so great a Schism, that they drew a partition between each other in
prison, and would not hold Communion in the same worship of Christ, for which
notwithstanding they jointly suffered; which dissen^ion of theirs did the
Church of God more hurt by causing a great rent and Sect among the Members
thereof, then any persecution the Enemy could have raised: Now so it is, that
War, there may and must be in the Church; War in a spiritual sense, War with
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses: For the Church is
Militant, and has weapons of spiritual Warfare, given of purpose to resist
Enemies, Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. page 35.
and a sword that Christ came to send against all dangerous Errors of mind or
manners: But for all this, Contention and inward jars there must not be, and
that for this very Reason, because there is War, open War with Foreign and
potent Adversaries, Apud veros Dei cultores, etiam bella parata sunt.
such as Satan, and all other Enemies of the Church are, who by the advantage
of intestine Commotion, would save himself the labor of drawing the sword, and
become rather a Spectator, then a Party in the Conquest. August. in lib. de
verbo Dei.
Greatly therefore does it concern every Man in his place, all Men in their
several orders, to put to all their power, prayers, interests, for preserving
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, that in nothing they give offense
to the Church of God; but rather be willing to silence and smother their
private ^udgments, to relinquish their particular liberties and interests, to
question and distrust those domestica judicia, (as Tertullian calls them) their
singular conceits and fancies, (...), chrysust. Hom. in Genesis 4.
then to be in any such thing stiff and peremptory against the quiet of the
Church of God: The weak to be humbled and tractable; the strong to be meek and
merciful; the Pastors to instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the wandering, to
convince the froward with the spirit of meekness and compassion. The People to
obey, ho^our and encourage their Ministers by their docible and flexible
disposition, to suspect their own judgment, to allow their Teachers to know
more then they; not to hamper themselves, nor to censure their breathren, nor
to trouble their Superiors by ungrounded scruples, or uncharitable prejudices,
or unquiet, and in the end uncomfortable singularities; To take heed of strife,
vainglory, and pride in their own conceits, to have such humble judgments, as
that they can be willing to learn any, though unwelcome Truth; to unlearn any,
though darling Error; have such humble lives and purposes, as that they can
resolve to obey with duty, whatsoever they are not able with reason to gainsay;
And thus it is, that War may be in the Church, but not Contention and jarring.

Difference of Judgment has, and ever will, be in the Minds of Men; And why
so?
THere was never any Instrument so perfectly in tune, in which the next hand
that ^ouched it, did not amend some thing: Nor is there any Judgment so strong
and perspicatious, from which another will not in somethings find ground of
Variance; See we not in the ancient Churches, Eusebius. Soz^men. Nicephor.
those great lights in their several Ages at variance amongst themselves?
Ireneus with Victor, Cyprian with Stephen, Jerome with Austin, Basil with
Damasus, Chrysostom with Epiphanius, Cyril with Theodoret. Desired it may be,
Isid. P^lus. lib. 2. ep. 90.
Desired it may be, but hoped it cannot, That in the Church of God there would
be no noise of Axes and Hammers, no di^^erence in judgments and conceits; For
while there is corruption in our Nature, narrowness in our Faculties, Aug.
epist. 105.
sleepiness in our Eyes, dif^iculty in our Profession, cunning in our Enemies,
Juel against Hard^ng. art. 8.
(...) hard things in the Scripture, and an envious Man to superseminate, there
will still be (...), Men that will be differently minded; In this hard
necessity therefore, when the first evil cannot be easily avoided, our Wisdom
must be to prevent the second, that where there is not Perfection, yet there
may be Peace; that dissentions of Judgments break not forth into disunion of
hearts, but that amidst the variety of our several conceits, we preserve still
the Unity of Faith and Love, by which only we are known to be Christ's
Disciples.

Men not to be Censurers of one another.
IT was an old trick of the Gentiles, (as Gregory, Nazianzen, Arnobius, and
Minutius tell us) to object illiteratenenesse unto the Christians; S^udiorum
rudes, literarum prophani, etc.
But a very unfit way certainly it is for Christian Men amongst themselves, to
refute adverse opinions, or to insinuate their own, by their mutual
undervalewing of each others parts and persons, Hoc est ^astidium vestrum, etc.
Arnob.
to censure every one for dull and brutish, who in judgment Varieth from their
own conceits; If then they must needs be censuring, let them look to what is
wanting in themselves, and to what is useful in their brethren; The one will
make them humble, the other charitable, and both peaceable.

The joyful coming of Christ Jesus in the Flesh.
WHen Solomon was made King, Ed. Reynolds Joy in the Lord; A Sermon. at S. Paul's.
they did eat and drink with great glad^^^^ before the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29. 42.
And at the solemn Inaugurations of such Kings and Princes, the Trumpets sound,
the People shout, the Conduits run wi^e, Honors are dispensed, gifts
distributed, prisons opened, Offenders pardoned, Acts of Grace published,
nothing suffered to eclipse the beauty of such a Festivity. Thus it was at the
coming of Christ Jesus in the Flesh; Joseph. antiquit. lib. 7.
Wisemen of the East brought Presents unto him, rejoicing with exceeding great
joy, Matthew. 2. 10, 11. The glory of God shines on that day, Turnebi Adversar.
lib. 24.
and an Heavenly host proclaim that joy, Luke 2. 9, 14. John the Baptist
leapeth in the Womb, Mary rejoices in God her Savior, Zachary glorifieth God
for the Horn of salvation in the house of David; Luke 1. 41, 47.
Simeon and Hanna bless the Lord for the glory of Israel; And after when he
came to Jerusalem, the whole Multitude spread garments, strewed branches, cried
before him and behind him, Hosanna to the Son of David, Hosanna in the highest,
Matthew. 21. 9. And the Psalmist Prophesying long before of it, said; This is the
day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118. 24.


WAter may be easily damned up, Naturam expellas ^urca licet, etc.
but no art or industry can make it run backward in its own channel; It was by
a Miracle, that the River Jordan was driven back: And it is very near, if not
altogether a Miracle, that a Man accustomed to do evil, should learn to do
well; That the Tide of Sin, which before did run so strong, should be so easily
turned; That the Sinner which before was sailing Hell-ward, Defficile est,
longum subito depon^re amorem, Cat. Tibul.
and wanted neither wind nor tide to carry him, should now alter his course,
and tack about for Heaven, Hic labor hoc opus est, this is a work indeed, and
that a hard one too; To see the Earthly Man become Heavenly; to see a Sinner
move contrary to himself in the ways of Christ and Holiness, is as strange,
as to see the Earth fly upward, or the bowl run contrary to its own bias.


AS the juice of the same Earth is sweet in the grape, Basil. Hexam* Homil. 5.
but bitter in the Wormwood, Or as the same odor is a refreshment to the Dove,
Gr. Nyssen in Cant.
but a poison to the Scarabaeus: So the same Learning, qualified with Charity,
piety and meekness, may be admirably useful to edify the Church; which with
Pride, contempt, and corrupt judgment, may be used unto harmfull purposes, (as
the Philosopher speaks) Nothing is more dangerous then Wickedness in armor;
Arist. Rbet.
Hence is it that Satan has usually set on work, the greatest Wits in sowing
Errors in the Church; Aug. ad Licentium. ep. 49.
as Agrippina gave Claudius poison in his delicatest meat; Or as Thieves use to
pursue their prey with the swi^test horses; so the Devil made choice of
Licentius, a Man of rare parts, but a corrupt mind: Wherein Satan would fail of
his end, Ep. 119.
if Men would make no other use of their Gifts and Learning, then to make them
as engines and Instruments, for the more happy promoting of Piety and pure
Religion.


ALexander coming with his Army against Jerusalem, A. Gellius. Quintus Curtius.
Jaddus the high Priest went out of the City to meet him, adorned with his
Priestly robes, an upper garment of Purple embroydered with gold, and a golden
Plate on the fore-side, wherein the Name of God was written; The sight was so
grave and solemn, that the Emperor fell to the ground, as reverencing the Name
that was thereon inscribed. Thus it is, Pietati summa tribuenda laus est.
Solinus.
that in Holiness there is such a sparkling luster, that whosoever behold it,
must needs be astonished at it; Nay, even those that oppose it cannot but
admire it; Holiness is an excellent thing, a beautiful thing, it carries a
graceful Majesty along with it, wheresoever, or in whomsoever it is truly and
sincerely professed.


AS in a building, some bring stones, some timber, others mortar, and some
perhaps bring only nails; yet these are useful, these serve to fasten the
work in the building. Thus the Church of God is a spiritual building, 1 Cor. 3.
9.
some Ministers bring stones, are more eminent and useful; others Timber,
others less, T. Watson Christian's Charter.
they have but a nayl in the work, yet all serve for the good of the building;
The least star gives light, the least drops moystens, the least Minister is
no less then an Angel, the least nayl in the Ministry, serves for the
fastening of Souls unto Christ; there is some use to be made even of the lowest
parts of Men, the weakest Minister may help to strengthen ones Faith; Though
all are not Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 29.
all are not Evangelists; all have not the same dexterous abilities in the
Work, yet all edify: And oftentimes so it comes to pass, that God crowns his
labors, and sends most Fish into his net, who, though he may be less
skillful, is more faithful; and though he have less of the brain, yet he may
have more of the Heart, and therefore not to be contemned.

The Minister and Magistrate to go hand in hand together.
IT is reported of Queen Elizabeth, that coming her progress into the County
of Suffolk, W. Gurnall The Magistrates power.
when she observed, that the Gentlemen of the County, who came out to meet her,
had every one his Minister by his side, said; Now I have learned why my County
of Suffolk is so well governed, it is, Quam been convenient.
because the Magistrates and Ministers go together. And most true it is, That
they are the two legs on which a Church and State do stand; And whosoever he
be that would saw off the one, cannot mean well to the other; An
Anti-Ministerial spirit, is an Antimagistratical spirit; The Pulpit guards the
Throne; Be but once persuaded to take that away, and you give the Magistrates
Enemies room to fetch a full blow at them, J. Speed Chronicle.
as the Duke of Somerset in King Edward the sixth's days, by consenting to his
Brother's death, made way for his own, by the same ax and hand.

The great danger in commission of little Sins.
WHat is lesser then a grain of ^and; yet when it comes to be multiplied, T.
Watson Christian's Charter.
What is heavier then the Sands of the Sea? A little sum multiplied rises
high: So a little Sin unrepented of will damn us, as one leak in the Ship, if
it be not well looked to, will drown us: Little Sins, as the World calls them,
but great Sins against the Majesty of God Almighty, who does accent and inhance
them, if not repented of; One would think it no great matter to forget God, yet
it has an heavy doom attending on it, Navis si unam habuerit tabulam
per^oratam, etc. Aug. de sal. doct.
Psalm. 50. 22. The non-improvement of Talents, the non-exercising of Graces,
the World looks upon as a small thing; yet we read of him, that hid his Talent
in the earth, Matthew. 25. 25. he had not spent it, only not trading it, is
sen^enced; such and so great is the danger of the least Sin whatsoever.

The Worldling's inordinate desires; And why so?
THe Countryman in the Fable would needs stay till the River was run all away,
Rusticus expectat dum de^^uat amnis, at ille Labitur* etc.
and then go over dry-shod; but the River did run on still, and he was deceived
in his expectation: Such are the Worldling's inordinate desires, the deceitful
heart promises to see them run over and gone, when they are attained to such a
measure; and then they are stronger and wider, more impotent and unruly then
before: For a Covetous heart grasps at no less then the whole World, would
fain be Master of all, and dwell alone, like a Wen in the body, which draws
all to it self; let it have never so much, it will reach after more, Esaias 5. 8*
Ex libidine orta sine termino sunt. Ari^^o^.
add house to house, and field to field, till there be no more place to
compass; like a bladder, it swells wider and wider, the more of this empty
World is put into it; so boundless, so endless, so inordinate are the corrupt
desires of Worldly-minded Men.


IT is said of Alcibiades, Plutarch in vita.
That he embroydered a Curtain with Lions and Eagles, the most stately of
Beasts and birds, that he might the more closely hide the picture that was
under, full of Owls and Satyrs, the most sadly remarkable of other Creatures.
Thus Satan embroyders the Curtain with the image of virtue, that he may easily
hide the foul picture of Sin, that is under it; Peccata splendida, August.
Sin, that in the eye of the World, is looked on as Grace; colored and masqued
over with Zeal for God, good intentions, etc. such as has a fine gloss put
upon it, that it may be the more vendible; Wherein the Devil like the Spider,
first she weaves her Web, and then hangs the Fly in it; So he helps Men to
weave the web of Sin with specious shows, and Religious pretenses, and then he
hangs them in the snare, and sets all their Sins in order before them.


SOlomon having made a Critical enquiry after the excellency of all
Creature Comforts, In libr^ Ecclesiast.
gives this in as the Ultimate extraction from them all, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity: And have not all of us great experience, how loose the World
hangs about us? If you go to the Creature to make you happy, the Earth will
tell you, that happiness grows not in the ^urrows of the Field; the Sea, that
it is not in the Treasures of the deep; Fallax est hic mundus, finis dubious,
etc. Pe^. Blesensis.
Cattle will say, It is not on our backs; Crowns will say, It is too precious a
gem to be found in us; we can adorn the head, but we cannot satisfy the heart.
It is true, that these Worldly earthly things can benefit the outward and the
Natural Man; but to look for peace of Conscience, ^oy in the Holy Ghost, inward
and durable comfort in any thing which the World affords, is to seek for
treasure in a Cole-pit, a thing altogether improbable to be found there.


TAke a piece of Wax, T. Watson Christian's Charter.
and a piece of Gold of the same Magnitude, the Wax is not valuable with the
Gold; but as this Wax hangs at the labell of some Will, by virtue of which,
some great Estate is confirmed and conveyed, so it may be worth many hundred
pounds. So Faith considered purely in it self, does challenge nothing more then
other Graces, O^thesaurus omnibus opulentior Fides, etc. Aug. lib. de Virgin.
nay, in some sense it is inferior, it being an empty hand; But as this hand
receives the precious Alms of Christ's Merits, and is an Instrument or channel,
through which the blessed streams of life flow to us from him; so it does
challenge a superiority over, and is more excellent then, all other Graces
whatsoever.


SOcrates in his time wondered when he observed Statuaries, Diog. Laert. in
Socrate.
how careful they were, and how industrious to make stones like Men, and Men in
the mean time turning themselves into very blocks and stones; The case is ours;
Men walk not as Men that have Souls to be saved, many walk as if they had
nothing but bellies to fill, -- tanquam Mors nulla sequatur.
and backs to cloth, fancies to be tickled with vanity, eyes and ears to look
after pleasure, brains to entertain empty notions, and tongues to utter them;
as for their Souls, they serve them to little other purpose, then as Salt to
keep their bodies from stinking.

Honor and Greatness, the Vanity of them.
IT was foretold to Agrippina, Neroe's Mother, Suetonius in vita.
that her Son should be Emperor, and that he should afterward kill his own
Mother; to which Agrippina replied, Occdat modo imperet, Let my Son be so* and
then let him kill me and spare not. So thirsty was she of Honor: Alas, what
are swelling Titles but as so many rattles to still Men's ambitions? And what is
Honor and Greatness in the World? Honor is like the Meteor which lives in
the Air; Honor est in honor ante non in honorato.
so does this in the breath of other Men; It Is like a gale of Wind which
carries the Ship; sometimes this Wind is down, a Man has lost his Honor, and
lives to see himself intombed: sometimes this Wind is too high: How many have
been blown to Hell, while they have been sailing with the Wind of popular
applause; (...).
So that Honor is but magnum nihil, a glorious fancy, Acts 25. 23. It does not
make a Man really the better, but often the worse; For a Man swelled with Honor
(wanting Grace) is like a Man in a dropsy, whose bigness is his disease.

Present Time to be well husbanded.
AS it is observed of the Philosopher, Diog. Laert. in Thalete.
that foreseeing a plentiful year of Olives, he rented many Olive-yards, and
by that demonstrated that a learned Man, If he would aim at worldly gain, could
easily be a rich Man too; It is noted as an excellent part of Wisdom to know
and manage time, to husband time and opportunity; For as the Rabbi said, Nemo
est cui non sit hora sua; Pirke Aboth.
Every Man has his hour, and he who overslips that season, Luke 19. 42.
may never meet with the like again. The Scripture insists much upon a day of
Grace, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Heb. 13. 15. The Lord reckons the times which pass over
us, and puts them upon our account, Nemo vestr^m parvi aestimet tempus, etc.
Bern.
Luke 13. 7. Rev. 2. 21, 22. Let us therefore improve them, and with the
impotent persons at the pool of Bethesda, to step in when the Angel stirs the
water: Now the Church is afflicted, it is a season of prayer and learning, Mic.
6. 9. Esaias 26. 8, 9. Now the Church is enlarged, it is a season of praise,
Psalm 118. 24. I am now at a Sermon, I will hear what God will say: now in the
company of a learned and wise Man, I will draw some knowledge and counsel from
him: I am under a Temptation, now is a fit time to lean on the name of the
Lord, Esaias 50. 10. I am in place of dignity and power, Let me consider what it
is that God requires of me in such a time as this is, Esth. 4. 14. And thus as
the Tree of life brings fruit every Month, Rev. 22. 2. so a wise Christian,
as a wife husbandman, has his distinct employments for every Month, brings
forth his fruit in its season, Psalm. 1. 3.

Frequent Meditation of Death, the great benefit thereof.
IT is said of Telephus, that he had his Impostume opened by the dart of an
Enemy which intended his hurt; Dyctis Cre^. lib. 2.
Roses, they say, are sweetest, which grow near unto Garlic, so the nearness
of an Enemy, makes a good Man the better; And therefore the wise Roman, when
Carthage the Emulous City of Rome was destroyed, said; Plutarch de capienda ab
h^stibus utilitate.
Now our affairs are in more danger and hazard then ever before; When Saul,
David's Enemy eyed and persecuted him, this made him walk more circumspectly,
pray more, trust in God more; He kept his mouth with a bridle while the wicked
were before him, Psalm 39. 1. An hard knot in the Wood drives a Man to the use
of his Wedges; A malicious Enemy that watches for our halting, Vive memor quam
sis aevi brevis.
will make us look the better to our ways: And so it is that Death by the
nearness thereof, and by the frequent meditation thereupon, makes us more
careful of our great account, more sollicitous to make our peace with God, to
wean our hearts from Worldly and perishing comforts, to lay up a good
Foundation for the time to come, that we may obtain eternal life, to get a City
which has Foundations; whose builder and maker is God.


THe ordinary Manna which Israel gathered for their daily use, Exodus 16. 20.
did presently corrupt and breed worms; but that which was laid up before the
Lord, verse. 33.
the hidden Manna in the Tabernacle did keep without putrefaction: So our life
which we have here in the Wilderness of this World, does presently vanish and
corrupt; Col. 3. 4.
but our life which is kept in the Tabernacle, our life which is hid with
Christ in God, that never runs into Death: Natural life is like the River
Jordan, Ez^k. 47.
empties it self into the dead Sea; but spiritual life is like the waters of
the Sanctuary, which being shallow at the first, grow deeper and deeper into a
River, -- Haec brevis est, illa perennis aqua.
which cannot be passed through; Water continually springing and running forward
into eternal life; So that the life which we leave is mortal and perishing,
and that which we go unto is durable and abounding, Joh. 10. 10.


IT is observeable, Ed. Reynolds Sermon. at the Fun. of Pet. Whaley at
Northampton.
that when of late years Men grew weary of the long and tedious compass in
their Voyages to the East Indies, and would needs try a more compendious way by
the North-West passage, it ever proved unsuccessefull: Thus it is that we must
not use any compendious way, we may not neglect our body, nor shipwreck our
health, nor any thing to hasten Death, because we shall gain by it. He that
makes have (even this way) to be rich, Psalm. 31. 15.
shall not be innocent Prove. 28. 20. For our times are in Gods hands, and
therefore to his holy providence we must leave them. We have a great deal of
work to do, and must not therefore be so greedy of our Sabbath day, our rest,
as not to be contented with our working day, our labor; Hence is it, that a
composed frame of Heart, like that of the Apostles, Phil. 1. 21. wherein either
to stay and work, or to go and rest, is the best temper of all.


IT is commonly known, Will. Gurnal Christian in complete Armor.
that those who live on London Bridge sleep as soundly, as they who live at
White Hall, or Cheapside, well knowing that the Waves which roar under them
cannot hurt them; This was David's case, when he sang so merrily in the Cave of
Adullam, My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise,
Psalm 57. 7. And what was it that made him so merry in so sad a place? He will
tell you, verse. 1. where you have him nestling himself under the shadow of Gods
loving wings of Protection, -- hic murus abeneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, etc.
and now well may he sing care and fear away: Thus it is that a Man persuaded
and assured of Gods love unto him, sings as merrily as the Nightingale with the
sharpest thorn at his breast, lies at ^ase on a hard bed, sleeps quietly over
the stouds of trouble and sorrow, nay of Death it self, and fears no ill, Psalm
23. 5.

A Faithful, modest Friend, very hard to be found.
THere are some drugs very wholesome, but very bitter; good in the operation,
but unkind in the palate, as the common saying is, Wholesome, but not
toothsome; Such are some Friends in the World, real in their love, but morose
in their expressions of it, that a Man is almost afraid of their very
kindnesses; but to meet with a Man that shall be as full of sweetness as
^idelity, whose love is not like a pill that must be wrapped in something else
before a Man can swallow it, but whose candor and serenenesse, make his love as
amiable, as useful to his friend; so that he may very well be said to deserve
the character given to one of the Roman Emperors, Neminem unquam dimisit
tristem; of such a disposition made up of love and sweetness, of such a
balsome Nature, that is all for healing and helpfulnesse.

The good Names of Gods people, though now obscured, yet hereafter will be
cleared.
EVen as it was with Christ, the Jews rolled a great stone upon him, T. Watson
Christian's Charter.
and as they thought, it was impossible he should rise again; but an Angel came
and rolled away the stone, and he arose in a glorious triumphant manner: So it
shall be with the People of God, their good Name often lies buried, a stone of
ob^oquy and reproach is rolled upon them, but at the day of Judgment, not an
Angel, but God himself will roll away the stone, and they shall come forth
from among the pots, where they have been blacked and sullied, Psalm. 68. 13.
as the Wings of a Dove covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold;
Now it is, that many of them are called the troublers of Israel, seditious,
factious, Malignants, rebellious, and what not? But a day is shortly coming,
when God himself will proclaim their innocence; For the Name of a Saint is
precious in Gods esteem, it is like a Statue of Gold, which the polluted breath
of men cannot stain; and though the wicked may throw dust upon it, yet as God
will wipe away tears from the eyes of his People, so he will wipe off the dust
that lies upon their good Names, And a happy day must that needs be, when God
himself shall be the Saints compurgator.

Men to be thankful for the little strength of Grace that God affords.
AS soon as ever Moses with his Army was through the Sea, Exodus 14.
they strike up before they stir from the bank^ side, and acknowledge the
wonderful appearance of Gods power and m^rcy for them, though this was but one
step in their way; a howling Wilderness presented it self unto them, and they
not able to subsist a few days with all their provision, for all their great
Victory, yet Moses, he will praise God for this handsell of Mercy; Now this
holy Man knew, how to keep credit with God, so as to have more, was to keep
touch, and pay down his praise for what was received: Thus it is with thee, O
thou poor, weak, trembling Christian; If thou would have fuller
communications of divine strength, own God in what he has already done for
thee; Art thou weak? bless God thou have life; Do thou through feebleness
often fail in duty, and ^all into temptation? Mourn in the sense of these: yet
bless God that thou do not lie in a total neglect of duty, W. Gurnall
Christian in complete Armor.
out of a profane contempt thereof, and that instead of falling through
weakness, thou do not lie in the mi^e of Sin, through the wickedness of thy
heart; Art thou not of that strength of Grace, to run with the foremost, and
hold pace with the tallest of thy brethren, yet art thou thankful that thou
have any strength at all? although it be but to cry after them, whom thou see
to outstrip thee in Grace, this is worth thy thanks, though it be but a little
strength of Graoe, that God is pleased to afford thee.


THe Friendship of most Men in these days is like some plants in the water,
which have broad leaves on the surface of the water, but scarce any root at
all; Amicus certus in re incerta.
like Lemons, cold within, hot without; full expressions, empty intentions;
speak loud, and do little; Like Drums and Trumpets, and Ensigns in a battle,
which make a noise and a show, but act nothing; meet Friendship in pretense and
complement, Aristot.
that can bow handsomely, and promise emphatically, and speak plausibly, and
forget all: But a true, real, active Friend, whose words are the windows of
his heart, (...), the notifiers of his affections; such a Friend is rare and
hardly to be found.


EVen as it is with the Proclamation of a Prince, which he sends out to his
Rebellious Subjects, wherein he makes offer not only of pardon, but of Grace
and favor to those that will lay down their Arms, and come in, showing
themselves loyal and obedient; but on the other hand threatens extremity of
punishment to those that shall yet stand out: Now this Proclamation, with the
same breath, Joh. Brinsley Emblems of Jesus Christ.
breaths out both life and death; Life to those which will hearken to it
(which is the main end and intent of proclaiming it) but death to those that
oppose themselves against it. Even so it is with the Evangelical Proclamation,
the preaching of the Gospel, it reaches out life and death after the same
manner; life to penitent Believers, who readily accept the offers of Grace and
Mercy there tendered; but death to obstinate and Rebellious Sinners, who reject
them; 2 Cor. 2. 16.
To the one it is (...), to the other (...), to the one, a savor of life unto
life, Rev. 22. 16.
to the other a savor of death unto death; to Believers the Morning Star,
bringing light of Grace here, Ioh. 3. 18.
and of Glory hereafter; to others the Evening Star, leading to everlasting
darkness; Not that it is so in it self, being in its own Nature, the Word of
Life; but accidentally it becomes so to them through their unbelief and
rejection of it.


When the Pump goes, we shall soon know what water is in the Fountain,
Quotidiana fornax lingua, etc. August. lib. 10. confess. Matthew. 12. 34.
whether clear or muddy; When the clapper strikes, we may guess what metal
is in the bell: Thus the tongue of Man becomes the Interpreter of his heart;
the inward motions of the mind have vent at the mouth as sparks from a furnace,
and the Souls conceptions are brought out by its busy Midwifery: The Tongue is
the key that unlocks the Hearts treasury, out of whose abundance it speaks; so
that the corruption of Men's minds (not much unlike the inflammation of a
Fever) ordinarily breaks forth and blisters upon the tongue: J. Meriton ep. to
Edw. Reyners Government of the Tongue.
He that is rotten in his heart, is commonly rotten in his talk; And as evil
words corrupt good manners, so they also discover corrupt manners; the foul
stomach betrays it self in a stinking breath, and a wicked heart in wicked
communication; But where Grace is in the heart, it will manifest it self in
holy, Heavenly, and savoury speeches.

The Sin of Bribery condemned.
IT is reported of Sir Thomas More, (then Lord Chancellor of England, that when
two great silver Flaggons were sent him by a Knight, R. Young Philargu^iae
mastix.
that had a Suit depending in Chancery, (though gilded with the specious
pretense of gratuity) sent them back again filled with his best Wine, saying;
If your Master likes it, let him send for more: And when his Lady at another
time offered him a great bribe in the behalf of a suppliant, he turned away
with these words; Gentle Eve, I will none of your apple. -- terras Astraea
reliquit. Ovid.
An upright Man he was in the place of Judicature: And it were to be wished,
That all those who succeed him on the Bench, were not almost, but altogether
like him in the matter of Justice distributive: but so it is, (and which is to
be lamented) the Rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye, Hos. 4. 18.
their right hands are full of bribes, Psalm 26.
they are ready to transgress for a piece of bread; they love gifts, Prove. 28.
21.
and follow after rewards, and like the Horse-leeches daughter they cry, Give,
give; so that by woeful experience, Esaias 1. 23.
the balance of Equity is tited too too often on the one side, Prove 30. 15.
and the cause of the poor out-vyed with power and greatness.

No Man free from Temptations.
A Countryman riding with an unknown Traveller (whom he conceived honest) over
a dangerous Plain; T. Fuller on Christ's Temp^at.
This place (said he) is infamous for robbery but for my own part, though often
riding over it early and late, I never saw any thing worse then myself: In good
time, replied the other, and presently demanded his purse, -- Sub dulci melle
ven^na latent. Ovid. amor. 1.
and robbed him. Thus it is, that no place, no Company, no Age, no person is
Temptation-free, let no Man brag that he was never tempted, let him not be
high-minded, but fear, for he may be surprised in that very instant wherein he
boasts that he was never tempted at all.

The Holy Scriptures to be made the rule of all our actions.
IT is written of Boleslaus, one of the Kings of Poland, that he still carried
about him the picture of his Father, Cromerus lib. 6. Joh. Gerson in orat. ad
R. Gallic.
and when he was to do any great work, or set upon any design extraordinary, he
would look on the picture and pray, That he might do nothing unworthy of such a
Fathers name. Thus it is, that the Scriptures are the picture of Gods Will, and
therein drawn out to the very life; before a Man enter upon, Ob. Sedgwick Sermon.
at Elect. of L. Mayor, Land. 1648.
or engage himself in any business whatsoever, let him look there, and read
there what is to be done, what to be undone; and what God commands, let that be
done; what he forbids, let that be undone: let the balance of the Sanctuary
weigh all, the Oracles of God decide all, the rule of Gods Word be the square
of all, and his glory the ultimate of all intendments whatsoever.

Charity rewarded to the full.
THere is a story of a certain godly and charitable Bishop of Millain, who
journeying with his servant, Con^. Zuingerus in theat. hum. vitae.
was met by some poor People, that begged an alms of him: The Bishop commanded
his Man to give them all the little money that he had, which was three Crowns:
But his servant thinking to be a better husband for his Master, gave them but
two Crowns, reserving the third for their expenses at night: Soon after,
certain Noblemen meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a good Man, and one
that was liberal to the poor, commanded two hundred Crowns to be delivered to
the Bishop's servant for his Master's use; The Man having received the money,
ran with great joy, and told his Master of it: Ah, said the Bishop, Si enim
tres dedisses, trecentas accepisses; What wrong have thou done to me, Sam.
Clark Sermon. to the Natives of Warwickshire, 1655.
and thy self! For if thou have given those three Crowns as I appointed thee,
thou should have received three hundred. And most true it is, that such
open-handed, and such open-hearted Christians have more then once Gods Word of
promise for such ample retribution; Bounty is said to be the most compendious
way to plenty; Benefacere homini, est beneficium magnum apud Deum depoacre,
Chrysostom. homil. in Genesis
neither is getting, but giving, the best way to thrift; For in works of
Charity, our scattering is our increasing; no spending, but a lending; no
laying out, but a laying up, Prove. 11. 24.


IT is observable in Nature, That those Creatures which have the most
excellency in them, Chr. Love Lect. on 2 Timothy 2. 1.
have something also of defect and deformity in them, as if the God of Nature
did it to keep them humble, in a posture (as it were) of condiscension: The
Peacock has glittering feathers, Plin.
and yet black feet; The Swan has white feathers, Ulys^. Aldrovandus.
but under that a black skin; The Eagle has many excellencies, quicksight, and
high flight, but yet very ravenous; The Camel and Elephant are great and
stately Creatures, but of a deformed shape: So it is in the state of Grace, God
does suffer some strong and unsubdued lusts and corruptions to remain in the
dearest of his Children, (and that even in such who have not only truth, 2
Cor. 12. 7. Quantum quis crescit in gratia, etc. Bern. in Cant.
but strength of Grace in them) the Messenger of Satan to busset them, and a
thorn in the flesh to let out the impostumated matter of pride out of their
hearts, whereby they become more condescending to the weak, less depending
upon their own Righteousness, and so are brought to think better of others
then themselves, Sermon. 3.
yea to judge themselves the least of Saints, 2 Cor. 12. 17.
and greatest of Sinners that may be.


THere is mention made of an ancient King, who made a great Feast, and invited
a company of poor people which were Christians, Aloys Novarini tractat. Evangel.
and he bade his Nobles also; Now when the poor Christians were come, he had
them up into the Presence Chamber; but when the Nobles came, he set them in the
Hall: Being thereupon demanded the reason, he answered; I do not this as I am
their King here, for I respect you more then them; but as I am King of another
World I must needs honor these as Gods dear C^ildren, and such (as though
dejected now) shall be Kings and Princes with me hereafter, and I would have
you esteem of them according to their worth, and show it. And so without all
doubt, great is the worth of true Christians: Greg. Naz. in ora^. 16. de
pauperum amore.
A Pearl upon a dunghill is worth stooping for, and a gracious Man or Woman
(though outwardly clothed with rags) worth looking after. Sure it is, that
God looks on them as his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
as a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 6.
an holy Nation, a peculiar People, his delight, his chosen ones, his dear
Children, Tit. 2. 14.
and what not? It much conc^rns us then to set a true value upon them, Prove.
11. 20.
make a true estimate of them, and (as much as in us lies) to be mindful of
them, Matthew. 5. 9.
comfortable to them, and willing on all occasions to do them good.

Love, Unity, and Peace, the best supporters of Kingdoms, Common-weals, etc.
THere is mention made of a dispute betwixt Mars and Pallas, which of them
should have the honor to give the name to the City of Athens; Joh. Bodin.
methodus hist. cap. 6.
at length it was resolved, That he should give the name, who could find out
that which might most conduce to the benefit of the City: Hereupon Mars
presents them with a stately horse, which signified, Wars, Divisions, Tumults,
etc. but Pallas came in with an Olive branch, the Emblem of Peace, Love and
Unity; the City chose Pallas to be their guardian, rightly apprehending, That
Love, unity, and peace would make most to their prosperity and safety: Nihil
pernitiosius Re^pub. quam divisio, nihil melius quam unio, Plato de l^g.
And questionless, great must needs be the happiness of that Nation, Kingdom,
or Commonweal, where they are made supporters; Love and Unity to cement all
affections, and Peace to compose all differences that can be found amongst them.

Self-seekers, reproved.
IT is reported of one Cnidius, a skillful Architect, who building a sumptuous
house, Ptolomeus Philad.
or Watchtower for the King of Egypt, (to discover the dangerous rocks by
night to the Mariners) caused his own name to be engraven upon a stone in the
wall in great letters, and afterward covered it with Lime and mortar, and upon
the outside of that wrote the name of the King of Egypt in golden letters,
Plinius Aelian.
as pretending, that all was done for his honor and glory: But herein was his
cunning, he very well knew, that the dashing of the water, would in a little
time consume the plaistering, (as it did) and then his name and memory should
abide, and continue to after-generations. Just thus; there are many in this
Nation of ours, who in their outward discourse and carriage, pretend to seek
only the glory of God, the good of his Church, and the happiness of the
State; Ed. Calamy ^p. ded. in Sermon, at S. Paul's, Land. 1655.
but if there were a window to look into their hearts, we should find nothing
there written but self-love, self-interest, and self-seeking: Many such would
be found out, who instead of loving God to the contempt of themselves, love
themselves to the contempt of God; Many who seek their own, and not the things
of Jesus Christ, or which is as bad, if not worse, Phil. 2. 21.
who seek their own under the hypocritical pretense of seeking the things of
Jesus Christ.

How it is, that Men are so much mistaken in the thoughts of long life.
IT fares with most Men's lives, as with the sand in an hypocritical
hour-glasse; look but upon it in outward appearance, T. Fuller Fun. Sermon. at
Chelsey, 1652.
and it seems far more then it is, because rising up upon the sides, whilst
the sand is empty and hollow in the midst thereof; so that when it sinks down
in an instant, a quarter of an hour is gone in a moment. Thus it is, that many
men are mistaken in their own account, reckoning upon threescore and ten years,
Nihil ita decipit, quam cum ignorent homines spatia vivendi Hieron. ep. 79.
the age of a Man, because their bodies appear strong and lusty. Alas, their
health may be hollow, there may be some inward infirmity and imperfection
unknown to them, so that Death may surprise them on a sudden.


THere is a Bird peculiar to Ireland, Fynes Morison's Travels. Qu^tidie
morim^r, quotidie commutamur et tamen aeternos nos esse credimus, Hieron. ad
Heli^d^r.
called, The Cock of the wood, remarkable for the fine flesh and folly thereof;
All the difficulty to kill them, is to find them out, otherwise a mean
marks-man may easily dispatch them: They fly in woods in flocks, and if one of
them be shot, the rest remove not but to the next bough or tree at the
farthest, and there stand staring at the shooter, till the whole covey be
destroyed; yet as Foolish as this bird is, it is wise enough to be the Emblem
of the wisest Man in the point of Mortality; Death sweeps away one, and one,
and one, here one, and there another, and all the rest remain no whit moved, or
minding of it, till at last a whole generation is consumed and brought to
nothing.


LOok but upon a Rabbets skin, R. Vines Sermon. at Westminster. 1650.
how well it comes off, till it come to the head, and then there is haling and
pulling, and much ado before it stirs: So it is, that a Man may crucify a
great many lusts, subdue abundance of imperfections, and may perform many good
duties, and all this while come smoothly off; but when it comes once to the
head, Hic labor hoc opus est. Virg.
to the Dalilah, the darling, the bosom beloved Sin, then there is tugging and
pulling, great regret, loath to depart; but if God have any interest interest
in such a Soul, Romans 6. 12.
he will pull the skin over his ears, either break his neck, or his heart,
before that any such Sin shall reign in his mortal body, or have any dominion
over him.


IT is observable, Hier^n. Drexelius de damnatorum rogo. lib. 5.
That a Sumpter-horse, or a pack-horse, which all the day long has gone
nodling with abundance of treasure, has at night all taken from him, and been
turned a grazing, or put into a stable, so that all the benefit he has gained
by it, is, that he has only felt the weight of it, and probably got a galled
back for his labor. Thus many rapacious, wretched, rich Men, such as are
little better then pack-horses, -- Extremos currit mercator ad Ind^s.
that all their lise long carry the things of this World, lade themselves with
thick clay, rise early and late, and eat the bread of carfulness to get a
little pelf, and a galled Conscience to boot, are on a sudden either for ill
using, or ill getting their wealth, turned (unles^e God be more merciful) into
a filthy stable, into Hell, where their pay is everlasting torment.


THere is a story of one, T. Fuller on Christ's Temptat.
who undertook in few days to make a fat sheep lean and yet was to allow him a
daily and large provision of Meat, soft and easy loding, with security from all
danger, that nothing should hurt him: This he effected, by putting him into an
iron grate, and placing a ravenous Woolf hard by in another, always howling,
fighting, senting, scratching to come at the poor sheep; which affrighted with
this sad sound and worse sight, had little joy to eat, Multa miser timeo, quia
feei multa proterve
less to sleep, whereby his Flesh was suddenly abated: And thus it is that all
wicked Men have the terrors of an affrighted Conscience constantly not only
barking at them, but biting of them; which spoils all their mirth, dis-sweetens
their most delicious pleasures with the sad consideration of the Sins they have
committed, and punishment they must undergo, when in another World, they shall
be called to an account for what they have done here in the Flesh.

Satan's subtilty in laying his Temptations.
AN Enemy before he besieges a City, T. Fuller ut antia.
surroundeth it at a distance, to see where the wall is the weakest, best to be
battered; lowest, easiest to be scaled; ditch narrowest to be bridged, Diabolus
quando decipere quenquam tentat, prius naturam, etc. Hug. lib. 2.
shallowest to be waded over; what place is not regularly fortified; where he
may approach with least danger, and assault with most advantage: So Satan
walks about, surveying all the powers of our Souls, where he may most
probably lay his temptations, as whether our Understandings are easier
corrupted with error, or our Fancies with levity, or our Wills with
frowardness, or our Affections with excess, etc.

How it is that Soul and Body come to be both punished together.
IT is mentioned of two Travelers, Prosper de bono timoris. lib. 2.
that walked together to the same City, whereof the one was wise, the other
foolish; And when they came where two ways met, the one broad and fair, the
other strait and foul, the Fool would needs go the broader way; but the Wise
man told him, though the narrow way seemed foul, yet was it safe and would
bring them to a good lodging, and the other seeming fair was very dangerous,
and brought them to a desperate Inn; yet because the Fool would not yield to
any reason, but believed what he saw with his eyes rather then what he heard
with his ears; The Wise man for companies sake was contented to go the worser
way; and being both robbed by thieves, detayned in their company, and at last
apprehended with the Robbers, and carried before the Magistrate, these two
began to accuse one another, and each to excuse himself; The Wiseman said, he
told his fellow the dangers of that broad way, and therefore he only was to be
blamed, because he would not yield unto his Counsel; but the Fool had so much
wit to reply, Pares culpae pares poenae.
That he was a very silly Creature, and knew neither the way nor the dangers of
the way, and therefore ^e was to be excused, and the wise Man to be condemned,
because he would follow such a Fools counsel; Whereupon the Judge, having heard
them both, condemned them both; the Fool, Gr. Williams S. Peter's Charge, A
Sermon. at Wesem.
because he refused to follow the Counsel of the Wise; and the Wise Man,
because he would not forsake the Fools Company: So it is that when the Soul,
which is the Wise man, and does know the dangerous issues of the ways of death
and Sin, and the pleasant fruits of Virtue and goodness, will notwithstanding
follow the vain delights of Foolish Flesh, and walk in the paths of
unrighteousness; no marvel, if the righteous Judge condemn both body and Soul
together.

A blessed thing to have Riches and a Heart to use them aright.
IT is credibly reported of M. Thomas Sutton (the sole Founder of that eminent
Hospital commonly known by his name) that he used often to repair into a
private garden, T. Fuller Church Hist. of Britain. Anno 1611.
where he poured forth his prayers unto God, and amongst other passages, was
frequently overheard to use this expression. Lord thou have given me a
liberal and large estate, give me also a heart to make good use thereof; which
at last was granted to him accordingly: And thus (without all doubt) a great
blessing it is for any Man to have Riches and a heart to use them aright, Jos.
Hall D. D. dec. 5* ep. 7. to M. Tho. Su^ton.
to be rich as well in Grace as in Gold, rich in good works as great in riches,
not so much a Treasurer as a Steward, whose praise is more to lay out well,
then to have received much; otherwise he may have Riches, not goods, not
blessings; his burden would be greater then his estate, and he richer in
sorrows then in metals.


WHen Julian the Apostata had received his deaths wound, In hist. tripartit.
Nauclenis Marcellin.
he could not but confess that the fatal arrow which shot him, came from
Heaven, yet he confessed it in a phrase of scorn, Vicisti Galilaee, The day is
thine O Galilean, and no more; not as he should have said, Thou have
accomplished thy purpose O my God, O my Maker, O my Redeemer, but in a style of
contempt, Vicisti Galilaee and no more. And thus it is, that many who have used
and accustomed their mouths to Oaths and blasphemies all their lives, J. Done,
D. D. Sermon. at Fun. of the L. Danvers. 1627.
have made it their last syllable and their last gasp to swear they shall dye.
And others there are too, that enlarge and ungird their wits in jesting at
Religion and Goodness, but what becomes on it? they pass away at last in
negligence of all spiritual assistances, and scarcely find half a minute
betwixt their last jest here in this life, and their everlasting earnest in
that which is to come.


AS a Man that buyeth Freehold-land, E. Calamy Sermon. at Westminster. 1644.
though he pay dear for it, yet it is accounted cheaper, and a far better
purchase, then if he had laid out his money upon that which is held by Copy of
Court-role; And why so? because it freeth him from many services and duties
which Coppy-hold-Land is obliged unto, all which the Lord of the Manor may
justly challenge according to custom: So it is that the service of God is
perfect freedom, and will free a Man from all other services whatsoever; so
that, be but a true servant of God, whosoever thou art, Bonus ^tiamsi serviat
liber est, etc. Aug. lib. 4. de Civitat. Dei.
thou art free indeed, free from the service of Sin and Satan, and free from
all those domineering lusts, that would fain be ruling in thy mortal body; but
on the contrary, if thou be not a true servant of Jesus Christ, thou shall be a
slave to every thing besides him. Either thy belly will be thy God, or thy Gold
will be thy God; Pleasures, Profits, Preferments, all that is besides God,
Hieron. in epist. ad Simplicianum.
will put in to make up a God; And then, O quam multos habet ille Dominos qui
unum non habet, How many Lords must that Man needs have, that has not God for
his Lord and Master?


EXcellent is the story of St. Basil, Theodoret.
who when the Emperor sent to him to subscribe to the Arrian heresy, The
Messenger at first gave him good language, and promised him great preferment if
he would turn Arrian; To which Basil replied; Hist. tripart. lib. 7. cap. 36.
Alas, these speeches are fit to catch little Children withal, that look after
such things, but we that are nourished and taught by the Holy Scriptures, are
readier to suffer a thousand deaths, then to suffer one syllable or tittle of
the Scripture to be altered: The Messenger offended with his boldness, told
him he was mad; He answered, Qui totius orbis impetum sus^inuit. Sleidan.
Opto me in aeternum sic delirare, I wish I were for ever thus mad; Here was a
stout resolved Christian, that Luther-like opposed all the World of
contradiction; And such another was Nehemiah, who met with so much opposition,
that had he not been steeled by a strong and obstinate resolution, he could
never have rebuilded the Temple, but would have sunk in the midst of it; Such a
one was David, that would not be hindered from fighting with Goliath, though he
met with many discouragements; And it is heartily to be wished that God would
make us all such, i. e. resolved Christians to put on divine fortitude, and
Christian resolution, which if we do, it will make us like a wall of brass to
beat back all the arrows of strong persuasion, that can be shot against us,
like an Armor of proof against all the Anakims and Zanzummins, Scyllas, and
Sirens temptations on the right hand and on the left, like the Angel that
roled away the stone from before the door of the Sepulcher it will enable us to
remove the great mountains of opposition that lie in our way, or else to stride
over them; yea, like the ballast of a Ship, will keep us steady in the cause of
God; Iam. 1. 8.
and his Church, who would otherwise be but (...) like those mentioned by the
Apostle, men of double minds, unsettled, and unstable in all our ways.

Gods omniscience necessarily demonstrated from his omnipresence.
SUppose we in our thoughts a Sphere of infinite greatness and efficacy, whose
center were every where, and circumference no where, it must necessarily
follow, that whatever thing or things be, besides this Sphere, must needs be
within it, encompassed by it, and contained in it; and all things existing
within this Sphere it will follow, Nihil agi posse quod ab illo, non sentiatur
Ar. Mont. in hist. not.
That there can be no action nor motion but this Sphere will perceive it. Such
is God, a Sphere of infinite being, who fills all things that he has made,
as spirits, bodies, things above and below, things in Heaven and Earth, all;
that encompasseth all things, is above all things and susteyneth all things,
neither does he ^ill them on the one side and encompasse them on the other
side; Augustine. de fide lib. ad Petron.
But by encompassing does fill them, and by filling does encompasse them, and
by susteyning them he is above them, and being above them, he does sustain
them; then must it needs be that God that thus fills, encompasseth, and
susteineth all things, does also know all things.

To be Zealous for the honor of Jesus Christ as he is the eternal Son of God.
IN the days of Theodosius, the Arrians through his connivence were grown very
bold, and not only had their meetings in Constantinople, the chief City of the
Empire, but would dispute their opinions etiam in foro, and no man could
prevail with the Emperor to lay restraints upon them, Theodorer. lib. 5. cap.
18.
because (says the Historian) he thought it nimis severum et inclemens esse;
At length comes to Constantinople one Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, Cedreni
hist. in vitae Theodosii Imp.
a poor Town; an honest Man, but no great Politician for the World, he
petitions the Emperor to restrain the Arrians, but in vain; Next time he comes
to the Court, finding the Emperor and his son Arcadius (whom he had lately
created joynt-Emperour) standing together, he does very low obeisance to the
Father, but none to the Son, yet coming up close to him in a familiar manner
stroaketh him on the head, and says; Salve mi fili, God save you my child; The
Emperor taking this for a great affront, being full of rage, bids turn the Man
out of doors; As the Officers were dragging him forth, he turning to the
Emperor, says; Ad hunc modum existima, o Imperator, etc. Make an account O
Emperor, that thus, even thus is the Heavenly Father displeased with those
that do not honor the Son equally with the Father, Which the Emperor hearing,
calls the Bishop back again, asks him forgiveness, presently makes a law
against Arrianism, forbids their meetings and disputations, constituta paena:
Here was a blessed artifice by which the Zeal of this Emperor was suddenly
turned into the right channel: and he was taught by his tenderness over his
own honor, and the honor of his Son to be tender over the honor of God,
Matthew. Newcomen Sermon. at Westminster. 1647.
and his Son Christ Jesus. Now, so it is that much of Arrius is at this day in
England; and more then ever was since the name of Christ was known in England;
yet it is much hoped and heartily wished for, that as there has been some
actings for God, that men may no longer impun^ wickedly, and pertinaciously
blaspheme his glorious essence and attributes, so to show the like Zeal for the
glory of his eternal Son and spirit; This being the will of God, that all men
should honor the Son, as they honor the Father, he that honors not the Son
honors not the Father. Ioh. 5. 23.



AS the Potters clay, Ph. Edlin Sermon. on Temptat. 1656.
when the Potter has spent some time and pains in tempering and forming it
upon the wheel, and now the Vessel is even almost brought to its shape, a Man
that stands by may with the least push, put it clean out of shape, and mar all
on a sudden that he has been so long a making: So it is that all the plots and
contrivances of lewd and wicked Men, Esaias 29. 15.
all their turnings of things upside down shall be but as the Potters clay; For
when they think they have brought all to maturity, ripeness, and perfection,
when they look upon their business as good as done, on a sudden all their
labor is lost, the designs they travel so much withal, Parturiunt montes,
etc.
shall be but as an abortive birth, for God that stands by all the while and
looks on, will with one small touch, with the least breath of his mouth blast
and break all in pieces.


THere is a story of that holy Martyr of Jesus Christ, B. Latimer, that having
in a Sermon at Court in Henry the eighth's days much displeased the King, M.
Newcomen Sermon. at Westminster. 1647.
he was commanded next Sunday after to preach again and make his recantation:
according to appointment he comes to preach, and prefaceth to his Sermon with a
kind of Dialogisme in this manner; Hugh Latimer, do thou know to whom thou
art this day to speak? to the high and Mighty Monarch; the Kings most excellent
Majesty, etc. that can take away thy life if thou offend, therefore take heed
how thou speak a word that may displease; But as it were recalling himself,
Hugh, Hugh (says he) do know from whence thou come, upon whose message
thou art sent? and who it is that is present with thee and beholds all thy
ways? Even the great and mighty God that is able to cast both body and Soul
into Hell for ever, therefore look about thee, and be sure that thou deliver
thy message faithfully, etc. and so comes on to his Sermon, Quid dignum tanto
fe^e^ hic promissor?
and what he had delivered the day before, confirms and urges with more
vehemence then ever; Sermon being done, the Court was full of expectation what
would be the issue of the matter; After dinner, the King calls for Latimer, and
with a stern countenance asked him, How he durst be so bold as to preach after
that manner? He answered, That, duty to God and his Prince had enforced him
thereunto, and now he had discharged his Conscience and duty both, in what he
had spoken, his life was in his Majesty's hands: Upon this the King rose from
his seat, and taking the good Man from off his knees, embraced him in his arms,
saying, He blessed God, that he had a man in his Kingdom that durst deal so
plainly, and faithfully with him. Thus, Cave Deus videt. Bern.
did but all Men, especially Ministers, Preachers of the Word, such as are
immediately employed by God, seriously take notice of his Omnipresence, and
continually remember how his eye is always upon them, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
O how diligent! how confident! how abundant, would it make them in the work of
the Lord! how faithful! how courageous! how unbyassed! how above the frowns
and smiles of the greatest of the Sons of Men! etc.

The consideration of Gods omnipresence, to be a disswasive from Sin.
IT is well known what Ahashuerus that great Monarch said concerning Haman,
Esth. 7. 8.
when coming in, he found him cast upon the Queens bed, on which she sat; What
(says he) will he force the Queen before me in the house? There was the
killing emphasis in the words before me, will he force the Queen before me?
What will he dare to commit such a villainy and I stand and look on? Thus it is
that to do wickedly in the sight of God, is a thing that he looks upon as the
greatest affront and indignity, that can possibly be done unto him; What (says
he) will thou be drunk before me? swear, blaspheme before me? be unclean before
me? break my Laws before me? this then is the killing aggravation of all sin,
that it is done before the face of God, in the presence of God, whereas the
very consideration of Gods Omnipresence, that he stands and looks on, should be
as a bar, a Remora to stop the proceeding of all wicked intendments, a
disswasive rather from Sin, then the least encouragement thereunto.

Courts of Judicature to be free from all manner of Injustice.
IT is said of that famous Athenian Judicature, A. Gell. lib. 12. Valor. lib.
2. cap. 1.
where once Dionysius sat as a Judge, and thereupon called (The Areopogite)
that they did excel so much in authority, that Kings laid down their Crowns,
when they came to sit with them; that they were of such integrity, that they
kept their Court and gave judgment in the night, and in the dark, that they
might not behold the persons wh^ did speak, least they should be moved thereby,
they only did hear what was said; Here it was that the Pleader must not use
any proeme, nor make any Rhetorical expression to move the affections, so that
the People did bear as much reverence to the sentences and decrees promulged
there, as they did to their sacred Oracles: Such was the strictness, such the
Justice of that though then Heathen Council, that it may very well serve as a
miroir to look in, as a pattern for the imitation, and as a copy for the most
Christian Courts of Judicature to write by; For, were but Causes evenly weighed
in the balance of Justice, there would not be so much complaining of the often
titing on the one side or the other, as now there is; Were men but Christian
Lawyers, they would not be so often looked on as Heathen Orators; Were Laws but
justly put in execution, the sword would not so often be born in vain; neither
would great ones bear down those that are less, nor mighty ones confound the
mean, but all would be subservient to the Supreme, serviceable and respectfull
one to the other.

Ministers advised in the method of Profitable Preaching.
AS the Physician himself gives not health, R. Bax^er Saints Eternal R^st.
but only gives some helps to bring the body into a fit temperament and
disposition, so far as to help and strengthen Nature; So the Preacher cannot be
said to give knowledge, but the helps and motives by which natural light being
excited and helped, may get knowledge: And as he is the best Physician, that
does not oppress nature with a multitude of medicines, but pleasantly with a
few does help it for the recovery of health. So he is the best Preacher,
Gibieuf. in Praefat. lib. 2. de libert. citat. ex Aquin^te p. 1. q. 117.
not that knows how to heap up many mediums and Arguments to force the
understanding, rather then to entice it by the sweetness of light; but he that
by the easy and grateful Mediums, which are within reach, or fitted to our
light, does lead Men as by the hand unto the Truth; in the beholding, or sight
of which Truth only, knowledge does consist and not in use of Arguments; Non
tam eleganter dicentes quam utilia docentes sunt audiendi. Zeno.
hence is it that Arguments are called Reasons by a name of relation to Truth;
And why so? but because they are a means for finding out of Truth, and
discovery of Error.


THe passage in Scripture is well known how Nebuchadnezzar erected a Golden
Image with this terrible commination, Dan. 3. 6.
That whosoever would not fall down and worship it, should be cast into the
fiery Furnace; This now was so terrible to every one that heard it, that
unless it were three or four, there were none that did resist, the very fear
of a Fiery Furnace made them do any thing; And shall not then the fear of those
eternal flames, the fear of that great day wherein God shall reveal all wrath
without any mercy to the Wicked man, shall not this turn him out of the ways
of Sin? shall not this make him with bitterness bewail his former lusts? and
to hate those bitter-sweets of pleasure, (...) Chrysostom.
which er'st he so much delighted in, saying with Jonathan, I have tasted a
little honey and I must dye, I have had a little pleasure of Sin, and I must be
damned for evermore.


IT is said of Argo (the then Royal Sovereign of the Asiatique Seas) that being
upon constant service; Plutarch in Theseo.
she was constantly repaired, and as one plank or board failed, she was ever
and anon supplied with another that was more serviceable, insomuch that at last
she became all new, Alex. ab Alexandro, lib. 3. cap. 1.
which caused a great dispute amongst the Philosophers, of those times, whether
she were the same ship as before or not: Thus it is that for our parts, we have
daily and hourly served under the commands of Sin and Satan, made provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14.
drawn iniquity with cords of Vanity, and sin as it were with a Cartrope, Esaias
5. 18.
and daily like Ephraim increased in wickedness, insomuch that there are not
only some bruises and brushes, Hos. 12. 1.
but as it were a shipwreck of Faith, and all goodness in the frame of our
precious Souls; What then remains but that we should dye daily unto Sin, Ph.
Edlin in his last Sermon. on 2 Cor. 5. 17. at S. Mich. Bassishaw, Land. 1656.
and live unto Righteousness, put in a new plank this day, and another to
morrow; now subdue one lust, and another to morrow; this day conquer one
Temptation, and the next another; be still on the mending hand, and then the
question needs not be put, Whether we be the same or not. 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Ephesians. 5. 24.
Psalm. 40.
For old things being put away, all things will become new; we shall be new
Men, Ezekiel. 18. 31.
new Creatures, we shall have new hearts, new spirits, and new songs in our
mouths, Rev. 21. 2.
be made partakers of the new Covenant, and at last Inheritors of the new
Jerusalem.


SUppose a Man should come into a curious Artificers shop, S. Bolton Sin the
greatest evil; A Sermon. on 2 Samuel 24. 10.
and there with one blow dash in pieces such a piece of Art as had cost many
years study and pains in the contriving th^reof: How could he bear with it? How
would he take on to see the workmanship of his hands so rashly, so wilfully
destroyed? He could not but take it ill and be much troubled thereat. Thus it
is that as soon as God had set up and perfected the frame of the World, Sin
gave a shrewd shake to all, it unpin'd the frame, and had like to have pulled
all in pieces again; nay, had it not been for the promise of Christ, all this
goodly frame had been reduced to its Primitive nothing again, Man by his Sin
had pulled down all about his ears, but God in mercy keeps it up; Man by his
Sin provokes God, but God in Mercy passes by all affronts whatsoever; Oh the
Wonderful Mercy! O the Omnipotent Patience of God!

How it is, that there may be partial desertions of Spiritual Grace in the
Souls of Gods dearest Children, but never total nor final ones.
AS it was with Sampson, when his locks were cut off, his strength was gone;
and therefore though he thought to go out, and do great things as formerly he
had done, yet by woeful experience he found there was no such matter; he was
become even as another Man. So it is with the best and dearest of Gods
Children, S. Bolton Love of Christ to his Spouse, A Sermon. on Cant. 4. 9.
When God is gone, their locks are cut, their strength is gone, as not lying in
their hair, but in their head; yet this is but a partial, a temporary, not a
total and final desertion of divine assistance and Spiritual Grace in the Soul:
For God may forsake a Man in respect of his quickening presence, and leave a Man
to such barrenness, flatnesse, Psalm. 88.
deadness of his Spirit for a time, that the Soul cannot pray, hear, meditate,
do any thing as formerly it has done; And God may forsake a Man too in respect
of his comforting presence, Job.
he may eclipse his joys, damp his comforts, David.
withdraw the beams of his Countenance, and leave him in da^kn^sse and trouble;
Heman.
yet for all this God never forsakes such a Man in respect of his supporting
presence, then it is, that in the saddest condition, in the darkest night, in
the stormiest day, the Soul has support from him; As he told S. Paul, so he
tells all Men, all of the election of Grace, all that love and fear him; His
strength shall be seen in their weakness, and his Grace is sufficient for
them, i. e. sufficient to bear them up in the trial, and sufficient to bring
them out of all trials whatsoever.

Complete Christian duty.
IT was the speech of Mr. ^radford, That he could not leave a duty, till he had
found communion with Christ in the duty, J. Fox Acts and Monum.
till he had brought his heart into a duty-frame; He could not leave
Confession, till he had found his heart touched, broken and humbled for Sin;
not Petition, till he had found his heart taken with the beauties of the things
desired, and carried out after them; nor could he leave Thanksgiving, Nunquam
abs te a^sque te recedo. Bern. meditat.
till he had found his Spirit enlarged, and his Soul quickened in the return of
praises; just like that of S. Bernard, who found God in every duty, and
communion with him in every Prayer; This was true, sincere, complete Christian
duty. And thus it is, that the Soul taken with Christ, desires converses with
him in prayer, Esaias 58. 9.
in hearing, and meditation; And such too is the Genius of a Soul taken up with
Christ, that duty does not content it, if it find not Christ in the duty; so
that if the end of a duty has not left it on this side Christ, it has left it
so far short of true comfort.

Directions for both strong and weak in Faith how to demean themselves as to
the matter of Gods Providence.
We may read, Coel. Rhodog. le^t. antiqu. lib. 28.
that Ulysses, when he was to pass the coast of the Sirens, he caused his Men
to stop their ears, that they might not be enchanted by their Music to destroy
themselves; But for himself, he would only be bound to the Mast, that though
he should hear, yet their Musical sounds might not be so strong, as to allure
him to overthrow himself by leaping into the Sea. Thus there are some of Gods
people that are weak in Faith, so that when they see Gods outward proceedings
of Providence seemingly contrary to his Promises, they are apt to be charmed
from their own steadfastnesse. It were therefore good for them to stop their
ears, S. Bolto^ Gods wonderful working for his Church and People. Sermon. on
Exodus 15. 11.
and to shut their eyes to the Works, and look altogether to the Word of God:
But for those that are strong, such as in whom the pulse of Faith beats more
vigorously, they may look upon the outward proceedings of God; yet let them be
sure to bind themselves fast to the Mast, the Word of God, lest when they see
the seeming contrariety of his proceedings to the Promise, they be charmed from
their own steadfastness, to the wounding of their own most precious Souls, and
weakening the assurance of their eternal salvation.


IT is observable, S. Torshell Design to harmonize the Bible, 1647.
that when some Men look up to the Rack or moving clouds, they imagine them to
have forms of Men, of Angels, of Armies, of Castles, Forests, Landskips,
Lions, Bears, etc. where none else can see such things, nor is there any true
resemblance of such shapes; And some there are too, that when they have
somewhat roules and tumbles in their thoughts, J. Fienus de Viribus Imaginat.
they think, that the ringing of bells, the beating of hammers, the report that
is made by great Ordinance, or any other measured, intermitted noise, does
articulately sound and speak the same which is in their thoughts. Thus it is,
that a strong Imagination or Fancy becomes very powerful, as to persuasion in
the matters of God and Religion; Hence is it, that most of those that are
unlearned and unstable, wrest the Scripture, thinking they find that in it,
which indeed is not there, persuading themselves that it represents to them
such and such formed opinions, when questionless they do but patch and lay
things together without any reason at all; from whence have proceeded the
senseless dotages of Heretics in elder times; S. Philastrius de Haerefibus.
Jude.
and of late in the ridiculous papers of some Dreamers, that have flown about,
and bring Scripture with them, but no sense, fancying the holy Word of God to
strike, to ring, or chyme to their tunes, to echo out unto their wild
conceits, and join with them in their rude indigested notions.


AS the Apes in the story, H. Drexelii Gymnasium ^atientiae.
who finding a Glo-worm in a very cold night, took it for a spark of Fire, and
heaped up sticks upon it, to warm themselves by; but all in vain: So do they
lose their labor, that in the warrantable search of Divine truth, busy
themselves about sounds of words, and incoherent Scripture-sentences; When
partly from depravednesse of mind, partly from ignorance, partly from
instability, suddenness and haste, they take a snatch and run away with that
which looks somewhat like the sense of Scripture, and so deceive their own
Souls, crying out like the Mathematician in Athens, Archimedes.
I have found, I have found it, when indeed they have found nothing to the
purpose, nor any thing to the true information of themselves or others in the
ways of God and goodness.


TH^re is mention made of Parrhasius and Xeuxis, Fulgosus lib. 8. cap. 11. ex
Plinio.
(a pair of excellent Painters in those times (that being upon trial of their
skill, how to excel each other in the matter of their Art; Xeuxis drew out a
bunch of grapes so fair and well colored, that the birds came and pecked at
them, to the great admiration of the beholders, even as if they had been of a
natural and lively growth: And the expectation was great, what it could be,
that Parrhasius should draw to outdo so exquisite a piece of Workmanship; He
thereupon falls to his pensill, and makes upon his Table the resemblance of a
white sheet, tacked up with four nayls, one at each corner, so artificially,
that being offered to view, Xeux^^ bade him take away the sheet, that they
might see the excellency of his A^t that was behind it; Whereupon it was
adjudged, That Parrhasius had gone beyond him in so doing: And but good reason
too, For the one had only deceived silly birds, but the other had put a trick
upon a knowing Artist himself. And so it is with the close reserved Hypocrite,
-- rapido gestans sub pect^re Vultum. Pers. Sat. 5.
such is his subtilty, that he does not only delude silly birds, poor ignorant
Souls, but knowing Men, experienced Christians, and if it were possible the
very Elect themselves; He can compose his forehead to sadness and gravity,
whilst he bids his heart be wanton and careless, and at the same time laugh
within himself, to think how smoothly he has cozened the believing beholder.

The danger of immoderate Zeal against those of another judgment; And how so.
THere is in the Nature of many Men a certain (...), Is. Casaub. Exercitat. in
Ba^onium. 14. Sect. 6.
an heat and activeness of spirit, which then principally, when conversant
about Objects divine, and matters of Conscience, is wonderful apt, without a
due corrective of Wisdom and knowledge, to break forth into intemperate
carriage, and to disturb Peace; It was Zeal in the women that persecuted S.
Paul, Act. 13. 50.
and it was Zeal in S. Paul, Phil. 3. 6.
who persecuted Christ before he knew him: For as the Historian says of some
Men, Tacitus.
that they are sola socordia innocents, bad enough in themselves, yet do
little hurt, by reason of a flegmatique and torpid constitution, indisposing
them for action; So on the contrary, men there may be; Nay, without all doubt,
some there are, Spiritus magni magis quam utiles. Live. dec. 3. lib. 10.
who having devotion like those Honorable Women, not ruled by knowledge; and
Zeal, like Quicksilver, not allaied, nor reduced unto usefullnesse by Wisdom
and mature learning, may be, as Nazianzene says, they were in his time, the
causes of much unquiet; Insomuch, that Truth it self has been stretched too
far, Basil. ep. 41. Jos. Acosta de Hierony. citante Rivet. in Psalm 16. Sext.
Senens. lib. 5. in prooemi^.
so that by a vehement dislike of Error on the one side, Men have run into an
Error on the other, as Dionysius Alexandrinus being too servent against
Sabellius, did lay the grounds of Arrianism, And Chrysostom in Zeal against:
the Manichees, did too much extol the power of Nature; And Illiricus out of an
hatred of the Papists lessening Original Sin, ran another extreme to make it
an essential corruption, etc.

The All-sufficient Goodness of Christ Jesus.
ALl the good things that can be reckoned up here below, Ed. Reynolds Joy in
the Lord; A Sermon, at S. Paul's.
have only a finite and limited benignity, some can cloth, but cannot feed;
others can nourish, but they cannot heal; others can enrich, but they cannot
secure; others adorn, but cannot advance; all do serve, but none do satisfy;
They are like a beggars coat made up of many pieces, not all enough either to
beautify or defend: But Christ is full and sufficient for all his People, He
ascended on high that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10. that he might
pour forth such abundance of Spirit on his Church, Omnis mihi copia, quae Beus
meus non est, Egestas est. Aug. confess. lib. 13. cap. 8.
as might answer all the conditions, whereunto they may be reduced;
Righteousness enough to cover all their Sins; Plenty enough to supply all
their wants, Grace enough to subdue all their lusts; Wisdom enough to resolve
all their doubts; Power enough to vanquish all their Enemies; Virtue enough to
cure all their diseases; Fulness enough to save them, and that to the utmost;
Over and besides, Non bonus Angelus, sed Bonum Bonum. Id. de Trin. lib. 8. cap*
3.
there is in Christ something proportionable to all the wants and desires of
his People; He is bread, Wine, Milk, living waters to feed them, Ioh. 6. 5, 7,
37. He is a garment of Righteousness to cover and adorn them, Rev. 13. 14. A
Physician to heal them Matthew. 9. 12. a Counselor to advise them, Esaias 9. 6. a
Captain to defend them, Heb. 2. 10. a Prince to rule, a Prophet to teach, a
Priest to make atonement for them, an Husband to protect, a Father to provide,
a Brother to relieve, a Foundation to support, a Root to quicken, an Head to
guide, a Treasure to enrich, a Sun to enlighten, and a Fountain to cleanse; So
that as the one Ocean has more waters, then all the Rivers of the World, and
one Sun more light then all the Luminaries in Heaven; so one Christ is more all
to a poor Soul, then if it had the all of the whole World a thousand times over.


JOsephus tells us, that the sons of Noah for some years after the flood, dwelt
on the tops of high Mountains, In lib. antiquitat. Iudaic.
not daring to take up their habitation in the lower ground, for fear of being
drowned by another flood; yet in process of time (seeing no flood came) they
ventured down into the plain of Shinar, where their former modesty we see ended
in one of the boldest, proudest attempts against God, Genesis 11. 2.
that the Sun was ever witness to; The building of a Tower whose top should
reach up to Heaven; They, who at first were so maidenly and fearful, as not to
Venture down their Hills, for fear of drowning; now have a design to secure
themselves against all future attempts from the God of Heaven himself. Thus it
is often seen, that Gods Judgments leave such an impression in Men's spirits, that
a while they stand aloof from their sins (as they on their hills) afraid to come
down to them, but when they see fair weather continue and no clouds gather
toward another storn; then they can descend to their old wicked practices, and
grow more bold and Heaven-daring then ever; O how nice and scrupulous are they
while the smell of Fire is about them, In minimis ^auti, in maximis
negligentes. Hieron. de hom. perfect.
and the memory of their distress fresh, they are as tender of sinning, as one
that comes out of a hot close room is of the air; they shrink at every breath
of Temptation; but alas, how soon upon the least remove of Judgment, are they
hardened to commit those Sins without remorse, the bare motion of which, but a
little before, did so trouble and afflict them.


IT was an high piece of ingenuity and clemency in Augustus Caesar, Suetonius
in vita.
that having promised by Proclamation a great sum of Money to any one, that
should bring him the head of a famous Pyrate, did yet when the Pyrate (who had
heard of this) brought it himself to him, and laid it at his foot, not only
pardon him for his former offenses against him; O sancta venerabilisque
humilitas, etc. Augustine. in Sermon. de superbia.
but reward him for the great confidence that he had in his Mercy. And thus
does God, though his wrath be revealed against all sin and unrighteousness,
yet when the Soul it self comes freely and humbles it self mightily before him,
his anger will be soon over, neither will he stretch forth his arm to strike
such a Soul that gives so much glory to his Mercy.


SIns pleasure is like the pleasure, S. ^Purchas Pilgrimage.
which a place in the West Indies affords them that dwell in it; There grows in
it most rare luscious fruit; but these dainties are so sauced with the
intollerably scorching heat of the Sun by day, and the Multitude of a sort of
creatures stinging them by night that they can neither well eat by day, nor
sleep by night, to digest their sweetmeats; which made the Spaniards call the
place, Comfits in Hell; And truly, What are the pleasures of Sin, but such
Comfits in Hell? there is some Carnal pleasure they have, which delights a rank
^e^sual pala^e; Impia sub dulci mell^^ venena la^ent. Ovid. amor. 8.
but here is the misery of i^, they are served in with the fiery wrath of God,
and stinging of a guilty, restless Conscience, so that the fears of the one,
with the anguish of the other, are surely able to melt and wast away that
little joy and pleasure they bring to the sense of any Man that shall enjoy
them.

The People of God to be at Peace one with another, and why so?
THe unseasonablenesse of the strife, betwixt Abraham's Heardsmen and Lots, is
aggravated by the near neighborhood of the Heathens to them; And there was a
strife (says the Text) between Abraham's herds-men, and the herdsmen of Lots
Cattle; And the Canaanite and Perizite dwelled in the Land: Now to fall out,
Genesis 13. 7.
whilst these Idolaters looked on, this would be Town-talk presently; and put
themselves and their Religion both to shame; And it may for our parts be very
well asked; Papistae, Rapistae.
Who have been in our land all the while the People of God have been scuffling?
Even those that have curiously observed every uncomely behavior amongst us,
and told all the world of it; Such as have wit and Malice enough, to make use
of it for their wicked purposes; They stand on tip-toes to be at work, only we
are not yet quite laid up and disabled (by the soreness of these our wounds,
which we have given our selves) from withstanding their fury. They hope it will
come to that; and then they will cure us of our own wounds, by giving one, if
they can, that shall go deep enough to the heart of our life, Gospel and all.
Tunc tuares agitur.
Let us then consider where we are, and among whom; Are we not in our Enemies
quarters; so that if we fall out, what do we else but kindle a Fire for them to
warm their hands by; It is an ill time for Mariners to be fighting, when an
Enemy is boring a hole in the bottom of the Ship; The Sea of their rage will
weaken our bank fast enough, we need not cut it for them; Then to close up all,
Luke 13. 12.
shall Herod and Pilate put us to shame? They clapped up a Peace to strengthen
their hands against Christ; And shall not we unite then against a common Enemy,
such a one as seeks to raise himself by our uneven, and unkind quarrelling
amongst our selves.

The emptiness of all Worldly delights without Christ.
AS a cup of pleasant Wine offered to a condemned Man, in the way to his
Execution; As the Feast of him who sat under a naked sword, hanging
perpendicularly over his head by a slender thread; Damocl^^. Dan. ^. 25.
As Adam's forbidden fruit, seconded by a flaming sword; As Balthazar's
dainties overlooked by a handwriting against the wall. Such are all the
empty-delights of the World, in their matter and expectation, earthly; in their
acquisition, painful; in their fruition, nauseous and cloying; in their
duration dying and perishing; in their operation, Delitiae cadunt et
praetereunt, vulnerant et transeunt. Ambros.
hardening, effeminating, leavening, puffing up, estranging the heart from God;
in their consequences seconded with anxiety, solicitude, fear, sorrow, despair,
disappointment; in their measure shorter then that a Man can stretch himself
on, narrower then that a Man can wrap himself in; every way defective and
disproportionable to the vast and spacious capacity of the Soul of Man, as
unable to fill that, as the light of a Candle to give day to the whole World,
nothing but emptiness attends them all, unless they be found in Christ Jesus.


IT is said of Constantine, that he was a great honourer of the Ministry,
Eusebius in vita.
and so favorable in the entertainment of any complaint against them, that he
would not read any accusations brought in against them, but did burn them; And
it was a Law amongst the Egyptians, that if a Man found another in the hands of
Thieves, and did not deliver him when it was in his power, he was condemned to
dye. So it is, that Ministers fall too too often among Thieves, who would rob
them of their good names, and labor much to clip their credit, that so they
might weigh the lighter amongst the People; Nay, it is counted by some a piece
of their Religion, neatly and handsomely to defame the Minister. And some there
are too, who would be thought more modest, who (though^ they do not raise a
report) yet they can receive it, as a welcome present; but all this is contrary
to that Apostolical rule, 1 Timothy 5. 9. If others seek to rob them of their good
names, we are to seek to deliver them. If others clip their credits, let us put
some grains into the scales, that they may weigh the heavier; if they open
their mouths to God for us, let us not shut our mouths in their just defense;
if they labor to save our Souls, let us be forward to save their credits.


AS Shell-fishes which breed pearls for others to wear, but are sick of them
themselves; As a Mercury Statue, which shows the way to others, but stands
still it self; Or as a Whetstone which sharpeneth the knife, but is blunt it
self. Thus many Men like Plutarch's Lamiae, In lib. Morali^m. Prove.
have eyes for abroad, but are blind at home, are wise for others, but not for
themselves: If thou be wise, (says Solomon) be wise for thy self: It is not
enough for a Man to do good to others, though he could to all, if he remain an
Enemy to himself; Purchase Pilgrims.
He must be like a Cynamon-Tree, which lets not out all its sap into leaves and
fruit which will fall off, but keeps the principal part of its fragrancy for
the bark which stays on; like a Tree planted by the water side, Psalm. 1.
which though it let out much sap to the remoter boughs, yet is specially
careful of the root that that be not left dry: And to speak truth, What profit
would it be to a Man, if he could heal and help all the sick Men in the World,
and be incurably sick himself? If he could get all the Men on the Earth, all
the Angels in Heaven to be his Friends, and have still God for his Enemy? If he
could save others, and then lose his own Soul; to be like the Ship, Acts 27.
broken to pieces it self, though it helped others to the shore? Or like those
that built the Ark for Noah, Genesis 6. 14. Luke 10. 14.
and were drowned themselves; this is to have the cares of Martha upon him on
the behalf of others, and never mind that one thing of Mary, the care of his
own Salvation.


SUppose a Master before he goes forth, W. Gurnall Christian in complete Armor.
should charge his Servant to look to his Child, and trim up the house
handsomely against he comes home; But when he returns, will he thank this
servant for sweeping his house, and making it trim (as he bade him) if he find
his child through negligence fallen into the fire, and so killed or cripled; No
sure, he left his child with him as his chief charge; to which the other should
have yielded, if both could not be done. Thus, there has been a great Zeal of
late amongst us about some circumstantials of Gods worship; but who is it that
looks to the little child, the main duties of Christianity? Was there ever
less love, charity, self-denial, Heavenly-mindednesse, or the power of
Godliness to be found then in this sad Age of ours? Alas, these like the
child, are in great danger of perishing in the fire of contention and division,
which a perverse Zeal in less things has kindled amongst us.

Pleasures of Righteousness, not discerned by unrighteous Men; And how so.
THe Roman Soldiers, Conr. Zuingerus in theat. hum. vitae.
when at the sacking of Jerusalem, they entered the Temple, and went into the
Sanctum Sanctorum; but seeing no Images there, as they used to have in their
own idolatrous Temples, gave out in a jeer, that the Jews worshipped the
clouds. And thus because the pleasures of Righteousness and holiness, are not
so gross, -- quantum mortal^a pectora caecae Noctis habent. Ovid* Met. lib. 6.
as to come under the cognizance of the Worlds carnal senses (as their brutish
ones do) therefore they laugh at the Saints, as if their Joy were but the child
of Fancy, and that they do but embrace a cloud instead of (...) her self, a
fantastic pleasure for the true; But let such know, that they carry in their
bosom, what will help them to think the pleasures of a holy life more real;
and that the power of Holiness, is so far from depriving a Man of the joy and
pleasure of his life; that there are incomparable delights and pleasures
peculiar to the holy life, Prove. 14. 10.
which the gracious Soul finds in the ways of Righteousness, and no stranger
intermeddles with his joy: The truth is, they lie inward, and therefore it is
that the World speaks so wildly and ignorantly of them.

Gods different disposal of his blessings.
WHen a Prince bids his Servants carry such a Man down into the Cellar, Will.
Gurnal The Christian in complete armor.
and let him drink of their Beer and Wine; this is a kindness from so great a
Personage to be valued highly: But for the Prince to set him at his own Table,
and let him drink of his own Wine, this, no doobt, is far more. Thus i^ is,
Psalm 4.
that God gives unto some Men bona scabelli, great Estates, abundance of corn
and wine and oil, the comforts of the Creature, yet in so doing, he entertains
them but in the common Cellar; they have none but carnal enjoyments, they do
but sit with the servants, and in some sensual pleasures, they are but
fellow-Commoners with the beasts; but for his People, they have the bona
throni, his right hand blessings, he bestows his Graces on them, beautifies
them with holiness, makes them to drink of the Rivers of his pleasures, Psalm.
36. 8.
and means to set them by him, at his own Table with himself in Heavenly glory.

The increase of Atheism amongst us at this day.
IT is reported to have been the saying of Mr. R. Greenham (a good man in his
time) That he feared rather Atheism then Popery would be Englands ruin; Jo^.
Shute, in a Sermon. at S. Mary Wolno^h, Land. 1624.
Had he lived in our dismal days, he would have had his fears much increased:
Were there ever more Atheists made and making in England, since it was
acquainted with the Gospel, then in the compass of some few years past? There
is reason to think there were not; When Men shall fall so far from profession
of the Gospel, Victa j^cet pietas. Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
and be so blinded, that they cannot know light from darkness, righteousness
from unrighteousness; Are they not far gone in Atheism? This is not natural
blindness; for the Heathen could tell when they did good and evil, Romans 2. 14.
and see Holiness from Sin, without Scripture Light to show them: No, Ioh. 4.
this blindness is a plague of God fallen on them for rebelling against the
ligh^ when they could see it: And if this plague should grow more common, which
God forbid, woe then to England.


THere was a foolish (it may be said cruel) Law among the Lacedaemonians,
Plutarchi Moralia.
That none should tell his Neighbor any ill news befallen him; but every one
should be left, in process of time, to find it out themselves: And it is to be
supposed, that there are many amongst us, that would be content, if there were
such a Law, that might tie up Ministers mouths from scaring them with their
Sins, and the miseries that attend their unreconciled estate; The most are more
careful to run from the discourse of their misery, Auris bona est quae
libenter audit Utilia. Bernard.
then to get out of the danger of it; are more offended with the talk of Hell,
then troubled for that sinful state that shall bring them thither: But alas,
when then shall the Ministers show their love to the souls of Sinners? When
shall a loving Man have a fitting time to tell his Friend of his faults, if not
now, in the present time? And why? because that hereafter there remains no more
offices of Love to be done for them; Hell is a Pesthouse, Psalm. 6. 5.
there cannot be written so much on the door of it, as, Lord have mercy on
them, that are in it: Nay, they, who now pray for their salvation, and weep
over their condition; must then with Christ vote for their damnation, and
rejoice in it, though they be their own Fathers, Husbands and Wives, they shall
see there tormented.


SIr Thomas Moor, W* Cambden Remains.
whilst he was a Prisoner in the Tower, would not so much as suffer himself to
be trimmed, saying; There was a controversy betwixt the King and him for his
head, and till that was at an happy end, he would be at no cost about it; Let
us but scum off the froth of his Wit, and we may make a solemn use of it: For
certainly, all the cost we bestow upon our selves, to make our lives
pleasurable and joyous to us, Nil pla^idum est fine pace Deo, nec munus ad
aram, etc. Mantuan.
is but mere folly; till it be decided what will become of the Suit betwixt God
and us, what will be the issue of the Controversy that God has against us,
and that not for our heads, but Souls, whether for Heaven or Hell: Were it not
then the wisest course, to begin with making our peace, and then we may soon
lead a happy life? It is said, He that gets out of debt, grows rich: Most sure
it is, that the pardoned soul cannot be poor; For as soon as the Peace is
concluded, a Free Trade is opened between God and the Soul; If once pardoned,
we may then sail to any Port that lies in Gods dominions, and be welcome; where
all the Promises stand open with their treasure, and say; Here poor Soul take
full lading in of all precious things, even as much as thy Faith can bear and
carry away.

Ringleaders of Faction and Schism, their condition deplorable.
What would the Prince think of that Captain, Rich. de Mediavilla Progres.
Coelestis.
who instead of encouraging his Soldiers to fall on with united Forces, as one
Man against the Common enemy, should make a speech to set his Soldiers
together by the ears amongst themselves; surely he would hang him up for a
Traitor: Good was Luther's prayer, In vita ejus per Anonymum.
A Doctore glorioso, a Pastore contentioso, et Inutilibus quaestionibus liberet
Ecclesiam Deus; From a vainglorious Doctor, a contentious Pastor, and nice
questions, the Lord deliver his Church; And we in these sad times have reason
to say as hearty an Amen to it, as any since his age; Do we not live in a time,
when the Church is turned into a Sophister's School, where there is and has
been such a wrangling and jangling, Will. Gurnal Christian in complete Armor.
that the precious truths of the Gospel are lost to many already (whose eyes
are put out with the dust these contentions have raised) and they have at last
fairly disputed themselves out of all their sober Principles; as some ill
husbands that light among cunning Gamesters, and play away all their money out
of their purses. Woe then to such vile Men, who have prostituted the Gospel to
such Divellish ends: God may have mercy on the cheated Souls, to bring them
back to the love of the Truth; But for the cheaters, such as have been the
Ringleaders into Faction and Schism, they are gone too far toward Hell, that
we can look for their return.

When it is that a Man is said to thoroughly forsake his Sin.
EVery time a Man takes a journey from home about business, W. Gurnall ut
supra.
we do not say, he has forsaken his house, because he meant, when he went out,
to come to it again: No, but when we see a Man leave his house, carry all his
goods away with him, lock up his doors, and take up his abode in another place,
never to dwell there more, this Man may very well be said to have forsaken his
house indeed. Thus it is, that every one of us are to forsake sin so, as to
leave it without any thought of returning to it again. It were strange to find
a Drunkard so constant in the exercise of that Sin, but sometimes you may find
him sober; and yet a drunkard he is, as if he were then drunk. Every one has
not forsaken his Trade, Delinquendi materia debet praesci^di. Greg. lib. 5.
moral.
that we see now and then in their Holy Day Suit; then it is that a Man is said
to forsake his Sin, when he throws it from him, and bolts the door upon it,
with a purpose never to open any more unto it, Ephraim shall say, What have we
to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14. 8.

Mortification, the excellency thereof.
THere is mention made of one of the Cato's, Laur. Beyerlinc^ in theater magno
Concionatorum.
That in his old age he drew himself from Rome to his Country House, that he
might spend his elder years free from care and trouble; And the Romans as they
did ride by his house, used to say, Iste solus scit Vivere, This Man alone
knows how to live: What art Cato had to disburthen himself (by his retirement)
of the Worlds cares, is altogether unknown: But most sure it is, that a Man may
go into the Country, and yet not leave the City behind him; his mind may be in
a crowd, while his body is in the solitude of a wilderness. Alas poor Man, he
was a stranger to the Gospel; had he been but acquainted therewith, it could
have showed him a way out of the crowd of all Worldly employments, even in the
midst of Rome it self, Col. 3. 5.
and that is by mortifying his heart to the World, both in the pleasures and
troubles thereof; And then that high commendations, That he alone knew how to
live, might have been given him without any hyperbole at all; For to speak
truth, He only knows aright how to live in the world, that has learnt to die
to the World, such is the excellency of Mortification.


IF a Traveller has but enough to bring him to his journeys end, he desires no
more; Quid opus est ad brevem vitam longis opibus. Hyper.
We have but a day to live, and perhaps we may be now in the twelfth hour of
that day; And if God give us but enough to bear our charges till night, it is
sufficient: Let us be content. If a Man had the Lease of an House or Farm, but
for two or three days, and he should fall a building and planting, would he
not be judged very indiscreet? So when we have but a short time here, and Death
calls us presently off the stage, to thirst immoderately after the World,
Brevis est vita, etc. Aug.
and pull down our Souls, to build up an estate, were it not extreme Folly?
Therefore as Esau said once in a profane sense concerning his birthright,
Genesis 24.
Lo, I am at the point to die, and what profit shall this birthright do to me?
So let us all say in a Religious sense, Lo, I am even at the point of Death, my
grave is going to be made, and what good will the World do me? If I have but
enough till Sunsetting, I am content.


IT is reported, Melch. Adamus in vita.
That a certain Jew should have poisoned Luther, but was happily prevented by
his picture which was (...) to Luther, with a warning from a Faithful friend,
that he should take heed of such a Man when he saw him, by which he knew the
Murderer, and so escaped his hands. Thus it is, that the Word of God shows us
the face of those lufts, which Satan employes to butcher our precious Soul;
Psalm 19. 11.
By them is thy servant forewarned, says David, Psalm. 19. 11. Let a Man be but
careful to read the Word of God with observation, and in it he shall have the
History of the most remarkable battles, Scriptura schola est coelestis,
eruditio vitalis, etc. Cassiodor. super Psalm. 15.
that have been fought by the most eminent Worthies of Christ with Satan that
great Warrior against their Souls, how Satan has many times foiled them, and
how they have recovered their lost ground; In it you shall have all Satan's
Cabinet-counsels opened, there is not a lust, which you are in danger of; not
the least Sin which presses down, but you have it de^cryed and laid open in
its proper colors; not the least Temptation which the Word does not arm you
against, etc.


AS the Paper which came to Brentius from a Senator his dear Friend, In vita
ejus ut supra.
took him as he was at Supper with his Wife and Children, and bade him flee
cito, c^tius, citissime, which he did, leaving his dear company and good cheer;
So must we do from our dearest bosom Sins, or we may repent our stay when it
is too late: For Satan labors to while us off with delays; floating, flitting
thoughts of Repentance he fears* not, he can give Sinners leave to talk what
they will do; Laur. Justinianus de vita Monastica. cap. 14.
so he can beg time, and by his Art keep such thoughts from coming to a head,
and ri^ening into a present resolution; few are in Hell, but thought of
repenting before they came there, yet Satan so handled the matter, that they
could never pitch upon the time in earnest when to do it; If ever therefore
thou meanest to get out of his clutches, cito, citius, citissime, fly out of
his doors, and run for thy life, where ever this warning finds thee, stay not,
though in the midst of thy joys, with which thy lusts shall entertain thee.

Men through spiritual Pride preferring one Preacher before another, reproved.
ZAnchy tells of one in Geneva, who being desired to go hear Viretus, that
preached at the same time with Calvin, W. Gurnal ut ant^a.
answered his Friend, If Paul were to preach, relicto Paulo Calvinum audire^n,
I would leave Paul himself to hear Calvin; Now can it be imagined, that Pride
in the gifts of another, should so far transport any Man, as to the very
borders of Blasphemy; yet so it is, and so it has been of old, 2 Cor. 3. 4.
one was of Paul, another of Apollos; and now one for this Preacher, another
for that: Prudens auditor omnes libenter audit, etc. Chrysostom. in Heb.
It is not every Sermon, though wholesome food, nor every Prayer, though
savoury, will go down, they must have a choice dish, that must have an
exquisite hault-goust for their curious pala^s; And are such ever like to get
good by Preaching? Thus Pride makes them take parts, and make sides as they
fancy one Preacher to excel another; so that Pride destroys Love; and Love
wanting, edification is lost: The Devil has made foul work in the Church by
this engine, it is high time to look about us.

The weakness of a Christian without Christ.
IT is said of one Mr. Benbridg, that being at the stake ready to suffer
Martyrdom; his heart failed him, J. Fox Martyrol. Qui pro nobis mortem semel
vicit, etc. Aug.
his heart failed him, so that he thrust the faggots from him, and cried out; I
recant, I recant; yet this Man, when re-inforc't in his Faith, and endued with
power from above, was able within the space of a week, after that sad foyl, to
dye at the stake cheerfully. Thus the stoutest Champions of Christ, and for
Christ, have been taught from time to time how weak they are, if Christ steps
aside, or if he should withdraw his Grace, and leave them to their own
cowardice and unbelief, they would soon show themselves in their own colors.

Men seeking after the Vanities of all Worldly things, reproved.
SOlomon had more variety of all Worldly things, and more Wisdom to improve
it, then any now have; and he made it his business critically and curiously to
examine all the Creatures, and to find out all the good which was under the
Sun: And the product and result of all his enquiries, amounted at last to a
total made up all of Ciphers, Vanitas vanitati; omnia vanitas.
of mere wind and emptiness, Vanity of Vanities, Vanity of Vanities, all is
Vanity. So he begins his book, and to show that he was not mistaken, so he
concludes it, Eccles. 1. 12. And so it is, that whereas many seek for joy out
of the broken Cisterns of the Creatures, as in secular wealth and greatness;
Others in sensual pleasures, feasting, gaming, luxury, excess; Nihil est in
vita durabile; non opes, non imperium, etc.
some in Titles of Honor, others in Variety of knowledge, some in stately
Structures, magnificent retinue, goodly provisions; others in low, sordid, and
brutish lusts; Unto all whom may be said, as the Angel unto the Women, Why seek
ye the living amongst the dead? or as Samuel did unto Saul, Luke 24. 5. 1 Samuel
9. 20.
Set not thy mind upon the Asses, there are nobler things to fix thy desires
upon.


IT was a notable speech of Erasmus, if spoken in earnest, and his wit were not
too quick for his Conscience; In vit^ praefixa operibus.
Nihilo magis ambio opes et dignitates, quam e-lumbis equus graves sarcinas. He
said, he desired Wealth and Honor no more then a feeble Horse does an heavy
Cloak-bag; Thus every good Christian ought to be of his mind; And indeed all
the Christian has or desires, as a Christian, is Heavenly; Psalm. 38. Job 6.
the World is extrinsecal, both to his being and happiness; it is a stranger
to the Christian, and intermeddles not with his joy nor grief; Heap all the
Riches and Honors of the World upon a Man, they will not make him a Christian;
heap them on a Christian they will not make him a better Christian; Again, take
them all away, let every bird have his feather, when stripped and naked he will
be still a Christian, and it may be a better Christian then otherwise he would
have been.


IT is observed by an ingenious Divine, Joh. Gaul in his Votive Speculat. on
John Bapt. Nativity.
that the name of John is next to the name of Jesus; It was God that first gave
them both, John and Jesus signifying as much as Grace and Salvation; John
prepared the way to Jesus, hinting out thus much unto us, that there is no way
to Salvation but by Grace, John's name was an honor to him, nor was John a
disgrace to his Name, He both was, and was called Gracious; But so it is that
many of us (by our bad manners) slander and belly our good Names; We have fair
appellations and filthy conditions; Nay, have nothing to betoken us Christians,
Nomina cum reconsentiant. Plato de sapient.
but the Name: usurping the style whereof we want the Truth; so contrary are
our lives to our callings, and titles of our persons so unlike the works of our
Profession. What skilleth it to be called Clement, Convenient raro nomina, etc.
Urbane, Pius, and yet to be cruel, uncivil, evil? to be called Christian,
Prudence, Grace, Faith, and yet to be Unchristian, unwise, ungratious,
unbelieving? Let us not therefore be a scandal to our Calling, not a reproach
to our own Names, but let us be mindful of our Vow and duty so often as our
Names are mentioned: and as ready to answer to our Faith as to our Names.


THere is mention made of a Prince in Germany, R^rum Germanicarum Vet. Script.
who being invaded by a more potent Enemy then himself, yet from his Friends
and Allies (who flock't in to his help) he soon had a goodly Army, but had no
money (as he said) ^o pay them, but the truth is, he was loath to part with it;
For which cause some went away in discontent, others did not vigorously mind
his business, and so he was soon beaten out of his Kingdom; and his coffers
(when his Palace was rifled) were found to be thwack't with treasure; And thus
was he ruined, as some sick Men dye, Omnes sumus in minimis cauti* in maximis
neglig^ntes. Hieron. de hom. perfect.
because unwilling to be at cost to pay the Physician: Now so it is that few or
none are to be found, but would be glad their Souls might be saved at last; but
where is the Man or Woman, that makes it appear by their Vigorous endeavor
that they mean in earnest? What Warlike-preparation do they make against Satan
who lies between them and home? Where are their Arms, where their skill to use
them, their resolution to stand to them, and conscionable care to exercise
themselves daily in the use of them? Thus to do is a rarity indeed, if woulding
and wishing would bring them to Heaven, then they may likely come thither; but
as for this diligence in the ways of God, this circumspect walking, Osi, osi,
otiosi.
this Wrestling and fighting, this making Religion our business, they are far
from these, as at last in so doing they are like to be from Heaven.

No way to Happiness but by Holiness.
ONe fitly compares Holiness and Happiness to those two sisters Leah and
Rachel; W. Gurnall Christian in complete armor.
Happiness like Rachel seems the fayrer (even a carnal heart may fall in love
with that) but Holiness like Leah is the elder and beautiful also, though in
this life it appears with some disadvantage, her eyes being bleared with tears
of Repentance, and her face furrowed with the works of Mortification, but this
is the Law of that Heavenly Country, that the younger sister must not be
bestowed before the Elder: We cannot enjoy fair Rachell Heaven and Happiness,
Non est ad astra mollis.
except first we embrace tender-eyed Leah, Holiness with all her severe duties
of Repentance and Mortification? If we will have Heaven, we must have Christ;
If Christ, we must like his service as well as his Sacrifice; there is no way to
Happiness but by Holiness.

Men deluded by Satan in not taking the right notion of Sin.
IT is with men in sinning as it is with Armies in fighting; Captains beat
their Drums for Volunteers, Hieron. Drexelius de Militia Christiana.
and promise all that list pay and plunder, and this makes them come trowling
in: but few consider, what the ground of the War is, or for what; Thus Satan
enticeth Men to Sin, and gives golden promises of what they shall have in his
service, with which silly Souls are won: but how few ask their Souls, Whom do I
sin against? What is the Devils design in drawing me to Sin? Sine permissione
Dei, Diab^lum nocere non posse cognoscas, etc. Greg. lib. 2. Moral.
Shall I tell thee? Do thou think, it is thy pleasure or profit he desires in
thy sinning? Alas, he means nothing less, he has greater plots in his head
then so; He has by his Apostasy proclaimed war against God, and he brings thee
by sinning to espouse his quarrel, and to jeopard the life of thy Soul in
defense of his pride and lust; which that he may do, he cares no more for the
damnation of thy Soul, then the great Turk does to see a company of his slaves
cut off for the carrying on of his design in the time of a siege: If therefore
thou will not be deluded by him, take the right notion of Sin, and labor to
understand the bottom of his bloody design intended against thee.

Gods love to his Children in the midst of spiritual desertions, And how so?
AS Joseph, when he spoke roughly to his brethren, and made them believe he
would take them for spies, Genesis 42.
still his heart was toward them, and he was as full of love as ever he could
hold, he was fain to go aside and weep. And as Moses his Mother, when she pu^
her child into the Ark of bul-rushes, and went a little way from it, yet still
her eye was toward it, Exodus 2.
The babe wept, I and the Mother wept too; So God when he goes a side as if he
had forsaken his children, yet he is full of sympathy and love toward them; It
is one thing for God to desert, another thing to dis-inherit; How shall I give
thee up O Ephraim, Hos. 8. 11. This is a Metaphor taken from a Father going
about to dis-inherit his Son, and while he is going to set his hand to the
deed, his bowels begin to melt; and to yearn over him: though he be a prodigal
child, yet he is a child, I will not cut off the entail; So says God, How
shall I give thee up? though Ephraim has been a Rebellious Son, yet he is my
Son, I will not dis-inherit him; Gods heart may be full of love when there is a
vail upon his face; The Lord may change his dispensation toward his children,
but not his disposition. So that the believer may confidently say, I am
adopted, and let God do what he will with me, let him take the rod or the
staff, it is all one to me so long as he loves me.


THe Persians had a certain day in the year, Brisson, de reg. Pers. lib. 2.
which they called Vitiorum interitum, wherein they used to kill all Serpents
and venomous Creatures; Such a day as that will the Day of Death be to a Man in
Christ; this day the old Serpent dies in a believer, that has so often s^ung
him with his Temptations; this day the sins of the Godly, these venomous
Creatures shall all be destroyed, they shall never be proud more, they shall
never grieve the Spirit of God more; the death of the body, shall quite destroy
the body of death; so that Sin, which was the Midwife that brought Death into
the World, Mors mihi lucrum.
Death shall be the grave to bury sin: O the privilege and comfort of a true
believer! he is not taken away in his sins, but he is taken away from his sins,
and death is made unto him advantage.


NIcephorus tells us of one Agbarus a great Man, In hist. Eccles.
that (hearing so much of Christ's fame, by reason of the Miracles he wrought)
sent a Painter to take his picture, and that the Painter when he came was not
able to do it, because of that radiancy and divine splendour, which sat on
Christ's face. Whether this be true or no, penes sit authorem; but to be sure,
there is such a brightness on the face of Christ glorified, and that
Happiness, which Saints shall have with him in the highest Heavens, as forbids
us that dwell in mortal flesh to conceive of it aright, much more to express
it; it is best going thither to be informed, and then we shall confess we on
Earth heard not half of what we there find; yea, that our present conceptions
are no more like to that vision of glory we shall there have, then the Sun in
the Painters Table, is to the Sun it self in the Heavens.

Men to be constant in the performance of holy Duties.
IT is observable, Hic magnus sedet Aeneas, secumque volutat
That many who have gone into the Field* and liked the work of a Soldier for a
battle or two, but soon have had enough, and come running home again from their
Colors, whereas few can bear it as a constant Trade; War is a thing that they
could willingly woo for their pleasure, Eventus belli varios. Virgil.
but are loath to wed upon what terms soever. Thus many are soon engaged in
holy duties, easily persuaded to take up a Profession of Religion, and as
easily persuaded to lay down; like the new Moon, which shines a little in the
first part of the night, but is down long before half of the night be gone; the
lightsome Professors in their youth, whose old age is wrapped up in thick
darkness of Sin and wickedness: O this constancy and persevering is a hard
word! Hic labor, hoc opus est.
this taking up the Cross daily, this praying always, this watching night and
day, and never laying aside our clothes and armor, i. indulging our selves to
remit and unbend in our holy waiting upon God, Alacriter incumbendum est
inchoatis, etc. Cassiodor. lib. 5. ep. 15.
and walking with God; this sends many sorrowful from Christ; yet this is the
Saints duty, to make Religion his every-dayes work, without any vacation from
one end of the year to the other.

How it is that there are so many Professors of Religion, and so few Christians
and Practisers of Religion.
ALl Israel came joyfully out of Egypt under Moses his conduct, yea, and a mixed
Multitude with them, Exodus 9.
but when their bellies were a little pinched with hunger, and their greedy
desires of a present Canaan deferred; yea, instead of peace and plenty, nothing
but War and pen^ry appeared, they (like white-liver'd Soldiers) are ready to
fly from their colors, and make a dishonorable retreat into Egypt. Thus the
greatest part of those, who profess the Gospel, when they come to push of
pike, -- E^ ^uga Cervis, A patribus datur, et patrius pavor incitat ar^us.
Lucretius.
to be tried what they will do, deny, endure for Christ, grow sick of their
enterprise: Alas, their hearts fail them; they are like the waters of
Bethlehem; but if they must dispute their passage with so many Enemies, they
will even content themselves with their own Cistern, and leave Heaven to
others, that will venture more hardly for it.

Gods comfortable presence in the midst of spiritual desertions.
THe Gardener digs up his Garden, pulls up his fences, takes up his plants, and
to the eye, Jos. Symonds Case and cure of a deser^ed Conscience.
seems to make a pleasant place, as a waste piece of ground; but every
intelligent Man knows, that he is about to mend it* not to mar it; to plant it
better, not to destroy it. So God is comfortably present with us, even in our
spiritual desertions, and though he seem to annihilate, or to reduce his new
Creation, Hag. 2. 9.
yet it is to repair its ruins, and to make it more beautiful and glorious:
Or, as in the repairing of an house, we see how they pull down part after part,
Diruit, aedificat, etc.
as if they intended to demolish it quite; but the end is to make it better; it
may be some posts and pillars are removed, but it is to put in stronger. It may
be some lights are stopped up, but it is to make fairer. So though God take
away our props, Fortior ut possit cladibus esse suis. Ovid. Amorum.
it is not that we may fall, but that he may settle us in greater strength, he
batters down the life of sense, to put us upon a life of Grace: And when he
darkens our light that we cannot see, it is but to bring in fuller light into
our Souls; As when the Stars shine not, the Sun appears, repairing our loss of
an obscure light, with his clear bright shining beams; So that though God do
forsake his people, O amor^o Boni^as, nostris been provida rebus. J. Picus
Mirandula.
yet not totally, not for ever, not ceasing the affection of Love, but the acts
of Love for some time: And when he seems to be turning a Man into a desolate
and ruinous condition, yet even then is he building and preparing him to be a
more excellent structure.

The Christians spiritual growth, when seemingly dead and declining.
AS in the lopping of a Tree, there seems to be a kind of diminution and
destruction, Omnis medicina habet ad tempus amaritudin^m; sed etc. Hieronym*
yet the end and issue of it is better growth; And as the weakening of the body
by Physic, seems to tend to death, yet it produces better health, and more
strength; and as the ball, by falling downward, rises upward; and Water in
pipes desc^nds, that it may ascend: So the Christians spiritual growth, when
seemingly dead and declining, Descendit ut ascendat.
and to stand a stay, is still carried on by the hidden method of God to
increase: For every true Christian is a member of a thriving body, Ephesians. 4.
16. Col. 2. 19.
in which there is no Atrophie, but a continual issuing of spirits from the
head, so that life being wrought by the Spirit of life, never dies; but is
always upon the growing hand, ripening and increasing, even in the midst of
tentations and trouble.


AStone needs not to be driven downward, Ubi cadaver ibi erunt et Aquilae.
because that motion is suitable to it, and it affects the Center; the Eagles
fly willingly to their prey; an hungry Man needs not either persuasion or
compulsion to eat his meat: So did but Men delight in God, Jos. Symonds Case
and cure of a wounded Canscience.
What means their hanging back from him; How is it that the Counsels and
thoughts of their hearts, the pressing persuasions of the Word, the strong
motions of the Spirit, the shining Examples of the godly, the wise advice of
Faithful friends, the sweet inducements of precious Promises, the sad menaces
of fearful Evils; yea, Te pater Aeneas et avunculus excitat Hector. Virg.
the heavy strokes of an angry God: yea, the tender Mercies of a melting
Father, yea the bleeding wounds of a crucified Redeemer; How is it that none of
these do more prevail with them to a more ready walking with their God: Surely,
such backwardness, such unwillingnesse in the service of God, cannot but be
hateful unto him.


AS the Boat cannot move rightly, Qui Deum amare negligit, proximum diligere
nescit. Greg. lib. 10. moralium.
when the Oars only on one side are plied; Or as the Foul, if she use only
one wing, cannot fly up: So Religion consists of duties to be performed, some
to God, and some to Man; some for the first Table of the Law, some for the
second; otherwise that Religion will never profit, that has one hand wrapped
up, that should be toward Man in all offices of Charity, though the other be
used toward God in all offices of Piety.


IT is the observation of a Learned Man, Edw. Brerewoo^, Enquiry in La^guages.
That if the World were divided into thirty equal parts, nineteen of those
thirty would prove to be overspread with Heathenish Idolatry, six of the eleven
remaining with the doctrine of Mahomet, so there would remain but five parts of
the thirty, wherein were any thing of Christianity, And among those Christians,
so many seduced Papists on one hand, and formal Protestants on the other, that
surely but few are saved: Nay, such is the paucity of true believers, Esaias 17.
6.
that as that Olive Tree, (mentioned by the Prophet) with two or three berries
on the uppermost bough; Satan may be said to have the harvest, Horat. Ode. 1.
and God only a few gleanings. It should therefore make us strive the more
tanquam pulvere Olympico, that we may be of the number of those few that shall
inherit Salvation.


THere is mention made of certain Spaniards, S. Pulchas Pilgrimage.
that live near unto a place where there is great store of Fish, yet are so
lazy, that they will not be at the ^ains to catch them, but buy of their
Neighbors: And such is the sinful stupidity of most Men, Non dormi^ntibus
provenit regnum Coel^rum, n^cotio et desi^ia tor^enti us, beatitudo
acternitatis ingeritur. Prosp. de vita contemplat.
such the spiritual sloth upon them, that though Christ be near them, though
Salvation be offered in the Gospel, and (as it were) brought to their very
houses, yet they will not work out their salvation; This was the case of the
Israelites, It is said, that they despised the pleasant Land, Psalm. 106. 24.
And what should be the reason? Canaan was worth the looking after, for it was a
Paradise of delight, a type of Heaven; I, but they thought it would cost them a
great deal of trouble and hazard in the getting, and they would rather go
without it; And thus many had rather go sleeping to Hell, then sweating to
Heaven.

To be more careful for the Body then the Soul, a thing justly reproveable.
THere is a Parable of a Woman, which traveling with child brought forth a
twin, and both children being presented to her, she falls deeply and fondly in
love with the one, but is careless and dis^respectfull of the other; this she
will nurse her self, Paul de Wann Sermon. de tempore.
but that is put forth; her love grows up with the child she kept herself, she
decks it fine, she feeds it choicely; but at last, by overmuch pampering of it
the child surfets, becomes mortally sick, and when it was dying, she remembers
her self and sends to look after the other child that was at nurse, Speculum
Exemp^orum.
to the end she might now cherish it, but when the Messenger came, she finds it
dying and gasping likewise, and examining the Truth, she understands that
through the Mothers carelessness and neglect to look after it, the poor child
was starved, thus was the fond partial Mother to her great grief, sorrow, and
shame, deprived of both her hopeful babes at once: Thus every Christian is
this Mother, the children are our Body and Soul; the former of these it is,
that Men and Women fall deeply and fondly in love with, whilst indeed they are
careless and neglect the other, this they dress and feed, nothing is too good
or too dear for it; but at the last the body surfets, comes by some means or
other to it is deathbed, when there is very little or no hope of life, then Men
begin to remember the Soul, and would think of some course to save it, the
Minister he is sent for in all haste to look after it; but alas, H. Hardwick
ut antea.
he finds it in part dead, in part dying, and the very truth is, the owner
through neglect and carelessness has starved the Soul, and it is ready to go
to Hell before the Body is fit for the Grave. And so the foolish fond Christian
to his eternal shame and sorrow loses both his Body and Soul for ever.

The nature and properties of the Holy Spirit set forth for our instruction in
the similitude of a Dove.
THough Pliny and all the Heathen writers were silent, L. Andrews Winton. Sermon.
at Court on Whitsonday, 1615.
the Holy Word of God has enough to set out unto us the nature and properties
of the Dove; There is first of all Noah's Dove with an Olive branch in her
mouth, a peaceable one. 2. David's dove for the color with Feathers silver
white, Genesis 8. 11. Psalm. 68.
not speckled as a bird of diverse colors, but white, the emblem of sincerity,
and there is Solomon's dove for the eye a single and direct eye, not learing as a
Fox, and looking diverse ways. 3. Esayes Dove for the voice in patience,
mourning; not in impatience, murmuring, Esaias 38.
and repining. Lastly, our Savior Christ's Dove for bill and claw, Matthew. 10.
innocent and harmless, not bloody or mischievous: Now qualis species talis
spiritus, as the Dove so the Holy Ghost. 1. A Spirit that loves (...), men of
one accord. 2. Et qui ^ugit fictum, Act. 2.
cannot abide new tricks, mere fictions indeed, feyned by feyned Christians,
party-propositions, half in the mouth, and half in the mind. 3. And when he
speaks, he speaks for us with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed,
Romans 8. Act. 2.
such is his love and so earnest. 4. And hurts none, not when he was in the
resemblance of a Dove; No not when he was Fire, he was harmless Fire at the
same time. And thus it is that the nature and properties of the Holy Spirit are
set forth for our instruction in the resemblance of a Dove teaching us to be
peaceable, to love singleness in meaning, speaking and dealing, to suf^er
harm, but to do none.


NAturalists report of the bird Ibis, Conrad. Gesnerus hist. lib.
whereof there are many in Egypt, especially in the City of Alexandria, that it
^ateth up all the garbage of the City, but leaves somewhat behind it, that is
more noisome then any filth it had eaten; Others write that it will devour
every Serpent it meets with; but from the egg of this bird comes the most
hurtful of all Serpents, Oppiana. Pierius Hieroglyph. Strabo. l. 17.
the Basilisk, the sight whereof kills: Thus it is to be heartily wished that
those who are entrusted for the Peoples good, whether in Church or State be not
like unto this bird, seem to do something good but much hurt withal; but that
in them as they are Gods upon Earth, may always be found that which the
Psalmist has of God in Heaven, Thou art good and do good, Psalm 86. 5. that
their lives may be Examples of good, -- In vulgu^ manant exempla regentum*
Claud.
because that otherwise their authority will be less prevailing for
suppressing those evils whereunto their bad Examples give encouragement.


JUstinian is said to have made a Law, Joachim Mynsingerus in Iustitut. lib. 1.
in tit. de recum.
that no Master-workman should put up his name within the body of that building
which he made out of another Man's cost; And our own History tells us that when
William of Wickham then Chaplain to Edward the third, was by him made overseer
of the work for the repair of Windsor Castle, that those three words, which he
caused to be inscribed upon the great Tower, Fr. Godwinus d^ Praesul^bus
Angliae, in vita ejus.
This made Wickham, had not he construed them another way (as that no he made
the work, but the work made him) had quite lost him the Kings favor: Thus it
is that God is jealous of his honor, he cannot endure that the Creature should
have any share primarily therein, but as derived and participated only; let
every Man then, especially, such whose greatness makes them too apt to take
too much unto them selves, D^o datori sit ^^us, honor, etc.
ascribe all unto God, give all the glory to God, and when they begin to give
unto God, never give over giving, Psalm. 115. 1.
till they have given all that they are, all that is his due, all honor and
glory, praise, power and dominion for evermore.


IT was a divine saying of Epictetus that Heathenish Philosopher, Joh. Alstedii
Theolog. not.
admiring the singing of birds, Si luscinia essem, etc. If I had been made a
Nightingale, I should have sung like a Nightingale, now that I am made a Man, a
reasonable Creature, shall I not serve God, and praise him in that station
wherein he has set me? Thus he an Heathen, Iustum est ut creatura laudet
Creatorem; Ipse enim ad laudandum se creavit. Aug.
and thus we Christians are to consider the Creatures leading the way unto the
duty of thankfulness. First, what they are mutually to each other, and then
what they are to us, and lastly what they are to God, in their kind ever
thankful; so that it is conceived, that one of the foulest and shamefullest
things, that the Creatures shall lay to man's charge at the day of Judgment,
Origin.
is, that all other Creatures from the Creation have been obedient to God
without the least digression, only Man (for whom and for whose service all
else were made) has failed in his service and proved rebellious and
unthankful.

Riches, the danger of them being not well used.
IN an Artichock, S. O^es exposit. on Jude.
there is a little picking meat not so wholesome as delicious, and nothing to
that it shows for; more then the tenth part is unprofitable leaves; and
besides, there is a core in the midst of it, that will choke a Man if he take
not good heed. Such a thing is Wealth that Men so covetously desire; It is like
some kind of Fish, so full of bones and unseen, that no Man can eat of them
without great danger: The Rich Man's Wealth is very troublesome to the outward
Man like a long garment that is too side, Si recte frueris, non est ut copi^
major Ab Iov^ donari possit tibi. Ausonius. Prove. 10. 15.
if he tread upon it, he may chance to catch a fall, a fall into much
discontent and envy of the World; But to the Soul, Riches, if not well employed
prove very pernicious, making a Man vainly confident; thinking that he is so
wal^'d and moated about, that he is out of all Gunshot, when he is more open to
danger then a poorer Man; then they make him proud: And Pride, says S.
Bernard, is the Rich man's cosen, it blows him up like a bladder with a quill,
then he grows secure, and so falls into sudden ruin.

Mortification, the great necessity thereof.
SOme Physicians hold, The Newlanders cure.
that in every two years, there is such store of ill humors and
excrementitious matter engendered in the body of Man, that (if not by Physic
purged out) a vessel of one hundredth ounces will scarce contain them, so that
according to this account in a short time the whole body would be morbus
complicatus, nothing but diseases: If it be so then in the Body, What shall we
think of the Soul? Certainly, Scelerum coll^vies, farrag^ vitiorum, errorum
turba* Isid. de Sum: bono.
there is a World of Wickedness, and superfluity of naughtiness, even a bed of
spiritual diseases, daily gathered and got together in the Sin-sick Soul;
purged therefore it must needs be by the practice of Mortification, according
to that of the Apostle, Morti^ie therefore your Earthly members: Col. 3. 5.
not as those Religious Roman Bedlams that whip and lash their bodies, but to
dead that body of Sin, that it may not have dominion over us, nor reign in our
mortal bodies.

The excellency of Unity in Church and Commonweal.
PLiny writes of a certain stone called, Not. hist. lib. 2.
Lapis Tyrrhenus, that grandis innatat, comminutus mergitur; While it is whole
and entire, it swims aloft, but if it be broken into pieces, every piece and
parcel sinks to the bottom: So the Church and Commonweal by Unity float and
swim aloft, and are supported and kept above water; but if they crumble into
sects and factions, M. Adamus in vita. Strigelii.
and divide into parts and parties, like those that fled to Franckford in Q.
Mary's days, or that uncommunion-like Sacramentarian difference, Dr. Elborow
Visitat. S^rm. 1637.
that made Strigelius wish himself in his grave, they are near unto
destruction: For Unity is the life and Soul of both Church and State, Daunum et
Populus est, toll unum et turba est, a disgregation rather then a
Congregation; Confusion rather then Order or Government.

Love, the great want thereof to be deplored.
AS in the days of Deborah there was neither Spear nor Shield. Judge. 5.
As in the days of Saul there was no Smith in Israel. 1 Samuel 13. 8.
As in the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 8.
there was no Manna to be found. 2 Samuel 1. 21.
As on the Mountains of Gilboa no rain. In Gilead no Balm. No flowers in
Bashan; in Sichem no corn, S. Otes explanat. on ep. of Jude.
being sowed with salt. In Tyrus no ships. Ier. 8. 22.
In Cimmeria no light: So in England no Love, Judge. 9. 45.
or (which is to be deplored) but a little; We have plenty of all things but of
Love; If there be an hundred Men in a Town or place, Ezekiel. 28.
scarce two love together and agree as they should; and in this worse then
Devils, seven of them could agree in Mary Magdalen, and a Legion in another,
Matthew. 26. -- Rara est concordia fratrum. Ovid. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.
which is seven thousand six hundred twenty two, as Vegetius and Varro affirm;
but scarce seven Men of seven hundred love as brethren: It cannot be said with
S. Paul; As touching brotherly love you need not that I write unto you. For
most Men in our days are either brethren and not good fellows, or else good
fellows and not brethren; The composition is rare, there be few Philadelphians
in the World; Schismatics are all for the brotherhood, and nothing for
Fellowship: on the contrary, wicked Atheists are all for Fellowship, and
nothing for Brotherhood; So that such are the divisions that are to be found in
the midst of us, not as Labans sheep into three Companies, some white, some
black, some speckled, but into threescore (if possible into more) so that there
is little Love, and less agreement; but God (it is to be hoped) will make us
Friends in Heaven, where all Injuries shall be forgotten.


SElymus the great Turk, R. Kooles hist. Turk.
as he lay languishing, (his incurable disease still increasing) leaning his
head in the lap of Pyrrhus the Bassa, whom of all others he most loved; I see,
said he, O Pyrrhus, I must shortly die without remedy: Whereupon the great
Bassa took occasion to talk with him of many great matters; And amongst others,
that it would please him to give order for the well bestowing of the great
wealth, taken from the Persian Merchants in diverse places of his Empire;
persuading him to bestow the same upon some notable Hospital for relief of the
Poor: To whom Selymus replied; Would thou, Pyrrhus, that I should bestow
other Men's goods, wrongfully taken from them, upon works of Charity and
devotion for my own vainglory and praise? Assuredly, I will never do it; Nay,
see they be given again to the right owners; which was forthwith done
accordingly: What a shame then is this to Christians, who minding nothing less
then Restitution, Dejustis laboribus saciendae sunt Eleemosynae, etc. Aug. de
divit.
make ex rapina holocaustum, out of a world of ill-gotten goods, they cull out
some small fragments to erect some poor Hospital, having cheated Thousands,
build Almshouses for some few, and then set a glorious Inscription in the
Front; whereas this one word, Aceldama, would be far more proper: But this is
not the right way of Almsgiving; Take ^eed how you do your Alms, Matthew. 6. 1.
Notae Ministr^rum Land. in loc.
says our Savior; where the word Alms, is in the Syriack, Justice; showing,
that Alms should be of things well gotten, when a Man is able to say, This,
Aug. lib. 1. Sermon. Dom. in monte.
by the blessing of God, is the fruit of my own labors: And then too, He that
gives Al^s to the poor, must do it with discretion, omni petenti non omnia
petenti, to every one that does ask, but not every thing that he does ask.


DAvid and Jonathan had but one heart. Eusebius and Pamphilus Martyr ^ut one
name: Pilades and Orestes but one life: Ruth and Naomi but one affection, 1 Samuel 18. S. O^es explanat. on Jude.
Basil and Nazianzene of whom it is said, that anima un^ erat inclusa in duobus
corporibiu, there was but one Soul shut up in two bodies; And there was a whole
Multitude but as one Man. O the excellency of Unanimity, Act. 4. 32.
Unanimity of Truth, not of Error! Happy days were those, when amongst the
People there was Cor^unum, via una; One heart and one way to walk in, when they
were all but as one Man, which made their very Enemies to say of them, Ecce ut
invicem se diligunt, Eusebius in hist.
See how these Christians love one another, how they knit and cloze together:
But now it is come to Ecce ut invicem se oderunt, behold how they hate one
another, divide and separate one from another, the Master to the Church, the
Mistress to the Chamber* the Servant to the Fields, yet all in one house; some
to the Sacrament, -- en quo discordia cives Perduxit miseros! Virg. Eclog. 1.
some to breaking of bread, and some to neither, yet all in one Parish; their
hearts are divided, the cord of Love is untwisted; they may sing and say, Come
holy Ghost; but no marvail that he comes no faster, they are not of one mind;
Accord is wanting, and therefore not fit for the Spirit to come into them.

The formal Christian described.
IN the History of the World encompassed by Sir Francis Drake, Anas redivivus.
by Ph. Nichols. Joh. Trap Com. on ^vang*
it is recorded, that in a certain Island to the Southward of Celebes, among
the Trees, night by night did show themselves, an infinite swarm of
Fiery-seeming worms, flying in the Air, whose bodies, no bigger then an
ordinary fly, o^d make a show and give such light, as if every twigg on every
Tree had been a lighted Candle, or as if that place had been the starry sphere.
This was but a semblance, but an appearance; no more is that of all Formal
Christians, but a flaunt, but a flourish, Odi virum duplicem natum.
their knowledge is but a form, their Godliness a figure, their Zeal a Flash,
all they do but a shadow of what they should do; They make use of God for their
own purposes, Bonum sermonibus, inimicum moribus. Pers. Sa^. 5.
and care only to make divine Authority, a color for their own hypocritical
designs: In whose silent faces are written the characters of Religion, which
their tongues and gestures pronounce, but their hands recant, whose mouths
belie their hearts, and fingers oppose their mouths.

God afflicting his Children to try their sincerity.
AS a Father will sometimes cross his Son, T. Gataker David's remembrancer. A
Sermon.
to try the Child's disposition, to see how he will take it, whether he will
mutter and grumble at it, and grow humorous and wayward, neglect his duty to
his Father, because his Father seems to neglect him; or make offer to run
away and withdraw himself from his Fathers obedience, because he seems to carry
himself harshly and roughly toward him, and to provoke him thereunto: So does
God oft-times cross his Children, In furnace ardet palea; et purgatur aurum,
etc. Aug. in Psalm. 60.
and seems to neglect them, to try their disposition, what metal they are
made of, how they stand affected toward him, whether they will neglect him,
because he seems to neglect them; cease to depend on him, because he seems
not to look after them; and say with Ioram's propnane Pursivant, This evil is
of God, 2 Kings 6. 33.
and why should I depend upon him any longer? or whether they will constantly
cleave unto him, though he seem to cast them off; and say with Esaias, yet will I
wait upon God, Esaias 8. 17. Job 13. 15.
though he hide his face from us, and I will look for him, though he look not
for us. And with Job, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: And with the
Heathen, Seneca ad Marc^l. cap. 13.
iratum colere numen, to worship even an angry God; and with the Cynick to his
Master Antistenes, Nullus tam durus erit baculus, etc. There shall be no cudgel
to be found so crabbed, Diog. Laert.
as shall beat me from you.

The Original and excellency of the Hebrew Tongue.
THere are three Tongues that are in a more especial manner, Edm. Leigh.
Critica Sacra in vet. Test. in praesat.
famous all over the World, The Latin, Greek, and Hebrew: The first propter
Regnum, because of the Monarchy of the Romans; who as they subjected the people
which they did conquer to their Laws and Customs, so did they force* them to
learn their Language: The second propter doctrinam, because in it, the great
Philosophers and wise Men of the World left the Monuments of their Wisdom
dome and Learning to Posterity: The third propter Deum, because in it God
delivered his Law, and the interpretation of it by Moses and the Prophets, to
the People of Israel his chosen; The Latin is a common tongue, Joh. Buxtorph.
de origin, etc.
the Greek a copious tongue; but Hebrew the most ancient and holy tongue; For
antiquity, the tongue of Adam; for sanctity, Joh. Drusii observe. sacrae. lib.
15.
the tongue of God. In this tongue, God spoke to the Prophets and Patriarks; In
this tongue, the Angels spoke to Men; In this tongue, the Prophets wrote the
Old Testament; And in this tongue, as is thought, Will. Fulk on Rhem. Test.
Apoc. 19. 4.
shall the Saints speak, and sing praises unto God in Heaven.


SEverus the Emperor had that sentence of our Savior often in his mouth,
Wol^g. Lazius de reb. gest. Romanorum Aelius Spartianus.
Quod tibi non^vis fieri, alteri ne feceris, Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, Matthew. 7. 12. and commanded it to be
proclaimed by the Crier, whenever he punished such of his Soldiers, as had
offered injury to others: And without all doubt, Quod sibi quis noli^ fieri,
non inferat ulli. Prosper.
For a Man to do as he would be done by, is the Royal Law, the standard of
Equity, the golden Rule, according to which we must square and frame all our
actions and transactions with others; And were but Men as Faithful Disciples of
active charity, as they are for the most part Doctors of the passive, the work
would soon be done: It is confessed, J. Trap on Evang.
that Charity begins at home, How is that? In regard of order, but not in
regard of time; For so soon as a Man begins to love himself, he must love his
Neighbor as himself, neither may any Man at any time hide himself from his own
flesh, Esaias 58. 7.
that is, from his Neighbor of the same stock with himself.


THe Nurse goes aside from the Child to teach it to find its feet, Bas.
Sel^uc. Ho^. 21.
and see how it will go alone; The Eagle, when her young ones are fledged,
turns them out of the nest, not bears them on her wings, as at other times
she was wont to do; but that she may enure them to fly, flies from them, and
leaves them to shift for themselves: Thus God seems to withdraw himself from
his Children, Tentat ut probet Deus. Aug.
no exercise those excellent Graces of Patience and confidence in him, that
like Tapers burn clearest in the dark; to teach them to swim without bladders,
and to go without crutches; as not to trust in themselves, so not to trust in
the means, but in him that works by them, and can as well work for them
without them, when they fail.


BEnzo relating the Spaniards cruelty upon the poor Natives of America, says,
In hist. novi orbis.
that in one of their Islands, called Hispaniola, of twenty hundred thousand,
when the People stood untouched, he did not think that at the time, when he
penned his History, there were above one ^undred and fifty Souls (...) alive;
Whereupon he breaks out into a passionate exclamation upon the horror of such
Inhumanity; O quot Nerones, quot Domitiani, quot Commodi, quot Bassiani, Ah
nimium saciles! qui tristia crimina caedis, Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua?
Ovid. Fast. 2.
quot immites Dionys^i eas terras peragravere! O, How many Neroes, how many
Domitians, with other the like infamous, egregious Tyrants, have harrowed those
Co^ntries? But had Benzo lived to have written the history of our times, he
might have truly said; Barbarous and inhumane Christendom! Men of blood and
cruelty! whose hearts are so bound and confirmed with sinews of Iron, that they
are no more moved with the life of a Man, then if a dog had fallen before them;
so fallen from their kind, as if Rocks had fathered them, and they had sucked
the Dragons in the Deserts, rather then the daughters of Men; Non in
compendium, Seneca de Clem. lib. 2.
sed occidendi causa occidentes, murdering upon every occasion, and killing
because they delight in killing; whereas the care and study not only of
Christians, but of Civil and good natured People, should be, Parce Civium
sanguini, spare the blood of Men, because they are all Kinsmen and Brethren in
the flesh.

How far there may be a lawful compliance with others of different Judgment.
ST. Augustine preaching to the Roman Colonies in Africa, Conr. Zuingeri
theatrum ^um. vitae.
spoke broken bar^arous Latin, to the end they might understand him: When I
come to Rome, says S. Ambrose to Monica the Mother of S. Augustine, I fast on
the Saturday; When I am at Millain, Theod. Beza in vita.
I fast not: Calvin was cast out of Geneva for refusing to administer the Lords
Supper with Water-cakes or unleavened bread; de quo, restitutus, nunquam
contendendum putavit, of which, being afterward restored, he thought best to
make no more words, but to yield; though he let them know, that he had rather
it were otherwise: Thus it was, that Christ himself is said to come eating and
drinking; Matthew. 11. 19. Luke 5. 30.
and to sit at me^t with Publicans and Sinners. And thus must all of us do,
with S. Paul, be all things to all Men, 1 Cor. 9. 22. J. Trap Com. on the
Evangel. Romae Tiburamo, etc.
that we may win some; to turn our selves into all shapes and fashions both of
speech and spirit to win Men unto God, to make use of things indifferent, to do
what we can to preserve our good esteem with others, that we may the sooner
prevail with them: And whatsoever Church we come to, ejus morem servare, to do
as they do, not giving offense carelessly, nor taking offense causelessly; the
defect whereof is charged upon the best, Luke 16. 8.
when Christ said, The Children of this World, are wiser in their generation
then the Children of Light.

Rulers and Men in Authority, subject to many failings in Government.
THe Bythinians being convented before Claudius the Emperor, Tacitus.
Suetonius. Xyphilin. in Claud.
cry down Iunius Clio, that he may be President over them no longer: The noise
being somewhat confused, the Emperor understood not their desires, and
thereupon demanded of those next him, What the People would have; Narcissus a
Familiar, or rather an auricular buzze of the Court, answered, like a false
Echo, That the People gave his Excellency great thanks for their last
President, and requested the continuance of him to be still over them: The
Emperor meaning well, but ill-informed (to gratify them as he thought)
assigned them their old President again, whereby the Emperor was abused, and
the People still oppressed, whereas they had been eased, had it not been for
the mis-interpretation of a crooked Interpreter: Thus it is that Rulers and Men
in power, Geo. Strodes A^at. of Mortality.
by reason of Flesh and blood do travail with infirmity, and bring forth
escapes: The wisest Governors that in speculation of Justice are admirable, in
their practice may be quite transported; They that in thesi are sharp, in the
application are oft-times very dull: They may do wrong non voluntate nocendi,
Magistratus est medicus civitatis; beneque praeest, qui juvat, etc. Thucid.
lib. 6.
not with purpose to do ill; sed necessitate nesciendi, because they cannot
come to the knowledge of the right; Many byasses they have to draw them awry;
Affection at one time may dazzle their eyes, and wrong Intelligence at another
time abuse their ear.


Smoke is of the same nature with flame; J. Trap exposit. on Matthew.
For what is flame but smoke set on fire? The least spark of Fire, if
cherished, will endeavor to rise above the air, as well as the greatest: So, a
little Grace may be true Grace, as the filings of Gold are as good Gold (though
nothing so much of it) as the whole wedge: A Reed shaken with the wind is taken
for a thing very contemptible at the best, Matthew. 11. 7. How much more when it
is bruised? The wick of a Candle is little worth, and yet less when it comes
to smoke, as yielding neither light nor heat, but only stink and annoyance,
such as men bear not with, but ^read out: So does not God, Tarda s^let magnis
rebus in^sse fides. Ovid. ep. 16.
who has a singular sagacity, and can soon resent the least of provocations,
yet the bruised Reed he will not break, and the smoking Flax he will not
quench; Nay, the very pantings, inquietations, and the unsatissiablenesse in
the matter of Grace spring from the truth of Grace, and are such as God makes
high esteem of.


A Physician or Surgeon, T. Gataker. David's Remembrancer. A Sermon.
when he meets with a soar festered, or full of dead flesh* he applies some
sharp Corrosive to eat out the dead flesh, that would otherwise spoil the cure;
Which being done, the Patient, it may be, impatient of anguish and pain, cries
out to have it removed; No, says the Surgeon, it must stay there till it have
eaten to the quick, and effected that thoroughly for which it is applied;
commanding those that are about him, to see that nothing be stirred till he
come again to him; Nihil prodest medicamentum, nisi qui^ ejus prius concoxerit
amaritudinem, etc. Thryver. in Apophthegm.
In the mean time, the Patient being much pained counts every minute an hour
till the Surgeon come back again; and if he stay long, thinks that he has
forgotten him, or that he is taken up with other Patients, and will not return
in any reasonable time; When as it may be, he is all the while but in the next
room to him, attending the hour-glasse purposely set up till the Plais^er have
had its full operation: Thus in the self-fame manner does God deal oft-times
with his dearest Children, Psalm. 3 9. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 17.
as David, and S. Paul. The one was instant more then once or twice to be rid
of that evil; and the other cries out as fast, Take away the plague from me,
for I am even consumed, etc. but God makes both of them to stay his time. He
saw in them as in all others much dead flesh, much corrupt matter behind, that
was as yet to be eaten out of their Souls, he will have the Cross to have its
full work upon us, not to come out of the fire as we went in, not to come off
the fire as foul and as full of scum, as we were first set on.


TRees and other Vegetables in the Winter time, Geo. Strode Anatomy of
Mortality.
appear to the eyes and view of all men, as if they were withered and quite
dead; yet when the Spring time comes, they become alive again, and (as before)
do bring forth their buds, blos^oms, leaves and fruit; the Reason is, because
the body, grain, and arms of the Tree are all joined and fastened to the root,
where the sap and moisture lies all the Winter time, and from thence by reason
of so ^ear conjunction, it is derived in the Springtime to all the parts of
the Tree: Even so the bodies of Men have their Winter also, Surrexit Christus,
exultet Universus mundus, etc. Aug. in Paschate.
and that is in Death, in which time they are turned into dust, and so remain
for a time dead and rotten; yet in the Springtime, that is, in the last day,
at the Resurrection of all Flesh, then by means of the mystical Union with
Christ, his divine and quickening Virtue, shall stream and flow from thence to
all the bodies of his Elect, and chosen Members, and cause them to live again,
and that to life eternal.

The inestimable value of Christ Jesus.
CHarles Duke of Burgundy being slain in battle by the Swissers at Nantz, Joh.
Henr. Al^tedii Chr^nologia.
Anno 1476. had a Jewel of very great value, which being found about him, was
sold by a Soldier to a Priest for a Crown in money, the Priest sold it for two
Crowns: Afterward it was sold for seven hundred Florens, then for Twelve
thousand Ducats, and last of all for twenty thousand Ducats, and set into the
Popes triple Crown, Prove. 8. 11. Omnia ^abemus in Christo et omnia in nobis
Christus, etc. Ambros. Matthew. 13. 46. Genesis 27. 37.
where it is to be seen at this day: But Christ Jesus is a commodity of far
more value, better then Rubies, says Solomon, and all the things that may be
desired, are not to be compared to him; He is that Pearl of price which the
Merchant purchased with all that ever he had. No Man can buy such gold too
dear; Joseph, then a precious Jewel of the World, was far more precious, had
the Ishmaelitish Merchants known so much, then all the Balms and Myrrhes that
they transported, and so is Christ, as all will yield that know him.

To depend upon Gods bare Word.
THe Earth that we tread on, T. Gataker. David's Remembrancer; A Sermon.
though it be a massy, dull, heavy body, yet it hangs in the midst of the
air, environed by the Heavens, and keeps its place steady, and never stirs
an inch from it, having no props or shores to uphold it, no beams or bars to
fasten it, nothing to stay or establish it, but the Word of God; In like
manner, must we learn to depend upon the bare Word of God. Nil desperandum
Christo duce, etc. Juvenal.
And when all other ayds and comforts have taken their leaves of us, then to
rest and rely upon God himself, and his infallible, unfailable Word of
promise, not on the outward pledges and pawns of his Providence, nor on the
ordinary effects and fruits of his favor; so shall we see light even in the
midst of darkness, and be able to discern the sweet Sunshine of his blessed
countenance through the thickest clouds of his fiercest Wrath and displeasure.

The day of Death better then the day of life.
PLato makes mention of Agamedes and Trophonius, In Axico.
who after they had builded the Temple of Apollo Delphicus, they begged of God,
that he would grant to them, that which would be most beneficial for them; who
after this suit made, went to bed, and there slept their last, being both found
dead the next Morning; Whereupon it was concluded, That it was better to die
then to live; Guil. Cambdeni Elizab.
Whilst I call things past to mind, (said that incomparable Q. Elizabeth) I
behold things present; and whilst I expect things to come, I hold them
happiest that go hence soonest: No^ne mori sa^ius, etc? Claudian. Numb. 10. 15.
And most true it is, that Death being aeterni Natalis, the birthday of
Eternity, as Seneca at unawares calls it; And if Death like unto the gathering
Host of Dan come last into the Field to gather the lost and forlorn hope of
this World, that they may be found in a better, needs must then be the day of
Death better then the day of life; Therefore as a witty Sir Fr. Bacon.
Man closed up a paper of Verses concerning Worldly calamities, and natural
vexation^, What then remains, but that we still should cry
Not to be born, or being born, to dye?



IN or about the year 1626, A book formerly printed and entitled; A
prepara^^on to the Cross of Christ, composed by John Frith, Martyr, was
brought to the M^rket in Cambridge, in the belly of a Fish, and that a little
before the Commencement time, when by reason of the confluence of much People,
notice might be given to all places of the Land, Jer. Dyke ^ast-Serm. at Westminster.
which (as a late Reverend Divine observed) could in his apprehension be
construed for no less then an Heavenly warning, and to have this voice with
it, England prepare for the Cross; A great work of God it was to be sure, and
a fair warning to us of this Nation before the sad days of trouble came, had
but Men made good use of it; but, surdo narratur, No Man prepared for the
Cross; since which time here has been enough of the Cross, Crosse-doing, and
Crosse-dealing one with another, and much ado has been about pulling down and
defacing material* Crosses, (such as in themselves were but Civil, K. Charles
(...).
not Religious marks, as that Princely Job defined them) when they should
rather have been busied in pulling down the old Man out of their hearts, and so
made way for spiritual Crosses, and been prepared for the worst of times that
could be.


PHilo the Jew being employed as an Ambassador or Messenger to Caius Caligula,
Eusebii hi^t. lib* 2. cap. 5. Joseph. Antiqu^t. l. 18.
then Emperor of the Romans, his entertainment was but slight; for he had no
sooner spoke on the behalf of his Country, but was commanded to depart the
Court; Whereupon he told his People, That he was verily persuaded, that God
would now do something for them, because the Emperor was so earnestly bent
against them: And certainly, Gods help is then nearest, when Man's is furthest
off; the one's extremity made the ot^er's opportunity; Ubi desin^t P^ilosophus,
Quum duplicantur lateres, tunc venit Moses. August.
incipit Medicus, etc. Where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins;
and where the Physician ends, there the Minister begins; and where Man's
aid ends, there Gods begins; Deliverance is often nearest, when destruction
seems surest.


ABraham was ready to have sacrificed his only son Isaac. Geo. Strode's A^at.
of Mortality.
And God gave his only Son Christ Jesus to death for our salvation. It is
most true, that the death of an only Son must nee^s be grievous, and the
cause of great heaviness and lamentation: (...)
But let all disconsolate Parents take notice what Elkanah said to Anna, Am not
I better to you then ten Sons? So does God say, What though I have taken away
your only Son, the child of your delight, there is no just cause of
complaint, I have taken but my own, I will be better then ten hundred sons to
you, and you shall one day find, that he is but gone before, as your Feo^^ee in
trust to take possession, and keep a place for you in Heaven.

How it is that Men may be said to learn of little Children, dumb shows, etc.
SExtus Tarquinius, Polyaenus lib. 8.
the son of Lucius, being suborned by his Father, pretending to be banished,
fled fraudulently to the Gabii, where having screwed himself so much into their
bosoms, Frontinus lib. 1. cap. 1. Plin. junior de viris illustribus.
as he thought was sufficient for his design, sent secretly to know his Fathers
pleasure, who leading the Messenger into the Garden, walked a while, and not
speaking one word, with his staff struck off the heads of the Dazies which
grew there; Horat. lib. 16.
the Messenger reports this to his Son, who thereupon put the chief Noblemen
of the Ga^ii to death, and so by force and Injustice usurped a power over that
Commonweal: Such was the tacit Counsel that Periander the Corinthian gave
unto Thrasibulus the Tyrant of Athens, Aristotel. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 13.
when pulling the upper ears, he made all the standing corn equal; intimating
thereby, what a Tyrant must do, that would live safe and quiet: Thus it was,
but in a better way, Benedict. Aretius in ^^c. Matthew. 18. 4.
and a far better sense, that when the Disciples were building Castles in the
air, quaerentes non quaerenda, seeking who should be highest in Heaven, when
they should rather have been enquiring how to get thither, Christ sets a little
Child before them, who neither thinks great things of himself, nor seeks great
things for himself; con^uting hereby their preposterous ambition and
affectation of Primacy: And thus it is, that dumb shows may be said to speak
out much to the purpose; and speechless Children read many a significant
Lecture to the Sons of Men; as of simplicity, humility, innocence, ignoscency,
etc. not of childishness, Abrah. S^ku^^eti annals. Sedul. lib. 3. cap. 1.
peevishness, open-heartednesse, etc. Non praecipitur ut habeant aetatem, sed
innocentiam parvulorum, not of their age, but innocence; Whereupon some
misunderstanding the Text in a Nichodemicall way, (as one Goldsmith an
Anabaptist, and Masseus a Franciscan Friar) to abundance of more then childish
folly.

Gods Judgments, the causes of them to be considered.
LAy a book open before a Child, T. Gataker. David's Remembrancer.
or one that cannot read, he may stare and gaze upon it, but he can make no use
of it at all, because he understands nothing in it; yet bring it to one that
can read, and understands the language that is written in it, he will read you
many stories and instructions out of it; It is dumb and silent to the one, but
speaks to, and talks with, the other: In like manner it is with Gods
Judgments, as S. Augustine well applies it; All sorts of Men see them, In Ioh.
cap. 24. Nocumenta, documenta.
but few are able aright to read them, or to understand them what they say;
Every Judgment of God is a real Sermon of Reformation and Repentance; every
Judgment has a voice, but every one understands not this voice; as S. Paul's
companions, when Christ spoke to him, Act. 9. 7.
they heard a voice and no more. But it is the duty of every good Christian, to
listen to the Rod and him that sent it, Mich. 6. 9.
to spell out the meaning of Gods a^ger, to enquire and find out the cause of
the Cross, and the ground of Gods hiding his face; Why it is that he deals
so harshly with them, and carries himself so austerely toward the^*

The Love of God, the only true Love.
EVery beam of Light proceeding from the body of the Sun, Tho. Staplet^ni.
Prompt. moral. Dom. 17 post Pentecost.
is either direct, broken, or reflex; direct, when it shines out upon the
Center in a lineary motion without any obliquity; broken, when it meets with
some grosser body, so that it cannot shine outright, but is enforced to
incline to one part or other, and therefore called a collateral or broken
light; reflex, when lighting upon some more gross body, it is beaten back, and
so reflects upon its first principle: Thus let the Sons of Men pretend never so
much to the Love of God, their Love is either a broken or reflecting Love,
seldom direct; broken, when it is fixed upon the things of this World; reflex,
when it ayms at self-Interest; Whereas the Love of God is the only true Love,
Illi diligune Deum qui non non aliud, etc. Aug. de vita Christi. Psalm. 73. 25.
a direct Love without obliquity; a sincere Love without reflection; such a Love
as breaks through all impediments, and has nothing in Heaven but God, and
desires nothing on Earth in comparison of him; such a Love as looks upon the
World by way of subordination, but upon God by way of eminency.


LUther was offered to be made a Cardinal if he would be quiet: He answered,
No, not if I might be Pope; and defends himself thus against those that thought
him happily a proud Fool for his pains; Epist. ad Staunc.
Inveniar sane superbus, etc. Let me be counted Fool, or any thing, said he, so
I be not found guilty of cowardly silence. The Papists, when they could not
rule him, rayl'd at him, and called him an Apostate; He confesses the action,
and says; I am indeed an Apostate, but a blessed and holy Apostate, one that
has fallen off from the Devil: Then they called him Devil; Epist. ad
Spalatinum.
But what said he? Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, etc. Luther is a Devil, be it
so; but Christ lives and reigns, that is enough for Luther; So be it: Nay,
such was the activity of Luther's spirit, that when Erasmus was asked by the
Elector of Saxony, Why the Pope and his Clergy could so little abide Luther? ^e
answered, J. Trap exposit. on S. John.
For two great offenses* Meddling with the Pope's triple Crown, and the Monks
fat paunches: and hence was all the hatred, If he would have been quiet and
silent, they would have never meddled with him: Thus it is that a Woolf flies
not upon a painted Sheep, and Men can look upon a painted Toad with delight: It
is not the softly pace, but the furious march of the Soldier that sets Men a
gazing, and dogs a barking; let but a Man glide along with the stream of the
World, do as others do, he may sit down and take his ease; -- non est mollis ad
astra via, Ovid.
But if he once strive against the stream, stand up in the Cause of God and act
for Christ, then he shall be sure to meet with as much despite and malice as
Men and Devils can possibly throw upon him.


THe Physician, Jul. F^rmicus de errore Gentil.
when he finds that the potion, which he has given his Patient will not
work, he seconds it with one more violent; but if he perceive the disease to be
settled, then he puts him into a course of Physic; so that Medice misere, he
shall have at present but small comfort of his life; And thus does the Surgeon
too, if a gentle plaster will not serve, then he applies that which is more
corroding; and to prevent a Gangrene, he makes use of his cauterizing knife,
and takes off the joint or member that is so ill-affected: Even so God, when
Men profit not by such crosses, as he has formerly exercised them with, when
they are not bettered by ligher Afflictions, then he sends heavier, and
proceeds from milder to sharper courses; if the dross of their Sin will not
come off, Quando hac non suc^ssit alia aggredienda est vi^. Terent.
he will throw them into the melting-pot again and again; crush them harder in
the press, and lay on such Irons as shall enter more deep into their Souls; If
he strikes and they grieve not, if they be so foolish that they will not know
the Judgment of their God, he will bring seven times more plagues upon them,
cross upon cross, loss upon loss, trouble upon trouble, one sorrow on the
neck of another, till they are in a manner wasted and consumed.

Zeal of Heathens to their false Gods, condemning that of Christians to their
true God.
THere is mention made of Five Men of the Tribe of Dan, T. Stapleton promp.
moral. Dom. Pasch. Judge. 18.
that rushed into the house of Micah, and took away his carved and his golden
Images; He follows them with a loud cry; The Danites ask him, What he ails,
wherefore he made such a noise; O, says he, ye have taken away my gods which I
made, and what have I more? And, What is that you say unto me, What ayleth
thee? Poor man! How sadly does he bemoan the loss of his false Gods! And, what
have I more, says he; concluding, that in taking away of them they had taken
away all that he had: But which of us are so zealous for the true God, as he
was for the loss of his false one? We daily lose the sight of his comfortable
presence, Sin deprives us of him, Who lays it to heart? In losing of him, we
lose all, Nich. Felton D. D. Sermon. at S. Antholines, Land. 1612.
and yet we are no more moved then if we lost nothing at all; One said of the
Papists, I pray God that their charitable blindness do not one day rise up
against our uncharitable knowledge; so it may very well be said of too too
many, God grant that the ignorant zeal of Pagans and Infidels to their false
Gods, be not matter of condemnation to those that are better instructed in the
knowledge of the true and only God.

Ministers to be careful in the practice of that which they preach unto
others.
IN a certain battle against the Turks, there was a Bishop, that thus
encouraged the Army; Play the Men, Joh. Manlii loc. com.
Fellow Soldiers, to day, and I dare promise you, that if you die fighting,
you shall sup to night with God in Heaven: Now after the battle was begun, the
Bishop withdrew himself; And when some of the Soldiers enquired among
themselves, what was become of the Bishop; and why he would not take a Supper
with them that night in Heaven; Others answered, Multi Sacerdotes, et pauci
Sacerdotes; multi nomine pauci opere, etc.
Hodie sibi jejunium indixit, etc. This is Fasting-day with him, therefore he
will eat no Supper to night, though it were in Heaven: Thus it is a sad thing
when Ministers like those Pharisees of whom Christ himself spoke, shall say and
do not, have tongues to speak by the talent, and hands that scarce act by the
ounce, have Heaven like that ridiculous Actor of Smyrna at their tongues end,
Chrysostom. in Matthew.
but Earth at their fingers end; Whereas Christ was full of Grace as well as
Truth; John Baptist a burning and a shining light; It was Origen's Iussit et
gessit, his teaching and his living were both one; And that is the best Sermon
surely, Bernardi ep. 22.
that is dug out of a Man's own breast, when he practices what he preaches:
the want whereof occasioned Campian our Jesuited Countryman to write, In epist.
Ministris eorum nihil vilius, their Ministers are most base.

No comfortable return of Prayer till Sin be removed.
A Man that is wounded, Isid. de sum. bone lib. 3. cap. 7.
may cry and call upon the Surgeon to have some ease of his pain; but if he
will not endure to have the splinter or the Arrow head pulled out that sticks
fast in the flesh, O quam falluntur, sua qui jucunda Tonanti
and causes the grief, he may cry long enough, but all in vain: And if People
should pray to God to stay the rage and fury of the burning, when a house or
Town is on fire, and themselves in the mean time pour on oil, or throw on
fuel, Vota putant; cum sint pectore nata mal^.
there will be but small hope of quenching the same: Hest. 7. 14.
So there can be no comfortable return of our Prayers unto God till Sin be
removed; It is but folly to seek unto God by Prayer, Esaias 9. 12.
till the partition wall of Sin that is betwixt us and him be broken down;
Psalm. 66. 18.
It is Sin that crosses and hinders the effect and fruit of Prayer, like
those Heathens of whom the Cynick made this observation, Diog. La^^^. lib. 6.
That they prayed indeed to their Gods for health, but at the very same time
when they prayed, they used such excess, as could not but greatly impair their
health, and so wilfully deprived themselves of that they prayed for.


IT is observed, that the Egyptians had Idols and very heavy burdens, these
the Israelites detested; but they had withal vessels of gold and silver, and
these according to Gods command, Exodus 11. 12. Rob. Holco^ in Sap.
they made a Religious use of. One seeing Virgil very studious in a dull piece
of Ennius Poetry, asked him, what he did with that book? He answered, Lego
aurum in stercore, I am gathering gold out of a dunghill. Thus it is, that
Knowledge is to be owned wheresoever or in whomsoever it is found; fas est et
ab host doceri, A man may learn of his Enemy; nay, aliena pericula, another
Man's harms may teach us how to beware: Much of Morality may be picked up from
the Heathens, much of the Knowledge of God from Philosophers, much of Learning
from the Poets, and much of Divine truth from some of our well-read Adversaries
of Rome, of whom it may be said, as it was sometimes of another, Origin.
Ubi been, nemo melius; ubi male, nemo pejus; Where they have written truth, T.
Fuller Sermon. at S. Clem. Land. 1649.
as in mere speculative points of God, the blessed Trinity, etc. th^re no Man
better, and there it is that, as the Israelites, so we may go down to the
Philistims forges to whet our swords and spears, 1 Samuel 13. 19.
to be ^urnished with sharp arguments, and solid reasons to the confutation of
false and heretical opinions; but where they have roved from the Truth, as in
the doctrine of Merit, Indulgences, etc. where you shall be sure always to
find a Matthew sitting at the receipt of Custom, there no Man worse; and there
we may and must forsake them.


A Gardener offering a Rape-root (being the best Present the poor Man had) to
the Duke of Burgundy, J. Trap on Evang.
was bountifully rewarded by the Duke; Which his Steward observing, thought to
make use of his bounty, presented him with a very fair horse; the Duke,
Sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficiant merita. Bern. Sermon. 68. in Cant.
ut perspicaci erat ingenio, being a very wise discreet Man, perceived the
project, received the horse, and gave him nothing for it: Right so will God
deal with all Merit-mongers, that think by their good works to purchase Heaven,
which cannot be, the work being finite, the Wages infinite; so that Merit must
needs be a mere fiction, since there can be no proportion betwixt the Work and
Reward: There is indeed mention made of a Mercy-seat in the Temple, but there
was never heard of any School of Merit, but in the Chapel of Antichrist.


NOah is commanded by God to make such a Vessel as should save him and his
from a flood which should drown all the World beside, he sets upon the work,
the People laugh at him, and think the poor old Man doated, and had dreamed,
Ralph. Hollinshed Chr^^. in He^. S. An. 1524.
not as we say, of a dry Summer, but a wet Winter, and that he was no wiser
then the Prior of S. Bartholomews, who upon a vain prediction of an
addle-headed Astrologer, went and built him a House at Harrow on the Hill to
secure himself from a supposed flood that that Astrologer had foretold; Many a
br^ad jest, many a bitter scoff was, no doubt, broken upon Noah; yet for all
that he went not only about, but through the work, that God had enjoined; so
did Abraham, Lot, Genesis 12. 19. 2 Samuel 16.
David, Esaias, Chap. 20. Jeremy, Chap. 19. Ezekiel, chapter 4. H^sea, chapter 1. And
thus he that truly fears God, passes not for the a^^ronts of Men; He is a
fool, we say, that will be laughed out of his Co^t, but he is a fool indeed that
will be laughed out of his skin, Charles Pinner of Cat^chism.
nay out of his Soul, out of his eternal salvation, because he is loath to be
laughed at by lewd and wicked Men: No, A^quo animo audiend^^ sunt imperitorum
convitia. Sen. ep. 76.
no, the true Fear of God will make a Man set light by such Paper-shot, it will
carry him through the pikes not of evil tongues only, but of the most eager
opposition that either Satan himself, or any limb of his shall at any time be
able to raise against him.

How every good Christian is to order his life.
IT is said of the Israelites in their Travells through the Wilderness, Exodus
11. 17. Rob. Holcot in lib. Sap.
that they wandered like Pilgrims without house or home, they fought like
Soldiers the battles of the Lord, and they called upon the Name of the Lord
their God, who heard them in the midst of their distress: And thus it is that
every good Christian is to order his life, as a Pilgrim not seeking high things
for himself, Ier. 45. 5. 1 I^h. 4. 15.
but having food and raiment therewith to rest contented; As a Christian
Soldier not to be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, but to
fight manfully under his banner against the three Arch-enemies of Mankind, the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil* Lastly, as the true Servant of God to tread
often upon the threshold of his Sanctuary, to frequent his Ordinances, Psalm.
147.
to be always in such a frame of Spirit as to bless, and praise, and
magnify, and speak good of his holy Name.

Men to hear the Word of God, though they come with prejudicate thoughts.
WHen one Henry Sutphen was Preacher at Breme, the holy Roman Catholics were
not idle, Joh. Sleidani Comment.
but sent their Chaplains to hear every Sermon, that so they might trap him in
his words. But God (whose footsteps are in the midst of the flood) would have
his mavelous power to be seen in them, by the conversion of them; Insomuch,
that the greatest part that were sent to hearken, did openly witness his
doctrine to be the truth of God, against which no Man could contend, and such
as in all their life they had not heard, persuading them also that sent them,
that forsaking all impiety, they should stick to the Word of God, and believe
the same, if they would be saved: Thus it is good to come and hear the Word,
though it be with ill intent, to sit under the Ordinance, though a Man be, as
it were, upon thorns all the while he is there; They that come to see fashions,
as Moses came to the bush, may be called as he was; They that come to sleep,
Anno 1550.
as old Father Latimer said in a Sermon before K. Edw. 6. may be caught
napping; They that come with a resolution to steal, peradventure the first word
they hear may be, Exodus 20. Ephesians. 4. 28.
Thou shall not steal; or, Let him that has stole, steal no more, and so
become honest Men; They that are sent upon any wicked design, 1 Samuel 19.
as Readiness Messengers were to take David, the Spirit of God may come upon them.
And they that come to catch at the Preacher, may be caught themselves, Lib.
Confess. 5. cap. 14.
as Augustine was by S. Ambrose: Lastly, they that come as it were in despite
of Christ, may become lovers of Christ; as the Officers that were sent to
apprehend Christ, were so taken with his parts, their malice being turned to
admiration, that they were made Proclaimers of his divine excellencies, saying;
Ioh. 7. 46.
Never man spoke like this Man.


GOd spoke thus unto Noah, T. Gataker Noah's Remembrancer.
An hundred and twenty years hence will I bring in a Flood, that shall drown
the whole World; and therefore if thou will be saved, go thy way out of hand,
and build thee such an Ark as I will show thee, Genesis 6. He was then 500 years
old, and might have thought thus with himself, I am 500 years old, and it will
yet be one hundredth and upwards before the Flood do come; Why? I may be dead
and rotten in my grave before that time, or at leastwise very near the end of
my days; And who would go moyl and toil so about building a Vessel of such
bulk and bigness to prolong his life for so short a time? And if it must needs
be done, I may go and take pleasure for these hundredth years yet, and then set
upon it twenty or ten years before, and get more help then, and dispatch it the
sooner: But Noah did not, he could not, he durst not defer the doing of it, but
fells his wood, sawes out his planks, 2 Pet. 3. 7. Cic. de not. Deorum. Justin.
apolog. Lactant. de ira Dei. Athenagoras de Resurrect. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ephesians. 2.
22. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. Mortalium nemo est, qui crastinum sibi audeat
polli^eri, Euripid.
hewes out his timber, and so falls to work. The same case is ours, God
foretells us, that a second general destruction shall come, not by Water, but
by Fire, the fiercer Element of the twain, which even Heathens have taken
notice of; And that none shall then be saved, but those that have a spiritual
Temple, or Sanctuary built in their Souls, an house for the blessed Spirit to
dwell in, as hard and difficult a work, as ever the making of the Ark was; For
before the spiritual building can be raised, we must pull down an old Frame, of
the Devils rearing, that stands where it must stand, and rid the place of
the rubbish and remainders of it. Let us then fall to work betime, we are so
far from being able to promise to our selves a hundredth years, that we cannot
assure our selves of one hour, no not of one minute.


THe Natural Philosophers and others, Ulyss. Aldr^vand. Ornith. R. Holcot in
lib. Sap. cap. 11. v. 25. Virgil. AEneid. lib. 4.
write of a monstrous bird called an Harpy, which having the face of a Man, is
of so fierce and cruel nature, that, being hunger-bitten, will seize upon a Man
and kill him; but afterward making to the water to quench her thirst, and
there espying her own face, and perceiving it to be like the Man, whom she had
devoured, is so surprised with grief, Similis simili gaudet.
that she dies immediately: Thus our likeness to Christ, and his likeness to
us in all things (sin only excepted) ought to be an argument of Love, not of
hatred; -- savis inter se convenit ursis. Virgil.
Birds of a feather will flock and keep together; Beasts, though by Nature
cruel, yet will defend those of their kind: How much more should one Man love
another, bear with one another, and stand by one another in the midst of any
dang^r or difficulty whatsoever, they being all fellow members of that mystical
body whereof Christ Jesus is the Head.


A Blind Boy that had suffered imprisonment at Gloucester not long before, Act.
and Monum.
was brought to Bishop Hooper, the day before his death; Mr. Hooper, after he
had examined him of his Faith, Coe^um terramque non aspicit; sed coeli
terraeque Dominum spectandi facultas non cripitur. Petrarch. de Coecitate.
and the cause of his imprisonment, beheld him very steadfastly, and tears
standing in his eyes, said unto him; Ah poor boy, God has taken from thee thy
outward sight, upon what consideration he in his Divine wisdom best knows,
but has given thee another sight much more precious; For he has endued thy
Soul with the spiritual eye of understanding: O happy change! doubtless there
is a wide difference betwixt corporeal and spiritual blindness, though every
Man be blind by Nature, yet the state of the spiritually blind is more
miserable then that of the other blind; The bodily blind is led either by his
Servant, Wife, or Dog, but the spiritually blind is misled by the World, the
Flesh, Joh. Passeratius de coecitate.
and the Devil; The one will be sure to get a seeing guide; but the other
follows the blind guidance of his own lusts, till they both tumble into the
ditch; The want of corporal eyes is to many divinum bonum, albeit humanum
malum; but the want of Faith's eyes, is the greatest evil which can befall Man
in this life; For Reason is the Soul's left eye, Faith the right eye, without
which it is impossible to see the way to God, Heb. 11. 6.

Good Conscience, a Man's best Friend at the last.
IT is a witty Parable, Greg Mag. moralia.
which one of the Fathers has of a Man, that had three Friends, two whereof he
loved entirely, the third but indifferently; This Man being called in question
for his life, sought help of his Friends: The first would bear him company some
part of his way; The second would lend him some money for his journey, and that
was all they would or could do for him: But the third, whom he least respected,
and from whom he least expected, would go all the way, and abide all the while
with him; yea, he would appear with him, and plead for him: This Man is every
one of us, and our three Friends are the Flesh, and the World, and our own
Conscience: Now when Death shall summon us to Judgment, What can our Friends
after the Flesh do for us, they will bring us some part of the way, Mr. Hughes
Sermon. 1622.
to the grave, and further they cannot; And of all the Worldly goods which we
possess, What shall we have? What will they afford us? Only a shroud, I^^^ar
omnium conscientia bona. Sen. ep. 69.
and a coffin, or a Tomb at the most: But welfare a good Conscience, that will
live and die with us, or rather live when we are dead, and when we rise again,
it will appear with us at Gods Tribunal; And when neither Friends, nor a full
purse can do us any good, then a good Conscience will stick close to us.

The captivated Soul, restless till it be in Christ Jesus.
THere is mention made of a certain Bird in Egypt near the River Nilus, Alb.
Magnus lib. 3.
called Avis Paradisi, (for the beauty of its feathers, having in it, as we
say, all the colors of the Rainbow) the Bird of Paradise, Conrad. Gesner. de
avibus.
which has so pleasant and melodious notes, that it raises the affections of
those that hear it: Now this Bird, if it chance to be any way ensnared or
taken, it never leaves mourning, and complaining till it be delivered: Such is
the Soul of every Regenerate Man, if it be taken by Satan, or overtaken by the
least of Sins, weakness or infirmity, it is restless with the Spouse in the
Canticles, no sleep shall come into the eye, nor any slumber to the eyelids,
till Reconciliation be made with God in Christ Jesus.

Sin, of a dangerous spreading Nature.
A Among many other diseases that the body is incident unto, Nath. Cannon's
Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1617.
there is one that is called by the name of Gangrena, which does altogether
affect the joints, against which there is no remedy but to cut off that joint
where it settled, otherwise it will pass from joint to joint, -- viresque
acquirit eun^o. Virgil.
till the whole body is endangered; Such is the nature of Sin, which unless it
be cut off in the first motion, it proceeds unto action, from action to
delectation, from delight unto custom, and from that unto habit; which (being
as it were, a second Nature) is never, or very hardly removed without much
prayer and fasting.


MAxentius that cruel Tyrant, Eusebii hist. lib. 9. cap. 9. Joh. Cuspinianus in
hi^. de Caesaribus.
coming with an Army against Constantine the Great; To deceive him and his
Army, he caused his Soldiers to make a great bridge over Tyber, where
Constantine should pass, and cunningly laid planks on the Ships, that when the
Army came upon the planks, the ships should sink, and so drown the Enemy; but
Maxentius hearing of Constantine's sudden approach, in a rage rushed out of
the gates of Rome, and commanded his followers to attend him, and through fury
forgetting his own work, led a few over his bridge; And the ships sinking,
himself and his followers were all drowned: Thus it is that the mischiefs of
wicked Men fall usually upon their own heads, Will. Jemmat Sp. Trumpet.
their plots recoyl upon themselves, they do but (as it were) twist a cord to
hang themselves, whilst they digg a pit for others, the Earth falling in beats
out their own brains; This is that Lex talionis, that retaliation which Christ
threatens, Matthew. 7. 2^ Psalm. 62. 11.
and that David asserteth. Nec enim lex justior ulla est, Most just it is, that
he which breweth mischief, should have the first draught of it himself.


SUppose a Man invited to Dives his rich Table, Ph. Edlin. Sermon. at S. Mith.
Bassishaw, Land.
furnished with all sorts of delicacies, and delicious fare, and that he should
pass by all the provision, and sit sullenly at the Table, not eating a bit of
the meat, but staring about him, should look for a second course to drop down
from Heaven, or to be ushered in by a Raven, 1 Kings 17. 6.
as it was to the Prophet Eliah; Would not one think such a one to be a kind of
Madman? Yes surely; And such have been at all times, and are the
Anabaptistical spirits of our times; Whereas God has in his Word, set before
them a plentiful Feast of holy and sacred vyands, full and clear discoveries of
himself, yet they must needs gape after new Revelations, and Enthusiasticall
inspirations, not much unlike to the Man that pulled out his eyes, and then put
his Spectacles on his nose, that he might see the better.


CRoesus being taken captive of Cyrus, Xenophon Herod^tns lib. 1.
used this one reason to prefer Peace before War, namely, because in the time
of Peace, the Children might in all likelihood bury their Parents; but in War,
the Parents with much heaviness buried their Children. Now in the spiritual
Warfare we may use the same argument to prefer War before Peace, because in
Peace our Children and wicked off spring, Joh. Bailey Sermon. at Hamsted, 1608.
that is, our Sins do, as it were, bury us alive; whereas if we make but war
against them, we bury them, and get Peace with God; So that he which has Peace
with his Sins, the Lord proclaims War against him, the issue whereof will be
most uncomfortable.


IT was a good speech of an Honorable Person, W. Cecyl L. Burleigh.
when some others were undervaluing the Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments;
Well, said he, God bless them by whom God blesses us; Sir Henry Croke.
And a great Judge giving the charge at an Assizes, professed in open Court,
That he would as soon bind a Man to his good behavior for contempt of a
Minister, as for contempt of a Magistrate: This was a good Resolution then, but
in these licentious days of ours, Quis home est tanta confidentia,
most fit to be put into Execution, wherein Men have taken upon themselves a
sinful liberty, both by words and deeds to throw dirt in the very face of the
Ministry; How comes it to pass else, Qui Sacerdotem audeat violare?
that the Calling is made so contemptible above all others? that the name of
Priest is become so odious? Plaut*
Well, they will one day find, that God has made them Fathers, Abrah. Gibson,
a Visitat. Sermon. 1628.
(so Micah called the young Levite) Teachers, Seers, Guides, such as watch for
the good of Men's Souls, etc. let Men then highly esteem of them, Judge. 17. 10.
whom God has thus honored.

The good Man's comfort in Death.
IT is reported of S. Anselm, D. Anselmi. similitud.
that riding abroad, a Hare that was almost hunted to death, squatted down
betwixt his horses legs; The good Man conceiving that the poor languishing
Creature made to him for shelter, relieved her from the rage and violence of
the Huntsman and his dogs; They that stood by wondered, that he should spoil
their game, and some of them laughed at it; which the good Man perceiving,
wept, and said unto them; My Friends, this is no laughing matter: and thus he
applied it, This Hare may very well be compared to every Christian Soul, when
he is at the point of death, then it is that the Devil labors all that he can
to make his passage out of this World uncomfortable; Dan. 3. 22.
then it is that Nebuchadnezzar-like he heats the oven of his persecution seven
times hotter then before; Quanto propinquius m^rtem hominis videt Diabolus,
tanto crud^lius persecutiones exer cet, etc. Isid. de sum. bono. lib. 1.
and then it is that like a subtle Sophister he brings out his strongest
arguments to drive the poor Soul to desperation: In the midst of this great
extremity, the poor Soul looks about for comfort, but finds none, none in any
outward things, miserable comforters are they all; but then by the eye of Faith
looking up unto Jesus, is rescued out of the snares of the Devil, and is saved.

To beware of Errors and erroneous Teachers.
IT is said of Spondanus, Degrees. Whear. de methodo legend. bist.
(the same that epitomized Baronius) that he gives his Reader Popish poison to
drink so slily, quasi aliud agens, as if he were doing something else, and
meant no such matter: And Schwenkfeldius, who held many dangerous heresies, did
yet deceive many, by his pressing to an holy life, prayi^g frequently and
fervently, etc. by his stately expressions ever in his mouth, Erasmus in Ephesians.
4. 14.
as of Illumination, Revelation, Deification, the inward and spiritual Man,
etc. so cunning in the cogging of his die, as S. Paul phraseth it; so wily in
the conveyance of his collusion, that like a Serpent he stung with hissing:
Such are therefore to be avoided, how slily soever they seek to insinuate with
their Pithanology and seigned humility, whereby they circumvent, and beguile
the simple, there is no dealing with them; Shun their society as a S^rpent in
the way, as poison in your meat; For such is the nature of their erroneous
doctrine, that as a Noble Writer says, L. Brook.
It is like the Ierusalem-Artichoaks, plant it where you will, it over-runs all
the ground, and choaks the heart of it.

The way of Religion irksome in the beginning, but comfortable in the end.
AN Heyser that is not used to the yoke struggles, Jos. Shu^e Sermon. before
East India Company. 1630. Omnia dum incipias, gravia sient, etc. Ter. Heaut.
the yoke pincheth the neck, but after a while she carries it more gently: A
new Suite, though never so well fitted to a Man's body, is not so easy the
first day, as aft^r it is worn awhile: Two Millstones, after they be made fit,
do not grind so well at the first, as afterward; As we see it is with a Man,
when he goes to bathe himself in the midst of Summer, there is a trembling of
his body, when he first puts into the water, but after he has drench't himself
all over, he is not sensible of any cold at all; So the way of Piery and
Religion, Greg. Mag. moralia.
is irksome at the first, but after it gives great comfort and contentment; It
is called a yoke, Matthew. 11. 29. Matthew. 7.
Grave cum t^llis, etc. grievous when a Man takes it up, but after it is born
awhile, both easy and light: It is a straight way, yet try it, put into it
however, do but digest the di^^iculty of the entrance, Prove. 4. 12.
and then thy feet shall not be strait^ed, thou shall find more and more
enlargement, every day more comfort then other.


IT was an unhappy meaning, Abrah. Gibson, a Visitat. Sermon. 1638.
that Sir Thomas Moor had, though he spoke it pleasantly, when he said of a
vicious Priest, That he would not by any means have him say the Creed, lest it
should make him call the Articles of his Faith into question: Thus too too many
are apt to call the Truths of Gods Word into question because of the lewdness
of the Preachers life. One will not have his children baptized by such a one,
it goes against another stomach to receive the Sacrament from the foul hands
of such a one; others care not for their doctrine, because they say and do not,
etc. A preposterous Zeal, 1 Kings 17. Loc. Com. tit. de Ministerio.
God wot! Eliah received comfortable food from a Raven, as well as from an
Angel. If God speak to thee as he did to Balaam by the mouth of an Ass, thou
must have so much Patience (says Luther) as to hear him; If God will have thee
to be saved by one, who peradventure shall be damned, hear what he says, and
look not what he does; if thy Pastor live lewdly, Erret non erret ille, tu non
erras si ^redideris, Luther. ut supra.
that is his own hurt; if he preach well, that is thy good, take thine own and
go thy way; Good water, which passes into a Garden through a channel of stone,
does the Garden good, though it do the channel none; and so may the Word and
water of life, conveyed by a bad instrument of a stony heart, do good to the
Church of God, though it work not upon himself; And good seed, though it be
cast into the ground with foul hands, will ^ructifie; One may be a bad Man, yet
a good Seeds-man both in the Field and the Church; yet woe be to him by whom
the offense comes, by whose means the offerings of the Lord are so slighted;
Eli's sons smoked for this. And to many, 1 Samuel 11.
which have prophesied in his Name, Christ will say in his just displeasure,
Luke 13. 27.
Away from me ye workers of iniquity.


Jews of Granada that devout Spaniard, Lib. 3. de orat. et meditat.
makes mention of a very poor diseased Man dwelling in Italy, that was brought
so low, that he could stir neither hand nor foot; and seeking for a skilful
Physician to heal him, he found a potent Enemy to torment him, who to add unto
his misery, cast him into prison, and there kept him with a very small
allowance of bread and water, so much only as should keep life and soul
together: But it so happened, that there being a new face of Government in that
Province, he was released from his imprisonment and his disease together; For
the want of Food, intended to take away his life, proved the only remedy to
preserve it: And thus it is that God makes use of Wicked Men for his Peoples
good; Dan. 7.
The Wicked cast them into the Furnace thinking to destroy them, but they rise
out thence more glorious then before: They plow deep Furrows on the backs of
Gods people, but that makes them more fruitful in good works; put them to
death, that proves their advantage; vex, grieve, trouble and torment them; yet
do what they can do, Romans 8. 28.
they are still gainers, not losers; so true is that of the Apostle, (...),
etc. All things work together for the best to them that love God.

How it is that one Man may be said to be punished for another Man's sin.
A Man that has f^d high for a long time, Jos. Shute Sermon. on Exodus Plague of
Frogs, etc.
comes to have a plethory of crude and indigested humors in his stomach; It so
falls ou^, that this Party riding afterward in the wet, and taking cold begins
to shiver and shake, and after falls into a durable lasting Fever; If the
Physician be a wise Man, one that has parts and skill, ask him, What was the
cause of this sickness? and he will tell you, The ill humors of the body, and
the abounding of them: yet it is like enough it had not turned to a Fever so
soon, if he had not took cold of his feet, or been some way troubled in his
journey: So when God brings punnishment upon People, the proper cause is in
every Man's self; There are personal sins in every Man to make him obnoxious to
the curse of God; yet may the sins of the Father or Parent, or Neighbor, be
the occasion that God will punnish Sin; so that it may be said, that the
personal Sins of Men are the primary, internal, antecedent, dispositive cause
of Gods Judgments, but the Sins of other Men as they are Members of the whole
may be the external irritating, excitating cause of Gods Judgments upon a
People or Nation.

The Souls comfortable enjoyment of Christ.
IT were a great grace, T. Gataker Deaths advantage, A Sermon.
and such as would minister much comfort to a Courtier, lying sick at home of
the gowt, to have the Prince not only to send to him, but in person also to
visit him; but much more comfort and joy would it be to him to be able, being
recovered, to repair to the Court, and there enjoy his Prince's presence, with
such pleasures and favors as the place may afford: How much more then in this
case is it a grace and a comfort, that God vouchsafes to visit us here by his
Spirit; sometimes more familiarly and feelingly, but always so effectually; as
thereby to support us even in the greatest of extremity; but how much more
exceedingly, shall our joy and comfort be increased, when being freed from all
infirmities, we shall be taken home to him, that we may enjoy him for evermore?
As that Courtier having assurance given him of recovery by such a time, would
exceedingly rejoice to think of the joy of that day, and count every day a
week, if not a year to it, wherein he should, being recovered, return to the
Court, and be welcomed thither in solemn manner by all his Friends there, and
by the Prince in a more especial manner; So well may the faithful Soul, not a
little joy to fore-think with it self, what a joyful hour that shall be unto
it, wherein by Death parted from the body, it shall solemnly be pr^sented
before the face of Jesus Christ, and entering into the Heavenly place, shall be
welcomed thither by the whole Court of Heaven, the blessed Saints and Angels.

Unhappy Prosperity, happy Adversity.
IT is a Philosophical observation of Turtle Doves and some other birds, Pet.
Berchorii Re^. moral.
that use to take their flights into other parts beyond the Seas, that if the
Southwind blow, they will be sure of a good guide to direct them; but if the
wind be Northward, then they venture of themselves, without any conduct at all:
This may note unto us the unhappy Prosperity of the Wicked, Luxuriant animi
rebus plerunque secundis* Ovid. 2 Art.
and the happy Adversity of the Godl^; He that spreads his sails before the
Southwind of Prosperity, blowing honors, riches, and preferment into his lap,
had need of a good Pilot, the special Counsel of God to lead him, and the
extraordinary mercies of God to support him, Omnis qui ad Paradisum redire
desiderat, ^p^rtet tran^^re per ignem et aquam, etc. Aug. in Sermon. ad Lippium.
if ever he intend to arrive at the port of eternal bliss: Whereas he that
sets out whilst the North Wind of Adversity and trouble beats fiercely upon
him, minds his way, rides through the storm, well knowing that the way to
Heaven is by the gates of Hell, and that by many tribulations he must and shall
at last enter into happiness.


BIas the Philosopher, Diog. Laert. in vita.
being at Sea in a great Tempest with a number of odd fellows, some of them
very rake-shames and naught, they began (as men in such a case usually do) to
call upon the gods; which he perceiving, comes to them, and says; Sirs, hold
your peace, lest the gods take notice that you are here, and so not only you,
but we also suffer for your sakes: And it is observed, that S. John leaped out
of the Bath, Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 3.
because Cerinthus was there, his reason was, le^t the Bath should fall for his
sake only, being a wretched blasphemous Heretic: Thus it is, Jos. Shute Sermon.
on Exodus.
that a Wicked Man, though he thinks he hurt no body but himself, is a Plague
and a curse to the place he lives in, let him be never so Noble, never so
Honorable, potent or wealthy, if he be a profane Man, a lewd loose Libertine,
he engages the place of his abode to the wrath of God, and hastneth his
Judgments thereon.


A Virgin being espoused to one that is shipped for the East Indies, T. Gat^ker
Death's advantage, A Sermon.
or some such long-winded Voyage, if she do indeed faithfully and unfeignedly
affect him, though she joy to read a letter, or to see some token from him, yet
it is nothing in that kind that can give her contentment, Nil mihi rescribas,
nothing will serve her turn but his presence; O how she hearkens after the
Ships for his return, and joys to think of that day, wherein they shall be so
fast knit together, that nothing shall separate them but Death: Thus the
Christian Soul contracted to Christ, may receive many favors and love tokens
from him, such as are all the blessings she enjoys, whether spiritual or
temporal, yet they cannot all of them give any true contentment, but help
rather to inflame her a^^ection toward him, and make her, if she sincerely
love him, as she profess^th and pretends to do, the more earnestly and
ardently to long for that day, wherein she shall be inseparably linked unto
him, and everlastingly enjoy his personal presence, which above all things she
most earnestly desires.


A Scholar coming to Paul's Churchyard, Griff. William's true Church.
asked a Bookseller, Whether he had Abulensis Works? and the Man said, No, but
he had Tostatus, which was as good: The Scholar replied, Tostatus would do him
no good, unless he had Abulensis; which indeed was the same book, Alphonsus
Tostatus being Episcopus Abulensis, Veniun^ ut audiant, non ut disc^n^: non id
agunt ut aliqua illo viti^ dep^nant, sed, etc. Sen. ep. 20.
Bishop of Avila in Spain: Thus it is with the partial and prejudicate
opinions and fancies of many Men and Women, when they rather respect quis
praedicat, then quid praedicatur, who preaches, then what is preached; For if
the self-same Sermon were preached by diverse Men, the Sermon should never be
respected according to its worth, but according to the fancy, opinion and
affection which they hear unto the deliverer; because commonly they know no
other difference but the names, voices, and faces of their Teachers; Sure it is
that Christ made the best Sermons that ever were preached, and yet they were
not best liked, because they liked not the Preacher.

Every Man to confess that his own Sin is the cause, though not always the
occasion, of punishment.
IT is said of Prince Henry, Jos. Shute Sermon. on Exodus 8.
that delitiae generis humani, that darling of Mankind, (as it was once said of
Titus Vespasianus) whose death was then to this Kingdom as so much of the best
blood let out of the veins of Israel; When it was told him, That the sins of
the People caused that affliction on him; O no, said he, I have sins enough of
mine own to cause that: So should we all confess, though God take occasion by
another Man's sin, or by the neglect of another person to fire my house, Ille
ego qui s^ci, etc.
yet the cause is just, that it should be so, and that I my self have deserved
it, whatsoever the occasion be; God had cause against the seventy thousand that
dyed of the Plague, though David's sin were the occasion, yet the meritorious
cause was in them; therefore whenever it pleases God to lay his hand of
anger upon us, though another may be the occasion, yet Ille ego qui feci, let
every Man in particular acknowledge, that it is he that has sinned, and so
justify God in his sayings, and clear him when he is judged.

Ministers of the Gospel, to be of godly lives and conversations.
AS the Jews in their preparation to the Passover, Tho. Godwin's Moses and
Aaron, lib. 3. cap. 4.
did for four hours search out all leaven out of their houses, and then for two
hours cast it out; and lastly, cursed all the Leaven that they had not seen,
and could not find: So let all the Priests of the Lords house, all the
Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, be careful to search, R. Abbot Visit.
Sermon. at Cranborn in Kent. Been vivend^ et been populum docendo, etc. Chryso^^.
in Matthew.
to purge, and to execrate all the leaven of wilful and reigning Sin, and to
oppose and mortify the least sins, that so they may be Priests after Gods own
heart, Stars in Gods right hand, such as Greg. Nazianzene of whom Basil speaks,
that he did thunder in his doctrine, and lighten in his conversations, and that
having an inward principle of the light of Holiness in them from Christ, they
may shine out holily unto others, not only in the Pulpit and prayer, but in
the whole course of their life's also.

The right use of humane Learning.
MAgnus, Hieron. epist. tom. 2.
a Roman Orator accused S. Hierome for bringing too many uncircumcised Greeks
into the Temple, and by that means defiling candorem Ecclesiae sordibus
Ethnicorum, the unstained candor of the Church of Christ, with the impure
sentences of Heathen Orators; But the good Father with sufficient Reason does
clear himself from those aspersions: And so it is to be desired that every one
may do the like, and not to show themselves to be greater disciples of Nature,
then Scholars of Grace; or to have studied more in the School of Humanity,
then in the University of Divinity, because humane Learning is to be used, not
as the means to satisfy our stomach, but as the sauce to provoke our appetite,
not to add strength unto the Truth, but ornament to our speech, being (as it
were) Trimming to a plain suit, and garnish to a good dish of meat; And indeed,
R^ch. Edes Sermon. Duty of a King.
to speak the best of it, It is but a learned kind of Ignorance, which yet
being guided and bridled by the Spirit of God, may be wrought (as one well
observed) to speak like Balaam's Ass to good purpose.


S. Augustine has this passage of one that passing by a stately House, Jos.
Shute Sermon on Exodus 8.
which had fair demeans about it, and asking another that he met, to whom that
House and Land belonged? He answered, To such a one: O, says he, that is a
happy Man indeed: No, says the other, Not so happy as you think for, It is
none such happiness to have that House and Land; but he is happy indeed that
has the Lord to be his God, It is a privilege that exceeds all things
whatsoever; For he that has Honor and Riches may go to Hell for all them; but
he that has God to be his God is sure to be everlastingly happy.


THe Jewish Rabbis observe a very strict method in the instruction of Children
and others according to their age and capacity; At five years old they were
^ilii Legis, Raym. Martinus de Rep. Heb.
Sons of the Law to read it; At thirteen they were called ^ilii Praecepti, Sons
of the Precept to understand the Law, then they received the Passover as a
Sacrament, (for even Children did eat it, as a remembrance of their deliverance
out of Egypt) and then also they were purified; At fifteen years old, they came
to be Talmudistae, and went to deeper points of the Law, and Talmudick doubts:
Thus did the Jews, and let no Christians lagg behind them, in propagating the
truths of Jesus Christ their Master: Let Children be well instructed,
principled, and catechized, in the Fundamentals of Christian Religion; For
without Catechizing, the People perish in the want of knowledge, and become fit
matter for every Priest, Jesuit and Sectary to work upon. The Papists have
confessed, J. Dons Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1621.
that all the ground we have gotten of them is by Catechism; and the little
ground they have gotten of us, is by a more diligent requiring and practicing
of it; In a word, Catechizing is as well a Family, as a Church-duty; were but
the Family well-instructed, the Minister would have less work to do; there
would not be so many uncatechised heads, nor so many Weathercock Christians,
as now are to be found amongst us.


THere is a Story of two Neighbors, Joh. Bromyardi ^um. praed.
the one of them threw himself upon the providence of God in all things; but
the other by his industry and pains would be making out a Fortune to himself,
so that if any thing fell cross, A^que Deos atque astra vocat crudelia, he
would nothing but murmur and repine; Now so it happened, that the grounds and
granaries of the one were fertile and full; of the other, barren and empty;
Many wondered at it, but one wiser than the rest, Deus est; Faciat quicquid vult.
made answer; Do not marvail at this thing, The one has enough, because he
depends on God; the other little enough, because he will be wiser then God
who disposes all things. And many such there are now adays to be found
amongst us, such as although they pray daily, Thy Will be done, Sort tua
contentus abi --
yet are restless and discontented, if it be not done according to their own
will; Whereas all true Children of God submit themselves to his most wise,
powerful, and good will; and that too like the good old Patriark, Genesis 40. 36.
even in those things which may seem unjust, in such things as may thwart and
cross their intentions, well knowing* that to throw themselves upon Gods will,
is the readiest way to have their own will in all things.

The Poorest Man may in his Calling do very very good service unto God.
IT is reported of an Abbott, Speculum exemplorum.
that lived after a most strict and severe kind of life, and being desirous to
know with whom he should be associated in Heaven, was informed in a vision,
that such a one in such a Town, should be his next Companion in the joys of
Heaven; Whereupon the Abbot went and enquired, What such a one should be: and
understanding that he was but a poor Tradesman, that lived uprightly in his
calling, and brought up his Children honestly in the fear of God; He went home
and learned humility, making this conclusion to himself, That God is no
respecter of persons, but is far better pleased with him that is faithful and
diligent in the meanest o^^ice, G. Williams of Church, Egentes in mundo sed
lecupletes Deo, vitiis vacui, sed virtutibus pleni, etc. Cassiodor. in Psalm.
then with him that is careless and negligent in the highest employment. And
thus it is that the poorest Shepherd, and the meanest Plowman are necessary and
useful in the Church of God, and may, by performing the duties of their
calling, do as acceptable, though not as excellent service unto God, as any
other in a higher place; the Fidelity of the service, and not the Excellency of
the service being that wherewith God is most affected: But what then shall
become of such, who though otherwise born of gentile blood, and bred up at the
feet of Gamaliel in the Schools of the Prophets, Men of pregnant capacities,
and able bodies, yet live out of all honest Vocations, sacrificing their
precious time either to Morpheus the Minister of sleep, Bacchus the god of
Wine, or Venus, the Goddess of beauty; as if neither the true God, nor the
Common wealth deserved any service at their hands, but that all were due to the
Bed, the Tavern, and the Brothel-house.

The happy succession of a Christian Family.
IT was accounted a great honor, Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 41.
nay the very height of felicity, that in one house and race of the Curio's,
there were known to be three excellent Orators one after another, by descent
from the Father to the Son; And the Fabii afforded three Presidents of the
Senate in course, one immediately succeeding the other; the like has been
amongst us in several high places of Government and Judicature: But if this
kind of succession be so Honorable, so happy; How happy, how Honorable does
the succession of Religion from Father to Son make Families to be? there it
is that the Name of Christ may be said to live for ever: ^iliabitur nomen ejus,
so the words are, Psalm. 72. Sim. de M^is. in loc.
It shall be begotten as one generation is begotten of another, and so make a
happy succession of Christ's Name; so that it must needs be then a blessed
Tenure, where Christ is held in Capite; a happy Family, where Christ and the
name of the Family go hand in hand together.

No Salvation but by the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus.
THere is a Story of one, ^aur. Sucius in vita Dominici.
that falling asleep, dreamed that he was in a large Field, hedged in on all
sides with Thunder, Lightning, Hail-storms and the like tempestuous weather,
and that he saw certain houses afar off, and making toward one of them, craved
admittance till the storm were over; What art thou, said the Master of the
House; I am such a one, says he, telling him his name: And I, says the
Master, am called Justice, thou must not look for any comfort from me, but
rather the contrary; At another house he was answered, Joh. Bromiardi sum.
Praedic.
That there dwelt Truth, one that he never loved, and must therefore expect no
shelter there: Well, he goes to the third, the house of Peace, and there he
finds the like entertainment; In the midst of this distraction, he lights upon
the house of Mercy, and there humbly desiring entrance, was made welcome and
refreshed: This may be but a dream, Misericordiae tuae, Dominae Jesus, ultima
sunt refugia. Bern, in Cant.
imaginary; yet the application is a real Truth; Then thus, It is not the
sewing up together of some few Fig Leaves of Merit (as some suppose) that will
cover the nakedness of a poor distressed Soul; nor the outward varnish and
goodly splendour of moral virtues, and humane performances, (as others think)
that can add any thing of comfort to the wounded Conscience; When the
habitations of Justice, Truth, and Peace are bolted fast upon the drooping
Soul, then are the Gates of Mercy wide open to receive it, there being no
Salvation, but by the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus.


THe Griffon in the Fable, Aesop. Fab.
when the battle was to be fought betwixt the beasts of the Field, and the
Fowls of the Air, would partake of neither side, but stood neutrall, until he
could perceive which (...) did get the best of the day; and therefore showed
his forepart like a Fowl unto the Birds, and his hinder part like a
four-footed beast unto the beasts, thereby to gull them both; but his deceit
being perceived of both, he was hated and rejected of both, as unworthy to be
trusted on either side: Thus it fares with the Hypocrite, who being desirous to
serve two Masters, G. Williams of Church. Odi virum duplicem natum; Bonum
Sermonibus, inimicum moribus, Pers. epigr. 1.
and to retain the favor both of God and the World, is hated both of God and
the World; The Devil hates him, because he retains unto Christ; and Christ
hates him much more, because he does but only retain unto him; The World
cannot abide him, because he professes Godliness; and God can worse abide
him, because he does but profess it: neither of them does love him, because he
has been true to neither, nor yet indeed unto himself, but has betrayed
Christ for the Worlds sake, and the World for Christ's sake, and himself for Sin
and Sathan's sake.


IT is reported of Alexander, Q. Curtius. lib. 7.
that being in extreme thirst, when a draught of water was offered unto him, he
thought it a hard thing, and no way suitable to the dignity of a Prince, that
he alone should quench his thirst, when others in his Army had not wherewithal
to abate theirs, wherefore he returns the cup with this speech, Nec solus
bibere sus^ineo, etc. I cannot endure to drink alone, and here is not enough for
every one to wet their lips: Thus Uriah, while the Ark and his Lord Ioab was in
the Field, will not go down to his house, 2 Samuel 11.
no not so much as to refresh himself. And what says old Anchises, when Aeneas
would have saved his life, Virgil.
Absit ut, excisa, possim supervivere, Troia, Far be it from me, that I should
desire to live when Troy suffers that it does; And thus, Far let it be from any
true-hearted Christian to live deliciously, when not Troy, but the Church of
God is under a clowd of sorrow and affliction, so that what betwixt the Popish
and the peevish party, She is ready to be overwhelmed; too too blame then are
all they, that with those Jewish Priests at the taking of Jerusalem by Titus
the Roman Emperor, Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 6.
have not only a desire to live, but to live in pomp, in bravery, in giving
liberty to themselves in all sensual delights, in abating nothing of their
carnal contentments, when they see and hear of the Church of God suffering
grievous things, and brought unto lamentable streights, under the burden of
sore and most heavy pressures.

Mercies of God in Christ Jesus, the danger of dallying with them.
ONe that has plied his cups hard, S. Fr. Bacon uat. hist.
and coming home drunk finds a Candle lighted on the Table, but through the
swiftness and violence of the spirits being oppressed to and fro, he sees
things double; instead of one Candle he sees two, and going, as he thinks, to
put out one of them, he finds himself in the dark, and cries out, Lud.
Granatens. Dux peccato^^m.
Where is the other Candle? but all in vain. Thus carnall-minded Men being, as
it were, intoxicated with the delights and pleasures of this World, do through
the multiplying glass of their own deceitful fancies, see not only one or
two, but the many and superabundant mercies of God, yet extinguishing and not
seasonably applying the sweet and tender Mercies of God in Christ Jesus to
their Souls, Joh. Bromiardi sum. praed.
like Children that have played away the Candle, and go to bed darkling; so
they having abused the time of Mercy, are cast out into utter darkness to all
Eternity, and then when it is too late, they cry out, as the Drunkard did for
the Candle, Psalm. 88.
Lord, where are thy Mercies of old?

God, not to he set out by any Representation or Image to the eye of Man.
IT is recorded of Zeuxis, Plin. not. hist. lib. 35. cap. 9.
one of the best Gentile Painters in the World, that going about to draw the
pourtrayture of Juno, he singled out five of the fairest Virgins in
Agrigentine, and paint^d her according to that which he saw most commendable in
any one of them; but when he went about to make the picture of Venus, he
selected fifty of the fairest Maids in Sparta, and said, M. Tul. Ci^. de
Invent. lib. 2.
Fifty more fairer then those were not sufficient patterns to afford him form
and beauty to express the perfection of such a Goddess; And therefore when
his art was not able to reach her excellency, Coel. Rhodoginus. Var. lect. lib.
4.
he drew on his Table a large picture of a Temple, with a door open, and the
Goddess, as it were, going in, so that the beholder could see nothing but her
back-parts. Now if so excellent an Artist, could not express the excellency of
Flesh and blood, How shall any man be able to paint or set out by any
presentation to the eye of Man the spiritual and invisible God? And therefore
let Demetrius the Silversmith, -- Procul hinc Zeuxis, procul es^o Licippus.
Horat.
and Alexander the Coppersmith, and all the other Carvers and Painters pack and
be gone, and nev^r employ their skill to resemble the Image of the
Incomprehensible God; because the drawing of his Image, will but rather show
the greatness of their folly, then be able to express the least part of his
glory.

In time of Prosperity to provide for Adversity.
THe Naturalists observe, Ulyss. Aldtovandi Ornithol. lib. 20. Plin. not. hist.
lib. 10. cap. 32. Tu quoque sac timeas, et quae tibi laeta videntur, Dum
loqueris fieri tris^ia posse puta. Ovid. 4. Pont. 3.
that whiles the Halcyon Bird is brooding her eggs, and bringing forth her young
ones, there is usually fair weather (from whence we call good times,
Halcyon-dayes) she neglects not any of those days, but sits close upon her
nest, and is very diligent in bringing forth, lest if there should be a change
of weather, the waters should grow high, and her young ones be in danger of
drowning: Thus in the times of Prosperity, we must provide for Adversity, lay
hold upon the opportunities of peace and liberty to ed^fie our selves in the
most holy Faith; This was the Church's care, Act. 9. 31. and this must be
ours, while our Ship is in the Haven to mend it there, when it is out at Sea in
a storm, it will be too late then; there is yet some hope, (but how long there
will be, God knows) let us provide for worser times, that we be not surprised
on a sudden when they come upon us.

Mercies of God in Christ Jesus to be sought while they may be found.
HE that intends to speak with any one in a well fortified Castle, Joh.
Bromiardi summa Praedicant.
must come by day whilst the draw- bridge is down, otherwise being once up,
there will be no entrance at all, Thus many a Man loses Mercy as Saul did his
Kingdom by not discerning the time; Esau came too late, and the foolish Virgins
did not lay hold upon the first opportunity; He therefore that resolves for
Heaven, must in the time of this life make good his passage, strive to enter
whilst the bridge of Mercy is let down; For if it be once drawn up, Fac b^ne
dum vivis, post mortem, etc.
there is no by-ward, no loop-hole to creep in at: And that Soul must needs then
be exposed to the Justice of God, where Mercy has shut up her tender bowels of
compassion.

own Children.
IT is reported of Gracchus a Nobleman of Rome, Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Conr. Zuinger. theat. hum. vitae.
that when the Nurse brought home his Child, he gave her a pearl of very great
price, and another of far lesser value to the Mother; And being demanded, Why
he respected the Nurse so much, and the Mother so little? answered; That the
Mother bare the Child but nine months in her womb, and the Nurse bare him
above thirty months in her arms. It was otherwise with Anthusa the Mother of
that Golden-mouthed Father, she was able to draw Arguments to dissuade her
son from leading a Monastic life, G. Williams of the Church.
by his drawing of her breasts, when he was an Infant; But now, it is much to
be feared, that very few Women can make out any such Reason to persuade, or
dissuade their Children, which is the cause many times, that as Parents have
showed little love and affection in the nursing of their Children, so their
Children in like sort do perform little regard and obedience to the honoring
of their Parents.

Professors of the Gospel.
FElix, Flac Illiric. cat. Test. veritat.
Earl of Wartenburgh, one of the Captains of Charles the fifth, swore in the
presence of diverse at Supper, That before he dyed he would ride up to the spurs
in the blood of Lutherans; but God soon cooled his courage; For, that very
night he was choked and strangled in his own blood. After John Hus was burnt,
Acts and Monuments.
his Adversaries got his heart, which was left untouched by the fire, and beat
it with their staves; And the bones of Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius were
taken up and burnt, after they had a long time been buried in silence: O the
desperate madness and malice of all Persecutors, such as burn in anger against
the Godly! It was S. Paul's prayer, that he might be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked Men; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
the word is (...), absurd Men, such as put themselves upon ways of opposition
against all Reason and common sense; nay, such is their rage and bitterness of
spirit, that it makes them break all bonds of humanity, and go against Laws or
any thing, so as they may but torment the dear servants of God.


IT is reported of a certain Duke of the Saracens, Joh. Bromiardi summa
Praedicant.
and he none of the wisest, that being almost persuaded to be a Christian,
would needs be baptized; but being brought to the water side, and having one
foot in, before he would wet the other, he demanded of the Baptizer, Where his
Father, Mother, Kindred, and Friends were that dyed without Baptism? It was
answered, Conr. Zuingeri theat. hum. vitae. lib. 7.
That they were all in Hell, with a Multitude of Unbelievers besides; But
whither shall I go, says he, when I am baptized; To Heaven, says the Priest,
if you live a good life; Nay then, says he, pulling his foot out of the water,
Take your Baptism to your self, let me go to that place, where the many, not
where the few, where my Friends and acquaintance, Turba tremens s^quitur
fortunam. Juven.
and a great number of others of all sorts are, I love see my Friends about me:
And this is just the fashion of this present wicked World, Men are much taken
with the Many, they choose rather to follow the Multitude to do evil, then to
close with the remnant, that shall be saved, to do any good: A sad choice, --
pauci quos aequus amavit Jupiter. Ovid.
God wot! to be so far taken with the common rabble that know not God, and run
headlong to Hell, rather then to join with the little flock of Christ that
shall be assuredly saved.

Every Man to think the best of his own Wife.
XEnophon being demanded, In appendice Xenophontea adject. operibus.
if his Neighbor had a better house then himself, and that he might have his
choice of them, which would he have, his or his own? he answered, His; so being
demanded the like question of his horse, -- Uxor bona chara supellex. Ovid.
of his Field, and the like, he still answered, His; But being asked, if his
Neighbor had a fairer or a better Wife then himself, Which of them he had
rather have; Hic Xenophon ipse tacuit, he either said, His own, or said
nothing; silently concluding, Quicunque bonus maritus et p^udens, suam amat et
curat. Homer.
That she was the best: Thus it is, that every Man must think his own Wife to
be the fairest and the faithfullest that he could find, esteeming of her as of
the best treasure he has, loving her above all others; not like the Egyptian
Frogs croaking in other Men's chambers; but, as the Adamant turns only to one
point, so keeping to his own Wife so long as they both shall live.

To be ready to suffer persecution by Christ's Example.
THere is mention made of a Roman servant, who knowing that his Master was
sought for by Officers to be put to death, Jer. Buroughs Moses choice, page 91.
he put himself into his Masters clothes, that he might be taken for him, and
so he was, and put to death for him; Whereupon in memory of his thankfulness
to him, the Master erected a brazen Statue with this Inscription, Servo fideli,
To the trustly servant: Thus Christ who was not a Servant, but our Lord and
Master, yet when he saw we were like to die, he took upon him the form of a
Servant, he came in our likeness^, that he might die for us, and he did so; Now
he requires not of us to ^rect any brazen Monument in memory of him, or in
honor to him, but that we should be ready and willing to suffer for him,
Philip. 1. Qui in Christ's credimus, Christi sectemur exemplar.
when he calls us thereunto: Certainly, his Example in humbling himself so much
to suffer for us, should be mightily prevalent with us, that if he emp^ied
himself so much to become the Son of Man, how much more should we (having so
fair a Copy to write by) be much more willing to empty our selves, Hieron.
epist. 9.
that we may be the sons of God.

Pride, the vanity thereof.
VAlerius Maximus, Val. Max. Qui^tus Curtius. de reb. ge^^is Alexand.
an eminent Observer of Times and Persons, says; That Alexander the Great had
three ill qualities; First, That he looked upon his Father (though otherwise
well enough qualified) as a Man of no d^sert at all. Secondly, Though he was a
Macedonian born, yet he put himself into the Persian garb, because more rich
and costly then his own. Thirdly, His conquest had so swelled him, that he
would be no longer a Man, but he must be a God forsooth, and no less then the
Son of Jupiter: Such is the nature of Pride, and natural condition of all proud
Men, whether it be in relation to things spiritual or temporal, that they
think no Man good enough to be their fellow; Stand further off, Joh. Feri
Postillae.
says one, I am holier then thou; Keep your distance, says another, I am
Richer, greater, etc. then thou: Let a Man be but once got upon a Foot-cloath,
how bigg does he look upon inferior passengers? And if he have purchased a
little more Land then his Neighbors, you shall see it in his garb; if he
command, it is imperiously; if he salutes, it is with a surly and silent nod;
He thinks with the Pharisee, Quid superbis terra et cinis, etc.
he is not like other Men, he looks upon himself as a Giant, Origin. homil. in
Ezech.
and upon all the World besides as dwarfs, as if made for nothing but to be
laughed at; when himself is but a Man, and, God knows, a foolish one too, whom
a little trash can a^^ect so deeply, not remembering, that as the King, so the
beggar; as dies the wise Man, so the fool; and that the Rich and the Poor
shall both meet together in the grave, Eccles. 7. 15.


A Certain King desirous to know, Cassiani Collat. lib. 2.
What Professors he had most in his Kingdom? one of his Courtiers answered,
Physicians; That Is impossible, said the King: But to make it good, the King
being disguised, he went along with him the next day amongst a Multitude of
People, and feigning himself not well, but troubled with such and so many
diseases, that he could not tell what to do without remedy; Then every one
began to tell him, What was good for such and such a disease; some one thing,
some another; none heard his complaint, but prescribed a remedy; and he was a
Fool that was not then a Physician: So it is now amongst us, G. Williams. of
the Church. Miser est qui docet antequam didicit, etc. Sidon. cp. lib. 4.
He is no body that is not a Teacher; Teaching Cobblers, teaching- Tradesmen,
teaching- Soldiers, all Teachers and Preachers; all got into the upper form,
when their place is in the lower; they are up in the Mount with Moses, when
they should stand below with Aaron amongst the People; they are teaching
others, when it is fit they should be taught themselves, their foolish heads
like over-seething pots, casting out the froth of their own shame.


WHen a Soldier was to die for taking a bunch of grapes against the Genera^'s
command, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice, page 99.
and going to Execution, he went eating his grapes; one of his Fellows rebuked
him, saying; What? are you eating your grapes now? The poor Man answers, I
prithee Friend do not envy me these grapes, for they do cost me dear; so they
did indeed, for they cost him his life: Thus let no Man envy the Prosperity of
the wicked, not fret at the Men of this World who live in pleasure, Quid
proderit area pl^na, etc? Aug. de verb. D^m. Sermon. 12.
and wallow in the sensual delights of this life, they know no better, they
seek after no better things; there is little cause, why any Man should grudge
what they have, for they must give a sad account of what they have received,
and pay dear at the last; even, without Gods preventing Mercy, the loss of
their immortal Souls to all Eternity.


IT is said of the Cranes, Ulyss. Aldrovand. Ornith^l^g. lib. 1.
that roosting by the Waterside, one of them is always upon the Watch, with a
stone in her claw, so that upon the approach of their Enemy, down falls the
stone into the water, wherewith being awakened, they take themselves to flight
for farther safety; And that natural Musick-Master the Nightingale, Plin. not.
hist. lib. 10.
being to delight her self with her Night-songs, and fearing lest that by
sleep, she should endanger her self to birds of prey, lets her breast against a
thorn to keep her waking: And thus must we be watchful over our selves in all
things, ut t^^psum serves non expergisceris?
especially in the performance of holy duties, Horat. ep. 7.
whether it be in Prayer when we speak unto God, or in Hearing when God speaks
unto us, or in Sacramental actions, wherein God off^reth himself freely unto
us, or when we be about to sing the songs of Sion, Col. 4. 4.
then it is that we must use all good means to keep us waking, because we are
every hand-while apt through our sluggishnesse to take a nap, and thereby to
endanger our Souls to those ravenous and hellish Fowls, who take their chief
delight in the works of darkness, and are ready to seize upon us, if they find
us sleeping.

Magistra^es, Ministers, etc. to be Men of courage.
ELvidius Priscus being commanded by Vespasian, Sue^onius in vita.
either not to come into the Senate, or being there to speak nothing but what
he directed; made answer, That being a Senator, it was sit he should go into
the Senate, and being there, it was his duty, to speak in his Conscience what
he thought to be true; and then being threatened, if he did so, he should die,
further added; That he never as yet told him that he was immortal; and
therefore, said he, Do what you will, I will do what I ought; Reipub. causa te
exponens et non cedens neque fugiens, etc. Aquin. de regim. princip.
And as it it in your power to put me unjustly to death, so it is in my power
to die resolvedly for the Truth: Here now was a brave spirited Heathen, sit for
Christian imitation; For he can never be a Faithful Man, that is afraid to
speak his mind: Men of public employment for the Peoples good, must and ought
to stand up for the Truth, to be Men of courage, Men of resolution, not fearing
the frowns of any whatsoever; not ecchoing out the dictates of others, but
freely speaking their own thoughts without any fear at all.

To be Temporate in meat and drink.
DAniel was afraid of taking liberty to his Flesh in eating the Kings meat;
(...). 1. 8.
Mean was the provision of John the Baptist, his fare was locusts and wild
honey, Matthew. 11. 11. epist. ad Iulianum.
and yet there was not a greater born of a woman before him. A few loaves and a
little bread was Basil's provision. Epist. 22. ad Eustach.
And Jerome reports of Hilarion, that he never did eat any thing before the Sun
went down, and that which he did eat at any time was very mean; nay, Jerome
himself lived very abstemiously with cold water, and a few dried Figgs, for to
eat any thing so much as boiled was accounted Luxury; And to make up the Mess,
S. Augustine has such an expression concerning himself as this; Lib. 10.
Confessionum.
Hoc me d^cuisti, Domine, etc. Thou Lord, have taught me this, That I should go
to my meat as to a Medicine; he meant, as not to satisfy his appetite, but to
repair Nature: Thus it has been the care of all Gods, dearest Servants, to
keep down their bodies, to club them down, so signifies the word (...), 1 Cor.
9. 27. to deny contentment to the Flesh, David Paren^ in locum.
not making the least provision for it; so that they have in their several
generations become eminently instrumental to Gods glory; whereas they that
cater only for their bellies, Vina venusque nocent. Horrendumque human^ in
corpore monstrum est. Mantuan.
have their brains sunk down into the quagmire of their bellies, so that their
parts, those g^fts of understanding they were wont to have, are as the light of
a snuff fallen down into the socket, even drowned with the filth of their
Intemperance, being fit for nothing.


IT is reported of the Birds of Norwey, Olaus Mag. hist. Septentrional.
that they fly faster then the Fowls of any other Country, not because
Nature has given more nimblenesse or agility to their wings, but by an
instinct; they knowing the days in that Climate to be very short, not above
three hours long, do therefore make the more haste to their nests: Thus should
every one of us do, Vive memor quam sis aevi brevis.
and strange it is that we do not so; Shall birds make such use of their
observation, know their appointed time, Ier. 8. 7. Then let us practically,
knowing the shortness of our lives, by a speedy and seasonable Repentance make
haste to our home, the house appointed for all living, Job. 30. 23.


FErdinando King of Spain, Rerum Ger. Scriptores.
when he sent Pedrarias to be Governor of the Western Islands, forbade him to
take any Lawyer or Advocate along with him; his reason was, that they mig^t no^
sow the seed of suits, where there were none before: And it was usually put on
by K. James, in a cautionary way, upon the convention of any Parliament, that
they should have a care of the wrangling Lawyer, (and another sort of peevish
People) in a more especial manner; not but that the Laws are right, but the
practice of them is much abused; God and Men have made them Righteous, but the
Lawyers have found out inventions; They are Virgins in calamo, pure Virgins as
they were first penned, but Meretrices in foro, R. Willan. Conspiracy against
Kings, Gods laughter. A Sermon at Court, 1627.
prostituted whores as they are pleaded; Lawyers being now like the Physicians
in Christ's time, on whom the poor Widow had spent all that she had, and was
never the nearer to her health; so Men may spend their money, and lose a great
deal of pre^ous time in running after Lawyers, and in the end be in a far worse
case then they were at the beginning.


IT is reported of a Young Man, Joh. Cassiani Collat. lib. 2.
that had devoted himself to a Religious life; whereupon his Parents disl^king
that way, wrote diverse letrers unto him, to dissuade him; but he being resolved
to go on, when any letters came afterward directed to him, he would not so
much as open them, but threw them into the fire: And thus it is, that a Man is
no sooner entered into a trade of Godliness, and shall give up his name unto
Christ, but Flesh and blood will be ready to come in and say; Spare your self,
What need you to do thus and thus, you may do well enough at last: This now is
destructive Counsel, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
pleasing damnation; hearken not to it, throw away these letters, these carnal
suggestions; do not by any means answer them; but be resolved in thine heart,
and say; I know in whom I have believed, I did not choose this way rashly, but
I felt the power of God upon my heart before I made my choice, and I had
grounds and Arguments for my so doing, and whatsoever can be suggested to the
contrary, I will not give ear unto it.


WAx, J. Downham Guide to Godliness.
when it is laid in cold places becomes so hard and stiff, that it will break
rather then bow; but being laid in the Sun becomes soft and plya^le, M. Ficinus
in Dionys. Areopagite, de div. nom.
fit for any impression: So when we neglect the duty of Meditation on good
things, our hearts being changed from God, wax hard and obdurate; but when by
Meditation, we draw nigh unto him, the beams of his favor shining upon our
hearts do make them soft and flexible, and fit for any holy impression that he
shall be pleased to stamp upon them.

A good Wish to good Government.
PTolomy King of Egypt, feasting on a day seven several Ambassadors, requested
each of them to name three of the best Customs that they had in their several
and respective Commonwealths; G. Williams of the Church.
And first the Roman Ambassador said; We do greatly reverence our Temples, We
do faithfully obey our Governors, And we do severely punish all lewd livers.
Secondly, Conr. Zuingeri the atrum hum. vitae.
the Carthagenian said; With us the Nobles are ever warring, The Commons ever
laboring, And the Philosophers ever teaching. Thirdly, the Sicilian said; With
us Justice is exactly kept; Merchandise is truly exercised; And all Men account
themselves equal. Fourthly, the Rhodian said; With us old Men are honest,
Young men are shamefast, And Women are silent. Fifthly, the Athenian said; With
us Rich men are not factious, Poor men are not idle, Governors are not
ignorant. Sixthly, the Lacedemonian said; With us Envy reigns not, for all
Men are equal; Covetousness corrupts not, for all Goods are common; And
Sloth dwells not; for all that can, do labor. And lastly, the Syconian
said, With us Voyages are not permitted, left they should bring home new
fashions; Physicians are not suffered, lest they should kill the sound; And
Orators are not entertained to maintain and plead causes, Gubernatio recta est
cum fit gratia gubernati non gubernatoris. Marsil. Ficinus in Plat. de Regno.
lest they should make the good evil, and the evil good. Here now are
Governments of all sorts, and it is to be heartily wished, that the Civil
Magistrate, and such as are entrusted with the Peoples interests, would truly
imitate what is good in any of them, that when the Governor of all Governors
shall come to Judgment, he may say unto them, Euge boni servi, Well done ye
good and faithful servants, enter into your Masters joy.

The ways of Godliness more comfortable then Worldly Men can imagine.
PEter Martyr in his Sermons on 1 Cor. has a passage (which occasioned the
Conversion of that Noble Marquess Galeacius Vico): If ^o be, Jer. Borroughs
Moses Choice.
says he, one should see a Company of Musicians that are playing and dancing,
according to their art, upon some Hill a great-way off, he would think that
they were a company of Madmen out of their wits; but if he come nearer and
nearer, and hear the melodious sound of the Music, and observe their art in
all they do, how the Musicians keep their time, and the Dancers their measures;
then he will be of another mind: And so Men of the World look upon the ways of
Godliness as very uncomfortable, Coecus non judicat de coloribus.
and upon the People of God as afar off, and think them Madmen to take such
strict courses; but if they would come nearear and observe their ways, and see
the equity and reason, and observe the excellency and beauty that is in them,
they would soon be of other minds; and find for certain, that the service of
God is per^ect freedom, and that his Servants are the only merry People in the
World.

The necessity of divine Meditation.
IT is generally observed, J. Downom's Guide to Godliness.
that a Man which casts up his food soon after he has eaten it, may by the
virtue of some small relics that remain behind in the stomach, live for a
good time in a weak estate and poor plight, but will never be fat, healthy and
strong, if the meat be not retained, concocted and applied to the several
parts: Thus Meditations is the food of our Souls, or the very stomach and
natural heat whereby it is disgested; Well may our Souls live a kind of
spiritual life by hearing and reading the Word, Animae Viaticu^ est meditatio.
Bern. in Cant.
yet for want of Meditation, and thinking of it afterward, they retain little
of that spiritual food, but cast up all again, saving some small remainders
which upon occasion will come into their minds; yet for all this, they cannot
be in any good plight, or have any spiritual growth, unless they digest what
they hear and read by Meditation, and making it truly their own by applying it
home to their own Souls and Consciences.


THe Graecians had a custom, that when the new married Wife was brought home
to her husbands house, Coel. Rhodegin. le^t. Var. Carolus. Sigonius de Repub.
Romans
they burnt the axel-tree of the Wagon before the doors, to show, that she
must now dwell there, and not depart thence; And the Romans had a custom, that
when the Bride came to the entry of her Husbands house, the Bridegroom took her
by the wings of her gown, and lift her so high, that she struck her head and
the door-post together, and so set her within the doors, to teach her by the
remembrance of that blow, not to go often forth out of her Husband's house;
Plutarch. moral.
And the Egyptians did give no shoes unto their Wives, but suffered them to go
barefoot, because they should abide at home: Hence it is that a Woman is
compared to a Snayl, that never goes abroad but with her house upon her head;
Uxor bona chara sup^llex.
When her Husband provides things necessary abroad, she must be careful to
order them at home, not to be gadding abroad, but to keep at home, her greatest
Virtue being not to be known of any but her Husband.


AS it is with the Deer that is hunted, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
when the Huntsman goes into the Park, he rouzes the whole herd, and they all
run together; but if one be shot, and they see the blood run down, they will
soon push him out of their Company: Or as a Man being in his travel upon the
Road, and there being a Sun-Dyall set up in the way; If the Sun shine, he will
step out of his way to take notice of it, but if the Sun do not shine, he will
go by a hundred times and never regard it: So let but the Sun of Prosperity
shine upon a Man, then who but he? Multos numerabit amicos, he shall have
Friends more then a good many; but if a clowdy day come and take away the
Sunshine, solus erit, he may easily number his acquaintance; And so when a Man
goes on in the credit of the World, he shall be well come into all Companies,
and much made of by every one; but if he come once to be shot, Nil tamen
attuleris, etc.
and disgrace put upon him, then he shall soon perceive a clowd in every Man's
face, no one so much as regarding him.


DOctrinae radix amara, Jo. Downam's Guide to Godliness.
fructus vero dulcis, is a saying as old as true, Children in all Ages have
found it so; What discouragements and difficulties have they ever found in
their first entrance to Learning? But having made some progress therein, the
nut being once cracked, and they tasting the sweetness of the Kernel, go on
with cheerfulness and delight, through all difficulties whatsoever, and so in
time become eminently isntrumental in Church or Commonweal. So the greatest
difficulty is in the first beginnings of the exercise of divine Meditation,
Aegre quidem, sed faciamus tamen.
it being a thing so harsh to corrupt Nature, so repugnant to carnal
Principles; yet for all that, use and practice will make it easy familiar;
besides, the sweetness that we shall find therein, and the benefit that we
shall reap thereby, will make a rich return for all our pains and labor; the
thought of tediousness will be taken away, so that we shall perform the work
with alacrity of Spirit here in this World, and be fitted for Saints in that
which is to come.

Men to bear with the Infirmities of their Wives.
KIng Taxiles said unto Alexander, when he came to war against the Indians,
Plutarch in vita Alexandri.
(...), etc. Why should we make war one against another, neither of us want
either food (...) (...) If thou be less then I, receive benefits of me; and if
thou art greater, I will take courtesies from thee; Hereupon they were both
Friends: So if our infirmities be more then our Wives, Why should we be grieved
to bear with theirs, Nath. Shute Sermon. at S. Mild. Poultry Land* 1636.
seeing they bear a great deal with us? If their infirmities be more then ours,
Why has God made us the stronger, but to be the better able to bear the
infirmities of a weaker Vessel? If we bear with one another, Patience heals
what offense wounded; But if the one be Fire, and the other Fl^x, then nothing
can follow but combustion, even the flames of contention and debate.

Piety, not promotion, that makes up a Godly Minister.
IT was the speech of Boniface that was a Martyr, Laurent. Surius in vita.
one asking him, Whether it were law^ul to give Sacramental Wine in a wooden
cup: Time was, said he, when there ^ere wooden Chalices and golden Priests,
but now there are golden Chalices and wooden Priests: Thus it was of old, they
thought then to gain Men's devotion by outward pomp and bravery, yet when
wooden Chalices came in, that things were carried in a lower way, the
Ministry lost nothing of its luster; Whereas many Ministers think, if they
should be poor and mean, every one would contemn their Ministry, hence they
fondly imagine, that the way to have the Ministry respected, is to get great
(...) but they are quite out, that will not do it; For it is Piety not
promotion that makes up a godly Minister; And a poor godly man that exercises
his function conscionably, will gain more respect then any other Dignitaries
whatsoever.

Friendship tried in times of Affliction.
IT is reported of Herodius, Wife to Herod the Tetrarch, who when the Emperor
had deprived her husband of the Tetrarchy, Josephi Antiquit. Iud. lib. 19. cap.
9.
and banished him into France, understanding that Herodias was Agrippa's
Sister, gave her all her husbands estate, supposing, that she would not go
along with him; but she answered the Emperor, saying, There is a cause that
hinders me from partaking the benefit of your bounty, The affection I bear to
my husband, because I have shared with him in his Felicity: Whereupon the
Emperor being displeased with her answer, banished her likewise. Memorable is
that also of David's brethren, and those of his Fathers house, 1 Samuel 22. 1.
who when they heard of his being in the Cave of Adullam, slighted the
forfeiture of their goods, and venturing the displeasure of Saul, Amicus certus
in re incerta, etc.
went down to comfort him: And thus it is, that true Friendship is best tried
in times of Affliction and distress; Prove. 17. 17.
A brother, a Friend, a Wife, is, for the time of Adversity. Away then with
those Summer-birds, those false-hearted Friends, that like ditches are full in
the Winter-season, but dry in the heat of Summer when we have most need of them.


MEn that are sick and weakly in their bodies, J. Downham Guide to Godliness.
do not altogether abstain from food and Physic, but rather use them, that
they may recover their strength again; and though their appetite is small, yet
they force themselves, that by eating a little and a little, they may get a
stomach: Shall a Man that is dim-sighted, shut the windows because the house
is dark? Shall he not rather open them to let in the light, that he may the
better see to go about his business? And the colder a man feels himself, the
more needful he thinks it to come to the fire and warm himself, or use some
exercise, that so he may recover his natural heat. Thus in like manner, the
sight of our own natural wants and weaknesses is not a sufficient plea to bar
us from the exercise of divine Meditation, -- sed contra audentior ito.
but rather incite us thereunto, it being an excellent means to clear up our
sight, to enlighten our minds with more knowledge, to get spiritual health and
strength, and to warm our cold and frozen hearts, that so by Gods assistance,
we may perform service unto him with more heat of Godly Zeal and fervor of
devotion.


ERasmus in his Adagies reports of a young Man, that had travailed many
Countries, and at last returning home, began to praise himself in every
Company; and amongst many his other excellent feats that he had done, he said,
that in the Isle of Rhodes, he out-jumped all the Men that were there, and all
the Rhodians could bear him witness of the same: Whereupon a stander by said;
(...), If thou say true, think this to be Rhodes, and jump here; And then he
could do just nothing, but hid his face for shame: Thus, Hieron. Thryverus in
Hippocrat. aphorism.
as those sticks that send forth most smoke, do afford least heat; So those Men
that are the greatest boasters, are for the most part the least doers;
according to our English Proverb, Minima possunt qui plurima ^actant.
Great boast, Thryverus.
and small roast. Alas! what are words? mere van^ty, if not attended with
deeds; hence is that saying, Loquere ut te videam, so speak, that I may see
you; make no more words, but what may be demonstrated by deeds in the view of
all Men.


IT is reported of Herod Agrippa, Josephus de Antiquitat. Iud. lib. 18. cap. 8.
(the same that was eaten up of Worms, Act. 12. 23.) that being bound in
chains, and sent to prison by Tiberius for wishing Caius in the Empire, one
Thaumastus a servant of Caius, carrying a pitcher of Water, met him; And
Agrippa being very thirsty, desired him to give him drink;
which he willingly did: Whereupon Agrippa said; This service thou have done in
giving me drink, shall do thee good another day: And he was as big as his word;
for afterward, when Caius was Emperor, and Agrippa made King of Judea, he
first got his liberty, then made him a chief Officer of his household; and after
his decease, took order that he should continue in the same Office with his
Son: How much more then shall Christ reward those that shall give to his
distressed members but a cup of cold water (one of the least, Grave nimis est
ut fructu laboris sui fraudetur bonus, etc. Matthew. 10. 42.
readiest and meanest refreshments that may be) in the midst of their
Afflictions? Shall not he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
have a Prophets reward? Yes, surely, they shall not be unrecompenced; when
Christ shall appear in his glory, he will own them before Men and Angels.

Want of matter not to be pretended against the practice of Divine Meditation.
LOok but upon an Earthly-minded Man, and he will have matter enough to think and
meditate upon in worldly things, W. Strong, Sermon. at Westminster. 1652.
if it were for a whole year together, building as it were Castles in the air,
busying himself about things that are not, or ever shall be; and herein they
are such quick Workmen too, that they can both gather their straw, and burn
their brick in full tale: Strange then! that any Man should object the want of
matter, or barrenness of invention in the Meditation of things spiritual;
whereas did he but resort to Gods storehouses, (like the Egyptians to Joseph's)
did he but open the large volume of the Creation, and unclasp the book of holy
Scriptures, -- monstrat quaelibe^ herba Deum.
he might find abundant matter of Meditation; besides, the consideration of his
own misery, his manifold sins and corruptions, wants and imperfections, Gods
great Mercies and blessings, the admin^stration of his Judgments, the workings
of his Providence, etc. so that there is no want of good seed, no cause to
complain of any thing, but the barrenness of heart, and averseness to good
things, if there be not bringing forth fruit in a plentiful manner.

More comfortable to have a strong Faith, then a weak one.
AS two Ships sailing together, the one sound and well tackled; the other
leaking and wanting sails, G. Williams of the Church.
though both do arrive at the same port; yet not both alike disposed; the one
comes in merrily and confidently, the other with much difficulty and doubting:
So the strong in Faith does singingly walk toward Heaven, goes on comfortably
and with full assurance, when they of little faith do but, as it were, creep
thither with many doubts, great fears, and small joy; And therefore as it is no
Wisdom for any Man to continue poor that may be Rich, or to live in Fear, when
he may be free from it; So it is no point of Wisdom, no piece of Christian
Prudence for a Man to content himself with a weak Faith, when by any means he
may increase it.

Men to be forward in promoting the cause of God and Religion.
FAmous is the Story of one Terentius, a Captain in the Emperor Valens his
Army, Theodoret. hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 23.
who returning from Armenia with a great Victory, the Emperor bade him ask
what he would; He only desired as a Recompense for all his service, That there
might be granted a Church to the Orthodox in Antioch, (where, to the honor of
the place, Christ did, as it were, at first spread his glorious banner, Act.
11. 26.) that they might freely meet there, and publicly join together in the
service of their God; The motion, he could not but know, must be exceedingly
unwelcome to the Emperor, Si perit Ecclesiae causa, periisse juvabit.
because he was an Arrian; Prosper.
and so it proved: For the Emperor tore his Petition, and bade him ask
something else; but Terentius gathered up the torn pieces of the paper, and
said; Hoc tantum desidero, etc. This I ask as a reward of my service, and I
will ask nothing else: Here was a ^ree sp^rited Man, a true Christian Soldier,
that sum'd up all his service for the public, in an humble Petition for the
Church's good, Dic mihi Musa virum, S^ow me such another: Do men improve their
Interest in great ones, and make such use of opportunities as may conduce to
the good of Gods cause and Religion? They do not; It is too too apparent, that
Men are too much biased, too much (...)-ended, seeking, quae sua non quae
Christi, their own things, not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 21.
Theophilact, Anselm. in (...).
preferring their own private gain, and Worldly profit before the advancement
of Gods true Religion.


IT is the persuasion of Seneca to his Friend Lucilius, Epist. 11.
for the better keeping of himself within compass of his duty, to imagine,
that some great Man, some strict, quick-sighted, clear-brain'd Man, such as
Cato or Laelius did still look upon him: And being come to more perfection,
would have him to fear no Man's presence more then his own, nor any Man's
testimony above that of his own Conscience; and adds this Reason, because he
might flee from another, but not from himself, Jo. Downame Guide to Godliness.
and escape another's censure, but not the censure of his own Conscience: Thus,
did but Men set God before their eyes, and always remember, that his eyes are
upon them, it would be a notable bridle to pull them back, Deus totus oculus
est, etc.
and to hold them up when they are ready to fall into any Sin; it would make
them to watch over themselves, Aug. in Psalm. 120.
that they did not do any wickedness in his sight, who is greater then their
Consciences; and so upright in his Judgments, that though Conscience may be
silenced for a time, and give no evidence, or be a false Witness to the truth,
yet it is impossible to escape his sentence, either by flight or any appeal
whatsoever.


JOsephus in his book of the Antiquities of the Jews, Lib. 20. cap. 4.
makes mention of one Cumanus, a Governor of Judea, that though he were but an
Heathen, and a Wicked Man, yet he caused a Soldier to be beheaded, for tearing
a Copy of the Book of Moses Law, which he found at the sacking of a Town; And
venerable in all Ages, and amongst all Nations, have been the books that
contained the Laws either of their Belict or Polity; R. Holdsworth Sermon. 1632.
as the Jews, their Talmud; the Romans, the Laws of the twelve Tables; the
Turks, their Alcoran; and all Pagans, the Laws of their Legislators: And shall
not Christians have then an high esteem of the holy Scriptures, and deem them
(as the good old Christians did) to be the Miroir of divine Grace and Man's
misery, Schola coelestis, eruditio vitalis, etc. Cassiodor in Psalm. 115.
the Touchstone of Truth, the Shop of remedies against all evil, the Hammer of
Heretics, the Treasury of Virtue, the Displayer of Vanities, the Balance of
Equity, and the most perfect Rule of all Truth and honesty.


IT is a note of Mr. Calvin's upon that Text, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
Seek ye my face, Psalm. 27. 8. That Superstitious People will go on Pilgrimage
to the Image of such a Lady, or such a Saint, or to visit the Monument of the
Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and they will go over Mountains, and through strange
Countries; and though they be used ^ardly, and lose much of their estates,
sometimes in perils of false brethren, other times in the hands of Arabian
Robbers, they satisfy themselves in this, I have that I came for. Alas! What
came they for? the sight of a dumb Idol, a mere nothing. If they then will
endure such hardship for the sight of a mere empty shadow, How much pains
should we take to see God in his Ordinances? Psalm. 84. 6. -- Per ardua Virtus.
What though the way to Sion lie through the valley of Bacha; Surely, when God
moves the hearts of Men to join with his People, a little difficulty cannot
hinder them, they will be content to go through the valley of tears, so as they
may appear before God in Sion; they will go through thick and thin, rather then
not go to Church at all: And thus as it is prophesied of the Church of God,
that she should be called, Sought out; i. e. sought unto, or sought after,
Notae diverse. Ministr. in locum.
Esaias 62. 12. It is heartily to be wished, that it might be so, a place had in
high estimation and regard, which out of respect and devotion, Men would repair
and resort unto, encouraging others also so to do, saying; Come let us go up to
the Mountain of the Lord, that our hearts may be refreshed with the
consolations of our God, in the way of his Ordinances.

Experimental Knowledge, the only Knowledge.
IT is well known, that the great Doctors of the World by much reading and
speculation, Jos. Shute Sermon. ut Merc. Chap. Land. 1629.
attain unto a great height of Knowledge, but seldom to sound Wisdom, which
has given way to that common Proverb, The greatest Clerks, are not always the
wisest Men; It is not studying of the Politiques that will make a Man a wise
Counselor of Estate, till his Knowledge is joined with experience; which
^eacheth, where the Rules of State hold, and where they fail; It is not
book-knowledge that will make a good General, a skillful Pilot, no not so much
as a cunning Artizan, Experientia docet.
till that knowledge is perfected by practice and experience; And so surely,
though a Man abound never so much in literal knowledge, it will be far from
making him a good Christian, unless he bring precepts into practice, and by
feeling experience apply that he knows, to his own use and spiritual
advantage.

The Church of the Gospel, it is amplitude above that under the Law.
THe Samaritans Inn was called (...), because it gave entertainment to all
strangers, Edm. Leigh. Crit. Sacra in loc.
Luke 10. 34. In S. Peter's sheet were all sorts of Creatures, four-footed
Beasts, and creeping things, Act. 10. 11. The Net, mentioned in S. Matthews
Gospel caught all kind of Fish, Chap. 13. 47. Ahashueru's Feast welcomed all
comers, Esth. 1. 4. Such is the Church of the Gospel in its amplitude; The
Prophetical Gospel was hedged in and limited within the pale of Palestine; but
the Apostolical Gospel is spread over the face of the whole Earth; Then it was
lux modii, Matthew. Styles Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1627.
a light under a bushel; now lux mundi, the light of the World: Then the
Prophets sang, In Iudaea natus est Deus, In Jury is God known, his Name is
great in Is^ael; but now we sing, Laudate Dominum omnes gentes, Praise the Lord
all ye Nations. Psalm. 76. 1.
Then the Name of Christ was an ointment kept close in a box; but now it is an
ointment poured out. Psalm. 117.
And lastly, then the Church was a Garden enclosed, a Fountain sealed up; but
now it is a springing Well, that overflowes the World to renew it, as Noah's
flood did to destroy it.

The Company of Wicked Men to be avoided.
IT was once the Prayer of a good Gentlewoman, when she was to die, being in
much trouble of Conscience; Jer. Buroughs Moses choice,
O Lord, let me not go to Hell, where the Wicked are; For, Lord, thou know I
never loved their Company here: the same in effect, though not in the same
words, was that of holy David, Lord gather not my Soul with Sinners. Psalm. 26.
6.
Thus if Men would not have their Souls gathered with Wicked Men hereafter,
they must take heed of joining with them here; Can God take it well at any
Man's hands, to go and shake hands with his Enemies? God himself will not so
much as reach out his hand to the Wicked. Biblia vulgat. edit. Job 8. 28.
Why then should any of us do so? Can we be in any place where we see God
dishonored, and sit still as though not concerned therein? Certainly, the
sight of Sin, wheresoever, Psalm. 119. 5^.
or by whomsoever it is committed, should cause horror in the Soul, it should
make us forbear coming into such wretched Company.


IT is observable, J. Downam's Guide to Godliness.
that when Men have misspent their youth in Riotous living, neglected all
means of thriving, and prodigally wasted their Estates; but coming to riper
years, and being beaten with the rod of their own experience in the sight of
their folly, do not only, desist from their former lewd courses; but are sorry
and ashamed of them, and set themselves with so much the more care and
diligence to recover and repair their decayed estates, and with the greater
earnestness use all good means of thriving; -- Validis incumbere remis.
And he that being to travel about important business nearly concerning his
life and estate, if he have over-slept himself in the Morning, or trifled out
his time about things of no worth, when he sees his error and folly, he makes
the more haste all the day following, that he may not be benighted, and so
coming short of his journey, be frustrate of his hopes: And thus must every
good Christian do, laboring with so much the more earnestness after the
spiritual riches of Grace, Plus vigila semper, etc.
and assurance of his Heavenly hope, by how much the longer he has neglected
the spiritual thri^t; And tra^elling so much the more speedily in the ways of
God, by how much the longer he has deferred his journey, and loytered by the
way, fearing (as the Apostle speaks) lest a promise being left of entering
into Gods rest, he come short of it, Heb. 4. 1.


POmpey the Great, Josephus lib. 14. cap. 8. A^tiquitat.
who is noted by Titus Livius, and Cicero, to be one of the most fortunate
Soldiers in the World, yet after he had abused and robbed the Temple of
Jerusalem, he never prospered; but, velut unda s^pervenit undam, as one wave
follows another, so ill successes succeeded to him, one on the neck of
another, till at last he made an end of an unhappy life by a miserable death;
Many more Examples of the like nature are recorded to posterity: To what
purpose? To forewarn them of the heavy Judgments that depend upon all
Sacrilegers, that as the A^k of God could find no resting place amongst the
Philistines, A sacris abstinendae manus.
but was removed from Asdod to Gath, from Gath to Ekron, and so from place to
place, till it came to it is own proper place; so shall it be with the goods of
Gods Church, of what nature soever, being wrung out of the Church's hands by
violence, Quae malign contraxit Pater, pejori fluxu refundet haeres, Pet
Blesens. Epist. 10.
That which the Father has so wickedly scraped together, the Son shall more
wickedly scatter abroad, and so it shall pass and repasse from one to another
until it be far enough from him and his, for whom it was collected, so that
the outside of all his goodly purchase will be the Judgment of God against
himself, and the curse of God to remain upon his Posterity.


WHen there were several attempts made upon Luther, Melch. Adamus in vita.
to draw him back again to the Romish side, one proposed a sum of Money to be
offered unto him; No, that will not do, says another; Illa bestia Germanica
non curat argentum, etc. That German beast cares not for money, nor any
temporal thing whatsoever, B^sil. magn. hom. in 40 Martyrs.
and so they ceased any further tampering that way; Such was the Christian
resolution of those Four^y Martyrs under the persecution of Lici^ius the
Emperor, Anno 300. that when Agricolaus his chief Governor, and one of the
Devil's prime Agents, set upon them by several ways to renounce Christ, and
at last tempted them with money and preferments, they all cried out with one
consent, (...), etc. O Eternity! Eternity! Give money that may last ^or (...),
1 Cor. 2. 2.
and glory that may never fade away; Nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified
will serve S. Paul's turn; And thus it is, that nothing but Eternity will
satisfy the gracious Soul; Let all the World, the things of Heaven and Earth,
present themselves to the Soul by way of satisfaction, it will say; What are
ye? Temporal, or Eternal? If temporal, away with them; but if they bring
Eternity along with them, if the Inscription of Eternity be set on them, then
it closes with them, and is satisfied in the sweet enjoyment of them.

The Ranters Religion.
IT is reported of the Lindians, a People in the Isle of Rhodes, Herdotus.
Strabo.
who using to offer their Sacrifices with curses and execrable Maledictions,
thought their unholy holy-Rites were profaned, if that in all the time of the
solemnity, vel imprudenti alicui exciderit verbum bonum, Lactant. de vero Dei
cultu. A^que Deos alque astra vocant crudelia, etc. Virgil.
any one of them at unawares should have cast out or let fall one good word:
Such is the irreligious Religion, and desperate carriage of a wretched crew,
called Ranters, whose mouths are filled with cursing, and blasphemous
speeches, and that in such an ^orrid and confused manner, as if Pythagoras his
(...) were to be credited, a Man would think Rabshekah's Soul had been
transported into their bodies, their Dialect being alike Divellish, their
language semblable.

Flatterers to be avoided.
WHen Xerxes with his multitudinous Army marched toward Greece, and asked of
his Friends, Trog. Pomp. hist.
What they feared most; and one said, That when the Greeks heard of his coming,
they would fly away, before he could come near them; another said, He feared
the air had not room enough for the arrows of his Army; another feared, All
Greece was not sufficient to quarter his Soldiers in; And then Damascerus the
Philosopher said, He feared that all those Parasites would deceive him: And no
wonder, For many Men have been eaten up, and cheated out of their whole estates
by such dissembling and devouring Caterpillars: adulationis unctio est domorum
emunctio, the oil of Flattery has soaked up many a good Family; Plus nocet
lingua adulatoris qua^ gladius persecutoris, says another, A Flatterers
tongue, S. August. in Psalm. 56.
does more mischief then a Persecutors sword; so that better it were for Men to
live (...), amongst Ravens, then (...), amongst Flatterers; For Ravens fe^d
only upon dead carcasses, Diog. Laert. in vita Diog. Cyn.
and Flatter^rs feast upon living Men; Adulatores sunt hosts et scintillae
Diaboli. Hieron. in Prove. 1.
they are therefore to be banished from our ears, or at the least no ways
trusted, and by no means countenanced; which if they be, it is to be feared
they will not only deceive us, but also destroy us, Prove. 26. 28. and mislead
from the ways of goodness.

The Vanity of temporal things compared with those Eternal.
A Bulensis setting out the Vanity of all Worldly excellency, Com. in 2 Reg.
cap. 15. qu. 20. et in cap. 17. qu. 21.
observes; That those who have been the most glorious in what Man accounts
excellent, have had inglorious ends, whereby their splendour has been much
eclipsed; As in Sampson for strength, and what a contemptible end had he?
Absolon for beauty, Achitophel for Policy, Azahel for swiftness, Alexander the
great for Conquests, yet poisoned in the end; And he instanceth also in
Kingdoms, as that of the Assyrian, the Chaldean, Persian, Grecian, and Roman;
How soon were they gone? He might have added, Commonwealths; For be they never
so well settled, they must have their ending too.


SUch then is the Vanity of all temporal things, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
Sic parvis est componere magna, etc.
compared with those Eternal; The beauty of all Wordly things being but as a
fair picture drawn upon the (...) that melts away with it; The fashion of this
World passes away; And d^d but Worldly Men consider, what is become of all
those, that have had as great dealings, and as many merry-meetings as they, and
have indulged the Flesh as much as they, that they are gone, rotten in their
graves, and their Souls (it may be) crying under the wrath of an infinite God,
and all their bravery and delights at an end, they would then leave doting on
the World, and fix their hearts upon things that shall make for their Eternal
and everlasting good.


PLiny in his natural history reports of Hedg-hogs, Will. Barlow Defense of
Art. of Relig.
that having been abroad to provide their store, and returning home laden with
nuts and fruit, if the least Filbert fall but off, they will in a pettish
humor, fling down all the rest, and beat the ground for very anger with their
bristles: And such is the peevish fancy of many strait-laced Christians amongst
us, (such as in themselves are bells of passing good Metal, and tuneable
enough, though by the artifice of some, miserably rung out of tune) that will
leave our Church, W. Laud ep. ded. in Reply to Fisher.
and remain obstinate for trifles and accidents, Ceremonies, things in
themselves adiaphorous, indifferent, and harmless, that Fire has tried them
to be but stubble and straw-controversies, 1 Cor. 3.
easy to be moderated, if Malice and Prejudice make not men irreconcilable.


AESop being sent by his Master, to buy all the best meat he could get in the
Market, Ia vita Aesopi.
bought all Tongues; And being sent again to buy all the worst, he bought all
Tongues again: being demanded, Why he did so, answered; That no flesh was
better then a good Tongue, nor any worse then a bad Tongue: And most true it
is, Plutarch.
as Bias told Amasis King of Egypt, The Tongue is the best and worst member of
the body, for the most part, an unruly michievous member lambit et laedit,
Li^gua mali pa^s p^ssi^a servi. Juvenal.
a killing and destroying Member; a dangerous weapon, and the worst of all
other weapons; the stroke of a sword may be born off, the shot of an arrow may
be shunned; or if not, the wounds may be healed; but there is no way to escape
a poisoned Tongue, Saints Paginni these. ling. sanct.
no salve to cure it; hence it is well observed, that a Word, and a Pest grow
upon the same root in Hebrew, signifying, that the Plague and an (...) Tongue
go together.


THere is a notable Story of one Theodorus a Christian young Man in Egypt, who,
Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
when there was a great deal of Feasting with Musi^k in his Fathers house,
withdrew himself from all the Company, and being got alone, thus thought with
himself; Here is content and delight enough for the Flesh, I may have what I
desire, but how long will this last? this will not hold out long; then falling
upon his knees to God in prayer; O Lord, says he, my heart is open unto thee,
I indeed know not what to ask, but only this, Lord let me not dye Eternally, O
Lord, thou know I love thee, O let me live Eternally to praeise thee: And
then when his Mother came to him, and would have had him come in to the rest of
the Company, he made an excuse and would not, only upon this Meditation,
because he saw, this could not hold out long: And thus it is heartily to be
wished, that the Sons of Men, when they find their hearts beginning to be let
out upon any temporal good, when they are in the midst of all their Worldly
delights and pleasures would think upon Eternity, Sursum corda.
and reason with themselves thus; I am now in the midst of all temporal
enjoyments, but will they hold out? I was made to abide for ever, I was made
for that God that must abide for ever; What are a sew hours here? if years,
they were nothing to Eternity; Those that abide longest in the fruition of
health and prosperity, their time is but a bubble, they are gone, and the
memory of them is perished; Xenophilus in Pliny lived an hundred and five years
without any sickness; lib. 7. cap. 5.
but what is that to Eternity?

Popery, a mere heap of Confusion.
IT is said of the Nabis, Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 18.
a beast in Egypt so called; that it has the shape of several beasts; and of
Hanniball's Army, that it consisted ex colluvie omnium Gentium of the very scum
of all Nations. Thus the whole body of Popery is naught else but a very amassed
lump of Pagan Rites, and old Heretical dregs, as in their Purgatory, Idolatry,
Sacrifice for the dead, holy Water, Free Will, challenge of the Church, merit
of Works, renouncing of Scriptures, etc. so that as Josephus said of Apion's
writings, lib. 1.
that they were (...), a mere dunghill of shameless untruths, rather then
Orthodox verities, a mere heap of trash and trumpery.

Children to have a care how they marry without consent of Parents
TErtullian the African Father, writing to his Wife concerning Marriage,
closes all with a piece of admiration, G. Williams of the Church.
U^de sufficiam ad e^arrandam foelicitatem ejus Matrimonii, quod Ecclesia
conciliat, confirmat oblatio, etc. O how shall I be able suffciciently, to
describe the happy state of that Couple, whom the Church has joined, Prayer
and thanksgiving have confirmed, Angels in Heaven proclaimed, and the Parents
on Earth approved; Genesis 24.
Such were those of Rebecca, Judge. 14.
and the Woman of Timnah; the one for Isaac, the other for Sampson, though both
appointed by God, yet consented thereunto by Parents on all sides: But on the
other side, O how miserable is the state of that pair, which by contemning the
advice and consent of their Parents, do so highly offend God, that they can
expect no blessing from God, Phil. Bosquieri tabula naufragii.
till with weeping tears they have sued unto God for pardon, and by all
possible means of submission and humiliation (which is the b^st plank after
Shipwreck) sought to be reconciled to their Parents, and labor in what they
can to make a compensation for their former disobedience, with a care of
Conscionable walking before them.

Afflictions of this life, the comfortable use that is to be made of them.
A Ship after a long Voyage, Jer. Buroughs Moses choice,
being come into Harbor, springs a leak, the Master is somewhat troubled at
it, and is never at quiet, till it be stopped, so that it is an evil to him;
yet he comforts himself in this, that it did not happen unto him, when he was
out at Sea, that had been a great deal worse, and might have proved the ruin
of them all: And thus it is for troubles and sorrows, there is a comfortable
use to be made of them, so long as they happen to us in this life, We may say,
They are upon us; but, (blessed be God) they are upon us here in this World,
Dabit Deus his quoque finem. Virgil. Aen. 1.
so that by a sanctified use to be made of them, they shall never be eternally
upon us in the World to come. Hence is that prayer of S. Augustine, and of all
good Men, in his words; Domine, hic ure, hicfeca, ut in aeternum parcas, Here
Lord do what thou will with me, but spare me hereafter; and that of Fulgentius,
Di Domine patientiam hic, etc. Give patience here Lord, and pardon hereafter;
Whatsoever my grievances are here upon Earth, let me rejoice with thee in
Heaven.


IT is easy to keep that Armor bright which is daily used, but hanging by the
Walls till it be rusty, Jo. Downame Guide to Godliness.
it will ask some time and pains to furbish it over again; If an Instrument be
daily played upon, it is easily kept in tune; but let it be but a while
neglected, and cast in a corner, the strings and frets break, the bridge flies
off, and no small labor is required to bring it into order again: And thus
also it is in things spiritual, in the performance of holy Duties, if we
contiue them with a settled constancy, they will be easy, familiar, and
delightful to us; usus promptos facit.
but if once broken off, and intermitted, it is a new work to begin again, and
will not be reduced to the former estate, but with much endeavor and great
difficulty.


IT is said, 1 Kings 4. 26. Not. Shute Sermon. ^ S. Mild. Poultry Land. 1627.
that in the days of Solomon, Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every Man under
his Vine, and under his Figtree, from Dan, even to Bersheba, i. e. from one end
of the Country to the other: But then at the very next verse following, it is
said; And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of Horses for his Chariots, and
twelve thousand Horsemen; What! Peace and plenty, Horses and Horsemen, Quam
male convenient? How can they stand together? Very well; P^^v, 22. 3.
No doubt, but this was one of the greatest points of Solomon's wisdom, to
foresee a danger, and shun it; in times of Peace, to provide for War: And
thus it must be the care of all good Christians, to be provident Christians,
with Joseph, in times of Plenty to lay up for times of Dearth; now in the
strength of Youth, to provide for the weakness of Age; now in the time of
Gospel Light and knowledge to be stocked and stored with Graces and
Gospel-promises to live upon in worser times.


IT is reported of a Voluptuous young Man, that could not endure to be craossed
in his ways; and of all things he could not bear it, to be kept awake in the
dark: but it so happened, that being sick, he was kept awake in the night, and
could not sleep at all; Whereupon he had these thoughts; What, is it so tedious
then to be kept from (...) and to lie a few hours in the (...)? Oh, what is it
then to be in torments and everlasting darkness! Hieron, Drexel consid. de
aeternitate.
I am here in my own house upon a so^t bed in the dark, kept from (...) but one
night; but to lie in flames and endless misery, How dreadful must that needs
be? These and such like Meditations were the happy means of that young Man's
Conversion; (...)
and by the bl^ssing of God may be the like unto diverse others, when they shall
consider the Eternity of Hell Torments, that they are everlasting, for ever and
ever, (a fatal Soul-wounding expression) when there shall be a suffering of as
many years as there be sands on the Sea shore, and Stars in the Firmament for
their number, yet no comfort at all: Oh this Eternity of torments is the Hell
of Hell. In the curse of Adam there was a donec reverteris, In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat thy bread, until thou return, etc. there is no donec, no
time limited, no bounds set to the Torments of the damned in Hell, they are for
evermore.

Christian perfection to be attained by degrees.
MEteors, Jer. Whitaker Sermon. at Westminster. 1650.
soon after their first appearing, make the greatest show; A Fire of thorns, as
soon as it is kindled, gives the fairest blaze, and makes the most noise and
crackling, and both of them decrease by little and little, till they disappear,
whereas the Morning light shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prove. 4.
18.
Mushromes come to their perfection in one nights growth, but trees of
Righteousness of Gods right planting, are still in growth, and bring forth
most fruit in old age, Psalm. 92. 14. Summer-fruits are soon ripe, and soon
rotten; but Winter-fruits last longer: Infants in the Womb that make more haste
then good speed, prove abortive; whereas those that stay their time, come to
their growth by degrees: And thus it is, that we must think to aspire unto
Perfection, but in a graduall way; not imagine, that we can the first day, and
in the beginning of our first conversion attain unto it; For as, Nemo repent
fit pessimus, No Man is made the worst at the first; S. Bernard. in Cant.
so, Nemo repent fit optimus, No Man is made the best all at once; which made
a good old Christian cry out, Nolo repent fieri summus, etc. I would not upon
the sudden attain to my highest pitch, but grow toward it by little and
little; Phil. 3. 14.
Nondum apprehendi, I have not yet attained, (says the blessed Doctor of the
Gentiles) but I press hard forward, etc. and so must we, from knowledge to
knowledge, Festina lent.
from virtue to virtue, from Faith to Faith, from one degree of grace to
another, unto a perfect Man, and unto the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13.

The Liars reward and punishment.
AESop tells us a tale, how a Town-Shepherd ran to the Village where he dwelt
twice or thrice, and told the People the Wolves came, and were devouring their
sheep; but when they came out to rescue their Cattle, they saw there was no
such matter: At last, the Wolves came indeed, and the Shepherd ran into the
Town, as before, crying out, That his Sheep were all at the mercy of the cruel
Wolves; but the People being formerly deceived by this lying Shepherd, would
not believe him, nor step one foot out of doors to save their goods, until
they were all destroyed by the salvage beasts; his accustomed lies made them so
diffident to believe the truth, that they were all undone by the bargain: And
such is the reward of all Liars, that they shall not be believed when they
speak the truth; Aristotle. apud Diog. La^rt. lib. 5.
as Demetrius Phalerius being asked, What was the fruit and reward of lying?
answered; Quod ne vera quidem dicentibus, deinceps, fides adhibeatur, That
after a Man is known to be a Liar, every thing is questioned that he speaks;
let him have never so much gold in his Chest, his words are but brass, and
pass for nothing; yea, he is no better then a dumb Man in effect; For it is
all one, whether one cannot speak, or cannot be believed when they do speak.

In all our doings to think upon Eternity.
AMongst many other Rites and Ceremonies of elder times in the Consecration of
Bishops, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
they had this speech made unto them, Habeatis aeternitatem in omnibus
cogitationibus vestris, Have Eternity in all your thoughts; Whether it were so,
penes sit Authorem; but certain it is, that at the decollation of the late
Archbishop of Cant. Jan. 10. 1644. there stood on either side as he was to
pass, a generation of People that ecchoed out unto him the like saying, In
vita ejus per Anonym.
Remember Eternity; (a sweet breath, had it not come from corrupt lungs; a good
Memento, had it proceeded from sanctified hearts; but it is much to be feared,
that they spoke rather ex livore malitiae, quam ex Zelo justitiae, rather out
of malice, then love to his Soul, being not silent many days after in
quarrelling his Salvation,) However, there is a right good, and godly use to be
made of the thoughts of Eternity; so precious are they, that if Men would but
spend one quarter of an hour of every day therein, thus thinking with
themselves; Hieron, in Drexclii, con^iderat. de aeternitate.
This body of mine though frail and mortal, yet must live for ever; and this
Soul of mine must live eternally; It is too too much time that I have spent in
seeking after contentment for the flesh; but what have I done for my Soul? what
for Eternity? It cannot be imagined, what good such thoughts would do; For
without all doubt, there is many a blessed Soul now in Heaven praising and
magnifying God, that they were so well employed; and too many in the neglect
thereof, howling in Hell for ever.


CLemens Alexandri^us in his Book called Paedagogus, makes mention of the
Sea-Asse, Lib. 2. cap. 1. Hist. animal. lib. 9. cap. 17. Ulyss. Aldrovandus de
Piscibus.
and citing Aristotle for his Author, says; That amongst all other living and
sensible Creatures, this only has his heart in his belly, whom Epicharmus, an
ancient Poet, terms, (...), such an one as varies from the ordinary course of
Nature: And such are all they that do Indulgere genio, pamper themselves,
quorum animi in patinis, who mind nothing but their guts; and are so given over
to their carnal appetite, that they take more pains to satisfy it, then to
please God, (...), whose belly is their God, Phil. 3. and as Tertullian sets
them out, Lib. de jeju^io. -- o prodiga rerum
(...) stomach is their Altar, their belly is their God, their Priest is their
Cook, their holy ghost is the smell of their meat, the Graces of the Spirit are
their sauces, their Kitchen is their Church, etc. thus being transformed from
Men to beasts, they are led more by their sense and appetite, then by Reason
and Religion, and have their gluttonous panch the chief seat of their Souls,
not their hearts where it should be.


AMongst the Locrians there was a Statute of that strictness, that whosoever
desired to bring in a new Law, G. Williams of the Church.
he should come and declare it publicly in the Marketplace before the People
with an halter about his neck; that if his Law was not thought meet to be
enacted for the good of the Commonwealth, he might presently be hanged for his
desire of Innovation. And good reason too; For it is very dangerous to innovate
any thing either in Church or Commonwealth; not but that it is in the power of
Supreme Authority to change and correct such Laws, as shall seem fit to be
changed for the good of the People; yet according to the strict Rules of Policy
that is not to be done neither, but upon pure necessity, what apparent profit
soever may be pretended to the contrary.


DAvid upon sad experience, compares a wicked, reviling Tongue to three ^atall
weapons, Jer. Boroughs Moses Choice.
a Razor, a Sword, and an Arrow; to a Razor, Psalm. 52. 2. such an one, as will
take off every little hair; so a reviling Tongue will not only take advantage
of every gross sin committed by others, but those peccadilio's, the least
infirmities, which others better qualified cannot so much as discern. Secondly,
Psalm. 57. 4.
to a Sword that wounds; so the Tongues of reproaching Men ^ut deeply into the
credits and reputations of their brethren; but a sword does mischief only near
hand, not afar off; And therefore it is in the third place compared to an
Arrow, Psalm. 64. 3.
that can hit at a distance: And so revilers do not ill offices to those only
in the Parish or Town where they live, but to other far remote. How much then
does it concern every Man to walk circumspectly? Plena victoria est
acclamatione tacere, etc. Val. Episcop. in Sermon.
to give no just cause of reproach, not to make himself a scorn to the Fools of
the World; But if they will Reproach, (as certainly they will) let it be for
forwardness in Gods ways, and not for Sin, that so the Reproach may fall upon
their own heads, and their scandalous language into their own throats.

Correction of Children and Servants, how to be moderated.
ST. Hierome writing to Celantia, Epist. de institu^ione Matris-Familias.
a worthy Matron, amongst much other good Counsel that he there gives her,
thus advises; Famili^m tuam ita rege et con^ove, etc. That she should so
govern her Family, and cherish it, as that she should rather seem their Mother
then their Mistress; and draw from them Reverence rather by loving benignity,
then rigorous severity: and he adds this reason; For that obedience is always
more faithful and acceptable, which flows from love, Cunctaprius teutanda,
etc.
then that which is extorted by fear: Thus in the correction of Children and
servants, Ovid.
(if there be no other help) Justice must be observed: First, (...) parcius
utereloris. Id. lib. 2. Met.
that there is a fault committed, and that the fault so committed deserves
punishment, and that the punishment do not exceed the quality of the fault;
which will otherwise seem to rage and revenge, then to chastise ^or amendment.

Christians not to revile and reproach one another.
IT is a notable speech of one Nemon, Plutarch. in vita Alexandri.
that was a General of the Persian Army, that when he was fighting against
Alexander, one of his Soldiers run upon Alexander's face with much ill
language, and many opprobrious terms, the General hearing of it, smote him on
the face, saying; I did not hire thee to reproach Alexander, but to fight
against him: Thus if an Heathen could not endure to hear that his Enemy should
be reproached, How much less will God bear it, to have his Children
reproaching one another? It was therefore a brave speech of Calvin, Melch.
Adamus in vita.
Etiamsi Lutherus vocet me Diabolum, etc. Although Luther call me Devil, yet I
will honor him as a dear Servant of Jesus Christ; And so, though those that
are our brethren do cast Reproach upon us, we should honor the Grace of God in
them, and not cast reproach upon them again: It is more then enough, that the
briars and thorns of the Wilderness, such as are without, do tear the Flesh,
and rend the good names of Christians, let not them do it then one unto another.

A Child of God bettered by Afflictions.
STars shine brightest in the darkest night; Torches are better for the
beating; Grapes come not to the proof, Sam. Cle^k Preface to Martyrology.
till they come to the Press; Spices smell sweetest, when pownded; young Trees
root the faster for shaking; Vines are the better for bleeding; Gold looks the
brighter for scowring; Glowworms glister best in the dark; Juniper smells
sweetest in the Fire; Pomander becomes most fragrant for chasing; The Palm Tree
proves the better for pressing; Camomile, the more you tread it, the more you
spread it: Such is the condition of all Gods Children, they are then most
triumphant, when most tempted; most glorious, when most afflicted; most in the
favor of God, when least in Man's; as their Conflicts, -- Dolor bit tibi
proderit olim. Ovid. Amor. 3.
so their Conquests; as their Tribulations, so their Triumphs: True
Salamanders, that live best in the Furnace of Persecution; so that heavy
Afflictions are the b^st Benefactors to Heavenly affections; And where
Afflictions hang heaviest, corruptions hang loosest: And Grace that is hid in
Nature, as sweet water in Rose-leaves, is then most fragrant, when the fire of
Affliction is put under to distill it out.


IT is reported of a River in Sicily, Jul. Solinus. 2 King. 5.
wherein if black sheep be but bathed, their wool immediately will turn white:
And it is well known, that the waters of Jordan cleansed the Leprosy of Naaman
the Syrian. So whosoever he be that bathes himself in the pure Fountain of
Repentant tears, shall be purged from all the filthiness of Sin; though it be
as red as scarlet, yet it shall be made as white as wool: S. Ambrose in Luc.
lib. 19. -- Lachrymae pondera v^cis habent. Ovid. de Ponto lib. 3.
And the reason is given by S. Ambrose, Quia lacrymae tacitae quaedam preces
sunt, non p^stulant, sed merentur, non causam dicunt sed consequuntur, Our
tears are a kind of silent Prayers, which, though they say nothing, yet they
obtain pardon; and though they plead not a Man's cause, yet they procure Mercy
from Gods hands, as we find in S. Peter, Non legitur quid dixerit, etc. he said
nothing that we can read of, but wept bitterly, and obtained Mercy.


Dionysius having not very well used Plato at the Court, M^rsil. Ficinus in
vita Platonis.
when he was gone, he feared lest he should write against him, and therefore
sent after him, to bid him have a care, how he set out any thing prejudicial
unto him: Tell him, says Plato, I have not so much leisure as to think upon
him. So we should let those that reproach us know so much from us, that we have
not leisure to think of them; and though we should not be insensible, yet not
to take too much notice of every Reproach that is cast upon us; Nihil utilius
quam tacere provocatis, etc. Valor. Episcop. in Sermon.
but as when the Viper came upon S. Paul's hand, he shook it off; so when
Reproaches come upon our good names or credits, shake them off; For it is a
dishonor to think upon them, as if we had nothing else to do.


IF the wounded Jew in the Parable should have cast away the two pence, Luke
10. 35. Tho. de Trugillo ^hesaurus Concionat. Rex non diligitur si odio lex
ejus habetur. I^dor.
which the Samaritan left to provide for him, it had been an Argument, that he
neither regarded him, nor his kindness. And it was a sign that Esau loved not
God, because he esteemed not his birthright: Thus the true Love of God is far
from us, if we set not an high esteem upon his Ordinances, those pledges of his
favor which he has left with us, to wit, the Word and Sacraments; the Word,
wherein we hear him speak lovingly; and the Sacraments, wherein we see him
speak comf^rtably to us.


IT is a pretty observation of a Jewish Rabbi, Joh. Plantavit. Floril^g.
Rabbinicum.
That it was good policy for husbands to attire themselves below their ability,
for so they might the sooner ^hrive; and to cloth their Children according to
their ability, so they might the better match them; but to maintain their Wives
beyond their ability; for so perhaps they might live in more peace, Mollia
indumenta animi mollitiem indicant.
then they should otherwise do: But now it is so, that Husbands and Wives,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants are very vain in the matter of
Apparel, Bern. in Apollon.
all of them antic and fantastic in garb and fashion; of many whereof it may
be truly said, That when they have their best clothes on, they are in the very
midst of their Wealth; Whereas a modest discreet Man goes in a plain Suit, but
has rich Linings.

Reproaches to be born cheerfully, because God is concerned therein.
AS a Man going to Sea, if he know that the Martiner has skill, that he loves
him, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
and has promised, that he will have a care of him, and that many others have
had experience of his former industry, this is much; But when he considers,
that his life is the Mariners life, that being both in one bottom, if the one
perish, the other cannot be safe; this now is full assurance, that as far as
the Matriner can do it, it shall be well with him: Thus in the matter of
Reproaches, and the cheerful bearing of them; Were it that we only did know,
that God had a love to us, and were merciful to us, that were enough to assure
us: But when we shall find, that as God has loved us, so he has engaged
himself that he will stand by his People in the time of their suffering: add
hereunto our own experience of Gods gracious dealing with us in the day of our
trouble; Contumeliae sunt Christi insig^a, etc. Thryverus. In vita ejus.
this is somewhat more. But lastly, to rise somewhat higher, when we shall
consider, that it is Gods own case, so that our Reproaches and Sufferings are
his Reproaches and Sufferings (as Luther writing to Melancthon at that time
much distracted with fears con^erning the Church's good, Si nos ruimus, ruit
et Christus, If we fall, Christ falls with us) this may fully assure us in the
cheerful bearing of them, because he is chiefly concerned in them.

The true Love of God, will cause familiarity with God.
WHere there is Love free from jealousy betwixt Man and Wife, they are, Root
of Thankfuln^sse; A Sermon at S. Paul's, 1627.
as it were, incorporated; they think themselves never better, then when they
are in one another Company, talking and discoursing together, laying open each
others griefs, and making one another partaker of each others comforts. So, we
must have such interest in God, if we love him, we must in an humble distanced
manner be familiar with him. Let never a day pass over our heads, Job 12. 21.
wherein we have not fetched a walk or two in the gallery of our he^rts with
him, and there said open our selves before him, both concerning our miseries
and our Sins, saying after this or the like manner; Thou ^eest, O Lord, what
sorrows I endure within and without, I be^eech thee give me grace, so to carry
myself, as that thou may have the glory of thy own work; And thou know, O
my God, that I have this infirmity, or that weakness; and that were it not for
thee, I should fall into fearful breaches of thy Law; but, Lord, help me
against this or that sin, us against Pride, deceit, vainglory, and the like,
that I may in a more settled and constant course honor thee, my God, to whom I
am so infinitely bound, etc.

No Man too good, to learn.
ST. Augustine writing to Auxilius his fellow Bishop about the matter of
Excommunication, Ep. 57.
in all humility says; Senex a juvene co-episcopo, et Episcopus tot annorum a
Collega nec dum a^niculo, paratus sum doceri, Though I be an old Man, and a
Bishop, of so many years standing, yet I am ready to be taught of a young Man,
my Companion, scarce of one years growth: Thus, dimly (in their own conceits)
have those great lights from time to time shined out in the Firmament of the
Church, having been ever glad of any auxiliary to add unto their luster. Then
if the greatest Clerks have need to be instructed, Omnis aetatis homines
Scholae admittit. Sen. ep. 76.
What shall we think of the meanest? How much knowledge do they want, that know
almost nothing, when they that think they know so much, do notwithstanding want
so much as that they may be taught something by the meanest? No age
superannuated, no condition of Man so exalted, but may in one thing of other in
ordine ad Deum, learn of the youngest; and the meanest, either by bringing to
their mind what has been forgotten, confirming in what they have already
learnt, or instructing in what (for all their parts) they never as yet heard of.


SUppose one were set upon going to do mischief, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
and his Father and Mother should throw themselves down in the path, that if he
goes on, he must tread upon them, and they should say thus; You shall tread
upon the bowels out of which you came, upon the loins that begat you, this
would certainly be a great stop; And thus when we find our hearts begin to
stir, and corruption boil, the Name of Christ calls, Stay, and says; If you
go to sin, you shall tread upon me, trample upon me and my blood, and bring
reproach upon me; this must needs be a great stop in the ways to sin. In all
the Word of God, there is scarce a stronger argument to keep Man from sinning,
then the consideration of Christ's Name lying prostrate before us, that the Name
of Christ shall suffer by it; For the People of God to suffer by our sins, is
an evil thing; For a Man to have his kindred ashamed of him, is a sad thing:
But for a Man to be a Reproach to Jesus Christ, to be a grievance to the
blessed Spirit of God, this, if he have any ingenuity, any spark of Grace left
in him, any love of Christ remaining in him, will take him quite off from the
ways of sin and wickedness.


PEr brachium ^it judicium de cord, Hippocratis aphorism.
is the Physitian's Aphorism; And therefore when they pass their judgments of
Men's hearts, they do it by the pulse beating in their arms, and not by the
words that proceed from their mouths; Act. 1. 1.
So wise Me^ will look more to doing, then to saying, (though both are good,
and both must be done) remembering, that Jesus did and said. And then it is that
men are truly thankful unto God, Root of Thankfulness; A Sermon at S. Paul's,
1627.
when they act what they say; as Noah is no sooner out of the Ark, but he
builds an Altar for the Lord, before he provides an house for himself; he talks
not of it, but does it: For to thank God with our tongues, and not to live
answerably thereunto, is no better then to say, All hail, King of the Jews, and
to spit upon him; Hosanna with one breath, and Crucify him with another; to
have Jacobs smooth tongue, and Esau's rough hands; a great deal of formal
hypocrisy hanged out at the sign of the lips, and no reality at all in the
heart and hand where it should be.


IT was Plutarch's shame, G. Williams of the Church.
when his Servant could thus upbraid him, Non est ita ut Plutarchus dicit, It
is not as my Master says, his opinion is, that it is a shame for a Philosopher
to be angry, and he has often reasoned of the mischiefs that come thereby, de
cohibenda iracundia.
and has written a book of not being angry, et ipse mihi irascitur, Turpe est
doctori, etc.
yet he is angry with me. A great fault it was in Plutarch then, and it is no
less in those that are guilty of the same sin they reprove in others now, and
little good will come thereby; For the eye which is filled with dust, can never
see clearly the spot, that is in another face; nor that hand which is
besmeared with mire, wash any other member clean; nor that Man which is
corrupted with Sin, do any good when he reproves his own Sin in another. As
when one Thief reproves another, one Drunkard condemns another, they may shame
one another, Gregorii homit.
but seldom mend one another, Mundus a vitiis esse debet, qui aliena corrigere
curat, He must needs be clean himself, that goes about to cleanse another.

Reproaches and Sufferings for the Name of Christ, marks of Salvation.
THere is mention made of one Eschylus, Jer. Boroughs Moses Choice.
who being condemned to be stoned to death, and all the People being ready to
do Execution upon him, his brother ran in unto him, and showed them that he had
but one hand, and that he lost the other in defense of his Country; whereupon
there was none that would throw a stone at him: And thus it is that Reproaches
and Sufferings in the cause of Christ, are notable marks to safeguard us in
the time of trouble; It was Ieremiah's plea, O Lord, thou know, remember me
and visit me, know, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke: Ier. 15. 15.
This is the evidence that a gracious heart has to its self, that God will
spare him, when others shall suffer from his wrath: For the more any Man is
called to suffer in the cause of God, and when he finds his heart ready and
willing to yield to God in suffering, the more evidence he may have to his
Soul, that when others be called to suffer from wrath, he shall be spared; this
being the bottom of the Psalmists prayer, Remember, Lord, the Reproaches of thy
servants, Psalm. 69. 9.
how I do bear in my bosom the Reproach of thy mighty People.

Mercies of God to be particularly recorded to Posterity.
THe Jews (as the Rabbines do observe) the night before the Passover, are wont
to confer with their Children on this wise; Joh. Menochius de Repub. Heb.
The Child said, Why is it called the Passover? The Father answered, because
the Angel passed over, and destroyed us not; The child said, Why do we eat
unleavened bread? The Father answered, Because we were forced to make haste out
of Egypt. The Child said again, Why eat we sour herbs? The Father said, To put
us in mind of the afflictions in Egypt, etc. Thus ought we to deal in all the
great and mavelous kindnesses of God, to speak publicly of them for the
generations to come; with David to tell what God has done for our Souls; Psalm.
66. 16.
to declare his glory among all Nations, and his wonders amongst all People.
The Prince must speak of them to his subjects, Psalm. 96. 3.
the Minister to his People, the Master to his servants, and the Father to his
Children.

Parents not to be forsaken, though they be Infidels and Wicked.
WHen S. John had baptized Chrysippa, the Governor's Wife of Pathmos, she
presently thereupon would forsake her unbelieving husband: Prochorus in vita S.
Ioh. cap. 21.
By no means that must not be. S. John told her that he had a Commission to
join her to Christ, but no warrant to keep her from her husband; and therefore
he suffered her not to depart, but commanded her to return unto her house
again. It is also written of S. Martin, that he lived with his Parents that
were Gentiles, and performed all good offices to them as became a good
Christian Child, Sulp. Sev. hist.
because the Church of God, when she receives any one to Christ, does by no
means acquit the obligation of that Law, which binds a Son unto his Father:
Thus we are not with the Prodigal to run out of our Fathers house, G. Williams
of the Church.
not to contemn them that begat us, but to condemn their impiety, if they seek
to mislead us; For it is not to be believed, that God which commanded us to
honor Father and Mother, would ever bid us to forsake them: And therefore if
any Man has an Infidel to his Father, let him not be persuaded by him to do
any disservice unto God, but continue his obedience to him, and in so doing, he
shall receive the reward of his duty, and the Father shall find the punishment
of his Iniquity.


WHen a Father sends his Son abroad about some earnest business, Lud.
Granatens. Meditat.
and he meet with much difficulty in the way, and come home in rainy,
tempestuous weather, How gladly does he entertain him? the whole Family are
ready to tend upon him, one makes a fire, another gets him dry clothes; a third
is busy in preparing somewhat to comfort his wear^ed spirits: And thus the
People of God, when they meet with hardship in the Pilgrimage of this World,
and suffer even unto death for Righteousness sake, To. Willan Eliahs Wish; A
Funeral Sermon. 1629.
whether they be Martyrs in will, and in deed, as S. Stephen; In will and not
in deed, as S. John; In deed, but not in will, as the Innocents, When they come
and meet with Christ, for whom and in whose cause they have suffered, How shall
they be received? With what welcome shall they be entertained? What Riches of
glory shall they enjoy in the highest Heavens for evermore? They shall have
Crowns upon their heads, palms in their hands, long white robes upon their
backs, and shall sit at the right hand of God, when all their Persecutors shall
stand like so many base unworthy Creatures before them.


LOok but upon a Pageant, Jer. Leech Sermon at S. Mary le Bow, 1627.
on some triumphant day, what a goodly show it makes without, how it is carried
on Men's shoulders; Oh, but look then again within it, and you shall find little
substance, only a few gilded laths and pastboards, things of small
concernment: Then again, a May Pole stands on high, decked with ribbons and
garlands on the top, gazed upon by all Men; O, but it has no rooting, no sap
to preserve it. Such are all Formal Christians, top and top-gallant, Col. 2. 7.
they have fair gilded outsides, some certain general notions swimming in
their heads, but as the Apostles phrase is, they are not rooted, not
principled, their heads are uncatechised, and their hearts unsanctified, they
make a goodly show, have abundance of form, but no power of Godliness in them.


IT is the opinion of some Learned Men, Ed. Calamy epist. Dedic. before Dr.
Taylor's posthume-works.
that the Saints who are now triumphing in Heaven, have an augmentation of
glory bestowed on them, according to the good they do after their deaths, as by
Sermons preached, or books printed, while they were living; Instance is given
in the Apostle S. Paul, whose glory in Heaven, say they, is increased,
according as Men are converted by reading of his Epistles: Which doctrine, if
it be true, will be a might^y encouragement to persuade the Friends of deceased
Ministers, and other Learned Men to publish the Sermons and Works they leave
behind them. Howsoever, whether this be true or no, sure it is, that by the
publishing thereof, especially when perfected, after their deaths, much glory
is brought unto God, and much benefit to the Souls of the living.

Reproaches and Sufferings made Honorable by God.
IT is said of Joan Conntesse of Shrewsbury, Edw. 3^. Guil. Cumbdeni Britt^nnia
in Co^. Berk.
that in the midst of a dance at Court, she let her garter sall at unawares;
and blushing at the accident, the King took it up in his hand, whereat the
Nobility smiled: Well, says he, I will make this an honorable ornament ere
long; and upon that came the Order of the Knights of the Garter; the Garter
being an Ornament of the highest Nobility, such as Kings wear about their
necks, as an Ensign of their Princely Order. Thus if Man can put honor upon
such mean things, then God much more; It is he that ennobleth Reproaches, and
sanctifies Afflictions to his Children, and makes the sufferings of his
servants, as so many ensigns of Heavenly Nobility, so that if Men had but the
true skill of Christianty, they would be ambitious of the Crown of Martyrdom,
Matthew. 5. 11.
look upon it as a blessed thing, when Men speak all manner of evil of them;
Heb. 11.
and with Moses rather choose of su^^er with the People of God, then enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season.

God showing Mercy, only for Christ Jesus sake.
DAvid after his Victory over the Philistines, Jer. Leech; Sermon at S. Maryle
Bow, 1631.
calls Ziba before him, and asks him, Whether there were not yet any Man left
of the house of Saul, that he might do him kindness for Ionathan's sake;
whereupon they presented unto him Mephibosheth, a poor lame impotent Man, who
no sooner sees the King, but he falls on his face, and looks upon himself as a
dead dog, far below the Kings favor: No matter, 2 Samuel 9. 7.
says the King, Fear not, for I will show thee kindness for Ionathan's sake,
etc. And thus if there be any for lorn Joseph that is fallen into the pit of
despair, let him but cast up his eyes to the hills from whence comes his
salvation, and God will show him Mercy for Christ Jesus sake; If there be any
lame impotent Mephibosheth, any wounded spirit, any of the household of Faith
that is distressed, God will enquire after them, and do them good for Christ
Jesus his sake.

Gods goodness to us, to be a Motive from vain Swearing.
POlycarp, Eusebii hist. lib. 2. cap. 15.
that Religious Martyr and Bishop of Smyrna, in the time of the Fourth
Persecution under Marcus Antonius Verres, When he was commanded to swear but
one Oath, made this answer; Fourscore and six years have I endeavored to do
God service, and all this while he never hurt me; How shall I speak evil of so
good a Lord and Master, who has thus long preserved me? And added further,
being thereunto urged by the Proconsul; I am a Christian, and cannot do it; let
Heathens and In^idels swear if they will, I cannot do it, were it to the saving
of my life. Thus it is, Te pater Aenea^ et avunculus excitat Hector. Virgil.
that if nothing else will keep a Man from idle swearing, and taking of the
blessed Name of God in vain, the very consideration of benefits received from
him, should be motive and disswasive sufficient, not to lade him with oaths,
that has so laden us with Favors, and that whilst he is every moment doing
good for our Souls and Bodies, we should dare to return him evil for the good
he does unto us.


WHen the Duke of Medina Sidonia was armed by the King of Spain his Master,
Hispan, rerum Scriptores.
against the Protestant party, he spoiled all before him, and flew as well upon
those of his own Religion as others; One asked him, Why he had no more care to
spare those of his own Religion? his answer was, My sword knows no difference
betwixt Catholics and Lutherans: Thus it is, Tutius est igitur fictis
contendere verbis, Quam pugnare manu.
that whenever God shall be pleased for the sins of a People or Nation, to
give the Sword^ a Commission to eat flesh, and drink blood, it will make little
or no difference at all betwixt the precious and the vile, the godly and
profane, the bullet will not distinguish betwixt the Commanders, Ovid. Metam.
and the commanded: No argument was found so forcible, as to persuade the
enraged Babylonians to spare the poor captived Jews. And at another time, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17.
it was neither the Religion of God himself, the memory of ancient Prophets,
nor the glory of their Temple, nor the beauty of their well-compacted City,
Josephus de bell^ Iud. Egesippus de excidio Jerusalem.
nor the multitudes of People, nor any respect in the World could move the
incensed Romans to have the least pity on them: But there is no such need to
step over our own threshold to prove the truth of this assertion, It is yet in
fresh and bleeding Memory, that the sword of War is impartial, sparing none
that come before it, and pitying none that come nigh it.


IT was a notable expression of Master Hawks, Acts and Monuments.
writing a consolatory Epistle to Master Philpot, then a prisoner in the
Bishop's Cole-house; This Bishop's Cole-house, says he, is but to scowr you,
and make you bright, and fit you to be set up, upon the high shelf, meaning
Heaven; As when good Housewifes would set up vessels of brass or iron, they
first take cinders or ashes and scowr them, whereby they are fitted to be set
up. So all Afflictions and troubles of this life are but means that God uses
to furbish his People withal, Post afflictiones vit^ tranquillior, post
tenebras venit lux. Greg. Nazianzen. in orat. ad Cyprian.
to make them bright and clean, that so they may be set on high, they must not
come on the high shelf till all the rust be taken off; not enter into Heaven
till they have been in the furnace of Afflictions, and are washed and cleansed,
and purified from the filth and dross of sinful pollutions.


IT is a Moral that is given of Aaron's apparel, Lanc. Andrews Winten. Sermon.
at Court, 1617.
that he carried the twelve Tribes in his breast plate next his heart, to show,
that in care he was to bear them; But he had them also engraven in two Onyx
stones, and those set upon his shoulders; to show, that another while he was to
bear them in Patience also. And it was so with Moses too, Exodus 28.
at one time he bears the People as a Nurse does her child, Numb. 11. 14.
that is, full tenderly. But when they fall a murmuring, (as they did often) he
bare them upon his shoulders in great patience and long suffering; yea, he
complained, Non possumportare, I am not able to bear all this People. Thus it
is, Onos, onus.
that Governments may well be said to have their weights, be heavy, when
shoulders and all must be put to them, when they need not only a good head,
but good shoulders that sustain them; yet that not so much while they be in
good tune and temper, then they need no great carriage; but when they grow
unweildy, (be it weakness or way wardnesse of the governed) in that case they
need: And in that case there is no Governor, Chrysostom, ad populum Antioch.
but that at one time or other, he has load enough upon his shoulders, and
finds the weight of Government, onus humeris Angelorum non leve, unsupportable.

New inventions of Sin, condemned.
SArdanapalus, Plutarchi Sympos^ac.
that wretched Epicure, made Proclamation through the Coasts of Assyria, that
he should be well rewarded, who could devise some new way of delight, never
thought on before; And as he was industrious to find out new ways of Pleasure,
Coel. Rhodogin. lect.
so was Perillus as careful to invent a new way of Punishment, by the making
of a brazen Bull at the command of a Tyrant, by whose means he was the first
that bellowed out his life in the same. Thus it is with us, We are all for
invention, and new devices of Sin, altogether unknown to the Ages of our
Forefathers; New Lords, -- cun^^arum novitas gratissima rerum.
new Laws; new lights, new doctrines; new fashions, new faces; nay almost new
kinds of Men and Women, Hic mulier, haec vir, Ovid. 3 Pont. 4.
scarce discernable by their habits whether Men or Women, or neither, or some
kind of Monster betwixt both; new devices for gain, new ways of cheating, new
ways of breaking; So that without all doubt, God is devising some new manner
of Judgment, as was said of Korah and his accomplices, Numb. 16. 29.

To bless God for all.
THere is a kind of Dialogue betwixt one Doctor Thaulerus, Franc. de Sali^.
introduct^on a la vie devot.
and a poor Man that lay begging by the highway side; Good morrow poor Man,
(...) the Doctor. I never had any bad morrow, said the beggar. No, says the
Doctor? Thou art a miserable poor Man, thou art as good as naked, without any
clothes on thy back, no Friends, nor any one to relieve thee, How can it then
be true, that thou say thou never had any bad morrow? I Will tell you, says
the beggar, Whether I am sick or in health, whether it be warm or cold weather,
whether I be clothed or naked, rich or poor, I bless God for all. O but
Friend, said the Doctor, What if Christ should cast thee into Hell? If he
should, says he, I would be contented; but I have two arms, the one of Faith,
the other of Love, wherewith I would lay such fast hold on him, Semper Deo
gratias agere studeamus, etc. Augustine. de verbo Dom.
that I would have him along with me, and then I am sure that Hell would be
Heaven if he were there. And thus it is, that we should bless God at all
times, in all places, upon all occasions, and in all conditions, as well for
years of Dearth, as years of Plenty; times of War, as well as times of Peace;
for Adversity, as well as P^osperity; in sickness and in health, in weal and
in woe, in liberty and restraint, whether it be that the Lord gives, or
whether he takes away, still to bless the Name of the Lord.

Godliness, a great mystery, and why so.
THe World has her mysteries in all Arts and Trades (yea, L. Andrews Winton.
Sermon. at Court, 1614.
Mechanical appertaining to this life) which are imparted to none but filiis
scientiae, Apprentices to them; These have their mysteries; have them, nay, are
nothing but mysteries: So they delight to style themselves by such and such a
Mystery, 1 Timothy 6. 6. 7.
such and such a Craft, etc. Now if Godliness be great gain, and profitable
unto all things, a Trade of good return, and in request with all good Men, then
to be allowed her Mysteries: At least such as all other trades have: And the
rather for that, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
that there is Mysterium iniquitatis, a Mystery of iniquity; so that it would
be somewhat hard if there were not Mysterium pietatis, a My^^ery of Godliness
to encounter it: That Babylon should be allowed the name of a Mystery, Apoc.
17. 6.
and Sion not; that there should be profunda Satanae, deep things of Satan's,
and there should not be deep and profound things of God and Godliness for the
Spirit to search out and dive into, Apoc. 2. 24.


IT is said of Antigonus, Plutarchi moralia.
that being invited to a great Feast, where a notable Harlot was to be present,
he asked Counsel of Menedemus, a dis^reet Man, What he should do, and how he
should behave himself in such Company? Who bade him, only to remember this,
that he was (...), the Son of a King: Ante circumspiciendum est cum quibus edas
et bibas, quam quid edas et bibas. Sen. ep. 11.
So good Men may be invited where none of the best may ^eet; Many an honest Man
may fall into a Knaves company; the best counsel is, Keep ever in mind, that
they are Kings Sons, Gods Children; and therefore it were a base thing for them
to be allured by the Wicked to do things unseemly, and that they should much
degenerate, if they should make any sinful compliance with such as are
notoriously wicked.


ST. Ambrose reports of one Theotymus, Com. in Luc. cap. 4.
that being troubled with a sore disease upon his body, when the Physician told
him, that ex^ept he did abstain from intemperance, as drunkenness and excesle,
he was like to lose his eyes; his heart was so desperately set upon his sin,
that he said, Vale lumen amicum; Farewell sweet light then, I must have my
pleasure in that Sin, I must drink, though I drink out my eyes, thea farewell
eyes, and farewell light and all. O desperate madness, for Men to venture upon
Sin, to the loss not only of the light of the eye, but the light of Gods
loving Countenance for evermore! It is to be supposed, -- quae te dementia
cepit? Virg.
that no Man will be so far owned by his words, as to say, Farewell God and
Christ, and eternal life and all, I must have my Sin; yet though directly they
say not so, they do in effect say it; They know that the Scripture says, that
no Drunkard, Whoremonger, nor Covetous, Ephesians. 5. 5.
nor unclean person shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; then whosoever that
knowing this, goes for all that in such a way, does as it were say, Farewell
God and Heaven, and farewell all that God has purchased by his blood, rather
then I will lose my Sin, I will lose all.


AS Kings keep the day of their Inauguration; L. Andrews Winton. Sermon. at
Court, 1616.
As Cities have their Palilia, when the trench is first cast up; And Church's
their Encaenia's, when they are first dedicate; As Men their (...), when they
first came into the World: So all good Christians celebrate the day of Christ's
Nativity, a day of Joy both in Heaven and on Earth; Luc. 2.
In Heaven for a day of glory unto God on high; On Earth, for a day of Peace
here below, and good will toward Men: A day of joy to all People past,
present, and to come; such a day as wherein after long expectation, the best
return was made that ever came to the poor Sons of Men, Psalm. 118.
such a day as the Lord himself made, let us therefore rejoice therein.


JOseph had his Tomb in his Garden, Geo. Sandy's Travels. Coel. Rhodogin. lect.
Var. Convivium a precatione caeptum, etc. Chrysoft. hom. de fide anima.
to season his delight with Meditations of his death. The Egyptians had a
Skeleton or carcass brought into their Feasts for the same purpose; At
Prester-Iohn's Table a Deaths-head is the first thing set on; And Philip had
not only a Boy every Morning, but a Dead-Man's skull on his Table every meal,
to put him in mind of his Mortality: And thus ought we all to do, mingle our
Feasting with the meditation of our Farewell out of this wretched life, when we
sit at dinner, to think of our dissolution, and ever ^o set our own carcass
before the eyes of our mind, saying within our selves; Alas! this feeding and
Feasting is but a little repairing and propping up of a poor ruinous house,
that ere long will fall down to the ground, and come to nothing.

Heaven not to be found upon Earth.
IT is storied of a King of Persia, Jer. Borroughs M^ses Choice.
that he must have an imaginary Heaven, and thereupon he is at the charge of a
stately brave Palace, where in the top he caused the Heavens to be
artificially molded, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be painted, and under
them the clouds, that by art moved up and down, distilled rain, and made great
cracks of Thunder; Above that was placed a great Throne, glistering with all
the Art that Nature could afford: This might be sufficient for an Heathen, that
knew no better things; But how sad is the condition of a Company of
drossy-spirited Men, Phil. Comines hist.
that (with that Duke of Bourbon in France, who if he might but have his Palace
in Paris, would not change it for Paradise) can be content to take the things
of this World for their portion; If they had but this or that thing, it were
Heaven to them; It argues they have low thoughts of an Immortal Soul, and are
ignorant of what an immortal Soul is capable of, that can think themselves
satisfied in any Creature, and have loose thoughts of God, as if there were no
Treasures in him, but only a few temporary Earthly delights; as Meat and Drink
and Sports, and whatsoever the vanity of this world calls delightful.

Afflictions, if any thing, will make us seek God.
THe Persian Messenger, L. Andrews Winton. Sermon at Court, 1614.
(though an Heathen) as Aeschiles in one of his Tragedies observes, said thus,
When the Grecian Forces hotly pursued our host, and we must needs venture over
the great Water Strymon, frozen then, but beginning to thaw, when a hundred to
one we had all dyed for it, with mine eyes, I saw, says he, many of those
Gallants, whom I had heard before so boldly maintain, There was no God, every
one upon his knees, and devoutly praying, that the Ice might hold till they got
over. And Pharaoh was at high terms with God, but when Extremity came upon him,
then he was humbled. Thus it is, that many Men, E^od. 5. 2.
like the Dromedary of exceeding swiftness, (the Female especially) run over
hill and dale, Esaias 60. 6.
take their whole swing of pleasure, Esaias 2. 34.
and snuff up the air of all sensual delights; Age, death and sickness are
afar off; Youth, health and strength possess them, there is no coming to them
then; no meddling with them till their Month come, Ier. 2. 24.
till Winter come, a day of sorrow and distress overtake them, Afflictiones
humiliter sustinentes c^eles^ia mustiplicant. Greg. homil. super Evang.
then they will seek unto God. And herein is Folly condemned even of her own
Children, and Wisdom justified of her very Enemies: That they, that greedily
seek sin, are at last glad to be rid of it; and they that merrily scorn
Religion, at last are glad to be sheltered under the protection thereof.

Deceit and Unfaithfulness in Trade and Commerce, condemned.
LYsander the Lacedemonian, Joh. Bodin. Commonweal.
held for a main Principle of his Religion, that Children were to be deceived
with trifles, as rattles and guegawes; but old Men were to be gul^'d with
oaths, and held on with fair promises: And it is now almost grown a Trade for
Men to be so slippery in their dealings one with another, Plutarchs
that they can find loop-holes to wind out of the most cautelous contracts for
advantages, break faith, -- non hospes ab hospite tutus. Ovid.
promises, bonds, run away with Men's goods; so that Turks and Jews are more
trusty then such hollow shifting Christians: And hence it is, that Gods
Justice, and his just revenge on all Trades at this day is such, that scarce
any prosper in them, God having divorced his blessing from them, because they
have turned their Trades into craf^s, not for the help, but the overthrow one
of another.


THere have been Prodigalls in all Ages, such as having a fair Inheritance,
have lost it all upon one cast of the dice; A man may escape many wounds and
shots in the Wars, and yet may be killed at the last with the stab of a
penknife, or the prick of a pin or needle. S. Fr. Bacon by way of discourse.
It is reported of Sir Francis Drake* that having compassed the World, and
being in a Boat upon the Thames in a very rough tide, said; What have I escaped
the violence of the Sea, and must be now drowned in a Ditch? Thus many a Man
that has escaped many gross sins, may by some little secret lust be deprived
of the glory of the Kingdom of Heaven. Moses came within the sight of Canaan;
Exodus 22.
but for one Sin, not sanctifying Gods Name at the water of Meribah, he never
set foot within it. A great Affliction it was, no d^ubt, U^itata culpa obligat
mentem ut nequ^quam surgere possit, etc. Greg. moral. lib. 24.
unto him to be so near, and yet so far off from entering. And no less will it
be to any Man, that for one Sin, not sanctifying the Name of God as he ought,
shall come short of Heaven; not but that there may be some remainders of sin,
and yet the Heart be taken off from every Sin: but if there be any secret
closing with any one Sin, all the profession of Godliness, and leaving all
other Sins, will be to no purpose, nor ever bring a Man to happiness.


ST. Gregory confesses thus much of himself, L. Andrews Sermon at Court, 1616.
that never any sentence entered ^o deep into his Soul, as that Text, Fili
recordare, etc. Son remember, that ^hou in thy lifetime receivedst thy
pleasure or good things, and likewise Lazarus pains; Luke 16. 25.
And that as surgite mortui was ever in S. Hierom's ear; and non in
commessationibus, Romans 13. 3.
not in surfeiting, in S. Augustine's, by which he was first converted; For he
sitting in the Sea of Rome, when it was grown rich, and of great revenue, In
moral: super locum.
was, as he says, still afraid of this Text, Whether his exalting into that
chair might not be his recompense at Gods hands, and all that ever he should
receive from him for all his service, mercedem non arrham, his portion of
Earth, not the earnest of Heaven: Thus did the good Father. And would God his
example herein might make a due impression, Disca^^ divites non in
facultatibus, etc. Ambros. in Luc.
and work the like fear, in so many as have, in the eyes of all Men, received
the good things of this life: For it is too apparent, that diverse that have so
received, and that in a measure even heaped up, and running over, carry
themselves so without remembrance of themselves, as if no such Simile were in
all the Bible, Matthew. 19. 24.
as that of the needles eye; no such Example as that of the rich Glutton, no
such Memento as that of Abraham to him; but that they have learned a point of
Divinity, such as Abraham never knew; Balaam'^ divinity, 2 Pet. 2. 15.
(it is to be feared) to love the wages of unrighteousness; Numb. 23. 10.
and yet they must needs into Abraham's bosom, dye the death of the Righteous.


A Massy piece o^ Timber floating upon the water, Hect. Pintus in Daniel.
may be easily drawn toward the shore so long as it swimmeth, any one may turn
it this way or that way at pleasure; but if it be once grounded, not many Men
can move it, but with great pains and industry. Thus Man's life is the water;
Death the shore; and Sin the piece of Timber: Whilst we live in strength and
health, born up ^y the streams of Worldly pleasure and delight, Apparent rari
nantes in gurgite vast^.
Sin seems but light unto us, great Sins appear as little Sins; and little sins
as no sins at all: but at the time of our dissolution, when we are ready to
touch upon the brink of Death, then sin appears in its colors, in its true
proportion; small ones so great in the magnitude, light ones so ponderous in
the weight, that the poor miserable Sinner finds them a burden unsupportable,
too heavy for him to bear; and looking about for help, cries out with S. Paul,
Miserable Man that I am, Who shall deliver me! etc. Romans 8. Romans 8.


Godliness, a very gainful Trade.
A Merchant that drives a rich Trade, Tho. de Trugillo. Sermon.
will, by a bargain in one Morning, get an hundred pounds or more; whereas many
other poor People are fain to work hard to get a shilling or eighteen pence a
day: Now every one would be of the gaining side, It is the common voice of
Nature, Who will show us any good? How shall we come to be Rich? Oh, prize the
Trade of Godliness then, therein is great gain to be had: As for the Works of
Morality and common grace, Nulla Deo merces est melior ea quae habet pietatis
munera. Ambros^ in lib* de Viduis.
they are like the Trade of the poor laboring Man, that earns some small
matter, that works hard and gets only some outward blessings from God; but
Godliness is a full Merchants Trade, that brings in hundreds and thousands at
a clap; and such a Trade God would have us set our hearts upon, to look after
great and glorious things: As Cleopatra, Plutarch. in Antonio.
that Egyptian Princess said to Marcus Antonius, It was not for him to fish for
gudgeons, but for Towns, Forts, and Castles; so it is not for those that are
acquainted with the ways of Godliness, to be trading for poor things, for
temporal, transitory trash; but for eternal life, glory and Immortality.

Consideration of our secret Sins, a motive to Compassionate others.
WE may read of a Judge in the Primitive times, R. Abbot, Secret Sins
discovered.
who when he was seriously invited to the place of Judgment to pass Sentence
upon another, withdrew himself; and at last, being earnestly pressed, came with
a bag of sand upon his shoulders to the Judgment Seat, Conr. Zuing^ri theat.
hum. vitae.
saying; You call me to pass Judgment upon this poor Offender; How can I do
it, when I my self am guilty of more sins then this bag has sands in it, if
the World saw them all: This was not so well done as a public Magistrate,
being invited to do Justice; yet as becoming a Conscionable Christian. And thus
ought all good Men to do, the consideration of their bosom Sins, should work
in them Compassion toward others, saying within themselves; Genesis 38. 25.
Can I be as Judah to cry out upon Tamar, Let her be burnt, when I remember the
Ring and the Staff, laid in pawn to her in secret? How can I be extreme
against my weak brother, when if my faults were written on my forehead, I might
deserve as severe a censure my self.

Ministers to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the discouragements of their
Auditory; And why so?
TUlly makes mention of Antima^hus, Libr^ de claris Oratoribus, et in Brut^.
a famous Poet of his time, who having penned some excellent quaint Piece, read
it openly before a Judicious Auditory; but whether through disaffection to the
Person, or disregard of the Poem, Plato erit instar omnium.
they all left him except Plato; which he perceiving, resolved to go on with
this confidence, that Plato being there alone, he cared not though all the rest
were absent. Thus Ministers are to preach the Gospel of Christ, Qui animarum
curam pro Domin^ suscipit, etc. Gloss. super Prove. 11.
though they (...) with many discouragements to the work of their Ministry;
though the Congregation be so thin, that there may seem to be more Pews and
Pillars in the Church then People, and they as stupid and senseless in the
matter of attention as the Seats they sit on, some highway side, some thorny,
some rocky hearers, yet for all that, Mark 4.
there may be one Plato, one good grounded Hearer, who may prove the Crown of
all his labors, and in whose conversion, he shall have much cause of rejoicing
before Men and Angels in Heaven.


A Beggar asking an Alms, Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
if a Man put his hand in his pocket, and take out a penny or two pence, he
has hope to have that; but if he chance to pull out a piece of gold, then his
heart fails, because it is too much: Cast a bone to a dog, he falls to it
presently, but for a joint of meat before him, well dressed, in a fair large
dish, he dares not venture upon that: So, for these sublunary things, as
Riches, Honors and preferments, such as God casts many times to dogs, -- hau^
tali se dignatur honor.
Worldly men may fall upon them, and think they are for their ^ooth; but when
they come to the dainties, and infinite treasures of God; Can a Drunkard that
prizeth nothing but a little swilling drink, Can a swinish filthy base
low-spirited Man, that never minded any thing but the satisfying of his unclean
lusts, think, that God should make it the greatest work that he has in the
World, to communicate the Riches of his goodness and grace to such a one as he
is? He cannot but have mis-giving thoughts, and think that he has no part in
them.


Travelers tell us, Relat. di Bot^ro.
that they that are on the top of the Alps, may see great showns of rain fall
under them, which they over look, but not one drop of it comes at them. And he
that is on the top of some high Tower minds not the croking of Frogs and
Toads, the hissing of Serpents, Adders, and the like venomous. Creatures; --
quo ^ata trahunt retrahunth sequnti, Virg.
they are below. Thus an Heavenly-minded Man, who dwells in Heaven on Earth,
looks through and beyond all Troubles and Afflictions, rides triumphantly
through the storm of disparagements; nay, he boldly stares Death in the Face,
though never so ugly disguised; as Anaxarchus said to the Tyrant, Diog. Laert.
in vita.
Tunde, tunde, Anaxarchum non tundis, beat him, and bruise him, and kill him it
may, but he will keep up his Soul in the very ruins of his Body.

Deliberation to be used in all our ways.
HE that is to climb up some high ladder, must not think, that setting his Foot
upon the lowest rownd, he can skip over all the rest and be at the top, without
evident danger to himself: Such is the course of our life, just like a Ladder
of many rownds set up to some high place: the first step is (or of necessity
should be) the thought of God and goodness; and the last step, the full
assurance of Heaven; but there are in the middle many other steps, as of means,
consideration, deliberation, etc. how to love God above all things, and our
Neighbors as our selves, and how to demean our selves in the midst of a
crooked and froward generation; which if we miss, and step over, no marvel if
we never come to the top, but perish in the midway to all Eternity.

Heavenly mindedness of a Child of God.
IT is recorded of Edward the First, J. Speed's Chronicle ex Walsingh.
that he had a great desire to go to the Holy Land, but being hindered by a
domestic ^arre, he gave his Son a strict charge upon his deathbed, that
after his death he should cause his heart to be conveyed thither, and to that
purpose he had prepared two and thirty thousand pounds to defray the charge,
and ordered that sevenscore Knights with their several retinues should attend
it thither. Propter Deum fastidit omnia terrena.
Thus the Saints and dear Childr^^ of God, though they have not their bodies in
Heaven, yet their hearts are there; Muscul: in Psalm. 73. v. 5.
they are like Eagles, always mounting upwards, their treasure is in Heaven,
and there will their hearts be also, they may have many weights of corruption
without, that press them downwards, yet they have an inward Principle that
works upwards: A special work of God so ordering it, that their Conversation
is altogether in Heaven; Phil. 3. ult. cant. 3. 6.
and that though with the Church they be black and dark in regard of their
infirmities, yet they are like unto pillars of smoke that ascend upwards.

To be careful of our precious Souls.
CHarles the Fifth, Val. Rothm. Carolid. lib. 3.
when he was solicited by a great Counselor Antonius de Lena, to cut off all
the petty Princes of Germany, and then he should rule alone, cried out; Anima,
anima, My Soul, my Soul; Nay, says the Tiger, Paul. Jovii hist. lib. 27.
If your Majesty have a Soul, give over your Empire: The Emperor had some care
of his Soul, the bloody Advocate had none. Oh the precious Soul of Man! the
Master-wheel of all our actions, O anima insignita Dei imagine, decorata, etc.
the chief Seat of the Image of God; that, for which Christ emptied himself of
glory; that, wherein Christ desires to dwell by faith; How ought such a Jewel
to be kept with all diligence; let the Men of the World prise their Soul at
never so low a rate, Bern. in Medit.
yet let all good Men set an high value upon theirs.

The Worlds uncertainty.
AS it cannot be otherwise, Jer. Leech Sermon at S. Maryle Bow, 1624.
but that the Sun shining out in our Horison, must needs be the occasion of
darkness in another, so that our day is their night; and when it is day with
them, it is night with us: Thus it is with the things of this World, they are
at no certainty, many are made poor, that a few may become rich: One is made
Honorable by another disgrace; Rara si constat sua forma mundo, Si tantas
variat vices, Bo^th. deconsolat. lib. 2.
this Man full by that Man's emptiness: If the day of Prosperity smile upon
one, the night of Adversity lowres upon another; one weepeth, and another
rejoices; one gains by another loss; Why then should any Man think that to
be certain with him, that is so inconstant to all besides him.

How to know whether a Man be Heavenly or Earthly-minded.
ALL things in Nature, Jer. Buroughs Moses choice.
have a principle to carry them to their pr^p^r place; As for example, take
Earth and close it in a vessel; and tak^ Fire and put it in another vessel;
then open the vessels, let them out, and they will both go to their proper place,
the one upward, the other downward, because the place of Fire is on high; hence
is it that sparks fly naturally upwards: And because the place of Earth is
below, thence is it that it tends downward. Thus if the place and center of the
Heart be in Heaven, then certainly it will move upwards toward Heaven; but if
on Earth, E^itus acta probac.
then it will bear downward; So likewise the Souls of Men, when they are gone
out of the body, they go to the place, where they had a Principle to carry
them, not a Principle that shall be put into them when they die, but a
Principle, that they were led by before; so that if their hearts he pressed
down by Earthly things, when they die, they will fall down; but if
Heavenly-minded, they will mount upwards: It stands therefore upon every Man to
know how his Soul works.

Parents Necessities.
LUther has a Story of a good Father in Germany, Let. Com. tit. de amore ergae
Parents.
that had made over all his estate to his Sons, reserving only to himself a
power, by turns to come and take his diet at their Tables: One of the Sons
being at dinner, and having a goose before him, espied his Father coming, and
set the goose underneath the Table, till his Father was gone again: Then takes
he up the goose, which God had miraculously turned into a great Toad, which
leaped into his face, and notwithstanding all his striving, R. Abbot Secret
Sins discovered.
it could not be removed, till it had stifled him: Let all Children seriously
look upon this Example, and look to it, that they relieve their Parents; For
Parents helped them, when they were not able to help themselves; Deuteronomy. 27, 16.
Let Parents not be slighted, Prove 30, 17.
not mocked, Levit. 9. 10.
not cursed, Exodus 21. 15.
not smitten; Ioh. 19. 26.
but submitted unto, Sam. 22. 3.
and relieved by the Examples of Christ, Genesis 47. 12.
of David, and of Joseph, and of diverse others, that for their filial love,
are recorded as famous in their several generations.

Captious Hearers of the Word, condemned.
SUppose a company of People coming (not to an elbow, Hector Pintus Com. in
Isaiam.
but) a working Goldsmith's shop; One buys a chain, another a Diamond Ring;
this buys a Jewel, that a rich piece of Plate; And that there should be one
amongst them so self-conceited, should take up a coal, from off the floor, and
handle it so long, till he had all to besmeared his Fingers, refusing what the
Shop afforded, so as he might but have that coal along with him; Were not this
great absurdity? Yet such and more is the condition of those Captious Hearers
of Gods Word, that whilst others carry away good and wholesome doctrine,
precious promises, such as is food for their Souls; they come only to carp and
catch at their Minister, that so they may more easily traduce him, and brand
him with the black coal of Infamy and disgrace; but they shall one day find,
that the more they throw dirt in his face, the more they bespatter their own.

Patience.
IN the way of Trade, Jer. Leech, Sermon at S. Mary le Bow, Land. 1622.
if a Man go and buy a commodity of five or ten shillings price, he lays down
ready money; but if the price rise high, and come to a good round sum, then
he does but give something in earnest, the great payment (it may be) comes six
or twelve months after: So when Men will bargain with God for their obedience,
to have credit and esteem in the World, these are but poor trifling matters,
and God gives them presently; but because the Covenant that is betwixt God and
Christ, and so betwixt Christ and Us, is about great matters, and God intends
to reward his People with glorious things eternally in the Heavens, Persert
patientia palman.
we have but the first fruits of them at present, and must not expect the
fullness of them suddenly; they are great things, and must be waited for with
Patience till they do come; and being once come, they will make amends for all
our tarrying.

Children to be Religiously educated.
IT was the saying of Aulus Fulvius to his Son, Val. Max. lib. ^. cap. 8. R.
Abbot. Secret sins discovered.
when he was discovered to be a Complo^^er in Cateline's conspiracy, Ego te non
Catelinae sed Patriae genui, I begot thee not for Cateline, but for thy
Country; And indeed too too often it falls out, that Parents may be said to get
Children for the Devil rather then God; for the ruin, rather then the raising
of their Country; they must therefore look to it, that they be well educated,
religiously trained up, that they may appear to be Gods Children as well as
theirs.

How the Devil is said to know our thoughts.
AN Angler having baited his hook, R. Holdsworth Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1626.
the Fish having espied the bayt after two or three vagaries about it, nibbles
at it, and after a while swallows down the bayt, hook and all: The Fisher sees
none of all this; but by the sinking of the cork he knows that the Fish is
taken. Thus the Devil (though a most cunning Angler) knows not the thoughts of
Men, Pr^us complexionem unius cujusque adversarius perspicit, et tunc
tentationis laqueos apponit. Greg. moral. lib. 9.
such as are mere pure thoughts, that is Gods peculiar, it is he that se^rcheth
the heart, and tries the reins; but if we write or sp^ak, if the cork do but
stir, if our Countenance do but change, he is of such perspicuity, and so
well experienced withal, that he will soon know what out thoughts are, and
suit his temptations accordingly.

Faithful and seeming Servants of God, diffeferenced by way of Reward.
GReat Men have usually two kinds of Servants; Jer. Borroughs Moses Choice.
some that they hire by the day, or the month, or the year, and they shall
have so much or so much wages paid unto them every night, or, it may be, every
week: Other Servants there are, that are not paid off presently; but that which
they se^ve for, is the expectation of some great Office, or some reversion of
Lands that should fall unto them after a certain time expired, and thereupon
they go on in doing faithful service, though there come nothing of it at
present: This is the difference of Faithful and seeming servants of God in
reference to the matter of Reward; They who live the best lives, such as
Moral, civil honest Men, who cannot yet be called truly gracious, though in
some measure they may be said to do God some service, it is but such as poor
laboring Men do, that are paid for their days labor, and so they have their
daily pay of meat and drink, and clothes such comforts as the Creature can
afford; Certantes in ^adio numerosior ^^^ona glorificat. Cassiodor. lib. 8. cp.
22.
But God has other manner of Servants better qualified, such as are Godly and
true Christians indeed, who though they have not so much present pay as the
other, yet there are Reversions and some glorious things that they expect
hereafter: Hence is it that they go o^, not envying them that have their daily
pay in outward things, but wait patiently for better.

Wicked persons may be in a godly Family.
ST. Augustine writing to the Clergy and Townsmen of Hippo, Quantum libet
vigilet disciplina domus meae, etc. in Epist.
says, Although the discipline and government of my house be strict and
vigilant, yet as I am a Man, and live amongst Men, I dare not arrogate to my
self, that my house should be better then the Ark of Noah, the house of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of Christ: Thus may it be also with many a good Man;
yea, there have been no worse Men in the World, then they that have had the
best means of Grace in Christian Families; As in Adam's, there was a murdering
Cain; In Abraham's, a persecuting Ishmael; Rich. de Mediavilla Progres.
culestis.
In Noah's, a scoffing Cham; In Isaac's, a profane Esau; In David's. an
undutiful Absolon; In Mephibosheth's, a Faithless Ziba; In Elisha's, a lying
Gehezi; And in the College of Christ, a treacherous Judas: And no wonder; For
Religion is not hereditary, Rom 9. 17.
yea, Religion is the Work of God, and he has other en^s in means of
Reformation then conversion, as may be ^^en in Phara^h, and in Eli's sons. 1 Samuel 2. 15.



A Skillful Ieweller having taken a great deal of pains to make up some
exquisite piece of Art, Hector Pintus in Ezcki^l.
cannot choose but be much troubled, when he sees his Workmanship fallen into
the hands of children and fools that have no understanding, such as cannot
value what work is, and therefore slight it. Such a rare piece is the Soul of
Man, framed by God after his own divine Image, so precious and transcendent in
the estimate, that the Spirit of God is, as it were, at a stand to find any
thing to equal it, Matthew. 16.
What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Now, to speak after the manner
of Men, How is the holy Spirit of God grieved, when that which he has made a
Temple for himself to dwell in, shall by sin be made a den of dragons, 1 Cor.
3. 17.
a cage of unclean birds, a harbor for impure thoughts? to see that slighted,
which himself holds so near and dearly beloved unto him.


JUlius Caesar, Sueronius in vitae.
that great Roman Emperor, when he was at any time sad upon the thoughts of
some disaster, that besell him in the way of his dominion, was w^nt to say,
Cogitate esse Caesarem, Think that thou art Caesar; and that was it that put
him into a more joyous temper: And memorable is that place of holy Writ, 2 Samuel
13. 4. Annotat. in ^iblia. Angl.
When Ionadab said to Amnon, Why art thou lean from day to day, being the
King's Son? Intimating, that he could have no just cause, to pine and fret away
himself, being the King's son, and heir apparent to the Crown, whose present
condition, and future hopes, might make him easily dispense with such matters,
as would be grievous to others; besides, he was of that power and authority,
that he might easily remove any obstacle that lay in his way. Thus it may very
well be said of every true-hearted Christian, that having an eye upon the
Reward, they should not be daunted at any outward thing whatsoever, but to
think upon their Crown and glory, Heb. 11. 26.
not to have their hearts troubled, and to walk dumpishly and heavily in the
ways of God; For they are the King of Heaven's Sons, Heirs of God, Coheirs
with Christ, the Children of the Bride-chamber, and therefore to rejoice and go
on with an holy and heavenly cheerfulness and courage in all the ways of God.


IN a fiered Coal, R. Abbot's Catechism. Damascen. lib. 2. orthodox. fidei.
cap. 4.
there is the substance of the Coal, the light of the Coal, the heat of the
Coal, and yet but one fiered Coal; So soon as the Coal is fiered, there are
these three, substance, light, and heat; So in the divine Essence (though in a
more transcendent way) is there, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Again, it may
be shadowed out in a Man's self; As Soon as ever he is born into this World, he
is a Creature to God, a Child to his Parents, a Subject to his Prince, and yet
he it but one; So, so soon as ever that God is, (that is from all Eternity) he
is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet but one God.

How to be truly Rich, and truly Honorable.
THere is mention made of a Painter, Plutarch* moral:
that having drawn the picture of a Horse, would needs have him foaming at the
mouth, but could not by any means do it: Whereupon in a great rage, he took the
sponge wherewith he made his pensils clean, and thr^w it at the picture,
intending to have utterly defared it: but it so fell out, that the sponge
having sucked in several sorts of colors, effected that by chance, which the
Artist by all his industry could not compass: Thus it is with them that strive
to make themselves great and eminent in the World, (...)
How do they cark and care, flatter, lie and dissemble, and all to be thought
some body, amongst their fearful Neighbors? But all in vain; this is not the
way to do it: for as Charles and Fifth told his son, That Fortune was just
like a Woman, the more you woe her, the further she flings off: Let every good
Christian then, take up the sponge of contempt, and throw it at these outward
eminencies. Moses did so, Heb. 11.
and found to his exceeding joy, that the abjection of vain glory was the
acquisition of that which was true and real.

The difference of good and bad Men in their preparation for Death.
A Wife that has been faithful to her Husband, and waits his coming home, let
him knock when he will, (...)
she is always ready to open the door unto him; but another Woman that is
false to her husband, and has other Lovers in the house; if her husband chance
to knock at the door, she does not immediately go to the door and let him in,
but there is a shuffling up and down in the house, and she delays the time
till she have go the others out of the way: Thus it is when Death knocks at the
door of these Earthly Tabernacles of ours, Piis mors ultra non est mors, sed
nomen tantum habet mortis. Chrysostom. Homil. in Math. cap. 10.
here is the difference; A good man is willing and ready to open to Death; his
Heart is in such an Heavenly frame, that he is always prepared for Death; and
seeing (...) Death, that so he may take possession; Whereas the Atheist, he
dares not die, for fear of a Non esse, that he shall be no more; the profane
Person is afraid of Death, because of a male esse, to be made miserable; and
every wicked ungodly Man is loath to die for having espoused himself to the
things of this World, he shrinks at the very thought of Death, and cries out to
his Soul, as sometimes Pope Adrian did; P. Jovius in Adriano.
O my Soul, whither go thou? thou shall never be merry more. Or as those ten
Men, Stay us not, for we have Treasures in the Field of Wheat and of Barley,
and of Oil and of Honey, etc. Jer. 41. 8.

Christ to be the sum of all our Actions.
THere is mention made of one in the Primitive times, Rich. de M^diavilla.
who being asked, What he was? answered, A Christian. What is thy name? he
answered, Christian. What is thy Profession? He answered, Clavis David.
Christian. What are thy thoughts? He answered, Christian. Thy words and deeds,
What are they? He answered, Christian. What life leadest thou? He answered
still, Christian. He had so digested Christ into his Soul by Faith, that he
could speak nothing but Christians. And thus it is, that Christ is to be made
the sum and ultimate of all our actions; we must labor that Christ may be
made one with us, and we with him, that in all our Works begun, continued and
ended, we may still conclude with that expression of the Church, In Liturgia
Eccles* Anglicanae.
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


A Man traveling upon the Road, (...)
espies some great Castle, sometimes it seems to be nigh, another time afar
off; now on this hand, anon on that; now before, by and by behind; when all the
while it stands still unmoved: So a Man that goes in a boat by water, thinks
the shore moves, whereas it is not the shore, but the boat that passes away.
Thus it is with God, sometimes he seems to be angry with the Sons of Men,
another time to be well pleased; now to be at hand, anon at a distance; now
showing the light of his Countenance, by and by hiding his face in displeasure;
Mal. 3. 6.
yet he is not changed at all. Numb. 23.
It is we, not he that is changed. Tho. primae part. sum.
He is Immutable in his Nature, in his Counsels, and in all his Promises;
whereas all Creatures have and are subject to change, having their dependence
on some more powerful Agent, but God being only independent, is (as the
Schoolmen say) omnino immutabilis, altogether immutable.


IT is storied of Godfrey Duke of Boloigne, Matthew. Paris in hist. Ang.
Foelicissimae justorum mors tanquam fin^ laborum, etc. Bern. de transitu
Malathiae.
that when in that his expedition to the Holy Land, he came within view of
Jerusalem, his Army seeing the high Turrets, goodly Buildings, and fair fronts
(though but, as it were, as so many Skeletons of far more glorious bodies)
being even transported with the joyfulnesse of such a sight, gave a mighty
showt, that the Earth was verily thought to ring with the noise thereof. Such
is the rejoicing of a Godly Man in death, when he does not see the Turrets and
Towers of an Earthly, but the spiritual building of an Heavenly Jerusalem, and
his Soul ready to take possession of them, How does he delight in his
dissolution? Especially, when he sees Grace changing into Glory, Hope in^o
fruition, Faith into vision, and Love into perfect comprehension; such and so
great are the exultations of his Spirit, such mighty workings and shoutings of
the Heart, as cannot be expressed.


IN the course of Justice we say, L. Andrews Winton. Sermon. at Court, 1617.
and say truly; When a Party is put to death that the Executioner cannot be
said to be the cause of his death, nor the Sheriff by whose command he does it;
neither yet the Judge, by whose sentence; nor the twelve Men, by whose verdict;
nor the Law it self, by whose Authority it is proceeded in, (for God forbid
that we should endite these, or any of these of Murder) Solum peccatum
Homicidae, Gloria peccati nulla petenda tui est. Ovid. de remed.
Sin, and sin only, is the cause and occasion of all sorrows; It is not the
looking upon any accidentals, any Instrumentals of our Miseries and vexations,
but upon the principal, the prime Agent, and that is Sin, to take a wreak or
holy Revenge upon that, to send out an enquiry in our Souls after that, and
having found it, to pass sentence thereupon.


IT was a handsome conceit of a great Duke of Florence, Hector Pintus in
Daniel. cap. 4.
that had for his Arms a fair spread Tree, having one branch only lopped off,
with this Motto, U^o avulso non deficit alter; intimating thereby, that as long
as the Trunk or body of the Teee was well rooted, there was no fear, though a
branch or two were withered: Thus a good Man bears up himself in the matter of
temporal loss, As to the matter of Government, if a David be gathered to his
Fathers, a Solomon may succeed him in his Throne. If a John be cast into
Prison, 1 Kings 2.
rather then the Pulpit shall stand empty, a greater then John even Christ
himself will begin to preach. What if a Sulpitius die at Rome, Ma^k 1. 14.
a Tully is left behind. What though a good King, a good Minister, a good
Magistrate be removed, he chears up himself, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
that as good may succeed; Luke 6. 22.
however he lies down with patience, expecting the event: If God take away his
estate in this World, manet altera caelo, he looks for a better in Heaven; If
he be traduced by Men, he shall be cleared by God; Matthew. 16. 25.
If he lose his life here, he shall find it hereafter.

Men, upon hearing of the joys of Heaven, to be much taken therewith.
THe Gauls, Plutarch. in vita Camilli.
an ancient People of France, after they had once tasted of the sweet wine of
the grapes, that grew in Italy, inquired after the Country where such pleasant
liquor was, and understanding of it, they made toward the place, and never
rested till they came thither, where such pleasant things grew. Thus when the
Minister has endeavored to lay open the rich and precious things of God, and
brought unto our Souls some of the clusters of Canaan, and some of that Wine
which is to be drunk in the Kingdom of Heaven, let it be our parts to close in
with him, in the pursuit after such good things, and not to let out Hearts
rest, till we come to taste the sweet, and enjoy the benefit thereof.

Order to be in the Church of God.
AS there is an Order in God himself, Will. Artersoll on Numb. in preface.
even in the blessed Trinity, where, though the Persons be coeternal and
co-equall, and the Essence it self of the Deity indivisible, yet there is the
first, second, and third Person; And as in God, so in the whole Creation,
Angels have their Orders, Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers, and
an Archangel, that at the last shall blow the Trumpet. So it is amongst the
Saints, Ephesians. 1. 12.
the Souls of Just men perfected, Col. 1. 16.
all of them have enough, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
none of them want; yet there is a difference in the measure of their glory, 1
Cor. 3. 8.
because every one has his own Reward according to his labor. Dan. 12. 3.
Stars are not all of one Magnitude, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
one differs from another in glory. As for things below, some have only a
being; some, being and life; others, being, life, and sense; and others besides
all these have Reason and Understanding: All Arts and Sciences, before they can
be learned, must be reduced into Order and Method; A Camp well disciplined is a
perfect pattern of good Order; Nay, Ephesians. 6. 12.
there is a kind of Order even in Hell it self, Matthew. 12. 24.
a place of disorder and confusion. And shall then God and Belial, Angels and
Men, Saints and Devils, Heaven and Earth, be all in Order; and the Church, out?
It cannot be, The Church is to be as an army with banners, to consist of
Governors and governed, Cant. 2.
some to teach, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
and some to hear, Ordine quisque suo, all in decency and in Order.

How the Humane nature may in some sort be said to excel the Angelical.
A Chain that is made up of coorse gold, Hector Pintus in Ezech.
may in some sense be said to outvalue that which is made up of ^iner, not in
respect of the Nature and perfection of the gold; but because there is a very
rich Jewel fixed unto it: So the Angelical nature, may in respect of its pure
and undefiled quality, be said to excel that which is humane; yet the humane
in another way excells it, because there is that sparkling Diamond of the
Divine Nature fastened unto it, Verbum caro factum, The Word made Flesh, the Son
of God made like unto the Son of Man in all things, (Sin only excepted)
passing by the Angels, taking the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16.


IT is reported of Adrianus, Laurent. Surius in vita Adriani.
an Officer unto Maximinianus the Tyrant, that seeing the constancy of Martyrs,
in suffering such grievous things for the cause of Christ, was very earnest to
know what was that which caused them so willingly to undergo such exquisite
torments; One of them (there being at that time two and twenty under the
Tormentors hands) made answer in that text of St. ^aul, 1 Cor. 2. ^.
Eye has not seen, ear has not he^rd, neither has it entered into the heart
of Man to conceive, what is laid up for them that love God. Upon the hearing
whereof, Adrianus was converted to the Christian faith, and s^aled the
profession thereof with his blood. Thus ought the very mention of the joys of
Heaven to be as a winning argument to work upon the Souls of Men, not to ^it
down contented with the greatest things in the World, if they once appear in
competition with the things of Heaven; Shall Men's hearts stir when they hear
of Gods wrath, and dreadfulnesse of his displeasure against Sin? And shall not
their hearts burn within them for joy, when they hear of the goodness of God,
and of the Riches of the grace of God, and of the wonderful thoughts that he
has for the everlasting good of Mankind?


WHen Moses had received the Law from the mouth of the Lawgiver himself, Will.
Attersol on Numbers.
and had published the same, and finished the Tabernacle of the Ark and
Sanctuary, he musters up all the Tribes and Families of Israel, from twenty
years of age upwards: The number of the whole Army was six hundred and three
thousand, five hundred, and fifty Men of War, besides Women and Children, and
strangers that followed out of Egypt; these he divides into four gross and
mighty Battailions; Templum portatilo.
In the midst of them, the Tabernacle (as it were a portable Temple) was
carried, Isidor. de sum. bono.
being surrounded by the Levites, and the Levites by the other Tribes; so that
not only the Pagans and Heathens were forbidden access unto it, but the
sentence of death passed upon every Soul of the Israelites themselves, that
durst be so bold as to approach it, such who were not Levites, Numb. 3. 8.
to whom the charge was wholly committed. So sacred was it, and with such
reverence guarded and regarded, that two and twenty thousand Priests were
dedicated to the service and attendance thereof, which was performed with such
dutiful observance in the preserving and laying up of the holy vessels, J.
M^rtinus de Repub. H^b.
the solemn removing, together with the prudent and provident defense of the
same, that it might well procure all due reverence to the holy things of God,
and increase zeal and devotion in such as drew near unto him; This was their
devotion to the Ark of God then, and afterward to the Temple, and ought to be
continued amongst all good Christians to the house of God, R. Holdsworth Sermon.
at S. Paul's, Land. 1624.
the house of Prayer, now in times of greater light; But (which is to be
lamented) whereas most of our Ch^rches have two doors; Superstition crept in
long since at the one, and Profaneness has of later days shouldered in at the
other; so that had there been more fear and Reverence in the hearts of Men
toward the worship of God, and the parts thereof, there had been less
sleighting of his Ordinances, and much less contempt of his Word and
Commanments.

A good Christian will rather part with his life, then his Integrity.
PIerius Valerianus in his book of Egyptian Hierogliphicks, Lib. 13.
makes mention of a kind of white Mouse, called an Armenian Mouse, being of
such a cleanly disposition, that it will rather die, then be any way (...), so
that the passage into her hole being besmeared with any filth, she will rather
expose her self to the mercy of her cruel Enemy, Hector Pintus in Ezckie.
then any way seek to save her life by passing so foul an entrance. And thus
every well-grounded, true-hearted Christian will with those three Nobly
spirited Hebrews, choose rather to be cast into the Fiery (...), then worship
the golden Image; Dan. 3.
with Moses rather suffer affliction with Gods people, Exodus 2.
then live a pleasant life in Pharaoh's Court; with Daniel rather he fed with
water and pulse, then eat of the Kings portion; In a word, rather part with
estate, liberty, life and all, then part with his Integrity.

To have Children male and female, Gods great blessing.
AS it is with the Soul and the body, though the Soul be far more excellent
then the body, Jos. Caryll on Job, Chap. 2.
yet the Soul alone is not so perfect, as when Soul and body are together;
because though the body be not so strong in Constitution, and noble in
Condition as the Soul, yet Body and Soul in creation were joined together;
hence is it, that their greatest perfection consists in Unity: So likewise is
it in a Family, though Sons in Nature are more perfect, yet because it was the
first Institution of a Family, Male and Female, therefore the fullness and
compleatnesse of the blessing is in the Union of both; Sons without daughters
may bear up the Name, and Daughters without Sons may enlarge the Family: but
where there are Sons and Daughters both, is the perfection of the blessing,
Genesis 2.
because Man was so made at the first, Male and Female created be them.

The Multitude always desirous of change in Government.
LIvy makes mention of the Citizens of Capua, that being gathered together in
a mutinous manner, Decad. 3. lib. 3.
they would needs depose the Senate; and being weary of their Government,
agreed to put them to death; But Pacuvius Calavius the head Magistrate, being
willing to save them; When they had passed sentence upon one of them to have
him executed, bade them first in his stead to choose a good and Righteous
Senator: Sir Walter Rawle^gh hist. of the World.
At the first, they were all silent, not knowing how to find a better; After,
when some odd fellow of the crew, past all shame and reverence, seemed to
nominate one to succeed, by and by they grew to loud words and great outcries;
Some said flatly, they k^en not the Man: Others laid heinous things to his
charge: Some said, he was of a base and beggarly condition; Others objected his
Trade and way of living: T^us they grew more and more vehement upon the
Proposals of a second and third t^ their choice: Whereupon they bethought
themselves, and repented of what they had done already, considering how much
they failed, and were to seek upon every new Election, and so at length they
were content to keep their ol^ Senators still. And just thus is it with the
Bellua multorum capitum.
many-headed Multitude, Neutrum mo^^, Mas mod^ vulgus, as changeable,
unconstant, and variable as the weather^ never at any certain; discontented
with the present Government, which if changed for another, they like that no
better, weary of present things, desirous of change and alteration; Either they
serve basely, or rule proudly. As for Liberty, that is the mean betwixt them
both, they have neither the skill to desp^se with Reason, nor the Grace to
entertain in any proportionable measure.


DAvid, 1 Samuel 21. 13.
coming to the Court of Achish King of Gath, saw himself in danger, and
thereupon feigned himself mad, which though he did in a politic may to save
his life and liberty, P. Martyr in locum.
yet he had no warrant so to do, because it tended not only to his own
disgrace, being King of Israel, but it was also dishonorable to God himself,
whose Majesty he should have represented: Thus there are some that think it
good Policy (and so it is good Worldly Policy) to rise ^^^ly, Matthew. Griffiths
Bethe^.
and go to bed late, to eat the bread of care, and work full hard; yea, they
have s^t hours for working, eating, resting, etc. but this their Policy (as it
is much to be feared) eats up the service of God, it leaves them small or no
time wherein they may offer up the calves of their lips in the morning, H^s.
14. 2.
or at night to come before him with an Evening sacrifice; Psalm. 141. 2.
and therefore prejudicial to his honor, and, as the Apostle speaks of
Wisdom in the same respect, earthly, sensual, Iam. 3. 15.
and Divellish.


IT was a pretty sweet passage that was once betwixt a distressed Mother and a
Child about eight or nine years of age, Jos. Ca^yll on Job, cap. 2.
who being reduced to such a straight, that hunger began to pinch them both;
the Child looking earnestly on the Mother, said; Mother, do you think that God
will starve us? No, child, answered the Mother, He will not: The Child replied,
But if he do, yet we must love him and serve him. Here now was language from a
little child, which being from the heart, might well become and argue a child
of Grace, a well grown Christian: Job 13. 15.
Such an one was Job, though God slay him, yet he will trust in him. And the
rod and staff of God shall be David's comfort; Psalm 23. 4.
and S. Paul had so learned the art of thankfulness, P^il. 4. 11.
as in all conditions to be contented. And so must every one labor to have the
same frame of spirit, that in the worst of times, in the saddest of conditions,
whether public or private, National or personal, they be thankful unto God,
and speak good of his most holy Name.


IN the art of Navigation, G. Nazianz. in laude^ (...) Basilii.
it was a Law, wont to be seriously observed, that none should be Master of a
Ship, or Masters Mate, that had not first been a sculler, and rowed with oars,
and from thence been promoted to the stern: And in Military discipline, a Man
is first listed a Soldier, then rises by degrees, before he come to be a
Commander; Will. Attersol on Numb. cap. 8.
The Levites under the Law, were first Probationers, before they were allowed
to be Practitioners. Such ought all Ministers to be, Ier. 23. 21.
Men of gravity and experience, not such as run before they are sent, and
thrust themselves into the vineyard before they be hired, that come from
Jericho before their beards be grown, that are young in years, and as young in
qualities and qualifications relating to the Ministry, young Timothy's, and
possibly old Demasses, that have not shed their Colts teeth, nor scarce sowed
their wild oats, so that it may very well be said of them, The Prophet is a
fool, the spiritual Man is mad, Hos. 9. 7.

Worldy Policy, not to prejudice the truth of a good Conscience.
RAchel having stolen her Fathers Idols, Genesis 31. 19.
when he pursued her, and came to search for them in the Tent; Lippoman. in
Genes.
she having hid them in the Camels litter, and sitting upon them, entreated him
not to be angry, though she rose not up to him; For she was sick, as she
pretended, and said; It was with her after the manner of Women: If by the
custom of Women, she would be understood to be in travel, then she told a
flat lie; but if by a trick of mental reservation, she did use that ambiguous
phrase, with an intention to deceive, then at the best she did but Equivocate;
and even in so saying, and so doing, she made a flat breach of Conscience. Thus
many amongst us desire to be at as little charge as may be possibly, Seneca de
beneficiis
whether to the State or to the Church; And therefore when they are pressed by
or for either of these, then they are politickly s^^k in the purse, make
themselves poor and needy, and will hardly part with a penny, (if they can but
with common civility or shameless impudency keep it) which favors not only of
unthankful hearts to God, Gesp. Melo in Matthew. 22 cap.
but shows, that they have most wretched Consciences, caring not what they do,
so as they may keep that, which (falsely) they call their own.

Holy duties call for holy Preparation.
DAvid washes his hands in Innocence, before he compasses Gods altar, Psalm.
26. 6. and Job intending to sacrifice unto God, on the behalf of himself and
his Children, sends to them solemnly to prepare themselves, chap. 1. v. 5. Nay,
the very Heathens themselves would not admit any to come to their Religious
services, Virgil. lib. 2. Aenead.
unless they were first prepared; as that of Aeneas to his Father Anchises,
Coel. Rhodogin. lect. Var.
upon his returrn from the Wars, Tu genitor cape sacra manu, therefore they
had one that cried out to the People, Procul hinc, procul, este prophani, All
you that are unclean and profane depart hence and come not near us. And shall
Christians then who have learnt better things, Jos. Caryll on Job.
touch holy things with unholy hands, or unholy hearts? No, they must not, they
ought not; Holy Duties call for holy Preparation; they must be sanctified
within and without, before they come to the performance of any holy duty: It is
true, that the duty sanctifies; but it is as true, that the duty seldom
sanctifies, unless Men be sanctified for the duty; And they get most holiness
from the duty, who are most holy before they come to it.

Attention in Hearing Gods Word, commanded and commended.
MAny there are in our days, Plautus in Poenulo.
that delight to have Rings and Jewels hanged at their ears, and they account
it a great ornament unto them; whose Vanity the Poet long since in a scoffing
manner, answered; It is (says he) because they have no fingers on their hands,
as if the fingers not the ears were made for Rings: However, this may be said,
Plutarch in Romans antiquitat.
that if we had the richest Jewels the East or West could afford us, if we have
not an ear bored through to the Heart, a hearing ear to hear the Word of God,
they are no better then Jewels in a Swines snowt: Jos. Shute Sermon. at S. Paul's,
Land. 1627.
Oh the excellency of the Jewel of attention! when audire terminates in
obedire, when we hear the Word of God and do it, when we understand, believe
and practice what we hear.


KIng David was very Politic in contriving how to work himself out of the
shame of Adultery, Matthew. Griffiths Bethel.
and his child by Bathsheba out of the shame of bastardy; and therefore he so
closely carried it, that Uriah was slain, and then he took her to Wife; but
because it did not stand with Justice, first to deprave the Wise, then to
deprive the husband, this his supposed Masterpiece of folly, and Worldly
policy, 1 Kings 15. 5.
is (amongst many other good characters) brought in as a cressebarre in his
arms, and a foul blemish in his Coat. Per sas et nesas.
Thus it is that few of us make any Conscience at all of that Justice which is
commutative, due unto our Neighbor; Do we not sometimes swear and lie, and
swear falsely, and lay our Foundation in the blood of the Innocent, rather then
we will not build and enlarge our Houses? Yea, Are not many of our buildings
raised out of the ruins of S^on? Numb. 12.
What care we to take advantage of our brothers simplicity? We look upon
Inferiors with contempt and scorn, use them but as stirrops to mount up into
the saddle of our own private ends; Geo. Downam Sermon at Norwich, 1640.
or like so many ladders to reach our designs, and when we have got so high as
they can help us, then, no matter, though (ladder-like) they be hung up by the
walls: As for Superiors, we either not know, or will not acknowledge any,
living like the Locusts, as if we had no Supreme Authority, Prove. 30. 27.
no Law, no Government, to the great prejudice of the place wherein we live.

The best of Men not free from Sin in this life.
AS a Man, Jos. Caryll on Job.
who in the Morning washes his hands, and goes abroad about his Worldly
business, though he does not puddle in the mire, or rake amongst dunghills,
yet when he returns home again at dinner, or at night, if he wash, he finds
that he has contracted some uncleanness, and that his hands are foul; Nullus
sanctus et justus caret peccato, etc. Aug. de Eccl^s. dogmat.
There Is no Man can converse with an unclean and filthy World, but some
uncleanness must needs fasten unto him. Even so it is with the Souls of Men,
such is the universal corruption of human Nature, that the Souls of the best,
of the purest, of the holies^, though they do not rake in the dunghill, and
wallow in the mire of Sin basely and silthily; yet they do from day, yea from
moment to moment, contract some filth and uncleanness; they may be clear from
sinning wil^ully, 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
and with delight, (in which sense it is said, He that is born of God sins
no^,) and free from scandalous sins, whereinto many of Gods dear children have
through inadvertency fallen; but they can never acquit themselves from Sins of
infirmity, such as do inevitably and inseparably cleave unto the best of Men,
especially considering the state and condition wherein they are, having corrupt
flesh and blood about them.

Children of persons excommunicate to be Baptized.
ST. Augustine writing to a young busy Bishop called Auxilius, Epist. 75.
on the behalf of one Classicanus, says; That for the offense of the Master of
the house, whom he had excommunicated before, he should not therefore
exeommunicate the rest of the Family, and deny them the benefit of the
Sacrament: For (says he) herein the Man may perish that is a Friend, Nallus a
baptismo prohibendus (...), etc. Aug. in enchirid.
and the Devil be glad that is an Enemy. Thus in a manner do they offend, who
refuse to baptize the Children of those that are excommunicated, and such as
are born in Fornication, because their Parents are impenitent; as though the
Son should bear the Iniquity of the Father, or the Wife of the Husband; or he
that is not yet born, the iniquity of them that are born, contrary to that of
Ezekiel, Chap. 18. 20.

No Man so old but he may learn something.
CHarles the Fifth gave for his Arms, Impp. Romans vitae*
Hercules Pillars, with this Motto, Plus ultra, meaning, that those pillars,
which are two hills at the entrance of the Straights mouth, Ad discendum* quod
opus est, nulla aetas sera videri potest, etc. Aug.
should not bound his Empire, which he intended ^o extend further (as indeed he
did afterward) to America: Thus it is, that old Men should do well, if they
did s^yl by his Compass, never to set any bounds to their knowledge, not to
hug themselves in their great experience, as it there were not a plus ultra;
S. Augustine in his old age studied (...) Greek, and Cato the Rudiments of
Grammar: Conr. Zuingeri theat. hum. vitae.
As for Gods School, that does not only teach the Principles, but also the
perfection of Divine Wisdom; which, not being attained unto even in oldest
age, S. John writes as well to you Fathers, 1 Io^. 1^ 13.
as to you young Men and Children; intimating, that the Fathers themselves have
as much to learn as the Children.

Religion not to be made a stalking horse to Policy.
ONe of the Trent-Doctors, Matthew. Styles Sermon at S. George Botolph Lane,
Land. 1636.
being a Fisherman's son born, whilst he was of some inferior Order, would
always cause a net to be spread under his Table-cloth, when he was to sit down
at his meat, and this was to put him in mind from whence he came, that so he
might not at any time be puffed up with any high conceit of his own worth: A
good meaning, had it been real; but it so fell out, that being saluted with a
red hatt from the Conclave, the Net was presently laid aside; and being desired
to tell the reason, why it was so? made answer; Simulata sanctitas.
I have now caught what I fished for: Thus it is, that Religion is too too
often made a stalking horse to Worldly Policy, so that when they have gotten
enough (as they think) from God, they care not for God; and when the Fish is
caught, they lay by the Net; For they do but a go a Fishing with holiness, and
the profession of Religion; and when they have their ends, there is an end also
of their Profession.

The painful Ministers joy at the time of his death.
IT is said of Gregorius, surnamed Thaumaturgus, G. Nyssenus in vita.
Wonder-worker, When he asked the question, being now ready to die; How many
Infidels yet remained in the City Neocaesaria? answer was returned unto him,
Seventeen: that he rejoiced greatly, and comforted himself, and gave thanks
unto God, saying, Totidem erant Fideles, etc. Ruffin. lib. 2. cap. 9.
There were only so many Faithful and believers, when I was made Bishop of
that place: A great work of God by a Wonder-working Man! Been agente populo
u^usquisque pro suo merito remuneratur sed Sacerdos pro bonis omnium. etc.
Chrysostom. in Ma^^h. 25.
And such will be the Crown and rejoicing of all painful and laborious
Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, that when they shall be ready to give an
account of the Souls committed to their charge, that they can do it with joy,
and not with grief, that they have been Faithful, and looked more after the
Flock, then the Fleece, and that it is not with them (as it often falls out
with too too many) whose rising has been the fall of the Church, and
mightiness the miseries thereof.

Parents to show good Examples to their Children.
WE may read in the Fable, Dialogo Creaturarum.
What the Mother-Crab said to the daughter, Go forward my daughter, Probum esse
oportet patrem qui gnatum suum, and. Plautus.
go forward; the daughter replied, Good Mother, do you show me the way;
Whereupon the Mother crawling backward and sideling as she was wont, the
daughter straight cried out; Lo Mother, I go just as you do: Matthew. Griffith
's Bethel.
Let Parents then be sure that their carriage be just and justifiable,
especially in the sight of their children, lest instead of being their
Correctors, they prove their corruptors; let them never be able to stop their
mouths, and twit them in the teeth (when they reprove them) with their own
vicious pattern; As if where the Parents were naught themselves, the Children
should hold it a kind of sauciness to be good, and had rather be bad for
company, then their mannerly carriage should seem to teach their betters.


AS it was with Naomi and her two daughters in law, Orphah and Ruth; All the
while that she was Naomi, beautiful and had enough, they both stayed with her;
but when Naomi became Marah, bitter and empty, then Orphah took her leave of
her, Jos. Caryll on Io^, cap. 3.
but Ruth abode with her still, Chap. 1. Here was the trial, whether Orphah or
Ruth had the more sincere affection to Naomi, Ruth loves her Mothers person,
Orphah her outward estate and preferment: Thus while Religion and Prosperity go
together, it is hard to say which a Man follows; but when they are forced to a
separation, where the Heart was, will soon be manifest; Many will hold on with
God as long as the Sun shines, as long as it is fair weather, Matthew. 7. 27.
as long as the profession of the Gospel is countenanced; but if the storm
arise, Ruth. 4.
and troubles come, then they pull in their heads, then they deny and forsake
God, then they drawback from, and betray his Truth: But the upright in heart
are like Ruth, whatsoever becomes of the Gospel, they will be sharers with it
in the same condition, be it affliction, or be it consolation; be it fair
weather, or be it foul; be it light, or be it darkness; they will take their
lot with it, whatsoever it be.


IT is the observation of S. Ambrose, De Jacob lib. 1. cap. 2.
though he were not by birth the firstborn, yet hiding himself under his
brothers clothes, and having put on his coat which smelled most sweetly, came
into his Fathers presence, and got away the blessing from his elder brother:
Genesis 27. 36.
So it is very necessary that we lie hid under the precious pureness of Christ
our elder brother, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
that having the sweet savor of his garments, our sins may be covered with his
perfections, and our unrighteousness with the Robes of his Righteousness,
that so we may offer up our selves unto God a living and acceptable Sacrifice,
Romans 12. 1.
not having our own Righteousness, but that which is only to be found in
Christ Jesus.


THere is mention made of a notable Soaker, Plutarch. in vita Pyrrhi.
who being brought before Pyrrhus for railing against him in his cups, said; It
is true, that I spoke somewhat against thee; and much more should I have
spoken, had not the Wine failed me: Thus it appears ex confesso, that where Men
do swill immoderately, they will make every Object they light upon, matter of
Reproach; no person shall be free from their derisions; Math. Griffith's Bethel.
they will observe no Laws, reverence no Magistrates, respect no Friends, spare
no cost, regard no Religion, keep no Church, fear no God; tell them of Gods
displeasure, Esaias 5. 11.
like so many Michols they will jeer you to your face: Prove. 29. 23. and 29. 30.
Tell them of Solomon's induction, like so many Edomites they will make songs
of you, all and every of these are but a May Game and a mocking-stock unto them.

Graces of the Spirit to be held fast in the midst of temporal losses.
AS it is with a Man in a wrack at Sea, when all is cast over-boord, the
Victuals that feed him, the clothes that should keep him warm, yet he swims to
the shore with his life in his hand; Or as it is with a valiant
Standard Bearer, that carries the banner in the time of battle, if he sees all
lost, he wraps the banner about his body, and chooses rather to dye in that as
his winding sheet, then let any man take it from him, or spoil him of it; he
will hold that fast, though he lose his life with it. Thus Job in all his
troubles is said to hold fast his Integrity, Chap. 2. verse. 4. And so must all
of us do, Jos. Caryll in ^ocum.
hold our spirituals, whatsoever becomes of temporals: When Wife and Children,
and Friends, and liberty, and life and all is going, say unto peace of
Conscience, to Innocence and Integrity, as Jacob said to the Angel, (whether
they be those Summer-graces of Prosperity, as Joy and Thanksgiving; T. Fuller
Sermon. at S. Clem. Land. 1652.
or the Winter-graces of Adversity, as Patience and Perseverance; or the grace
of Humility that is always in season) We will not let ye go; For indeed there
is no blessing without them: There Is not a Man upon the face of the Earth, but
if he be of an Heavenly temper and spiritual resolution, will in the greatest
storm, in the hottest assault, wrap himself round about with his Integrity, and
will not let it go, till he go along with it.

Children not to marry without their Parents consent.
CYrus, Xenophon Cyroped. lib. 8.
an Heathenish King, having conquered Babylon, and returning home in Triumph,
was offered by his Uncle Cyaxares, to have his daughter in Marriage; but he
thanked his Uncle, praised the Maid, liked well of the Portion; as for consent
to the Match, he returned this answer: Uncle, I commend the Stock, and the
Maid, and the Portion; Howbeit, (says he) by the Counsel of my Father and my
Mother, I will assent unto you: As if he had said, Without their advice I can
do nothing. And thus all dutiful Children are content to submit to their
Parents directions, Will. Attersol. on Numb.
and to be ordered by them, especially in the matter of so high concernment as
Marriage; thus did Jacob, and Sampson, not as it is the manner of Children now
adays, Genesis 27.
who consult with their Parents last of all, nay regard not their Parents
consent at all, Judge. 14. 3.
but make their choice after the lust of their eyes, and delight of their own
deceitful hearts, making up a Match in great haste, and repenting at leisure.

How it is that Wicked drunken Men think well of themselves.
THere is a Story of a Frenchman, that lodging one night in a Curtizan's house
at Rome, Othon. Melandri Iacoseria.
when in the Morning he took his gold Chain, he found it would go but thrice
about his neck, whereas it was formerly wont to go four times: And thereupon he
guessed, that the Curtizan had (as she had indeed) taken away some of the
links* but she cunningly dissembling to excuse her fault, would needs make the
Frenchman believe, that his head was much swollen that night; and to confirm
her words, she caused him to view himself in a false glass, which made all
things seem a great deal bigger then indeed they were; And so not knowing how
to help himself, he was fain to persuade himself, Nath. Shute Sermon. at S. Mild.
Poultry Land. 1633.
that all the fault was in the growth of his head. To this chain may be likened
the Soul of Man, which being sober, perceives that, by Intemperance, the Memory
and Understanding (which are two main links of it) are taken away; but the
Devil (like a cunning Curtezan) as it were by a false glass, makes Men
believe it is nothing so; Multum me^um pauca cogit sapere. Menand.
but on the contrary, that all things are greater then they were, their Memory
greater, their understanding greater, their strength greater, their wits riper;
whereas it is nothing so, their Understanding is infatuated, their Will
perverted, their Memory enfeebled, their Comeliness deformed, all out of order.


THe Rabbines have a conceit, Jos. Caryll on Job.
why after the work of the second day was finished, God (beholding what he had
done) did not add any approbation to it; When he made the Light, which was the
first days work, he approves it, God saw the Light, and said, It was good: but
to the work of the second day, God subjoyned no approbation, Joh. Plantavit.
Florileg. Rabbinicum.
by saying; It was good: The reason which they give of it, is this, because
then was the first disunion, that made the first second that ever was; All
before was one (sub unissimo Deo) under the One-most God: But to leave this
fancy to the Jewish Doctors, amongst many others of the like Nature, there is
somewhat in the notion it self, namely, that Division and Disunion are the
evils of the Creature, all natural dis-unions are the Afflictions of natural
things: And so Civil dis-unions and Civil dissentions are much more the
affliction of People and Nations; Christ assures us, that the strongest
Kingdom divided, Mark 3. 14.
cannot stand. Whereas contrarily, Weak things are strong by union, Vis unita
fortior.
and that not only by union with the strong, but by union amongst themselves;
And things obscure, united, are Honorable, especially when united to things
that are Honorable.


IT is reported of Master Fox the Martyrologist, Rich. Greenham's Works.
when it was told him, that a certain Man (of none of the highest or greatest
calling) who had received much comfort from him in the days of his trouble,
was desirous to acknowledge his thankfulness toward him, and asked him,
Whether he remembered such a one? He answered, I remember him well; I tell you,
I forget Lords and Ladies, Will. Attersol on Philemon.
to remember such as he is. But now it is otherwise in the World, Many there
are that look so high, that they cannot discern their lower brother, whom
notwithstanding God loves, for whom Christ dyed, and to whom the Word of
Salvation is preached: Nil habet infoelix paupertas ^urius in se, Quam quod
ridiculos homines facit. Juvenal.
Nay, so supercilious and lofty are most Men, that they look upon a lower, a
poorer Man, no otherwise then if God had made them so on purpose to be laughed
at: but let all such know for a certain, that they are the same with them, and
though they have not vestem communem, the same coat, yet they have cutem
communem, the same skin, and that, He that mocketh the poor, reproacheth him
that made him.


CYrus, the Persian Monarch, Xenophon in Cyropadia.
being demanded of his Grandfather Astyages, Why he would drink no Wine?
answered; For fear lest they give me poison; For, quoth he, I noted yesterday,
when you celebrated your Nativity, that some body had poisoned all the Wine
they drank, because at the taking away of the Cloth, not one of all those that
were present at the Feast, arose in his right mind. Let all Men take heed then
how they multiply their cups, Est^. 1. 8.
as in that Feast of Ahashuerus at Shushan, where every Man drank as much as he
lift; but content themselves with Timothy's Modicum prescribed by S. Paul. One
cup is enough, 1 Timothy 2.
two are too much, and three too little: but How may that be? When a Man has
taken off three, Lud. Vives in exercitat. ling. Let.
he is fit (if possible) for three hundred, and then ab hilaritate ad
ebrietatem lubricus est gradus, He shall find to his sorrow, that from mirth to
madness the step is very slippery.

The great pains that Wicked Men take to go to Hell.
IT is observed of Antiochus Epiphanes, one of the Kings of Syria, that he was
a most cruel Persecutor of the Church, Joh. Buntingus Itinerarium Patriarch,
etc.
and undertook more troublesome journeys, and went upon more hazardous designs
merely to trouble, vex, and oppose the Church of the Jews, then ever any of his
Predecessors did about any other conquest, or noble enterprise; that he
traveled more miles to do mischief, (as he that compares their journeys) then
any of the Saints did to do good, And thereupon concludes the Story of him;
with this general truth concerning all wicked Men; That they go with more pains
to eternal death, then the Saints to eternal rest; that they toil themselves
more, and suffer more hardship to work out their own damnation, then the godly
do to work out their Salvation. Thus it is, Jos. Caryll on Job.
that a Wicked ungodly Man is said to travel with pain all the days of his
life, and wearying himself in the way to Hell doing the Devils drudgery: And
whereas a good Man is merciful to his beast, Job 15. 20.
he is unmercifull to himself, and tires himself more then a good Man will tire
his beast; For he that will follow Sin and serve his own lusts, Prove. 12. 10.
(especially the lust of Pride and oppression) serves a hard Master, one that
will make him sweat for it, and pay him home at last with eternal death; 1 Cor.
15.
so that the work of Sin is bad enough; but (as to the Sinner) the wages is
worse.

Proper Names of Men, not to be so much regarded as Appellative.
A Poor Shepherd in Germany, T. Adams on ep. 2 Pet.
when diverse observing the Cardinal of Colein, and admiring his pomp as a
Prince, whereas his calling was but a Bishop; O, says the Shepherd, Cum
damnatus fuerit Rex, quid fiet de Episcopo? If the great Duke should go to Hell
for pride, What would become of the humble Bishop? Thus as with Titles, so is
it with the Names of Men; It is not the proper Name, Ex nominis significatione
non est judicandum de moribus. Demosth.
but the Appellative; not the Nominal, but the Real that makes a good
Construction in Gods grammar; Abraham is a good Name; but the Father of the
Faithful is a better: Moses, a good Name; but the servant of God much better.
David, a good Name; but a Man after Gods own heart, far better: so it may be
said of S. John, he had a good Name; but to be the beloved Disciple of Jesus
Christ, was much beyond it. Paul, a good Name; but to be a chosen vessel of
the Lord, much more: So that Grace is not tied to Names; Theodorus, Theodosius,
Dorotheus, Theodatus, Deodatus, Adeodatus, R. Holdsworth Sermon. at S. Pet. poor,
Land. 1632.
all signifying the gift of God, may well be given to our Children; but it is
the Grace of God that makes happy; No Man has the mystery of his Fortune
written in his Name; Names are not Prophetical, much less Magical; yet the
Civil use of them is for distinction, Nomen quasi Notamen; and the Religious
use of them has by good antiquity been always observed in the Sacrament of
Baptism.

Excessive drinking, condemned.
A Nacharsis had a saying, In Sopholog.
that the first draught of Wine is for thirst, the second for nourishment, the
third for mirth, the fourth for madness; Whereupon Calisthenes being pressed
to quaffe off a great Bowl of Wine (which bowl they called Alexander) gravely
replied; Theopompus in hist.
That he would not for drinking of Alexander, stand in need of Aesculapius, i.
e. he would drink no more then what should do him good. And it were heartily to
be wished, (...) etc. Philemon.
that all Men were of his mind; but so it is, that now adays, a drunken health
(like the Conclusion in a Syllogism) must not be denied; yea, such and so
excessive is the custom of high drinking, that S. Basil makes it a wonder,
Homil. 13. in ebrietat. et luxum.
How the bodies of Drunkards, being by Nature framed of Earth, do not with so
much moisture dissolve into clay and water.


IT is usual in Scripture to ascribe a testimony to the more notable
circumstances and accidents of humane life, Iam. 5. 3.
as to the rust of hoarded money, to the solemn publications of the Gospel,
Matthew. 10.
the dust of the Apostles feet. And so downward in the Primitive times, T.
Manton in praesat. Com. in Iacobum.
when grown persons were baptized, they were wont to leave a stole or white
garment in the vestry for a Testimony and witness of their Baptism: Wherefore
when one Elpidophorus had revolted from the Faith, the Deacon of the Church
came and told him, Nicephorus in hist. Ecclesiast. l. 3.
O Elpidophorus, I will keep this stole as a Monument against thee to all
Eternity. And thus it is, that Books of Piety and devotion, being public
Monuments, are much of this Nature, a testimony likely to be produced in the
day of Judgment, not only against the Authors, but the Persons, into whose
hands they shall happen to be perused, in case on either side there be any
defection in Judgment, or manners, from the Truths therein expressed.


IT is the report of a Reverend Divine (now with God) concerning an Atheist in
England; Dr. Westfield.
A young Man, says he, was a Papist, but soon fell into dislike of their
superstition? He became a Protestant, but that did not please him long; England
could not content him, he reels to Amsterdam, there he fell from one sect to
another, till he lighted upon the Familists; The first Principle they taught
him was this; There is no God; (as indeed they had need to sear up their
Consciences, and dam up all natural light that turn Familists) hereupon he fell
to a loose life, committed a Robbery, was convicted, condemned, and brought to
die; At the Execution he desired a little time, uttering these words, Say what
you will, surely there is a God, loving to his Friends, terrible to his
Enemies. And thus it is, Julianus. Antiochus.
that the lewdest Reprobates, the most wretched Atheists that spit in the face
of Heaven, and wade deepest in blood, are forced at the time of Death, Dan. 5.
5.
when they see the handwriting of Gods Judgments upon the wall, Rev. 15. 3.
to confess there is a God, who is just in all his ways, and wondrous in all
his works.


IT is said of the Torpedo, Plin. not. hist. lib. 32. cap. 1.
a kind of dangerous Seafish, that it is of so venomous a Nature, that if it
chance to touch but the line of him that angles, the poison is thereby derived
to the Rod, and thence to the hand of him that holds it; whereupon the Party is
so benumbed and stupefied on a sudden, that he loses the use of his limbs:
Even so, when enchanting lusts insinuate themselves into, or indeed but barely
touch upon voluptuous minds, Ovid. Met.
they grow (with the Companions of Ulysses) not only brutish, but withal so
senseless, that they have not the power to think a good thought, or to do any
good action.


MAhomet, Frid. Sylburgii.
that grand Hellish Impostor, often pretended Visions from Heaven; And the
Story assures us, Mahometica.
that he cunningly made use of the disease of his body, to persuade his
Disciples of the soundness of his doctrine: For being afflicted with the
Falling Sickness, when at any time a fit was upon him, he made the People
believe, that he was in an ex^asie, or ravishment of the Spirit at the
appearance of the Angel Gabriel, who revealed many mysteries unto him: And
having by long use and familiarity taught a Pidgeon to feed at his ear, he by
art prevailed with the People to feed at his poisonous mouth, as if his words
had been the inspirations of the Holy Ghost, Jude 8.
who (as she affirmed) came then to him in the form of a Dove, and taught him
those secrets: Thus it is, Jos. Caryll on Job, chap. 4.
that when vain Men, such as the Apostle calls filthy dreamers, would put a
new-nothing upon the World, as an infallible Truth, and have it swallowed down
without chewing, received without disputing, then usually they pretend that it
is quid Divinum, a Doctrine or Message come down immediately from God; and so
shaping their own dark conceptions, by the light of Divine Revelation, do with
the more estimation, put off either such points of doctrine, or such rules of
Policy as themselves have only invented.

To be favorable in the Censure of our brother.
IN Freesland there was a false Prophet, Joh. Sleidan's comment.
one George David, who called himself Gods Nephew, and said; That Heaven was
empty, and that he was to choose some to fill it, Quid de quoque viro et cui
dicas saepe caveto.
and none (forsooth) must come there but whom he liked. And we have some
amongst us, such mad Prophets, that will elect and damn whom they please; But
as themselves say, The Pope has no power to make Saints, so we may very well
say, Horat. ep. 1.
They have no Authority to make Devils; Every Man is to be reputed honest, till
he be disproved; Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5.

The Worlds Deceitfulness and Treachery.
IT is said of the City of Athens, Treasury of ancient and modern times.
that it was a goodly place for a Philosopher to pass through, for there he
should see and hear many things that might better his understanding, (it being
as it were the Nurse and Mother of all Learning) but it was not good for him to
stay there, because he could hardly live in safety: So may it well be said of
this World, that if a Man do but only pass through it, Matthew. Griffiths
Bethel.
he may behold many admirable works of God to better his knowledge; but if he
take up his abode here, then he is in jeopardy of his life; For the World
salutes Passengers after a friendly manner, and bids them welcome, but with
that Proviso to his Servants, which Judas gave to his Accomplices, Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that is he, hold him fast; Matthew. 26. 48.
treacherously kissing and killing them, entertaining them with a Smile, but
sending them home not by Chearing-, but by weeping-crosse: It gives them for a
while the liberty of the house, to call for what they list, they may have all
the deadly sins at their service; but they shall have a cutting reckoning in
the end: Conscientia codex est in quo, etc.
Conscience keeps the bar, and will make them pay with a Witness: For in the
very height of their Contentments, they shall be arrested upon an action of
Riot, Chrysostom. in Psalm.
and (if Gods great mercy prevent not) be cost into Hell without bayl or
mainprize, for ever.

Commonnesse of the Death of others, taking away the sense of Death.
IT is said of Birds that build and roost in Steeples, Jos. Caryll on Job. chapter
4.
being used to the continual ringing of Bells, the sound disquiets them not at
all; or as those that dwell near the fall of the River Nilus, the noise of the
Water deafens them so, that they mind it not. Thus it is, that the commonnesse
of the death of others, is made but as it were a formal thing; Many have been
so often at the grave, that now the grave is worn out of their hearts; --
Vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequaiu^.
they have gone so often to the house of Mourning, that they are grown familiar
with Death, they look upon it as a matter of custom for Men to die and be
buried; And when the solemnity is over, the thoughts of Death are over also; as
soon as the grave is out of their sight, preparation for the grave is out of
their mind, then they go to their Worldly business, to trading and dealing,
yea to coveting and sinning, as if the last Man (that ever should be) were
buried.


HErodotus writes of a dumb Son that Croesus had, In Clio. lib. 1. cap. 85.
who when his Father was endangered in a battle, on a sudden his tongue was
loosed, and he cried out, Parce, Rex est, O spare him, he is the King; So, when
Gods glory is in question, what a numbnesse, what a dumbness is it, not to
say, O spare him, he is the Lord? In epist. ad Staupium.
Luther will be accounted proud, passionate, Enemy to the Pope, or any thing
rather then to be found guilty of sinful silence, when the cause of God
suffers. To hear Blasphemers wound and tear the sweet and sacred Name of
Christ in pieces, would make a dumb Man speak, though there be a time (yet an
evil time) when a Prudent Man is to hold his peace, Amos 4.


XEnophon writes of the Persians, Lib. de Instit. Cyri.
that they taught their Children to lie to their Enemies, and to speak truth to
their Friends; but they soon forgot their distinction, and so discovered
themselves: As it is in the Fable, A Woolf being crept into a Sheeps-skin, went
so long to School, till he came to the spelling of his Paternoster; Laur.
Abstemius in Mytholog.
And being asked, What spells P and a, he answered, Pa; Then what spells t, e,
r. he answered, ter; Put them together, said the Master: The Wolf cried, Agnus;
Ore protulit quod in cord fuit, says the Moral; intimating, that the deepest
dissembler will at one time or other discover himself. Nem^ potest personam
fictam diu ^erre, etc. Se^. ep. ad Ner^nem.
No Man can personate another long, neither can any so transform himself, but
now and then you shall see his heart at his tongues end: The Devil may
transform himself into an Angel of light, and Men may seem to be zealous in a
good Matter, when their hearts are ranging after their lusts; yet mark them
well, and at one time or other, you shall find that true, which the Damsel said
unto Peter, Thou art a Galilean, thy speech bewrays thee, etc. Mark 14. 70.


IT is observed concerning Paracelsus, T. Fuller Holy. State.
(a great Physician, and a Man exceedingly well verst in Chemical experiments)
that he bragged and boasted, that he had attained to such Wisdom in discerning
the Constitutions of Men's bodies, Christoph. Pezelii mellificium ^ist.
and studying remedies, that whosoever did follow his rules, and keep to his
directions, should never dye by any disease; casually he might, and of age he
must; but he would undertaker to secure his health against all diseases: a bold
undertaking! But he, who by his art promised to protect others to the extremity
of old age from the arrest of death, could not by all his art and skill make
himself a protection in the prime of his youth, but dyed even as one without
wisdom, before or when he had seen but thirty: Thus it is, that Wisemen many
times do not only dye as well as Fools, Eccles. 2. 16. Jos. Caryll Sermon. on
Job, cap. 4. v. 21.
but as Fools without Wisdom. They who have most Worldly wisdom, usually die
with the least, in not preparing wisely for death; they may be said to have had
Wisdom, but they die as if they never had had any; Job 4. 21.
that is, they apply not their Wisdom while they live, to fit themselves for
their death; they die before they understand what it is to live, or why they
live; and so dying unpreparedly, they die foolishly.

Neglect of Restitution, condemned.
A Great Lady in Barbary, T. Adams Sermon. on cp. 2 Pet.
being a Widow, called to her an English Merchant, trading in those parts, with
whom she knew her husband had some commerce, and asked him if there were
nothing owing to him from her deceased husband? He after her much importunity
acknowledged what, and showed the particulars; She tendered him satisfaction,
(yea and after his many modest refusals, as being greatly benefited by the dead
Barbarian) forced him to take the uttermost penny; saying thus, I would not
have my husbands Soul to seek your Soul in Hell to pay his debts. Here now was
a Fire in a dark Vault, great Zeal in blind Ignorance, Si in ignem mittitur,
qui non dedit rem propriam, ubi putas mittendus erit, etc. Aug. de Verb. Dom.
cap. 20.
seeing that by the Candlelight of Nature, which S. Augustine delivered long
since for a doctrinal Truth, Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum,
thus in Master Latimers old English, Either restitution, or Hell. But O the
sadness of these grasping Times! Where is the Man that restores what is
unjustly taken away, what has been indirectly gotten? The estates, credits,
goods and good Names of Men are taken away, by exactions and slanders; but
where is the Man that makes Restitution? Zacheus may very well rise up in
Judgment against such a griping and exacting generation as this is, Luke 19. 8.

Wives to love their Husbands cordially.
IT is not without some significancy, Matthew. Griffith's Bethel.
that the Church in the solemnity of Marriage, ordains, that there shall be a
gold Ring; of gold it must be, intimating, that Love should abound betwixt the
Married couple, Love the best of graces; and round it must be, to show, that
Love must continue to the end; besides, Pet. de Clavis rubeis.
this Ring must be put by the Man upon the fourth finger of the Woman,
signifying also thereby, that as there is a vein in that finger which
correspondeth with the Heart; so she should be cordially affected to her
Husband, having no thought in that kind of any other man as long as he lives,
whom God by his Ministry has given unto her.

The Wicked Man's Folly in his Worldly choice.
WHen an Heir is impleaded for an Idiot, the Judge commands an apple or a
counter, Swinburn Court of Wards and Liveries.
with a piece of gold to be set before him, to try which he will take; If he
take the apple or the counter, and leave the gold, then he is cast for a Fool,
and so held by the Judgment of the Court, as one that is unable to manage his
estate, because he knows not the value of things, or how to make a true
election of what is fittest for him in the way of subsistency: This is the case
of all Wicked Men, -- mutant quadrata rotundis.
thus foolish, and much more; When Bugles and Diamonds, counters and gold are
before them, they leave the Diamonds and the gold, and please, themselves with
toys and baubles: Nay, when (which is infinitely more sottish) Heaven and
Hell, Life and Death are set before them, they choose Hell rather then Heaven,
and death rather then life; they take the mean, transitory, trifling things of
the World, before the favor of God, the pardon of Sin, a part in Jesus Christ,
and an Inheritance amongst the Saints in light celestial.

Custom in Sin hardly broken off.
THere is an Apologue, how four things meeting, boasted their incomparable
strength: Laurent. Abstemii Mytholog.
The Oak, a Stone, Wine, and Custom. The Oak stood stoutly to it, but a blast
of wind came and made it bow, the Axe felled it quite down. Great is the
strength of Stones, yet gutta cavat, a continual dropping wears them away, and
a hammer beats them to pieces. Wine overthrowes Giants and strong Men, Senators
and Wise Men, et quid non pocula possunt? yet sleep overcomes Wine. But
Custom, invicta manet, remains unconquered: Hence it was, that the Cretians,
when they cursed their Enemies, did not wish their houses on fire, not a sword
at their hearts, but that which in time would bring on greater woes, -- Laqu^^
tenet ambitiosi Consuetudo mali.
that mala consuetudine delectentur, they might be delighted with an ill
Custom; And to say truth, Custom in Sin is hardly broken off; When Vices are
made manners, Juvenal.
the disease is made incurable; When through long trading and Custom in Sin,
neither Ministry nor misery, nor miracle, nor Mercy, can possibly reclaim; a
Man may very truly write on that Soul, Lord have mercy on it: Nath. Shute Sermon.
at S. Mildred Poultry, Land. 1627.
For Custom is not another nurture, but another Nature, and what becomes
Natural, is not easily reduced; It is the principal Magistrate of Man's life,
the guide of his actions, and as we have inured our selves at the first setting
out in this World, so commonly we go on, unless we be turned by Miracle, and
changed by that which is only able to do it, the Grace of God.


WHen the Sun is down, the Moon takes upon her the Government of the Heavens,
and out-shines the Stars, yet not without borrowing her best light from the
Sun; but when the Sun appears she vailes her light, and by degrees vanishes
out of sight: Horatius.
So the Wife in her husbands absence shines in the Family, tanquam inter ignes
Luna minores, like the fair Moon amongst the lesser Stars; but when he comes
in, it will be her modesty to contract and withdraw her self, R. Burton's
Melancholy.
by leaving the Government to him only; Cardinal Wolsey's, Ego et Rex meus, I
and my King, is insupportable in the Politiques; so I and my husband is
insufferable in the Oeconomicks; For let but the Moon get the upper hand of the
Sun, the Wife over her husband, the glory of that Family must needs be eclipsed.


PLutarch in the relation of Alexander's Wars, Plutarch. in vita.
says; That when he came to besiege the Segdians, a People who dwelt upon a
Rock, or such as had the munition of Rocks for their defense, they jeered him,
and asked him, Whether his Soldiers had wings or not? Jos. Caryll on Job.
Unless your Soldiers can fly in the air, we fear you not. Such is the safety
of Gods people, he can set them upon a Rock so high, that no ladders can be
found long enough to scale their habitations, nor any Artillery or Engine
strong enough to batter them down; so that unless their Adversaries have, and
those more then Eagles wings, Esaias 33. 16.
to soar higher then God himself, they cannot do them the least annoyance;
Their place of defense is the munition of the Rocks; safe enough from all
dangers whatsoever.


WHen Lucretia, Sueton. in vita.
that gallant Roman Lady, was ravished by Tarquin, Augustus makes this
observation, Duo fuerunt et unus adulterium admisit; there were two persons,
and but one Adulterer; a conjunction of bodies, but a distraction of minds:
This is the direct condition of every Regenerate Man, Sin is rather done on
him, then of him; there will be sensus, but his care is that there shall not be
consensus, T. Adam's on ^p. 2 Pet.
not the least Consent unto sin; Though lust yield, and Sin must be bred, yet
he is sure to lock up the Midwife of Consent, that it may prove an abortive
brood, Prove. 1. 10.
be stifled in the womb and still-born: And thus ought all of us to do, Romans 7.
24.
If Sinners entice us, not to consent unto them. All of us have lust about us,
a very body of death: Satan the Father is ready, Lust the Mother is willing,
keep away Consent the Midwife, that though Sin be done upon us, we may have
this inward comfort, that we consented not.

Children to submit to their Parents Correction.
IT is said of Aelian, Coel. Rhodogin. lect. Var. lib. 22. cap. 22
that after he had been long absent from his Father, and being asked, What he
had learned? answered; He should know that ere long: and in the mean time his
Father correcting him, he took it in good part, and said; Sir, you see I have
learned somewhat, For I have learned to bear with your anger, and patiently to
endure what you please to inflict upon me. Thus it is that Children should show
their obedience, in quietly bearing their Parents Corrections. The Rod of
Correction being Monile ingenuorum, Prove. 15. 5. Nazianz. d e plaga grandinis.
such a Jewel that it makes Gods Jewels of so many as willingly submit
thereunto; It is the unum necessarium, a most necessary lesson to be learned;
necessary for Parents, because they are bound to do it, and for Children,
because they are by God commanded to suffer it.

The different effects of the Gospel preached.
AS the same light of the Sun offends weak eyes, but comfort those that
are stronger sighted; And as the heat thereof hardens clay, but softens wax; Or
as the same Star is to some (...) to others (...) to some a Morning Star
ushering in light and day; and to others an Evening Star, bringing darkness
and Night: Annotat. of sundry Divines, on 2 Cor. 2. 1.
So the Gospel is preached indifferently to all manner of Persons, (...) to all
People, but it works in a different manner, it has not the like effect on all
People; Forasmuch as being received by the Faithful, it produces in them life
and salvation, as containing all the causes thereof in its self; but being
rejected by unbelievers, it becomes in them the occasion of a greater
condemnation, and makes their perdition inevitable; to some it is a comfort, to
others a terror; the rise of one Man, and the fall of another, Luc. 2. 34.

Content with Gods good pleasure, a great blessing.
When Aesop with the rest of his Fellow-slaves, were put to carry burdens to
a City, In ejus vitae.
One chose to carry this Merchandise, another that, every one had his choice,
and Aesop chose to carry the Victuals: Every one laughed at this, that he being
the weakest, had elected the heaviest burden; Away they went together, and
after some miles they went to breakfast, his bu^then was the lighter for that;
Then to dinner, it was lighter still; then to supper, now it was easy; the
next day, they had eaten up all his burden, and he went empty to the City,
whither they being laden could not reach. Thus it is in the World, -- trabit
sua quemque volun^as.
the Covetous Man chooses gold for his burden; the Proud, fine clothes; the
Ambitious, Mountains of honor; every Worldling, his several luggage; but a
Child of God contents himself with Gods good pleasure, and sets up his rest
with that of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 6. 15.
If he have food and raiment, therewith to rest contented, and so he goes the
lighter to Heaven.

Children to be carefully educated by Parents.
IT was a saying of Alexander, that he was as much beholden to Aristotle for
his breeding, Plutarch. Apophthegm.
as to Philip his Father for begetting him; For the one, said he, gave me a
being, the other a well-being. S. Paul was brought up at G^^naliel's feet,
Timothy was instructed in his youth; And King Saul tells David, that Goliath ^
Sam. 17. 33.
was a Man of War from his youth up. All this to show, that Children should be
carefully and Religiously educated by their Parents; Jer. Leech Sermon at S.
Paul's, Land. 1624.
For they can never fight the Lords battles as they should, that are not sworn
Soldiers in their very swaddling clouts. What a guard lies that Man open at,
that wants manners and Religious education? Every one espies, and either jeers
or pities his breeding, every step he treads, and word he speaks, bewrayes him
to a kind of Nothing in the habit of Somebody; He is commonly used like a
Whetstone for every one to sharpen their wit upon; And if at any time he
counterfeit and look big, yet he may be easily discovered to be an Ass, for
all the Lions skin that he stalks in.


IT is Pliny's observation, that never any good came to a Man by offering a
beast in Sacrifice, renitentem et se trahentem ab aris, such a one as violently
drew back from the Altar, and could not be brought to it, but as it is said,
(like a Bear to the stake) with much force: ^is est gratum si quod opus est
ultro feras.
Thus it is in the matter of Charity and Liberality, that which is extorted
from a Man, he properly gives not; Liberality implies liberty; Annotat. of
sundry Divines, etc.
and Necessity and Liberty in this kind cannot well stand together; God loves
a cheerful Giver, because he gives his heart first to him, 2 Cor. 9. 7.
before he give his Alms to the poor, and giving that with lightsome
countenance, he more refreshes the Receiver, giving him hope of future bounty;
Bis dat qui cito dat, (said the Heathen) He that gives quickly, gives twice,
first to the expectation, then to the necessity of his wanting brother; and
with such a Giver God is well pleased.


When Dionysius the Syracusian Tyrant, Justin. lib. 51.
saw what heaps of gold and silver his Son had hoarded up in his Closet; he
asked him, What he meant to let it lie there, and not to make Friends with it
to get the Kingdom after his decease? O fili, non est in te animus regni
capax, Son, (says he) thou have not a spirit capable of a Kingdom. Nibil
miserius est quam propter nummos Deum contemnere, Ambros. in epist.
And thus we may safely conclude, Wheresoever we see a wealthy Rich man pilling
up his baggs, and purchasing the whole Country about him, and yet perceive no
Works of Charity or Piety in him, that he is no Heavenly-minded Man, and justly
say of him, Non est in illo animus Regni coelorum capax, He has not a Soul
capable of the Kingdom of Heaven.


THe Patriarks of old were principal Men and Princes in their generations,
Matthew. Griffiths Bethel.
yet their tender daughters were brought up in doing Household business;
Rebecca went with her pitcher on her shoulders, to give drink to her Fathers
Camels. Genesis 24. 17.
And the seven daughters of the Priest of Midian, accustomed themselves to draw
water, Exodus 2. 16.
and fill the troughs to water their Fathers sheep. And some say (how true, is
uncertain) that Christ himself wrought as a Carpenter at his Fathers trade:
Such was the harmless simplicity of those days, and such was the obedience of
Children, that even she that was appointed to be the Mother of Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Kings re^used not to set her hand to ordinary employments. But
how is the case altered in these days of ours? Our delicate Damsels are ready
to urge Rebecca's example for the wearing of Bracelets and Jewels about their
necks, but they will not hear of Rebecca's carrying the pitcher upon her
shoulders, they would be clothed like the Lillies of the Field, but they
cannot endure to spin, not work at all: So that whereas Solomon's good Huswife
laid her hands to the wheel; Prove. 31.
they for want of taking pains (especially if once married) set all upon
wheels, and while they do nothing, they undo themselves, and bring all to
nothing.

The right use of humane Learning in Divinity.
IT is seen by Experience, Basilius.
that when a Man crops a flower from the Earth, he can get nothing out of it
but the sweetness of the smell, or delightfulness of the color; but when the
diligent Be comes, he will make another manner of work with it, he will
extract honey, Dan. Featly. clavis mystica.
which is (as it were) the very spittle of the Stars: So when simple
carnal-minded men read the Poets and the Philosophers, they gather nothing but
delight and pleasure; but when the diligent Be comes, a Wise man, a serious
considerate man, he draws honey and comfort out of them: Or (which is more to
the purpose) as a man that comes into a Garden of Roses, and seeing them blush
upon him, is not afraid to pluck one, Greg. Nazianzen.
yet in the mean time he has a great care that he do not prick his fingers: So
in reading of Poets and Philosophers, we should pluck the Rose, but shun the
thorn or prickle; always take the best, and be sure to avoid that which is
harmfull; For the mixture is such, that as the Rose grows in the midst of
thorns, so the doctrine of the Poets is mixed with Barbarism, superstition and
corruption.

Drunkenness a great punishment of it self.
THere is mention made of a Monk at Prague, who having heard at shrift the
Confessions of many Drunkards, Radulph. Fo^nerius select. lib. 3.
wondered at it, and for experiment would try his brain with this Sin; so
accordingly stole himself drunk; Now after the vexation of three sick days; To
all that confessed that Sin, he enjoined no other penance but this; Go and be
drunk again: Surely his meaning was like that of Seneca, Sceleris in scelere
supplicium, that Drunkenness was a torment and affliction to it self. And most
certain it is, Ubi regnat ebrictas ratio exulat, etc. Raven.
that besides all other plagues, Drunkenness is a Woe to it self. When the
Carowser pours in his Wine, it troubles him, and he would give somewhat to
avoid it; when it offends the stomach, it troubles him worse; Prove. 23. 29.
When it comes up again, it troubles hiw worst of all, so that the merry
madness of a few hours is paid home with the afflictions of a tedious age.


COnstantius, the Father of that good Emperor Constantine, gave it out upon a
time, In hist. tripart.
that all such Christians as would not leave their Religion and deny the Faith,
should be deprived both of their honors and their Offices, and thereupon some
(with Demas and Diotrephes, loving preheminency) forsook Christ, and embraced
this present world; 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Others stood confidently to it, accounting all but dung and dross in
comparison of Christ, 3 Job. 9.
with whom they chose rather to dye, then for life or liberty, honor or
offices to deny him; When the Emperor had by this means made a perfect
discovery, who were true Christians, and who false, by a public Edict he
banished all the halting Hypocrites out of his Dominions, saying; They would
never be faithful to him, who were false unto their God. And what he then said
of Subjects, may as truly now be said of Servants; They can never be faithful
to their Masters, that are false to their Maker. It does therefore concern Men
to take up David's resolution, Math. Griffith's Bethel. Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
to be careful in the choice of their Servants, and to entertain such only as
have been well principled in Religion, such as have been well instructed in
their duties to God and Man; if otherwise they may prove to be poison to their
Children, Moaths to their Wardrobes, Thieves to their store, and an ill Example
to the whole Family.


IT was the saying of Menander, that lived 300 years before S. Paul, Evil words
corrupt good manners; 1 Cor. 15.
of Aratus, We are the workmanship of God; and of Epimenides, Mart. Day on 1
Cor. 15.
The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. All three of them,
Men famous in their generations, Act. 17.
though such as knew not God, nor had any glimpse of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, Tit. 1.
yet the great Doctor of the Gentiles scorns not their sayings, but brings them
into the Garden of God, and there makes as so many flowers of them: Diog. Laert.
Nay, Christ himself owns Socrates and Plato, the one for that golden rule,
Quod tibi non vis fieri, etc. Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
Matthew. 7. 12.
do ye even so to them. And the other for that excellent caution, Luke 4. 23.
Medice cura teipsum, Physician heal thy self. Vain then must needs be the
opinion of such, that think there is nothing to be uttered in Sermons or other
divine discourses but Scripture. Alas! they understand not what perfection God
requires to be in him that is truly called, Saterdotis est, in omni doctrina
esse versatum, etc. Ambros. in Hexam.
A Man of God, one fitted to every good work, that can speak to a Poet after
the manner of a Poet; and to a Philosopher in the language of a Philosopher,
which unless he can do, and so accommodate himself to the party with whom he
deals, it is impossible he should be a fit and complete Man in the service of
God, the neglect whereof has been a great inlet to Idleness, negligence and
ignorance in the study of Divinity.


IT is fabled, Imagines Deorum, per Cartarum.
that when Juno on a day had proclaimed a great Reward to him that brought her
the best present; there came in a Physician, a Poet, a Merchant, a Philosopher,
and a Beggar; The Physician presented a hidden secret of Nature, a prescript
able to make an old Man young again: The Poet, an Encomiastick Ode of her bird,
the Peacock; The Merchant, a rare hallow Jewel to hang at her ear: The
Philosopher, a book of strange Mysteries, The poor quaking Beggar, only a
bended knee, saying; I have nothing that is worth acceptance, Accipe meipsum,
T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
Take my self. Thus it is, that many come unto God in the hearing of his Word
with prescripts of their own; they have receipts enough already, they care for no
more: Others like the Poet, come to admire Peacocks, the gaudy Popinjayes and
Fashionists of the time, all to be daubed with gold and silver Feathers; Others
like the Merchant present Jewels, but they are hallow, they come with critical
or hypocritical humors, like Carps to bite the net, and wound the Fisher, not
to be taken; Some like the Philosopher, bring a book with them which they read,
without minding the Preacher, saying; They can find more Learning there then he
can teach them: But blessed are the poor in spirit, that like the Beggar give
themselves to God, Juno gave the reward to him, and God gives the blessing to
these. Luke 1. 53.
It is a poor Reverently devoted heart that carries away the comfort,
Godliness in the humble dust of adoration, that shall be lifted up by the hand
of Mercy.


ST. Hierome having read the life and death of Hilarion (one that lived most
Christianly, Hieron. Guadalupense in vita.
and dyed most comfortably) folded up the book, saying; Well, Hilarion shall be
the Champion that I will follow, his good life shall be my Example, and his
godly death my President. How much more then should each of us first read with
diligence the life and death of Jesus Christ, and then propound him to our
selves, as the most absolute pattern for our Imitation, resolving by the Grace
of God, that Christ shall be the copy after which we will write, the pattern
which we will follow in all things that he has left within the sphere of our
Activity; Dan. Price Sermon at Chr. Church, Land. 1619.
so also in that necessary duty of Preparation for death; He did so, Job. 14.
and we must do so; For as in shooting, there is a deliberate draught of the
bow, a good aim taken before the loose be given; so if ever we look for comfort
in death, we must look at death through the preparation for it.

The greatest of things wrought by God without means.
AS when Gedeon was to fight with the Midianites, Judge. 7.
pretending that his Army was but a few, How many have thou, says the Lord? So
many thousand: They are too many; The Lord will not have them all, but commands
them to be reduced to one half, and yet there were too many; the Lord would not
work by them, they were too strong. At last he comes to make choice of them by
lapping in the water, then they came to three hundred Men, Mart. Day on 2 Cor.
15.
to fight against three hundred thousand; For it is said, they covered the
Earth like Grasshoppers: And now the Lord begins to work by these Men. And how
does he work? by Weapons? No, but with a few broken pitchers in their hands,
and they had the day of it; the Midianites be delivered up into their hands as
a prey: This was a wonderful act of the great God, who not tied to means,
wrought out Victory by his own arm. It is true, that means and second causes he
has much honored in the World, and commands them to be used; but when he
comes to effect great things, such as was the Redemption of Mankind by Christ,
such as shall be the Resurrection of the dead at the last day, then such means
and causes as seek to set him forward, he rejects them, and works not by them,
but the clean contrary. The greater stench the bodies have sustained in the
grave, shall work it unto greater sweetness; and the greater weakness it had,
the greater strength shall accrue unto it, and wondrous puissance shall God
work unto that part that lacked honor, according to his blessed dispensation
in all things.

Not to be Angry with our Brother.
A Railing Fellow fell very foul upon Pericles, Plutarchi Apophthegm.
a Man of a Civil and Socratica^ spirit, and he left him not all the day long,
but continued till he had brought him to his own doors in the Evening somewhat
late at Night; He all this while not returning one unbeseeming word, commanded
one of his Servants with a Torch to light the brawler home to his house: Thus
did he by the dim light of Nature. Vince animos iramque tuam. Ovid. ep. 3.
And therefore if a brother offend us upon ignorance, let us neglect it; if
upon infirmity, forget it; if upon malice, forbear it; upon what terms soever,
forgive it, as we would have God to forgive us: It is a saying, That every Man
is either a Fool or a Physician; so every Christian is either a Madman or a
Divine; A Madman, if he give his passions the rein; a Divine, if he qualify
them.

The Natural Man's blindness in Spiritual things.
WHen Xeuxes drew his Masterpiece, and Nicostratus fell into admiration of the
rareness thereof, Coel. Rhodog. Var. lest. lib. 17.
highly commending the exquisiteness of the work, there stood by a rich
Ignorant, who would needs know what he had discovered worthy of so great
applause? To whom Nicostratus made this answer; My Friend, could thou but see
with my eyes; thou would soon see cause enough to wonder as well as I do.
Aeliani Vat. hist.
Thus it is, that the dear Children of God have inexhaustible treasure, even in
the midst of their poverty, transcendent dignity in the midst of their
disgraces, height of tranquillity in the very depth of tribulation; their
pulse and Locusts relish better then all the Gluttons delicious fare; their
Sheepskins, Goat Skins, and Camels hair wear finer then all the Purple and
soft raiment; W. Strong, Sermon. at Westminster. 1650.
the Worlds hate makes them happier then all the applauses of the Capitol; Now
the sensual, carnal Naturalist sees none of all this, he perceives not the
things of the spirit, neither indeed can he, for they are spiritually
discerned, no Man knows them, Act. 7.
but he that has them; but had he spiritual sight, were but the scales fallen
off from his eyes, as they did from S. Paul's at the time of his Conversion,
then he would clearly see and say, as the same S. Paul did, That though we
suffer tribulation in all things, 2 Cor. 4. 8.
yet we are not distressed; we are brought into perplexities, yet we are not
forsaken.


A Servant coming from Church, Not. Shute Sermon at Merc. Chap. Land. 1627.
praises the Sermon to his Master; He asks him, What was the Text? Nay, quoth
the Servant, it was began before I came in. What was then his conclusion? He
answered, I came out before it was done. But what said the Preacher in the
midst? Indeed, I was asleep in the midst. Thus many there are that crowd to get
into the Church, but make no room for the Sermon to get into them, commend the
Preacher to other men's ears, but commend it not to their own hearts, audiunt
sonum sed nullam vocem, they hear a sound, but for sound doctrine, that is the
least part of their attention.


THe Doctors of Doway (in their edition of Thomas of Aquines Sums) have
pictured him on the Title page, D. Griffith's Bethel, or Gods House.
kneeling before a Crucifix, which they feign to speak unto him thus, Been
scripsisti de me Thoma, etc. Thou have written well of me, Thomas, Say what
reward will thou have? To which he seems to reply, Nullam Domine, nisi teipsum,
None, Lord, but thy self. Now quod illi pictie et ficte, that which they forge
and feign of Aquinas, must be true of every one of us thus far, We must expect
and desire no other Reward for all our service of God (both in life and in
death) but only God himself, for he is all in all.


THe slaves that serve the Turks in their galleys, Alphons. ab Avendam. Com. in
Matthew. cap. 6.
if they could but think, that at seven years end, some Christian would come
and redeem them, they would be better affected and tugg at the Oar with more
cheerfulness and alacrity of spirit, especially if they could be assured of
their delivery. If Jacob serve the churl Laban seven years longer, if he think
he shall have Rachel at the end of it, it will be but as seven days, and he
goes on with comfort, and is content that God shall use him to his hand as it
pleases him. Genesis 29.
Thus it is, that the hope of better things sweetneth the present sadness of
any outward condition, There is no grief so heavy, but if a Man tie Heaven at
the end of it, it will become light; put but them together, Romans 8. 18.
and the one will be swallowed up in the other. If the times be bad, hope for
better, the expectation whereof will be an excellent lenitive to allay the
smart of present calamity.

The Law abused by Libertinism.
AS upon some great Solemn Feastival day, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet. Verus
amor Christi, vera est custodiae legis. Anthol. sac^a.
the bells in all Steeples are rung* but then the Clocks are tied up; there is
great untuned confusion and clangour, but no Man knows how the time passes
away: So at this time in the universal allowance of Liberty by the Gospel,
(which indeed rejoices our hearts, had we the grace of sober usage) the clocks
that should tell us, how our time passes, Truth and Conscience, which show the
bounded use and decent form of things are tied up, and cannot be heard; Men
give so general an acclamation to the Gospel, and the salvation by it, that
they keep not the Law at all.

How to think of God in Prayer.
THere is mention made of a Gentile and a Christian, Nich. de Cusa. ^ial. de
Posses.
and the Christian being upon his knees unto God in Prayer; the Gentile (using
to have the Image of his false God before his eye) asked him, Who do you pray
to? The Christian replied, That he knew not. How? says the Gentile, pray to
you know not whom! O, says the Christian, Ideo adoro quia ignoro, I do
therefore adore him, because I am ignorant of him; For could I but either
apprehend or comprehend him, he were not worthy of Prayer, he should be my God
no longer: Thus when we make our addresses unto God in Prayer, we must have a
care that we do not frame any thing in our thoughts of his Essential property,
that were to set up some Idolatrous Image in our hearts; Tho. White Sermon at
S. Giles Cripple gate Land. 1653.
but to think of him in his Attributes, especially those of his Majesty,
goodness, power, mercy, and. such as may raise our confidence to draw more
nigh unto him; And then, being as it were in a divine rapture, non-plus'd, and
overwhelmed with admiration of him, is the only time of adoration and
supplication unto him.

A Child of God triumphing over Death.
IT has been an ancient Proverb, Mart. Day on 1 Cor. 15.
when a Man had done some great matter, he was said to have plucked a Lion by
the beard; but when a Lion is dead, even to little Children it has been an
easy matter. As boys, when they see a Bear, a Lion, or a Woolf dead in the
streets, they will pull off their hair, insult over them, and deal with them as
they please; They will trample upon their bodies, and do that unto them being
dead, which they durst not in the least measure venture upon whilst they were
alive. Such a thing is Death, a furious beast, a ramping Lion, a devouring
Woolf, the helluo generis humani, eater up of Mankind, yet Christ has laid him
at his length, has been the death of Death, so that Gods Children triumph over
him, In me convertite ferrum.
such as those refined ones in the oar of the Church, those Martyrs of the
Primitive times, who cheerfully offered themselves to the Fire, and to the
sword, and to all the violence of this hungry beast; and have played upon him,
scorned and derided him by the Faith that they had in the life of Christ, 1
Cor. 15.
who has subdued him to himself.

To be diligent Hearers of the Word of God, and remember what we hear.
IT is said of our Country, That we have fair houses, but bad Chimneys, because
there is so little smoke of Hospitality. J. Squire Sermon. at S. L^n. Shord. 1637.
And it may as truly be said, That we have excellent ears, but bad Memories;
quick conceptions, bad retentions, Not a Nation under Heaven hears so many good
Sermons, not a Nation under Heaven sooner forgets them. Many Arts are taught
amongst us, of quick-reading, of short-writing, where, by Brachygraphical
characters they will take a Sermon, verbatim: But there is one Art, it were
heartily to be wished, that some good body would teach it us, It is the Art of
Memory; That as Sermons are taken word for word in our papers, Memoria sit
scriba intus manens. Aristot.
so they might be written sense for sense in our hearts.


SUppose a Creditor to whom a Man is engaged by bond or otherwise, Abulens. in
cap. 5. v. 25. S. Matthew. Prideaux in idem.
and upon Forfeiture should put the bond in suit, the Law is open, the Judge
must do right, the penalty is Imprisonment; Were it not then an high part of
Wisdom by way of arbitration, or otherwise to come to some agreement, before
the matter come to trial, that so by withdrawing the Action, the Party
concerned may be drawn out of danger. -- Pone vesanos animi tumoros, teque
pietati refer. Sen. in Theb.
The like is every Man's case here in this World in the point of brotherly
Reconcilement, whether thou be wronged, or have wronged, seek peace and ensue
it, and that now in the acceptable time, speedily without demurs; For thou art
way-lay'd by Death, and know not how soon thou shall be arrested; If thou
come out of Charity before Gods Tribunal Seat, the Angels are his Sergeants,
Hell his prison, Devils his Hangmen, Fire and Brimstone his Rack, Judgment must
pass, Execution will follow, and then to desire a Composition will be too
late, the Law must pass, and the Judge will prove inexorable.


THere was in Rome a Temple dedicated to Ianus, Plutarch. de Numa et Romans sato.
the Tutelar god of that City, the doors whereof stood open all the while they
were in War, and shut all the time of Peace; but they were so cumbred with
Enemies abroad, that in eight hundred years together, the doors were but thrice
shut; They were open, to show, that the Wars were open, and therefore they gave
their God leave to go out and in to succor them, or else they thought his arm
could not reach, -- Coelestis pax optima re^^im. Auson.
his power could not extend to their relief; And when the Wars were ceased,
they shut the doors to keep in their god, as having no occasion to use him: A
ridiculous and foolish conceit! But for the Saints comfort, When God shall be
pleased to give to this corruption, incorruption; and to this Mortal,
immortality, then there shall be for ever a ^essation from War, the Temple of
Ianus shall never be opened again, it shall be shut to all Eternity, there
shall be no cause of War, but the People of God shall live in perfect peace,
under the defense of his protection shall they be secured for ever.


THere is a Tale of an old Usurer, Speculum Exemplorum.
that had nothing in his mouth, but, It is good to be sure; If his Servant went
to receive money, he would follow him; Why? O it is good to be sure: Though
himself had locked the door, yet he must needs rise out of his bed in the cold,
to feel it fast; Why? O it is good to be sure. Let him have told his money
never so often over, yet he will tell it again; Why? O it is good to be sure.
It came to pass that he fell very dangerously sick; and his servant perceiving
little hope of life in him, asked him, Master, Grannatens. dux peccatorum.
have you said your prayers? Yes, I have said them. Nay* but say them again,
Master, you know, It is good to be sure. No, says the Worldling, It is more
then needs, I am sure enough of that. He bids his Servant open his chest, and
bring him all his gold in it, to look upon. The honest Servant willing to work
his Master to Repentance, having opened it, told him; Master, the Devil is in
the chest, he lays his paw upon all the gold, and says it is all his, because
it was extracted out of the life-bloud of Widows, Orphans, and poor Wretches.
Says he so, quoth the Extortioner? Then bring me the gold, the chest, the
Devil and all, It is good to be sure. And hence, it may be, it is, That
usually Wicked Men are said to get the Devil and all: Thus the voice of Nature
is all for the matter of security in all Purchases, -- Quarenda pecunia primum
est, Virtus post nummos.
bargains and sale, but as for the things that concern eternal bliss, how to
make out Evidences for Heaven, to make their Calling and Election sure, no care
is taken at all for that; but a day will come, when the purchase of their
Lands, the Leases of their houses, bonds and specialities of their Moneys, with
the great care of keeping their Shop-books exactly, will be as so many bills to
rise up in Judgment against them.

Repentance not to be put off till old age.
COmmon experience teaches, that a Ship the longer it leaketh, the harder it
is to be emptied; J. Prideaux Sermon at Oxon. 1636.
An house the longer it goes to decay, the worse it is to repair: And a nail,
the farther it is driven in, the harder it will be to get out: Such is the
condition of Repentance put off till old age. Let us not then think to
sacrifice our health and youth to the service of Sin and Satan, and leave God
only the Dog-dayes of our age, Senectus ipsa totus morbus, etc. Terence.
a body full of sores, and a soul full of sin; Is it to be thought, that the
trembling joints, the dazeled eyes, the fainting heart, the failing legs of
unweildy, drooping, and indisciplinable old age, may empty, repair, pluck out,
the leaks, the ruins, and nails of so many years flowing, failing and
fastening? and so make that the task of our old age, which should be the
practice of all our life, settling our everlasting, our only, our surest
making or marring, upon so tottering, sinking and sandy foundation as old age
is.

The uncertainty of temporal Victories and Success.
WHen Philip of Macedon had obtained a great Victory at Cher^nia, Tit. Live.
hist. lib. 31.
being puffed up with success, he wrote to Archimedes in such lofty
expressions, that enforced this slight answer; Sir, says he, you write very
stately to me, an^ in very high terms, Incerti quo fata ferant, ubi sistere
detur, Virg.
the reason I partly know; but if you will but take so much pains as to measure
your own shadow, you shall soon find that it is no more, no longer, no larger,
then it was before your victory; you were as great a Man then, and as many
inches about as you are now, etc. and what you may be, and how soon, you know
not. Such and so uncertain is Chance, Mart. Day on 1 Cor. 15.
(as Men call it) and Success so variable, that no man can tell, how he shall
begin, or where he shall end; Inter utrumque volat, so mutable are the smiles
of the World, that there is no Victory constant, but still she hovers about,
moves and changes her Tent and Tabernacle from one side to another. Hence no
boasting or bragging in these Earthly conquests, which have made the great^st
Emperors of the World after a full gale of Fortune, for fear of cross blows
to retreat, and leave their honors, and betake themselves to a solitary
Monastic life, lest they should have a foul end after so fair beginning.

The place of Purgatory, a mere dream.
SOme of the Geographers, for the proving of a black Rock many hundred miles
about, ^odocus Hondius in ta^. univers, mundi.
seated directly under the North pole, send us to Gyraldus Cambre^sis, he to a
Priest of Norway; the Priest to an Oxford Magician, who was carried thither to
see it by the Devil, if we will believe the Narration: So the best proofs of
our Adversaries for their subterranean Purgatory, comes by many deductions from
the same Author, Rob. Bellarmin de Purgat. lib. 1* cap. 7.
as it appears by the diverse apparitions they so confidently allege of it.
One of their greatest Champions is fain to rake Hell it self to find out
Purgatory, and like that Lunatic in Atheneus that thought all the Ships to be
his own, In fine lib 12.
that arrived in the Haven at Athens; so wheresoever there is of Fire
doubtfully mentioned in Scripture, it is straight-waies conveyed by him to heat
Purgatory Kitchen. Lomb* did. 45. lib. 4.
The Fathers father not (howsoever the great Cardinal marshal them) any glowing
or local Purgatory, but rightly understood, are as far from it, as it from
Truth; S. Augustine. de peccat. remis. cap. 28.
take one for all, Non est ullus ulli locus medius, ut possit esse nisi cum
Diabolo qui non est cum Christo, There is no medium place, He must needs be in
Hell with the Devil, that is not in Heaven with Christ.


IT was the saying of an Ingenious witty Divine, T. Adams in a Sermon. at S.
Gregory's by Paul's, Land. 1623.
that our Grandmother Eve got such a cold in Paradise, that all her Posterity
have ever since had a cough of the Lungs, nothing will down with them but
forbidden fruit; Would you have a Book ^ell well? the Stationer will soon find
a way for that, let it be but prohibited and called in by Authority; The only
way to make a Woman be a blab of her tongue, Non quia cocta sed quia c^pta.
is to bid her keep Couns^l. Venison is nothing so sweet (they say) as when it
is stolen, and then it comes to be dear many times with a Witness: Thus it
is, that nothing more enflames the Natural affections of Men, then the
prohibition of things they desire; they long to be meddling with the forbidden
morsels of sin; they love to eat that on Earth, which they may chance to
digest in Hell. It is quite against the Nature of Man to be confined, to be
limited; he will have his own Will, though it be contrary to the Will of God;
though he get Hell for his Will, he will have his will. And so much the
stronger the interdiction is of any thing, Nitimur in vetitum semper, etc. Ovid.
so much the more (such is the exorbitancy of his Nature) he is enflamed with
desire, till he have accomplished it.


THere is an Apologue, Laur. Abs^emius in Mytholog.
how the Dove made moan to her fellow Birds of the Tyranny of the Hawk; One
counsels her to keep below; but the Hawk can stoop for his prey: Another
advises to soar aloft; but the Hawk can mount as high as she. Another, to
shroud her self in the Woods, there she shall be sure; but alas, that is the
Hawk's Manor, the place where he keeps his Court. Another bids her keep the
Town, there she was sure from the Hawk; but so she became a prey to Man, and
had her eyes put out to make the Hawk sport. At last, one bids her rest her
self in the holes of the Rock, there she should be safe, Violence it self could
not surprise her. This Dove is the Soul of every Man, she would gladly be
secured from Satan: Come to me, says Riches, here thou shall be sure: No,
Wealth is the Devil's stirrup, whereby he gets up and rides the Covetous Man:
Come to me, says Pleasure, here thou shall be safe; as if she were not as very
a Whore as Dalilah to betray thee to the Philistines. Honor says, Come to me,
here thou art sure; as if the Devil durst not come near the Court gates, or
greatness were a Supersedeas to sin, or a protection against the arrest of
Judgments; No, there is no assurance in any of these; Cant. 2. 4.
yet there is a Rock of safety, clefts in that Rock, the wounds of Jesus
Christ, there and there only the Soul shall be in safety.


IT is the observation of Platina, that when one Facimus Canis was hired by the
Gibellines to suppress the contrary faction of the Guelphs in the City of
Papi^; In vita P. Ioh. 24.
and the convenant was, That he should have the goods of the Guelphs for his
pay: He obtaining the Victory, falls a rifling the Gibellines also without any
distinction at all; and being accused therefore, as not standing to his
promise, made this answer; That themselves indeed were Gibellines, and should
be safe; but their goods were Guelphs, and must go to wrack as well as those of
their Adversaries. Just like that of Garnet the Provincial, who being
questioned by Catesby, Arraignment of Traitors, 1606.
Whether with a safe Conscience they might proceed in their power-project,
seeing that in blowing up of the King and Protestants, diverse also of their own
party must necessarily go the same way? replies very profoundly, that No doubt
it might well be done, Joh. Prideaux Sermon. on Nov. 5. at Oxon.
seeing it would redound to the good of the Catholic cause. What, not spare
their own side to do ours a mischief? No, it will not be, there is no safety;
there can be no immunity from damage in the times of public danger; The truth
of this assertion has been experimen^ally felt in these late differences
amongst us; If our Persons were on the right side, our Goods were on the wrong,
all proved Fish that came to the net; whether Friend or Foe, the goods were
sure to suffer.

How it is that the Law is said to be the strength of Sin. 1 Cor. 15.

AS when a Physician that is skillful in his Profession does all that belongs
to the best of his Judgment; Mart. Day exposit. on 1 Cor. 15. 47.
the druggs that he gives, and the ingredients that ^e infuseth, are able to
work their effect, if they fall into a suitable body: But if the Patient be
froward, and will not be ruled, or his body be distempered, he is never the
better for it* Now the fault is not in the Physi^ian, nor in the Physic, they
be both very good; but in the Party that was not prepared for it, or that would
not receive it, Index peccati lex est, plectenda vetando. Billii Antholog.
and convert it to that use for which it was prepared. Thus it is, that God
gave the Law for a good Law, an holy and just Law, as a true direction for the
reformation of life and manners; but the Party that received it, did not take
it thus, so that occasionally, not from the Nature of the Law, but by the ill
acceptance of the Party, it comes to be the strength of Sin. The Law of it self
is said to be a light unto our feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and a lanthorn to our paths; and the light of it self, were we but able to
follow it; but because of our own Natural indisposition, it comes so to pass,
that the Law which should pull down Sin, gives strength unto it; and being made
to kill sin, gives life unto (...).

Gods Promises are for the most part conditional.
A Proclamation is read, Jacobi Merchanti hor^us Pas^orum.
wherein a Christian King grants honor and Wealth to certain of his Subjects,
with assurance of donation upon their just demand: One amongst the Multitude
leaps at the news, springs away, and stays not to hear it out; there is a
Condition following, provided first, That they put on Arms, and expel the Turk
which infests some part of his dominions. This Man comes one of the foremost to
demand the promised honors, he is asked for a testimony of his Valor and
service in the Wars. Alas, He never tarried to hear that condition, and
therefore lost the Retribution. Thus it is, that God promises etern^l life to
M^n; but withal charge them to believe in Christ, and to do him faithful
service against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; but so it is, that many
are quite lost, for not staying to hear the Proclamation of the Gospel out,
they run away with opinion of sufficient belief, and never think of obedience;
Whereas the Promises of God are conditional, made up with Provisoes. As there
is a reward promised, so there is a Condition premised; It must be our
Obedience first, and then comes in Gods recompense; Our devotion goes before,
and his Retribution follows after.

To be careful of Vows and Promises made in the time of Extremity.
THeodoricus, Archbishop of Colen, when the E^perour Sigismund demanded of him
the directest and most compendious way how to attain to true happiness, Aen.
Sylv. lib. 2. Com.
made answer in brief, thus; Perform when thou art well, what thou promisedst
when thou wast sick. David did so, he made Vows in War, and paid them in
Peace. Psalm. 116.
And thus should all good Men do, not like the cunning Devil, of whom the
Epigrammatist thus writes: Aegrotat Demon, Monachus tunc esse Volebat,
Conval^it Demon, Monachus tunc esse nolebat.


Well Englished: The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be,
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.


Nor like unto many now adays, J. Prideaux Higgaioa Selah.
that if Gods hand do but lie somewhat heavy upon them, O what Promises, what
engagements are there for amendment of life? How like unto Marble against rain
do they seem to sweat and melt, but still retain their hardness; let but the
Rod be taken off their backs, or health restored, then as their bodies live,
their Vows die, all is forgotten; Nay, many times it so falls out, that they
are far worse then ever they were before.


WHen the Romans had made War upon the Carthagenians, Historia Roman.
and often overca^^ them, yet still within eight of ten years, or less, they
made head again, and stirred up new Wars, so tha^ they were in successive
combustion; And it has been the same in all the Nations of the World, he that
was erst an underling, not long after becomes the Commander in chief, Joh.
Xyphilin. in vita Vespasiani.
and the same thing that the Lord has now made the ^ayl, may be the head in
time to come. As for Example: Cerealis gets a great Conquest over the Cymbrians
and the Tutons, and shortly after Sylla had the like over him; And Sylla no
sooner shines out to the World, but is eclipsed by Pompey; And Pompey, the
glory of his time, is, by the conquering hand of Caesar, Plutarch in Caesare.
outed both of life and honors: And Caesar, in the height of all his pompous
state, falls by the hands of bloody Conspirators in the Senate House. Thus in
the course of this World, As one Man is set up, another is pulled down, the
Conqueror is oft-times conquered himself; but in the Victory that every good
Man has over Death, Piis mors non est mors, sed nomen tantum habet mortis; imo
et ipsum nomen sublatum est.
it is so absolute, that it is without any hope or comfort on Death's part, and
without any fear or suffering on their part: For it is so taken away, as if it
had never been; and that which had the greatest triumph, the mightiest Trophies
in the World, unto which all Kings and Princes have bowed their heads, and laid
down their Scepters, as so many morsels ^o ^eed on, Chrysostom. in Matthew. 10.
shall by the hand of Jesus Christ be turned into nothing, shall have no Name
or nation, and be ber^ft of all hope of recovery, 1. Cor. 15.


WHen Harold King of Denmark made War upon Harquinus, Conrad. Lycosth^n^s de
Prodigiis, et o^^^tis -- Vive memor mortis, uti memor sis et salutis. Ausonius.
and was ready to join battle, a dart was seen flying into the air, hovering
this way and that way, as though it sought upon whom to rest; when all stood
wondering to know what would become of this strange Prodigy, every Man fearing
himself, at last the dart fell upon Harquinus his head, and slew him. Thus
Death shoots his arrows amongst us, here he hits one that is Rich, there
another that is poor; Now he shoots over at one that is elder then our selves;
Anon he shoots short at one that is younger; Here he hits one on the right
hand, our equal; another on the left, inferior; And none of us know how soon
the Arrow may ^all upon our own heads, our turn will come, let it be our care
then we be not surprised on a sudden.

Religion pretended, Mischief intended.
CElsus the Philosophe^ upon his defense of Paganism, Origines contra Cells.
lib. 1.
sets an Inscription o^ the Word of Truth; Manicheus, that blasphemous
Heretic, taking in hand to write to the Church his damnable Paradoxes,
doubts not to begin thus, Augustine. contra ep. fundament. cap. 1.
Manicheus Apostolus Jesus Christi, etc. Manicheus the Apostle of Jesus Christ;
The (...) H^reticks were always saying, Nos recta^fide i^cedimus, We wa^k in
(...) right Faith; All of them seeking the cloak and coverture of Religion; It
is the old Prove^^, Chrysostom. sanct. ep.
In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, well Englished; In my name have they
prophesied lies, Ier. 23. Thus it was with them; and is it not the ^ame (^ay
worse, considering the abundance of means afforded to be better) with us now,
Cambden. Elizab.
and but some few years ago; Parsons, that Arch-traytor, when he was hatching
mis^hief against his Prince and Native Country, set forth (as if he had been
wholly made up of devotion) that excellent piece of Christian Resolution; And
now, For Sio^s sake, I will not hold my tongue, says one, etc. So, says
another; and so a third; Sion at the tip of the tongue, -- sub dulci melle
v^nena latent* Ovid. amor. 1.
but Babel at the bottom of the Heart; Religion pretended, Mischief intended;
like Sons of Simon, rather then children of Sion, writing P^^rmaca medicines,
where they should write venena poisons; And by this means they do sugar the
brims of their intoxicated cups, that Men the more gr^edily, and without
suspicion, may suck in their venomous doctrines, that are administered unto them
therein.

Why God suffers his Children to be in a wanting condition.
SEverus the Emperor was wont to say of his Soldiers, Aelius in vita.
That the poorest were the best; For when they begun to grow rich, then they
began to grow naught. Hence is that of the Poet, Martem quisquis amat, andC. If
you will bring up a boy, or young Man to be a Soldier, learn him first to
endure poverty, to ^^e hard, and fare hard, and to encounter all the hardship
that Necessity can present unto him, and then he will deal the better with his
Enemies: So in the School of Christ, the Lord suffers his People to be in a
wanting condition, Mart. Day on 1 Cor. 15.
not because he does not intend to supply them, not because he cannot provide
for them; but the reason is, to bring them up in the discipline of War, to
train them up as weaned Children, lest they should be taken off with the things
of this World, and (as it were) drowned in the vanities of this life, and so
forget God and their own Soul's health, which is most of all to be regarded.

All Men alike in Death.
LUcian has a Fable, Lucianus.
the Moral is good; Menippus meeting with Mercury in the Elizian-fields, would
needs know of him, which amongst all the ghosts was Philip the great King of
Macedon? Mercury answers, He is Philip that has the hairlesse^scalp. Menippus
replies, T. Adam's on ep. 2 Pet.
Why, they have all bald heads. Merc. Then he with the flat nose. Menip. They
have all flat noses. Merc. Then he with the hollow eyes. Menip. They all have
hollow eyes, all have naked ribs, disjoynted members, all are car^asses. Why
then, says Mercury to Menippus, Omnia mors aequat. Claudian de raptit Pros^rp.
In Death there is no difference betwixt the King and the Beggar: And it is
true, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. Men upon Earth, as in the game of Chesse,
supply different places; One is a King, another a Queen, another a Bishop,
another a Pawn; But when the game is done, and they are shuffled into one bagg
into the grave, they are all alike.


IN the Parable of the Supper, Luke 14. 18.
and the ghests that were bidden, we find one that had bought a Farm, and he
must needs go see it, Another had bought five yoke of Oxen, Alphons. ab
Avendano. ^om. in ^vang. S. Matthew.
and he must by all means go try them: strange Purchasers! What, buy a pig in a
poke? Land and Oxen unsight, unseen: but we may read of another manner of
Purchaser, and that a Woman too, Prove. 30. that first considered a Field, and
then bought it; she cast up the price, considered the soil, the tenure, the
situation, then drives the bargain, and takes possession. Now the Wordly
Purchaser buys hand over head, considers not what he buys. The voluptuous
Epicure eats, drinks, and is merry, but he never looks after the reckoning,
that after all this he must be brought to Judgment. Eccles. 11.
The Drunkard swills and carowses, and rises up early to take his fill of Wine,
never minding the shot, that there is Mors in olla, in the end it will bite
like a Serpent, and sting like a Co^katrice. Prove. 23.
The Luxurious Man that spends his time in dalliance, little thinks that
there is a sting in the tail of his Wantonness, J. Brown Sermon. at S. Faith,
Land. 1629.
Nocet empta dolor voluptas, that he is but as an Ox to the slaughter, and a
Fool to the correction of the stocks. The griping Covetous wretch that joyneth
house to house, and Land to Land, Prove. 7. 22.
making his barns bigger, takes no notice that he is but a Fool for his labor,
and shall be suddenly snatched away from all. All these and many more like
these, Luke 12. 20.
poor Ignaroe's, take upon trust, and pay dear in the conclusion: Whereas the
serious Christian sits down, casts up his charges, considers what it will cost
him, to be Rich in this World, what his Honor and greatness will come to, and
then purchases accordingly.


IT is usual with Men, Mart. Day Sermon on 1 Cor. 15. 16.
that when they are to go upon some long Journey, or Voyage into a fat
Country, they promise, that if God be pleased to return them safe, they will
give so much or so much to the Poor; Or as a Man passing by an Hospital,
promises the poor People, that as ^^cometh back again, he will give them
something toward their relief; but when he comes back, he passes by, not so
much as thinking of them. This is the case of many Men in these promising days
of ours; Fit ut saepenumero promptiores in promittendo homines sint, quam in
exequendo. Dion. lib. 38.
If they may be but prosperous in such a Voyage, successful in such a design,
If God will but do thus and thus by them, then they will do thus and thus unto
him, they will relieve the Poor, there is no act of Mercy, but they will be one
of the foremost to put it on; yet when their turn is served, they never think
of their promise at all: But let all such know, that their Promise stands upon
Record in Heaven; they may seem to forget it, and sneak away, not paying the
shot of their engagement here in this life; but God will call them to a
Reckoning for it, and take it upon their bodies and Souls hereafter: Let none
think therefore to pass a Vow to the Lord in a good mood for a good purpose,
but that he will take it, and exact it at their hands.


IT is a Rabbinical conceit, that Moses being a Child, had Pharaoh's crown
given him to play withal, Joh. Plantavit. Florileg. Rabbinicum.
and he made no better then a Football of it, cast it down to the ground, and
kicked it about; as if it were a sign of his future vilipending temporal
things, That he should esteem the reproach of Christ, greater then all the
Treasures of Egypt. Heb. (...). 26.
Thus ought we all to do, (especially when Riches stand in compettion with
Christ) away with them, or they will make away with us. Lu^. 18. 22.
It is Christ's own Counsel, Sell all thou have and give it to the poor; sell
it; or if no Man will buy it, give it: Or if no Man will take it, leave it; It
is not worth thy keeping, Hieron. in locum.
especially not worth thy carking; do thou part from it, rather then it shall
part thee from Christ; For he that impoverisheth his Soul to enrich his body,
is more mad then he that kills his Horse to ^ose his Money at a race.

How it is that Godfathers and Godmothers undertake for Children in Baptism.
AN Infant being born to an estate of Inheritance cannot actually take
possession, Ph. Edlin. Sermon. at S. Mich. Bassishaw, Land. 1651.
but is carried to some part of the Land in the Nurses or some other's arms,
where the Guardian of the Child takes Livery and Seisin for its use, and
promises fealty, and to do such service as the Premises are bound to; All
which the Heir (though but then an Infa^^) is fully to make good, when he comes
to years of discretion, Thus in the Sacrament of Baptism, the Child is
conditionally received into the Congregation of Christ's flock; but the
Godfathers and Godmothers answering to the Stipulation of the Church proposed
unto them, and undertaking on the Child's part, the Child coming to years of
understanding, is engaged to perform in as full a manner to all intents and
purposes, as if it had been able to have answered for it self.

The Poors relief, Heavens treasure.
AS when a Man is outed in England, Mart. Day on 1 cor. 1^.
whether it be by banishment or otherwise, if he have but laid up a bank at
Venice, Amsterdam, or some such like place, he goes thither with more comfort,
and much more confidence then otherwise he should have done, because he shall
meet with that there in safe hands, which will ^ellcome him when he comes to
it: Hence is it that we are called upon to lay up treasure in Heaven, 1 Cor.
16. Luke 16. 9.
to make unto our selves Friends of unrighteous Mammon, such are our good Works
and Alms-deeds, which being sent before, are laid up as a stock of Money in a
faithful ^and, Plus valet amicus in vid quam d^narius in corrigia. Gorran.
not in a Bankrupt or Mountebank's hands, but in the trusty hand of God
Almighty, which will repay us again with interest. And thus it is that all good
Men have made sure, that when they shall come to dye, they have sent their
Charity before them, to lie in bank for their better refreshing.

Ill-gotten goods, never prosper.
IT is an observation set upon the house of Desmond in Ireland, Fines Morisons
Travells.
That Maurice Thomas the first Earl raised it by Injustice, and by Injustice
Girala the last Earl ruined it. De male quaesitis vix gaudet, etc.
The crafty Fox in the Fable hugged himself, to think how he had cosened the
Crow of his breakfast, but when he had eaten it, and found himself poisoned
with it, he wished that he had never meddled with it. Thus Wealth got by deceit,
it like a piece of buttered sponge, (an Italian trick) it goes down glib, but
in the stomach swells, and will never be got up again. The gains a Man gets by
cheating and baseness, at last he may put it all in his eye, yet see himself
most miserable.

Men to be careful of their principles in Religion.
AS in the things of this life, R. Abbot Sermon. at S. Mary. Oxon. 1610.
Men have great care to gain the skill to know Money, whether it be current and
lawful; and Wares, whether they be good and Marchantable; and Meat, whether it
be wholesome and ^ound. Much more then may we think it concerns us (there
being so much counterfeit, false, and un^ound doctrine abroad) to learn skill
and knowledge of the true Religion, to beware of our Principles, to stir up
and sharpen our endeavor upon the search and trial of the true Faith, and to
gain ability to judge and discern of that which is erroneous and false.


LUdovicus Vives makes mention of a Town in Spain, In Com. super August. de
civit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 8.
consisting of about one hundred Families, all of them inhabited by the seed of
one old Man then living, so that the youngest of them knew not what to call
him; and he gives this reason, Quia lingua Hispanica supra Abavum non
ascendit, because the Spanish tongue has not any word of expression higher
then the great Grandfather's Father: Such as this must needs be then a numerous
issue, a prolificall and fertile brood, Levit. 26. 9. Psalm. 127. 3.
and without all doubt a great and inestimable blessing of God; especially when
they are not so much the fruits of their bodies, as of their Prayers; such as
was promised to Abraham, Genesis 13. 16. and 26. 5.
to Isaac, to Job, and to the Man that fears the Lord. Yet let none trust too
much in this blessing, Job 42. 16.
it was Haman's fault, and his Childrens ruin; Psalm. 128. 6.
nor any grumble and count them a cross or a curse to their faint estate;
Hest. 9 10.
not look upon them as a Bill of Charges, when God hat^ put them upon the
Account of Mercies: Esaias 47. 8, 9.
Neither let the barren womb de discouraged; For that God that knows how to
raise good out of evil, does sometimes bless an a^ulterous copulation with
increase; and sometimes to the chaste embraces of hones^ Wedlock denies it.


THe Poet feigned Pluto to be the God of Riches and of Hell, (as if Hell and
Riches had both one Master) and to be lame, Homer.
yet withal swift and ^^mble as Fire: When Jupiter sent him to a Soldier or a
Scholar, he went limping; but when to one of his Bawds or Mistresses, he flew
like Lightning. The Moral is thus, The Riches that come in Gods Name, and are
sent to honest Men, come slowly; but they that come by unjust dealing, flow in
apace. He that resolves to be evil, T. Adam's on ep. 2 Pet.
may soon be Rich; When the spring of Conscience is screwed up to the highest
pin that it is ready to crack, When Religion is locked up in an out-room, and
forbidden on pain of Death, to look into the shop or Warehouse, then is the
Devil on his Throne: Dives qui fieri vult, Et cito vult fieri. Juvenal.
But more safe and welcome is the gain that comes in the slow Wayn of Honesty,
then that which comes hurrying in the swift Chariot of Iniquity.


THe Egyptians had an Idol, Exodus 14. 2. Abulens. in locum.
called Baal-Zephon, which is by interpretation, Dominus speculae, Lord of the
Watchtower* his office was to fright such Fugitive Jews, as should offer to
steal out of the Country; but when Moses and the People of Israel past that
way* and pitched their Camp there, this drowsy god was surely fast asleep, for
they all marche^ on their way without let or molestation; Tho. Pestell. Visit.
Sermon. at Lei^est. 1630.
Whereas He that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps; He kept his
Israel then, and since; He made good his Title then, and will do the like to
us; his eyes run to and fro through the World, He is Watchful over his People
for their good.

Husband the Head of the Wife.
THe Persian Ladies have to this day some resemblance of a foot, worn in the
top of their Coronets, Pet. Bizari. Rer. Pe^sic. hist.
in token, that the top of their glory must stoop even to their Husbands feet,
Hest. 1. 20.
remembering that of Vashtai. And who knows it not, but that the Virgin, when
she is married, leaves to be called after her Fathers Name, and from thence
forward is owned by her Husbands; besides, Women are said to be under
Covert-Baron, so that whatsoever Contracts or Bargains they make, are of no
force, either by the Laws of God or Man, except the Husband do approve the
same: Ephesians. 5. 22.
Hence it is that the Husband is called the Head of the Wife. And Man is more
excellent then Woman, Lib. de cura rei ^amit.
(not to go so far as Aristotle, to say, she is only (...), the aberration of
Nature) and surely more eminent, respectu originis et ratione finis, The Man
was not created for the Woman; but the Woman for the Man; 1 Cor. 11. 19.
and then, ratione dominii, God gave him not only power to rule over the
beasts, Genesis 3. 16.
but the Woman too. And every Schoolboy can say, The Masculine is more worthy
then the Foeminine; so that obeying Husbands, and commanding Wives, may be well
said to live very unnaturally, and contrary to the Order of Creation.

Riches, the danger that attends them.
AeSop has a Fable of the two Froggs, D. Valentine at S. Paul's, Land. a Sermon.
1623.
that in the time of drought, when the the plashes were dry, consulted what was
best to be done; One advised to go down into a deep Well, because it was likely
the Water would not fail there; The other answered, But if it do fail, How
shall we get up an again? Thus, Riches are a pit, whereinto we soon slip, but
can hardly scramble out: Small puddles, light gains will not serve some, they
must plunge into deep Wells, excessive profits; -- Opes irritamenta malorum.
but they do not consider how they shall get out again, they do not mind the
great dangers, that are attendant upon Riches, whereby it comes to pass, that
they are either famished for want of Grace, or drowned in a Deluge of Wealth:
If then, this World be a Sea, over which we must swim to the Land of Promise,
there will be no n^cessity of such abundance of luggage, except it be to make
us sink the deeper.

The unconstancy of Worldly honors and preferments.
WHen Alexander in the height of his glory kept (as the History says)
Conventum terrarum orbis, Plutarch. J. Denison, Souls Safety; a Sermon, 1621.
a Parliament of the whole World, himself was summoned by Death to appear in
another World; And it was Res spectaculo digna, (says another Historian) a
wonderful precedent of the Vanity and variety of humane condition, Justin.
to see mighty Xerxes to flote and fly away in a small Vessel, who but a little
before wanted Sea-room for his Navy: But if ever there was a lively spectacle
of the Worlds Vanity and misery, 2 King. 25. 7.
it was in Zedekiah. This is the Worlds inconstancy, the Worlds grand
Impostury, the Flux and reflux of Honors and advancement: Nihil est in vita
durabile: non opes, non imperium.
Men erewhile shining in glory like Stars in the Firmament, now vanishing like
Comets. How has the Moon of great Men's honors been eclipsed at the Full?
Constable. Manass. Annal.
and the Sun of their pomp gone down at Noon? such is the incertainty of all
Worldly honors and preferments whatsoever.


THe Egyptian Sorcerers were forced to confess, that the finger of God was in
the miracles that Moses wrought before Pharaoh. Nebuchadnezzar, Exodus 8. 19.
as stiff as he was against the three Children, yet when they are freed from
the flames, God extorteth this speech from him, Dan. 3^. 28.
That no god could deliver like their God. The Wife of Haman, as ill-affected
as she was toward Mordecai, yet she says; If Mordecai be of the seed of the
Jews, Dan. 6. 13.
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him. The
Officers that were sent to apprehend Christ, instead of bringing Him, Ioh. 7.
46. Acts and Monuments.
they brought a testimony of him, Never Man spoke like this Man. But to come
nearer; Stephen Gardener, sometimes a great Man of this Nation, and Bishop of
Winchester, lying on his Deathbed, and the Bishop of Chichester his old
acquaintance, coming to visit him; When the promises of the Gospel, and
salvation by the blood of Christ was laid to his Soul, made answer; Nay, if you
open that gap once, then farewell all. Not much unlike hereunto, is the close
of that learned Cardinal, Rob. Bellarm. de Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
who after the expense of many Arguments to the contrary, concludes; Sed,
propter incertitudinem propriae justitae, et periculum inanis gloriae
^utissimum est, etc. that because of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness
and the danger of vainglory, the most safe way is to rely upon the Merits of
Christ Jesus. Thus it is, that God can fetch light out of darkness,
testimonies of Truth out of the mouths of very Adversaries, Magna est veritas
et praevalebit, so great is the Truth, that it will prevail, and so powerful is
God, that he has not only the tongues of Men, but their hearts also, and
turns them as the Waters of the South which way soever he please; Psalm. 126. 4.
Numb. 22. 36.
so that Balaam shall bless those whom Balaac curses, and the Midianites
thrust their swords into one another bowels: Madmen must they needs be then,
to lock up the Truth, for it will break forth, maugre all opposition whatsoever.


THe Poets feign, Homerus.
That when Jupiter had made Man, and was delighted with his own beauteous
Fabric, he asked Momus, What fault he could espy in that curious Piece? what
out of square or worthy blame? Momus commended the proportion, T. Adams
exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
the complexion, the disposition of the lineaments, the correspondence and
dependence of the parts; and in a word, the symmetry and harmony of the whole;
He would see him go, and liked the motion; He would hear him speak, and praised
his voice and expression: But at last, he spyed a fault, and asked Jupiter,
whereabout his Heart lay? He told him, within a secret Chamber like a Queen in
her privy lodging, Conr. Zuingeri theat. hum. vitae.
whither they that come must first pass the great Chamber and the Presence,
there being a Court of guard, Forces and Fortifications to save it, shadows to
hide it, that it might not be visible; Th^re then is the fault, (says Momus)
thou have forgotten to make a Window into this Chamber, that Men might look in
and see what the Heart is a doing, and whether her Recorder, the Tongue, do
agree with her meaning: Thus Man is the Masterpiece of Gods Creation,
exquisitely and wonderfully made, but his Heart is close and deceitful above
all things, Ier. 17. 9.
Had he but pectus Fenestratum, a glasse-window in his heart, How would the
black devices which are contrived in tenebris, appear palpably odious? How
would the coals of festring Malice blister the tongues, and scald the lips of
them that imagine mischief in their hearts? Psalm. 140. 2.
Then it would be seen, how they pack and shufflle, and cut, and deal too; but
it is a poor game to the Innocent: In the mean time, let all such know, that
the privy Chamber of the Heart has a window to Gods, Ier. 17. 20.
though not to Man's or Angels inspection.

The Union and fellowship of Gods Children one with another.
THe least drop of Water has the nature of its Element, has the entire
properties of it, partakes of the round figure of that Element, and best agrees
and unites it self to Water; In like manner it is with Fire, Sermon o^ Josh. 4.
15. per Ignotum.
and the rest of the Elements, being Homogeneall bodies, every part does
suscipere rationem totius participate of the name and Nature of the whole,
shuns what is contrary to that Nature, and most willingly gathers it self to
that which is of the same kind: So it is with the true members of that mystical
body whereof Christ is the head; such is the Union, Unanimity, association and
fellowship of the People of God one amongst another, that they cannot suffer
themselves to be combined with wicked persons and unbelievers; No, they will
associate none unto themselves by their good-wills, who are not endowed with
Grace and goodness and a godly conversation being the true qualities and marks
of that true Church whereof they themselves are true Members.

Excellency of the Crown of glory.
MAny were the sorts of Crowns which were in use amongst the Roman Victors;
Wolfgang. Lazius in Com. Reipub. Romans lib. 9.
As first Corona Civica, a Crown made of Oaken bows, which was given by the
Romans to him that saved the life of any Citizen in battle against his Enemies.
2. Obsidionalis, which was of Grass given to him that delivered a Town or City
from siege. 3. Muralis, which was of Gold, given to him that first scaled the
Wall of any Town or Castle. 4. Castralis, which was likewise of Gold, given to
him that first entered the Camp of the Enemy. 5. Navalis, and that also of
Gold, given unto him that first boarded the Ship of an Enemy. 6. Ovalis, Clem.
Alex. p^dag. lib. 2. cap. 8.
which was given to those Captains (and that of Myrtle) that subdued any Town
or City, or that won any Field easily without blood. 7. Triumphalis, which was
of Laurel, given to the chief General or Consul, which after some signal
Victory came home triumphing; These with many other, as Imperial, Regal, and
Princely Crowns, (rather Garlands or Corone^s then Crowns) are not to be
compared to the Crown of glory which God has prepared for those that love him.
Who is able to express the glory of it? Or to what glorious thing shall it be
likened? Ingenium fateor transcendit gloria, Sic parvis est componere magna.
If I had the Tongue of Men and Angels, I were not able to decipher it, as it
worthily deserves; It is not only a Crown of glory, but has diverse other
titles of preheminency given unto it, 2 Timothy 4. 6.
of which all shall be true partakers that are Godly; A Crown of
Righteousness, by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; A Crown of
Righteousness, by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; A Crown of life,
because those that have it, shall be made capable of life Eternal; A Crown of
Stars, because they that receive it, Rev. 2. 10. Iam. 1. 12.
shall shine as Stars for ever and ever.

The slavery of Sin to be avoided.
WHen Alexander found Diogenes in his Tub, and disputed with him, Whether was
the freer estate, Diog. Laert. in vita. Diogenis.
With Alexander to command the World, or with Diogenes to be confined to a
ba^rel? The Cynick answered: Latior tua potestas non felicior, Thou command
others, I command my self; I am a servant to the King, the King is a servant to
his slave; yea even to my slave; I am Emperor over those affections that
exercise a dominion over thee: And surely most true is that undeniable Axiom,
Impius non unius hominis* sed, quod gravius est, tot dominorum quot vitiorum
servus est.
quot Vitia tot Tyranni, Sin and slavery cannot be separated, The Dog runs at
the Masters whistling, but for the Master to go at the Dogs commanding, is a
preposterous servility; Great cause have we then to abandon that service which
must be obsequious to the Vilest, proudest, basest grooms in our Family, our
own carnal lusts, which are no better (though they dwell with us) then the
very limbs of Belial. Aug. de ci^it. Dei. lib. 4.



A Servant, whilst a stranger walks with his Master, Joh. Denison Soul's
Safety, A Sermon, 1621.
follows them both; but when the stranger takes his leave and departs from his
Master, he leaves the stranger, and follows his Master; Thus whilst the
World does any way concur with the Lord, and conduce to the Salvation of the
precious Soul, so far we may accompany it; but if it once depart from that,
then let us give the World a Farewell, follow God, and have a care of our
Souls. Again, as Almighty God by bounding and confining the waters to their
proper places, Genesis 1. 9.
has made the Sea a garment, which was before a grave to the whole Earth: So
we by bounding and ordering our affections toward the World, and actions in
the World, may make it a help, Da tua dum tua sunt --
which otherwise would be an hinderance in our way to Heaven, Fac trajectitium
(says S. Augustine) meaning, that we should employ these Earthly things to the
glory of God, and the good of our brethren, that like provident Merchants, we
may have those temporals returned in Heaven, by bill of Exchange, into things
Eternal.


HErmodius, Plutarch.
a Nobleman born, upbraided the Valiant Captain Iphicrates, for that he was but
a Shoomaker's son; My blood (says Iphicrates) takes Beginning at me, and
thy blood at thee now takes her Farewell; intimating, that he not honoring
his house with the glory of his virtues, as the house had honored him with the
title of Nobility, D. Winnick Dean of S. Paul's. Land. a Sermon, 1634.
was but as a wooden knife put into an empty sheath, to fill up the place; but
for himself, he by his valorous achievements, was now beginning to be the
raiser of his Family: Thus in the matter of Spiritualty, He is the best
Gentleman, that is the best Christian: The Men of Berea who received the Word
with all readiness, were more Noble then those of Thessalonica. Act. 17. 11.
The Burgesses of Gods City be not of base lineage, but truly Noble; Gal. 4. 26.
they boast not of their Generation, Heb. 2. 11.
but their Regeneration, which is far better; For by their second birth, Ioh.
2. 27.
they are the Sons of God* and the Church is their Mother, Heb. 1. 14.
and Christ their elder Brother, Psalm. 8. 6.
the Holy Ghost, their Tutor; Angels, their Attendants; 1 Pet. 2. 11.
all other Creatures, their Subjects; the whole World, their Inn; and Heaven
their Home, John 14. 2.

The Devil rewarding his Servants.
Charles King of Swede, Mart. Cromerus in hist. Polon.
a great Enemy of the Jesuits, when in the time of War, he took any of their
Colleges, would first hang up all the old Iesuit^s, Quod quisque fecit
patitur, authorem scelus repelit. Sen. Herc. fur.
and then put the rest into his Mines; saying, That since they had wrought so
hard above ground, he would now make a trial, how they could work under
ground: Thus the Devil, when the Wicked have done him what evil service they
can upon Earth, he confines them to his lower Vaults in Hell for evermore: A
sad reward! to sow trouble, and reap nothing but horror and vexation of spirit,
still bringing fuel to that Fire, which must burn themselves to all eternity.


ALL Artists in what they do have their second thoughts (and those usually are
the best); Tho. White Sermon at S. Giles Cripplegate, Land. 1653.
As for Example, A Watchmaker sets upon a piece of Work, (it being the first
time that ever Men were wont to carry a Passe-time in their pockets) but having
better considered of it, he makes another, and a third, some ovall, some round,
some square, every one adding luster and perfection to the first invention,
(whereas heretofore they were rather like Warming-pans to weary us, then
warning-pieces to admonish us how the time passed;) The like may be said of the
famous art of Printing, Painting, and the like, all of them ou^doing the first
copies, they were set to go by. But it was not so with God in the Creation of
the several species of Nature, he made them all perfect simul et semel, at one
and the same time, every thing pondere et mensura, so just, so propo^tionate in
the parts, such an Elementary harmony, such a symmetry in the bodies of
Animals, such a correspondency of Vegetals, that nothing is defective, neither
can any thing be added to the perfection thereof.

Men to argue themselves into a mood of Contentment.
ALexander, that great Monarch of the World was discontented, because Ivy would
not grow in his gardens at Babylon; Diog. Laert. in vita.
but the Cynick was herein more wise, who finding a Mouse in his sachel, said;
He saw that himself was not so poor, but some were glad of his leavings. Thus,
had we but hearts to improve higher providence, we might soon rock our peevish
spirits quiet, by much stronger Arguments; T. Watson Art of Conten^ment.
As to take notice of Gods bountiful dealing with us, that we are less then
the least of his Mercies, that though we be not set in the highest form, yet
there are many below us, that God is our good Benefactor; this would bring us
to that pass, Psalm. 145. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
as to conclude with our selves, Having food and raiment, therewith to be
content; and though we were many times cut short of Creature accommodations,
yet this would limit our desires after them, and make us rest assured, that
nothing is withdrawn or withheld from us, which might be really advantageous to
us.

To do good for evil.
A Malefactor, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
in birth and person a comely Gentleman, was sentenced to death by a Judge,
deformed in body; Hereupon he turned all his prayers unto Heaven, into curses
and revilings of the Judge, calling him a stigmaticall and bloody Man; The
patient Judge for that time reprieved him, still he continued the same language
of Invectives, and blasphemies against him: The next Sessions, being brought
again to the bar, the Judge asked him, If his choler were any thing boiled
away and spent; but then he redoubled his railings; yet he reprieved him again,
as loath to let him die in so uncharitable and desperate condition of Soul:
Inimicis non est male faciendum, vel ulciscendum injurias. Ficinus in Plat.
Crit.
Before the third Assizes, he sent for him to his Chamber in London, and asked
him, If he were yet more pacified? still nothing came from him but words of in
veterate rancour; Whereupon said the Judge, God forgive thee, I do; and withal
threw him a pardon; Whereat he was so astonished, that being hardly recovered
from a swoon that he fell into, he refused the pardon for his life, unless the
Judge would both pardon his Malice, and admit him into his service; He did so,
and found him so faithful, that dying, he gave him the greatest part of his
Estate. Here now was extreme evil overcome with extraordinary goodness; a
conquest without blood, the best of all Victories; Love overcoming evil with
good: Romans 12. 21.
This is to be like God, whose Image we bea^ in our Creation, and to whose
Image we are restored in our Redemption.

Gods dwelling in the Humble spirit.
A Gentlewoman (of more then ordinary quality and breeding) being much troubled
in mind, Tho. White Sermon at S. Giles Cripple-gate Land. 1653.
and cast down in her Soul with the sad thoughts of spiritual desertion; her
husband (with the assistance of others better experienced in such cases then
himself) did all that he could by prayers unto God, and otherwise by persuasion
to reduce her to the knowledge of Gods mercy and goodness to her; but all in
vain, she could not be drawn either to hear or read any thing that might work
for her spiritual advantage; At last her Husband, by much importunity prevailed
that he might read but one Chapter in the Bible unto her; the Chapter was Esaias
57. And when he came to the fift^enth V^rse in these words; For thus says the
high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the
high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
Quamvis habitet in excels^ Deus, non desinit habitare in humili spiritu. Gab.
Alvarez. in loc.
to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones: O, says she, Is it so that God dwells with a contrite and humble
Spirit, then I am sure that he dwells with me; For my Heart is broken into a
thousand pieces, O happy Text and happy time that ever I should hear such
comfort; and she was thereupon recovered: Thus it may be very well concluded,
that God makes his dwelling in an Humble heart, not with him that is proud and
high-minded, one that looks high and speaks big words, such shall be pulled
down from their seats, Luc. 1.
when the lowly and the meek shall be exalted, and made a fit habitation for
the high and mighty God to dwell in.


THe wheels of the Chariot move, but the Axletree stirs not; the Circumference
of the Heavens is carried about the Earth, but the Earth moves not out of its
Center; T. Watson Art of Contentment.
The Sails of a Mill move with the wind, but the Mill it self stands still: All
Emblems of Contentment; And thus it is, that a Christian is like Noah in the
Ark, which though tossed with the waters, he could sit and sing in it, and a
Soul that is gotten into the Ark of Contentment, sings and sits quietly, and
sails above all the waves of trouble; when it meets with motion and change in
the Creatures round about on every side, it stirs not, nor is moved out of its
place; When the outward estate moves with the wind of Providence, yet the Heart
is settled through holy Contentment; And when others like Quick silver shake and
tremble through disquiet, the Contented spirit can say with David, O God my
heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7.


John the Baptist was called the Voice of Christ, Vox clamantis, Alphons. ab
Avendan. in Matthew.
the voice of him that cries in the Wilderness: Herod did cut off his head:
Now Christ spoke not many words to his apprehenders and accusers, not many to
the high Priest, nor to the Judge Pilate; but when he came before He^od, he
spoke never a word at all: Among other reasons, this is wittily given, He spoke
not a word to Herod, because Herod had taken away his Voice in beheading John;
And how should he speak without a voice? There may be a voice without speech,
but no speech without voice: Now the tongue of the Soul is Conscience, the
voice with which she is best acquainted; but men for the most part, have
tongue-tyed their Consciences, taken away her voice, and who shall control
them? yet when God shall un^y those strings and unmuzzle their Consciences, Et
si clausis parietibus ^is coopertus tenebris, sine test; habes tamen
Conscientiam facti* etc. Aug. ep. ad Constant.
she will be heard, and ten Consorts of Music shall not drown her clamorous
cries. Now it is that their Conscience is bound, and they are loose; but in the
day of trouble themselves shall be bound, and God shall let their Conscience
loose; It shall be hard for them with that frantic Musician, to fall a ^uning
their Viols, when their house is on fire about their Ears. When all the doors
are shut up to the Voices of men, Conscience will speak within, and that with a
language loud enough to be heard, easy enough to be understood.


WHen God Almighty had in six days made that common-diall of the World the
Light; Joh. Done Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1627.
that Storehouse of his Justice and his Mercy, the Firmament; that Ferry of the
World, the Sea; Man's workhouse, the Earth; Charriots of Light, the Sun and
Moon; the a^ry Choristers, the Fowls; and Man's s^rvants the Beasts; yet had he
one more excellent piece to be made, and that was Man, a Microcosm, even an
Abstract of the whole, to whom having fashioned a body, proceeding by degrees
of Perfection, he lastly created a Soul; And as the Family of Matri was singled
out of the Tribe of Benjamin, and Saul out of the Family of Matri, 1 Samuel 10 20.
being higher then the rest by the shoulders upwards. So is the Soul singled
out from the other Creatures, Pet. Gal. lib. 2. cap 8. ^en. 1. 21.
far surpassing them all in Excellency, whether we consider the efficient cause
of its Creation, Elohim the blessed Trinity being then in consultation; or the
material cause a quinta essentia, noble and divine substance more excellent
then the Heavens; or the cause Formal, made after the Image of God himself; or
lastly the cause Final, that it might be the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
and the habitation of his blessed spirit.

The spiritual benefit of Poverty.
THe Naturalists, T. Watson Art of Divine Contentment.
such as write concerning the several Climates, observe; that such as live
under the Frozen Zone, in the Northern parts of the World, if you bring them to
the Southward, they lose their stomachs and die quickly, but those that live in
the more Southern hot Climates, bring them into the North, and their stomachs
mend, and they are long lived: Thus bring a man from the cold starving Climate
of Poverty, into the hot Southern Climate of Prosperity, Aurem cordis
tribulatio aperit, quam saepe prosperitas hujus mundi claudit, Greg. moral. 16.
and he begins to lose his appetite to good things, he grows weak, and a
thousand to one, if all his Religion do not dye; but bring a Christian from the
South to the North, from a rich flourishing estate into a jejune low Condition,
let him come into a more cola and hungry air, and then his stomach mends, he
has a better appetite after Heavenly things, he hungers more after Christ, he
thirsts more after Grace, he eats more of the bread of life at one meal then he
did at six before, and such a Man is like to live, and hold out in the way of
Gods Commandments to the end.

A foul polluted Soul, the object of Gods hatred.
THe rheumatick and spawling Cynick, Diog. Laert. in vita Diogen.
when he was entreated by the dainty Mistress of the house, where he was
entertained, that he would spit in the foulest part of the house, did thereupon
very unmannerly spit in the Mistresses own face, because that in his opinion it
was the foulest: Thus, as it is the honor of the Holy, Omnis decor ab in^us,
to be all glorious within, what outward wants soever seem to disgrace them; D.
Howell Sermon. at S. Steph. Walbro^k Land. 1637.
so it is the disgrace of the Worldly, Omnis faetor ab intus, they are filthy
within, what outward abundance soever does seem to honor them; God requires
truth in the inward parts; but alas, we may say truly of these, their inward
parts are very wickedness, so that when he sees their houses kept neat and
clean, -- Ad candida tecta Columbae.
the floores swept, the walls hung, the vessels scowred, their Apparel brushed,
their bodies adorned, all curiously highted, only their hearts filthy and
polluted, he will certainly spit his contempt upon that Heart; Therefore wash
thy heart from iniquity, O Jerusalem, that thou may be saved. 2 Kings 9. 12.

The high price of the Soul.
PLato that divine Philosopher, Lactant. lib. 3. cap. 4.
traveling to see the wonders of Sicily, was (upon some discourse had betwixt
him and Dionysius the Tyrant) apprehended and clapped up in Prison, his fact was
made capital, but by the favor of some near the Tyrant, he was adjudged to be
sold: one Annecerts buys him, lays down twenty pounds, and sends him home to
Athens; Seneca quarrels the price, censures Anneceris for undervaluing so
worthy a Man, ballancing one of such high parts with such a low sum of Money.
But this censure cannot light upon our Savior, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 48.
who gave not for the Soul of Man, the Earth, the Sea, the World; but that
which was of infinite Value, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
even his own dearest blood. Propter Animam Deus secit mundum, Chromatius in
Matthew. hom. 25.
etc. It was for the Souls sake that God made the World; And it was for the
Souls sake that the Son of God came into the World, made himself of no
Reputation, was like unto man in all things (sin only excepted) scorned,
scourged, derided, etc. and at last submitted himself to Death, even the Death
of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8.

Prosperity for the most part draws Envy to it.
SHeep that have most Wool, T. Watson Divine Art of Contentment.
are soonest fleeced; The fattest Ox comes soonest ^o the slaughter; The
barren Tree grows peaceably, no Man meddles with the Ash or Willow; but the
Appletree and the Damosin shall have many rude suitors: David a Shepherd was
quiet; but David a Courtier was pursued by his Enemies: Thus it is, Noverca
virtutis Prosperitas, etc. Chrysolog. lib. 1. de nugis Curial.
that Prosperity is an Eyesore to many, and a prosperous condition for the
most part draws Envy to it, whereas he that carries a lesser sail, that has
less Revenues, has less Envy; such as bear up with the greatest Front, and
make the greatest show in the World are the White, for Envy and Malice to shoot
at.

Liberty the cause of Licentiousness.
IT was a grave and smart answer of Secretary Walsingham, Sir R. Nanton
Fragmenta Regalia.
a great Statesman of that time, when he was consulted by the Queen, about the
lawfullnesse of Monopoly-Licences; Licentia omnes deteriores sumus* We are all
the worse for License: And most true it is, let but the golden raynes of Law
and Religion lie any thing loose upon the People shoulders, -- Suadetque
licenti^ luxum. Claudian.
they will soon be licentious enough; If the well-compacted hedge of Discipline
and Government be broken down, neither Church or State shall long want those
that will intrude upon their Privileges, and trample all Authority under their
feet.

their Souls for trifles.
WE laugh at little Children to see them part with rich Jewels for silly
trifles: And who does not wonder at the Folly of our first Parents, Joh.
Denison Soul's Safety, A Sermon, 1610.
that would lose Paradise for an Apple? and of Esau that sold his birthright
for a mess of Pottage? yet alas, daily experience does proclaim it, that
many are so childish to part with such rich and precious Jewels as their
immortal Souls for base unworthy trifles; and so Foolish as to lose the
celestial Paradise, the kingdom of Heaven for Earthly vanities, Suetonius in
vita.
of whom it may be truly said, as Augustus Caesar in another case; They are
like a Man that fishes with a golden hook, the gain can never recompense the
loss that may be sustained.

divine Contentment.
ZEno (of whom Seneca speaks) who had once been very rich, hearing of a
Shipwreck, and that all his goods were drowned at Sea, Fortune, says he,
Seneca de Tranquil.
(speaking in an Heathen Dialect, Iubet me Fortuna expeditius Philosophari)
has dealt well with me, and would have me now to study Philosophy; He was
content to change his course of life, to leave off being a Merchant, and turn
Philosopher; And if an Heathen said thus, Discite in hoc mundo supra mundum
esse, et si corpus geritis, volitet in vobis ales interior. Ambros. lib. de
Virg.
shall not a Christian much more say, When the World is drained from him; Iubet
Deus mundum derelinquere, et Christum expeditius sequi, God would have me leave
off following the World and study Christ more, and how to get Heaven, to be
willing to have less gold and more goodness, to be contented to have less of
the World, so I may have more of Christ, to sit down with a little, so much as
shall recruit Nature, and if that fail, so that the slender barrel of Provision
fall shorter and shorter, not to murmr and say with Micah, Have ye taken away
my gods, and do ye ask me, What I aile? Judge. 18. 24.

Hope, to be kept up in the midst of all Perplexities.
PAndora, Hesiodus.
a beautiful Woman (as the Poets ^eign) was framed by Vulcan, to whose making
up, every god and goddess gave a contribution; Coel. Rhodogin. Var. lect. lib.
9.
They put into the hand of this fair Inchan^resse a goodly box fraught and
stuffed with all the Woes and Miseries that might be, only in the bottom of it
they placed Hope; It was presented to Prometheus, but Providence refused it;
then to Epimetheus, and After-wit accepted it; Which he no sooner rashly
opened, but there came out a swarm of Calamities, fluttering about his ears;
This he perceiving, clapped on the cover with all possible speed, and so with
much ado, saved Hope sitting in the bottom. Such an Army of Miseries, T. Adam's
exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
like the troop issuing from the womb of the Trojane horse, invaded the World,
by opening the box of Pandora, by tasting the apple of Eve, that if the Mercy
of God had not left us Hope, solam solantem spem, in the bottom, such a Hope as
should be able to buoy us up out of the depth of misery wherein we were
involved, our case had been most desperate; let us therefore keep up our Hope
in the very midst of all Perplexities whatsoever.

The loss of the Soul, irrecoverable.
ST. Chrysostom has well observed with the Anatomists, Homil. 22. ad Populum
A^tioch.
Omnia Deus dedit duplicia, God has in the frame of Man's body given him two
eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet, and the like, that the failing of the one
might be supplied by the help of the other; Animam vero unam, yet he has given
him (says he) but one Soul, so that if It be lost, there is no supply to be
had; Dan. 4.
Nebuchadnezzar may lose his Kingdom, and it may be restored. Ioh, his health
and wealth, and they may be recovered, Chap. 2. 7. and chapter 42. Lazarus, his
life; Id. in Plat. hom. 50.
and he may be r^vived: But for the loss of the Soul, Nullo modo sarciri,
nullo pretio redimi potest, No means can repair it, no price can redeem it, all
the World cannot recompense it; being once lost, it is lost irrevocably.

The Hypocrite and true Christian, their difference in growth of Grace.
A Poysonful weed may grow as much as the Hysope or Rosemary; T. Watson Art of
Divine Contentment.
the Poppy in the Field, as the Corn; the Crab, as the Pear-main; but the one
has a harsh, sour taste, the other mellowes as it grows: Thus an Hypocrite may
grow in outward dimensions as much as a Child of God; He may pray as much,
prosess as much, but he grows only in magnitude, he brings forth sour grapes,
his duties are leavened with Pride; the other ripens as he grows, he grows in
love, humility, Faith, which do mellow and sweeten his duties, and make them
come off with a better relish.

Christ Jesus, the good Man's chief portion.
WHen Alexander the Great passed into Asia, Plutarch. in vita.
he gave large donatives to his Captains and Men of merit, insomuch, that
Parmenio asked him; Sir, What do you keep for your self? He answered, Hope; And
John of Alexandria surnamed the Almoner, did use yearly to make even with his
Revenues, Surius de vitis SS.
and when he had distributed all to the Poor, he thanked God, that he had now
nothing left him, but his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, to whom he longed to
fly with unlimed and untangled wings: Thus we can want nothing if we want not
Christ, he is the good Man's chief portion: Crosses, calamities, poverty may
take from us all the goods of this World, Lam. 3. 24.
or our Charity may give them away; The Worldlings ask us, What we have left
for our selves? We answer, Only Jesus Christ, and in him we have all things.

The Soul not to be starved in the want of means.
IT was a poor equivocating trick of the Duke D' Alva, Hist. B^lg. lib. 9.
at the Fuyck Sconce before Harlem, when having promised the Soldiers their
lives, he caused them to perish with hunger; and being challenged with his
promise, answered; That he had given them assurance of their lives, but never
promised that they should have meat or drink. And such is the Folly of him that
talks of saving his Soul; D. Valentine a Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1624.
and yet denies unto it the means of Salvation, being negligent in hearing of
the Word, cold and careless in Prayer, remiss in the actions of
Mortification, and dull in the ent^rtainment of those Christian duties and
Graces, whereby the precious Soul is not only preserved and nourished, but
also adorned and beautified.


HIppocrates gave this Counsel to all Physicians that resorted unto him, Jan.
Cornarus in vita.
that when they went upon any occasion to visit their Patients, they should
consider with themselves, Whether there were not Divinum quiddam in morbis, the
stroke of God in the sickness; because then (as it should seem) he held the
cure to be desperate, J. Gosson. M. S.
and that it was but in vain to administer any Physic: Well! This was but one
Doctors opinion, And by the leave of so eminent a Man, the disease was not
Mortal; For then no Sickness were curable, because that in every disease there
^s the stroke of God, Quicquid patimur venit ab alto, There is no Si^knesse so
l^^t^e, but God has a Finger in it, though it be but the a king of the little
Finger: And though there be in the body but only one disease that is called
sacer morbus, yet is it most certain, that there is sacrum quiddam in omni
morbo, the hand of God in every Sickness, and yet every sickness is not unto
Death, as Christ himself t^stifieth, Ioh. 11. 4.


TWo walking together found a young Tree laden with fruit; Alphons. ab Avendan.
Com. in Matthew. cap. 16.
both did gather and satisfy themselves for the present; One of them took all
the remaining fruit, and carried it away with him; the other seeing him gone
with the Fruit, took up the Tree it self, and planted it in his own ground,
where it prospered, and bore plentifully every year: The first had more fruit
at the present, but the other sped best; For he had Fruit when the other had
none. Thus it is with Men at the hearing of Sermons, some have large Memories,
and can gather many Observations, which they keep awhile, to rehearse, not to
practice: Another has a weaker capacity; but he gets the Tree it self, the
root and substance of the Text, plants it in his Heart, feeds on the Fruits
with comfort, and his Soul is thereby nourished unto life eternal.


THe Fowl that flies low is quickly taken, Ambros. d^ bono Mortis. cap. 5.
but that which soars aloft, nec laqueis capitur, nec visco fallitur, is
neither entrapped in the snare, nor entangled in the lime-bush: So the Soul
whilst it is hovering about these Earthly vanities, and stooping down to catch
at Wordly preferments, is easily and quickly ensnared by Satan; but when it
soars and mounts aloft in divine Meditations, is seldom taken in the snares of
Temptation.

Wicked Men reserved for Exemplary punishment.
THere is a story of a bloody Murderer, Tho. de Want. Sermones de tempore.
that after the fact, went to sleep under a rotten wall all night; but had a
Vision presented unto him to bid him awake and begone for fear of further
danger; which he did, and presently the Wall fell; The Murderer thereupon
thought, that his fact was acceptable with God: The next night following he had
another Vision, and heard a Voice, saying; O Wretch, think thou that I care
for Wicked Men? No, I would not have thee die sleeping, but have reserved thee
for a halter, whereby thou shall end thy days with pu^lique shame and
disgrace; and so it happened accordingly: Thus many notorious Malefactors, who
draw Iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a Cart-rope, Esaias
5. 18.
contriving mischief on their beds, and committing all uncleanness even with
greedin^sse, Mich. 2. 1.
often escape great dangers in their drunkenness and other outrages, Ephesians. 4.
19.
yet in the and some Fearful and Exemplary Judgment overtakes them.

Youth to be seasoned with Grace, not giving the least way to the Devil.
THere was an Abbot of this Land, T. Adams exposit. on ^p. 2 Pet.
which desired a piece of ground that lay conveniently for him; The owner
refused to sell it, yet with much persuasion, was contented to let it: The
Abbot hired it for his Rent, and covenanted only to farm it for one Crop; He
had his bargain, and sowed it with Acorns, a Crop that lasted three hundred
years. Thus Satan begs but for the first crop; let him sow thy youth with
Acorns, they will grow up with thy years to sturdy Oaks, so bigg bulked and
deep-rooted, that they shall last all thy life; Sin has a shrewd title when it
can plead prescription; -- Iuvenilibus annis Luxuriant animi. Ovid. ep. 4.
And Satan thinks his Evidence as good as eleven points at Law, when he has
once got possession; let him be sure of thy Youth, he will be confident of thy
Age: Poma dat Autumnus, he well knows, that the blossoms in the Spring, are
the Fruit in Autumn; and that in thy Youth thou art not Cloth but Wool; so
that the deepest Purple sins are those which are died in the Wool: Let thy
Soul therefore like Gedeon's fleece drink up betimes the dew of Grace, Quo
semel est imbutarecens, servabit od^rem, Testa diu --
Judge. 6. 37. For younger years well led, are as the sweetness of a Rose,
whose smell remains in the dry leaves. Take then the first opportunity of Gods
gracious motions and monitions; or if thou have omitted the first, embrace the
second; or if many have passed by, unanswered of thee, embrace the present
Invitation, and even now with Faith and Repentance turn unto God thy Maker.

A good Conscience, the best Friend.
WOrldly Friends are uncertain, J. Denison, Sermon. at Court, 1621.
they go and come, and stand afar off when they should be most near; they love
not in time of trouble, they are loath to come to a sick Man's bed side; or if
so, they cannot abide to hear his groans; And by no means to see a dead Man; at
the most they can but follow one to the grave, Bona C^nscientia hortus
d^liciarum, aula Dei, etc. Hug. l. 2. de anima. cap. 9.
and there leave him. But a good Conscience will make one's bed in sickness,
and cause him to lie the softer; will stand by him when he groans, and do him
comfort; will hearten him upon Death when it is coming, and say; Thy Redeemer
lives; will whisper to him when departing, and say; Thy Warfare is
accomplished; will lodge the body in grave as in a bed; mann the Soul to
Heaven, and make it able to look God in the face without any terror; yea, so
fast a Friend is a good Conscience, that when Riches, Husband, Wife, Parents,
Friends, Breath, Life, nay, Patience, Hope, Faith have left us, in some
measure, it will stick close unto us.


ORators, Ephr. ^dall Serm^n at S. Paul's, Land. 1638.
though in every part of their speech, they use great care and diligence, yet
in the close of all, they set forth the best of their art and skill to stir
up the affections and passions of their Hearers, that then they may leave, at
the last, the deepest impression of those things which they would persuade:
Thus ought all of us to do, our whole life being nothing else, but a continued
and persuasive Oration unto our God, to be admitted into his Heavenly Kingdom;
Una tamen spes est, quae me solatur, etc. Ovid.
but when we come to the last act and Epilogue of our age, then it is, that we
must especially strive to show forth all our art and skill, that so our last
words may be our best words, our last thoughts our best thoughts, our last
deeds our best deeds, whereby stirring up (as it were) all the affections of
God, and even the bowels of Compassion unto us, we may then as the Sun, though
always glorious, yet especially at its setting, be most resplendent, when we
draw near unto our Western home, the house appointed for all living.


IT is observed of the word Conscientia, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
that it ever had ill luck in the Church, and could never be found at once, in
full syllables: Conscientia altogether may be called Devotion; take away the
first syllable, it is Scientia, Knowledge: cut off the next, it is Entia, Means
or Worldly maintenance: First, in the time of Prophanenes^e, there was Sci and
Entia, Learning and Living, Knowledge and Maintenance; but Con was left out,
Devotion was wanting, they were ungodly Men: In the next Age there was Con and
Entia, Devotion and Exhibition, a Rich and Religious, yea, a superstitious
number; but Sci, Knowledge was wanting, they were none of the learned Clerks.
In the third Age, Con and Sci, Learning and Devotion were both lost, and only
Entia was left, they had the Honors and Manors, the fat of this Land: But now
in this last Age, it is come quite round; We have, and not long since in a
better measure had, Con and Sci, a Learned and Religious Clergy, only Entia is
taken from them, their livelihood and subsistence is by sacrilegious hands
exhausted: The like Fortune has a Pure Heart in the World, Desi^it in piscem.
Pureness goes one way, and the Heart another way, and these two have much ado
to meet: There is no lack of Hearts, every Man has one, some have more then
one: And for Pureness, it abounds, proud Dames will have pure houses, pure
clothes, pure meat, etc. Hypocrites will have pure eyes, Puritas cordis i^
qu^renda gloria Dei, et utilitate proximi. Bern. in Apol^get.
pure tongues, pure habits, garbs and gestures; And the Profane sort are all
for brave Hearts, they make a pish at Pureness: This is the Devils plot, to
keep pureness and the Heart asunder; Purity will do well in nothing without
the Heart; the Heart can be happy in nothing without purity: It is great pity,
two such sweet Companions should be kept asunder. The God of all purity bring
them together.

Sin of the meanest Man in a Nation may be the destruction of it.
EVery particular individual Man is a part of the City and Kingdom wherein he
was born, Rob. Harris a Fast-Sermon at Westminster. 1628.
be it never so ample; as a l^tt^r is part of a word; Some be like to C^pital
or Text-letters, as great Men; some to smaller characters, as Men of low
degree; some be like to Vowels, as Men in Authority; some to mutes and liquids,
as the Vulgar sort: All Men go to the making of a City, or Kingdom, as all
letters go to the making up of words. And as in a Word, if one letter be
amiss, though but a Mute, it may endanger to mar the word, though not so
much as if a Vowell be defaced: So in a City or Nation, if any one Man be
blotted with Sin, let it be but a mean Man, it may bring a destruction to that
place, yet not so soon as if a Man of higher place were blurred with iniquity.

The Secure, careless Sinner.
IT is said of those that are taken with the Phrenetique disease, Aristot. de
Anima, lib. 3. cap. 7.
that by how much the more the malady does affect them, so much the more secure
they are; careless of any thing, presumptuous in all things; fearing nothing,
as having lost the very use of common sense; by which they should judge of the
Nature of things, what is convenient, and what is not sitting for them: So it
is with those that are laden with the phrenzy of Sin, by how much the more they
are infected with the poisonous Nature thereof, so much the more are they
careless and secure from sinning; so that the greater the guilt, the less is
the sense of sin: just like Agag, Prove. 3. 18.
when he was ready to be hacked in pieces, Holcot in lib. Sap. 1 Samuel 15. 32.
concluded, Esaias 47. 8.
that the bitterness of Death was past; Luke 12.
or pernicious Babylon, that sits like a Lady in her Palace minding nothing,
when much of destruction was at the Threshold: or the Rich Fool in the midst of
his abundance. Such is the careless, heedlesse, headless Phrenetical
condition and Constitution of all Sin and Sinners.

The Keys of Knowledge much abused by those that keep them.
IT is feigned of Pope Sixtus Quintus, That after his death he went to Hell,
but by good luck the Porter would not let him in, T. Adams exposit. on ep. 2
Pet.
though he had ^ighly deserved it, but sent him to a place under his own
command, Purgatory; this he long sought, but could never find: At last he took
heart, and went to Heaven, fearfully knocking at the gate. S. Peter asked him,
Why he knocked, considering he had the Keys? He answered, Because the Wards
were altered, and they could not now unlock the door. It were to be wished,
that the Moral of this fiction were not too true: How are the Keys of Knowledge
abused by many that have the keeping of them? The Pontificians have so bruised
the keys with breaking Men's heads, Sunt qui scire volunt, ^o fin^ ut scire
valea^t, etc. Be^n. super Cant. Sermon. 16.
and so furred them with the blood of Innocents, that they are not able to open
the gates of Heaven; Some let them rust in their hands for want of use,
Teachers that do not teach, that can neither open the doors of Heaven for
others, nor for themselves; Some alter the Wards by false and erroneous
doctrine: Others, like Gallio, care not which end goes forward, let the
Church-Keys hang in the Townhouse, let who will preach, all is one to them; But
some there are (God increase the number) that keep them bright with fair and
continual usage, whom God blesses in the way of their Ministry, with the
letting in of many Souls to himself.


IT is reported of Julius Caesar, Sue^onius in vita.
That he never entertained hatred against any so deeply, but he was willing to
lay down the same upon the tender of submission; As when C. Memnius put in for
the Consulship, he befriended him before others of the Competition,
notwithstanding that C. Memnius had made bitter invectives against him. Thus
the great God of Heaven, to whom all the Caesar's and Kings of the Earth are
Tributaries and Homagers, -- Satis est prostrasse, etc.
does never hate so irreconcileably, but that true Humiliation will work a
Reconciliation, satis est prostrasse, let but the Sinner appear before him in a
submissi^e posture, and his anger will be soon appeased.


SUch is the foolishness of a Frantic Man, (the disease being got into the
Cock-loft of Reason) that when he is in greatest misery, he seems to be as one
that had no misery at all; ^. Preston Sermon at Lincolns-Inne. 1624.
and when most oppressed with the strength of his malady, laughing and smiling
as if he were not oppressed with any disease at all: So is it with him, whose
Soul is (as it were) drench't in a deluge of Sin, when he is extremely
miserable, and that the strength of his Sins are able to throw him down to
destruction; Prove. 7. 22.
yet you shall see him like Solomon's Fool go to the correction of the Stocks
full of jollity; such was the state of Jerusalem, not discerning the time of
their Visitation, Luke 19. 42.
that when Christ wept for them, they could not do so much as throw out one sob
of sorrow for themselves; such too was the condition of the old World, nothing
but Mirth and merriment, marrying and giving in Marriage, Genesis 12.
till the Flood overtook them, and such we may see to be the daily custom of
all desperate Sinners, such as walk with lifted up countenances, and hug
themselves in the perpetration of their wicked designs, when destruction is at
the very pits brim ready to overwhelm them.


AThaneus tells us, Deipnosoph. lib. 12.
that the Stoics had an opinion, that no Man could do well but a wise Man, not
so much as make good Lentill-broath but after his Receipt, and that was so
exact and curious that it prescribed the twelfth part of a Coriander seed: Thus
there are in the World many simple Men, and more simple and more sinful
Weomen, that have little besides a Will and a Tongue, 2 Kings 4. 40.
yet are so conceited of doctrine, that if Zeno, or one of their Zanies
prescribe it not, the broth is naught Mors in olla, death is in the pot, and
for every sup of broth, they must run to Zeno, when (God knows) all at the
best is but a poor mess of pottage; such are those humane traditions,
Constitutions, and Impositions of Usurpers, Rob. Harris Fast-S^rm. at Westminster.
1628.
but as mere artificial Paper-walls set up against the Apostolical Cannons;
such the Inventions of Men (though of those pure brains that pretend most, yea
mainly for the Word.) For sometimes they prove but Lapwings that cry, Here
it is, here it is, when their nests are far enough off; And such the Morality
that dropped in verse from the pens of the Poets; but not any of these, Ioh. 5.
39.
nor all of these (though they may be made use of in a subservient way) are to
be rested on, but only the Word of God.


THe Rainbow is an Emblem of Gods mercy, it is planted in the Clouds, as if Man
were shooting at God, Notes of sundry Divines in loc. Exodus 25. 21.
and not as if God were shooting at Man: The sci^uation of the Propitiatory, or
Mercy-seat, was a strong Argument of his Mercy. God commanded it should be
planted over the A^k, in which was the Testimony, the book of cursings; that so
Mercy might be near at hand to pronounce sentence of Absolution, when Justice
was ready to denounce Judgment: It is Gods nature and property to have Mercy;
Longanimity is as Gods natural child, the holy Trinity is in travel with it; 2
Cor. 1. 3.
Even as any thing great with young does desire to be rid of the burden, so
does God desire to pour out his Mercy; Never any Nurse, when her breasts were
full of Milk, was in greater pain for Children to suck them, then God is in
pain to have his Children draw Mercy from him; Alphons. a^ Avendan. in Psalm.
119.
He spins out the thread of his goodness to an unmeasureable length, and though
his Angle be in Heaven, yet he lets down the line of his Love, and baits it
with his Mercy, to try whether men will swallow, that so he may save their
Souls; Justice comes from him as a sting from a B^e, constrainedly; Mercy
flows from him, as honey from a Be, most willingly; Mercy is as ^s^entiall
to him as light is to the Sun, or as heat is to the Fire; He delights in Mercy,
as the senses and faculties of the Soul do in their several actions; Patience
and Clemency and Mercy, and compassion, and peace are the Fruits of his bowels
the Offspring which the Divine nature does produce; Fury and rage, and anger,
and impatience, War and fire and sword are forced into him by the provoking
exorbitances of the World.

Faith not always sensible.
IT is said of Eu^ychus, Tho. de Trugillo thesaur. Conci^nat.
that, falling down out of a VVindow, was taken up dead, his Friends were much
troubled at the sodainnesse of the accident; but Saint Paul being then
preaching in an upper chamber, went down and fell upon him, Act. 20. 8.
and embracing him, said; Trouble not your selves, for his li^e is in him;
though he seemed dead, yet he was alive; And as substance may be said to be in
an Elm or an Oak tree, Esaias 6. 13.
when they have cast their leaves, and there is Wine to be found in an
unlikely cluster, and one says; Esaias 65. 7.
Destroy it not, For there is a blessing in it. Such are the beatings of the
pulse, the trances and the swoonings of Faith, beating many times so slowly,
and drawing the breath of life so inwardly to it self, that no man can perceive
any life at all; so that, unless the goodness of God should embrace it as
Saint Paul did Eutychus, it would never recover strength again: such was the
trance of Adultery in David, of Idolatry in his son Solomon, of Apostasy in
Peter, of Recusancy in Jonah, etc.

Minding of good things, a notable way to increase Grace.
DOmitian perceiving many of his Predecessors in the Empire to be so hated of
the People, Impp. vita per Phil. Nepotem.
asked; How he might so rule as to be beloved? and wa^ answered, Tu fac contra,
Mind and examine what they did, and do thou the contrary: Thus if Men would but
truly mind the Law and the Prophets, they would find themselves miserable; J.
Wood, A Sermon at S. James Dukesplace, Land. 1636.
(For totus homo est inversus Decalogus) that they stood in a full contrariety
to all the Law, and that is the very definition of Man: Now this minding will
work a Godly sorrow, will make Men like those that after John Baptist's Sermon
was ended came with material Quaere's, What shall we do? and to make the
conclusion up in their own hearts, Luke 3. 10.
Is it comfort that we hear of; Repent, and it is ours; Is it Judgment? Repent
and it is none of ours; if any Virtue be commended, we shall fall to practice
it; if any Vice be condemned, we shall labor to avoid it; if any Consolation
be insinuated, to appropriate it; any good Example be propounded, to follow it;
Where good things are minded, Graces will be increased.


SAint Augustine relates of a certain Platonist, De Ci^it. Dei. lib. 10. cap.
29.
that should say (as Simplicianus his good friend told him) that those words of
Saint John's Gospel, In the beginning was the Word, Ioh. 1. 1.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning
with God; were fit to be written in letters of Gold, and to be set up to be
read in the highest places of all Churches; his reason was, because it is such a
strong Text to confirm the Divinity of Christ; For as Saint Ambrose says, In
lib. de fide contra Arrianu^.
Erat, erat, etc. Saint John says four times, Erat in principio, And where
does Arrius find, that it was not in the beginning? And thus verily that
Scripture where God proclaims his Nature by Adjectives, ought to be recorded to
all Posterity l The Lord, Exodus 34. 6.
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in
goodness, and Truth; keeping Mercy for thousands, ^orgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin, etc. Now, What is meant by all these Synonomaes, and
Equivocall expressions, but that as an Act of Oblivion and pardon of Grace the
abundant Mercies of God might be set out to the comfort of all Repentant
Sinners.


SAint Ambrose speaking of great drought in his time, In Hexam. ^ib. 4.
when the People talked much of rain, he sometimes comforted himself with this
hope, Neomenia dabit pluvias, the new Moon will bring us rain; yet, says he,
though all of us desired to see some showers, yet I wished such hopes might
fail, and was glad that no rayn fell, donec precibus Ecclesiae data esset, etc.
until it came as a Return upon the Churches prayers, not upon the influence of
the Moon, but upon the provident Mercy of the Creator: Such was the Religious
care of that good Saint then, and the like were to be wished for now, that Men
would be exhorted, not to be so much taken as they are with the Vanity of
Astrologicall predictions, A^^ra regunt homines, sed regit astra, Deus.
to read the Stars less and the Scriptures more, to eye God in his Providence,
not the Moon so much in it is influence, still looking up unto him as the primus
mot^r, and upon all other Creatures whatsoever as subordinate.


IN a City of Spain, T. Adams ^xposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
a Jesuit in the midst of his Sermon fell into a Trance (if we had but faith
enough to believe him) and starting up he told his Auditory, that he had been
in a dream, and the Scene lay in Hell: There he saw many Souls of all
conditions (naming them whom he thought fit to traduce) from Cobblers to Kings;
Amongst the rest, he pretended to see abundance of Franciscans, whereat he
stood amazed, that Men so holy and strict of life should come thither: This
dream of his stuck in the Franciscans stomachs, till they could requite him
with another; Therefore on the next occasion in the same Pulpit a Franciscan
preaching, In lib. cui titulus, Beltum Iesuiticum.
fell into the like trance, and waking told them, that he had also been in
Hell, and could not deny, but some sprinkling of Franciscans and other Orders
were there: But his wonder was that in all Hell, he saw never a Jesuit; at
which Beelzebub laughing, told him his error. That the number of Jesuits in
Hell did exceed all other Societies, put them all together; Where are they?
replies the Franciscan; Alas, says the Devil, they are in a room below, the
Common Jayl is too good for them, they are safe bound in the Dungeon, stowed in
the hold under hatches; For if they were suffered to come to the upper decks,
they would set all Hell in an uproar. It was well it was but a d^eam for their
sakes, and not so well that it is not a Truth for the Church and Common-Weal's
sake: Many dreamers there are that say, The Spirit of God is come down amongst
us in these latter times; but by the lives and practices of lewd and Wicked
Men, it may be concluded that Hell is rather broke loose, and the Devil let
out for a season; Else what mean those swarms of Jesuits, Sectaries, Ranters,
Heretics, etc. that are found amongst us, Men of desperate Principles, Ephr.
^dall Sermon. 1627.
and loose Conversa^ions, fitter for the dark rooms of Bedlam to recover their
straggling senses, then the open air to walk in, whereby others may be infected.

Young raw Ministers to be reproved.
UNder the Law the Levites had their appointed times for their ages, Steph.
Menoch^us, de Repub. Heb.
before which they might have no admittance to the service in the Tabernacle,
though they were never so ripe and pregnant; It was not well with Sacrifices,
when Priests boys were suffered to intermeddle; they never came to do any good
service to God and his Church, 1 Samuel 2. 13. J^r. ^hillips Sermon at Southwell
in N^rthamp^onshire, 1623.
but they came with their Flesh-hooks to fetch sweet morsels from the Altar,
and there caused the Sacrifices of the Lord to be despised. When the young sons
of the Prophets shall be set to gather herbs to make pottage for the food of
Gods household, they may happily instead of wholesome pot herbs, bring in
Colloquintid^, that when the broth is served in, they that taste of it may say,
2 Kings 4. 40.
Mors in ^lla, O Man of God, death is in the pot. Thus are they worthy to be
reproved, that being called to be Disciples, streightwaies run to the
Apostolic function, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
contrary to the Apostles rule, Neophytus ne sit, ^aking upon them to divide
the Word of God to his People before years and experience, reading and other
helps, bring them to maturity of Judgment; so that for their Forwardness it
may be said of them truly, what the Factious company said to Moses mutinously,
Numb. 16.
You take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi. No doubt, but God may enable some
as he did young Timothy; but it is not common, not ordinary: Et da mihi talem,
(says S. Bernard) Give me such a one, and I will feed him with gold and
silver; intimating, that there was none such before, and hardly since to be
found amongst us.

A good Man, Merciful to the very beasts.
IT is said of God, Genesis 8 ^.
that he remembered Noah, Jos. Shute S^rm. to the East-Ind^a C^mp^ny, 1629.
and every beast; Psalm. 36. 6.
yea such is his Merciful providence, Prove. 12. 10.
that he watches not over Men but beasts; Aelianus de Var. hist. lib. 13.
and a Righteous Man regards the life of his beast. Nay, Xenocrates, a very
Heathen, who had no other light but what the dim spectacles of Nature did
afford, is commended for his pitiful heart, who succored in his bosom a poor
Sparrow, that being pursued by an Hawk fled unto him, and afterward let her
go, saying; Se supplicem non prodidisse, that he had not betrayed his poor
suppliant. And such is the goodness of every just Man, that he is Merciful to
his very beast; Alas, it cannot declare its wants, nor tell its grievances,
otherwise then by mourning in its kind; so that to an honest heart, its
dumbness is a loud language, crying out for relief; this made David rather
venture upon a Lion, then lose a Lamb. Jacob will endure heat by day, 1 Samuel
17. 34.
and cold by night, Genesis 31. 40.
rather then neglect his Flocks. Moses will fight with odds, rather then the
Cattle shall perish with thirst. It is only Balaam and Bedlam-Balaamites Exodus
2.
that want this Mercy to their faultlesse beast; and it is ill falling into
their hands, whom the very beasts find unmercifull.


WHen the People of Rome heard, Plin. not. hist.
that the Fields of some of their Colonies waxed barren, their advice was, that
the Husbandmen should, melius arare et mi^us serere, plow better, and sow
less: So when Gods Field waxes barren, Jer. Phillips Sermon. ut (...).
and the People profit not by Preaching of the Word, by reason of a negligent
kind of Preaching thereof, it cannot be accounted ungodly Counsel to such as
cannot speaken often, and well too, that they spend more ^ime in their studi^s,
and be less seen in their Pulpit; If they have fished all night and caught
nothing, it were not amiss, that they should sit down a while upon the shore
and mend their nets, afterward with Gods blessing, they may fish with better
success.


IT is said of S. Anthony, L^u^. Surius in vita.
that being upon his Travel, and set down to Supper, his Host set a Toad before
him on the Table, and told him, That it was written in the Gospel, 1 C^r. 10.
25.
De omni quod tibi opponitur comedes, Thou shall eat of such things as are set
before thee. The holy Man, weighting with himself the irreligious entertainment
of his Host, signed himself (as the Legend has it) with the sign of the Cross,
and immediately the Toad was turned into a well-dress'd Capon. This he did, as
the Story lies. But can it be thought possible, that a Leopard should change
his spots, or a Blackamore be washed white? then may a Man Metamorphize Satan's
poisons, Dan. Tutevil Serm^n at S^^tons Hospital, 1631.
Toads, and Serpents, banefull Sins and transgressions into nutrimentall
Virtues and spiritual Graces; It cannot be. For Sin is crafty and full of
delusion, living still upon the cheat with the Sons of Men, Usury walks in
Alderman Thrifties gown; Pride gets the name of Decency; Idolatry praises it
self for pure Devotion; Homicide marches like a Man of valor; Lust professes
it self Natures Scholar; Covetousness is Nabals Husbandry; Enclosing of
grounds is Master Usurper's Policy; Drunkenness gets the name of good
fellowship; so that whereas it has been said, that black could never be turned
into white, the Devil has found out some Painters that will undertake it, --
Errore sub illo,
Pro viti^ Virtus crimina saepe tulit;
Virtue shall bear Vices faults, and Vice shall have the credit of Virtues
goodness; but when all is don, the best of the Worlds Wisdom, is Vitia non
abscindere sed abscondere, to excuse Sin here in this World, which will be sure
to accuse the Sinner hereafter.


ONe that has some choice Jewel, T. Gataker Sermon. at a Funeral, 1629.
that he purposes at the time of his decease to leave to some special Friend,
How chary is he of it? How careful to keep it fair and clean, when he is at
some time (as occasion serves) to wear it and make use of it? And if it should
against his Will, and besides his purpose upon such occasion, by some
occurrent or oversight take any soil, How diligent is he to wipe it, or
burnish it to get the soil off it, and to reduce it to its former luster again:
Such is the care that every Man is to have of his Soul, that precious piece,
that he purposes at his departure out of this World to commend to his God,
Ia^. 4. 8.
to his Christ, I^r. 4. 14.
to make it clean and keep it clean. 1 C^r. 10. 3.
And because that by daily occasions, whilst he lives here in the Flesh, and
is conversant in this Wicked World, it will be gathering soil, let him be
never so careful; he must ever and anon be washing it with the tears of
Repentance, and fetching off the soil by serious contrition and hearty remorse;
that when the time shall come, which he knows not how soon or suddenly may
come, it may be presented pure and spotless to him, whom he intends it now
unto.

Progress in Piety to be endeavored.
Progress in Piety and Religion is not unfitly compared to a building, R. du
Moul n. Combat Christien. Judge. 20.
to a Race, 1 Cor. 9. 24.
to the Morning light, Prove. 4. 18.
and to the Moon that waxes. Cant. 6. 9.
Houses are raised from the Foundation to the walls, from the walls to the
roof; In a Race, Men run on to the goal; The Morning light is brighter and
brighter, till the Noon day; And the Moon increases more and more till it come
to the Full; Habent et omnes virtutes suas conceptiones, nativitates,
incunabula, etc. And all virtues have their conceptions, births, infancies and
encreas: So must every good Christian have, Josh 10. 13.
he must not stand still in Religion, 1 Kings 10. 11.
like the Sun in Gibeon, Psalm. 19. 5.
or go back, like that on Ahaz's dyall; but as a Bridegroom coming out of his
Chamber, that rejoices as a strong Man to run a Race, he must go forward, make
still some progress in Piety; It is not enough that he receive a Talent, but
he must employ it, and gain by it like good ground, that gives not the bare
seedcorn back again, Mat^h. 25.
but fructifieth in abundance; 1 Th^ss. 4. 1.
He must increase more and more, as S. Paul exhorted the Jews of Thessalonica,
and to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of God, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Resurrection of the dead, asserted.
OUt of the Earth comes the bread that we eat; that bread, after it passes
several concoctions, is altered, and changed into blood, then conveyed
throughout the parts of the body, and at last attains to be even of the very
same substance and Nature with the body: Thus that which was Earth, and sprung
out of the Earth, R. Gardener Sermon. at S. Mary. Oxon. 1638.
becomes Flesh in substance, which before, it was not; In the Numerical
Resurrection, that, which was Flesh, and after turned into Earth, becomes Flesh
again in the same Nature, which before it was; If that were not daily and
ordinary; the difficulty would appear no greater in the one then in the other.
Again, We daily see a tall, fair spread, losty Tree, to have risen out of a
little seed; Moral, in Job. cap. 19.
If you demand, says Gregory the Great, Ubi latet fortitudo ligni, asperitas
corticis, etc. Whence was derived the solidity of the Wood, the superficial
hardness of the bark, the flourishing greenness of the leaves? Experience
testifies, it proceeded from the spreading virtue which lay treasured up in the
seed: What marvel then, if he that out of a small seed daily extracts the Wood,
Fruit, and leaves in the trunk and branches of a Tree, does likewise reduce
bones, veins, and hair out of the least remainder of our dust? And having
grafted them into the former stock of the same Flesh, commands again breath and
warmth into that Flesh, blood into those veins, strength into those bones, and
beautifies those hairs with a fresher hew.

The Soldiers calling, Honorable.
HE that in these days of the Gospel styleth himself, Matthew. Styles Sermon. to
the Artil. Company, Land. 1625.
Deus pacis, Josh. 5. 14.
the God of Peace, Job. 25. 3.
did in the days of old under the Law call himself, Luke 2. 13.
Deus exercituum, Cant. 6. 3.
the Lord of Hoasts; 2 Timothy 2. 3.
The Scriptures make Christ, Nulla fides pietas* etc. Impius haec tam culta
Novalia? etc.
The Captain of the Lords Army; the Angels, Soldiers; The Church, a Squadron
of armed Men; every Bishop or Superintendent of the Church, a Soldier, and the
Church upon good grounds has listed every Child in Baptism as a Soldier of
Christ Jesus; Eques, that formerly signified an ordinary Trooper, is now our
Knight; Miles that was wont to be a private Soldier, is now our Esquire or
Gentleman; such and so Honorable is the Condition and Calling of a Soldier,
that though the Poets have inveighed against it, yet they must so far yield,
that whatsoever of rubbish, and dirt is thrown upon it, it is vitium personae
non rei, the fault of the Persons, not of the Profession, since God himself
has graced it, our Savior has approved it, the Apostles have commended it,
the Saints have practiced it, and our Ancestors gloried in it.


IT was a witty answer that St. Bernard gave to the Image of the blessed Virgin
at the great Church of Spire in Germany; Rob. Wilkinson Merch. Royal; A Serm^n
at the Nuptials of L. Hayes.
Bernard was no sooner come into the Church, but the Image straight saluted
him, and bad him Good morrow Bernard; Whereat, Bernard well knowing the juggling
of the Friars, made answer again out of St. Paul; O (says he) your Ladyship
has forgotten your self, It is not lawful for Women to speak in the Church:
Thus it is commendable in a Woman, when she is able by her wisdom to instruct
her Children, and to give at opportunities good Counsel to her Husband; but
when she-Apostles, Women shall take upon them (as many have done) to hold out
the Word in public, and to chalk out Discipline for the Church, this is
neither commendable nor tolerable; Prove. 31. 19.
for her hands should handle the spindle or the Cradle, but neither the Altar
nor the Church; the commendations that St. John's elect Lady had, was not so
much for her talking, as her walking in the Commandments of God, 2 John v. 5,
6.


Suitors at Court observe mollissima fandi tempora, T. Goodwin Return of Prayer.
their times of begging, when they have the King in a good mood, which they
will be sure to take the advantage of: but especially if they should find, that
the King himself should begin of himself to speak of the business, which they
would have of him, then they take that very nick of time, and seldom or never
come off but with good success: Thus when God speaks secretly to the heart to
pray, fashioneth and composeth it into a praying frame and disposition, observe
such a time, Post est Occasio calva.
and neglect it not, strike whilst the Iron is hot, lay hold upon such a
blessed opportunity, such a one as thou may never have the like again; for
it is a great sign that he intends to hear thee, and answer thee graciously,
when he himself shall thus prepare and indite the Petition, and frame the
Requests that thou shall put up unto him, This must needs be the best time of
Prayer.


IT is observable in the very course of Nature, To. Wilkinson S^rm. ut antea.
That the highest Spheres are always the swiftest in their motion, and carry
about with them the inferior Orbs, by their ^elerity; The biggest Stars in the
Firmament are evermore the brightest, and give luster unto those of a lesser
magnitude. Thus Men that bear Authority, that are eminent in power and dignity,
that excel in Riches and command, are placed in the highest sphere of humane
Society, to this end, that (like sons of God) they might shine brightly unto
their Inferiors, by their godly life and Example.

Ministers to be acquainted with the state of Men's Souls.
MEn are careful that the Physician should be well and thoroughly acquainted
with the Constitution of their bodies, Arth. Hildersam on Psalm. 5^.
before he administer any Physic unto them; And their case shall be fully
known to their Lawyer, before he come to plead it; Nay, if their ^aylor come
but to make them a Suit of Clothes for their bodies, he must be sure to take
exact measure: Thus solicitous are Men in corporal things; and it would be
better with them in their spiritual estates, did they but know them that labor
amongst them, such as are set over them in the Lord. Would they but acquaint
themselves with their Ministers, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.
it would much advantage their poor Souls. Da^id knew this well, and though he
was a Prophet himself, yet he kept three Seers and Prophets about him, 2 Samuel
7. 2. and 4. 11.
Nathan, 2 Chronicles. 35. 15.
Gad, and Ieduthun; the reason was, that they might know him well, and so far
observe his ways, that they might do more good by their Ministry; For indeed,
How is it possible, that they that are strangers to Men, and know not their
ways, should ever apply the doctrine so particularly, or meet so well with
their special and beloved Sins, as they would the more exactly do, were they
better acquainted with them.

The Christians Library.
OF making many Books there is no end, Eccles. 12. 12. Ioshuah's Resolution; A
Sermon. per Anonym.
(says Solomon) and much study is a weariness of the flesh; every Art
abounding with books of its own way and profession; yet as Aquinas chose rather
to have Chrysostom upon S. Matthew's Gospel, then all the huge City of Paris.
And as Justinian out of two thousand Authors reduced the body of the Civil Law
into a more near compendium: So it is, Lapide in Eccles. cap. 12.
that the Christians Library is the soonest furnished of all other; it requires
no more books but two; the one, the book of Gods Law, containing the Theory;
the other, the book of his own Conscience, which contains the practice of his
duty; And what a happy Student must he needs be in the School of Grace, that
keeps for himself a true Concordance out of them both.

The Worldlings Woe, and the Just Man's joy at the time of Death.
IF a poor Man that had all his wealth about him, Arthur Hildersam on Psalm. 51.
should fall into the hands of Thieves, and be robbed, and rifled by them, he
must needs cry out and take on pitifully; For alas, he is quite undone, he has
nothing left at home to succor him and his poor Family withal: But a Rich man
that has store of Money at home, safe locked up in his Chest (unless he be
some base, miserable wretch) will never complain much, or be disquieted, when
he has thirty or forty shillings taken from him: Thus for Worldlings to rage
and take on, when they must lose their life, or their Peace, or their Wealth,
it is no marvel; For alas, when these things are gone, they have nothing left,
they are at a desperate loss; but a Christian that knows and considers what he
is born unto, and what he shall enjoy when he comes home to his Heavenly
Fathers house, Philip. 1. 21.
he cares not though he be stripped out of all, here in this World, and
rejoices in Death that hastens him to a better possession.


IT is an usual term amongst those that be graduates in the University, Rob.
Wilkinson, A Marriage Sermon, 1616.
Respondebit prome Aristoteles, that Aristotle the eye of Nature, and heart of
Philosophy shall answer for them, and justify them in that wherein they cannot
otherwise so well stand by: Thus it is that we are but Vermiculi, poor creeping
Worms; nay Vernaculae, Vassals and slaves of Sin, Et quid caenum Caelo? How
shall we be able to answer the great God of Heaven and Earth? We have no other
Anchor-hold but this, Respondebit pro me Jesus, that Jesus our blessed Savior
will intercede and mediate for us, his Wisdom will answer for our Folly; his
Humility for our Pride; his Meekness for our C^u^lty; his Righteousness for
our sin and Wickedness.


AS the Earth, Michael Jermin on Ecclesiastes.
though it be made soft by those showers that fall upon it in the Winter time,
and bring forth a blade, some kind of visible appearance of the Seed, that is
cast into it, yet is it not thereby made fruitful unto Man; It never yeildeth
any good or perfect fruit, till it have received the sweet heat of the Sun into
the bowels of it in the Spring time: Even so is it with the heart of Man. Job
23. 16.
It may be and is often softened by the judgments of God and terrors of the Law,
Exodus 10. 16.
so that some beginnings of Goodness and Reformation may be wrought thereby,
as in Pharaoh and the wicked Israelites, and in many a wretched Man in the time
of his sickness; yet all this while there is but a little blade, Mal. 4. 2.
a very slender show of Grace, till such time as Jesus the Sun of
Righteousness, (like the comfortable and quickening heat of the spring) do
shine upon the Soul by justifying Faith, and then it does bring forth fruit
that is good indeed, and unto God acceptable.


COpernicus that thought the Earth moved, B. Duppa B. Sarum in Sermon. before the
King. 1648.
and the Heavens stood still, was not yet so mad as either to look for Trees in
Heaven, or Stars upon the Earth; And should not we think that Man to be either
directly mad, or grossly mistaken in his way, that should knock at a
Gravestone for a Companion, or go down into a Charnel-house to make merry: And
such are all they that quaerunt gaudium in loco non suo, that look for Joy in
the honors or pleasures of this World; For, What is Honor? Lies it not in the
breath of others? A thin Cabinet of air which every Man has a key to, but
himself; Let but them above him agree, not to think him Great, or Wise or
Noble; let but his fellow worms forbear to honor him, He that holds the Plow
shall not change joys with him; Look but upon the joy of the Voluptuous, Does
not sorrow often wait so close as to tread upon the heels of it? Nulla est
sincera voluptas.
The Epicure crying out of his gowt, even at that time when he is feeding his
disease with riot: The Israelites were struck with meat betwixt their teeth,
and Zimri slain in the embraces of his Cozbi; So that if a Man should share in
all the goodness that is under the Sun, it were at the best but Indolence, a
privation of grief, an acquiescence, a kind of resting of the Mind, no true joy
at all.


THere is a story of two Men that dwelt in a certain City, Nich. de Ly^a in
cap. 3. Genesis
the one very Covetous, the other very Envious; The Ruler therefore of the
place sent for them both, wishing them to desire what they would, and it should
be granted them, adding withal, that he who did ask first, should have his
asking granted, but the other should have the same doubled: The Envious Man
would not ask first that his Companion might not have more them himself; But
the Ruler pressing upon them to ask, the Envious Man desired, that one of his
eyes might be pulled out, -- Anerius rebus macrescit ^pimis. Horat. ep. 1.
that so his companion might lose both his eyes: Such is the destructive
quality and condition of Envy, and every Envious Man; Envy is the consumption
of the possessour of it; The Envious Man is he that foldeth his hands together,
and as a Man discontented for the contemtment which another has, ever studying
and plotting how he may bereave him of it; He it is that eats his own Flesh,
not sparing to hurt himself, that he may destroy him whom he hates.

Not to be dejected, though the Joy of the just be not perfect in this life.
AS Gold keeps the name in the leaf as well as in the wedge, Bryan Duppa B.
Sarum, ut antea.
in the coin as in the bullion; or as he that sees a beam or two shine through
the crevice of a Wall, may say, he sees the Sun shine, as well as he that walks
abroad: So neither are we so destitute of all comfort, as because the Earth is
not our Heaven, Gaudia principium nostri sunt saepe d^loris. Ovid. Met. 7.
to make it therefore our Hell; but we may say, there is a leaf of joy, the
Tinfoil of it here in this life, some few glimpses that shine in upon us; As
for the full, the solid, the Jubilating joy, it must not be looked for in this
Valley of tears; There is joy, but not here; true joy, but not yet; tarry till
the Harvest we must, then we shall reap in joy, when Heaven is our dwelling,
the Angels our partners, Incorruption our change, Immortality our garment; the
Earth is not the place of such joy, nor dull flesh the subject of it.

A little with Content, sufficient.
ABbot Macarius has a story of a certain Barber, who trimming for three pence
a piece, Ca^^ian. collat. 24. cap. 13.
had many Customers, and found his Estate to increase well thereby; but hearing
that in a City not far off, there was twelve pence given for trimming a Man, he
would needs go thither: but when he came and found it to be so, going to the
Market to buy provision for his Family, he found that to be so dear, that his
great hire for trimming went all away in Victuals, so that he had nothing to
lay up for old age, which made him to think himself better in the former place,
though his hire was less, and to conclude with the Wise Man, Better is an
handful with quietness, then both the hands full with travel and vexation of
Spirit. And certainly it is so; Eccles. 4. 6.
that a little, even no more then a Man can hold in the hollow of his hand,
being spread abroad, is better then much, which a Man holds in both his
hands, bended and folded to hold so much as they can: But then the little must
be a fulnes^e also, it must be an handful, plenitudo Volae quietis, the
fullness of the hand of quietness and content, Vivitur exigu^ melius: Natura
etc.
fully so much as shall be sufficient for needful and convenient occasions,
that want and distress may not disquiet the Spirit; And then in this sense, a
little gotten and possessed; where Content lays up the comfort of it, is
better then much, quod curae arrodunt, solicitudines imminuunt; the jovisance
whereof cares gnaw away, and troubles diminish; a little that the hand of
quietness and Content does reach out, than much fullness, which travel holds
ou^ with one hand, and Vexation with another.

For a Man to be sorry, that he cannot be sorry for Sin, is a part of Godly
sorrow for Sin.
THe Mother of Peter Lombard must needs be in a great strait, Bryan Duppa ^.
Sarum; A Sermon at the Isle of Wight* 1648.
when having transgressed her Vow of Continency, she told her Confessor
plainly, That when she saw what a Son she had brought forth, she could not
repent, that she had sinned in having him; A hard condition! but her Confessor
sadly answered her, Dole saltem quod dolere non possis, be sorry at least that
thou can not be sorry: And the like may be said to every troubled Soul, that
crying out for comfort, says; you tell me Heavenly things of Repentance, What
power a Religious sorrow has, that God himself is pleased therewith, but
Wretch as I am, I cannot sorrow; If one should tell me that all the joys of
Heaven were to be bought for one single tear, What is that to me if I cannot
shed it? Well, for thy comfort; If thou find but so much impression made as
to grieve really, that thou can not grieve; know that thou art already come
to a degree of that, which thou grievest thou art not come to; thy very being
sorry that thou can not be sorry is in some measure a true godly sorrow for
Sin.


Origin speaking of Moses embracing the Counsel of his Father in law, Homil.
11. in Exodus 18. 24.
says; Accepit consilium inferioris, ut forman humilitatis Principibus
populorum daret, He received the Counsel of an Inferior, that he might leave
to Rulers over people a pattern of Humility: And it is said of Amal^sentha
Queen of Italy, that being deprived of her Husband and Son together, and
joining her brother Theobald in the government of the Kingdom with her,
Cassiodor. var. lect. lib. 10.
she wrote thus to the S^nate of Rome; Exultate et factum nostrum supernis
commendate Virtutibus, etc. Rejoice and commend our action to the divine
Powers; We desire to do nothing that shall deserve reproof, who have chosen to
do all things by the advice of good Counsel; Vis Consilii expers mole ruit sua
Horat. carm. lib. 3.
A happy Princess and a more happy People under such a Government, yet both
Heathen! Be wise therefore, O ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth; For there is
nothing does make the actions of any to deserve reproof so much, as when
themselves in their actions refuse to be reproved, at leastwise by good
Council; To refuse admonition, is in none a greater folly then in a Ruler,
because it is in none more pernicious, to none more dangerous, more scandalous,
being worse then a poor Child that receives instruction, Eccles. 4. 13.


SIx times Eliah's servant looked toward the Sea, 1 King. 18. 44.
before he could see any thing, the seventh time he saw but a cloud no bigger
then his hand, yet that cloud within few hours covered the Heaven with
darkness, and the Earth with rain. Verse. 45.
Just so may be the case with many a Man when he is praying to his God, Judge.
1. 15. Bryan Duppa. B. Sarum ut antea.
as Calebs daughter did unto her Father, dedisti mihi terram aridam, etc. thou
have hitherto made me the owner of a dry, a barren heart, but give me now some
springs of water, some feeling at least, some sorrow for my Sins; Well, though
at six times bending of thy knees, O lachryma humilis! tua potentia, tribunal
Iudicii non veretur, etc. Hieron. in epist.
God does not grant it, and though at the seventh there appear but one small
drop swimming in thy eyes, yet be not discomforted, that drop may prove a
shower, the beginning of that thaw may at last dissolve the very heart to
water; or if not so, from the small drop, that spot of sorrow, there is made
(as the least piece of a broken glass may serve to reflect the face that is
before it) a reflection of true Repentance; And as there is full joy for the
total, In mag^is voluisse sat est.
the full conversion of a Sinner; so there is a proportion, a measure of joy
for one tear; nay, for one desire of a tear, of any one Sinner that repents.

Rash, inconsiderate Prayers, reproved.
IT is reported in the Moscovy Churches, Mascovit. Russorum etc. re^^gio, ritus
etc.
that if the Minister mistake in reading, or stammer in pronouncing his words,
or speak any word that is not well heard, the Hearers do much blame him, and
are ready to take the book from him, as unworthy to read therein: And God is no
less offended with the giddy, rash, precipitate, and inconsiderate Prayers of
many, who send their Petitions in post haste unto him; Whereas the Prophet
David says, Psalm 39. 3.
At last I spoke with my tongue; his tongue came after his heart; his words
came after long-looking; what he would say, what he should say: And it is the
advice of Solomon his Son, Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart
be hasty to utter any thing before God. Eccles. 5. 2.
Where he puts the mouth before the heart, when he forbids the rashness of
them because he would not have thee to put it before the heart in using of it;
not to tumble out thy words when thou speak unto God, but that they be
distinctly digested into order, understanding well what thou say, that
others may understand thee also.

Insensibility of Sin, the sadness thereof.
IT is reported, Bryan Duppa B. Sarum in a Sermon. before K. Charles at Isle Wight
1648.
That the Grecians had an Hill so high above that Region of the air, where
winds are bred, that he that had drawn his name in the ashes of the last years
Sacrifices, might at the next year of his return, find the letters unblown
away: But thou, O Man, whosoever thou art, if thy heart be so calmly seated,
that the Devil may at the same instant, read in the sluttish dust of it, the
Sins which long ago he wrote there, if no Thunder have cleared the air about
thee, or any wind scattered those guilty characters, if all be hushed,
Athaeneus lib. 12. cap. 6.
silence and sleep and rest about the Conscience (like the sad Country of the
Sybarites, where not so much as a Cock, the Remembrance of Saint Peter, was
left alive to trouble them); If so, know then, that so long as thou art thus
senseless of thy sins, that thy Soul is utterly benu^'d, thy God has given
thee over, he will not so much as favor thee with a frown, or bless thee with
his anger.

The Vanity of using many Words.
TErtullian expressing the nature of Dreams, says; Conspice gladiatorem sine
armis, Lib. de Anima cap. 45.
vel Aurigam sine curriculis, etc. Look but upon a Fencer without weapons, a
Coach-driver without his running Chari^t, acting and practicing all the
postures and feats of his skill; there is fighting, there is a stirring; but it
is an empty moving and gesturing, Notwithstanding those things do seem to be
done, which are not seen to be done; They are done in the acting of them, but
not in effecting any thing by them: So it is in many words, there is often much
Fencing, but no Weapons wherewith the Enemy is wounded; there is much running,
Tho. Turner Sermon. at Court. 1637.
but no Chariot that wins the race. Much seems to be said, but it is to as
much purpose, as if nothing were said, all is an empty moving of the tongue;
And if there be any matter of worth in the multitude of Words, -- Foliis
leviora caducis Verba. Ovid. Amor. 2.
it is but by chance, as when a blind Man shoots many arrows, perhaps one may
be near the mark; And so in the multiplying of many words* perhaps some there
may be which carry some weight, some matter with them; but usually in a
multitude of Words, th^re is no multitude of matter, and in the idle tossing of
many words, what can there be but a fullness of Folly, when a Fools voice is
known by them, Eccles. 5. 3.


ANytus a young Spark of Athens, Athaeneus Deipnosoph* lib. 12. Plutarch. in
Alcibiade.
came revelling into Alcibiades house; And as he sat at supper with some
strangers, he rose on a sudden and took away one half of his plate, the guests
stormed and took on at it; He bad them be quiet and told them, that he had
dealt kindly with him, since that he had left the one half, whereas he might
have taken the whole: So let no Man repine for that Friend, that Child which is
taken away by death, but be thankful to God for those that are left; He that
takes one, might as well (if he would) have taken all, All are in his hands,
and it is his great Mercy that he has left any at all.


HOmer in his Iliads has appointed unto Dreams two doors, Michael Jermin Com.
on Eccles. cap. 4.
the one a door of horn, which was the door of Truth; the other a door of Ivory
which was the door of deceit; For, Horn (as they say) may be looked through;
but Ivory being thick and dark is not transparent: These doors may very well be
applied to the mouths of men, which are as the Indexes and Tables of the Heart;
For to some it is a door of glass, which is soon broke open, and easily gives
pass to a Multitu^e of words, Modum verborum quibusdam tenere, difficile est.
Curt. lib. 6.
wherein the Folly of their hearts and minds is discerned; to others it is a
door of Brass, firm and solid in keeping in their words with more care and
circumspection, and showing the firm solidity of their hearts and minds.


SHould any of us have a Child, T. Gataker a Funeral Sermon. 1627.
an only son in France, Holland, or some such like place of distance abiding
there to learn the language, to see fashions or the like, and should hear that
the Country were all in an uproar, ready to fight on^ against another; What
course should we take in this case? should we not in all have write to have him
home, where he might be in more safety? In like manner does God with his people
that he has (as it were) at Nurse or at School here in this World; Alba
ligustra cadunt etc. Virgil.
When trouble and danger is toward those places, where they make their abode,
he calls for them away, he takes them home to himself, wh^r^ they are sure
to be safe, far out of Gun's shot, and free from touch or view of evil.


JAcobus Emissenus a famous writer and Tutor to Ephraem the learned Syrian,
Andr. Masius in cap. Ult. Josh. v. 32.
reports; that when Noah went into the Ark, he took the bones of Adam along
with him, and coming thence he divided them amongst his sons, giving the skull
to Shem his first born, saying; Let not this delivery from the Flood make you
secure, behold your first Parent, and the beginning of all Mankind; you must
all (Nati natorum et qui nascuntur ab illis, and all that come from you) go
unto the dust to him: Scrius aut citius sedem ^roperamus ad unam.
And without all doubt, All Men must dye, and lie down in the dust, they may
desire to stay long here in this valley of tears, and to live in this thin
shadow of Mortality, when by the course of Nature, they are driven on, and
carried out to their last home; the very increase of their life tends to a
decrease, Eccles. 6. 6.
till they meet all in one place, that which Adam has provided for all his
Posterity, and where himself being already laid, all shall be brought unto him.

How it is that the Sins of Parents are visited on their Children.
IT is reported of a Persian Emperor, Plu^arch.
Artaxerxes the long-handed, that for such faults as his Nobles and Captains
committed, he enacted; That whereas their hair was wont to be pulled, their
head^ tire or turbants should be so used; and for such offenses as their bodies
had been wont to be beaten, their robes should be publicly scourged: In like
manner God deals with men, when they offend of themselves, he punishes not
themselves always in their persons, but oft-times in their possessions, Job 1.
1^. Salvian de provident. lib. 3.
in their goods and chattels, and in their temporal estates; And if in their
possessions, no marvel, if in their children too, they being part of their
possessions, nay part of themselves, Witness that indulgent Master, Math. 15.
22.

Reproofs of a Wise Man, not to be slighted.
IT is storyed of Alexander the Great, Plutarch in vita.
that having had a Philosopher a long time with him, at length said unto him;
Recede ^ me prorsus, consortium tuum nolo, Be gone from me, I desire not thy
company; And being asked why, made answer; Quod quum tantopere mecum degeris,
etc. because having lived so long with me, thou have not reproved any vice in
me; For either thou have observed me not to err, which is a great argument of
Ignorance; because being a Man, I know my self to be exposed to many errors;
Or else, thou have known me to err, and have held thy peace, which is a proof
of thine unfaithfullnesse: It was the praise of that great Monarch thus to do,
and in this he jumped, even with the Preacher, Eccles. 7. 5. Dr. Jermin on
Ecclesiastes. Si merito objurga^erit te aliquis, Scilo quia pro^uit, etc. Se^.
in epist.
It is better to hear the Rebuke of the Wise Man, etc. It may be not so
pleasant, but sure it is better, and there is less hurt, and more good that
arises from it; There is in Reproof, a jarring and harsh Music, because it
opposes the fault that is committed, it disagreeth with the mind of him that
has committed it; but yet it sounds sweeter then the melodious songs of
flattering Parasites, who leading on to Wickedness, do lead into destruction.

Magistrates to be Men of Understanding.
HEraclitus being sick, Diog. Laert. in vita.
examined his Physician concerning the cause of his sickness; but finding that
he was ignorant thereof, he would take none of his Physic, saying; If he be
not able to show me the cause, he is less able to take away the cause of my
disease: Thus there are many sores and sicknesses in a Commonwealth, mill
nocendi arts, Sam. Garev Sermon. at Assiz^s Norfolk. 1623.
a thousand ways of cheating, the generality of Men is (as Ovid said of
Autolycus) furtum ingeniosus ad omne, witty in all kind of wickedness; ^ay,
mundus in maligno positus, the World is set upon Mischief. And such is the
subtilty too of Offenders, 1 John 5. 9.
that Tertullus his trim tale for the Jews goes current, till the Apostle comes
after him and unstarcheth it; Act. 24.
How easy is a fair glove drawn upon a foul hand? a bad cause smoothed over
with goodly pretenses? so cunning, so wary, and so wise are the Many, that (as
Caesar said of the Scythians) difficilius invenire quam interficere, it is
harder to find them then to foil them; Pl^n not. hist. lib. 9, cap. 29. Foelix
civitas ubi praeses est Philosophus. Arist, Rhet. 2.
like the Fish Sepia, they can hide themselves in their own mud, cover
themselves close in their own devices; The Magistrate then, that Physician of
the body-Politick, had need to be Wise and learned, to get and keep that (...)
one ear open for the defendant, to be a Man of great experience, (...), and
judgment, to catch all such with the hooks of Justice, who are crafty and
slippery to avoid them, and by this means take away the causes of Corruption.


IT is said of Alexander the great, Plutarch in vita.
that being about to destroy Lampsacum, an eminent Port-town in Bithinia,
Anaximenes the Philosopher, and his former Master, being a Native of the place
came to meet him, and to entreat him in the behalf thereof; which being
foreseen by Alexander, He swore that he would not do that which Anaximenes
should ask him: Whereupon Anaximenes told him, That which I desire is, that
thou would destroy Lampsacum; Now Alexander being so taken by his word, for
the reverence of his Oath, did not destroy the place: Most Noble was it in this
great Man to keep his Oath, and necessary is it for all inf^riours to keep
theirs; For an Oath is not a slight business, although it be despised, Phil.
de ^ecalogo
because Men are accustomed thereunto; namely, being the testimony of God
concerning things doubtful, -- Tantum perjuria vita. Ovid. 1. Amor.
and therefore to cite God as the Witness to a Lie, must needs be a foul
Wickedness and horrible Impiety.


IT is said of Hippocrates the famous Physician, Soranus, in vita.
that he was never seen to be in choler with any Man; And that he had many
Scholars, yet permitted none to practice, before they had taken an Oath at the
Altar of Apollo, to abbreviate the cure of all diseases to the utmost of their
power: A good President for Physicians then, and a good Pattern for Lawyers now
to dispatch their Clients cause with expedition, Sam. Garey, ut antea.
not to spin out time in the suit donec evacuata Marsupia, till all their Money
is gone. In the Jewish Commonwealth, Judgment ^ea^s were placed in the gates
of the Cities, Ruth. 4. 2. intimating quick dispatch, that causes should not
depend so long, as to become aged and gray headed in Courts, lest they force
the poor Client to say unto his Lawyer as Balaams Ass did to his Master, Am
not I thine Ass which thou have ridden upon, since thy first time till this
present day, Numb. (...). 30?


IT is reported of Constantine, Caes. Baronii annals, an^o Ch^is^i. 324.
that being spoken to by many to punish some who had thrown stones at his
Image, saying that with the stones they had bruised all his face; he wiping his
Face with his hand, and smiling with his Countenance, gave them this answer;
Ego ver^ vulnus nusquam in front factum video, etc. I do not feel any hurt
about me; or any wound made in my face, but my head is sound, and all my body
likewise. Plainly, so it is with them that keep the Commandments of God, all
the evil which the Devil or any wicked man can work or do against them, it is
but like an evil done to their Pictures, they feel it not. Eccles. 8. 5.
For how should they feel evil, to whom all things work together for their
good? It is true, they may know sorrow, but not so to know it as to take care
for it; -- Est ipsis injuria passis Utilis interdum. Ovid. in epist.
they may find the dealings of Wicked Men to be evil, but they shall not much
feel the evil of them; Nay they shall receive much good for the evil that
they suffer; For, as it is an exercise of their Patience, so shall it be the
increase of their glory.

Goodness not Greatness, that holds out to the last.
WHen a wealthy Merchant bragged to Lycon a Wise Philosopher, D. Laertius
of the multitude of his great Ships, and Furniture for Sea, being able to
trade into all parts, Jos. Shute Sermon. at S. Mary woln^^h, Land. 1626.
the Wise Man made this answer; I esteem not that to be Felicity, which hangs
upon ropes and cables: Thus, when a Man is at the last cast, it is Piety and
the true fear of God, not plenty and Prosperity (which are tra^sitory) that
shall stand a Man in stead; Non amo illam fortunam rudenti^us ap^am
The smoke of a Great Man's sacrifice, smells never the sweeter before God,
because he is clothed in silk, or like the Bird of Paradise adorned with
pl^mes and fine Feathers; No it is the inside that God regards, He looks on
Man's obedience requires his service, loves his thankfulness, respects his
holiness, and will reward his Faithfulness.

How it comes to pass, that Death is more generally excused then accused.
IT was a Fable amongst the Ancients in former times, Imagini de gli. Dei d'
Antichi per Cartari.
that God appointing to every thing it is office and function, he gave order
unto Death to take away the lives of Men; but Death refused the employment, and
gave this reason, because he should be by every one accused, They would all be
ready to say, that he had killed them; No, says God, they shall all be forward
to excuse thee; Nay then, says Death; let me alone to undertake the service:
Hence it comes to pass, that of such a one we say, He died because he was an
old Man; of another, because he was intemperate in his diet; of a third,
because he was careless of his Health; a fourth, might have been a living Man,
had he not gone such a journey by land, or such a Voyage to Sea, so that with
one thing or other, Death that Prince of terrors, though he have his name in
Latin Mors, a mordendo, yet he is more generally excused by all Men, then
accused by any.

A Minister to keep close to his Text.
THe Poet was witty, Sam. Garey. Sermon. at Norfolk Assizes 1623.
who made this fiction; A Client having fee'd his Lawyer, to plead for the
recovery of his two Hogs: His Counselor tells him, it should be his first
motion, and so steps to the bar, and there makes a long Oration so far from the
matter, that the poor Client thinking he had been upon another business, pulls
him by the sleeve, saying; Domine jam age de Porcis, Sir, now plead for my
Hogs: This is a great fault in Lawyers* that many times in their Pleadings they
are so far from the matter, that neither Judge nor Jury can well tell what to
make of it; But the like may be said of some bold Ignaroe's, such as in the
Pulpit after they have repeated the Text, shake hands with it, and so part,
never coming at it again, In ventum verba proferunt, their discourse i^ like
wind. Job 6. 26. Act. 27. 14.
And yet the people are much taken with these Euroclydons, Men of more tongue
then Judgment; O, says one, He is a very ready Man, he was never out, and
that is true, For he was never in; O says another, He never looked on his book;
And that is as true; His Tutor (if he had one) could never get him look upon
any; It were therefore to be wished, that as the Lawyer was advised to come to
the point; so he, to keep close to his Text.


IT is written of Alexander, that having heard of Paradise, and that it was
upon the Earth, he was very eager in seeking of it out, and to that end coming
into the East part of the Earth, an old Man meeting with some of his Soldiers,
bad them to tell Alexander, Quint. Curtius.
that he sought Paradise in vain. For the way to Paradise was the way of
Humility, which he did not take; But, says he, take this stone and carry it to
Alexander, and tell him, that from this stone he shall tell what he is: Now the
stone was a precious stone, and of such a quality that whatsoever thing was
weighed with it, that was still the heavyer, only if it were covered with
dust, then it was as light as straw: The meaning of the thing did easily
appear, as showing Alexander and all others in power like unto him, that though
in their lives they outweigh others by greatness of their Authority, Mors
sceptra ligonibus aequat.
yet that in Death all their greatness signifies as much as comes to nothing,
and then they weigh as light as any other, they may forbid things by the Laws
of their Nations, but they cannot banish Death by any Law they can make; they
may dispatch away their Ambassadors to treat with Men, but not with Death;
they may send out their Military forces to withstand their Enemies, but they
cannot resist Death, Eccles. 8. 8.


SEleucus that impartial Lawgiver of the Locrians, made a Law against
Adulterers, In Cham. tom. 2 operum.
that whosoever should be found guilty thereof, Exocularetur (they are the
words of Reverend Bid) should have his eyes put out; It so happened that his Son
proved the first offender, sentence was pronounced, execution ready to be done;
Par^^re subjectis et debellare superbos Virgil.
Whereupon the People^ submissis precibus rogitabant, etc. earnestly entreated
the Judge his Father that he would pardon the fact; Who, upon serious
deliberation, put out one of his own eyes, and one of his Sons, and so showed
himself, pium Patrem, et severum Iudicem, a Godly Father and an upright Judge
together: Jer. Leech Sermon. at S. Mary le Bow. Land. 1627.
Thus it is that Magistrates, like the Earth, should be immovable, though the
Winds should blow at once from all the points of the Compass; not to favor
Friends, nor fear the frowns of enemies, but proceed impartially according to
the merits of the cause that is before them, Prove. 18. 5.


THere is a Relation of Alexander the great, Plut^rch Apoph.
that as he went on conquering the World, coming near some Wise men, he called
them unto him; and upon asking them some questions, he found them to be Wise
men indeed. He bad them to ask some gifts of him, and they should have them;
Whereupon one of the Philosophers said, We desire of thee certain Immortality;
At which Alexander laughing, said; I accounted you to be Wise men, but now I
perceive you to be ignorant. I cannot give that unto myself; How can I then
give it unto you? Are you Mortal then, say they unto him? I am, said he; Then,
replied they, Why do thou disturb the whole World, seeking the dominion of
it, as if thou were Immortal? Thus it is, -- Rigidum jus est, et inevitabile,
mortis, Ovid. ad Iiviam.
that the greatness of Kings, Princes and Rulers of the Earth, may do great
things at home and abroad, may protect others from dangers imminent but cannot
give themselves a supersedeas from Death approaching. They are said to be like
tumbling Seas, whose boiling, swelling, overflowing waves bring terror and
trouble to all that are near them; But God has said unto them, Hither shall ye
come and no further, here shall your proud waves be staid, here in the midst of
your march (be it never so fierce) shall the wheels of your Charriots be
knocked off, and here in the ruff of all your greatness shall Death arrest
you.

Marriage not to be made for Money only.
THere was a Rich Man in Athens, which had a daughter to marry, and he asked
counsel of Themistocles, A Marriage Sermon. 1632. per Anonym.
how to bestow her, telling him that there was a very honest Man that made suit
unto her, but he was poor; And there was a Rich Man, which did also defire her,
but he was not Honest; Themistocles answered, that if he were to choose, he
would prefer Monilesse Men, before Masterlesse money; Virum po^^us pecunia
indigentem, etc.
Intimating thereby, that Marriage is not to be contracted for Money only; yet
the question is now, with what money, not with what honesty, the party (whom
they seek) is endowed whether they be rich, not whether they be godly; What
lands they have on Earth, not what Inheritance they have in Heaven; It is dos
not Deus, all is good enough if there be goods enough, it is Money that makes
the Match; But let such know, that as their Money wastes, so their love
wears, neither is there any Love or Friendship constant, but that which is
grounded on constant causes, such as Virtue and Godliness which will hold out
to the last.

The day of the last Judgment, a terrible day.
THere is a story of two Soldiers that coming to the Valley of Iehosaphat in
Judea, Rob. Holcor. in lib. Sap.
and one saying to the other, Here in this place shall be the general
Judgment, Wherefore I will now take up my place where I will then sit, and so
lifting up a stone, he sat down upon it, as taking possession beforehand: But
being sat, and looking up to Heaven, such a quaking and trembling fell upon
him, that falling to the Earth, Dies irae dies illa etc. Manilius.
he remembered the day of Judgment with horror and amazement ever after: And to
say truth, so fearful and terrible, shall be the appearance of that day, that
our Savior in some sort describing the same, says; that then the powers of
Heaven shall be shaken: Math. 24. 29. Sermon. in feria 6. Parasc^^.
de Angelis hoc dicit (says S. Augustine) Christ here speaks of the Angels,
that trembling and great fear shall surprise them; so that if those glorious
spirits shall tremble at the horror of that day, who being guilty of no sin,
shall not then be judged, How shall poor Martals stand amazed, especially the
wicked, whose Judgment and condemnation shall then be pronounced.

The benefit of History.
Lucius Lucullus being appointed Captain General over the Roman Forces against
Mithridates, Praefat. ad vitam Pluta^chi.
had not great experience, or knowledge in War, but only what he had gotten by
reading History, yet proved a discreet and Valiant Commander, and vanquished at
that time two of the greatest Princes in the East. Thus it is that History is,
and may be the director of meanest Men in any of their actions, how others have
behaved themselves upon several occasions, and what has followed thereupon;
Hist^riae Utilitas est magna foelicitatem participat etc. Diodor. Si^ul. lib.
1. de ^abul^sis g^stis.
It is a trusty Counselor of State, by whose advice and direction, a
Commonweal may be framed, governed, reformed, and preserved; an Army may be
ordered, Enemies vanquished, and Victory obtained; In it, as in a glass we see
and behold Gods providence guiding and ruling the World, and Men's actions which
arrive often at unexpected events, and even some times reach unto such ends as
are quite contrary to the Actor's intentions; It is a punisher of Vice,
presenting aged Folly, Joh. Crompton Marriage-Sermon. 1632.
green and fresh to Posterity; not suffering Sin to dye, much less to be
buried in Oblivion; It is also a Re^arder of Virtue, reserving worthy deeds for
Imitation; A good Work, though it dye in doing is a Reward to it self, yet that
some dull Natures might be stirred up the more, and all benefited by seeing
gracious steps before them, this only is exempted by a firm decree from the
stroke of Death, to live in History.


IT is said of Moses and Joshua, Mich. Jermin on Eccles. chapter 7.
that when they were coming down from the Mountain, and heard a noise in the
Camp, Joshua said; There was a noise of War; Exodus 32. 17.
But Moses said, the noise of them that sing do I hear. Here was now great
difference of these two great Men's Judgments; but the reason was, that Joshua
being a Martial man, therefore judges the noise to be a noise of War; but
Moses being a Man of Peace, judges the noise to be a noise of Peace, each of
them judging according to their several dispositions: Hence is that of the
Philosopher, Qualis quisque est, tales existimat alios, Aristot. polit. lib. 3.
cap. 6.
such as every one is, the same he thinks others to be, measuring of other
Men's actions by his own bushel; The Lascivious Man thinks others to be
lascivious, The Covetous person thinks others to be Covetous, the Fool thinks
every Man to be as arrant a Wise man as himself, August. in Psalm 118. Conc. 12.
hoc proclivius suspicatur in alio, etc. Every Man readily suspects that of
another, which he finds in himself.


THere is a story of one Pambo, Euripid.
that on a time looking out at a Window, and perceiving a Woman to spend a
great deal of time in trimming her self, fell a weeping; And being demanded the
cause, answered; Have not I a great cause to weep, to see yonder poor creeping
worm, consume so long time in decking and adorning her poor Earthly carcass to
the sight of Man, Jame^ Forsith Sermon. at S. Paul's 1617. O Anima Christiana,
evigila, etc. August. de doct. Christ.
and I spend so small time in preparing my Soul for God? But were this Man
alive now, he would do nothing else but lament, and take on to see how people
of all sorts from the highest to the lowest, are taken up with high thoughts of
their bodies, little thinking of their Souls, Men and Women trifling out whole
days inter pectinem et speculum in finifying of their Fantastical Phis^omies,
and not bestowing one hour in smoothing and rectifying of their most precious
Souls.


THere is mention made of some Mountains, Cassiodori var. lect.
called Montes Lactarei, the milky Mountains, on which the Beasts that feed, do
give such nourishing milk, that Men's bodies, (though much consumed away) do
thereby, not only receive strength and health, but fatness also, whereas the
beasts themselves are exceeding lean; so that after a wonderful manner the
beasts do not profit by that grass, by which the bodies of Men come on and
prosper; they go up and down near the thickets of the Mountains meagre and
thin, and as it were, sustaining the condition of those who are healed by them:
Like to these beasts should Charity make every one of us, Si doles, condoleo
etc. Bernard de consolat, etc. Catena Grae. Pat. in Eccles. 11. 2.
that as we comfort the Poor with the milk that we give them, the relief that
we afford them, and that when we bestow our Alms, it should be cum sympathia et
lacrymis, with tears and sympathy of grief, as having a Fellow-feeling with
them, and bearing part of their distressed burden, so that as passion wringeth
tears from them, Compassion should do the like from us.

Folly to repent the choice of a Wife, Marriage being once past.
WHen Caesar was to pass Rubicon against Pompey, Lucan.
he left the Land with this Resolution That a Man could be undone but once: As
it is in the government of a Commonweal, or in the ordering of an Army, Non
licet in bello bis peccare, a Commander can err but once (which is a miserable
happiness) overthrow and ruin following so close, he cannot have leisure to
be twice faulty: So oftentimes it falls out in the choice of a Wife, Joh.
Crompton, A Wedding Sermon, 1632.
Men have not leave to change often; once blessed or cursed, must be for ever so;
for better or worse during life, What is tied by the tongue cannot be untied by
the hands. It will be good therefore for Men to look before they leap, to be
very wary in the point of Wiving, For if they marry they know not whom, they
may (for ought any Man knows) mend their choice they know not when.

Charity attended by the certainty of Reward.
When Alexander set forward upon his great exploits, Plutarch in vita.
before he went from Macedonia, he divided amongst his Captains and Friends all
that he had; For which when one of his Friends reproved him, saying, that he
was prodigal, because he had reserved nothing for himself; the answer which
Alexander gave, was this, that he had reserved much unto himself; namely, Hope
of the Monarchy of the World, which by the valor and help of those his
Captains and Nobles he hoped to obtain: In charitate pauper est dives, fine
charitate, etc. August. de laud charitat.
And thus surely, He that gives to the Poor may seem to be Prodigal, yet in
respect of the hope that he has of Profit, he is frugally Wise; Neither is his
hope such as Alexander's was, which depended on the uncertainty of War, but
such as is grounded upon the certainty of Gods Word, Prove. 19. 17.

Ministers to be careful in reproving Sinners.
IT is written of Domitian the Emperor, Suetonius in vita.
that a boy holding for a mark a far off, his hand spread abroad with the
fingers severed, he shot his arrows so artificially, that every arrow did hit
on the empty spaces betwixt the Fingers, and that not any one Finger received
damage thereby: Such must be the care of every Faithful Minister of Gods word,
how he shoots his arrows, how he places his words, Ad sit Regula peccatis,
quae poenas erog^t aequas. Horat.
especially in the matter of reproving Sin, so that the empty spaces thereof,
and which by Sin are made empty of all goodness, may be hit and wounded; but
that he leave the Hand and Fingers, that is the mind and desire of working and
doing well, not wronged, nor impaired; Whilst he fisheth* for Men's Souls, Greg.
de cura past. cap. 10.
he must have a great care how he baits his hook, too harsh an Increpation
(like an Axe that flies from the handle) may kill a Saint, when it should only
cut down the Sinner; Reproof being irksome to humane Nature, a violent and
fierce manner in the using of it, will much hinder the good success that
should come thereby.

Uncertainty of Worldly things.
IT is written of Sesostris, a King of Egypt, that he had his Coach drawn by
four Kings, Paul. Diaconus de reb. Romans lib. 17. Fallax est hic mundus, finis
dubious, etc. Pet. Blesens.
which he had lately overcome in battle, and one day perceiving one of them to
look often back, demanded the reason, why he did so, who returned answer; I do
behold and observe that part of the wheel which was lowest, becomes by and by
the highest, and the highest, lowest; Cogito de mutatione Fortunae, etc. I note
the instability of things in this World, etc. And most true it is, that the
World is at no certain, now up now down, and the things thereof now here, anon
there, so that nothing is stable under the Sun; Honors, preferments, Riches,
strength, beauty, parts, all momentany and uncertain, subject to alteration;
Greg. moral. lib. 33. cap. 7.
Nay, Life it self, like to the waters in the River, quae velut a fontis sui
origin, rising from the Fountain to the height, falls into the Mare mortuum
of Death, and never returns again.


WHen the holy things belonging to the Sanctuary, Numb. 4. R. Sibb's Sermon. at
Grayes-Inne, 1630.
were to be removed. God commands Aaron and his Sons, that there should be a
special care had to cover them all over, lest in the journey, dust should any
way soil them: In like manner, such as are the Children of God, and vessels of
Mercy, ut teipsum serves non expergisceris? Horat.
belonging to his Sanctuary, must walk circumspectly, and it must be their
great care, while they are in the way of this life, that they be covered close
with a diligent Watchfulness; otherwise the dust of Sin, or the pollution of
some uncleanness will easily fasten unto them, and braid even the best of
their performances.


A Man that walks in a great mist, James Forsith, A Sermon at S. Paul's, 1617.
or some thick Fog, cannot perceive whence it comes, nor whither it goes; but
if he go up to the top of some high hill, or Mountain next adjoining, he shall
soon discern, that it is nothing but a vapor, arising from the cranies and
intrails of the Earth, thickning in the clouds and vanishing in the air: Quod
sine miserabili gemi^u d^cendum non est, etc. Bern. super Cant.
And thus it is, that so long as the Earthly minds of covetous worldly men, are
overshadowed with the darkness of Ignorance, and thickened with a greedy desire
of wordly things, they cannot see, perceive, nor understand the things that are
of God, nor the Vanity and frail^y of the Creature; but if they would take a
turn or two on the top of Mount Sion, and be Lifted up in their minds with holy
Meditation, they would soon perceive, that all things of this life are
sublunary, and proceed from the bowels of the Earth, and that all the glory of
the World must pass away and come to nothing.


IN the time of the Law, the Nazarite was not only commanded to abstain from
Wine and strong drink, but he also might not eat Grapes, whether moist or dry,
Numb. 6. 34.
nor any thing that was made of the Vine-tree, from the kernels to the very
husk. Strange! that such small things as these in which there could be no
appearance of danger, Will Artersol in loc.
should be forbidden! yet not so strange as true; lest by the contentment of
these, they might be drawn to the desire of Wine, and so be carried on to Sin:
Thus, the remote occasion was forbidden to show how careful every one should
be to avoid the least occasion of Sin; hence is that Prayer of David, Remove
from me the way of Lying. By, the way, meaning the o^casion of Sin; Psalm. 119.
And Heathen Seneca could say, Q^antum possumus a lubrico recedamus, etc.
Epist. ad Lucillum.
As much as we can, let us keep our selves from slippery places, for even on
dry ground, it is not very strongly that we stand.


AVicen writes, Lib. 8.
that in the Country of Chaldea, there are many Rivers, and that the Heart being
almost hunted down, makes to the River side, and being not able to pass* ^oeth
to the first Man he sees, brayes and weeps to him for relief, and so is taken;
Which let every Christian man learn to follow this example, that seeing himself
beet with innumerable Enemies, wearied with the burden of Sin, Passio tua,
Domine Jesus, ultimum est refugium, Bern. in Cant.
and as it were overwhelmed with a deluge of sorrow and distress, turn to the
Man Jesus, who is able and willing to deliver him from all dangers imminent and
incumbent, who is the only shelter in time of trouble and affliction.

A Rich Man pleading Poverty, condemned.
ALexander the fifth, Mich. Jermin. exposit. on Ecclesiast. chapter 7.
Pope of Rome, said of himself, That when he was a Bishop, he was Rich; when a
Cardinal, poor; and when a Pope, a very beggar: And plainly, so it is in these
strait-laced times of ours with too many wretched Rich men; who the Richer they
are, the more wretched they are; as their store is enlarged, their Charity is
contracted; such as having a M^le in their Flock, sacrifice to the Lord a
corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14.
such as ride on Horses with golden chains, lie on beds of Ivory, eat of the
fattest, and cloth with the softest, yet when they come to the matter of
Charity, Prove. 13. 7. Magnas inter opes inops. Horat.
to the relief of the Poor, pauperrimis redduntur pauperiores, they plead
Poverty and make themselves more Poor then the poorest.

Magistrates to be active Examples of good unto others.
IT is said in the praise of Moses, that he was a mighty Man both in word and
deed; Act. 7. 22. Sermon. before P. Cha^ls at S. James's, 1622.
not mighty in word only, as many Governors are to command strongly; but
mighty also in deed, to do it accordingly. As Tully reports of Julius Caesar,
that he was never heard saying to his Soldiers, Ite illuc, Go ye thither, as
if they should go into service, and he to stay behind in the Tent; but venite
huc, Come ye hither, Let us give the onset, and adventure our lives together; A
great encouragement for the Soldier to follow, when he sees his Captain march
before! Quicunque proprium corpus subegerit, etc. Ambros. super illud Psalmi,
Anima mea in manibus, etc.
Thus it is, that if the Magistrate will persuade the People to any thing, he
must show the experience of it first in himself; Or if he will command the
People any thing, he must do it first upon and by himself, otherwise if he
exact one thing, and do another, it will be said that he is like a Water-man,
that rows one way, and looks another.

Sin, the destruction of any People or Nation whatsoever.
SEragastio, a servant (in one of Plautus Comedies) asking another, Ut munitum
tibi visum est oppidum? Plautus ex Persa.
How does the Town seem to be sortified? The answer given was this, Si Incolae
been sint morati, pulch^e munitum arbitror, If the Inhabitants be well governed
and good, I think it to be well fortified: And then reckoning up many Vices, he
concludes; haec nisi inde aberunt, etc. unless these be absent, an hundred
walls are but little enough for the preservation of it: And to say truth, such
is the destructive Nature of Sin, that it will level the walls of the best and
most polite Governments whatsoever; so that it is no more the walls and
Bullwarks, the secret Counsels, the subtle contrivements, the valor of the
Soldiery, or the greatness of Commanders, will be guard sufficient to a
Nation or People, unless Sin, that is, reigning, beloved Sin, be first removed.

Magistrates not to be guilty of that which they do forbid in others.
ALexander the great Conqueror took one Dyonides a Pyrate upon the Sea, and
asked him, Plutarch.
Quid sibi videretur, ut Mare infestum faceret? What he meant in that manner to
trouble the Sea? Sermon at S. James's before P. Charles, 1622.
The Pyrate answered him boldly and truly; Yea, What do you rather mean to
trouble the World? but because I rob and steal in a small Cock-boat, which you
do in a great and Roya^^ Navy, I go for a Pyrate, and you for an Emperor: And
when it is thus with the Magistrates in a Nation or Commonweal, Turpe est
doctori, etc.
when they punish that Sin in others, whereof themselves are notoriously
guilty; though no Man dare speak, yet every Man will matter; And Socrates will
laugh, because he sees Magnos latrones ducentes parvos ad suspendium, the great
Thieves leading the little ones to the Gallows.


IT is S. Augustine's instance of One, Enarrat. in Psalm. 92.
that considering himself to be cast into Prison, and there to be careful to
do the works of Righteousness, whilst he that laid him there, lay wallowing
in the abundance of outward Pleasures and delights, though he lived in all kind
of excess in Sin; the consideration whereof caused him to vent such or the
like expressions, Deus! quare tibi servio? etc. O God, Job. 21. 7. Mal. 3. 15.
why do I serve thee? Why do I obey thy voice? I think the Wicked please thee,
and that thou love those that work Iniquity: Such a Spirit as this has from
time to time possessed the best of the Sons of Men; but David came off well,
Psalm. 92. 5. 2 Samuel 30. 16.
when he said; O Lord, how great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep.
Deep indeed! so deep, that no humane plummet can fathom such a bottom, as that
the Wicked should flourish, Psalm. 37. 1.
and the Godly suffer tribulation; yet by way of direction, let us not suffer
our selves to be seduced with the Felicity of the Wicked, not to be taken with
the flower of the grass, nor gaze so much upon them who are happy for a time,
and (it may be) eternally miserable.


SAmuel was not in his Mothers keeping, S. Price Sermon. at White Hall, 1619.
but in the custody of the high Priest, much better sure then in his Mothers;
yet see how Motherly affection works; For, though he wanted neither meat nor
clothes, yet lest too much wind should blow upon him, she makes and brings him
every year a little coat, 1 Samuel 2.
and she goes up every year to Shiloh to offer Sacrifice; yea, and withal, to
sacrifice a little to her eyes, that is, to see Samuel too; For if the Son be
but a little missing, as out of sight, Sisera's Mother looks and looks out at a
Window, and Why ^arry the wheels of his Chariot, Judge. 5. 18. 2 Kings 4. 20.
and why is his Chariot so long a coming? If he be sick, then the Shunamite
sets him upon her knee; But if the Son be dead and gone, then a voice is heard
in Ramah, Rachel weeping for her Children, and will not be comforted. So dear
and tender is an only Son in the sight of his Mother: Men are said to abound
in Reason, but Women in Affection; such as flaming out like Fire cannot be
concealed, out it must like Solomon's Mothers, What my Son, and what the Son of
my Womb, and what O Son of my desires! As if she had said, O thou my Son, whom
once I bare in my womb, and whom I ever bear in my heart, born of my body by
course of Nature, but still unborn by strength of Love; The Father says, Luke
15. 31.
Son, thou art ever with me: but the Mother says, Son, thou art ever within
me; such and so great is the power of Motherly love and affection.


WE read in the Prophet Esaias of the S^raphins standing about the Throne of the
Lord, and that each of them had six wings; that with twain the Cherub covered
the face of God, with twain his feet, and with twain he did fly; Origines
exp^sit. in Isaiam, cap. 6. 2.
intimating (as one well notes on the p^ace) that with twayn they covered his
face, the face of God, not their own face; with two wings they covered his
feet, not their own feet; They covered his face, his beginning being unknown;
they covered his feet, his end being incomprehensible, only the middle are to
be seen; the things which are, whereby there may be some glimmering knowledge
made out, What God is. Thus as the Wiseman has it, That which is a^ar off, and
exceeding deep, Eccles. 7. 24.
Who can find it out? Who can find out, What God is? The knowledge of him a
priori is so far off, that he whose arm is able to break even a bow of steel,
is not able to reach it; so far off, that he who is able to make his nest with
the Eagle, is not able to fly unto it; Deus res quaedam est captu et venatu
difficilis, etc. Clem. Alex. Strom, lib. 2.
And so exceeding deep, that he who could follow the Leviathan, could not
faddom it; that he who could set out the center of the Earth, is not able to
find it out. And who then is able to reach it? In a word, so far of^, and so
deep too, that the depth says, It is not in me: And the Sea says, It is not
with me: deep to Men and Angels, as exceeding the capacity of both; Augustine.
de fide, contra Arrianum, cap. 6.
Insomuch, that S. Augustine says, making out the question; What God is? gives
this answer, Certe hic est de quo et quum dicitur non potest dici, etc. Surely,
such a one is he, who when he is spoken of, cannot be spoken of; who, when he
is considered, cannot be considered of; who, when he is compared to any thing,
cannot be compared; and when he is defined, grows greater by defining of him.

Parents to be careful in the Instruction of their Children.
THough Solomon was dear and tender in the eyes of his Parents, Prove. 31.
Sermon at Court* per Ignotum, 1619. Genesis 18.
yet they did not cocker him up, but taught him what he should do, and what he
should not do. God knew that Abraham would teach his Children. Alexander's
Father provides Aristotle to be his Tutor; And Theodosius finds out Arsenius to
be his Son's Schoolmaster: Thus it is, that good and careful Parents have from
time to time been careful to have their Children well instructed, ever whetting
the Law upon their hearts, and seasoning their tender years with Religious
Principles. O! but there is a love in too too many Parents, a doting love,
which teaches nothing; and there is a government in Parents, which looseneth
all the reins, Parents qui recte liberos suos instituunt, etc. Laert. in vita
Aristotel.
and suffers to riot and excess; And there is a pity in Parents, a Foolish
pity, which pardons all, and punishes nothing, till God come with the sword
of his Judgment, as he did to the Sons of Eli, and kill where the Parents leave
uncorrected; A strange love to kill their Children with too much kindness! But
good careful Parents truly love their Children; and to prove that love, they
teach them, as thinking them much better unborn then untaught.

Fervency in Prayer, the prevalency thereof.
IT is observed of S. Augustine, De visitat. Infirmorum, lib. 2.
That coming as a Visitant to the house of a sick Man, he saw the room full of
Friends and Kindred, who were all silent, yet all Weeping, the Wife sobbing,
the Children sighing, the Kinsfolks lamenting, all mourning; The good Father
suddenly uttered this short ejaculatory Prayer, Domine quas preces exaudis, si
non has? Lord, What Prayers do thou hear, Iam. 5. 16.
if not these? And certainly, It is the fervent effectual Prayer that avails
much. It is Zeal that puts the heart into a good temper, and apts it for
motion, which cannot be without an heat, it feathers the wings of Prayer, and
makes it fly swift into Heaven: Nullum Deo tale est sacrificium quam Zelus,
etc. Greg. homil. in Ezekiel.
Well may Prayer be the weapon with which we fight and struggle with God; but
Zeal is that which sets an edge upon devotion, and makes it prevalent; hence
are those usual Phrases of crying, wrestling, and striving with God, all which
argue an holy importunity, and sacred violence unto Heaven.


THe Earth brings forth fruit of it self, but first the blade, then the ear,
after that the full corn on the ear. Ma^k 4. 26. J. Ge^ha^dus in Locis Com. de
Lege. Ioh. 12. 14.
So did the blade or herb spring out of the Law of Nature; the ear or culm, in
the Law written; but we have in the Gospel, the pure grain or full corn, which
is Christ Jesus. Therefore as the stalk or ear, are of necessary use till the
corn be ripe; but the corn being ripe, we no longer use the chafe with it; So
till Christ was exhibited in the Flesh, which lay hidden in the blade and spike
of the Law, the Ceremonies had their use; but since that by his death and
passion, this pure wheat is threshed and wi^nowed, and by his Ascension laid up
in the garner of Heaven, they are of no further use: Gal. 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 15.
The Jews were taught by those shadows that the body should come, and we know
by the same shadows that the body is come; The Arrow moves, Col. 2. 14.
whilst it flies at the mark, but having hit the mark, rests in it: So the
Law which did level, and shoot at Christ with so many moveable signs and
Sacraments, does (as one may say) cease from her motion of practicing them any
more, having attained to her full end in Christ Jesus.


IT is the fashion of some vainglorious, Sam. Torshell Sermon. of Humiliat.
Braggadochia-Courtiers, that when they go down into the Country, they do
nothing but talk of what Friends they have in Court, what power they have with
the Lord Protector, the Council of State, the Lords Commissioners, etc. filling
their mouths with the names of greatness and eminency; whereas indeed, they
have neither command, nor the least of power to do any good, where they most
pretend it. Such are all Carnal, Plerumque minima possunt, qui plurima Jactant,
Thryverus.
unregenerate Men, let their pretenses be never so specious, and their
discourses never so Heavenly, they have no interest with God, no encouragement
to appear before him, no knowledge or acquaintance in the Court of Heaven, and
therefore no confidence to be helpful or serviceable to the place or
Commonweal wherein they live.


THere is a dangerous Harbor in our Seas (as Mariners say) at whose mouth is
the Goodwin; Aurigarii speculum Nauticum.
out of which the Pilot cannot make forth, but he must strike upon the sands,
unless he so steer his Ship, that he bring two steepls, which stand at a
distance, so eeven in his sight, that they may seem to be but one. And
doubtless, we cannot come to true happiness without the Knowledge of God
through Faith in Christ; We shall sink into endless error, unless we believe
God the Father and God the Son to be the same in substance, the same true and
living God, Romans 8. 4. Ioh. 14. 26.
who is our only Pilot to guide us in this way, and teach us all things; if
all things, then this Truth, the ground of Truth, the Knowledge of the Father
and the Son Christ Jesus blessed for ever.

God, a jealous God of his Honor.
When the Empress of Constantinople had let slip some words of Contempt
against the Valiant Narses, Cedreni Annals. Niceph. Gregor. de Impp. Romans lib.
6.
that she would make him spin amongst her Maidens, It so enraged the injured
Captain, that he protested in his anger, he would weave such a web, as all
their power should never be able to undo; And thereupon in a deep revenge
brought the Lombards into Italy: Thus, if the generous, of all other injuries
can least bear disgraces, can it possibly be imagined, -- Quis enim laesos
impune putaret Esse Deos? Lucan. 3.
but that if we speak contemptibly of Gods power, if undervaluingly of his
Wisdom, if complainingly of his provisions, if murmuringly of his providence,
or if impatiently of his corrections, but that we do all things that we can to
disgrace him, and that he will be highly provoked for the same?

Christ freely discovering himself to all that truly seek him.
WHen Ennius sought his Friend at his house, Lil. Gyrald. syntagin.
and asked his servant, where his Master was, the Master said to his servant;
Tell him, I am not at home: Which speech Ennius overheard, but took the answer
from the servant; Next day, the same Man comes to Ennius his house, and asked
his servant, where his Master was; Ennius spoke aloud, Tell him I am not at
home; S. Torshell of Humiliation.
What, says, he, will you deny yourself with your own tongue? Why not? said
Ennius; I believed, when but your Man told me you were not at home, and will
not you believe me which say so myself? Thus the Ministers and servants of
Jesus Christ, should show Christ to all that diligently seek him; but if there
be any such as that servant, which denied his Masters presence, when he knew
where he was (as some, which for belief in God bring Men to Romanam Ecclesiam
Catholicam, the Roman Catholic Church; for Faith in Jesus Christ, to Papa non
potest errare, the Pope cannot err) yet Christ is like Ennius, he cannot deny
himself, Ioh. 18. 8.
he showed himself to those wicked traiterous Jews that sought his life, and
surely he will make a gracious discovery of himself to those that truly seek
him.

Sin to be looked on, as it is fierce and cruel.
IT is usual with us to conceive of a Lion or a Bear, S. Torshell Sermon. before
the King's Children at S. James's, 1647.
or a Dragon, as (indeed they are) fearful and terrible beasts; but if we
should see them painted on a wall, they would not in the least dismay us;
though the Painter should use, and bestow the best of his Art, and the utmost
of his skill in the laying of his colors to make them look most fierce; And
why? because we know they are but painted: And thus it is that the most of men
look upon Sin as a dead thing, only painted out by the Oratory of witty
Preachers, and therefore they are nothing at all troubled; Multi evidenter
peccant, quia turpitudinem peccati perspectum non habent. Thryverus in
Apoph^hegm.
But if they should chance to meet a living Bear or Lion in some open place,
gaping and ready to devour, it would amaze them. Just such is Sin, of a
murdering, destroying Nature, let every Man labor to see the life of it, the
danger of it, the fierce gaping mouth of it, and then it will make them to run
for safety by repentance.

The book of Scripture to be preserved above all other books.
FRancis the first, James Connyers Sermon. ut S. Paul's, 1635.
King of France, questioned Budeus (a good Scholar of his time) that if all
the Volumes in the World were doomed to the fire, what one would he have, his
answer was; Plutarch's works; because they had the impression of all sciences;
And Thomas Aquinas chose rather to have Saint Chrysostom on Saint Matthews
Gospel then the huge City of Paris; Here now was a couple of Scholars choice;
Sint Scripturae divinae semper, in manibus, etc. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95.
But if the like Quaere were put to a sincere downright Christian, his reply
would be, Epistolam Creatoris ad Creaturas, the Epistle of the Creator to the
Creature; i. e. the book of holy writ; not Lipsius de Constantia, not Seneca de
tranquillitate animi, nor Boethius de consolatione animae, would he make choice
of, but the holy Scriptures, knowing very well, that in them he shall find the
way to everlasting life.


OBserveable is the story of Phaltiel. 2 Samuel 3. 15. M. Styles Sermon at S.
Paul's, Land. 1627.
David had married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another: When David
came to the Crown and was able to speak a word of command, he sends for his
wife Michol, her husband dares not but obey, brings her on her journey, and
then not without great reluctance of spirit, takes his leave of her: But what?
Was Phaltiel weary of his wife that he now forsakes her? No, he was enforced,
and though she were gone, he cast many a sad thought after her, and never leaves
looking till he sees her as far as Bahurim, weeping and bemoaning her absence.
Thus Carnal and Unregenerate Men, Vitia quae amamus malumus excusare quam
excutere. Sen. epist. 117.
though for fear or some other Reasons, they shake hands with their Sins, yet
they have many a longing heart after them, they part and yet they are loath to
part assunder: Hence it is, that as the Merchant throws away his goods in a
storm, because he cannot keep them; So they in the times of sickness and
distress, when the Sea grows high and the Tempest rages, when they begin to
apprehend what Death is, and what Hell is, and know unless the Vessel be
leighed, they cannot be safe, then they are hard at work, heave overboard their
Usury, their drunkenness, their swearing, and such like stuff, not out of
hatred to them, but love to themselves; For if they could but continue in their
Sins and be saved when they have done, they would never part with them all.


THe Ethnicks feign, Lil. Gyraldus de Diis gentium.
that their Gods and Goddesses for some lovely good loved certain Trees;
Jupiter, the Oak for durance; Neptune, the Cedar for stature; Apollo, the
Laurel for greenness; Venus, the Poplar for whiteness; Pallas, the Vine for
fruitfulness: But what should move the God of all gods to love us poor
Wildings in this Fools Paradise here below? Trees indeed but such as Saint Jude
mentions, Verse. 12.
corrupt, fruitless, twice dead and plucked up by the roots, S. Bernard
resolves it in three words, Amat quia amat, he loves us because he loves us;
The root of Love to us lies in himself, and by his communicative goodness the
fruit is ours.


A Roman writ to Tully, Mr. Collings 5. Lessons.
to inform him in something concerning the Immortality of the Soul; Tully writ
back again unto him, Evolve librum Platonis, et nihil amplius est quod
desideres, Read, says he, but Plato upon the same subject, and you will desire
no more; The Roman returned him answer, Evolvi, iterum atque evolvi, etc. I
have read it over, says he, again and again, but I know not whence it is, when
I read it, I assent unto it; but I have no sooner laid the book out of my hand,
but I begin to doubt again, Whether the Soul be Immortal yea or no. So it is
with all persuasion from Natural principles, as to that extent of Doctrine it
would persuade us of, the persuasion that arises from them is faint and very
weak; It is true, that Nature has principles to persuade the Soul by,
Praesent^mque refert quaelibet herb^ Deum.
to some kind of assent, As that there is a God, and he must be worshipped;
Look upon me, (says Nature) I have not a spire of grass but tells thee, there
is a God; See the variety, greatness, beauty of my work; Read a great God in a
great Whale or Elephant; A beauteous God in a glorious flower; A wise God, in
my choice of Works; Behold a God in the order thou have seen in me; Romans 2. 15.
See him in my Law, written in thy heart. From these and such like things
Nature bequeaths a kind of Faith to the Soul, and learns it Credere Deum* to
believe that there is a God; but this is far from Credere in Deum, Faith in the
point of true believing.

Christ's Humanity, asserted.
AS Alexander the Great, Plutarch. in vita.
however the Popular sort deified him, yet having got a clap with an Arrow,
said; Ye style me Jupiter's son, as if immortal, sed hoc vulnus clamat me esse
hominem. this blood that issues from the wound, proves me in the issue, a Man;
this is (...), the blood of Man, not of God; and smelling the stench of his own
flesh, asked his Flatterers, If the gods yield such a sent? So it may be said
of Jesus Christ our Savior, though Myriads of Angels and Saints acclaim he is
a God, Gabriel Prateoli elenchus Haeret.
ergo, Immortal; And a crew of Heretics disclaim him to be a Man, as the
Manichees denying the truth of hi^ Humanity; the Marcionites averring, that he
had a fantastical body; Ape^^es, who conceived that he had a sydereal
substance: In symbolo Athanasii.
yet the streams of blood following the arrow of Death that struck him, make it
good, that he was perfect Man, of a reasonable Soul and humane flesh subsisting.

Sinners crucifying the Lord of life daily.
THere is a story of one Clodoveyus, a King of France, that when he was
converted from Paganism to Christianity, while Rhemigius the Bishop was reading
in the Gospel concerning the Passion of our Savior, and the abuses he suffered
from Judas and the rest of the Jews, he brake out into these words; O that I
had been but there with my Frenchmen, Nich. Caussin en la Court Sa^ncte.
I would have cut all their throats; In the mean time not considering, that by
his daily sins, he did as much as they had done. And thus it is, that most of
Men, all sinful Men, condemn the crucifiers of Christ for their cruelty,
Hinicinarus in vita Kh^migii.
but never look into themselves, who by their daily sins make him to bleed
again afresh; The proud Man plats a Crown of thorns upon his sacred Head; the
Sweater nails his hands and feet; the Scorner spits upon him, Agnosce homo quam
gravia sunt vulnera, etc. Bern. Sermon. 3. in not. Dom.
and the Drunkard gives him gall and Vinegar to drink; Our Hypocrisy was the
kiss that betrayed him; the Sins of our bodies were and are the tormentors of
his body; and the Sins of our Souls were they that made his Soul heavy to
death, that caused the withdrawings of his Father's love from him, and made him
in the heaviness of his panged Soul to cry out, My God, Matthew. 27. 46.
my God, Why have thou forsaken me?

To bless God for the Revelation of himself in the Scripture.
IT is recorded of Ptolomey King of Egypt, Eusebii hist. lib. 5. cap. 8.
that however he had then gleaned up two hundred thousand Volumes, he sent
Demetrius the Keeper of his Library to the Jews, to have a Copy of their Law,
the Book was sent, and Seventy learned Men along with it, Irenaeus.
that they might translate the same into Greek; Ptolomey sets them to work,
puts them into several Cells or Chambers, that they might not converse
together: After some time and large expense, every one returned his papers, not
varying in the least from the truth of the Original. Such was the Love that
Ptolomey had to the Law of God at that time, that he spared no cost or pains
till he had it, being called the Septuagint at this day. But how are we then
bound to bless God, James Connyers Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1635.
that we need not send so far, or spend much to have the Book of the Law and
the Gospel too, the whole Scriptures, not only in our houses, but in Gods
house, where they are read, and orthodoxally expounded, that it is but opening
the casement and light flows in upon us, so that if the height of our
thankfulness to God, and the best of our desires be not thereto to know and to
do, we are not worthy the name of Christians.


THeodoret makes mention of the ancient Donatists, Haeret. Fab. comp. lib. 4.
that they were so ambitious of Martyrdom, (as they accounted it) that many of
them meeting with a young Gentleman, requested of him, that he would be pleased
to kill them; He, to confute their folly, condiscended to their desire, on
condition, that first they would be contented to be all fast bound, which being
done accordingly, he ^ook such order, that they were all soundly whipped, but
saved their lives: Thus when we hear (such as they call) Ranters, Roaring,
Dammy-boye^, etc. wish, that God would damn, sink, or confound them, hope that
God will be more merciful, T. Fuller Wounded Conscience.
then to take them at their words, and grant their desires, and withal
heartily desire; that he would be pleased sharply to scourge them, and soundly
to lash them with the frights and terrors of a wounded Conscience, the pain
whereof would be so grievous unto them, that they would, without all doubt,
revoke their wishes, as having little list, and less delight to ^aste of Hell
^ereafter.


THe Rabbines have a conceit concerning Noah, Joh. Plantavit. Florileg.
Rabbinicum.
that whilst the window of the Ark was shut, he made use of some resplendent
stone, by whose rays, the objects of the sights presented themselves to the
Organ of the eye, being, as it were, the light of some Lamp or Candle unto
them. However the conjecture may be curious, yet true it is, that Christ is
that stone, which albeit the builders refused, is now become the head of the
corner, a bright shining stone, Joel 2. 10. Wigmore Sermon. ^at a Vis^tat. 1633.
at whose presence the Moon is darkened, and the Stars withdraw their light; he
is that lux illuminans, at whose approach the light of the Moon becomes as the
light of the Sun; lux innata, that true light, that light of life; not lux
modii, but lux mundi, that light of the World, in whom there is not so much as
the least shadow of darkness.


When we behold Prime-Roses and Violets fairly to flourish, T. Fuller Cure of
a wounded Conscience.
we conclude, the dead of the Winter is past, though as yet no Roses or
Iuly-flowers do appear, which long after lie hid in their leaves, or lurk in
their roots; but in due time will discover themselves. Thus if some small
buddings of Grace do but appear in the Soul, it is an argument of far greater
growth, if some signs be but above-ground in sight, others are underground in
the heart; and though the former started first, the other will follow in order:
It being plain, that such a Man is passed from death unto life, by this hopeful
and happy spring of some signs in the heart.

Magistrates, Rulers, etc. the great comfort of good ones.
THe People of Rome were very jocund, Corn. Nepos in vita Galbae. Suetonius.
when they had made Galba their Emperor; but he had not been long in, till
they began to change their note: For, they found by woeful experience, that they
had met with a careless and cruel Gover^our. A sad thing, when it is either
with Magistrates or Ministers, as Pope Urban writ to a Prelate in his time very
scoffingly; Monacho fervido, Abbatic calido, Episcopo vero tepido, et
Archiepiscopo ^rigido, still the higher in means, J. Gray a Sermon. at Assizes
Newcastle, 1636.
the worse in manners. But, there is then good hope, when Men in power and
authority can say, Non nobis sed populo, that they aim at the public good:
And happy is that People, that place, that Commonwealth, whose Rulers think no
time too long, no pains too great, nor no patience too much, whereby they may
glorify God, and seek the public good in the appointed places of their
dignity.

Godly Company, the benefit thereof.
IT is observable of many houses in the City of London, T. Fuller Cure of a
wounded Conscience.
that they have so weak walls, and are of so slender and slight building, that
were they set alone in the Fields, probably they would not stand one hour;
which now ranged into streets, receive support in themselves, and mutually
return it to others: Such is the danger of solitariness, Omnium so^ietatum
nulla praestantior. est, nulla firmior, etc. Sen. ep. 11.
and the great benefit of association with good and godly Company; Such as want
skill or boldness to begin or set a Psalm, may competently follow tune in
consort with others; and such are the blessed fruits of good Society, that a
Man may not only be reserved from much mischief, but also be strengthened and
confirmed in many godly Exercises, which he could not perform of himself alone.

The excellency of Sunday or Lords day, above other days.
WHat the Fire is amongst the Elements, D. Hackwill Sermon. at Oxon. 1641.
the Eagle among the Fowls, the Whale among the Fishes, the Lion amongst the
beasts, Gold among the other metals, and Wheat amongst other grain; the same
is the Lords day above other days of the week, differing as much from the
rest, as does that wax to which a Kings great seal is put, from ordinary wax;
Or that silver upon which the King's Arms and Image are stamped, from Silver
unrefined, or in bullion; It is a day, A^hanas. in ep. ad Orthod. Ignat. ep. ad
Magnesios.
the most holy Festival in relation to the Initiation of the World, and Man's
Regeneration, the Queen and Princess of days, a Royal day, a day that shines
amongst other days, as does the Dominical letter clad in scarlet among the
other letters in the Calender; or as the Sun imparts light to all the other
Stars, so does this day, bearing the name of Sunday, afford both light and life
to all other days of the week.

Men to be as well industrious in their Callings, as zealous in their
devotions.
THe Inhabitants of the Bishopric of Durham pleaded a Privilege, Guil. Camdeni
Britan. in Durham. In qua quisque educantus est art, in hac se exerceat.
That King Edward the first had no power, although on necessary occasion, to
press them to go out of their Country, because (forsooth) they termed
themselves Haly-work-folk, only to be used in defending the holy shrine of S.
Cuthbert. Thus it is, that many in the World are much mistaken, thinking, that
if they be but once entered into the trade of Godliness, they may cancel all
Indentures of service, and have a full dispensation to be idle in their
Callings; whereas the best way to make the service of God comfortable within
their own Souls, is to take pains without in their lawful Vocations, there
being ever some secret good accrewing to such who are diligent therein.


IT is a received Aphorism amongst Physicians, Tillinghast Sermon. 1642.
that the Constitutions of all Men's bodies are of a mixed nature, hot, dry,
cold, and moist; and yet the Wisdom of God has so diversely tempered these,
that scarce in the World are two Men to be found, in every point of like
temper; The face of a Man is not above a span over, yet let ten thousand Men be
together, and their countenances shall all differ. -- Quot capitum vivant
totidem studiorum millia, Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Matthew. 25. 15.
So in the Church, as to the variety of gifts in the matter of Preaching, let
diverse Men take one and the same Text, yet scarce two of a hundred (though all
soundly and to the Point) are to be found, that have in all things the like
gift, either for matter or utterance; some having five talents, some but two,
some but one; some have a more excellent gift of Conference, some of Prayer,
some of Exhortation, some in opening of a Text, some in application, etc. every
one (though not all alike) some one way or other profitable unto Gods people,
to help onward the building up of the body of the Lord Jesus, in the
edification of those that are committed to their charge,


SOme Popish People make a superstitious Almanac of the Sunday by the
fairness or foulness thereof, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
guessing of the weather all the week after, according to that old Monkish
rhyme; If it rains on Sunday before Mess,
It will rain all week more or less.
However, it may be boldly affirmed, That from our well or ill spending of the
Lord day, a probable conjecture may be made, how the following week will be
employed; yea, it is to be conceived, that we are bound (as matters now stand
in England) to a stricter observation of the Lords day, then ever before: That
a time was due to Gods service, no Christian in this Nation ever did deny; That
the same was weekly dispersed into the Lords day, Holy Days, Wednesdays,
Fridays, and Saturdays, some have earnestly maintained; seeing therefore all
the last are generally neglected, the former must be more strictly observed, It
being otherwise impious, that our devotion having a narrower channel, should
also carry a narrower stream along with it.

Gods gracious return of his Peoples Prayers in the time of their distress.
IT is said of Martin Luther, Joh. Sleidani Comment.
that perceiving the cause of the Gospel to be brought into a great strait, he
flies unto God, lays hold on him by Faith, and offers violence to him by
Prayer, never leaving to wrestle with him, till he received comfort from him;
at length rising up cheerfully from his devotion, comes out of his Closet
triumphantly to his Fellow Laborers, saying; Vicimus, vicimus, We have
overcome, we have overcome; At which time it is observed, that there came out a
Proclamation from Charles the Fifth, that none should be further molested for
the profession of the Gospel. Thus there is not any Age but affords Examples
of Gods gracious assistance in the conscionable use of Prayer, T. Westfield
Sermen at S. Paul's, 1619.
when great things are to be effected; when crying Sins have awakened his
Justice, and broken the vial of his anger upon the heads of a People or
Nation, so that drops of blood hang hovering in the air like clouds of
Vengeance ready to break down upon them; When the dark and misty Fogs of
Wickedness, have been gathered from sundry places, threatening some great
tempest of thunder and lightning, Et Dominum mundi flectefe vota valent.
Martial. epigr. lib. 8.
a black and fatal day near at hand, then has the wind of his Peoples
devotions, together with the swift gale of sighs and tears, by Gods special
assistance so cleared the air, that they have not fallen upon them.

Patiently to wait on Gods good Will and pleasure.
PRodigious was the patience of Eliah's servant in obedience to his Masters
command, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
1 King. 8. 18. He went several times to the Sea (it were too tedious to tell,
what was not troublesome for him to do, to be seven several times sent down
steep Carmel with danger, and up it again with difficulty) and all to bring
news of nothing, till his last journey, which made recompense for all the rest,
with the tidings of a clowd arising. Thus we must not be disheartened, as
though comfort would not come at all, because it comes not all at once, but
patiently attend Gods pleasure; The Mercies of God are not styled the swift,
but the sure Mercies of David. Esaias 55. 3.
And the same Prophet says, The glory of the Lord shall be thy Rereward; this
we know comes up last to secure and make good all the rest; 1 Kings 18. Nube
solet pulsa candidus ire dies, Ovid. trist.
For where Grace leads the Front, Glory at last will be in the Rear, and the
thirsty Soul long parched with drowth for want of comfort, though late, yet at
last shall be plentifully refreshed with the dew of consolation.

Magistrates to stand up in the cause of God against all opposition.
WHen Theodosius the Great set forth a Law among the Egyptians, against their
sacrificing to the River Nilus, Joh. Young, A Fast-Serm. at Westminster. 1644.
it so fell out, that the River that year did not rise to the usual height in
overflowing the Land; The poor Heathen (knowing no better) ascribed it to their
not sacrificing, and blamed the Imperial act; the Governor fearing an
insurrection, timely informs the Emperor, but withal hinting, that it had been
well, if he could but have connived at that time; but the Emperor answered
resolutely like himself, That it was better to remain faithful to the Lord,
then to prefer the overflowing of Nilus and the expectation thereof to Piety
and Religion; yea, he would rather that it should never flow again. Here was a
Law seasonably declared, and an Heroical resolution thereupon, Sudandum est iis
qui Magistratum gerunt, etc. Cic. pro Sestis.
not upon any pretense whatsoever to repeal that Law which was conformable to
Gods Word. With the like courage ought all Magistrates to maintain and stand up
for warrantable Laws, to bear up for Gods honor in defense of that which is
good in Gods sight, and by no means be induced to sin against God, either under
hope of gain, or fear of approaching danger, to let those good, ancient and
fundamental Laws to sink, whereby Religion and the Commonwealth have been
upheld.

Men to pray for others as well as themselves.
WHen David had prayed, O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed; In
the next verse (as if conscious to himself, Psalm. 25. 2. T. Fuller Cure of a
wounded Conscience. Genesis 10. 11.
that his Prayers were too restrictive, narrow and niggardly) he enlarges the
bounds thereof, and builds them on a broader bottom, yet let none that wait on
thee be ashamed. Thus it is that Charity in the midst of our Religious
devotions must have Rechoboth, Room enough to expatiate in, Our Petitions must
not be pent or confind to our own private good, but extended to the benefit of
all Gods servants in what condition soever.


MArcion the Heretic meeting with Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, Ensebii hist.
lib. 4. cap. 14. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
desired of him, that he might know him; The good Man made answer, As for thee,
I know thee to be the first born of the Devil; the like we may read of S. John,
who coming to a Bath found Cerinthus there, but presently went out again,
saying; that it was impossible such a place should stand, where such an
Heretic remained: Thus the Saints of old, according to that of the second of
S. John, W. Strong, a Fast-Sermon 1646.
verse. 10. received not such into their houses, or bad them, God speed; And so
should we, not favor such as are deceivers and false Teachers, nor out of love
to the Error, or an affectation of novelty, countenance or converse with them;
but in testimony of our Zeal for God, and constancy in the Truth reject them,
avoid them that they be not encouraged in their Sin, nor we partakers thereof,
as abettors of their evil deeds.


BEggars when they crave an Alms constantly use one main Motive, T. Fuller Cure
of a wounded Conscience.
that the person of whom they beg may be preserved from that misery, whereof
they themselves have had woeful experience: If they be blind, they cry; Master,
God bless your eyesight; If lame, God bless your limbs; If undone by casual
burning, God bless you and yours from Fire. Tu quoque fac simile, let every
good Christian do the like, and reason good; For Christ, though his Person be
now glorified in Heaven, yet he is still subject, by sympathy of his Saints on
earth, to hunger, nakedness, imprisonment, banishment, and a wounded
Conscience, and so may stand in need of feeding, clothing, visiting,
comforting and curing. So that when we pray to Christ for any favor, it is a
good plea to urge, edge and enforce our requests withal, Lord grant us such or
such a grace, and never may thou, Lord, in thy mystical members, be
perplexed, vexed or tormented with such or such an extremity, further then may
make out for thy glory, and their everlasting good.


IT is said of the Angels that they are Spirits, Psalm. 104. 4. Fenner Christ's
alarm, 1646.
Spiritual Creatures; their Communion, spiritual; their food, spiritual; their
delights, spiritual; their affections and minds, spiritual; Thus it is, that
the Minister (though he be a body as well as his People) yet he should be a
spiritual Man in an especial manner, he should have animam separatam, a Soul
separated and sequestered from bodily things, Casta placent superis pura cum
vest venite. Tibull. 2. 1.
taken up with spiritual affairs, holding forth the fruits of the spirit; his
Sermons should not only be Moral but spiritual; his carriage, spiritual; his
discourse, spiritual; If otherwise, his own phrases will rise up in Judgment
against him; Ministers are called the Spiritualty, as though the People were
carnal in comparison of them, Hos. 9. 7.
whereas the truth is, Many are spiritual Mad men, being nothing less then
what they profess to be, spiritual Men in a mockery, such, as profane ones
call a spiritual Pig, that is, the poorest of all the ten, such a one as has
no substance in it; so no substance, no goodness, no holiness at all in them,
whereas they should exceed all others.

Fatherly Counsel, has and ought to be prevalent with Children.
ARistotle that great Philosopher, tells us of Archilocus; who being desirous
to give some prevalent Counsel, Lib. de Republica.
and effectual advice to Lycambes, whose Father was dead, did while he was
writing his admonitions, by an elegant Prosopopeia bring in his Father, and (as
it were) so put the pen into his Fathers hand, that Lycambes might receive
those Instructions from one, who by his very Relation, was much more probable
to prevail than himself; The like passage is also in Cicero, that Prince of
Oratory and Eloquence, as the former was of Philosophy; Ad Atticum, li^. 12.
that he being to read a lecture of Modesty and Temperance to his Friend
Clodia, raised up her Father Appius Caius from the grave, and in his name
delivered his directions to the daughter: Both of these in this practice of
theirs intimating thus much to all succeeding ages, that it is neither the
Philosophers wisdom be it never so deep, Pater, adsum* Impera quid vis, etc.
Plaut. Trin.
nor the Orators eloquence, be it never so winning is so effectual in the
hearts of Children as the voice of Fatherly Counsel, being (as it ought to be)
more persuasive and powerful then any other Argument or Rhetoric whatsoever.

Ministers to be earnestly Zealous in Preaching Gods word.
IT is a pretty story of Demosthenes when one told him, that he was beaten and
abused by such a Man; Joh. Combesii Enchirid. Apophtheg. Philosoph.
It seems he told it very dreamingly and coldly showing no affection at all;
Why, says Demosthenes, Has he beaten thee? I do not believe it; No? says the
Man, and so grew into a very great passion, I am sure thus and thus he did to
me, And do not you call this beating? Nay, says Demosthenes, Now I believe
that he has beaten thee indeed, now thou speak as if it were true what thou
saydst: So when a Minister preaches unto People in a dreaming manner, standing
in a Pulpit as though he were saying of his lesson, Rectitudinis Zelo contra
Vitia hominum accendendus est. Greg. in Ezech. hom. 5*
though the things he says be never so weighty, yet the People will not
believe him; but when he is earnestly zealous in Gods message, when he
preaches as one having Authority, then it is that the Peoples hearts may be
said to burn within them, Luke ult.

How far Self-safety may be consulted.
THere is an Apologue of an Ass, David Hume hist. of Douglas and Angus.
which a certain silly King did love so dearly, that he had a great mind to
have her to speak, they told him it was a thing impossible and against Nature;
but he being impatient, and not enduring to have his desire crossed, slew them,
because they told him the truth: At last trying about, what others could do;
one, who was made wise by their example, being required to do it, he undertook
it, but withal he showed him the greatness of the charge, and difficulty of
the work. The King being eager to have it done, told him he should have what
allowance he pleased, and bade him spare for no charges, and that besides he
would reward him liberally. The Physician also told him, that it would be a
long cure, and could not be done in a day, ten years were the fewest that could
be allotted to perfect a work of that Nature; so they agreed, and the Physician
began to fall to work about his Ass; His Friends hearing of it, came to him,
and asked him, What he meant to take in hand a thing so utterly impossible; He
smiled and said unto them, I thought you had been wiser, then to ask me such a
question; If I had, says he, refused to have taken it in hand, he had put me
to death presently, now I have gained ten years time, and before that he
expired, Who can tell what may happen? The King may die, the Ass may die, or I
myself may die, and if any of these happen, I am in freedom and safety* Male
sapit qui sibi non sapit.
Thus in the midst of temporal dangers, whether imminent or incumbent,
self-safety may and ought to be consulted, if a Man be persecuted in one City,
Matthew. 10. 23.
he may lawfully fly into another; but with this Proviso, that if the cause of
God and Religion be therein concerned, then farewell life and liberty and all,
for in such a case, he that lays down his life shall preserve it; he that
lo^eth all shall find all, Matthew. 10. 38.


THere is a facetious story of a Copyholder dwelling on the Sea side near
Plymouth, Dr. Lo, A Sermon. at Funerals of Dr. Featly, 1645.
who perceiving that diverse of his Neighbors trading to Sea, came home gallant
and rich, and lived in a plentiful manner, would by all means to Sea too; He
puts off his stock, makes money of all that he had, and leaves his Wife and
Children with Friends; his trading was into Spain, the freight returned was in
Figgs; A great flaw of Wind comes, the Ship was in danger, she must be
leightned, overboard go the Figgs, the poor Man cries out, O there goes my
Oxen, my Sheep, and all that I have in the World; Home he comes poor, his
Neighbors pity his folly, one lends him an Ox, another a Horse; after some few
years he picks up his crumbs again, and being at Plow on a very fair day, cries
Hoe to his boy that did drive, and standing still, looks on the Sea, and seeing
it very calm, said; A wannion on you, How is it you look so smooth now? Mari
just comparatur hic mundus, etc. Casciodor. super Psalm. 44.
you long for more Figgs, do you? your fair looks shall never deceive me again,
I warrant you; drive on, boy. Thus the World is like unto the Sea, very
uncertain, there is no trusting to it, like that Sea mentioned in the
Revelation, a glassy and Crystalline S^a, Chap. 4. v. 6. brittle as glass, Ubi
splendet, frangitur, where it is most shining and resplendent, there it soonest
cracks and breaks asunder, gulling with its transparency, ebbing and flowing
according to the influence of its Lunary Mistress, one while lifting up to
Heaven upon her billows and anon sinking down her Favorites as it were to
Hell, Psalm. 107. 27.


IT was the saying of Scipio, Sir Walt. Raleigh hist. of the World.
that warlike African, who being reproached by a certain Man, that he was not
so forward a fighter as he could have wished; That his Mother had born him to
be a Commander, not a Fighter; intimating, that a Captain's chief place was to
command all, and to choose fit times, places, and means for fighting; not that
he should account it his honor to fight upon the request of his Enemy, but as
he found most expedient and convenient for himself, -- Fortissimus ille est,
Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent, Et differ potest. Lucan. lib.
7.
in wisdom choosing the form, the Field, the time, the place, and all for the
advantage of his Army, giving not the least foot of advance to his Enemy,
whereof he could possibly hinder him. And thus it is, that many (though
otherwise high-spirited enough) do err in a false opinion of their own valor,
and thereby lose both themselves and their honors; so that whilst they affect
to be called gallant Fighters, do prove indeed to be but foolish Commanders,
and ill Captains, not getting that Honor and Va^our which they so eagerly
seek, but the blame of temerity and rashness, which they should mostly avoid.


SUppose a Town to be all on fire, Mr. Fenner Christ's alarm, 1646.
Should we not count the Man ridiculous, that should come and tell us a cold
story, saying; Sirs, let me tell you a thing, there is a great Fire in the
Town, and I verily think it may burn all the Town, and you should do well to go
and quench it. This Man tells us so indeed; but should not we think him a Fool
for telling us such a thing in such a cold and careless manner? Nature it self
teaches another course in such a case, Fire, Fire, help, O help, for the Lords
sake; water, water in all haste; Alas, alas, we are undone, quickly, quickly,
unumquenque Christianum zelus dom^s Dei comedat; probibe quas potes, etc. Aug.
tract. 20. in Ioh.
run for ladders, run for buckets, run for wet clothes; Ah you lazy Villain!
run apace for Iron hooks, and the like. So it is in the matter of Preaching,
What weighty things does the Word contain? Truths that should make the very
bowels of the Minister to yern, and pour out his affections in the Pulpit, to
rouse up the Peoples thoughts, and awaken them from the sleep of Sin and
security, wherein they have a long time snorted; otherwise when they hear of
matters of life and death, eternal life, salvation and damnation, they sit like
blocks on their feats, as though it were no matter of concernment.

Not to be hasty in the matter of Revenge.
IT is reported of James the Fourth, David Humes Hist. of Douglas and Angus.
King of Scotland, that being much offended with the Earl Crawford, he vowed to
pull down his house from the top to the bottom; but the Earl by his timely
submission took off the edge of the Kings anger against him; Insomuch, that the
King (that he might in some sort be as big as his word) went up to the top of
his house, and without doing any more harm at all, threw down a little stone
which was closed to the Fabric, which is to this day kept as a Monument of the
Kings favor to that Family. And thus it were to be wished, J. Preston Sermon
at Lincolns-Inne, 1626.
that Men in the height and heat of their passion would throw themselves down
at the footstool of him to whom vengeance belongs, not to be hasty in matters
of Revenge, and upon every slight occasion, or the least punctilio of honor
to be ready to sheath their swords in the bowels of one another; Noli imitari
malum virorum sed justitiae relinque vindictam. Phocilides. Ioh. 8. 50.
thus to do, is sawcily to seat themselves upon Gods throne, and as much as in
them lies, to wrest the sword out of his hands; But let all such know, that
the less any Man strives for himself, the more God is his Champion; and he
that said, I seek not my own glory, adds, but there is one that seeks it and
judges. God takes his part ever that fights not for himself.

More Converts made by Preaching, then by Reading.
A Man may be converted by Reading, S. Clark Marrow of Eccles. hist. In lib.
confession. Romans 13. 14.
as Luther said he was; It is the confession of Luther, that the reading of
John Hus's Works, was the main cause of his Conversion; And S. Augustin's,
toll, lege, taking up of the book, and reading that of the Apostle, Not in
chambering and wantonness, was, by Gods especial favor, a means to draw him
out of that puddle of Sin, wherein he had a long time wallowed. Rev. 1. 3.
Thus there is a blessing for Readers. And there may a Fish or two hang on the
Net, being let down on a heap; but that is a chance; It is not the Net lapped up
together that brings in the draught, Lectio lecta juvat, sed praedicata plus
ad pictatis affectum movet. Phil.* Diex. sum. praed.
but hailed out at length and spread all abroad that closes in the Fish; So it
is the spreading of the Word, the stretching of it out upon every Soul present
by the work of the Ministry, that is the way to catch many; so that the reason
of such ill success in many Ministers is, not spreading the net, not dilating
upon the matter in hand, whereby their Preaching seems to be little better then
Reading.

Magistrates, Rulers, etc. of all Men, to be resolved in the cause of God and
their Country.
JAmes the Third King of Scotland, Geo. Buchan. historia Scortica.
waving the wholesome advice of his Nobility; betook himself to the Counsels of
some few unworthy Men, insomuch that all things were out of order, so that the
Nobility fell upon consultations for the good of their King and Country;
Archibald Earl of Angus contrives the way, how the wicked Counselors might be
fe^ch'd off from the King; all approve it, only the Lord Gray perceiving the
forwardness of the People, told them the Fable of the Rats and Mice, who
consulting in a public meeting, how they might be secured from the surprisal
of their public Enemy, Rex est qui metuit nihil, quem non lancea militis,
etc. Sen. traged. 2.
the Cat, found out (as they thought) a very good way for their safety, which
was to hang a bell about every Cats neck, that so they might have warning of
their approach, and shift for themselves; But when it was put to the question,
Who should und^rtake to tie the bell about the Cats neck, they were all at a
stand, not one durst undertake to do it: The Earl of Angus suddenly smelt out
his meaning, and what application was to be made upon the matter, and thereupon
made answer, I will bell the Catt, and what your Lordships shall conclude fit
to be done, D. T. Jones Sermon. at S. Peter Pauls-Wharf, 1647.
shall not want for Execution; which fell out accordingly. And thus it is, that
Resolution in the cause of God and the Country becomes all Men, especially
Christian men, such as are in places of power and authority, that when their
Religion and liberties lie at the stake, they would not stand shall I, shall I;
but bell the Cat, stare in the face of any opposition whatsoever, and boldly
seize upon the Enemies of their peace and safety.


When the Danites asked the Levite in Mount Ephraim, Who brought him thither?
and what he made in that place? he made no other answer, but that Micah had
hired him, and dealt well with him, etc. he knew well enough that he put
himself there, sought for the place himself, It was maintenance that brought
him thither: His own Conscience told him, He was an Hireling, he came not in by
the door, but at the Window, he could not say that the Lord brought him
thither. A caveat for Archippus, A Serm^n, 1618.
And thus it is, that no Man can be said to enter into the Ministry in a right
way, but by God; he must have his letters of Orders from him, his Institution
and Induction from him, he must not intrude into Gods heritage, -- Grandis
dignitas est Sacerdotum, etc. Hieron. in Ezekiel. lib. 2. Act. 4. 13.
It must not be gain that makes him take up a Living, not advantage that makes
him chop and change, he that does so, never went to Christ f^r approbation; And
whereas it is said of the Apostles, that the Rulers and Elders perceived, that
they had been with Jesus; no Man by his life or doctrine can perceive that he
had been with Jesus, that ever he had any allowance from him, and yet he will
be crowding into the Ministry.


WE see all the motions of superior bodies, J. Wilson's Life of K. James.
in what excellent order and perfection they move, and if some exhalation
starts up amongst them from gross and putrid matter, whose course is not yet
known, What horrid trepidations bring they with them? And, what prodigious
calamities are they the forerunners of? yet they hold not that station long,
but blaze a little there, and then extinguish. And all that can be said of them
is, That we know not for what mischievous intents these Meteors did appear:
Whereas the other Celestial bodies beget no wonder, are no Prodigies, but keep
a constant course in their own spheres, and are not contaminated with things
below them, yet they retain a powerful influence over them: Reg^andi^causa
Regum fere omnium mos est, ut neque pietate neque verecuvdia promoveantur.
Paul. Jovius lib. 3.
So Kings and Princes always shine in glory and a noble Soul, when they loath
to soil themselves in sordid things; But when they grovell her^ for trash and
trumpery, and trade away that gallant stock of Love, housed in their Peoples
hearts, for some false coin, minted by passion, mutable affection, or misled
Reason, they do deg^ade themselves so far, that the only difference betwixt a
King and a mean Man is, that the one by his trade cosens a few, the other a
great many, but himself most.

Ministers not to be Verbal, but Real in their expressions.
THe Lacedemonian in Plutarch said, when he heard how sweetly the Nightingale
sang, Mr. Fenner christ's alram.
O that I had this bird, surely it is a rare dish; and after a while when he
had taken it, and eat it, and found but a little picking meat, he concluded
with that Proverbial saying, Vox es and praeterea ^ihil, Now I see thou art
mere voice, and nothing else: And such are they that go up into the Pulpit with
Stentorian voices, Oportet ut Praedicatores sint fortes in praeceptis,
compatientes infirmis, in exho^tationibus blandi, etc. Greg. in Ioh. mor. 30.
that have bigg words, but small matter, so that the People may be said to hear
a sound, but know not what it means; Whereas a Faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ is not verbal, but real in his expressions, such as John the Baptist,
who was more then a voice, a burning and a shining light; there was life and
heat in his Ministry; so that a Man may be said to preach much, yet preach
little; but it were far better to make less use of his lungs, and more of his
heart, which will at the last prove to be a great comfort to his own Soul, and
advantageous to those that hear him.

Not to take notice of every angry Word that is spoken against us.
IT is reported of Titus Vespasian, that when any one spoke ill of him, he was
wont to say, Suctonius in vita.
That he was above false reports; and if they were true, he had more reason to
be angry with himself, then the Relator. And the good Emperor Theodosius
commanded no Man should be punished that spoke against him; Eusebius.
For what was spoken slightly, said he, was to be laughed at; what spitefully,
to be pardoned; what angerly, Iratus nihil nisi crimina loquitur. Sen. in Thy
este. Chrysostom. sup. Ma^th. 5.
to be pitied; and if truly, he would thank him for it; O that there were but
such a frame of spirit in this carping age of ours, wherein Men, like tinder,
are ready to take fire upon the least spark that falls, to quarrel sometimes
the most inoffensive word that can be spoken; whereas the best way is to be
silent, Sile et funestam dedisti plagam, Say nothing, and you pay a talking Man
to the purpose. Thus it was that Hezekiah would not answer Rabshakeh, nor
Jeremy Hananiah, Chap. 28. 11. nor our blessed Savior his railing Adversaries,
Matthew. 26. 26. he reviled not his revilers, he threatened not his opposites, 1
Pet. 2. 23.

The excellency of a good Memory.
IT was the saying of an eminent Scholar, That an excellent Memory was needful
for three sorts of Men; P. Charron de lasagesse.
First, for Tradesmen, for they having many businesses to do, many reckonings
to make up, many Irons in the fire, had need of a good Memory. Secondly, great
Talkers, for they being full of Words, had need to have a good storehouse in
their heads to feed their tongue. Thirdly, for Liars, for they telling many
untruths, had need of a good Memory, to be able to remember what untruths they
have told, lest afterward they be taken in their lying, contradicting
themselves: All this is true, but as to the excellency of a good Memory indeed,
Fenner's Sermon. at S. Mary Camb. 1637.
the principal of all is, that it is a great blessing of God in ordine ad
spiritualia, in order unto spiritual things, the more we have of it, the more
advantage we have unto our eternal good; as to know that ever which we knew
once, to bring our knowledge into action upon all occasions, to have God before
our eyes; Omnis disciplina Memoria constat; frustraque docemur si quicquid
audimus, etc. Quintil. lib. 11.
It is like a Mercurial finger to put a Man into his way when he is once out; a
great help to belief and sound knowledge; Many and excellent are the benefits
and Privileges of such a Memory.


AS in a ground that lies untilled amongst the great variety of weeds, T.
Ga^akor Apology against Lilly, Astr^log.
there is usually some master-weed, one amongst the rest, that is rifer and
ranker then all the rest; And as it is in the body of Man, that although in
some degree or other, more or less, there be a mixture of all the four
Elements, not any of them wholly wanting; yet there is some one of them
predominant, that gives the denomination, in regard whereof some are said to be
of a sanguine, some of a Phlegmatic, some of a Choleric, and some of a
Melancholic Constitution. So it is also in the Souls of Men, though there be a
general mixture and medly of all evil and corrupt qualities, -- Trabit sua
quemque libido.
yet is there some one usually, that is Paramount, more powerful and prevalent,
that swayeth, and shows forth it self more eminently and more evidently, then
any other of them do; and from this therefore, more frequently and apparently
discovering it self is the denomination wont to be given, Whereby some are
styled, Ambitious; some, lascivious; some, envious; some malicious, some
haughty, some hasty, and the like.


AS it it with a Sieve or bowlter, D. Gouge Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1636.
the good Corn and fine flower goes through, but the light chafe and coorse
bran remains hehind: Or as a Strainer, that the sweet liquor is strained out,
but the dreggs are left behind. Or as a grate, that lets the pure water run
away; but if there be any strawes, sticks, mud, or filth, Memoria hominis ade^
labilis est, ut agree reperias duot quiquae semel audierunt, etc. Erasm. in
Apophthegm.
that it holds. Thus it is with most Men's Memories, by Nature they are but, as
it were, pertusa dolia, mere riven tubs, especially in good things very
treacherous, so that the vain conceits of Men are apt to be held in, when
divine Instructions and gracious Promises run through; trifles, and toys, and
Worldly things they are apt to remember, tenacious enough; but for spiritual
things they leak out, like Israel they soon forget them, Psalm. 106. 13.


AS in a piece of ground, Methodius de Resurrect. apud Epiphan. here is. Sect.
28. cap. 64.
even after the best and most accurate tillage, some seeds and roots of those
noisome weeds, wherewith it was formerly much pestered will still remain, and
will be springing up, be it never so sedulously, never so assiduously managed;
So after the gracious work of Regeneration there will be a smatch of all Sin in
some degree or other; hence it it that Methodius, an ancient Bishop of the
Church, Nullus sanctus et ju^us caret peccato, etc. Aug. de Eccles. dogmat.
compares the inbred corruption of Man's heart to a wild Fig Tree, growing upon
the wall of some goodly Temple, or stately Palace, whereof albeit the main
trunk of the stem be broke off, and stump of the root be plucked up, yet the
fibrous strings of it, piercing into the joints of the stone-work, will not
utterly be extracted, but will be ever and anon shooting and sprowting out,
until the whole frame of the building be dissolved, and the stone-work thereof
be disjoynted and pulled in pieces.

Four sorts of Men undertaking the work of the Ministry.
MArcus Antonius de Dominis that shufling Archbishop of Spalato, then Dean of
Windsor, Savoy.
and furnished with a fair Mastership besides, would needs put on for a good
fat Parsonage, in the gift of the Dean and Chapter of that Church; Dr. Thomas
White (the same that founded Sion College London) being one of the Prebends,
opposed the motion, hinting to the greedy Bishop the unevenness of his
desires, by telling him that there were four sorts of Men that undertook the
work of the Ministry, quorum pascere quidam nec volunt-nec valent; quidam
valent sed non volunt, T. Ga^aker Apology against Lilly s Lies.
quidam volunt sed non valent; quidam et valent et volunt, some that neither
would nor could discharge it, some that could but would not, some that would
but could not, some that both would and could And thus it is that some are to
be found in the midst of us, Sartores, sutores, Oino-polae, Pharmacopolae,
idque genus hominum, etc.
who (such is their ignorance) that they neither will nor can divide the word
aright, such as leaping from the shopboard, leave sowing of garments to make a
rent in the Church; or if by chance they looked upon the university, they think
themselves as su^ficiently inspired with the gift of Prophecy as he did with
the gift of Poetry tha^ dreamed upon the top of Parnassus; Others there are
(such is their unworthiness) that can but will not; Plus vellus quam gregem
spectantes. Sin. de Cassia in Evang. Vita sonantes et ardentes, Greg. moral.
that are able but sloathful in the work of the Lord, and look more after the
Fleece then the Flock committed to their charge; some also (such is their
unhappiness) that would but cannot, as hindered by some natural imperfection,
in the want of Utterance, weakness of Memory or the like; Other some again
(such is their glory) that both can and will deliver the whole truth of God,
preach in season and out of season to the great comfort of themselves and those
tha^ hear them.

How the Heart of Man may be kept up steady in troublous times.
TO make a Ship ride steady in the midst of a tempe stuous Sea, Joh. B^insley's
Sermon. at Yarmouth, 1647.
Four things are required; First, she must be well built, strongly,
well-timberd, not weak, artificially, well-moulded, not tender-sided; Secondly,
she must be down ballasted with some sad and ponderous lading; Thirdly,
low-maste^ (and low-built may be added too) for high-carved, and Tant-masted
Ships will fetch way in a stresse; Fourthly, Sure Anchored, by which means
though moved, she may be said to live and keep her station. Rebus angustis
animojus atque Fortis appare. Horat. 2. carm. 10.
Thus the Heart of Man, if ever we think to have it steady and fixed in the
midst of troublesome times, if eve^ we labor for stable and composed spirits,
that whatever Hurricano storms, or raging Tempests come down upon the World,
upon the Church, upon the places where we live, or upon our selves we may be
able to ride it out; We must be built upon a sure foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11:
and that is Jesus Christ, well- timberd with sanctifying Graces, down-
ballasted with sound Judgment and true Christian direction, Quod super
fundamentum christi aedificatur, etc. Ambros. de Cain et Abel.
Low-masted, to be humble and lowly, not heady and high-minded; And lastly,
sure Anchored, having a sound, solid, and substantial Faith; Faith not fancy;
Hope, not like that of the Hypocrite, which shall be cut off, Job 8. 13. 14.

To keep close to the word of God, especially in times of trouble.
IT is reported by Mr. Fox of one Gregory Crow a Seaman, that being wracked at
Sea, Acts and Mon. An. 1556.
and having cast all overboard, he kept his New Testament about his neck, and
so floating upon his broken mast, was after four days discovered by some
Passingers, taken off all Frozen, benumbed, and as it were sodden by the
continual washings of the water; Recurre^dum est ad solas divinas Scripturas.
P. de Alliaco.
but, which was most observeable* he kept his book close to him: Thus, if ever
we intend to keep our heads above water in the Sea of this troublesome World,
we must be sure to keep close to the Word of God, and not to suffer it to
depart from us, let money, wares, Ship, and all go ere we forego that; Nehem,
Rogers practical catchism.
So likewise in all our doubtful Cases whether Vows, Oaths, Marriages,
dealing with Men, intercourse with God, or any difficulty whatsoever, go to the
Law and to the Testimony for resolution, being glad that God has found out a
way to cast the wavering scale, Esaias 8. 20.
and to direct our conversation.


AN Anchor being let fall, Joh. Calvini com. in Heb. 6. 19.
it passes through the Water, and violently makes its way through all the
waves and billows, never staying till it come at the bottom, where taking hold
of the ground which lies out of sight, thus by a secret and hidden force
staying the Ship, so as though it be moved, yet it is not removed, Ut anchora
jacta de navi, haud permittit came circumserri, licet venti commoveant, etc. sic
et Fides.
but still keeps her station: Of such use is Faith to the Soul of Man; when
it is in a stress tossed with the waves and billows of Temptations and trials,
threatening to swallow it up, Faith breaks through all, never resting till it
come at God himself, who is invisible and taking hold upon him, by a secret
force it stays the Soul, and keeps it from being driven upon the rocks or
sands of desperation; An Anchor it is, and a sure Anchor, that (...) that Sheat
Anchor which the Soul must trust to, Ch^ysost. in Heb. homil. 11. Heb. 6. 19.
which it may ride and live by in whatsoever stress can come down upon it.


IT is reported of a certain Merchant in London, that he made much of a poor
Cobbler that dwelt near him, and did as good as maintain him, though he were a
Papist in the matter of his Religion, yet this unthankful Fellow went about to
betray him to death; but the Merchant having escaped his hands, merely out of
love to his Soul, used all means to be Friends with him again, and invited him
to his house: All this would not do, his heart was so embittered, that he would
shun the way of him, and not so much as look at him; It fell out so at length,
Nehem. Rogers practical Catechism.
that he met him in such a narrow lane, that he could not balk him, but must
needs talk with him, The good Merchant takes him to him, tells him he was glad
he had met with him, and wondered that he was grown so strange! What, said he,
do you think me your Enemy? If I were, Could I not crush you with a word
speaking? Alas, I am not offended with you, if you be not with me, and, for all
your treachery against me will forgive and forget it; These kind words were no
sooner spoken, but the Cobbler melted into tears, and falling down upon his
knees, confessed his villainy, and repenting of it, told him; This love of yours
shall bind me to you for ever, to serve you in all that I may or possibly can:
This Popish Cobbler is the heart of every child of Adam, this Royal Merchant is
the great God of Heaven, O aet^rna veritas, et vera charitas, et (...)
aeternitas! (...) es (...) meus ad (...) suspiro die (...) nocte. Aug. conses.
lib. 7.
this narrow lane is the straight of Conscience beset with sins and curles,
this kind behavior is the tender of Grace; Let us not then be worse to our
poor Souls then the Cobbler was to his, but break our hearts by Repentance, and
sorrow for our sins, that ever we should offend so good a God, so gracious and
loving a Master, and with Saul to David, say; Where shall a Man find such love,
as to spare his Enemy when he had him in his hand, and to be content to cut off
only a lap of his garment, to correct him here in this World with some
temporary Judgment, when he might have cut his throat, and cast him into
Hell Torments for evermore.

God raising up Instruments for the deliverance of his People.
MEmorable is that Vision of Zachary; I lift up mine eyes (said the Prophet)
and saw, Rhemigius Alrissiodorus in locum.
and behold four horns. Chap. 1. verse. 18. And the Lord showed me four
Carpenters. verse. 20. Now what were these four horns, What, but the Enemies of
the Church? verse. 19. Horns, so called for their power, and said to be four in
reference to the four parts of the World, East, West, North and South, from all
which they came; And what are the Carpenters? Why, Isidor. Clarius in loc.
Instruments raised up by God to break, and batter those horns, to oppose, to
overthrow that adverse power, verse, 21. and they are said to be four, to import
an equality of strength and power. Thus when God has a work to do, be it to
beat down Babylon, or build up Jerusalem, he can raise up Carpenters,
Instruments that shall be sufficient for the work; though never so mean, yet
they shall effect great work; I^sh. 6. 20.
Trumpets of Rams horns if they do but blow, down go the walls of Jericho with
a Vengeance. Nay, though Instruments fail, yet the promise shall not fail,
though the Carpenters should not strike one stroke, Fata vians invenient.
yet God has ways to take off the horns of his enemies, though his People
should be destitute of all humane protection, yet he will find out a way to
deliver and secure them, no Temptation, no cross, no trouble shall so far
seize upon them, 1 cor. 10. 13.
but he will find a way to esape that they may be able to bear it.

All endeavors to be sanctified by Prayer.
THere was a certain Husbandman that always sowed good seed, S. Smith Essex Dove.
but never could have any good corn, at last a Neighbor came unto him, and
reasoned, What should be the cause, he sowed so good seed, and r^aped so bad
corn? Why, truly, said he, I give the Land her due, good tillage, good seed,
and all things that be fit: Why then, replied the other, It may be you do not
steep your seed; No, truly, said he, nor ever did I hear that seed should be
steeped: Yes, surely, said the other, and I will tell you how, It must be
steeped in Prayer. When the Party heard this, he thanked him for his good
counsel, put it home to his Conscience, reformed his fault, and had as good
corn as any other Man whatsoever. Thus it is, that if ever we look to have a
good improvement of our labors, Egredientes hospitio, armet Orati^;
regredientibus de plate^, etc. Hyer. in epist.
and to have a blessing upon what we undertake, we must have recourse unto God
by Prayer; Otherwise we may trade and trasfick, fight and war, and get
nothing; Nay, let us get ever so much, it is all in vain, because we ask not
aright, Iam. 4. 2.

Universal Obedience unto God, enjoined.
AN Instrument, Tho. Cheshire Sermon at S. Paul's, Land. 1641.
if one only string be out of tune, although the rest be well set, yet that
one keeps such a jarring, and harsh sound, that the lesson played thereon, will
relish as unmusically in a skilful ear, as if all the strings were out of tune:
And thus if a Man should abstain from swearing and drunkenness, yet if he were
given to lust; or if from those three, and yet addicted to Covetousness, Iam.
2. 10.
it comes all to one reckoning. Let every Man therefore look into his bosom
sin, observe diligently that one jarring string, and never leave screwing and
winding of it up, till it be brought into right tune; and if that cannot be
effected, Matthew. 5. 29.
break it, pluck it out. For God will have a complete harmonious consent, a
resolution for Universal obedience, otherwise no acceptance.

the Body, then the Soul, reproveable.
THe Jews have a Story of a Woman that took two Children to nurse, Joh.
Plantavit. Florileg. Rabbinicum.
the one, a very mean deformed, crooked, blind, and not likely to live long;
the other as goodly a child as may be, beautiful, well-favoured, and likely to
be long-lived: Now this foolish Woman bestowing all her care and diligence,
pains and attendance upon the worst child, never so much as minding the best,
must needs be ignorant and very foolish in so bad a choice, and of so great
neglect: Thus it is, Si magnae mercedis est a morte ^ripere carnem, quanquam
morituram; quanti est meriti, a morte animam liberare^ etc. Greg. hom. 26.
that the most of Men are herein to be reproved, who having taken two Children
to nurse, their bodies and their Souls, and well knowing, that the Soul is
infinitely far better then the body, more beautiful and of longer continuance,
yet like the foolish Nurse; they bestow all their care, labor and pains for
the worst, they make provision for the Flesh, pamper up the body, which must
ere long lie down in the dust, and starve the Soul, which does and must live
for ever.

Repentance put off till old age.
HE cannot be otherwise looked on then as a very Unwise Man, Alphons. ab
Avendan. Com. in Matthew.
that having made a burden of sticks, and finding it too heavy for his
shoulders, should lay it aside, and go and cut down more and add unto it; And
him little better then a Madman, that having a great journey to go, and a
great burden to carry, and having choice of many lusty horses, should let them
all pass empty away, and lay his carriage upon a poor feeble Jade, that could
scarce bear himself; And him also none of the wisest, Jacob Merchantii bort.
Pass.
that shall neglect to pass over the Foord in the morning when the water is
low, and think to go over it at night, when the banks are full. Yet such are
all they, that put off Repentance till old age, that think to serve Satan and
their youthful lusts with full dishes, and reserve a few abject scraps of old
age for Gods Table; Sera nimis vita es^ crastina, etc.
but let such seriously consider, Whether it will be easier for them now to
repent and amend in the time of their youth, then hereafter in old age; now in
health, then hereafter in sickness; now when the burden of their Sins is
lesser, then hereafter when it shall be greater: In a word, now whilst Grace
is near, or when it shall stand at a further distance; In the midst of delay
the account is increased, Toll moras nocuit differ. Lucan.
the debt augmented, the Enemy more strong, themselves more feeble, and all the
difficulties of Conversion daily more and more multiplied upon them, having a
day more to repent of, and a day less to repent in.

Sermons.
A Certain Maid went to Church, Joh. Angier Help to better Hearts, etc.
with a purpose to sleep from day to day as she confessed afterward, thinking
she could sleep more sweetly there, then any where; It so pleased God, that one
night she fell into a dream, and imagined her self to be walking; two ways
were presented unto her, in the one way was a great Fire, that way she would
not go; the other way she took, it led her by the Church, she awaked with this
application of her dream; That she had been wont to sleep much at Church, and
if she did not amend that fault, she must expect no other but Hellfire; Cave,
serve Dei, ne sit somnus tuus non reparatio, sed spiritus extinctio. Greg. Mor.
This dream thus applied made her leave sleeping, and fall to Hearing, and from
Hearing to believing and repenting. Thus it is that Hell is made for
Sermon-sleepers, torment being the just recompense of sinful ease, that they
who sleep when they should awake, must make account to awake with pain when
they would be at rest.

Real Thanksgiving to be made unto God for benefits received.
THe Covetous Husbandman, when he se^s a plentiful Harvest toward; or the
Merchant a good return in trading, Tho, Cheshire Serm^n at S. Paul's, Land. 1641.
they will perhaps afford a, God be thanked; bu^ it comes off so poorly, with
such a squint-eyed relation to their profit, that a Man may easily perceive,
had not all things happened aright, he should have had little thanks at their
hands, as if they were no more bound to give God praise, then he to give them
present benefit: But it was otherwise with holy Job, he did not only sacrifice
for his Children, his health, and wealth, whilst he enjoyed them, but when
they were taken away from him, Chap. 1. And herein a good Man imitates the
bells, that ring as pleasantly at a Funeral, as at a Wedding; When it goes
well with him, Quando been sibi ^st, laudat misericordiam Dei, quando male
justitiam, etc.
he praises the Mercy of God; when ill with him, he magnifies his Justice, he
is thankful in all Conditions, not slightly, as the manner of the World is,
but cheerfully, and with a good courage, Psalm 33. 3.

Plots and Contrivances of the Wicked turning to the good of Gods People.
TUlly makes mention of one Phereus Jason, whom his Enemy running through with
a sword intending to kill him, Lib. 3. de not Deorum.
by chance opened an Impostume in his body, which the Physicians could not by
any means cure; Such was that confederacy of Ioseph's brethren, they sell him
into Egypt, thought all cock-sure; but God so ordered it, that the wickedness
of their cons^ltation was the stirrup whereby he mounted into greater
exaltation. Ge^. 45. 3.
Thus it is, that all the Plots and contrivances of wicked men shall turn to
the good of Gods people; the vexations, Collings 5. L^ssons.
troubles, sorrows, or any Affliction whatsoever, wherewith the Sons of Belial
are wont and do usually exercise the Children of God, are but as so many spurs
and goades in their sides to drive them forward to their Heavenly Father; And
though by his permissive Providence it has, and does often so fall out, that
they have a very large Commission to touch their bodies, their goods, and their
good names, -- Dolor hic ^ibi proderit olim. Ovid. 3. amor.
nay, their very lives, yet all shall be for the good of their precious and
immortal Souls.

The sad effects of not giving unto God his due Glory.
IT was the frequent affirmation of the late Heroic and Victorious King of
Sweden, Will. Hall. A Sermon. at S. Barthol. less, 1642.
That he feared the Peoples ascribing too much of that Glory to him which was
due to God, would remove him before the work was finished. And for ought as any
Man knows, it was a speech too Prophetical: Thus it is, that there is not any
way speedier to bring Judgments upon Rulers and Nations, then when the due
honor shall be taken from God, and ascribed to Men, which are but secondary,
De omni bono apparenti, a nobis rescrantur soli Deo lauds. Bern, in Cant.
subordinate Instruments to convey them: It is the only way to forfeit all
favors, when we ascribe too much to the second causes, and too little to the
first, by looking more to them for safety, then to him from whom all
deliverance comes.


ERasmus amongst others of his pleasant conceits, I^ colloqu.
reports a story of one at Sea, where (as their manner is) every Man in a
wrack, flies to his Saint, as it were a Tutelar God; There was one (says he)
amongst the rest, when he saw the present and imminent danger, Phillips Sermon.
at Feversham, 1625.
and that there was no time of delay; In the midst of his distraction thought
with himself thus, If I should pray to Saint Nicholas, it is uncertain whether
he hear me, and it may be, he is busy in hearing and dispatching some body
else; or if not so, yet it may be, he cannot have so speedy access to mediate
for me, Non vatat exiguis rebus adesse Io^i.
as my present necessity requires. I will therefore take the safest and the
surest course, and go directly to God himself by Christ Jesus, according to
that of the Psalmist, O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh
come. Psalm. 65. ^ 2.
And without all doubt, it is a manifest derogation, and robbing of God, even
of his peculiar right, who is the sole hearer of his Peoples prayers, Ch^^nit.
exame^. page 3.
when solemn addresses are made unto Saints and Angels by way of Invocation;
there being no warrant in all the Scr^ptures for the same, as Eckius and other
Pontificians do confess. Nay more, that it is the safer and better way to call
upon God only in the name of Jesus Christ, as another of them, out of a work
ascribed to S. Augustine, Augustine. de visi^^t. inform.
concludes the question thus, Tutius et jucundius loquor ad meum Jesum, etc.
More safely and more sweetly do I speak in Praye^ to my Jesus then to any of
the Angels, or Saints departed.


IT is recorded of one Sir William Champney in the Reign of King Henry the
third, Joh. Stow's Survey of London.
that living in Tower street London, he was the first Man that ever builded a
Turret on the top of his house, that he might the better overlook all his
N^ighbours; but it so happened that not long after he was struck blind, so that
he which would see more then others, saw just nothing at all; A sad judgment!
And thus it is just with God, when Men of towering high thoughts must needs be
prying into those A^cana Dei, T. Fuller Sermon at S. Bot^lph Bishops-gate,
Land. 1653.
the hidden secr^ts of God, that they should be struck blind on the place, and
come tumbling down in the midst of their so curious enquiry; At the Ascension
of Christ, it is said that he was taken upon in a Cloud; being entered into his
presence Chamber, a curtain, as it were, was drawn to hinder his Disciples
gazing, and our further peeping; yet for all that a Man may be pius p^lsator,
Quae Deus occulla esse voluit non sunt scru^^mda Prosper.
though not temerarius scrutator, he may modestly knock at the ^ounsel door of
Gods sec^ets, but if he en^er further he may assure himself ^o be more bold
^hen welcome.


MAster Dering, S. Clark in vita.
a little before his death, being raised up in his bed, and seeing the
Sunshine, was desired to speak his mind, said; There is but one S^n that gives
light to the whole World, but o^e Righteousnes^e, one Communion of Saints; As
concerning Death, I see such joy of spirit* that if I should have pardon of
life on the one side, and sentence of Death on the other, I had rather choose a
thousand times to dye then to live: S. Price Sermon. in Sh^^pshir^, on Rev. 7 17.
And another, one Mr. John Holland lying at the point of Death, said; What
brightness do I see? and being told it was the Su^shine; No, says he, My
Savior shines, Now farewell World, welcom^ Heaven, the Day Star from o^ high
has visited me* Preach at my Funeral, God deals comfortably and familiarly
with Man, I feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the body or out of
the body I cannot tell, God he knows, but I see things that are unutterable:
Thus it is, that the People of God have the comfortable appearance of him self
at the time of their dissolution, the door of Heaven standing then as it were a
charr, they are ravished with the very glimpse of those things that are at Gods
right hand; P^eti^sa san^ sanctorum mors est, tanquam vitae ^anua, ^t perfectae
securitatis ingressus. Bern. in Cant.
Whether they look up to God w^om they have offended, or downward upon Hell
which they have deserved, backward upon Sins committed, forwards upon Judgments
to be feared, the Spirit helps their Infirmities, Christ intercedeth for
them, and God stands by with the arms of his Mercy ready open to receive them.

A good Man denominated from the goodness of his Heart.
IT is one of Aristotle's axioms, that the goodness or badnesse of any thing
is denominated from its Principle; Geo. Vetterus in Psalm 51.
Hence it is that we call that a goo^ Tree, that has a good root, that a good
house that has a good foundation, that good Money that is made of good Metal;
that good cloth* that is made of good ^ool; But a good Man is not so called,
Laconici quoties b^^um quen^am virum commendare volunt Divinus hic vir, aiunt,
Plato in Men.
because he has good hands, a good head, good words, a good voice, and all the
lineaments of his body similar and compose^, as it were in a Geometrical
symmetry, but because he has a good Heart, good affections, good principles of
Grace, whereby all the faculties both of Body and Soul are always in a posture
of readiness to offer up themselves a living and acceptable Sacrifice unto God
Almighty.

Faith and Repentance to be daily renewed and increased.
AS the natural life of Man does consist upon that which by the Physicians is
called Humor radicalis and Calor naturalis, Natural heat and radical moisture;
for indeed all life is sustained by motion, and motion is between
contrarieties: J. Case Sermon. of Repent. 1616.
So in the life spiritual, there must be of necessity two contrary qualities;
Repentance, continually to put off our own Unrighteousness, and Faith to put
on Christ's, the one to work upon the other, so to preserve life by motion; Not
to sit down with those Anabaptistical, and fanatic spirits that limit a
certain time for sorrow and Repentance; Ne^o potest esse ^am prudens et
circumspectu^, ut aliquando non laba^ur, erg^ re^erat pedem etc. Lactant.
for the best of us all are but leaking Vessels, and we must ply the Pump daily
for fear of drowning, as long as there is excess of evil and defect of good
within us, Repentance must be renewed, and Faith increased daily, Death only
being the end and complement of our Repentance and Mortification, even as our
R^surrection shall be the period and ultimate of our Faith and Vivificati^n.

To be much more careful of the Soul than body.
IT was provided in the old Law, that the weight of the Sanctuary should be
double to the ordinary weight, Exodus 30. 13. N^h. Rogers practical C^^^chism.
and that the shekell of the Sanctuary should be worth as much again as that of
the Commonwealth which was valued at Fifteen pence: And all this to hint out
unto us, that God must have double weight in matters that appertain unto him in
the salvation of our Souls; Steph. Menochius de Rep. Heb. lib. 7. cap. 11.
double care, double diligence, that is twice as much care of our Souls as of
our bodies, begging oftener for Spiritual then temporal things: hence is it that
there is in the Lords prayer but one Petition for Earthly things and two for
Heavenly linked as it were together; but one for daily bread, and two for
pardon of sins and Graces to fight against them.


S. Chrysostom makes mention of the Women of Corinth, Homil. in 1 Cor. 4. Dan.
Price Sermon. at Spittle, 1617.
who had a custom to set up lights or tapers at the birth of every child, with
proper names, and look what name the taper bare which lasted longest in the
burning, they transferd that name to the Child; But the Lord does put up a
perpetual burning lamp to be as a Monument, for all those that shall persevere
in well-doing to the end; It is not enough to begin in the spirit, and end in
the flesh, It is not for him that runs, but for him that runs so, that
runs to the end, that persevereth, Non p^gnanti sed vincenti corona.
Augustine.
that the Crown is reserved; It is he that shall eat of the hidden Manna, he
that shall have the white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
Man knows, saving he that receives it, Rev. 2. 17.


IN the Levitical Law, things that crept upon all four were forbidden, yet if
they had feet to leap withal, Levit. 11. 7. Peir. du Moulin de IN amor de
Dieu.
they were judged to be clean. Even so howsoever some of our thoughts are taken
up about the things of this World, our trades and business, yet if we have
legs to leap up with, that we can raise up our hearts to God and better
things* when we come to pray, and prostrate our selves before him, Ibi maxim
^portet observare pec^^^um ubi ^asci solet. Vid. in cogitatio^ibu^, etc.
Hieron. in ep. ad Demet.
it is not to be condemned, they may pass for clean well enough: But if they
always creep on the ground, if never raised higher then the Earth, if no good
thoughts of God, if no looking up to better things; then without doubt, they
are unclean, not legally unclean as the beasts were, but really unclean in the
fight of God and his ^oly Angels.


MAry, when she went in quest of her Savior, stopped not at the empty Monument,
but searches and follows him so far, H. King Sermon. at Court, 1626.
that she discovered him under the disguise of a Gardener, and then casting her
self at his feet, takes possession of him, with this acclamation, Rabboni;
which is in effect as much as Thomas his congrat^lation, Ioh. ^0. 28.
My Lord, and my God. Thus it is, that true Knowledge does not always hunt
objects at the view, nor does it stop at the numerous effects wrought by the
Creator; Haec t^ta est scientia ^ominis, scire quod ipse ni^il est per se^et
qui^quid ^x Deo est, et prop^er Deum est. Aug. in Psalm. 70.
It is not a shallow or supersicial knowledge, that God is, in a general
consideration, the cause of all things, a Creator at large, but in a nearer, My
God, my Creator; So that Religion and Faith are but aerie empty sounds, if a Man
possess nothing of them beyond the words; the fruit of either consists in
their application; It Is true, that Christ is the Savior of the World, so much
I know, but this is an useless truth to me, if my knowledge reach no further,
unless my Faith entitle me to him, and by appropri^ting his work, be able to
call him my Lord, my God, my Rede^mer, etc.


A Wary discreet Traveller, when he comes to his Inn, calls for no more then
he means to pay for, S. Smith Essex Dove.
though he see a great deal of good cheer before him in the house, yet he
considers how far his purse will reach, otherwise if he call in for all he
sees, S^^ltus est debtor qui gaudens pecunias accipit, et tempus quo reddere
d^beat non attend^t, Greg. in moal.
and never take any thought of the reckoning, he shall not only run into a
great deal of disgrace, but of danger also. So fares it with most Men in
taking up more then they are able to pay for; but let every good Man howsoever
h^ sees a number of goodly things in this World, which may allure him, and set
his desire on Fire, causing expense both of time and Money, be careful how he
comes into debt, especially the debt of Sin, the worst of all other; For though
by death he may be out of the Usurers hands, yet Death cannot free him from the
debt of Sin, neither can he escape out of the hands of a just and all-knowing
God.

Infant Baptism, asserted.
A Ristotle was so precise in admitting Scholars to his Moral Lectures, In
lib. 8. Polit. H. King Sermon. at Court, 1626.
that he would first have them past their Wardship, as thinking that their
green capacities would not be mellow enough for his Ethiques till Thirty at
least: But Christ our Master was of another mind, his Sinite parvulos, Suffer
little ones to come unto me, and sorbid them not, encouraged Parents and
Supervisers of Children to enroll them in his bands, Mark 10. 14. Si pr^ ^o ^ui
respondere potest, alius respondeat, non tantum valet; Ex quaregula illud
Evang^lii dictum est; Aetatem habet, ipse pro se loquatur. Aug. de Baptism.
his Church, before they were Masters of so much tongue as to name Christ; well
knowing, that though their narrow apprehensions could not reach the high
mysteries of Faith, yet in a few years their understandings being elevated with
their statures, would grow up to them, and the accession of a little time
digest those precepts which their Infancy drew in, into the constant habit of a
good life, not ^owing themselves into any crooked postures of Error, nor
forgetting that straight form into which their first education brought them.

Grace to be communicated.
IF a Man had a thousand tuns of Wine stored up in a Cellar, Aloys Novori^i
tractat. Theolo^icitom. 2.
which he had no use of, but should be kept up close, What were any Man the
better for it? but if he would make a large Cistern, and turn out a Conduit
cock into the street, that every one that passed by might be refreshed, then
would they commend his bounty, and be very thankful unto him: So when it has
pleased God of his goodness to afford us the graces of his holy Spirit, and we
should keep them to our selves, Omne b^num sui diffusivum.
not being profitable to any in the communication of them, it would be matter
of rebuke and reproach until we let the Cock run, until we tell others what
God has done for our Souls; For Grace like oil is of a diffusive nature, like
Mary's box of ointment which she brought unto Christ, that filled all the house
with the sweet scent thereof; Ma^th. 26. 7.
so that God smells the savor, and others receive good thereby.

To be patient under Afflictions, because they will have an end.
AS an Apprentice holds out in hard labor, Web. Co^. in ep. 2. S. Petri.
and (it may be) bad usage for seven years together or more, and in all that
time is serviceable to his Master without any murmuring or repining, because he
sees that the time wears away, and that his bondage will not last always, but
he shall be set at large, and made a Freeman in the conclusion. Thus should
every one that groaneth under the burden of any cross or Affliction
whatsoever bridle his affections, possess his Soul in patience, -- Dabit Deus
his quoque finem. Virgil.
and cease from all murmuring and repining whatsoever, considering well with
himself, that the rod of the Wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the
Righteous; Psalm. 125. 3. and 30. 5.
that weeping may abide at Evening, but joy comes in the Morning; and that
troubles will have an end, and not continue for ever.

Every Man to find out the impediments of Repentance in himself.
THey who have Water running home in Conduit-pipes to their houses, as soon as
they find a want of that which their Neighbors have in abundance, Nehem.
Rogers pra^tical ca^ec^ism.
by and by they search into the causes, run to the Condui^-head, or take up the
pipes to see where they be stopped, or what is the defect, that so they may ^e
supplied accordingly: Even so must every Man do, when he finds that the Grace
of Repentance flows into other Men's hearts, and has no recourse or access
into his Soul, by and by sit down and search himself, what the cause should be,
In tribunal mentis tuae ascend contra te, et reum te constituito a^te te, etc.
Aug. de utilit. agend. poenitent.
where the Remora is that stays the course, where the rub lies which stops
the grace of Repentance in him, seeing they that live (it may be) in the same
house, sit at the same Table, lie in the same bed, they can be penitent for
their sins, sorry that they have offended God, and so complain in bitterness
of Soul for their Sins; but he that had the same means, the same occasions,
more sins to be humbled for, more time to repent, and more motives to draw him
to the duty, is not yet moved with the same, nor any way affected with the
sense of Sin, this must needs be matter of high concernment to look about him.


IT is reported of Caesar, Seneca.
That having prepared a great Feast for his Nobles and Friends of all degrees,
it so falling out, that the day was extreme foul, that nothing could be done to
the honor of the meeting with comfort, he was much displeased, and so far
enraged at present, that he willed all them that had bows, to shoot up their
arrows at Jupiter (then their chief god) as in defiance of him for that rainy
weather; Discat non murmurare qui mala patitur, etc. Isid. lib. 3. de sum. ^ono.
Which when they accordingly did, the arrows fell short of Heaven, and full
upon their own heads, so that many of them were very sorely wounded: Even so do
our muttering and murmuring words, either for this or that which God sends,
they hurt not him at all, but return upon our own pates, and wound both deeply
and dangerously.


A Party of the Syrian host, L. Scalabon moralia in passionem Christi.
as they were forraging about, light upon a little Hebrew Maid, they brought
her to Naaman, their Commander in chief, he bestows her upon his Wife; the
Girl perceiving that he was infected with Leprosy, said unto her Mistress,
Would to God, my Lord were with the Prophet that is in Samaria, he would soon
deliver him of his Leprosy. Such is the voice of the Gospel to every
unrepentant Sinner, 2 Kings 5. 3.
O that you would come unto Christ, seek after him by a lively Faith and
Repentance for your sins, Romans 1. 16.
he would deliver you from the threatenings of the Law, and release you of
those impossible conditions, 2 Cor. 3. 8.
which you are there bound unto, he has conquered Death and Hell for your
sakes, Col. 4. 11.
paid the ransom for your sins, and in the end by his Redemption, will bring
you to life everlasting.


PLiny makes mention of Cranes, that being about to fly over the Seas, they
take up stones in their feet, Not. hi^^. lib. 10. cap. 23.
and sand in their throat, to poyse them against the wind, and as they come
near the Land, by little and little cast them down; so lightning themselves,
that the desired shore sees the last stone not taken away, but let fall. --
Quanto ^aelicior hic qui.
Thus it is, that good Men use the World as if they used it not, they take up
the care of Riches as a Viaticum to serve them in this life, (...) cupere^ quam
qui totum (...) posceret orbem. Juvenal.
they know that en^ugh is useful, too much a burden, and therefore as they
come nearer and nearer to their desired R^st, they more and more disburthen
themselves, and cast off every thing that hinders in their way thither.

The work of the Law preceding the Work of the Gospel.
IF a Man have a corrupt and dangerous sore in his Flesh, Tho. de Trugillo
t^esaur. Concionat.
if he will be cured, or prevent the danger of a Gangrene, he must prepare
himself both for trouble, pain, and many other inconveniences; as first the
lancing of it, then the cutting and squeezing out the filthy and corrupt
matter, then corrosives to eat out the proud Flesh; and lastly, (if need be)
searing and cauterizing, before any healing plaster be applied: Even so in the
spiritual healing of our Sins, the work of the Law must precede the work of the
Gospel: Dulcia non m^ruit qui non gustavit amara.
First, that of the Law to humble us; then that of the Gospel to comfort us,
before there be any obtaining of pardon, any comfort in the hope of Redemption,
the Law must take ^s in hand, search our frailty, lance our Sins, squeeze out
the Corruption of our Natures, make us cry and roar again with the smart of our
wounds. And then it is that the gentle Cataplasms of the Gospel may be applied,
and the comforts of Remission ministered unto us from the Physician and Surgeon
of our Souls, Christ Jesus.

Divisions in Church and State to be prevented.
TAcitus in the life of Agricola his Father in Law, D. Price Sermon. at S. James'
s before P. ^en. 1608.
describing the figure, form, fashion, complexion, chivalry and resolution of
the Britai^s in that time, observes this also, that they were then drawn into
petty partialities and factions; and the greatest help the Romans had, adversus
validissimas gentes (as he calls our Warlike Nation) was, that they had no
Common Council, they did not cons^lt together, but each City fought against
their Neighbors, Et ita dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur (they are his
own words) whilst one by one sighteth, all are subdued: And it is much to be
feared, that the Romans are again entering our Land, they expect an advantageous
succ^sse by our homebred factions and divisions, W. L. C. at the time of his
death. Et scissagaudens v^dit d scordia pallens. Virg. Ae^eid. 8.
so that the Pope may well be said, never to have had hopes of a greater
harvest in England; For, how can it otherwise be? How shall the Church of
Christ, the body of Christ, the household of Faith, the Kingdom of Heaven upon
earth stand, if there be so many Sizers and Concisors, and cutters and carvers
of her Members.

Sorrow for Sin must be in particulars.
Physicians meeting with diseased bodies, when they find a general
distemperature, they labor by all the art they can to draw the humor to
another place, Hieronym. Guadalupens. Com. in Hoseam.
and then they break it, and bring out all the corruption that way; All which
is done for the better e^se of the Patient: Even so must all of us do, when we
have a general and confused sorrow for our Sins, Nemo dicat occulte;
poenitentiam ago apud Deum, novit Deus qui me agnoscit, etc. Aug. de cura mil^^.
labor as much as may be to draw them into particulars; as to say, In this and
in this, at such and such a time, on such an occasion, and in such a place I
have sinned against my God; For it is not enough for a Man to be sorrowful in
the general, because he is a Sinner; but he must draw himself out into
particulars, in what manner, and with what Sins he has displeased God,
otherwise, dolus latet in generalibus, he may deceive his own Soul.

Perseverance in goodness, enjoined.
IT is said of Hannibal, that notwithstanding the rough Rocks, and craggy
clifts of the Alps, Sir Walt. Raleigh hist. of the World.
he proceeded onward in his design for Italy with this resolution, Viam
inveniam aut faciam, I will either find or make a way, that is the terminus ad
quem, and thither I will go. Thus it is, that God being Alpha and Omega, he
will have his servants to run from (...) to (...), from the beginning to the
end, in the constant profession of the Faith; They that were marked to be
preserved in Jerusalem, were distinguished by the character (...), J. Menoch.
Com. in Ezekiel. cap. 9. v. 4.
which is the last of all the Hebrew letters, teaching them, that they must run
their race even to the last, that their Profession must be Sacramentum
militare; or like to that in the Covenant of Marriage, Till death us depart;
with the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 3. 4. Ioh. 20. 21. Matthew. 15. 22.
not to leave their hold; with Mary Magdalen, to stand, wait, and stay at the
Sepulcher; and with the Woman of Canaan, to cry, and continue in crying. And
why? because that as they have heaped Sin upon Sin, and drawn the threads
thereof so bigg, Esaias 5. 8.
so long, till they made them cords of Vanity, and after wreathed those cords,
Perseverandum est et assiduo studio robur addendum, etc. Phil. 3. 1.
till they became Cart-ropes of Iniquity; so that now being called unto
Sanctification (there being always in Christianity (...), a Furthermore) they
should increase more and more from Faith to Faith, from virtue to virtue,
crying out with S. Paul, Nondum apprehendi, I have not yet attained, etc.


HE that falls into the midst of a deep River, Marcel. de Pise. Encyclopaed.
Theolog.
must labor and take more pains to get out, then he that fell in but at the
brink thereof, the one must swim hard for it; whereas the other catching hold
upon the bank, or something else growing thereupon, more easily draws himself
out: Thus, if we fall into great Sins, it must and will cost us more sorrow and
tears, then if we fell into lesser; 2 Chronicles. 32. Matthew. 24.
Manasses sin was great, and his sorrow was proportionable. Peter's sin was
great, and his sorrow was suitable; so must ours be, if our sins be many and
great, our sorrow must be so much the greater; if but few and little, our
sorrow may be the less, and we sooner attain the peace of Conscience.


SIr Thomas Moor makes mention of a drowsy devoted Monk in his time, who in
his quotidian devotions was wont to say the first day, Gloria Patri, the
second, et Filio; the third, et Spiritui sancto, and in the end it was, Sicut
in principio, doubling over his Orisons, not much unlike to the ignorant
Countryman, that yawning out his thoughts unto God, Dan. Price Sermon. at S.
James's before P. Hen. 1608.
unbuttons his doublet with, Our Father which art in Heaven, and steps into his
bed with, I believe in God the Father Almighty, never laboring to understand
what the one or the other means: This is to be like the Sun in Ioshuah's time
that stood still; or rather the Sun in Hezekiah's time that went backward; or
Fabia in Quintilian, who for thirty years together would not confess that she
was one year elder: Non progredi est regredi.
But God cannot abide such halting in his service, any such delaying in
Religion, any such loytering in Profession, any such limits in Christian
profession, he cannot but distaste any Snail-like withdrawing, any piece-like
recoyling, any hypocritical feigning, any wearisome fainting, any dyall-like
staying, any pool-like standing, any Ephraemite starting, any foolish-Virgin
neglecting, or any drowsie-Apostle sleeping.


IT is well-known that when a Jailer knocks off a Prisoners bolts, Nehem.
Rogers practical Catechism.
fetters and Irons, that the constant wearing them, has put him to a great
deal less pain, then the knocking of them off does at the present; yet though
every blow go to the very heart of him, he never smayes at it, but is quiet and
well- contented, because he knows that the pain will make a compensation for
the ease that he shall afterward enjoy: Thus it is that all Men here in this
World lie fettered and gyved with the bolts and irons of Mortality and Sin, --
Mors ultima poenaoest, Nec metuenda viris. Lucan.
in which case it may be, when God comes to knock off those Irons by death that
they feel more pain and extremity then before; yet because this brings to ease
and everlasting rest, Rev. 14. 13.
let them be patient in this the time of their dissolution. Esaias 51. 2.


How it is that Wicked Men are said to be none of Gods children.
AS in Nature, when Children are neither in outward feature of the body, nor
inward quality of the Mind like to their Parents, which begat and brought them
forth, J. Reeks, A Sermon. at S. Mary-Spittle, 1624.
we say, that such Children degenerate and grow out of kind; neither can they
be outwardly judged to belong to their Parents, by reason of that great
dissimilitude, and unlikenesse of Manners: Even so, when we see Men in the
World, walking in bypath of their own, and no way like to their Heavenly
Father, Inde tu miraris si patrisset filius? Plaut. in Pseudolo.
in Holiness and Righteousness, no way resembling him which has begot them
in Christ, in doing of good, we may (and that justly) say of such, that they
degenerate, and grow out of kind, that they do not Patrizare, tread in their
Fathers steps, going about always doing of good after the example of Jesus
Christ their elder brother.

Things unlawful not to be asked of God in Prayer.
IT is written of V^^ellius the Emperor, Corn. Nepos in vita Vitellii.
that one of his Friends being denied a Petition that was not reasonable, waxed
angry and said unto him; What avails me thy Friendship, seeing I cannot obtain
that which I crave? Whereunto the Emperor replied, And what is thy Friendship
to me, if for thee I must do that which is unlawful? Despiciuntur orationes
leves, pl^nae rerum corporalium, etc. Prosper.
Now if such equity has been found in Man, What shall we think of our God?
With what face dare we seek that from God, which is not lawful to be given?
Hence it is that many times we ask and get not, because we ask amiss and not
for the right end; Iam. 4. 2.
Whereas did we ask in Faith, we should be sure to have that thing which we
desire or a better.

God alone more powerful then all the Enemies of the World.
ANtigonus King of Syria being ready to give battle near the Isle of Andros,
Plutarch in Pelopida.
sent out a squadron to watch the motions of his Enemies, and to descry their
strength, return was made, that they had more Ships, and better manned then he
was: How, says Antigonus, that cannot be, Quam multis meipsum opponis? For how
many do thou reckon me? intimating that the dignity of a General weighed
down many others, especially when poysed with Valor and experience: Matthew.
Styles Sermon before the Artil.
And where is Valor? Where is Experience to be found if not in God? He is the
Lord of Hosts with him alone is strength and power to deliver Israel out of all
her troubles, Land. 1627.
he may do it, he can do it, he will do it, he is wise in heart and mighty in
strength, besides him there is no Savior, no deliverer, he is a shield to the
Righteous, Job 9. 7.
strength to the VVeak, Esaias 43. 11.
a Refuge to the oppressed, Psalm. 5. 12. and 22. 12. and 99.
he is instar omnium, all in all, and who is like unto him in all the World?

Charity to be well-ordered.
MOses being commanded of God to make an holy anointing Oil, was to take a
certain quantity of some principal spices, such as Myrrh, Cynamon, Calamus,
Exodus 30. 3.
and Cassia, then to compound them after the Art of the Apothecary. And thus it
is, J. Reekes, A Sermon at S. Mary-Spittle, 1619. Charitas ad cuncta
virtutumfacta dilatatur, etc.
that the oil of our Charity must be rightly ordered; Every Christian
Al^^s-giver must be a kind of spiritual Apothecary; First, his Alms must be
like Myrrh, which distills from the Tree without cutting or the least incision,
so his Charity to be free without the least compulsion; Secondly, Cynnamon, hot
in taste and hot in operation, so his Alms, neither stone-cold as Nabal, nor
lukewarm as Laodicea, but hot as it was said of Dorcas, Greg. in cura
pa^^oral^.
that she was full of good works; Thirdly, Cassia, as sweet as the former, but
growing low, the Emblem of humility, so giving but not Vaingl oriously: Lastly,
Calamus, an odoriferous powder, but of a fragile reed; so giving, but
acknowledging his Weakness, thinking it no way meritorious; For periculosa
dom^s eorum qui meritis sperant, says St. Bernard, Dangerous is the state of
that ^ouse which thinks to win heaven by keeping house, etc.


THe Samaritans as long as the Jewish Religion flourished and was in honor,
Joseph. hist. lib. 13.
caused a Temple to be built on a high Mountain, named Garazin, that therein
they might not be inferior to the Jews, Car. Sigo^^. de Repub. Heb.
They boasted themselves to be of the Progeny of Joseph, and worshippers of God
also with them; but when they perceived, that the Jews were c^nelly afflicted
by Antiochus Epiphanes for the worshipping of God, then fearing lest they
should be also handled in like manner, they changed their coat and their note
too, affirming that they were not Israelites but Sidonians, Ignis ^^^rum probat
3 adversitas ver^ virum fortem. Lips. in epist.
and had built their Temple not unto God but Jupiter: Thus it is that times of
Trouble and danger easily distinguish the counterfeit and true Professor;
Trouble is a kind of Christian Touchstone, a Lapis Lydius that will try what
Metal men are made of, whether they be gold or dross, whether they be real
or ^arnall Professors, sincere Christians, or rotten-hearted Hypocrites.


IT is observed amongst Anglers, William Holbrook Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1609.
that Pickerils are not easily nor often taken, a Man may take an hundredth
Pinks or Minums before he catch a Pikeril; For he preyeth ^o sore at his
pleasure upon the lesser frye, that he seldom or never has any stomach to
(...) at the bait: And so fares it with the Rich Men of this World, their
stomachs are so cloyed and surfetted with the things of this life, Argentum
divitibus (...) et sangu^s est. Euripid.
that when the doctrine of Salvation is preached, they have no appetite unto
it; tell them of selling all that they have and giving it to the Poor, then
with the young Man in the Gospel they cry out, durus est hic sermo, this is a
very hard saying, Ioh. 6. 60.
Who can bear it? and it is as hard for such to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, whilst the Poor run away with the Gospel.


SOcrates carried Alcibiades, Joh. Combs Apoph* hegm. Imperat. etc.
as he was bragging of his lands and great possessions, to a Map of the whole
World, and bad him demonstrate where his land lay; he could not by any means
espy it, for Athens it self was but a small thing to the World, where his lands
at that time were: Thus many there are that bear themselves very high upon
their lands and livings; so much in one place, Recipit populos ^rna citatos.
so much in another, such a Lordship in this shire, and such a Manor in that;
Sen. Herc. sur.
but Saint Basil tells them truly where their land lies, and what (...) be said
to be really theirs, Nonne telluris tres tan^^ cubiti te expectant? So much
measure of ground to the length and breadth of their bodies, B. King F^n. Sermon.
as may serve to bury them in, or so many handfulls of dust as their bodies go
into after their consumption; that is terra sua, terra mea, and terra vestra,
their land* and my land, and thy land, and more then this no man can absolutely
claim.

Riches very dangerous in the getting of them.
SUppose a Tree, Aloys Novarini Matthew. expensus.
whose leaves and boughs were clogged and hung with honey, unto which an hungry
Man coming, falls a licking one bough and leaf after another, until he is
carried so high from one to another through the greediness of his hunger, that
he slips and slides, and cannot stay himself, but down he comes, and breaks a
leg or an arm, and it is well if he escape with his life: So dangerous is it to
climb up the Tree of Riches; For most commonly Men lay hold so upon one
hundredth after another, Quocunque modo rem.
one thousand after another, per fas et nefas, no matter how or which way they
do it, though they endanger themselves sore, even to the loss of their precious
and immortal Souls to all Eternity.

A great blessing of God to be gently used in the matter of Conversion.
IN some Corporations, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
the sons of Freemen bred under their Fathers in the same Profession, may set
up and exercise their Fathers Trade, without ever being bound Apprentices
thereunto; And whereas others endure seven years hardship at the least, before
they can be free; they run over that time easily, and are encorporated by their
Father's Copy. Thus it is, that they who never were notoriously profane, Gal.
4. 26.
such whose Parents have been Citizens of the new Jerusalem, and have been bred
in the mystery of Godliness, Ephesians. 2. 29.
are oftentimes entered into Religion, and become Children of Grace without any
Spirit of bondage seizing upon them, and though otherwhiles they taste of legal
frights and fears, yet God so preventeth them with his blessings of goodness,
Psalm. 21. 3.
that they smart not so deeply as other Men; A great benefit and rare blessing
to that Soul, where God in his goodness is pleased to bestow it.

Perfection of Grace to be endeavored.
AS the Waters spoken of in Ezekiel grew up by degrees, first to the ancles,
then to the loins, and lastly, to the head. Or as that gradual Wheat our
Savior spoke of, Ezekiel. 47. 4. Vine. de la Nuza Tract. Evang.
First, there was the blade, then came the stalk, after that the full Corn, but
lastly, came the Harvest. Even so like that Water, we must grow higher and
higher, till we come to our head Christ Jesus, and like that Corn riper and
riper until the end of the World, Mark 4. 28. Nemo perfectus, qui persectior
esse non appetit. Bernard.
when God shall come to winnow us; We must resolve, endeavor, contend and
strive for Perfection, as for a prize, though there may be many hindrances, as
Worldly allurements, the Devils temptations, and our own sinful provocations,
ever adding one grace unto another, Phil. 3. 3. Hugget Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land.
1615.
till we are in some sort, secundum hujus vitae modum, according to the
capacity of our humane Nature, perfect Men in Christ Jesus, Matthew. 5. 48.

The pain of a Wounded Conscience greatned by the Folly of the Patient.
SHeep are observed to fly without cause, scared (as some say) with the sound
of their own feet, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Consci^nce.
Their feet knack because they fly, and they poor silly Creatures, fly,
because their feet knack. An Emblem of Gods children under the pains of a
Wounded Conscience, self-Fearing, self-srighted: For as it is, that the pain of
a wounded Conscience amongst other reasons thereof assigned, (as from the
heaviness of the hand that makes the Wound, an Angry God; from the sharpness
of the sword, wherewith the Wound is made, the Word of God; from the
tenderness of the part it self, which is wounded, the Conscience) becomes
intolerable; so from the Folly of the Patients themselves, who being stung,
Sonus ex^itat omnis Suspensum. Virgil.
have not the Wisdom to look up to the brazen Serpent, but torment themselves
with their own Activity; Hear they but their own Voice, they think it to be
that which has so often sworn, lied, talked vainly, wantonly, wickedly, their
own voice being a terror to themselves; See they their own eyes in a glass,
they presently apprehend, These are they which shot forth so many envious,
covetous, amorous glances, their own eyes being a terror to themselves, and as
it was threatened to Pa^hur, themselves become a terror to themselves, Ier. 20.
4.


THere is an old Apologue of a Bird-catcher, Sam. Whaley Sermon. at S. Paul's,
Land. 1615.
who having taken a Nightingale, the poor Bird pleaded for her self as well as
she could, and seeing diverse go to the pot before her, said; Alas, I am not
worth the killing, I have little or no flesh on my back, therefore you may well
let me go; No, says the Fowler, One bird in hand is worth two in the bush: The
Bird replies, that her notes were more worth then her corpse, and that she would
chant him out three Songs, for which he should fare the better all the days of
his life, if he kept them, then if he killed her: The bargain was made, and the
Bird let fly; The Songs were these, 1. Strive not beyond thy strength, 2.
Grieve not too much for the loss of that which cannot be recovered. 3. Believe
not that which is incredible.


Now whilst the wise Bird-catcher was conning these Lessons, Conr. Zuingeri
theat. hum. vitae.
the Bird flying over his head, told him, that he had lost a great treasure;
For she had within her head a precious stone as bigg as an Estridge-egge. At
this news the Birder began to ply the Nightingale with fair words, and told
her, That if she would come again to his hand, he would spare the meat out of
his own belly to feed her. Then answered the Bird, Now I see thou art a Fool
indeed, that can make no good use of my Counsel; For, first, Thou labourest
for me which thou can not reach. Secondly, Thou grievest for that which is
irrecoverable. And thirdly, Thou believe that which no wise Man will, that I
have a Pearl in my head as bigg as an Estridge-egg, whereas all my whole body
is not so bigg: Thus surely, there are many of these Fowlers, Fallax est hic
mundus, fi^^is dubious, exitus horribilis, etc. Pet. Blesens.
or rather Foolers in the World, such as doat in their reposals, setting up
their rest in the things of this World, where it is not to be found, and in the
mean time neglect to seek where it is; For the World has no more sufficiency
to Man's desire, then the Nightingale had the true pearl with in her to give him
content; All the advantages of outward things being to Man's desire, but as
sharp sauce to the appetite, which does not satisfy hunger, but provoke the
stomach to hunger after more.


WHen an hunted Dear^ runs for safeguard amongst the rest of the Herd, T.
Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
they will not admit him into their Company, but beat him off with their horns,
out of principles of self-preservation, for fear the hownds in pursuit of him,
fall on them also: In like manner, when a knot of bad-good-fellows perceive one
of their Society become a New man, Loripes rectum de ridet; A^thiops (...).
Juvenal.
they will be shut of him as soon as possibly they can, preferring his room,
and declining his Company, lest his goodness prove infectious; He shall no
longer be welcome in their Society, then he is able to sing his part in their
Joviall (...) do as they do, and then he is a boon-Companion.

Pride, the vanity and sinfulness thereof.
IT is well known, Rich. Middleton Heavenly Progress.
that rotten wood and Glowworms make a glorious show in the night, and seem to
be some excellent things; but when the day appears, they show what they are
indeed, poor, despicable and base Creatures: Such is the Vanity and sinfulness
of all naughty, proud, high-minded Persons, who though now shining in the
darkness of this World, through the greatness of their Power, place and
height of their honor, Omni vitio deterior est sisterbia, etc. Isidor. de sum.
bo^o. lib. 3.
When the Sun of Righteousness shall appear and manifest the secrets of all
hearts, then they will be seen in their own proper colors, and appear to be
but rotten stuff, and stinking S^pulchers, For to have nothing, derogates
nothing from the worth of true Grace, but to have power without Piety,
greatness without goodness, is a scorn to him that confers it, and a sin to
him that receives it, but both shameful and sinful to him that waxes proud
by it.

Greatness of the torture of a Wounded Conscience.
AS long as Adam did fast in Paradise, he stood fast, but having once eaten the
forbidden fruit, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
he tarryed a while there, but took no contentment therein; The Sun did shine
as bright, the Rivers ran as clear as ever they did, birds sang as sweetly,
beasts played as pleasantly, Flowers smelt as fragrant, herbs grew as fresh,
Fruits flourisht as fair; no punctilio of Pleasure was either altered or
abated; The objects were the same, but Adam's eyes were otherwise, his
nakedness stood in his light, a thorn of guiltiness grew in his heart, before
any thistles sprang out of the ground, which made him not to seek for the
fairest fruits to fill his hunger, but the biggest leaves to cover his
nakedness: Such is the torture of a wounded Conscience, that it is able to
unparadise Paradise; Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis laesus. Plaut.
and the burden thereof so importable, that it is able to quail the courage,
and crush the shoulders of the bugest Hercules, of the mightiest Ma^^upon the
face of the Earth: Who can bear it? Prove. 18. 14.

The Proud man's Memento.
ALexander having compassed and conquered a great part of the World, Joh.
Combesii Apophthegm. Imperat. etc.
came into an Island of the Brachmans, a People that used no habit but breasts
skins, no houses but caves, no Meat but such as Nature produced, and demanding
the reason of this their strange kind of life, they answered; We know that we
shall dye, Co^. Sabellicus. in hist.
whether this day or to morrow we know not, And therefore why should we take
care for power to rule, honor to be esteemed, or Riches to live in pleasure;
With which answer he was so affected, that he bad them ask what they would, and
he would give it them; they presently demanded, Not to dye; to which he
replying, that he could not give that, For he himself must dye: Why, then, said
they, art thou so foolish to live in such Pride, seeing thou know thou shall
dye? Thus if rude, barbarous People by the only meditation of Death, could so
easily contemn all the thoughts of Power and Honor, Is it not more then time
that such as profess themselves to be Christians, who having so many Noble
restraints and retractives to beat down the pride of power and honor, --
nimium ne exede colori. Virg. Eclog.
should now cease to fall in love with their own shadows not to dote upon
greatness, and popular applause which will last no longer then the giver
pleases, not to look big or be proud upon the access of any preferment
whatsoever.


COnsiderable are the causes, T. Fuller Cure of a wounded Conscience.
why a broken leg is incureable in a horse, and easily cureable in a Man; The
horse is incapable of Counsel to submit himself to the Farryer, and therefore
in case his leg be set, he flings, he flounces, and flies out, unjointing it
again by his misemployed metal, counting all binding to be but shackles and
fet^ers unto him; Whereas a Man willingly resigneth himself to be ordered by
the Surgeon, preferring rather to be a Prisoner for some days, Omnia am^ra
et gravia patienter feras.
then a Cripple all his life: Thus it were heartily to be wished, that Men
would not be like the Horse or Mule, which have no understanding, but let
Patience have its perfect work in them, Psalm. 32. 9.
so that when they are as it were overwhelmed in a deluge of distress, -- dolor
hic tibi proderit. Ovid.
finding no way to get out, they would tarry Gods time, and though deliverance
come not at an instant, yea though it be irksome at the present, in due time
they shall certainly receive comfort.


AS when a City or a Castle is besieged, Rich. Middleton Heavenly Progress.
amongst other stratagems and devices, Men use to undermine the Foundation, and
blow it up with Gunpowder, that being (as they think) the surest way to gain
it: So the Devil laying battery to the Fort of Man's Soul, undermines it, and
puts the Gunpowder of Pride into it, knowing that as he himself was blown up,
so will that precious Fortress be easily scaled, if that powder once take fire
in it: And as those that fish with nets in standing Rivers, where they pitch
down their net, do blunder and trouble the water, Superbia Diaboli est
instrumentum, etc. Cassiod. in Psalm. 18.
that the Fish may not see the net, and then with poles beat and dash the
streams above, to drive the Fish into the net; So Satan setting the net of
disobedience, muds and troubles the heart of Man by Pride, and so beats him
down the stream of his own affections, till he have caught him in his deadly
Net of destruction.


THere are a sort of foolish Country people, M^. Collings 5. Lessons.
that think Nature will work out all distemperatures, and they need no Physic;
Some of them are confuted by their graves, others of more strength, and
healthier Constitutions possibly recover their former vigor; but their
diseases make a truce only, not a peace with their bodies; the latent cause
remains and watches its advantage of the next heat or cold the body takes, or
the next intemperate season that comes; And thus many deal with their Souls,
never regarding when their Spirits are troubled to heal up the wound with the
balm of Gelead, but go on in their Worldly natural way, and at last their
troubled Spirits are quiet again, so they get their Peace of course, -- latet
anguis in herba.
but all this while the hidden cause of their trouble watches the next
advantage, their Souls fester within and on a sudden they are ready to despair,
and to lay Violent hands on themselves.


WHen Praxiteles a cunning Painter had promised unto Phryne one of the choicest
pieces in his shop, Plutarch.
she not knowing which was the best, Moral. lib. 4.
began to think upon some plot, whereby to make him to discover his Judgment
which of them was the piece indeed, suborned one of his Servants to tell his
Master (being then in the Market selling his Pictures) Pausanias (...) Atticis.
that his house was on fire and a great part of it burnt down to the ground;
Praxiteles hearing this, presently demanded of his Servant, If the Satyr and
Cupid were safe, whereby Phryne standing by; discovered which was the best
Picture in the Shop: And shall a silly painter, set so high an esteem upon a
poor base Picture, the ^^ubber'd work of his own hands. Animam cura tuam ipsius
in quantum potes. Menander.
And shall not we much more value the Soul, that is of an Immortal being, the
most pretio^^ piece that ever God made, the perfect pattern and Image of
himself; let Riches, honors and all go, if nothing but this escape the fire,
it is sufficient.

Peace of Conscience, not wrought out by merry Company or drinking.
SOme there are that if they be in an ague, Colling^ 5. Lessons.
or the like distemperature, will drink hot waters, or good store of Sack to
prevent their cold ^it and out-burn Nature; but alas, all the good that comes
of it, is only that they fall into a burning Fever, and perhaps consume their
dust into ashes: So there are such profane wretches, that if their Conscience
alarums them, if their Spirit troubles them, or if crosses multiply upon them,
think there is no other way to wind out of the Devils fingers but by throwing
themselves into his arms, Matthew. 23. 15.
making themselves twice more the Children of the Devil then they were before;
they must needs to the Tavern, or to the Alehouse, seek out some boon
Companions, drink away their sorrow; but had Zimri peace that slew his Master?
Damning a Soul cannot surely be the way to save it. 2 Kings 9. 31.


The vast difference betwixt Pride and Humility.
SPectacles that are of an ancient sight, Rob. Bodius conc. in Ephesians.
if the young go about to use them, they show all things less then they are;
but unto old Men they present all things greater then they are: Such is the
difference betwixt Pride and Humility, that Pride is like the old Man's
spectacles, and makes things bigger then indeed they are; but Humility like the
spectacles worn by young Men, causes every thing to seem less then it is; --
impa^ congressus Achilli. Virgil.
A Proud man thinks no man better then himself, an Humble man none worse; The
one lifts up himself on high, the other lays his mouth in the dust, Lament.
3. 29.

Much Learning to be found in a small compass of expressions.
THe Learned Heraclite no less elegant then Aenigmatical amongst other his
quaint speeches, Henry C^^^es difference of Age^.
has this saying of special remembrance and observation; That the greedy
Metal mongers in their too too eager search for the Worlds wealth, after long
toil and trouble find parvum in magno a little pure substance in a great deal
of unprofitable Earth: But it fares otherwise in the Inquisition and pursuit
after Learning, Litera sementem faci^ et sententi^ (...).
For there a well grounded Scholar shall find with a little abstractive
speculation magnum in parvo much matter in few words; every short golden
sentence and particle thereof containing incredible store of most pure
substance; every short Aphorism, every Axiom, every Maxim, nay almost every
contracted line comprehending matter sufficient to fill whole Volumes.

The true Nature of Humility.
RUffin^^ the Companion of S. Francis, having a Revelation that a Crown of
glory was laid up for that holy Man, Bonavent. in legenda S. Francis.
told him one day that it would very much rejoice him, if he would let him
understand, What he thought of himself; To whom S. Francis gave this answer; I
esteem my self the greatest Sinner of any in the World, and that I serve God
less then any other man: How can that be, said Ruffinus, Marul. lib. 2.
seeing some are Thieves, some Murderers, some Adulterers, and many most
profane and Wicked wretches, such as are in the very gall of bitterness, such
as never think of God or goodness; and thou art not only free from all these,
but withal a Man of much sanctity, and holiness? But he replying, said; Out
of doubt if God had been so merciful to them, as he has been to me, Recta
facere, et inutilem se reputare, apud pauc^s invenitur. Bein.
they would have showed themselves more thankful then I have been; And besides
if God had forsaken me, I should have committed far greater Sins then they have
done. Here was a good Man though a Papist, a rare pattern of Humility, so far
imita^le as being a Man arrived at a most excellent degree of self-denial
coming from an inward and high knowledge of God and himself, so that all the
Virtues that he has, and all the good works that he does, though never so
worthy and deserving, yet they seem unto himself little or none at all; Jos.
Hall Chara^^. of Virlues and Vices.
And such is the Nature of every man that is truly humble, He admires every
thing in another, whiles the same or better in himself he thinks not unworthily
contemned; His eyes are full of his own wants, and others perfections. No man
sets so low a value of his worth as himself; not out of ignorance or
carelessness, but of a voluntary and meek dejectedness. Well may it be said of
him, that he is a lowly valley sweetly planted, and well watered; the proud
Man's earth, whereon he trampleth, but secretly full of Wealthy Mines, more
worth then he that walks over them; a rich stone set in lead; and lastly, a
true Temple of God built with a low roof.


IT was well said of Sigismund the Emperor, to a Doctor of Law, whom, for an
excellent stratagem against the Enemy, Rerum German. Script. incogniti.
he had Knighted not long before; When at an Assembly of Peers and Counselors
the Doctor doubted whether side he might with greater credit join unto, Sylvius
lib. 4. com. in reb. gesti.
to his own of the Togati, or the other of the Militia; Is it doubtful, said
the Emperor, Whether Learning or Military experience is more Honorable?
Alfonsi.
I can in one day make a thousand good Soldiers; Drake.
but I am not able in a thousand years to make one tolerable Doctor; Implying,
That the whole course of a Man's life was not time sufficient to arrive at a
full perfection of Learning. Cavendish.
We may read of them that have sailed about the World in three years, but as
yet never heard of any, who in the whole course of their life, how laboriously
soever passed over, were able to compass the whole Circle of the Liberal
Sciences; Aristoteles. Pet. Abaelardus.
There was one called sometimes in regard of the excellency of his parts, Ars
long^, vit^ brevis.
A walking Library; another was said to dispute de omni Sc^bili; mere
Hyperboles. For Socrates on his deathbed confessed, he had many things to
learn, nor shall any Man after him come to the requisite perfection of Learning.


IT is storyed of Homer, Per. Crinitus. de Poat. Grae.
the Prince of Poets, That all the Cities of Greece contended to have the
honor of his Nativity; every one affirming, that he was born there, as
thinking themselves sufficiently honored, if a Man in Philosophy so learned,
in Poesy so singular, should be born amongst them: Thus it may be said of
Humility, all the Virtues, as, Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, etc. contend
for the right of it, O sancta venerabilisque humilitas. Aug.
and think themselves much graced, if they may get it but to be theirs, so
excellent an Ornament they account it; excellent indeed; so that a Writer
defining of other Virtues, was so amazed at the consideration of it, Rich.
Middleton David's Key.
that he was fain to call it, donum sine nomine, in some sort like unto God,
who wants a definition, and cannot be expressed what he is; The wisest of
Philosophers never knew or understood it, and therefore amongst all the ancient
Latins it wanted a name, and amongst the Greeks they could not express it as
we do, but called it (...), the abjection or lowliness of the Mind.

Christ voluntarily engaging himself to take away the Sins of the World.
LOok but upon a poor Man, that lying under an arrest for debt more then he is
any way able to compass by way of satisfaction, Alphons. ab Avendan. Com. in
cap. 9. Matthew.
so that there is no way but one, either pay, or to prison; What though his
Friends be never so rich, never so potent, the Creditor cannot charge one
farthing of the debt upon them, there is no Justice for it; But if this poor Man
has some able Friend that will so far undertake for him, that the debt shall
be paid at a certain time and place appointed, the Prisoner is released, the
engagement is entered in the Creditors book, and from that day forward he looks
upon the Surety, not so much as once minding the poor Debtor at all. Col. 2. 14.
Thus it is, that a Writ of Vengeance was issued out of the Court of Heaven,
Mankind was ready to be arrested and thrown into an everlasting Prison, from
whence he should never have been released, till he had paid the utmost
farthing, which he was never able to do with all the Friends and means that he
could make; Yet such was the happiness, tha^ Jesus Christ seeing some of his
elected Friends that his Father had given him, having their names in the Writ,
steps in, and says; Father, these are my Friends, Esaias 63. 8.
surely they are my People, Children that will not lie, (so he was their
Savior) I will pay the debt, Gal. 4. 4.
charge it upon my account, it shall be paid in the fullness of time. The
Father accepts the tender, Matthew. 3.
desires no better security, then that of his beloved Son, Mark 1. 7.
in whom he is well pleased.

The Virtue of Humility.
AS the Amathist is said to repress Drunkenness, Vincent. speculum morale.
and breed sobriety; the Jasper to expel dreams; the Sapphire to heal tumors
and swellings; the Onyx to make Men valiant: Thus it is, that as several
stones, and Minerals have proper and peculiar Virtues in themselves, the grace
of Humility is that Panacea, O medicinam omnibus consulentem, omnia tumentia
comprimentem, etc. Aug. de verb. Dom.
that Catholicon of the Soul, that cures all diseases whatsoever, it beats down
the drunken fumes of windy conceits, puts away the earnestness of desire after
transitory things, which are nothing else indeed but dreams and shadows; It
cures the risings of heat and passion, and makes a Man valiant to fight against
those three Arch-enemies of Mankind, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

God only able to work Man to Will and to do*
A Great Emperor buyeth a Woman that is a slave, which he intends to marry,
and will so do, Collings. 5. Lessons.
whether she will or no; yet he will woe her, and, if possible, marry her Will
as well as her Person, yet whether she will or no, he will and may marry her,
for she is his purchase; she is his Wife in his determination before he has
married her: This is a Simile, that at the first view may seem to hold out much
of Gods ability in the working of Man to Will and do; yet being put into the
balance will be found light; For though this Emperor has power to force the
Woman's body to the action, yet he has no power to force her Will, to be
willing to the action: The Will is always independent sui juris, but God has
power not only to marry the Soul, which he has bought from being a slave to
the Devil, but to make it ready and willing to marry him.


A Bladder being puffed up with a little wind, if but two or three beans or
pease be put into it, Laurent. Sealabonii moralia in passionem Christi.
they make a mighty sound and rattling, insomuch that a good mettall'd horse,
which not otherwise afraid to enter the troops of ten thousand armed Men, will
be so scared with the strangeness of the noise, that the Rider shall be scarce
able to sit him; yet if this bladder be but pricked with a pin, it comes
instantly to naught. A true resemblance of such whom God enricheth with his
blessings, Divitiae honores, etc. superbis exhibiti, in eorum commutantur
ruinam. Greg. 7. Moral.
casting into their bosoms some beans and pease of extraordinary gifts and
graces, of authority, honor, wisdom, and the like, with which they make such a
rattling, that even valiant hearts are daunted with the sound thereof, and they
themselves drawing in the wind of popular applause, begin to swell as big as
any bladder with presumption of their own merits; but if their Princes
displeasure do but breathe on them, or some fever or distemper seize upon
them, this great wind is abated, their Souls are galled with impatience, and
they sing their part with those wretched ones; What has Pride profited us? or
what has the pomp of Riches brought us? Wisd. 5. 6.


IT was well observed, Seneca in Epist.
that it was as necessary for Rome, that Cato should be born as well as Scipio;
the reason was, Alter cum hostibus, alter cum vitiis bellum gessit, the one
kept War with their Enemies, the other with their vices, so that being alarmed
on both sides, they were ever in a posture of defense: Thus it is, Nemo securus
esse debet in ^ita ista. August. Vel* Pat. hist. Romans
that what with the sword of the Spirit drawn against the exorbitance of the
time, and that of the Militia to defend the Frontiers, the People rouse up
themselves, and become vigorous, well considering, that no Man is sooner
overthrown, then he that fears nothing, and most usually it so falls out,
that Security is the main cause of all calamity.


IT is said of the seeds of Henbane, that they kill all birds saving Sparrows,
and to them they are nourishing food; the reason given is this, their veins are
so narrow, that the fumes thereof cannot pass to the heart and surprise it so
soon as it does other Creatures: Such is the condition, property, quality, and
use of Riches, Avice^^a de medicin, cordialibus.
honors, preferments, or any other outward thing whatsoever, they do nothing
at all hurt the Godly, such as know how to make a right use of them; but to the
Wicked and Ungodly, such as know no other Heaven upon Earth, but the bare
enjoyment of them, they are but as so many ^nares and temptations to entrap
them, so that what is one Man's meat, becomes the others poison; R. Holdsworth
Sermon. before the East India Company, 1632.
And why so? because the Godly have certain private veins of Knowledge and
goodness, whereby that deadly fume of Henbane, the love of the World cannot
pass to the heart; Let Honors mount never so high, Riches increase never so
much, they look above them, they set not their hearts upon them, but take up
that of the Wiseman, Omnia bonis in bonum, All things to the good are turned to
good, Wisd. 39.

The sovereign Virtue of Humility.
Physicians and Naturalists do say, that there is nothing of the Mul^erry tree
but is medicinal, Plin. not. hist. lib. 16. cap. 26. Isidor.
and useful in some sort or other, the fruit, the root, the bark, the leaf and
all; Such is the sovereign Virtue of Humility, that every part of it,
Dioscorides.
as well the root of affections, and the bark of Conversation, as the leaves of
words and the fruit of Works heals some diseases or other, of the drooping
Sin-sick Soul. Hence is it that the great Physician of our Souls (as if they
could never be at rest or quiet otherwise) prescribes us this Recipe against
all spiritual qualms and agonies, Learn of me, that I am lowly and meek, and
you shall find rest to your Souls. Matthew. 11. 29.

The love of Riches, very dangerous.
A Tree when it is half cut through deceives the Elephant when he leans unto
it; Plinius in hist. not.
Mandrage if duly taken is good Physic; but if immoderately, it casts into a
dead sleep, congeals the spirits, and deaddens the Natural faculty; And as Sir
Franc. Bacon.
one said of Parliaments in England, that they are very good purges to evacuate
the ill humors of the body Politic, but very bad Diet-drink to live upon,
weakening the vigorous spirits thereof, and making it liable to much
inconvenience: Such is the immoderate love of Riches and the things of this
life, Rich. Middleton Heavenly Progress.
they deceive all that lean unto them, there is no safety in living upon them,
no rest in the acquiring of them; They cast their Favorites and all such as
dote upon them into strange dreams, their reason and understanding being
stupefied, their devotion and goodness congealed, and in fine their bodies and
Souls in great jeopardy to be everlastingly damned.

Worldly honors and greatness, their Vanity to be considered.
THe Romans to express the Vanity of Worldly honor and greatness, painted
Honor in the Temple of Apollo as representing the form of a Man, Wolfgang.
Lazius de rebus Romans
with a Rose in his right hand, a Lilly in his left, above him a Solsequy or
Marigold, and under him Wormwood, with this Inscription, Levate, Consider; by
all this declaring, that Man in this World flourishes as a Rose in delights
and Riches, but at night, that is, in the time of Death or adversity he is
dried up, rejected and set at naught as a dried Rose which all the day long is
carried in the hand with contentment, Discite in hoc mundo supra mundum esse,
etc. Ambros. in lib. de Virg.
but being once withered is cast away on the dunghill; The Lilly, excelling
Solomon in its glorious clothing, but the leaves falling, it becomes sordid;
aptly denoting the favor of Man whilst in worldly honor, but once clouded by
misfortune made of no account: The Marigold, opening and shutting with the Sun,
Dr. Staughton Sermon. at Mer^. Chap. Land. 1635.
showing that when the Sun of Prosperity shines, he sees all things delectable,
but the Sun setting, Death or Adversity approaching, then appears nothing but
darkness and horror of the grave: The Wormwood signifying, that all the
delights in this World are sweet in the execution, but bitter in the
retribution, no better then a bitter potion, and the very gall of Dragons, Esaias
24. Lastly, the word Levate, is very necessary, lift up your heads and
consider, ye that are proud of your honors and greatness, ye are but Roses
that will wither, Lillies that will lose their beauty, Marigolds that open and
shut with the Sun, and your portion without Repentance will be but Wormwood and
bitterness.


ALexander on a time having many Philosophers with him at a Banquet, Phil.
Nepos in vita Plutarch.
would needs have it put to the question, what was the greatest thing in the
World? some of them said, the hill Olympus, some the Sun, some the Earth, some
one thing and some another; but one of them said, that surely the Heart of Man
must needs be the greatest, because that in a moment it passed through the
whole World, Heaven, Earth, Sea and all: And such is the Heart of every
Worldly-minded Man, Hugo lib. 1. de anima.
though in the substance of it, such a bit as will hardly give a Kite a
breakfast, yet of that extent as to the desires thereof, totus non sufficit
Orbis, Jer. Leech Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1627.
the whole World is not able to satisfy it; If an Earthly-minded Man should
gai^ unto himself the whole World, and being placed in the middle of it, so
that, if possible, he might at once view his purchase, he would Alexander-like
ask whether there were any more Worlds, any more land, any more Wealth that he
might grasp that into his hands also.


OUr Chronicles record it of William Rufus, Sir Joh. Heyward 3. Norman Kings.
one of the three Norman Kings, who in his time was held for one sumptuous in
his Apparel, that when his Chamberlain had brought him a pair of new breeches
to put on, and he demanding what they cost? it was answered, Eight shillings;
The King being offended, bade him begone like a beggar, and bring him a pair of
a Mark price. Now it is much to be feared, that Histories for the time to come
shall have little or no cause at all to commend our sober moderation in this
kind, T. Adams Sermon at S. ^ennet. 1635. Impudicus quisque ut videatur
magnificus, satagit vestiri pr^tios^^ibus, etc. Justin.
but rather complain of the most intolerable and damned excess that ever
reigned amongst Christians, such being the Vanity thereof, that S^xes can
hardly be distinguished; and when one sees Men and Women in their bravery, they
may safely conclude many of them to be in the midst of their Wealth, the basest
of them wearing more in gold and silver-lace, or a set of points, then would
in times past have bought one of our ancient Kings a Suit of Apparel.


IT is said by the Naturalists, Plin. hist. not. lib. 16. cap. 35. Ben. Victo^.
Empyrica.
(how true, let them look to it) that a Vessel being made of the I^ie-Tree, i^
Water and Wine be poured into it together, the Wine will leak out, and leave
the Water behind it: Such are all careless, worldly Hearers of Gods Word, they
hold a true resemblance with this Wood for receiving into them the Wine of
Gospel-dispensations, which should inebriate them with the love of God and
goodness, and also taking in the Water of ^orldly apprehensions, they leave
out all the Wine, forget all the good, so that not^ing remains behind but the
pudled water of Vanity, Pride, Ambition, Luxury, and such other pests of the
Soul, which without the mercy of God upon true Repentance, will endanger it to
all Eternity.


IT is reported of a certain Philosopher, Greg. de la Nuza. Tra^t. Evang.
who dying, demised a great sum of Mo^^y to him that should be found most
foolish, and left another Philosopher ^is Executor; It fell out so, that
traveling many Countries to find out a Man exceeding all others in Folly, that
he came to Rome, where a Consul abusing his place, was adjudged to death, and
another immediately chosen, who joyfully t^ok it upon him; to this Man the
Philosopher delivered the sum of Money, telling him that he was the most
foolish Man in the World, Conr. Zuingerus in theat. ^um. vitae. lib. 16.
who seeing the miserable end of his Predecessor, yet was nothing daunted
therewith, but joyfully took upon him the succession of his Office. O how
Foolish then are the most Men of this World, Not. Shute S^rm. at S. Mild.
Po^ltry, Land. 1638.
that live and see the miserable wrack that Pride and Ambition have made every
where! In Heaven, in Paradise, and through the whole World and every part
thereof, (especially that of the Court of great ones, where but few prosper,
and those that prosper perish) yet dare adventure with joy and contentment to
hoyse out their sayls, Aulae culmen lubricum.
and run themselves upon such dangerous rocks, ruin and destruction.

Men by Nature looking more after their bodies, then their Souls.
SOcrates one day meeting Zenophon the son of Coryllus in a certain angiport,
Diog. Lae^t. in vita.
or Haven-street, and seeing him a youth of great hopes, stayed him with his
staff, and asked him this question; Where was the place where several
Merchandises and Commodities were to be sold? To whom Zenophon readily replied;
In such a place he might be furnished with all sorts: Then Socrates demanded of
him another question, Where was the place where Men were to be made good? To
this his answer was, That he could not tell. Then says Socrates to him, Follow
me that thou may learn it. Math. Styles Sermon. at S. Greg. Land. 1639.
And so from that time he began to be Socrates's Scholar. Now as it was with
Zenophon at that time, so it is now with most part of Christians, they know
readily, and are very well verst in all the ways of Worldly Trade and
Commerce, as having special care to be ignorant of nothing that belongs to
profit or pleasure; but if the demand be made concerning the Pearl of price,
the rich Merchandise of the Soul, the graces of Gods holy Spirit, and where and
how one may purchase them, they answer with Zenophon, they cannot tell; And
why? because they never made it their work to enquire after things of that
Nature.

Magistrates, Ministers, etc. their rule to walk by.
THe Seamen have a Proverb, Joh. Apostol. Paroemiae.
or rather a Riddle, Mare ab imbecillibus victum, fortior a vincit, that the
Sea is overcome of things weak, but the strongest are overcome of the Sea;
which is thus to be understood, That those ^abulous, dirty, and fenny places
about the Sea, are by aggregation and access of mire, sand and other things
falling into them continually enlarged, and so the Sea about such places is
contracted, restrained, and as it were overcome; but the rocky, strong, and
hard places are by the Sea strongly assaulted, and by little and little so
battered and eaten out, that it gets much ground there, and overcomes that
stony-hearted opposition: A good Rule for Magistrates, Ministers and Men in
power to walk by, Tho. de Trugillo thesaur. Conciona^.
to be gentle and loving, and of a yielding disposition to the humble,
virtuous, and Religious persons, and suffer such to be overcome by them; but to
the stubborn, stiff-necked and proud rebellious spirits to extend the waves and
billows of their Justice and power to break down their oppositions, and bring
under their aspiring thoughts; but with this Proviso, that their Sins may be
hated, not their Persons, and that to be done too, not with a desire of
Revenge, but of healing and curing their Infirmities.


ALexander having conquered Darius, Phil. Nepos in vita.
there was a box brought unto him from the Kings Cabin, curiously wrought with
gold and pearl; And asking of them (who were not ignorant of the Persians
profusednesse and vanity) What use there was of so precious a Vessel? It was
answered; That the King used therein to keep his Ointments, which as soon as he
understood, he gave order forthwith, Rich. de Mediavilla progressus Coelestis.
that it should be the keeper of a more precious Jewel, meaning the Iliads of
Homer, and be no more called (...), but (...), not the box of Ointments, but
the box of Homer. Now, how much rather should every Christian make his most
precious Soul (which has for a long time been no better then a cage full of
unclean birds, the keeper of Vice and all kind of vanity) a Temple fit for the
Holy Ghost to duel in, a Vessel and preserver of the Graces of Gods holy
Spirit.


THere is a story, Cassian. collat. 2. cap. 2.
how diverse ancient Fathers came to S. Anthony, enquiring of him, What Virtue
did by a direct line lead to perfection, that so a Man might shun the snares of
Satan: He bade every one of them speak his opinion; One said, Watching and
Sobriety; Another said, Fasting and Discipline, A third said, Humble prayer; A
fourth said, Poverty and Obedience; And another, Piety and works of Mercy; but
when every one had spoke his mind, his answer was, That all these were
ex^ellent Graces indeed, but Discretion was the chief of them all. And so
without all doubt it is, being the very Auriga Virtutum, the guide of all
Virtuous and Religious actions, Bern. Sermon. in Cant. 49.
the Moderator and Orderer of all the Affections; For whatsoever is done with
it, is Virtue, and what without it, is Vice; Discretio virtutibus modum
imponit, sine qua, etc. Pet. Ravis in Sermon.
An ounce of Discretion is said to be worth a pound of Learning; as Zeal
without Knowledge is blind, so Knowledge without Discretion is lame, like a sword
in a Mad-man's hand, able to do much, apt to do nothing; Tolte hanc et virtus
vitium erit, He that will fast, must fast with Discretion, he must so mortify,
that he do not kill his Flesh; Nich. Gorran. in Romans 12.
He that gives Alms to the poor, must do it with Discretion, Om^i petenti non
omnia petenti to every one that does ask, but not everything that he does ask;
Augustine. haeres. 57.
so likewise pray with discretion, observing place and time; place, lest he be
reputed an Hypocrite; time, lest he be accounted an Heretic. And thus it is,
that Discretion is to be made the guide of all Religious performances.


THe Naturalists do observe, Plin. hist. not. lib. 13. cap. 7.
that the Egyptian Fig Tree being put into the Water, presently sinks to the
bottom; but being well soaked with moisture, contrary to the nature of all
other wood bwoyes it self up to the top of the Water: Theophrast. Dioscorid.
So we may say of humble-minded Men, they keep the lowest place and degree in
every thing; but when in such places they are sooked with the waters of grace
and devotion, with the waters of tears and compunction of heart, with the
waters of pity and compassion of other Men's miseries, then do they (after
death especially) swim up to that incomparable weight of glory which God has
assured to the poor in spirit, Io^ 22.

No Worldly thing must hinder the Service of God.
IT was a good saying, out of a Wicked Man's mouth, When Balaac put hard upon
Balaam to curse the People of God, Ralph. Venning Sermon. at S. Olaves Southw^rk,
1654.
No, says he, I cannot do it, If Balaac would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot do it, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of God to do
either good or bad of my own mind, Numb. 24. 13.
but what the Lord says, that will I speak. And thus it is, that when a Man is
put upon any sinful design, such as shall not be agreeable to the Word of God,
nor suit with the dictates of his own Conscience, let him desist with that
resolution of Joseph, How can I do this great Wickedness, and so sin against
God? Avoid Satan, away with Riches, Honors, Preferments, etc. if they once
appear to dis-engage me from the service of my God; If not only a house full
of gold and silver, but all the Kingdoms of the World were to be at my dispose,
I would forgo them all, forsake them all, that I might stick close unto the
service of so good a Master, as God is.

Every Man is to make himself sure of Heaven and Heavenly things.
IT is related of a Man, that being upon the point of drowning in a great
River, Alard. Aemstel. redami select. Similitud.
he looked up and saw the Rainbow in the Clouds, and considering that God had
set it there as a sign of his Covenant, never more to drown the World by water,
makes this sad conclusion to himself; But what if he save the whole World from
a deluge of Waters, and suffer me to be drowned here in this River, I shall be
never the better for that; when I am once gone, all the world is gone with me.
Thus it is in the matter of Heaven and Heavenly things, as in the point of
Calling and Election; Matthew. 10. 30.
whereas it is said, That many are called, but few chosen; so that if a Man
cannot make out unto himself, that he is none of the Many so called, and one of
the few that shall be certainly saved, he must needs be but in a sad condition.
What is the blood of Christ, though in it self sufficient to save ten thousand
Worlds, if it be not efficient in the application thereof unto his Soul? He
shall be never the better for it. What if the Gospel come to him in Word only,
and not in power, not in the Holy Ghost and full assurance? it would do him
little good. What are Promises, if he be not Heir of them? What are Mercies,
if he be no sharer in them? What is Heaven, if he have no Evidence for it?
And, what is Christ, (though all in all in himself, yet nothing, nay the
further occasion of damnation to him) if he he not in him? Job. 3. 19.


The deaths of Faithful Magistrates, Ministers, etc. to be lamented.
IT is reported in the Life of S. Ambrose, That when he heard of the death of
any holy Minister of Christ, In vita; per Paulinum.
he would weep bitterly; The like may be read of Philo the learned Jew, That
when he came to any Town or Village, and heard of the death of any good Man
there dwelling, he would mourn exceedingly, because of the great loss, Lib. de
vita Mosis.
that that place and the whole Church of Christ had received thereby. How much
more cause have we then of this Nation, to lament our sad Condition, who have
in few years lost so many Reverend, learned and Godly Ministers, Ed. Calamy
Preface to M. Ash Sermon. at Fun. of Jer. Whitaker, 1654.
Magistrates, and others; Needs must we languish, when the breath of our
nostrils is expired; needs must the Church be in a tottering estate, when her
props and supporters are taken away; and such a one is every good Magistrate in
his place, every painful Preacher in his Parochial charge, every child of God
in the Precinct where he dwells; And if the taking away of any of these be not
matter of sorrow, I know not what is.


IT is said of Lycurgus, Apollodor. de origin Deorum lib. 3.
that being cast into a phrensy by Dionysius, in that distemper thinking to
have cut down a Vine, with the same hatchet slew his own Son: So the Antinomist
being possessed with a spiritual phrensy, which he calls Zeal; when he lifts up
his hatchet to cut off some errors, which like luxuriant branches have sprung
up about the Law, cuts down at unawares the very Law it self, both root and
branch, making the observation of it arbitrary in respect of Salvation, In the
Preface to Lanc. Andrews Wi^ton. on Command.
or as a Parenthesis in a sentence, where the sense may be perfect without it;
For under color of advancing Gods free Grace in Man's salvation, and affecting
Christian liberty, they abrogate the whole Moral Law, as if it were worthy of
no better entertainment among Christians then Iehojakim gave to Ieremies
prophecies, Ier. 26. 23.
when he cut the roll in pieces and threw it into the fire to be consumed.


IT is said of Julian the Apostate, Sozomen. lib. 5. cap. 5. Theodoret. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
that he might the better root out the name of Christianity, he did disgrace
the Orthodox Bishops, cast an odium upon the honor and office of Priesthood,
make away Church-maintenance, and Church Priviledges, forbad Christian Schools
and places of Learning for instruction of their youth, permitted not the
Christians to meet together, not to have any benefit of Law, any share in
Government, or any degree of dignity; and all this, that he might the better
advance his own wicked designs. E. Waterhouse Apology for Learning.
Thus the Devil by such and the like artifices projecteth the dishonours of
Learning and Learned men, that so in the dark of Ignorance and decay of Arts,
he may form and complete the model of his own Diabolical Kingdom, that having
put out the eye of good instruction, he may seduce the poor silly People as
Captives at his Will.


THere is mention made by S. Basil (...) of a certain art of drawing of
Pigeons to their Dove (...) in (...) Countries, Epist. 175. ad Julittam.
by anoi^ting the Wings of one of them with a sweet ointment, and it being sent
abroad, does by the fragrancy of that ointment, (as it were dequoy) invite and
allure others to that house, where it self is a domestic: Thus as a good Name
is bonum Utile, Prove. 22. 1.
a second Patrimony, and bonum Honestum, one of the requisites that makes up a
complete Christian, Phil. 8.
so it is bonum Iucundum, better then a precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1.
then an ointment poured forth, drawing all good Men after the savor thereof,
D. We^tfield Sermon at S. Paul's, Land. 1^41.
so that a Preacher well-reported of, shall not want Hearers; A Physician of
good report shall not want Patients; The Lawyer that has a good report shall
not want Clients; Nor the Schoolmaster, Scholars; Nor the Tradesman,
customers; Nor the poor Man, friends; such is the attractive faculty of a good
Name, Cant. 1. 3.


S. Augustine reports of his mother Monica, In (...). Confess.
that as often as her Children did sin against God, so often she did, as it
were, travel in birth of them again, every evil report she heard, did, as it
were, cause a new throw; Nay, it is verily thought, the pains and pangs of
Childbirth are not so tedious to the Mother, as those after-pains, that are
caused by the lewd conversation of their ungratious Children. For those pains,
though they be sharp, they are soon over, and there is some comfort in the
midst of them, that a Child is coming into the World. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Curas
pariunt liberi magnum malum si quid humanitus eis accidat.
But when a good Eunice, a careful Mother shall do her best endeavor to train
up her Children in the fear of God, acquainting them with the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make them wise to Salvation, and yet at last shall find all
her labor lost, her hopes frustra^e, her Children carried away with lewd and
vicious Company into all manner of loose conversation, this must needs bring
her gray head with sorrow to the grave, Prove. 10. 1.

Gods Omniscience.
PIerius in his Hieroglyphics wittily resembles God by the picture of an eye
standing upon the top of a staff, Lib. 33. ex Cyrillo et Eucherio, To^us oculus
est Deus, etc.
the staff being an Emblem of (...) power an^ scepter wherewith he governs; And
the eye as an express of his all-searching Knowledge, whereby he dives and
pierces into the secrets of all hearts: Thus it is that no man can entertain a
sinful thought, though slumbring upon his bed; nor effect a wicked purpose,
though bolted in his lodging when the windows are closed and the Curtains
drawn, Virgil. Eclog. 6.
but ad Lunae lumina visus erit, the eye of Heaven sees it, knows it, and
writes it down in the book of Accounts, yea and at the last day will summon and
warn that Soul to a reckoning for it.

The lawful use of humane Learning in Sermons.
QU. Elizabeth, Sir John Harrington View of the Church of England.
of ever blessed memory, having heard Dr. Thomas Dove B. of Peterborough preach
before her at her Manor of Richmond (he being a mo^^ eloquent and facetious
Scholar) said; That she thought verily the holy Ghost was descended again in
this Dove: And surely, whatsoever others may think of humane Learning as
Rhetorical figures and tropes, and other artificial ornaments of speech taken
from profane Authors to be but paintings fitter for wanton strumpets, then
habits for chaste Matrons; more beseeming the stage then the Pulpit; yet let
such know, that Judith did attire her head as well as Iesabell, Scientia
natural^ Theologiae ancilla. Tho. p. 1. q. 1.
and that seeing now the extraordinary gifts of Tongues and Miracles are
ceased, and that knowledge is not infusa but acquisita, Eloquence may serve as
an Handmaid, and Tropes and Figures as Jewels and Ornaments to adorn the
chaste Matron, Divinity.

God the only searcher of the secrets of the Heart.
A Ram King of Syria by the advice of his Council, secretly lays an
ambuscado for the host of Israel, but God revealed the whole plot to Elisha
the Prophet, 2 Kings 6.
and he to the King of Israel whereby they all escaped, there being not a word
spoken in their Enemies bedchamber, not a thought or intimation of a thought
but God discloseth it for their good: And thus though the Heart of Man be
seated in a darksome Closet, Tho. Sutton Second Summ^ns for England.
walled round about with flesh, swadled up and covered with the richest
hangings of Natures wardrobe, so charily attended, so shrouded with vails, that
though he bear it in his bosom, feed it with his own goods, study to delight
and please it, though it be his own, yet if he would give a world for the sight
of it, he could not have it; yet neither is the Heart so close imprisoned, 1
Kings 8. 39.
but God beholds it, nor a thought so privily conceived but he descries it, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
nor a spark of Lust so softly blown and kindled, but he discerns it, Psalm 139.
nor the smallest seed of Ungodliness so warily covered, but he reveals it.
Heb. 4. 13.



IT was anciently said of Eucrates (a crafty Companion that would do any thing
for advantage) Erasmi Adagia.
Vias novit quibus ef^ugiat Eucrates, Eucrates has more tricks then one,
Aristophan. in Equitibus.
there is no trap will easily catch him. So may we say of that subtle Serpent
the Devil (whose Agent every Godless Man is) that mill habet nocendi arts,
he has a thousand ways to deceive, he can either fingere personam, 1 Samuel 28.
14.
as when he appeared in Samuels mantle, or sumere personam when he gave that
fatal rout to all Mankind; Genesis 3.
so it may make for his Hellish improvement, he can transform himself into any
shape whatsoever; nay, he knows how to be an Angel of light to deceive (if
it were possible) the very Elect.


SCipio being made General of the Roman Army, was to name his Questor, or
^r^asurer for the Wars, Plutarch. Apophthegm.
whom he thought fit, it being a place in those days, as is now in these, of
great importance; One that looked upon himself to have a special interest in
Scipio's favor, becomes an earnest suitor for it, but by the delay mistrusting
he should be answered in the Negative, importuned him one day for an answer;
Think not unkindnesse in me, said Scipio, that I delay you thus; For I have
been as earnest with a friend of mine to take it, and cannot as yet prevail
with him; Intimating hereby that high preferments, offices of charge and
Conscience are fittest for such as shun them modestly, Nec abnuendum, si dat
imperium Deus; Nec appetendum* Sen. in Thyeste.
rather then such as seek them greedily: And without all doubt, he that hunteth
after any place or dignity, whether in Church or Commonweal, that does omnem
movere lapidem, leave no stone unmoved, no means unattempted, no Friend
unsolicited, does but declare himself as one biased to his own, not the
public Interest, and so a Man unfitting; whereas he that lies dormant, till
Preferment awaken him, that humbly carries an inferior condition, till he
hear the Governors voice, Friend sit up higher, Luke 14. 10. is the only Man
fit to be entrusted.


THe Pagans in their fabulous Legend, L. Gyraldus de Diis Gent. synt. 10.
have a story of Hercules (whom for his strength they counted a God) how a
Carter, forsooth, had overthrown his Cart, and sat, in the way, crying; Help
Hercules, O Hercules help me; At last Hercules, or one in his likeness, came
to him, and laid on him with a good cudgel, Porphyrii quaest. Homeri.
saying: Ah, thou silly lazy Fellow, call thou to me for help and do
nothing thy self? Arise and set to thy shoulder and heave thy part, then pray
to me for help, and I will do the rest: Thus in the matter of Prayer unto God,
we must do somewhat on our parts; It is not, as we say, lying in a ditch and
crying out, God help us, that will^bring us out; Shall a Scholar pray to God
to make him learned, and never go to his book? Shall a Husbandman pray for a
good Harvest and throw his Plow into the h^dg? No, no, as a W. Day Winton.
reverend B. said once in a Sermon before Q. Elizabeth, It is not a Praying to
God, but a tempting of God to beg his blessing without doing our endeavor also.


IT is reported of an M. Jerem. Whitake^.
able Minist^r (now with God) that riding with an intimate Friend by Tyburn
(which he had not know, or not observed before) demanded what that was, and
answer being made; This is Tyburn, where many Malefactors have lost their
lives; Sim Ash Sermon. at his Funera^, 1654.
he stopped his horse, and uttered these words with great affection, O what a
shame is it that so many thousands should die here for the satisfaction of
their ^usts, and so few be found willing to lay down their lives for Christ;
Why should not we in a good cause, and upon a good call be ready to be hanged
for Jesus Christ? it would be everlasting honor, and it is a thousand times
better to dye for Christ, to be hanged, to be burnt, then to dye in our beds:
And most true it is, that it were every way more glorious to die for Christ
then to live without him, such was the Christian temper of the blessed Apostle,
that he was not only willing to be bound, A^t. 21. 13.
but to dye for the Lord Jesus. And after him those Primitive Christians, How
ambitious were they of Martyrdom in the cause of Christ? And of late in the
times of that Marian persecution, How many cheerfully, Joh. Fox Martyrology.
and willingly laid down their lives, mounting Eliah-like to Heaven in Fiery
Charriots? And so must every good Christian be ready to do, to dye for Christ,
willingly to endure the Cross, and not to shrink back for any torment
whatsoever.

The generality of Men, not enduring to hear of Death.
DOctor Rudd then B. of S. David's, preaching before Q. Elizab. An. 1596. on
Psalm 90. verse. 12. O teach us to number our days, Sir Joh. Harrington View of
the Church of England.
etc. fell upon some sacred and mystical Numbers, as three for the Trinity,
three times three for the Heavenly Hierarchy, seven for the Sabbath, and at
last upon seven times nine for the grand Climacterical year; but the Q.
perceiving whitherto it tended, began to be much troubled in her mind; which
the B. discovering, betook himself to treat of some more plausible Numbers, as
of the Number 666, to prove the Pope to be Antichrist, and of the fatal number
88, blessing God for hers and the Kingdoms deliverance, not doubting, but that
she would pass her Climacterical year also. Sermon being ended, the Q. as the
manner was, opened the VVindow, but she was so far from giving him thanks, that
she said plainly; He should have kept his Arithmetic for himself, and so went
away for the time discontented, though upon second thoughts she was pacified:
And thus it is, Phil. Morney of Life and Death.
that the generality of Men and Women cannot endure to hear of Death, or to
entertain any thoughts of their latter end; you shall have them cry out upon
the miseries of this wretched life, Nemo tam imperitus est, ut nesciat sibi
quandoque moriendum, Sen. ep. 78.
and yet when Death appears, be it but in the bare apprehension thereof, they
do as little Children, who all the day complain, but when the Medicine is
brought them, are nothing sick at all; or as they who all the week run up and
down the house with pain of their teeth, and seeing the Barber come to pull
them out, feel no more torment.

Wit, how to make a right use thereof.
IN the Levitical Law, Deuteronomy. 21. 10, 11, etc.
there are directions for the usage of a Captive taken to Wife; When thou go
forth to ward against thy Enemies, and the Lord thy God has delivered them
into thy hands, and thou have taken them Captive, And see amongst the
Captives a beautiful Woman, and have a desire unto her, that thou would have
her to thy Wife; Then thou shall bring her home to thy house, and she shall
shave her head, and pare her nails; And she shall put the raiment of her
Captivity from of^ her, and shall remain in thy house, and bewail her Father
and Mother a full month, and after that thou shall go in unto her, and be her
husband, and she shall be thy Wife. Thus by way of Allusion, Jos. Hall
Contemplat. Solom. and Q. of Sheba.
this Captive-Woman is Wit, as yet unsanctified, Wit without VVisdome, Wit,
(as they say) Whither will thou? When speeches are witty, whilst the behavior
is wicked, when deeds are incongruities, whilst words are Apothegms; What
must then be done? shave the hair, pare the nails, take off the abuse of Wit,
pare off such evils as usually are concomitant. 1. Blasphemy, as in jesting
with the sacred Scriptures. 2. Lasciviousness, as in wanton discourses. 3.
Insolence, as in trampling on Men of weaker parts. 4. Contention, as in making
Policy to eat ou^ Piety; this being done, Wit is become Wisdom, then marry
her, and use her as thy own.


HE must needs be looked on as an unskilful Chemist, Joh. Gauden Apology for
Mini^t. in Preface.
who cannot refine from dross without consuming what is precious; And that Man
is a pitiful Empirick, who cannot purge without casting into bloody Fluxes: And
such an one is every ignorant, inexperienced Reformer, whether it be in Church
or Commonweal, who knows not how to shave his Fathers beard, without cutting
his throat, nor pare his nails without cropping off his hands, that cannot
distinguish betwixt the use and abuse of things, not moderate the ancient
discipline of the Church, nor regulate the wholesome Laws of the Nation, except
he strike at the root and branch of the one, and dig up the Fundamentals of the
other.


ONe of the Ancients thought, Ambros. de Tobia tom. 4. cap. 4.
that there was no fitter Creature to compare the Devil himself to, then the
griping Usurer; For as the Usurer does make sure to himself, and get into bonds
the Patrimony and Inheritance, and so sometimes the very life of the borrower,
for a little Money, which he lends to satisfy his need for the present: So the
Devil for a little fleshly or worldly content, which he lends a Man for a
moment, gets the very Soul of that Man into bondage, and makes the poor Sinner
make over unto his use and service the whole Patrimony of the powers of his
most precious Soul.


IT was the complaint of the Prophet Hoseah in his time, Hieron. Zanch. in
locum.
that the Princes upon their Kings day, (that is, upon a solemn day of mirth
and Festivity celebrated for the King) did make him sick with bottles of wine,
Hos. 7. 5. But if the same Prophet were now alive, he would complain, that both
high and low, Men and Women, old and young, do not only upon some solemn
Festival day, but upon every usual day, yea upon the King of Heaven his day,
the blessed Sabbath Day, Rodolph. Goclen. de luxu. page 97.
make both themselves and others drunk with bottles of Wine, and other strong
drinks, abusing those good Creatures of God so prodigally, so prodigiously, as
if they were born to no other end, but thus to abuse themselves and the good
blessings together, and as if there were no other Heaven or happiness but the
pouring of strong drinks into their bodies.


THere is a Fable, how that the Horse being too weak for the Stagg, required
the help of a Man, B. Barlow Sermon. at S. Paul's, on the next S^nday after the
discovery of the Gun-powder-Treason, 1605.
which was easily granted; Who getting upon the Horse back, put the Stagg to
flight; but after that, Non equitem dorso, non fraenum depulit ore, he could
never quit his back of the Rider, nor his mouth from the bridle bit. So it is
with the helps of all Worldly Potentates, mere beneficia viscata, just like the
poor bird, that having escaped the snare, percheth upon the Tree for refuge,
and there she finds bird-lime to entangle her, from whence she cannot fly, but
with the loss of her feathers, if not of her members. And thus it is with the
helps of States and Nations, Ask their help in time of distress, they will
grant it; but withal, either they exact a tribute, which exhausteth the
Treasury, or impose conditions which infringe the Liberty, or require a future
aid which weakneth the power, -- ibi fas, ubi maxima merces, Lucan.
or betray* upon advantage, which redoubles the misery, or upbraid the benefit,
which exulcerates the Mind, so that it is matter of danger to make any reliance
upon such aid and assistance.

The Christians growth in Grace, enjoined.
THe Eagles Emblem is sublimius, D. Price, The Spring; A Sermon. before P. Hen.
at S. James's, 1609.
to fly higher, even to behold the Sun in its splendour; The Suns Emblem is
celerius, swifter, as a Giant refreshed to run his course. The Wheat in the
Gospel has this Emblem, perfectius, riper, first the blade, then the ^ar, then
full Corn. Ezekiel's Emblem is profundius, deeper, first to the ancles, then to
the knees, then to thighs, Ezekiel. 47. 4. Christ's Emblem was superius, Psalm.
19.
sit up higher. Charles the fifth had for his Emblem, Mark 4. 28.
ulterius, go on further; Luke 14. 10.
The Woman with child has this Emblem, before, fuller until she bring forth;
And so ought every Christian, that is not heavy, dull and sluggish, Haud est
virile terga fortunae dare.
to mount loftier with the Eagle, to run swifter with the Sun, to wax riper
with the Wheat, to wade deeper with Ezekiel, to sit up higher with the guest,
Sen. trag. 6.
to pass on further with the Emperor, to wax fuller with the Woman, to be
still growing in Grace, till they come to the height of Perfection in Christ
Jesus.

Gods blessing upon the means does all.
AS in a course of Physic, a diseased Man is prescribed to boil certain
medicinable herbs in running water, D. Swale, Jacob's Vow, A Sermon at Court,
1621.
and then to drink a quantity of that water, and so is cured of his disease;
And yet we know, that it is not the Water, but the decoction or infusion which
cures the Patient: So it is not the bread that nourishes, nor the abundance
of outward things which enricheth or contenteth, but the infusion of Gods
blessing, which is the staff of life, without which a Man may starve for
hunger with bread in his mouth, suffer the extremity of cold with good clothes
on his ba^k, and dye like the Children of Israel with the Flesh of Quails in
his mouth.

Other Men's sins, the good Man's sorrow.
IT is said of Marcellus, a valiant Roman, that when as after a long and
tedious siege, Plutarch. Cic. orat. in Verrem.
he entered by composition into the great and rich City of Syracuse, the tears
trickled down his cheeks to see so famous a place, and such a multitude of
Inhabitants brought into Captivity: This was much to be done by an Heathen, 1 Samuel 15. 35.
and many of the dear servants of God have not been without example in the like
kind; Psalm. 11 9. 36.
Nay, Ez^k. 9 2, 3.
Christ Jesus himself wept for the security of Jerusalem: Ier. 13. 17.
And whose bowels that has in him any spark of Grace, any dram of goodness, 2
P^t. 2. 8.
would not yearn within him? Act. 17. 16.
Whose heart would not melt to see whole swarms and millions of People
trooping to Hell, Pia est t^^ stitia vi^iis alienis tribulari, non implicari,
Aug. in epist.
led as so many bondslaves by the Prince of darkness, and not bemoan it*
surely there can be no Religion where there is not such compassion.

Husband and Wife, each others Crown.
IN elder times, the Pagans worshipped all the powers of their Deities in two
Images; Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1.
The one whereof was the image of a Man, called Adra, pierched aloft; the other
of a Woman, called Adergidis, seated below: From the Image of the Man issued
Sunbeams after the fashion of a Crown, Ephesians. 5.
meeting in the head of the Woman; And from the Image of the Woman, 1 Pet. 3.
streamed up goodly rays in the form also of a Crown, collected on the head of
the Man: All this to hint out unto us, how the Wife (as Civilians speak)
shines in the beams of her Husband, and the Husband is made glorious in the
reflected beams from his Wife, both being, as it were, Crowns of glory one unto
the other.


IT is said of Mytilene, Vitruvius, lib. 1. cap. 6.
a magnificent stately City near the borders of Phrygia, that it was rarely
builded, but very badly situated; For when the South Wind blew, the
Inhabitants grew sick; when the West-wind, they did cough; but when the
North Wind blew, they were all well. Thus the Church Militant is rarely
builded, but badly situated, as it were, in the unhealthy Marshes of Egypt;
One while the South Wind blows, and it is sick, that is, when Heresies spring
up with the Gospel, as in the first five hundred years after Christ; Another
while the Church cougheth, Matthew. Brooks Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1627.
and labors for life under the strength of some violent disease, as in those
Ten Bloudy^ Persecutions next following Christ's Ascension: Add hereunto the
sad distress that she is in at this very time, rent and torn in pieces with
Sects and Schisms, and groaning under the burden of an unsupportable
Toleration thereof: Nube solet pulsa candidus ire dies. Ovid.
But the Churches comfort is, That God, the great Physician, will in his good
time, turn about the Wind into another corner, that it may be healed.


THere is in Italy, In lacu Acuni.
or some part of the Apennine Hills, not far from the hole Avernus, an herb
called Aconitum, one of the mortallest poisons in the World, and withal so
deadly, that the Poets held it too bad to be natural, and would have it to
come from some supernatural cause or curse, which not being within their
compass to apprehend, Ovid. Met. Will. Crashaw Parable of Poison.
they therefore feigned, That when Hercules drew Cerberus out of Hell, look
where the filthy froth and foam fell out of the ugly jaws of his troubled
mouth, there grew that deadly herb, the poisonous Aconite; Thus do they, poor
Heathens, make a great deal of do to devise a beginning for the most earthly
poison; But for Sin, the spiritual poison of Man's Soul, we need not go to
fancies and fables to find the original matter of it; For the Holy Ghost tells
us directly, That Whosoever commits Sin, is of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8.


IT was judiciously said by a Wise man of later days, P. Charron trois verites.
That if he were enjoined by his Superiors to put forth to Sea in a Ship,
which had neither Mast nor Tackling, nor any other furniture, he would do it;
And being asked, What wisdom there were in so doing? answered; The Wisdom
must be in him that has power to command, Imperare Principis est, et
subditorum obtemperare.
not in him which is bound to obey. Thus it is, that Men having an express
Commandment in Gods Word to do thus and thus, must not gainsay and overthrow
all with their own Worldly wisdom and Fleshly reason; Obedience must be no
disputant, no framer of excuses; If the Captain command the Soldier a piece of
service, Matthew* 8. 9.
Must he tell him why? Is it not enough for the Centurion to say to his
servant, Do this, and he does it; Must the Subject obey his Prince in nothing,
but when he is of his Council? But if with Men it were so, yet with God it may
not so be, of whom it is sufficient for us but to know, that we are commanded
to obey whatsoever his Will and Pleasure is.

Tyrants, Infidels, etc. forced to acknowledge the Providence of God.
JUlian, that wicked Apostate, though as Politic to obscure, as malicious to
oppose the Truth of Jesus Christ, Eusebii hist.
was yet in the end constrained to shut up his Tyranny, Rich. Knoles hist. of
Turks.
with a Vicisti Galilaee, Thou have overcome, O Galilean; In like sort we read
of Mahomet the Second, the first Emperor of the Turks, That at the Siege of
Scodra against the Christians, in the defense of so small a City against his
mighty Army, finding God his Enemy, he blasphemously asked by way of scorn,
Whether God had not enough to do in H^aven, that he should interpose himself in
his affairs on Earth. And thus the most cruel of Tyrants, the most irreligious
Heathen, through the thick clouds of Ignorance, have often espied the glimpse
of Gods dreadful lightning, and as often quaked at his Thunder; Nath. Carpenter
Achitophel.
They have felt his finger in their wounds, and acknowledged his strength in
their weakness; yea, such is the power of the Almighty God to expose their own
Wicked actions as a table of their Confession, and extort an acknowledgment of
his Victory out of their blasphemy; Nec vox hominis sonat o Deus ce^e.
For he that will not deny a God, must of necessity grant a Providence; and
whosoever he be that knows himself, Agitante calescimus illo.
and sifts into his own Will and Actions, must needs acknowledge a supernatural
power, which determines them to good or evil.

The wicked Politician discovered.
PLiny in his Natural History makes mention of a certain beast of Scythia,
that is able to change it self into all variety of shapes and colors, Nath.
Carpenter, ut aatea.
yet returning to his own form, expresses the resemblance of an Ass: A good
Emblem of a wicked Politician, who sitting, as it were, at the stern of State,
and holding the helm in his hands, must of necessity vary himself a thousand
ways to obey all winds, and second all rides: But Nature, which is the worst
dissembler of guilty actions, will one time or another betray it self to
discovery, or at least, plain dealing: Death will strip him naked, and lay him
open to shame, and leave him as a Fool to Men's contempt, and Gods vengeance.

Inconstancy in the ways of God, reproved.
IT is said of that humi repens, the Grasshopper, that it has wings, but they
are such as cannot lift it up from the Earth; J. Gerson Meditat. 7. circa
ascensi Dom.
Or if they do, it is but per sal^ um, not per volatum, they only serve them
to hop, not to fly withal; no sooner up from the Earth, but by and by down
again. And such are all they, whose devotion is soon hot, soon cold again; they
could like it well, if they might go to Heaven per saltum, as it were at one
jump, without any more ado; but per volatum, by flying, (by a constant course
of well-doing) that is too laborious for them, they cannot, they will not endure
it.

The Carnal Professor described.
IT is observed of the Ostrich, a kind of a bird-beast, half a bird of the air,
and half a beast of the Earth, Joh. Calvin. in Job 39. 16.
that he has such a weighty body, that he cannot raise up himself to fly
aloft, yet flickereth in such wise, and moves so fast by the help of his
wings, Aquin. 1. 2^de. q. 102. art. 6.
that he cannot be out-gone by some of the swiftest of other ^reatures: And
such are all Carnal Professors, all holy unholy Worldlings, that will needs
mingle Heaven and Earth together, that will seem to have their conversation in
Heaven, when yet their affections weigh them down to the Earth, 2 Timothy 2.
so that contrary to the Apostles rule, they will Deo militare et saeculo se
implicare, be Gods Soldiers, and the Worlds Solicitors; Nay, contrary to our
Saviors rule. Deo, and Mammonae servire, divide their service betwixt God and
Mammon. Matthew. 6. 24.



Dionysius causing Musicians to play before him, Justini hist.
promised them a great Reward; having played a long time, they expected their
pay; but he told them they were paid already, since as they had pleased him
with Musical sounds, so he them with windy hopes of Reward. But God deals not
so with his servants, he feeds them not with vain hopes, but sure
accomplishment of his gracious promises, there being a Reward for the
Righteous, and he Faithful that has promised it, who says, Behold, I come
quickly, and my Reward is with me, Rev. 22. 12.


WHen the Soldiers had chosen Valentinian to be their Emperor they were
consulting how they might join a Partner with him; Theodorer. in hist.
To whom Valentinian replied: It was in your power to give me the Empire, when
I had it not; Now I have it, it is not in your power to give me a Partner. Thus
if God be our God, Omnisque potestas Impatiens consortis.
Mammon must be our slave; He that is the servant of God must be Master of his
Money; If God be our King, he must be our King only, for the Bed and the
Throne brook no Rivalls, Plutarch.
God must be our God alone: Augustine.
Aequum est Deos fingere, ac Deum negare, It is all one to choose new Gods, and
to deny the true God; No let the Heathens choose new Gods, and forsake the true
God, but let every good Christian say, Thou O Father of Mercy, and Lord of
Heaven and Earth be my God, and my only God for ever and ever.


IT is storied of a young Virgin, that at a great Princes hands, had the choice
of three Vessels; Speculum Exemplorum.
One whereof was Gold, richly wrought, and set with precious stones; and on it
was written, Who chooses me shall have what he deserves; The second was of
silver; superscrib'd thus, Who chooses me shall have what Nature desires; The
third was of Lead; whose Motto was this, Who chooses me shall have what God
has disposed. The former pleased her eye well, but not her understanding: It
offered what she deserved; She knew that was just nothing, therefore refused
it. The second considered, offered what Nature desires: She thought that could
be for no solid good; Leon. d^ Utino. Quadrages. mal.
For Nature desires such things as please the carnal lust; This she also
refused. The third had a coorse outside, but the sentence pleased her well:
offering what God had disposed. So the Faithful Soul put her self upon Gods
Ordinance, Tho. Adams Spirit. Garden.
and chose tha^. The Virgin is Ma^s Soul: The Golden Vessel is the Worlds
riches; contentfull enough to an avaritious eye: Too too many choose this, but
being opened, it was full of dead Men's bones, and a Fools babble, to set them
down for very Idiots, which cleave to the present World, and at last have all
their hopes rewarded with Folly. The silver Vessel is the lust of the Flesh
those fond and vain delights which Concupisence so much hunts after; So says
the Motto, It gives what Nature desires; This Vessel opened was full of wild
fire, Paul. de Wann. Sermon.
and an Iron^ whip, intimating that God will scourge the lustful with the whip
of Judgments, as diseases of body, infamy of name, over^hrow of estate, and
vexation of Conscience. The leaden Vessel is, as the sense and sentence
declares it, The blessing of God; The chuser of it shall have what God has
disposed for him, shall be contented with the providential penny that comes in
daily: And in a blessed, happy condition is that Soul that makes this Election:
for opened, it was found to be full of Gold and precious stones, every one more
worth then a World, the immortal graces of Gods Spirit: The Virgin chose this,
and she was married to the Kings Son, and so shall every Soul that makes the
like choice: No matter, though it seems lead without, and glister not with
outward Vanities, it is rich within, the wealth thereof cannot be valued,
though all the Arithmetical Accomptants should make it their design to cast it
up.

Neglect in the Hearing of Gods Word, dangerous.
HErodotus has a merry tale of a Piper, how he came to the water side, and
piped to the fishes, In Polymnia. lib. 6.
but they would not dance, then he took his net, and caught some of them, and
being thrown upon the land, they began to leap and skip up. Nay (quoth the
Pipe^) I offered you Mu^^ck before and you would none, now you shall dance
without a Pipe. Dr. Joh. Br^wn Sermon at Court, 1627.
Thus it is that most Men commonly regard the songs of Sion, the preaching of
Gods Word, as some men do Music heard late at midnight in the streets, whilst
they are in bed, perhaps they will step to the window and listen to it a while,
and presently to bed again; step from the couch of their lusts to Church, hear
the Sermon, commend the Preacher for a good Man, N^c retin^nt patulae, commissa
fideliter aures, Horat. in ar^e Poe^.
and then to bed again, lulling themselves in their former security; but let
such know, that if God have given them Music, and they will not dance, if God
have afforded Orthodoxall Preachers, and they will not hear: as Christ reproved
the Jews, they shall mourn in sadness for their obstinate refusal of
proffered mirth, and say with heaviness of spirit, There was a Prophet amongst
us.

How Sins may be said to outlive the Sinner.
IT is said of a Lawyer, that resolving not to be forgotten, he made his Will,
so full of intricate quirks and quillets, T. Adams genera^. of Serpents.
that his Executors (if for nothing else) for very vexation of Law might have
cause to remember him. Thus the Incloser of Commons sins after he is dead:
even so long as the poor are deprived of that benefit: He that robbbeth the
Church of a due, and so leaves it to his heir, Sins after he is dead; even so
long as God is made to lose his right: The unjust decree of a partial Judge may
outlive him; even so long as the judged Inheritance remains in a wrongful
possession: Vivit post Funera Virtus.
but e^ contra we say of a charitable good Man, that he does good after he is
dead, his alms maintain many poor Souls on Earth when his Soul is happy in
heaven.

Heaven to be always in our thoughts.
IT is reported of a Reverend Preacher that sitting amongst other Divines, and
hearing a sweet consort of Music, R. H.
as if his Soul had been born up to Heaven took occasion to think and say thus;
T. Adams Sinner's pas. Bell.
What Music may we think there is in Heaven? Another taking a serious view of
the great pomp and state at Court upon a Collar-day, spoke not without some
admiration; What shall we think of the glory in the Courts of the King of
Heaven? And thus must we do, as we read the book of Nature, be still
translating it into the book of Grace, as we plod on the great Volume of Gods
works, Qu^cunque tempore non cogitaveris Deum, p^ta illum diem amissum.
be sure to spell on the word of use, of instruction, of comfort to our selves;
the spiritualizing of Earthly things is an excellent art, And that is a happy
object, and well-observed that betters the Soul in grace.


THere was a certain idle Monk in Winchester, who complaining to King Henry the
second, Mat^h. Paris.
that the Bishop had taken away three of their dishes, and left them but ten,
the King replied, That the Bishop should do well to take away the ten and leave
them the three; Pensate ^ratres, quanta damnationis est, ^ine labor mercedem
laboris, etc. Hieron.
And i^ is just with all Men, especially Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments,
that if they have crimen immane, and nomen inane, that they should have
mercedem ^enuem, a slender recompense; if inertes, then justly inopes;
especially cum valuerint, et non voluerint praedicare, when they are able and
are not willing to Preach, then let double honor which is countenance, and
maintenance be kept from them.


A Man may have his name set down in the Chronicles, Tho. Adams Happiness of
Church.
yet lost; wrought in durable Marble, yet perish; set upon a Monument equal to
a Colossus, yet be ignominious; inscribed on the Hospital gates, yet go to
Hell; written in the front of his own house, yet another come to possess it:
All these are but writings in the dust, or upon the waters, where the
characters perish so soon as they are made; they no more prove a Man happy then
the Fool could prove Pontius Pilate because his name was written in the Creed.
Luke 10. 20.
But the true comfort is this, when a Man by assurance can conclude with his
own Soul, that his name is written in those eternal leaves of Heaven, in the
book of Gods Election, which shall never be wrapped up in the cloudy sheets of
darkness, but remain legible to all Eternity.


A Senator relating to his Son the great honors decreed to a number of
Soldiers, Tacitus.
whose names were written in a book; the Son was importunate to see that book:
The Father shows him the outside, it seemed so glorious, that he desired him to
open it; No, by no means, it was sealed by the Council; Then, says the Son,
tell me if my name be there? The Father replied, the names are secretted to the
Senate; The Son studying how he might get some satisfaction, desired him to
deliver the merits of those inscribed Soldiers. The Father relates to him
their noble achievements, and worthy acts of Valor, wherewith they had
eternized their names; Such are written, said he, and none but such must be
written in this book; Conr. Zuingerus in theat. hum. vitae.
The Son consulting with his own Heart, that he had no such Trophyes to show;
but had spent his time in courting Ladies, rather then encountering Knights,
that he was better for a dance then a March, that he knew no drum but the
Tabret, no courage but to be drunk. Hereupon he presently retired himself,
repented, entered into a combat with his own affections, subdued them, became
temp^rate, continent, valiant, virtuous; When the Soldiers came to receive
their wreaths, he steps in to challenge one for himself; being asked, upon what
title? he answered, If honors be given to Conquerours, I have gotten the noble
conquest of all: Tho: Ad^ms ut antea.
Wherein? These have subdued strange Foes, but I have conquered my self: Now
whosover thou art, that desire to know whose names are written in Heaven, who
is elected to life eternal, it shall not be told thee, This or that undividuall
person: but generally thus, Men so qualified, faithful in Christ and to
Christ, obedient to the truth, and for the truth, that have subjected their
own affections, and resigned themselves to the guidance of the Heavenly will:
These men have made noble conquests, and shall have Princely Crowns, Lud.
Penestal. de Magistr. Romans
Find but in thy self this Sanctimony, and thou art sure of thy Election. In
Rome the Patres conscripti were distinguished by their Robes, as the Liveries
of London from the rest of the Company; so thy name is enrolled in the Legend
of Gods Saints, if thy Livery witness it, that thy conversation is in Heaven,
1 John 3. 16.

No time to be misspent.
THere were three special faults, Theod. Zuingerus, theat. hum. vitae.
whereof Cato professed himself to have seriously repented, One was passing by
water when he might have gone by land, another was, trusting a secret in a
Woman's bosom; but the main one was, spending an hour unprofitably: But how
many hours not only on common days, but upon the Lords day, that concerns the
business of our Souls, have and do we still unprofitably lavish? Let us then
embrace the counsel which Jerome* gave to Rusticus: Be ever doing, Ut quando
Diabolus veniat, occupatum inveniat; that when the Devil comes with ^is
business, he may find us at our business; It is the sitting bird that is so
easily shot, so long as she is flying in the Air, the murdering piece is not
leveld at her; and let us be going on in good employment, and then we shall not
be so fair a ma^k for the Devil to aim at.

The happiness of good Government.
IT was a smart invention of him, that having placed the Emperor, and the Pope
reconciled in their Majestic thrones; T. A. Barren Tree, A Sermon. at S. Paul's
Cross, 1623.
he brought in the several states and conditions of the World before them:
First came a Counselor of State with this Motto, I advise you two; then a
Courtier; I flatter you three* then a Husbandman; I feed you four: then a
Merchant; I cozen you five: then a Lawyer; I rob you six: Then a Soldier; I
fight for you seven: Then a Physician; I kill you eight: Lastly a Priest; I
absolve you nine: This was his Satyr, but happy is both that Church and
Commonweal, where legal Authority does govern in truth and peace; The
Counselor advise, the Judge censure, the Husbandman labor, Merchant
traffic, ^he Lawyer plead, the Soldier bear Arms, the Divine preach, Recta
domus ubi vir imperat. Aug. in epis^.
all bring forth the fruits of Righteousness, so that they become an exemplary
encouragement to their Neighbors, children may be blessed after them, En^mies
convinced, Aliens co^verted, Satan confounded, the Gospel adorned, and their
Souls eternally saved.

The Laity abused by the Roman Clergy in the matter of Confession.
IT is mentioned in a Fable, how the Woolf, the Fox, and the Ass went to shrift
together, In lib. vocat. Poenitent. Asini.
to do penance: The Woolf, confesses himself to the Fox, who easily absolveth
him; The Fox does the like to the Woolf and receives the like favor: After
this the Ass comes to Confession, and his fault was, that being hungry he had
taken one straw from the sheaf of a Pilgrim travailing to Rome, whereof he was
heartily penitent; but that would not serve, the law was executed severely upon
him, he was slain and devoured. By the Woolf is meant the Pope: by the Fox, A
chi manca ^n asino facia metter la cella, etc.
his Cardinals, Jesuits and Priests; these quickly absolve one another, how
heinous soever their offenses are: but when the poor Ass, that is the Romish
ridden Laity come to shrift, though his offense be not the weight and worth of
a straw, yet on his back shall the rigor of the Law be laid, he shall be sure
to pay for all.

The want of Hospitality, reproved.
A great Man of the new model had curiously engraven at the gate of his
Palace, T. Adams on ep. 2. Pet.
the Image of Bounty or Hospitality; The needy Travailer with joy spying such a
sight, makes his approach thither in hopeful expectation of succor; but still
silence, or an empty Echo answers all his cries and knocks: For Hospitality
(...) stand at the gate, but to be sure there is none in the house: Then comes
another, who having his hungry trust often abused, resolves to pluck down the
Image, with these words, If there be neither meat nor drink in the house, What
needs there a sign? Thus great portalls in the Country, and colored posts in
the City (like so many Mock-beggars) promise relief, but they are often found
but Images, dumb and lame signs; For Hospitality is not at home, you shall have
Divinity at their gates, Fores habent ^ritas ut pas^orum ^asae. Diogen.
but no humanity; wholesome counsel, but no wholesome food; much exhortation,
little compassion; charging the weary Travelers ear, but in no wise
overcharging his belly, they have Scripture against begging, but no bread
against famishing; The bread of the Sanctuary is common with them, but not the
bread of the buttery; If the poor can be nourished with the Philosophical
supper of moral Sentences, they shall be prodigally feasted, but if the bread
of life will not content them, they may be packing.


IT is related to the honor of Sir Thomas Moor, then Lord Chancellor of
England, and the charitable constitution of those Times wherein he lived (as a
thing never seen either since, Tho. Stapleton de ^ribus Thomis, in vita Mori.
or before) that he having ended a Cause then before him, did call for the next
to be brought; but answer was returned him, That there was never another Cause
behind, and so with thanks unto God the Court was dismissed at that time;
whereupon in perpetuam rei memoriam, it was ordered, That the proceedings of
that day should be registered in the Roles of the Chancery, as may be seen at
this instant. What a charitable disposition? What a peaceable frame of spirit
was upon the hearts of Men in those darker times? And what a raging Torrent of
dissension is broke in upon us in days that are far more clear? Ubi Causidici
multi, ibi lites multae. Plato.
Every Man almost lives like a Salamander in the fire of Contention; Witness
the multiplicity of Lawsuits, the swarms of Lawyers, the sholes of Clerks and
Registers that are to be found in the midst of us; witness the crowds of
Clyents, dancing attendance upon the Courts of Justice in the several
Judica^ures at Westminster and elsewhere; so that what the Apostle said to the
Corinths, 1 Cor. 6. 7.
Is there not a wise man amongst you, why do ye go to Law? may very well be
inverted upon us, We are all mad, or else the Lawyers would have less
employment.


AN Italian Seignior came with his Servant to one of our Ladies Images (no
matter which, Tho. Adams exposit. on ep. 2 Pet.
for they do not scant her of number) he threw in an Angle of gold; the humble
picture, in gratitude, made a courtesy to him: The Servant observing and
wondering at her Ladyships plausible carriage, purposed with himself to give
somewhat too, that he might have somewhat of her courtesy as well as his
Master; So he put into the basin six pence, and withal takes out his Masters
Angel; the Image makes him loving courtesy, and seems to thank him kindly. Cum
diis pugnant Sacrilegi. Q. Curt. lib. 7.
Thus it is too too common now adays, to take away the Clergies Angel, and lay
down six pence in the stead thereof, to take away their just maintenance, and
put them upon the Peoples benevolence, like those that steal a goose, and stick
down a feather, or those that have undone many, then build an Hospital for some
few; so they having made a sad purchase of Church Lands, having taken away a
Talent of Church-maintenance return a mite of popular Contribution.


PYrrbus and Ulysses being sent to Lemnos, to take from Philoctetes Sophocles
in T^ag. Philoctetis.
Hercules arrows, the two Legates advised by what means they might best ^rest
them out of his hands; Ulysses affirmed, that it was best to do it by lying and
deceit; No, said Pyrrhus, I like not of that course, because I never used it,
but always loved the Truth, at my Father and my Ancestors have ever done.
Whereunto Ulysses replied, That when he was a young Man, he was of his mind
too; but now being old, he had learnt by long experience dearly bought, that
the surest way* and safest art in Man's life is, Tuta f^equenque via, etc.
Fallere et mentiri, to lie and cheat. Surely many of this Age are of Ulysses's
mind, they speak one thing, intend another; they are all courtesy in promise,
no honesty at all in performance: but true Israelites are of Pyrrhus's spirit;
Magna est Veritas et praevalebit, Great is the Truth, and will prevail, is the
sweet Poesy of their profession, both in themselves, and those that relate
unto them, and they resolve upon the doctrine of Christ Jesus their Master,
Ioh. 8. 32.
that the Truth shall make them free.

Piety and Policy not inconsistent.
FAbles are not without their useful Moralls; Tho. Adams exposi^. on ep. 2.
Pet.
A Boy was molested with a Dog; the Friar taught him to say a Gospel by heart,
and warranted this to allay the dogs Fury. The Mastiff (alias Maze-Thief, in
the original Saxon) spying the boy, flies at him; he begins (as it were) to
conjure him with his Gospel. The Dog (not capable of such Gospel-doctrine)
approaches more violently: A Neighbor passing by, bids the boy take up a
stone, he did so, and throwing at the dog, escaped: The Friar demands of the
Lad, how he sped with his charm? Sir, (quoth he) your Gospel was good, but a
stone with the Gospel did the deed. And most true it is, Ambros. ^ffic. lib. 1.
cap. 27.
that prayers and tears are good weapons, but not the only weapons of the
Church. It is not enough to bend the knee, without stirring the hand; Shall
War march against us with thunder; and shall we assemble our selves in the
Temple, lie prostrate on the pavements, lift up our hands and eyes to Heaven,
and not our weapons against our Enemies? shall we beat the air with our voices,
and not their bosoms with our swords? only knock our own breasts, Quam been
convenient.
and not their pates? Sure, a Religious Conscience never taught a Man to
neglect his life, his liberty, his estate, his peace: Piety and Policy are not
opposites; Matthew. 10. 16.
He that taught us to be harmless as Doves, bad us also be wise as Serpents.

Progress in Piety enjoined.
THe Prophet Elias after he had traveled a days journey in the Wilderness,
Lud. Grana^ens. lo. com.
sat down and slept under a Juniper Tree, and there God calls upon him, Up,
and eat; and when he found him a second time, Up, thou have a journey to go;
and when he had traveled forty days, and was lodged in a cave, What do
thou here, Elias? Go and return unto the Wilderness by Damascus, and do thus
and thus. So, whether we be entered in our way, or have proceeded in it, whether
we be babes in Christ, or stronger men, whether carnal or spiritual, we must up
and eat, and strengthen our selves first with milk, and then with stronger
meat; We have still a greater journey to go, we must walk from grace to grace,
from vir^ue to virtue, from knowledge of knowledge, and always think that we
hear a voice that calls us forward, and says; Thou have yet a greater
journey to go, What do thou here, Non progredi est regredi.
Elias? Why stand thou here loytring all the day long? There is no time of
standing in this life, we must still forward, and take notice, that every
blessing of God bestowed upon us, is a further calling on, and a greater
engagement to duty.

The service performed unto God must be personal.
THere is an old Tale, idle in it self, the use may be good; A certain Man that
would never go to Church, Speculum Exemplorum*
when he heard the Saints-bell ring, would say to his Wife; Go thou to Church
and pray for thee and me: One Night he dreamt, That both he and his Wife were
dead, and that they knocked together at Heaven gate for entrance: St. Peter (by
the Legend's leav^) is Porter, and suffered the Wife to enter in, but kept the
husband out; answering him; Illa intravit prose et te, She is gone in both for
her self and thee; As thy Wife went to Church for her self and thee, so she is
gone to Heaven for her self and thee: The Moral instructs every one to have a
personality of Faith, and a propriety of devotion, not to have their Faith
pined upon another sleeve, not to think to go to Heaven upon another Man's
score, but that himself serving God, himself may be blessed of God both here
and hereafter.


AS a cunning Lapidary that shows the buyer an Orient pearl; Joh. de Rampegolis
Fig. Bibl.
and having a little fed his eye with that, our-pleaseth him with a Sapphire;
yet out-values that with some Ruby or Chrysolite; wherewith ravished, he does
lastly amaze him with a sparkling Diamond transcending them all: Or as Drapers
show diverse colors, yet at last for a Masterpiece exceed all with a rich
piece of well-dyed Scarlet. So there are diverse Graces and Virtues like to
Jewels, but the most precious of all, Tot sunt ^ides quot in cythara.
is Faith. And there are diverse degrees and sorts of Faith, as diverse colored
clothes, but the saving Faith is arrayed in the Scarlet robe, has dipped and
dyed her self in the blood of Jesus: yet she is white, pure white, Rev. 7. 14.
as the snow of Lebanon: The Faith that believes Gods Word to be true, is a good
Faith, but not illa fides, that saving Faith; The Faith that believes many Men
shall be saved, is vera fides, no illa fides, a true Faith, but not the Faith;
Only that Faith which believes a Man's own Soul redeemed, justified, saved by
the merits of Christ Jesus, Chrysostom. in symb. Apost.
and that not without works answerable thereunto, is the only Faith, and the
Queen of all other Graces.


THere is a Fable of a Widow, that being thick-sighted, sent to a certain
Physician to cure her; Joh. de Wan. Sermones de tempore.
he promises it to her, and she to him, a sum of money for satisfaction: The
Physician comes and applies medicines, which being bound over her eyes, still
as he departs, he carries away with him some of her best goods; so continuing
her pains and his labor, till he had robbed the house of her best substance:
At last he demanded of her, being now cured, his pay agreed upon: She looking
about her house, and missing her goods, told him that he had not cured her; for
whereas before she could see some good Furniture in her house, now she could
perceive none at all, she was erst thick-sighted, now poor-blind. And are there
not such spiritual Physicians to be found amongst us? Hieron. in ho^il.
such as with long or (at least) tedious prayers, prey upon the poor, and
devour their houses, the purse is still the white they level at; Miserable men,
that look to their own good more then the Churches; Sine labor mercedem
lab^ris percipientes, etc.
serving God with their parts, themselves in their hearts; working like those
builders in the Ark, rather for present gain, then future safety: but as they
desire rather nostra quam nos, so they preserve rather sua quam se, loving like
Demas, the World; losing like Judas, their own Souls.


LOok but upon a Fly coming to a platter full of sweet and pleasant honey,
Hect. Pin^u^ in Dan.
if she thrust not her self altogether into it, but only touch and taste it
with ^er mouth, and take no more then is necessary and needful, she may safely
take ^ing, and fly to anoth^r place: but if she wallow and tumble in the honey,
then is she lymed, and taken in it; and whilst she is not able to fly away,
she does ^here lose her life. Divitii^ utare tuis, etc. T. Mori Epigram.
Thus if a Man take only so much of his Riches as may su^tain, and honestly
maintain his estate, bestowing the rest well, and in a Christian ^anner, then
they cannot hold him back, or bar him from the Kingdom of Heaven, but if
Covetousness shall bewitch him, and prick him on to scrape and rake together
more and more, then he shall never be satisfied, but fall into many snares and
temptations.

The incorrigible Sinners desperate condition.
IT is written of the Elephant, that (as if guilty of his own deformity, and
therefore not abiding to view his snowt in a clear spring) he seeks about for
muddy and troubled waters to drink in. Ulyss. Aldrovand. de Quadruped.
Thus the incorrigible Sinner, that hates to be reformed; because he knows his
wound is deep, he will not suffer the Surgeon to search them, willing rather
to kill his Soul, then disquiet it; He refuses to look into the glass of the
Law, or to come to the clear springs of the Gospel, Qui male agit, odit lucem.
or any perspective that may present his evil Conscience to his eyes, but
seeks rather to muddy and polluted channels, such as misty Taverns, clowdy
Alehouses, vapouring Tobacco-shops, Societies of Sin, and all this to drown
the thoughts of former iniquities, with floods of new: And if he be enforced to
any such reflection, he spurns and tramples that admonition, as Apes break the
glass that shows their deformity; He runs himself prodigally into so many
arrears of debt, that he cannot endure to hear of a reckoning; and thus
dispairing to pay the old score, he recks not into what new and desperate
courses he precipita^es himself.

Wisdom, how to be regulated.
AS God appointed the Jews a measure, Joh. Weemse Ex^rcitat. Exodus 16. 1 Cor.
10.
how much Manna they might gather, so St. Paul appointed the Romans a measure,
how much Wisdom they might gather, Let every Man understand according to
Sobriety. The Jewish measure of Manna was as much as an Omer would hold, what
they gathered over, turned, into Worms and pu^refaction; So the Wisdom which
men gather beyond sobriety does no good, but puff them up, and corrupt them,
and put them upon strains of Machiavillian policy; Plerique accepta scientia
literarum, etc. Chrysostom. de sum. bono. lib. 3.
Wisdom not well regulated, is like a dangerous knife in the hands of a
Madman; and to speak truth, there is nothing so much to be feared, as Knowledge
accompained with Injustice, and armed with power; Meat indigested for want of
Exercise, will rumble in the stomach; and Knowledge not ballast with Sobriety,
will elevate the brain: Serpentine wisdom, and Dove-like innocence must go
hand in hand together, or else we shall drown in our own Knowledge like a
Candle that is quenched in his own Tallow. Matthew. 10. 16.


Affectation of Novelty in the way of Religion, reproved.
THere is mention made of two Men, that meeting at a Tavern, fell a tossing
about their Religion, Joh. Manlii Lo. Com.
as merrily as their cups, and much drunken discourse there was about their
Profession: One protested himself of Dr. Martin's Religion; the other swore, he
was of Dr. Luther's Religion; whereas Martin, and Luther was but one Man. Thus
some are for this Preacher, some for that; such doctrine as is begot in
Thunder, Fidem ex personis, non person^s ex fide existimantes.
full of Faction and Innovation, if it smell not of novelty, it shall not
concern them, they regard not Heaven so much whence it comes, as who brings it;
such a Man, or no Man; otherwise be the Doctrine never so wholesome, they spew
it up again, as if their Conscience were so nice and delicate, as that ground
of Colein, where some of St. Ursula's eleven thousand Virgins were buri^d,
which will cast up again in the night, any that have been interred there in the
day, Cas. Baronii Annal.
except of that company, though it were a Child newly baptized.


THat of Monica, Her. Spondanus de re s^pul^brali. Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 7.
the Mother of S. Augustine, is worthy of remembrance; She had with great care
provided her a Sepulcher near unto her Husband, who dyed at Tagasta in Africa,
and was there buried, purposing to l^e by him; but the Lord so disposed, that
she left her life at Ostia in Italy, and being ready to depart, she said unto
her son, Ponite hoc corpus Ubic^nque, nihil vos ejus cura a conturbet, Bury
my body where you think good, take no great care for it; And being asked, If it
grieved her not to leave her body so far off from her own City? she gave this
answer; Nihil long est a Deo, neque timendum est ne ille agn^scat in fine
saeculi unde me resuscitet; No place is nearer to God then other, neither am I
to fear lest the Lord should not as well raise me up in this place, as in my
own City: Thus let none be troubled with the thoughts of their Burial-place.
Ubicunque sep^li amur; Domini est terra et plenitudo. Ch^ys.
What though the distance be great betwixt them and them to whom they are more
especially related, and that without great charge and expense they cannot be
buried near together; All places are alike unto God, he can raise them up as
well out of Country clay, as out of finer City-dust, and bring them and all
their Kindred and Acquaintance together in a comfortable Resurrection.


OUr Common Law distinguishes between two manner of Freeholds; Tenures de
Little^o^.
A Freehold in deed, when a Man has made his Entry upon Lands, and is thereof
really seized: A Freehold in Law, when a Man has right to possession, but
has not made his actual entry: So is the Kingdom of Heaven ours, not in re
but in spe, our's tenore juris, though not yet j^re tenoris; ours in the
inheritance of the possession, though not in the possession of the Inheritance;
habemus jus ad rem non^dum in re, we are heirs to it, though now we be but
Wards. Our minority bids and binds us to be servants, Gal. 4. but when we come
to full years, a per^ect growth in Godliness, then we shall have a plenary
possession.


IT is reported of the Irish, Fyn. Morrison 's Travels.
that they dig deep trenches in the ground, and pave the surface over with
green turves, that their suspectlesse Enemies may think it firm ground and so
fall in, to their utter ruin: Thus the Devil makes this World his fatal
Vault which he strows over with pleasures and delights, Facili^ descensus
Averni.
the way seems smooth, but is slippery, his intention is mischievous, ut lapsu
graviore rua^t, that Man may have the surer and the sooner fall, then does he
laugh to see a knot of Gallants lie all a long on their backs, that have ru^
headlong at P^ide; a Corporation of Citizens that have run at Riches; a rabble
of Drunkards that ran apace to the ^avern; a crew of Cheaters that posted as
^ast to the gallows; all of them sinking to the bottomless pit of destruction.


THere is a story of a certain worldly, Leon. de Utino S^rm. Quadrage^^ma.
distrustful rich Woman, that being at a poor Woman's labor, the Child being
new born, and nothing to be had for the comfort of it; See (said she without
any pity or compassion) Here is the mouth, but where is the meat? Not long
after it so fell out, that the same Woman drawing near her time was delivered
of a dea^ child, which being well observed by another Woman, that was then
present at her labor; See (said she) here is meat enough, but where is the
mouth? Let none therefore grudg or repine at their issue be it never so
numerous, not grumble at the greatness of their charge, God never sent a mouth
but he sent meat for that mouth, he can as well feed many as few, make the poor
Man's pe^ny go as far as the Rich Man's pound; Psalm. 145. 15.
He is the great Housekeeper that gives every living thing, meat in due
season, and if so, then those little ones that bear his Image are by no means
excluded.

The least of Sin to be resisted.
THe Trees of the Forest held a solemn Parliament, Joh. R^^fensi his Parable
to King Hen. S.
wherein they consulted of the innumerable wrongs which the Axe had done them,
therefore made an Act, that no Tree should hereafter lend the Axe an helve, on
pain of being cut down. The Axe travels up and down the Forest, begs wood of
the Cedar, Oak, Ash, Elm, even of the Poplar, not one would lend him a chip: At
last he desired so much as would serve him to cut down the briars and bushes,
alleging that such shrubs as they did but suck away the juice of the ground,
and hinder the growth, and obscure the glory of the fair and goodly Trees:
Hereon they were all content to afford him so much, he pretends a thorough
Reformation, but behold a sad deformation, for when he had got his helve, down
went both Cedar, Oak, Ash, Elm, and all that did but stand in his way: Such are
the subtle reaches of Sins and Sinful Men, T. Adams Sermon. of the contagion of
Sin.
give but a little advantage on their fair promises to remove the troubles of
the body, and they will cut down the Soul also. Therefore obsta principiis,
crush the Cockatrice in the egg, refuse all iniquity at the first, in what
extenuation of quantity, or color of quality soever it be offered; For if
Satan cannot get leave for his whole Army of lusts, yet he will beg hard for
his Weak ones, Turpius ^jicitur, etc.
his little ones, sins of weakness and infirmity, which if once admitted will
soon unbolt the doors of the heart, let in all the rest of their Company, and
so make a surprisall of the Soul, and endanger it to all Eternity.

Not to admit of delays in Religious performances
EXcellent is that comparison of St. Ambrose; Com. in Lucam. lib. 7.
If (says he) I should offer thee gold, thou would not say, I will come to
morrow and fetch it, but thou will be sure to take it out of hand; yet
Redemptio animae promittitur, nemo festinat; the Redemption of our precious
Souls more worth then thousands of gold and silver is daily offered, Toll
mor^s, semper nocuit differ. Seneca.
and no man hastneth to lay hold thereon: How true may this speech of the
Father be returned upon the cunctators, such as procrastinate in the matters of
Religion; For Earthly things no Man will take time till to morrow, but is very
hot in the pursuit, never resting till he have one way or other compassed them;
yet for spiritual things, such as accompany salvation, most Men's states are
Weak, and like Men ready to break are taking order for two, three, four, six
Months time, and so as far from making satisfaction as ever.

Humility appeaseth the wrath of God incensed.
IT is recorded of an English King, Stowes Chron.
Edward the first, that being exceeding angry with a servant of his, in the
sport of Hauking, he threatened him sharply; The Gentleman answered, that it was
well there was a River betwixt them. Hereat the King more incensed, spurred his
horse into the depth of the River, not without extreme danger of his life; the
water being deep, and the banks too steep and high for his ascending: yet at
last recovering land, with his sword drawn, he pursues the servant, who rode as
fast from him; but finding himself too ill-horsed to out-ride the angry King,
he reyned, lighted on his knees, and exposed his neck to the blow of the Kings
sword; The King no sooner saw this, but he puts up his sword and would not
touch him: A dangerous water could not hold him from Violence, Arma^ura
tutissima, animi mode^^ia, Evagrius.
yet satis est prostrasse, his servant's submission pacified him* Thus whilst
Man flies stubbornly from God, he that rides upon the wings of the wind posts
after him, with the sword of Vengeance drawn, but when poor dust and Ashes
humbles it self, and stands to mercy, the wrath of God, though ever so much
incensed, is soon appeased.

described.
A Certain Colliar passing through Smithfield, Joh. Fox Acts and Monuments.
and seeing some on the one side hanging; he demands the cause, answer was
made; For denying the Kings supremacy; on the other side some burning, he
asking the cause, was answered, For denying the real presence in the
Sacrament; Some, quoth he, hanged for Papistry, and some burnt for Protestancy?
Hoyte on a Gods name: ^hil be nere another: Such an one is every timorous
faint-hearted Christian, another Gallio, a new Nichodemus that would fain steal
to Heaven, if no body might see him; one that owes God some good will, but
dares not show it; his Religion is primarily his Prince's, subordinately his
Landlord's; Whilst Christ stands on the battlements of Heaven, Prove. 10.
and beckens him thither by his Word, his heart answers; Lord I would fain be
there, but that there is a Lion or a Bear, some trouble in the way; All his
care is for a ne noceat, let him but sleep in a whole skin, then omnia been,
whether right or wrong, all is one to him.

ensnared Sinner.
IT is not unknown how the Spanish Index deals with Velcurio who commenting on
Livy, Index Hisp. ^ab. 158.
says; That the fifth age was decrepit under the Popes and the Emperors; The
Index favorably takes out the Popes, and leaves the Emperors wholly obnoxious
to the imputation: Thus the Devil winds out himself at the last from the
wicked, refusing to carry the burden any longer, but leaves it wholly to their
supportation; he that flattered them before with the paucity of their sins, now
takes them in the lurch, and over-reckons them, he that kept them so long in
the beautiful Gallery of Hope, Jac. Acontii stratagemata Satanae.
now takes them aside and shows them the dark Dungeon of despair, and
engrossing all their iniquities in great text-letters hangs them on the curtain
of their beds feet, to the wracking amazement of their distracted and
distempered Souls.


LOok upon a Man that dwells but in a borrowed house, Jer. Whitaker Sermon at S.
M. Magd. B. 1649.
expecting every hour when he shall have warning to avoid; he does not trouble
himself to bestow any cost, either in repairing or trimming up thereof, because
he has no time in it, no Lease for term of years to come: Such is the
condition of every living Man, his body is but as it were an House, lent unto
the Soul, from whence it looks daily and hourly to depart; Why should he then
be so careful to cloth this body with rich and brave Apparel, when (God
knows how soon) it must be laid down in the Earth, there to rot and perish, and
in the mean time neglect to adorn and beautify his precious Soul with Heavenly
graces, which is immortal.

How the wounded Sinner is to be cured.
THere is a story (nothing worth but for the Moral) of a great King that
married his daughter to a poor Gentleman that loved her: Joh. de Wann Se^m. d^
^empore.
But his grant had a condi^ion annexed unto it; that whenever the Gentleman's
side looked black, or he lost his Wedding Ring, he should not only lose his
Wife but his life also: One day pursuing his sports, he fell into a quarrel;
where at once he received a bruise on his left breast, and lost his Ring in the
scuffle: The Tumult over, he perceived the danger, whereinto his own
heedlesnesse had brought him, and in bitterness of Soul shed many tears;
Speculum Exemp^orum.
In his sorrow he spied a book, which opening, he found therein his Ring again,
and the first words he read was a Medicine for a bruised side, it directed him
to those herbs, whereof a plaster applied would not fail to heal him; He did
so, was cured, was secured: Thus applied. The great King of Heaven marries to
Man, poor Man, hi^ own daughter, Mercy or e^e^lasting kindness; but threatens
him, that his side mus^ not look black, his heart must not be polluted with
spiritual Idolatry, nor must he lose his wedding Ring, love to God and his
Saints, least he forfeit both Gods mercy and his own salvation: Man in pursuit
of Worldly affairs, quarrels with his Neighbors, and scuffles with Contention;
So his heart gets a bruise, looks black with hatred; And Charity his wedding
Ring is lost in these wilful turbulencies and Vexations; What should we do
but mourn? Lo, God in his goodness directs him to a book, the holy Gospel;
then the spirit helps him to his Ring again, his former love; and to heal his
bruise, prescribes him these special herbs of Grace, Repentance, Thankfulness,
and Meekness, which being well applied, will keep his Ring of Faith sure from
losing, and his Heart from the self-procured blows of Contention, and so hold
for ever his dear espoused Wife, the beautiful daughter of the King, Gods
everlasting goodness and mercy.

Minding of the day of Judgment, an excellent means to prevent Sin.
IT is reported of a certain Christian King of Hongary, St. Marshall Sermon. at
Fast.
who being on a time marvailous sad and heavy, his brother that was a resolute
Courtier, would needs know what he ailed; Oh brother, quoth he, I have been a
great Sinner against God, and I know not how I shall appear before him, when he
comes to Judgment; These are, (said his brother) Melancholy fits, and so makes
a toy of them, as Gallants use to do: The King replies nothing for the present;
but the custom of that Country was, that if the Executioner of Justice came
and sounded a Trumpet before any Man's door, the Man was presently without any
more ado, to be had to Execution: The King in the dead of the night, sends for
his Deaths-Man, and causes him to sound his Trumpet before his brothers door;
who seeing and hearing the Messenger of Death, springs in pale and trembling
into his brothers presence, and beseeches the King to tell him wherein he had
offended him: Oh Brother, replies the King; Thou have loved me and never
offended me, and is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful to thee? And shall
not so great a Sinner as I, fear to be brought to the Judgment seat of God?
Thus, did but Men stand in S. Ieromes posture, always hearing the Trumpet
sounding in their ears, Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium, they would make
more Conscience of their ways, they would then strike upon their thigh, and
cry out, quid faciam? What shall I do? And thus in all their doings remembering
their latter end, they would never do amiss.


SUch was the spiritual hatred of the Jews to the Lord Jesus, Jer. Boroughs
Gosp. Light.
that they would not vouchsa^e to give him his name, when they talked of him,
or with him; and to show the utter dislike they had of him, they used to say,
Is this be? Art thou be that wilt do such a thing? Whither will he go that we
shall not find him? They would not say, Is this Jesus Christ? or the Son of
God: This now was a spiteful kind of speaking, and did bewray abudance of
malice that lay hidden in their hearts: and so it sometimes falls out betwixt
Man and Wife, contempt, disdain, anger, and malice will not suffer the one to
afford unto the other their names and titles, least they should be put in mind
of such duties as those names and ti^les require, whereas the very names of
Husband and Wife does greatly help to persuade the mind, and to win the
affections, yea the very mention of these names does often times leave a print
of duty behind in the Conscience, Ioh. 7. 11. 15. 35.


HE that has been at Sea and often escaped the many dangers of wind and
weather (even then when both conspired to make a wrack of himself and the ship
he went in) is the more bolder and readier to entertain a ^ew Voyage; M. S.
And why? because he has by the assistance of his God, made way for
deliverance in times of such eminent danger; such an experimental, bold,
Logical Christian was David, when he made a Lion his Major, a Bear his Minor,
He that delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, will also deliver me from this
uncircumcised Philistine. 1 Samuel 17. 34. And such are all good Christians upon
whom the Cross has layen the heaviest, upon whose shoulders the persecuting
plowers have made the deepest furrows, whose feet have been often in the
stocks, and into whose Sculs the Irons have made a deep impression, they having
had from time to time the experience of Gods deliverance from, and assistance
in the time of their trouble, are as bold as Lions, and ready to meet death in
the face, though it come in the most ghastly figure or shape that may be
conceived.


IT may seem strange, J. Magiri Physica.
which is written of the Nature of Thunder and Lightning, that it bruiseth the
tree, yet breaks not the bark; it cracketh the blade, yet never hurts the
scabbard; melts the money in a Man's purse, yet never touches his Person;
Such a thing, and of such a Nature is sin, it will bruise and wound the heart,
but never harm the eyes, or the ears, or hands; it will ^i^rce and afflict the
Conscience, but never hurt the outward Man; it is even a Plague unto the Soul,
yet a pleasure to the body.


IT is observeable, Tho. Westfield Sermon. at S. Barth. great. 1619.
that there are but three main Rivers in this Land, whereof that of Thames is
held the best; Insomuch that when a Courtier gave it out^ that Queen Mary being
displeased with the City of London, threatened to remove the Term and Parliament
to Oxford; An Alderman asked, Whether she meant to turn the channel of Thames
thither, or not; If not, says he, by Gods grace we shall do well enough: And
in truth that River is such a prosperity to that Ci^y, it is such a loving
Meander, that it winds it self about, and shows its silver arms upon her sides,
ebbing slowly eight, but flowing merrily four hours, as if she longed to
embrace her beloved City with rich presents of M^rchandise; But what r^turn
does the City make? what thanks for all this Love? She sweeps all the dirt of
her streets in her face; and chokes her up with soil and rubbish: This is Man's
case, God crowns him with blessings, protecteth ^im with his power, carries
him on from Mercy to Mercy, etc. sed u^i fructus? Pertusum vas est ingratus
homu^cio. Co^narius.
The swelling River of Gods favors by the surfeit of a tide does no sooner
bring in the increase of outward things, but that increase does breed in his
mind another swelling, and in his body another surfeiting, he swells in Pride,
and surfets in Wantonness: And thus Peace breeding Wealth, Wealth breeds Pride,
and Pride makes Contention, and Contention kills Peace, and by this mea^s a
Civil War is raised to the ruin both of Church and Commonwealth.

Popish Miracles condemned.
IT is recorded, that at Amesbury in Wiltshire, when Q. Elianor the Wife of
King Henry the third lay there, a Man that feigned himself to have been long
blind, came to her, and told her, that he had now his sight restored at the
Tomb of the King her deceased husband. Chron. Rob. Amesburiensis.
The Mother easily believed it, but her son King Edward the first, knowing
this Man, that he had ever been a dissolute Wretch, and a vile Impostor,
dissuaded her from giving Faith unto it: protesting, That he knew so well the
Justice of his Father, that if he were living, he would sooner put out both the
dissembler's eyes, then restore sight to either of them. So without doubt,
those Saints, to the Virtue of whose dead bones, Qui expectat miraculum,
miraculum ipse, Aug.
they of the Church of Rome attribute the glory of Conversion, and enlightening,
and restoring of limbs, would (if they were living) rather say, These Men had
no eyes of Grace at all, no lineaments of Piety, then that any light was given
them, any health restored out of their dead dusts, or painted resemblances.

The great danger of the least Sin.
A Dram of poison diffuseth it self to all parts, T. Adams Contagion of Sin.
till it strangle the vital spirits, and turn out the Soul from the body; How
great a matter, a little fire kindles? Iam. 3. 5. It is all one, whether a man
be killed with the prick of a little thorn, or with the hewing of a broad
sword, so he be killed: We have seen a whole arm impostumated with the prick of
a little finger; Nolite contemnere venialia, quia minima sunt, sed timete, quia
plura. Aug. de december ^ho^dis.
A little Postern opened, may betray the greatest City. Thus a little Sin
infects a great deal of Righteousness; If Satan can but wound our heel, (as
the Poets feign of Achilles) he will make shift to kill us there, even from the
heel to send Death to the heart; If the Serpent can but wriggle in his tail by
an ill thought, he will soon get i^ his head by a worse action; hence is it,
that Christ calls hatred, murder; a wanton eye, adultery; because that besides
the possibility of the Act, they are the same in the intention of heart; let no
tang of corruption come to the least part, i^ thou desire to preserve the
whole.

The Heart of Man, the very seed-plot of all Sin.
THat which we call Gunpowder, R. Sibbs. S. Cordial.
is made of the salt and fatter Ear^h; in the ground are the materials, which
when Art has concocted, chym'd, prepared, charged and discharged, it overturns
Towns and Towers, Forts and Cities: So the Heart of Man is the Seminary of all
mischief, the seeds of all Sins are naturally in us; not so much as Treason,
Murder, Perjury, but are in us quoad potentiam, Plura mac^inatur cor Uno
momento. Hugo de anima, lib. 1.
yea, quoad naturam et propensionem, there is in our Nature a proclivity to
them; Nay, the Heart is so apt ground to produce and mature these innata mala
inbred seeds to Actualls, that without the preventing grace of God, unless the
reason of a Man, and Religion of a Christian, keep them under from eruption,
there is no avoiding of them.


When Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, was solicited by the Tarentines and other
People of Italy, Plutarch. in vita
to be the head of their League against the Romans; whilst he sat musing on
these affairs, Cineas his great Favorite came in upon him, Sabel. lib. 8.
Aeneid. 4.
and desiring to be acquainted with his thoughts, to which he was never made a
stranger; Pyrrhus gives him notice of the Embassee of the Tarentines, and
asks his advice; yet his purpose was to join with them against the Romans,
and doubted not but to prevail; The Orator demands, If he should have the
battle, What would he do then? He answered, That then Sicilia and Sardinia
would be at his command: The other consented, but still asked, What then should
be done? He then replies, that Africa could not hold out, but might be easily
conquered; But Cineas still pursued him with his old question, What he would do
then? He again answered, That when all these Countries were subdued, Nec tibi
regnandi ^eniet tam dira cupido. Virg. Eclog.
Graecia would soon come in. But being again demanded, What he proposed to do
then? He apprehending the Orators intention, and smiling, replied; Then Cineas
we will rest and be merry. The Orator answered, That he might do so presently
wit^out any trouble to himself or others, if he would but sit down, and be
contented with his own. This Heathen by the light of Nature and Reason easily
saw, and excellently taught the miserable Folly of wicked Men, who projecting
bey^nd the Moon, seeking great t^i^gs, and vexing themselves and thousands of
others by their wicked engagements, at length with much fishing catch a Frog,
and attain no more then what they might have long enjoyed with less labor and
trouble to themselves and others.


THere is mention made by a good old Christian, Ambros. in Hexameron. lib. 6.
cap. 4.
of a certain Dog, whose Master being slain by one of his Enemies, he lay by
him all the night with great lamentation, howling and barking; In the morning
many came to see the dead Corpse, amongst the rest he also came that slew his
Master; The Dog no sooner saw the Homicide, but made at him, and held him fast,
whereby the wickedness of so close a Murder was discovered: See here the
Love, the Faithfulness of a poor brutish Creature for a piece of bread, that
was so incensed against the Murderer of his Master: And shall poor sinful Man
make much of those Enemies, those Sins that killed his Lord and Master Christ
Jesus? cherish those Sins that apprehended him, that bound him, that scourged
him, that violently drew him to the Cross, and there murdered him? It was
neither Pilate, nor the Ie^s, nor the Soldiers, that could have done him the
least hurt, had not our Sins like so many butche^s and hangmen come in to their
assistance; Agn^sce homo quam gravia sint vu^nera, etc.
Let therefore our Fury be whetted against all Sin, let that be the Object of
our hatred, be sure to be the death of that, that has been the death of so
good a Master, and will, if not prevented, be the death of thy poor Soul to all
Eternity,


LOok but a silly Sheep, Arn. Pontani. Bibliothec. Concionum.
how it makes for succor and shelter under a thorny bush in the midst of
stormy and tempestuous weather, but still as she goes away, she leaves part
of her Fleece behind, and the oftener she goes, the barer and nakeder she is;
so that at last she is able to abide neither bush, nor storm: Such a bush of
thorns is every griping Usurer to the poor borrower, Curas curis accumulat,
etc. Greg. Nyss.
he will leave him at length no Fleece on his back, no house over his head, no
money in his purse, no bed to rest upon, no Flesh on his bones, no credit with
the World.

Christians to walk worthy the Name of Christ.
IT is said of Alexander the Great, Plutarch. in vita.
that spying in his Army a lusty proper fellow, yet when he came to trial, he
proved a very Coward; he asked him, What was his name? He answered, Alexander;
Nay then, said Alexander, either deny thy name, or by some valorous exploit or
other redeem thy credit, I will not have a Coward of my name. Franc. Raworth
Sermon. at S. Botolph. Alders. Land.
Thus it may be said of many Christians, such as by outward profession are so
accounted; If ye be Christians, Why are ye drunk? Why are ye covetous? Why are
ye proud, envious, malicious, uncharitable? Aut occultetur nomen, aut mutentur
mores; either wave your names, or change your manners in life and conversation.

Afflictions, Gods Love Tokens.
A Gentleman has a Hawk which he prizeth highly, he feeds her with his own
hand, is very careful in the pluming of her feathers, sets her upon his Fist,
and takes great delight in the sight of her; but for all this he puts vervells
upon her legs, and a dark hood upon her head, Et quare capititium? quare
compedes? Bernard.
(says the Father) Why is she hood-winked? why fettered? lest she should fly
away, he would not by any means have her out of call, but that she might be
always within the lure. Thus God deals with his children, there cannot be a
more evident sign of his love, then when he chastises them, nor a greater
evidence of his hatred and rejection, then when he gives Men over to do what
they list, Praesens indulgentia ^uturam poenam accersit. Isidor. Pelusio^.
to go on and prosper in all wicked and licentious courses; When he lets Men
neglect all duties without controlement, he makes it manifest, that his purpose
is to turn them out of service; and when he lets them feed at will in the
pleasant pastures of Sin, it is more then probable, that he has destinated
them to the slaughter.

God, not the Author of Sin.
AS a Man that cutteth with a dull knife is the cause of cutting, but not of
the ill cutting and hackling of the knife, Lud. de Carbo Inter homo.
the knife is the cause of that; Or if a Man strike upon an Instrument that is
out of tune, he is the cause of the sound, but not of the jarring sound, that is
the fault of the untuned strings: Or as a Man riding upon a lame horse,
Detestanda and ab hominanda est opini^ quae D^um cujusquam malae acti^nis
credit authorem. Aug. respons. ad art.
stirs him; the Man is the cause of the motion, but the horse himself of the
halting motion: Thus God is the Author of every action, but not of the evil of
that action, that is from Man: He that makes Instruments and tools of Iron or
other metal, he makes not the rust and canker which corrupts them, that is
from another cause; nor does that Heavenly Workman God Almighty bring in sin
and iniquity, nor can he be justly blamed, if his Creatures do soil and besmear
themselves with the foulness of sin, for he made them good, Genesis 1. 10. I^h
34. 11. Psalm 5. 4.

The appropriation of Faith is all in all.
IN Gedeon's Camp every Soldier had his own Pitcher; amongst Solomon's men of
Valor every Man wore his own sword; Judge. 7. 1 Chronicles. 26. 30.
The five wise Virgins had every one oil in her lamp: Luther was wont to say,
That there lay a great deal of Divinity couched up in Pronouns, Matthew. 25.
as meum, tuum, suum, mine, thine, his. Thus Faith appropriated is all in all;
a bird shall as soon fly with another wings, as thy Soul mount to Heaven by
another Faith; Whosoever will go to God, August. de fide.
whether it be in Prayer, or in any Religious performances, he must have a
Faith of his own, it must be fides tua, thy Faith; It is not enough to say,
Matthew. 7. Psalm. 18.
Lord, Lord; but to say with David, my Lord; with Job, my Redeemer; with the
blessed Virgin, my Savior; not to say, Credimus, but Credo; not We believe,
but I believe in God: Every Man must profes^e and be accomptant for his own
Faith: When a Man believes his own Reconciliation by the merits of Christ
Jesus, and strengthens this belief by a desire of pleasing God, this is Fides
sua, the right appropriation of Faith.


IT is observable, Tho. Ad^ms Contagion of Sin.
that when the Moon is lightest to the Earth, she is darkest to Heaven; And
when lightest to Heaven, the darkest to Earth; Thus they that seem best to the
World, are often the worst to God; they that are best to God, seem worst to the
World; and Men most glorious to the World, are obscurest to the Divine
approbation; others obscure to the Worlds acknowledgment, are principally
respected in Gods favor; The Samaritans were condemned by the Jews, Luke 17.
13, 28.
yet nine Jews are condemned by one Samaritan. The Jews thought, that if but
two Men were saved in the world, the one should be a Scribe, the other a
Pharisee, but Christ says, that neither of them both shall come into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Samuel was mistaken in Eliab, Abinadab, and Shammah: for the
Lord had chosen David. Isaac prefers Esau, 1 Samuel 16.
but God sets up Jacob; All this to justify, That Gods Judgment is not as Man's
judgment; his thoughts not as Man's thoughts, neither are his ways as Man's
ways, Esaias 55. 8.


DIogenes, Diog. La^rt. in vita.
a witty beggar, would usually walk in a place, where earthen Statues were
erected in honor of some that dyed for their Country; To them he would pray,
to them reach out his hand, bow, and beg; being asked the Reason, he answered;
Nihil aliud quam repulsam meditor, I think of nothing but a repulse, or denial:
We have many such living Statues in these strait-laced times of ours, mere
Idols that have mouths and speak not, eyes and pity not, hands and give not,
the Poor are sure of nothing but a repulse; They are just like St. Peter's
fish, -- Deus emit sanguine serv^s; M^rcari exigu^ nos piget (...) Deum.
Bislius.
it had money in the mouth, but not a hand to give it; like Dives his dogs,
they can lick a poor Man with their tongues, else give him no relief; The
Papists will rather lose a penny, then a Paternoster, these will give ten
Pater-nosters before one penny; They give the words of Nephthali, pleasant
words, but no meat; as if the poor were like Ephraim, to be fed with the wind;
or as if their words were Verbum Domini, Hos. 12. 1. Matthew. 4. 4.
the Word of God that men might live by it.


WHen one commended Alexander for his many noble acts, Qui^. Curr.
another objected against him, that he killed Calisthenes; He was valiant and
successful in the Wars; Plutarch. in vita.
true, but he killed Calisthenes; He overcame the great Darius; so, but he
killed Calisthenes: His meaning was, that this one unjust act poisoned all his
better deeds: And there was Naaman the Syrian, a Man plentifully commended, 2
Kings 5. 1. When he was cured and converted by Elisha; First he is charitable,
offers gold, and garments, but he excepts bowing in the house of Rimmon; he is
devout, and begs earth for sacrifice, but excepts Rimmon; he is Religious, and
promises to offer to none but the Lord, yet excepts Rimmon: This Rimmon, In
facie plus offendit navus, etc. Plutarch. in Moral.
like the Fly in the Alablaster-box, spoiled all the good intentions. Thus one
spot in the Face spoils all the beauty, one Vice in the Soul disgraceth a great
deal of Virtue; O such a Man is an honest Man, a good Man, but -- Let every Man
take heed, this is that, but, which the Devil ayms at; It Is true, we must hate
all sin, and every sin sowrs, but to the repentant Christian it shall not be
damnable, Romans 8. 2. there is in all corruption, to most affliction, to none
damnation that are in Christ; One Sin may disgrace us, and sour us, but to our
comfort upon true Repentance we are mad^ sweet again by the all-perfuming blood
of our Savior.

The sinfulness of Sin.
THere was a great Prince intending travel into a far Country, Joh. Br^^iardi
summa praedicant.
left his daughter to the tuition of a Servant; Him he made chief, and set
under him a Contro^^er, and five serviceable Guardians. The Prince no sooner
gone, bu^ the Servant falls to lust and riot, forces the Lady, the Controller,
and the Guardians to the like intemperance; which they refusing, he dispoyles
her of all her Robes and Jewels, them of their weapons, and turns them out by
begger^ or pillage to seek their lives in the wide world. This Servant is Man,
Peccatum est de^orme malum. Veri^^.
God i^ the Prince, his daughter the Soul, the Controller is Reason, and the
five Senses the Guardians; Whilst these hinder Man from spoiling his Soul with
riot and excess, he abuses them, turns Reason to madness, and makes all his
senses bu^ as so many Instruments of Wickedness; but woe to that Servant, who
when his Lord comes shall find so doing.

The several degrees of Faith.
AS meat digested turns to juice in the stomach, T. Adams Faith's Encouragement.
to blood in the liver, to spirits in the heart; So Faith is in the brain,
knowledge; in the Reason, assent; in the heart, application: As the child in the
womb has first a vegetative life, then a sensitive, lastly, a rational; So
Faith as mere knowledge has but a Vegetation; as allowance, but sense: only
the application and apportioning the merits of Christ to the Soul by it, this
is the rational, the very life of it. To exemplify this Similitude yet
further; The vegetative Soul is the Soul of Plants* and it is a true Soul in
the kind, though it have neither sense nor reason. The sensitive Soul is the
Soul of beasts, a true Soul, includes Vegetation, but is void o^ Reason. The
rational Soul is the Soul of Man, a distinct Soul by it self, comprehends both
Vegetation and sense, having added to them both the perfection of Reason: So
there are three kinds or degrees of Faith, Interrogo te, utrum credas; dicis,
Credo: fac tu quod dicis, et fides est. Aug. in Ioh.
1. To believe there is a God; this is the Faith of Pagans, and it is a true
Faith, though it believ^ neither the Word of God, nor mercy from God. 2. To
believe what God says is true; this is the Faith of Devils and Reprobates, and
a true Faith, including the Faith of Pagans, and going beyond it, yet it
apprehends no mercy 3. To believe on God, to rely upon his mercy in Christ,
this is the Faith of the Elect, comprehends both the former, yet is a distinct
Faith by it self.

The uncertain comfort in Riches.
CAst but your eye upon a vagrant Fellow, T^o. L^ghtfoot Sermon. at Uttoxe^er in
Staffordshire, 1624.
whom because he is big-bon'd and well limbed, and able to go through his work,
a Man takes in at his doors, and cherishes; It may so be, that for a while he
takes pains, and plyes his work: but when he spies opportunity, the Fugitive
servant is gone, and takes away with him more then all his service came to.
Thus the Riches and preferments of this World may seem to stand a Man in some
stead for a season, Nil prodest pondus mihi divitis auri. Tibul. lib. 3.
but at last they irrecoverably run away, and carry with them all his joys and
worldly comforts; As Jacob stole away Laban's Idols, so they take away the
peace and content of heart, and leave him desperate.


LOok upon a City besieged, how wise Governors will take care of ever
Posterndoor, and so every part of the Wall, St. Marshall Se^m. at Westminster.
and repair the least decays thereof; but it one Gate be more likely to be
entered then another, or if any part of the Wall be weaker, or more easily to be
thrown down then another, they will be sure to set the strongest Watch in that
place, where the danger is most. And so it is, or should be with us in respect
of our most precious Souls, Gravius est pecca^um diligere quam porpetrare.
Hieron. in epist.
We have here a Fort to keep, which is every day assaulted by our Enemies, and
we have a diseased Soul of our own, distempered with many spiritual maladies,
but some of them are worse then other, and some parts of the Fort are weaker,
and more in danger then others are, that is, there are some sins, as sins
whereunto by constitution of body we are most inclined, such as are Dalilah,
bosom, beloved-sins, by which the Devil more easily surprizeth and captivateth
our Souls: And therefore as we should set diligent Watch against all sins, so
we should especially bend our forces against those that do or may in a more
especial manner breed our harm, and hinder our Salvation.


IT has been usual with Cathedral Churches, M. S.
and is still in use with Colleges, to let Leases of houses and Lands for the
term of three lives, so that the Purchaser knows the certainty of his time,
and that if one life will not hold, another shall: But it is not so betwixt God
and Man, there is no Man but is Gods Tenant at will, he may put him out of
house and home when he list, he never devises any Tenement longer then for one
life, the which being expired, shall never be renewed again, ^revis est vita et
ipsa brevi^ as in^erta. Aug. de Verb. Dom. Sermon. 16.
nor will he suffer us to dwell any longer in the best and strongest of his
houses then above seventy years; if happily some continue eighty, their term is
exceeding long: and yet of all this time they cannot be secured of one half
hour, not the peaceable possession of one moment, so many and so mighty are the
Enemies that way-lay them, Ferro, Peste, Fame, Vinc^is, Algore, Calore ^
Mill modis miseros Mors rapit una viros.
By Sword, Plague, Famine, by Bonds, by Heat and Cold,
And a thousand other ways, Death brings us to his Fold.


What then remains? since that our Enemies are so strong, our Earthly houses so
weak, the coming of our Landlord unknown, and the term of our Lease so
uncertain, let us be sober and watching in prayer, and then happy shall that
servant be, whom when his Master comes, he shall find so doing.


SAd was the condition of the Egyptians, Dan. Price, Sermon at Christ-Church.
Exodus 8. 24.
when the plague of Flies was upon them, they did so bi^e and sting them, that
they were weary of their lives: Such are all biting Usurers, that gorge
themselves with the spoil of their poorer brethren, the suckers of their sap,
the bibbers of their blood, the pinchers of their hearts, Similis est pec^^ia
Us^rarii morsu^ ^spidis. Brya^ in Ma^^h.
and the stingers and the wringers of their very Souls, who with Noverint
universi, etc. make an universal ruin of many a Man's estate, and so fetch him
still within the Condition of the Obligation, that in the end his Condition is
woeful, and his heart breaks with the b^^ter grief of, Be it known unto all
men.

How to deal with Sin, being once committed.
AMmon when he had deflowred his Sister Thamar, Not. Sh^te Sermon. at S. Mild. 2 Samuel 13. 15.
forthwith hated her, and that in a far more exceeding manner then he loved her
before, then puts her out of doors, and lo^ks the door after her, lest she
should return again. Thus must we deal with Sin, being once committed, hate it
with a deadly hate, put it far from us, lock up the doors of our hearts, shut
up the windows of our eyes, and take up a Resolution of never sinning again.

How to make a right use of the doctrine of Predestination.
CArdinal Pool, T. Fuller Sermon. at S. Cl^m. Land.
a good Man, though a Papist, being desired by one to tell him how he might
come to understand the former part of S. Paul's Epistles, which are for the
most part doctrinal positions, made this answer; By a careful practicing of the
latter part of the same Epistles, which consist much in Precepts, and
directions how to lead a life in all godliness and holiness of conversation:
And thus if any Man desire to know the former part of Predestination, whether
his name be written in the book of Life, whether he be of the Election of
Grace, whether he be predestined to life eternal, let him but look into the
latter part of Predestination, the means as well as the end of Predestination,
whether his Conversation be in Heaven, whether his life be suitable to the
profession of the Gospel of Christ, and though he meet with many rub^ in the
way, and through frailty stumble and fall, yet rises again and presses on to
the mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; Thus if a Man do, he may
conclude himself to be within the number of the Elect: and this is the right
use that is to be made of the doctrine of Predestination; but it is otherwise
with too too many in these all questioning days of ours: For whereas S. Paul
presents us with a chain let down from Heaven, Romans 8. Election and
Predestination at one end of the chain, and Glorification at the other end
thereof; both which ends God keeps fast in his hand, as for the middle links
of the chain, Calling and Justification, those he leaves for them to lay hold
on; but they cannot be quiet, but must be ^ugging and laboring to wrest those
parts out of Gods hand, and so miss of the right use and comfort that is to be
found in the abstruse, yet sweet doctrine of Predestination.

The Relation of Parents, Wife, Children, to be slighted if they once appear
in competition with the Commandments of God.
IT was a pious (though erroneous) spirit, In vita ejus, per A^ony^.
that lodged in the breast of Sir Thomas Moor, once Lord Chancellor of England,
being at that time a Prisoner in the Tower of London, merely upon the account
of denying the King's supremacy who regarded not the Prayers, and passed by the
tears of his loving and tender Wife, when she persuaded him with the forfeiture
of his Conscience to endeavor the restoration of his liberty: And thus it is
that the relation of Parents, Wife, Children, etc. are to be slighted when
they once appear in competition with the Commandments of God, Hieron. Matthew.
10. 37. Luke 24.
Pietas est, impium esse pro Domino, It is piety toward God to be unnatural to
our Friends, nay, which is a more harsh expression, to hate them. Strange* that
love it self should require ha^red, but yet just, not in an absolute, Nath.
Hardy Sermon. at Fun. of Mr. John Rushout, 1648.
but a comparative sense; we must not love Father or Mother more then God, yea
when their desires come in competition with his Will, we must hate them for his
sake, we must say as Levi, nescio vos I know you not; or with Christ to his
Mother, Quid mihi tecum, What have I to do with thee? trampling underfoot all
natural Relations, which would hinder us from obedience (...) divine
injunctions.


IT is said of Pachomius a Religious Abbot, Niceph. hi^^. lib. 9. cap. 14.
that digesting his numerous Monks into various Classes according to the
letters in the Greek Alphabet, suited the names he gave them to the Natures he
observed in them; As, for those whom he found Politicians and dissemblers,
Cassiani. annot. in Pachomii regulam.
he compared to the letters z and x which are full of crooked turnings; those
whom he observed to be plain-hearted and upright, to the letter i, which is
carried right upward without any obliquity at all: Integer vitae sc^lerisque
pur^s Horat. 1. Car.
And thus it is, that the sincere upright Man is carried in a straight line to
the performance of all Religious duties, he levells all his actions to a right
end, the Loadstone of his Soul is not self-interest but Gods honor, he casts
no squint-eye at by-respects, but looks directly forward at his Creator's glory.


WHen Martia Cato's youngest daughter had buried her husband, Hieron. advers.
Jovin. lib. 1.
it was after some competent time demanded, why she did not marry again? she
made answer, Non se invenire virum etc. she could not find a Man that would
love her more then hers: Thus it is heartily to be wished, that this might not
be charged on too many Men, Facies, non uxor amatur. Juvenal. Sat. 6.
they love only with their eyes, and their fingers, because of the beauty they
see in, or the Money they receive with their Wives, not with their hearts out
of an ingenious or rather pious respect to that relation of a Wife, wherein
they belong to them.


PLutarh tells us, In lib. Moral.
that the Virgins, which were to attend Diana's Temple, were for many years, as
it were brought up in a School, and called (...), such as should administer
sacred Rites, and then being sufficiently instructed, they were called (...),
admitted to their divine mysteries, and afterward they became (...)
Instructors of others: N. Hardy Sermon at funeral of R. Goddard, at S, Gr^g.
Land. 1653.
Then surely if the light of Nature taught them to use so much care in
educating those who were to perform the worship of a false Goddess, How
shameful is the blindness of those Christians, who think some natural
abilities of Memory and Elocution sufficient to quali^y a Priest of the true
and most high God, such who whilst they can lay no just claim to an immediate
inspiration, Leo apud Gratian.
suddenly and unpreparedly enter upon so high employment; Sacerdotes
momentanei, such as in a day, in a moment turn Priests; Greg. Naz. Orat. 22.
modo Idiota, mox Clericus, how Laics a^on Clerks; such as skip from the
shop-board to the Pulpit, and owe more Sacrifices for their own then the
Peoples ignorance.


When a Carpenter or Ioyner has made some accurate piece of work, Cyprian.
Pet. Lilie. Sermon. 1619. Delet pictoram Dei, qui vul^um suum materiali ^blinit.
Ambros. in Hex^mer.
he will not think well that any one should discommend, or rend and deface it:
And can it be otherwise then a great disgrace, when God has in a wonderful
manner framed and fashioned both Men and Women, but they must needs be
tampering, and overlay his work with the Devill's colors? What is ^^is but in
a sort to make Christ a lier; For whereas he says, yet cannot make one hair
white or black, Math. 5. 36. they have a way to make them all of what color
they please.

Neutrality in Religion, reproved.
THe Bat, like the Woman with the adulterous eye, watches for the twilight,
Prove. 7. 9. such are all Equivocating Hermophrodite Christians, Religious
Neuters, who love the twilight of Truth better then the noon-light, whose
Religion may well-enough be declined with the Article (Hoc) for it is of the
Neuter-Gender; Hist. not. lib 35. cap. 9.
Not much unlike him (in Pliny) whose picture was so ambiguously drawn by
Polygnotus Thasius a cunning Painter, that it was doubted, whether he had
painted him climbing upward or going downward with his shield; And so slily do
these Utrinquetaries carry their shield of Faith (as the Apostle calls it,
Ephesians. 6.) that it justly may be doubted whether it be to defend us or our
adversaries, Franc. Rawlinson Se^m. at Count, 1625.
They have one foot within the gates of Sion, another within the gates of
Babylon; one within the Church of England, another within the Church of Rome;
one wing to fly to us, another to fly from us upon the least advantage that may
be.

To be careful in the keeping of our Vow made in Baptism.
THe Romans in times past, Justus Lipsius de Milit. lib. 1. dialog. 6.
when they pressed any Soldiers, ministered an Oath of Fidelity unto them which
they called, Sacramentum militare the Oath of their military service, without
which Oath they made a scruple to bear arms; And we, when we take up Soldiers,
do not always swear them, but they receive Prest-money which binds them
sufficiently; What then is to be thought of a Soldier, that after he is
admitted into pay, and enrolled in the Muster-book, shall forsake the Camp
without leave of his General, or perhaps revolt and run to the Enemy, or
staying in the Camp entertain private conference with the Enemy, and as
opportunity serves betray the trust committed to his charge, as diverse in our
times perfidiously and basely have done? Or if he do none of these, Pet. Lilie,
ut antea.
yet either out of cowardice or contempt, never fights blow, nor performs any
duty commanded. Do not such Soldiers deserve punishment, greater then if they
had refused to serve notwithstanding their Allegiance does bind them? So is it
in the matter of Baptism, We receive Gods Prest-mony, then we begin to be his
Soldiers, Cul^or D^i memento ^ontis et lava^ri Rorem subisse sanctum. Prudent.
and by that mystery do bind-our selves as fast as any Vow or Oath can tie us;
And being thus bound, if we be desertores Militiae forsakers of our Christian
profession, and become Apostata's or disobedient Soldiers, whose standing is
in Gods camp, but fight the Devils battles, or such as carry Gods mark in
their foreheads, but are the Devils servants in their actions, or such as
under pretense of fighting Gods battles, betray the whole Army to the Enemy,
then we are more guilty then if we had never contracted with God to serve him.

Men and Women to be knowing in the Scriptures.
IT is said of Angelus Politianus, that he would not vouchsafe the reading of
the Scriptures, ^. Vives de verit. fidei. lib. 2. cap. de Vet. Test.
as not containing elegancies suitable to his wit and style, as if he meant to
be saved by Criticisms, and quainter phrases; And St. Augustine (whilst
unconverted) valued Tully above all compares, as worthier of his study, Lib. 3.
cons. cap. 5.
then any of the inspired Authors; A sad choice God wo^! But let all of us be
heartily affected with the excellency of the Scriptures above all other
w^itings whatsoever, 2 Timothy 3. 19.
let us be such as Timothy, to know the Scriptures from our youth, such as
Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures, much learned and versed in them, Act. 18.
24. Ant. White Sermon at S. Mar. Oxon. 1628.
even to the stopping of the mouths of all gainsayers, and not to suffer our
selves to be bewitched with such Authors with whom Aristotle is more frequent
then St. Paul, making them our solemnest and devoutest studies, and the Bible
only read at some by-hours, rather because we would not be altogether
ignorant, then that we should be very skillfull in it.


IT was a good Emblem of Cardinal Farnese, To. Willan Sermon at We^^m. N^v. 5.
1622.
A Beechtree with the top off, the Motto, Ruina relinquor, I am le^t in ruin;
For as that Tree withers when it is lopped, so Multitudes vanish without
leaders, Mul^itude non ratione ducitur sed impetu. Silv.
whose power being not directed, is at the best but armed Folly, so that they
suddenly upon the first opposal become a burden to themselves, and a prey unto
those that pursue them.


AS a learned Man said sometimes of Rome, Jos. Scaliger*
having been some while there, That a Man might seek Rome in Rome, and yet not
find it there, Rome was so much altered from what it had been; Or as the Orator
said of Sicily after Verres had governed there, Cicero in Verrem. 3. Lanc.
Win^on. ^polog. adv. Bellarmin. Eu^ipid. Helena. Erasm. adag.
that Men sought Sicily in Sicily, it was by him so impoverished; Or as a
Reverend Prelate of ours said of Bellarmines latter works. That many missed
Bellarmine in Bellarmine, they were so much unlike unto, and came so far short
of his former: So may a Man find much want of a Wife in a Wife, much misle of a
Wife in a Wife if he makes his choice amiss, and so consequently do himself
great wrong, embracing with Ixion a cloud instead of Juno, or with Paris a
shadow without substance, a sorry help, a cold comfort, a Wife and yet no Wife
in regard of any joy or comfort in her, in regard of any help or assistance
from her, so that it were much better to be altogether without; Plutarch. de
Avarit.
For, what can be more miserable, then to have a Wife as Covetous wretches have
wealth, to have the burden of a wife, and want the blessing of a Wife, to have
the care and not the comfort; Whereas the Man that lives single, as he misseth
of the one, so he is yet withal freed from and eased of the other.


IT is said of Cyrus the great Monarch of Persia, that he never sat down at
the Table to eat, but whatsoever dish liked him best, he would send part of it
to his Friends, or such as deserved best of him, semesos anseres, semesos
panes, sometimes the meat off his trencher, and sometime the bread that himself
did taste of, Cyrus tibi ista, etc. Xenoph. de institut. Cyri. lib. 13.
with this kind and loving salutation; The King sends you this, because he
likes it best himself, and holds it choice and dainty: But God entreats his
Friends, his Children and servants after another manner, he makes them eat and
drink at his Table, or rather makes himself their meat and drink, who is the
bread of life, J. Wall Sermon. at We^^m. 1623.
and Well spring of Salvation; there is nothing so dear to him but they shall
have part with him; his own joy, his own secret, his own sweetness, his own
comfort, his own robe, his own justice, his own clothing, his own
Righteousness; nay they shall have his very life and spirit as a seal and
pledge of extraordinary Grace and favor.


THere is a story of a poor Man that served God faithfully, and yet was oppressed
cruelly, Speculum Exemplorum.
having all his goods taken from him by an exacting Knig^^, Whereupon in a
Melancholy humor he persuaded himself that God was dead who had formerly been
so faithful to him, and now (as he thought) had left him; An^ old Man met him,
and desired him to deliver a letter into the hands of his oppressor, upon
receipt and perusal of which, the Knight was so convinced, N. Hardy a Valedict.
Sermon. ^o Sir T. Bendish, 1653.
that immediately he confessed his fault and restored the goods, which made the
poor Man say, Now I see that God may seem to sleep, but ca^ never dye: Thus it
is that God in the dispensation of his Graces may withdraw himself for a time,
yet he will return at last, he may in his great Wisdom for a time hide his
face, Esaias 54. 2.
yet at last he will in mercy lift up the light of his Countenance to the great
joy of that poor Soul that seems to be deserted, and make bare the arm of his
power for comfort.

Men to be active in regaining their lost Souls.
IT is said of Xerxes, the greatest of the Persian Princes, that when the
Graecians had taken from him Sardis, Plutarch. in vita Themisto^l.
a famous City in Asia the less (in S. John's time one of the seven Churches)
charged, That every day at dinner, some one or other speaking with a loud
voice, should remember him, that the Graecians had taken the City of Sardis
from him: J. Rowlandson Sermon. at East-Tysted in Hampshire, 1623.
But what shall poor Sinners do, that have lost more then a City, even their
precious Souls, which are of more worth then all the World besides; Let them
then give their Redeemer no rest by incessant Prayers, till he deliver them,
and repair their ruins, let them still be calling upon him to remember his
loss and theirs (for theirs are his) till they have regained by him that which
was at first taken from them by the Enemy, ^ven the Image of their God, after
which they were created.

Hypocrites discovering their own shame.
IT is said of the Peacock, Fulgent. My^holog.
whose pleasant wings (as holy Ioh calls them chap. 39. 16.) are more for
ostentation then for use, For whiles he spreads out his gaudy plumes, he
displayes the ugliness of his hinder parts: Such are many Hypocritical
dissembling wretches a^ this day, who yet differ from the Peacock in this, that
whereas he is said to have Argus his eyes in his tail, they (it should seem)
have them in their heads, else how could they espy so many faults in others,
Franc. Rawlinson Se^m. at Court, 1625.
none in themselves; yet whilst they spread out their gay plumes, whilst they
simper it devoutly, and rail Jesuitically against Church and State, whilst they
hear Sermons, pray, give Alms, make a sour Lenten face, all to be seen of Men;
What do they else but discover their own shame? Matthew. 6.
show the ugliness of their hinder parts? bewray the fearfulness of their
latter end?

Sin, the chief cause of a Nation or Cities ruin.
Physicians make the Threescore and third year of a Man's life, J. Bodin Com.
Weal.
a dangerous Climacterical year to the body Natural; And Statists make the Five
hundredth year of a City or Kingdom as dangerous to the body Politic, beyond
which (say they) Cities and Kingdoms cannot stand: But (which is matter of
Wonder) Who has ever felt a Cities languishing pulse? Who has discerned the
fatal diseases of a Kingdom? found out their Critical days? Do they wax weak
and heavy, and old and shriveld and pine away with years as the body of Man?
No, they may flourish still and grow green, they may continue as the days of
Heaven, J. Gren^. Burden of Tire; A Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1627.
and be as the Sun before the Almighty, if his wrath be not provoked by their
wickedness; So that it is not any divine aspect of the Heavens, any malignant
Conjunction of Stars and Planets, but the Peoples loose manners, ungratious
lives, and enormous Sins, which are both the chief cause and symptom of a
Kingdom or Cities sickness, and they, indeed, soon bring them to a fearful
end and utter desolation.


IT is credibly reported, Joseph Sealiger in Theophrast. de Plantis.
That in some parts of Italy there are Spiders of so poyso^ous a Nature, as
will kill him that treads upon them, and break a glass if they do but creep
over it; This shows clearly, that the force of this Poison is not in measure by
the quantity, but in the Nature by the quality thereof: And even so the force
of Sin consists not in the greatness of the subject or object of it, W.
Crashaw Parable of Poison.
but in the poysonful Nature of it, For that it is the breach of the Law,
violation of the Justice, and a provocation of the wrath of God, and is a
present poison and damnation to Men's Souls; therefore as the least poison, as
poison, being deadly to the body, is detested; so the least sin, as sin, being
mortal to the Soul, is to be abhorred.


AS corruption and infection could not by the heat of the air ambient enter
into our bodies, if our bodies did not consist of such a Nature, as has in its
self the causes of corruption; No more could Sin, which is a general rot and
corruption of the Soul, enter into us through the allurements or provocation of
outward things, T. Bastard Sermon. 1612.
if our Souls had not first, of themselves, received that inward hurt, by which
their desire is made subject to Sin, as the Woman's desire was made subject to
her Husband, Genesis 3. 16.
and (as the Philosophers say) the Matter to the Form. Iam. 1. 13.
The causes of Sin are to be ascribed to our own Concupiscence; the root is
from our own hearts; It is confessed, that Satan may instill his poison, and
kindle a Fire of evil desires in us, yet it is our own Flesh that is the first
Mover, and our own Will which sets the Faculties of the Soul in combustion.


ST. Augustine confesses, Confess. lib. 1. cap. 13.
That in his youth (as many Wantons do) he read, that amorous discourse of
Aeneas and Dido with great affection, and when he came to the death of Dido, he
wept for pure compassion; But, O me miserum! (says the good Father) I ^ewailed
(miserable Man that I was) the fabulous death of Dido, forsaken of Aeneas, and
did not bewail the true death of my Soul forsaken of her Jesus: J. B. A Sermon.
at request of Sir Rich. Blunt, 1616.
Thus it is, that many unhallowed tears are sacrificed to the Idols of our
eyes, which yet are as dry as Pumices in regard of our Souls, We bewayl a body
forsaken of the Soul, and do not grieve for the Soul abandoned by God; Hence we
are to learn from every Corpse that is buried, what the daughters of Israel were
to learn from Christ crucified, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, Luke
23. 28. not so much for the loss of your bodies, as for the death of your
immortal Souls.

Not to wait Gods good pleasure in times of Affliction, very dangerous.
A Man that is unskilful in swimming, Cyr^l. Alex. Epist. 29.
having ventured past his depth, and so in danger of drowning, hastily and
inconsiderately catches at what comes next to hand to save himself withal;
but it so happens, that he often lays hold on sedgy weeds, that do but
entangle him, and draw him deeper under water, and there keep him down from
ever getting up again, T. Gataker A Sermon before the Judges, 1623.
till he be (by that whereby he thought to save himself) drowned indeed. Thus
it is, that whilst many through weakness of Faith, and want of Patience, are
loath to wait Gods good pleasure, and being desirous to be rid in all haste of
the present Affliction, they put their hand often to such courses as procure
fearful effects, and use such sorry shifts for the relieving of themselves, as
do but plunge them further and deeper, into such a Labyrinth of evils, out of
which they seldom or never get out again.

The great benefit of timely accompting with God.
A Merchant or Tradesman, Isocrates ad Demoni^.
that at leisure times casts up and ballanceth his Accounts, and brings all
to one entire sum, is at any time ready, if on a sudden he be called to a
Reckoning, though he have not time or leisure then amidst many distractions,
otherwise to run over Accounts, or to cast up the particulars; yet to tell how
things stand with him, it requires no more then the bare reading, he needs not
stand to recount it, being sure it was well and truly cast up before: T.
Gataker David's Remembrance^, A Sermon. 1623.
So he that has before-time truly examined his own estate, and made up the
Account betwixt God and his own Soul, may thereby know how it stands with him
in regard of God, by calling to mind only the issue of his former Examination,
when by reason of disturbance and distraction through the violence of
Temptation, he shall have small liberty, and less lei^ure, to take any exact
trial or proof of it at the present.

Ignorance, especially in the ways of God, reproved.
SOcrates being asked, S. Maxim. Sermon. 17.
What was the most beautiful Creature in the world? He answered, A Man decked
and garnished with Learning: And Diogenes being demanded, What burden the
Earth did bear most heavy? replied, An ignorant and illiterate Man. Now if
these Philosophers did thus judge of the excellency of Knowledge, Im. Bourne
Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land. 1622.
and vileness of Ignorance, How should Christians blush for very shame, that
having lived so long in the School of Christ, trod so often upon the threshold
of Gods Sanctuary, and sat so many years under the droppings of
Gospel-dispensations, they should yet be found ignorant of Christ, and of the
ways to everlasting happiness.

All the Creatures subservient to the good Will and Pleasure of God.
IT is reported of the River Nilus, Loys de ^rretta hist. de Ethi^pia. lib. 1.
cap. 20.
that it makes the Land barren, if in ordinary places, it either flow under
fifteen cubits, or above seventeen; And therefore that Prester-Iohn (through
whose Country it runs, and in which it arises from the Hills called, The
Mountains of the Moon) can at his pleasure drown a great part of Egypt, by
letting out into the River certain vast Ponds and Sluices, the receptacles of
the melted snow from the Mountains; Which that he may not do, G. Sandy's
Travels.
The Turks, who are now the Lords of Egypt, pay a great tribute unto him, as
the Princes of that Land have done time out of mind; which tribute when the
great Turk denied to pay, till by experience he found this to be true, he was
afterward forced with a greater sum of Money to renew his peace with that
Governor of the Abussines, and to continue his ancient pay. The truth of this
Relation may be questionable; but this we are all bound to believe, That the
great Emperor of Heaven and Earth, who sits above us, J. Rowlandson ut antea.
can at his pleasure make our Land, and all the Regions of the Earth fruitful
or barren, by restraining or letting loose the influences of his blessings from
above; At his Command the winds blow, and again are hushed, the Air pours down
rain, Cui cuncta assis^unt acta et agenda simul. Prosper in sentent.
or sends Mildews upon the Earth, and it rests in his power to make our Land
barren, if we continue disobedient, or to fructify it more and more if we
repent; He has dams and ponds, yea, an Ocean of Judgments in store, which he
can (when it seems him good) let down upon us to make both the Land fruitless,
and the Soul it self accursed that rebelleth; Not only Fire, or hail, or
lightning, or Thunder, or Vapors, or Snow, or stormy winds, blasting or
Mildews, but even whole Volleys, or Volumes of Curses more then can be numbered,
are pressed to do his Will to af^lict and vex them that grieve his holy Spirit by
their sins, and daily pr^vocations.


IT was a good Inscription which a bad Man set upon the door of his house,
Diog. La^rt. in vita.
Per me nihil intret malt, Let no evil pass through me; Whereupon said
Diogenes, Quomodo ingredietur Dominus? How then shall the Master get into his
own house? A pertinent and ready answer! How it agrees with our Mansions upon
Earth, J. Wall Sermon. at Westminster. 1623.
let every Man look to that. But most sure it is, that no unclean thing can
enter into Heaven, whatsoever is there, is holy, the Angels holy, the Saints
holy, the Patriarks holy, the Confessors, Martyrs, all holy; but the Lord
himself most holy and blessed, to whom all of them, as it were, in a divine
Antheme sing and say, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Heaven and Earth are
full of the Majesty of the glory.


IT is usual with Men to make toward a Sun-dyall, whilst only the Sun
shines; And with Women to make much of Flowers, and to put them in their
bosoms whil^st they are gr^en and flourishing; but when once withered, they
cast them upon the dunghill: But the Almighty deals not so with his Friends;
yea, when their danger is greatest, his help is nearest; And though oft-times
the case is so desperate, that Friends society can only afford pity, not
succor; they may look on, they cannot take off; but the presence of God is
ever active and powerful; N. Hardy a Valedict. Sermon. to Sir T. Bendish, ^ 1653.
And whereas most Faithful Friends part at death, this Friend will not leave
us; David knew, he would be with him in the shadow of death; and S. Paul
assures us, that neither death nor life shall separate his love, not only
when we walk through the pleasant meadow of Prosperity, but when we go through
the salt-waters of A^^liction, nay, when we pass Mare mortuum, the Sea of
death, he will be with us. It is the deriding question which the Saints enemies
put to them in the time of Affliction, Psalm. 79. 10.
Ubi Deus? Where is now their God? but they may return a confident answer, Hic
Deus, Our God is here, nigh unto us, I^sh. 1. 5.
round about us, in the midst of us. It was his promise to Joshua then, and is
since repeated by S. Paul, as belonging to all the Faithful, I will never leave
thee, Heb. 13. 5.
nor forsake thee.

To rely upon Gods blessing notwithstanding all opposition.
WHen an Alderman of London was given to understand by a Courtier, Rich. 3.
that the King in his displeasure against the City, threatened thence to divert
both Term and Parliament to Oxford; he asked, Whether he would turn thither the
channel of the Thames, or no? if not, said he, by the grace of God we shall do
well enough. Thus when either Envy of meaner Men repi^eth, or the Anger of
greater persons rages against our lawful thriving, we shall do well to
remember, Joh. Rowlandson ut antea. Psalm. 46. 4.
That there is a River which shall make glad the City of God; a current (I
mean) of Gods blessings, which whilst he vouchsafes to our honest labors,
and legal Callings, no malice of Man or Devil shall be able to stop or avert;
For, whilst this blessed River of God keeps its course, we shall do well
enough; but if his hand for our Sins turn it aside (as it were) into another
channel, no wonder then if we thrive backwards, if we prosper not in the
labor of our hands.

Regeneration, the excellency thereof.
ST. Augustine makes this observation of Demosthenes, Augustine. epist. 56. ad
Dioscorum.
that being asked, What was the first and chiefest amongst the Precepts of
Rhetoric? he answered, Elocution (or good utterance); what, the second? He
answered, Elocution; what, the third? He answered still, Elocution: After the
same manner says the good Father, If you ask me, What is the first, the
second, or the third, among the Precepts of Christian Religion? I must answer,
Humility; And what S. Augustine attributes to Humility in the praise and
commendations thereof, Im. Bourne ut antea.
may justly be given to Regeneration, or the new Creature, and to the
excellency and dignity of that: If it be asked, What is the first, or the
second, or the third, amongst the Graces of Gods holy Spirit? the answer will
be (...), our new Creation; And good reason too, For without this new Creation,
there is no Freedom from damnation, no happiness to be obtained, if any Man be
in his Natural condition, and would have any benefit by the death of Christ, he
must be a new Creature.

Ignorance, especially in the ways of God, condemned.
IT is related of Bion the Philosopher, Plutarch. Apophthegm.
That meeting with one of his Friends, who was somewhat too curiously busied to
have his Picture hewed out to the life in a piece of stone, but over-carelesse
in the study of Learning, he reproved on this manner, Tu ut tibi similis lapis
sieret, etc. Have thou been careful, that the stone might be made like thee,
and art thou not as careful, that thou by thy Ignorance S. Maxim, Sermon. 1.
be not like unto the stone. The like may be said of all the Sons of Vanity,
such as are stocks and stones, rather then Men, then Christian Men, that are
careful to fulfill their lusts, which will prove their destruction, and
negligent to be filled with divine Knowledge, which will bring them to eternal
happiness.

A Caveat for bloudy-minded Men.
IT was a Christian-like gallant resolution of Anastasius the Emperor, Evagrii
hist. cap. 3.
Quod nihil velit aggredi, etc. That he would adventure on no exploit, though
never so Honorable and glorious, if he thought it might cost him a drop of
blood. Then let all such know, Ah uimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis,
etc. Ovid. Fast.
that wallow in Flesh and blood, the blood of their Sins, and the blood of
their Iniquities, that delight in blood, and make no Conscience how they spill
innocent Christian blood, that are set upon miracles, and labor to convert
water into blood, color Seas, die Rivers, as if they would sail and swim to
Heaven through the hearts-bloud of their Enemies; Johan. Wallei Pretium mundi.
that Christ's blood may witness against them, and charge them with the blood
of their slain, quocunque sub axe, whether it were at home or abroad; that as
his blood calls for pardon, so theirs for vengeance, and may one day come upon
the desperate Malefactor, without Repentance, to his ruin and confusion.


IT is storyed of Diogenes, Diog. Laert. in vita.
That at Noonday he went about the streets with a Candle lighted; And being
asked, Why he did so? returned this answer, Hominem quaero, I seek for a Man;
meaning one that might deserve the name of a Man, but all in vain. It is the
same with us at this day, God commanded the Prophet, that he should run to and
fro through the streets of Jerusalem, Ier. 35.
and seek in the broad places thereof to find a Man that executed Judgment.
Psalm. 37.
And the Prophet David bids us, behold the upright; but where shall we find one
upright Man to behold? Pretenders to perfection, Professors of sanctity, N.
Hardy Sermon at Funeral of Sir Joh. Gayr, 1649.
this Age swarms with, but few Practisers; Facings of Religion were never more
in fashion, but the linings of Piety and goodness never more out of request;
so that we may well take up that of the Psalmist, Help, Lord, for there is not
one Godly Man left, Psalm 12. 1.


A Poor Labourer being taken to fell Timber for the building of a house for the
Children of the Prophets, 2 Kings 6. 5.
As he was felling of a Tr^e, the Iron fell from the helve into the Water; Then
he cried, and said to Elisha, Alas, Master, Sam. Cotiesford, Sovereign Oil to
restore Debtors.
it was borrowed; as if the poor Man should say, The loss of the Axe-head does
not so much grieve me, as that I borrowed it, and must restore it again. Just
thus must it be betwixt the Borrower and the Lender; the Borrower's care must
be how to make Restitution; if he have not wherewithal, and therein if he
speak simply from his heart, Domus aut famu^itium abjiciendum ut ^re liberemur
alieno. Plur. moral.
then si non effectu tamen affectu, If he cannot come any thing near to pay the
whole debt, yet come as near as he can, he must show his readiness out of that
little that is remaining, if not any thing near to a full, yet toward
satisfaction; And then however perhaps it will not please Men, yet in having a
good Conscience, God will be well pleased.


HE that is locked up in a dungeon, Aelredi Similitud, selectae.
or otherwise immured within some darksome place, can and may easily discover
the very moment of time, when either the least beam of the Sun, or glimmer of
sky-light shall break in upon him; Whereas on the other side, He that is in the
open air, is very sensible that the Day is broke, that the Sun is up, but
cannot make out any certain account of the springing of the one, or rising of
the other. Thus it is in the matter of our spiritual Calling, It is possible
that a Man may know the very time and moment, when the dayspring from on high
did visit him, when it was the good pleasure of God to dart into his Soul the
graces of his blessed Spirit, as in the case of S. Paul, the good Centurion,
the Iaylor, the Jewish Converts, and some others; Act. 2. 37.
but this is not ordinary, The wind blows where it lifts, (yea, and when it
lists too) even so the Spirit, both time and place uncertain; Some are called
at the first hour, that is, in their Infancy or Childhood, as Samuel, Jeremy,
and John the Baptist; Some in the third hour, that is, in their youth, as
Daniel the Prophet, and John the Evangelist; Others at the sixth hour, in their
middle age, ^. Boys Postills.
as Peter and Andrew; Others at the eleventh hour, in their old age, as
Gamaliel and Joseph of Arimathea; And some again not only in the last hour of
the day, but even in the last minute of that hour, as the Thief upon the
Cross. Again, Luke 23.
our Calling is uncertain in respect of place; For God calls some from their
Ships, some from their shops, and some from under the hedges, Matthew. 4. 15. and
9. 9.
and other some from the Market; so that if a Man can but make out unto his
Soul, Luke 14. 23.
that he is certainly called, it matters not much for the time when, nor the
place where, Matthew. 20 3.
both of them being so uncertain.

The Ministers Calling full of labor and toil.
THe Vocation of an Husbandman admits of little or no Vacation from his daily
labor, Not. Rogers Sermon ou 2 Cor. 13. 11.
the end of one work is but the beginning of another, every season of the year
brings its several travel with it; And the harvest Laborers are of all other
the sorest Laborers, N^hil est in hac vita difficilius, la oriosius,
periculosius, etc. Presbyteri vita. Aug. de verb. Dom.
no labor more toilsome then theirs: Such is the Calling of every Faithful
Minister, Has he broke up the fallow ground of his Peoples hearts, then must
he sow the precious seed therein? Has he sowed seed, then he must water what
he has set and sowed; yea, tares and weeds will grow, and soon sprowt up,
sleep he never so little, and therefore great need of daily weeding; so that
surely the sweat of the Ministry (be it followed as it ought) exceeds the
sweat of other Callings, and with the sorest labor does the Minister eat his
bread in the sweat of his brows, Onus humeris Angel^^ um non live. S.
Chrysostoin.
his Calling is not easy but painful and laborious; as it is an honor so it
is a burden, and such an one too as requires the strength of Angels to bear
it.

True brotherly Love, scarce to be found.
HIstories make mention of one Ursinus a Christian Physician, Hieron. Rubei
hist. Ravennat.
who being to suffer Martyrdom for the Gospel of Christ, began to waver and
faint; Which when Vitalis a holy Man saw, he step't to him, And though he knew
it would cost him his life, comforted and encouraged him; saying; Wha^ have you
been heretofore so industrious to preserve Men's bodies, and will you now shrink
at the saving of your own Soul? Nich. de Lyra in loc.
Be courageous, etc. For which Faithful Counsel, he also was condemned to
death and suffered accordingly: -- Fratrum quoque gratia rara est.
But now so it is that brethren have forgot that they are brethren, and almost
every Man stands aloof, Ovid. 1. Met.
when necessity requires his succor; they flinch away as Demas and others did
from Paul, leaving him to answer for himself; Few such Friends as Vitalis are
to be found, that will lay down their lives, or hazard them to the relief of
their distressed brother.

Men to be Compassionate one toward another, And why so?
IT is observed of the Bees, Plin. not. hist. lib. 11. cap. 17.
that aegrotante una lamentantur omnes, when one is sick they all mourn; And of
the Sheep that if one of them be faint, the rest of the flock will stand
between it and the Sun, until it be revived: Thus it is that God has hewn us
all out of one Rock, Cujus pectus tam ^erreum, cor tam lapideum, ut patienti
non compatiatur.
tempered all our bodies of one ^ay, and spirited all our Souls of one breath;
We are all Sons of one Father, members of one body, and heirs of one Kingdom,
in respect of which near linking together, there should be Compassion and
sympathy betwixt us; If one Member do but grieve, all suffer with it, When a
thorn is got into the foot, 1 Cor. 12. 26.
how is it that the back bows, the eyes pry into the hurt, Junius de utilit.
co^dit. humanae.
and the hands are busied to pluck out the cause of the anguish; And we being
Members of one another, should bear with, and forbear one the other; the not
doing whereof will stick as a brand upon our Souls, Annotat. Minist. diverse. in
loc.
that we are of the number of them that have forsaken the fear of the Almighty,
Ioh 6. 14.


IT is reported of two Noble Lacedaemonians, Suid^ hist.
that being at mortal hatred, were met by Archidamus, their King, in the
Temple of Minerva; he requires them to put the matter to an indifferent Umpire;
Plutarch. in Laconicis.
They choose the King himself, He makes them swear to abide his order, which
accordingly they do: Now, says the King, I order that you shall not go out of
this Temple until you be Friends; And so they patted Friends (For an Oath
taken in that Temple was unlawful to be broken:) Now it were heartily to be
wished, that we who are the Temple of God, Not. Rogers ut ante^.
and such as usually meet in the Temple of God, and there partake the holy
things of God, would keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, not to
be unpeaceable with the peaceable, which argues a devilish mind; not
unpeaceable with the unpeaceable, Candida pax homines, trux decet ira ^eras.
Ovid. 1. amor.
which argues a corrupt mind; nor yet content our selves in that we are
peaceable with the peaceable, which argues but a civil mind; but if it be
possible, and as much as in us lies to be peaceable with the unpeaceable,
which is that that argues only a true Christian, and Heroical mind; And so
should we make it good that we are endowed with true Grace, and are true
Subjects of that Kingdom which is the Kingdom of Peace, whose King is Peace.


S. Augustine relates of the Serpent, Lib. 8. cap. 6. de Civit. Dei et in
Psalm. 56.
that when she grows old, she draws her^self through a narrow hole, and by
this means stripping off her old skin, she renews her age; Thus it is our
Saviors directions to be as wise as Serpents, Math. 20. 6. and if in any
thing, then sure it is in this, that we should follow their Wisdom, that
forsaking the b^oad ways of vices, we may pass through the narrow and strait
way of Repentance and leaving off our old Coat of Sin, we may be clothed anew
with the Rich garments of Righteousness, and so become new Men in Christ Jesus.


IT was a good Christian resolution of S. Basil, In lib. de Spirit. sancto.
cap. ult.
who writing to Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, has these words; (...), The
People through ambition are fallen into grievous Anarchy, Whence it comes to
pass, that all the exhortations of the Rulers are in vain, No man will submit,
but all would reign being puffed up with pride growing from ignorance. Shall I
then keep silence? I may not; Though some supplant, others insult over me being
down, and the rest applaud them that do insult; Saevis inter se convenit ursis.
How can it be otherwise since Charity is decayed? Hence some sit no less
implacable and bitter examiners of things amiss, then unjust and malevolent
Judges of things well-done, so that we are become more bruit then the very
beasts, for they are quiet amongst themselves, but we wage cruel war against
each other, Shall I then hold my peace? Charity will not suffer me; The
Children in Babylon discharged their duty, though they were but three; Having
God then for my Patron and Protector, I Will not be silent, etc. And thus it is,
that both Minister and Magistrate in their respective places are to beat down
the vices of the time; Pa^cere subjectis et aebe^lare superb^s. Virgil.
Where the reins of Government lie ^lack upon the People shoulders, there they
must needs be straightened; Where wickedness and Sin have put on a Whores
forehead, it is high time to unmask them; Nay, if Gods people and the house of
Jacob will be doing that which is not right, it is the Ministers duty to set up
his throat, and tell the one of their sins, and the other of their
transgressions, Esaias 58. 1.

Peace linking the Church and Commonweal together.
THe Secretaries of Nature say, Plin. Dioscerid. Theophrast.
That the Solsequy or Marigold opens with the Su^, and shuts with the shade:
Even so, when the Sunbeams of Peace shine upon the Commonwealth, then by the
reflection of those beams; the Church dilates and spreads it self. Act. 9. 31.
And on the other side, when the Countries glory is once eclipsed, then is the
Churches beauty clowded, as all Men (whom the God of this World has not
blinded) must of necessity confess; M. Griffith Sermon. ^ P^ace at S. Paul's.
Land. 1642.
the Church and Commonwealth being so closely linked together, that the peace
or distraction of the one does redound to the welfare or ruin of the other.

A Caveat for Flatterers.
IT was a significant and well deserved punishment, El. Lampridius in vita.
that Alexander Sever^ allotted to Turinus, a fawning Flatterer, (one that
could lick a moath in a Gnathonicall sordid way) to be tied to a stake, and
stifled with smoke, with an Herald standing by and proclaiming to all the
People; Fumo punitur qui fumum vendidit, He lived by smoke blinding Men's eyes,
and by smoke let him dye: A good Caveat for those that think to purchase and
preserve love and favor, W. Price Sermon at S. Mary Spittle, 1642.
by deifying the undeserved and crystallizing dusty sordid actions, They may
chance to plead, that he that will not flatter, shall hang under the wheel,
that he that dares to tell a great Man, Isto maxim tempore regnat vitium
adulatio^s, etc.
he is not just; or a General, that he is not valiant; or a Lady, that she is
neither beautiful nor virtuous; shall never be Counselor, Commander or
Courtier: but Solomon, a wiser Man, is rather to be believed, who bids us take
it on his word, that he that rebukes a Man, Tul. ad ^elant.
(though for the present he may storm) shall afterward find more favor, then
he that flattereth with his tongue, Prove. 28. 3. Prove. 28. 3.


The nonperformance of Vows, Promises, etc. condemned.
IT is said of Andreas, Car. Bonfinius de reb. Hongaricis.
one of the Kings of Hungary, that having engaged himself by promise to go to
the holy Wars, (as they then called them) went with all his Forces, and coming
to Jerusalem, only bathed himself there, as one that had washed off his
promise, and so returned back again without striking one blow. Such is the case
with many Men at present, their Promises, Covenants, ut mundus sic sunt mund^
promissa, etc.
and Agreements with others, (though sealed and subscribed) prove too too often
as brittle as the glasses they drink in, No bounds will hold them, they rob the
Graecians of their Proverb, and own it themselves: For let but the worst of Men
say, They will do this or that, is as much as if they had sworn, Jac. Bil.
Antholog.
They would not do it, Graeca sides, Erasmi Adagia.
unless it be when they embarque themselves in some unwarrantable actions, and
the Sun may sooner be thrust out of his sphere, then they diverted from their
adamantine resolutions.

Justice duly administered, the Peoples benefit thereby.
IT is said of Francis the first of France, Jean. de Seres hist.
that when a Woman kneeled to him to beg Justice, He bade her stand up; For,
said he, Woman, It is Justice that I owe thee, and Justice thou shall have; if
thou beg any thing of me, let it be Mercy. A happy place and People surely,
where Justice (as it seems) was not extorted, but dropped as kindly as honey
from the comb; where there was no sale of Offices, no enhaunsing of Fees, no
subtleties of delay, no trucking for expedition, no making snares of petty
penal Statutes, where Justice had scales in her hand, not to weigh gold, but
equity; Where Judges and Magistrates were as Noah's Ark to take in weary Doves,
W. Price ut antea.
and as the horns of the Altar, for oppressed Innocence to betake it self unto;
where Lawyers, Advocates, Pleaders did not call evil good, and good evil,
bitter sweet, etc. Where Plaintifts or Accusers did not inform or prosecute
through malice, envy or for advantage; where subordinate Officers durst not
help potent delinquents out of the briars, nor suffer poor men tempest-tost in
Law to languish in their business within ken of harbor for want of giving a
sop to Cerberus, or sacrificing to the great Diana of expedition; where those
setting-doggs, such as base promoting Informers, were not countenanced, and
severely punished upon any false, unjust, or malicious information; To close up
all, where the Magistrate ought Justice to the People, and paid it, where the
people begged for Mercy and had it.


THere is mention made of a River in Spain, Athaenei Deipnosoph. lib. 2. cap.
6.
whose upper waters are sweet and pleasant, but toward the bottom very Salt
and brackish: And such is every wicked State-Politician, he is only
superficial whilst others are fundamental Christians, Advers. haeres. lib. 2.
he likes the humor of the Samseans in Epiphanius, that were neither Jews,
Gentiles, nor Christians, but preserving a commodious correspondence with all,
whatsoever he acts in reference to Heaven is merely theatricall and done in
subordination to some other interest; Modern Policy.
It Is to him indifferent whether the Religion he personates, be true or false,
so it be but popular; And like the strictnes^e of that notable Theife, who
always before he went about the work of his calling (for so he called
Thieving) went to prayer, that God would bless and prosper him; so he says
grace to his design, be it never so wicked and gives thanks for his success,
be it never so bloody.


Honey is very sweet and comfortable, Columnella de re Rust.
but too much honey causes gripings in the belly, breeds choler and brings
diseases; Fragrant flowers are sweet to smell to, and much refresh the brain
if used moderately, but too much smelling of them causes pain in the head, as
experience testifies; how delightful is the light to our eyes? but too much
Staring into the Sunbeams, is the dazzling of the eyes, Omne nimium vertitur in
Vitium.
if not the blinding of them: Thus it is that the excess, even of good and
lawful things may be evil and unlawful; we may take of the good Creatures of
God (as it were upon a Knives point, or a spoonefull at a time, that is, in a
stinted moderate quantity) in due measure; but if we fall a grasping with both
hands, eat great morsells, or drink down great draughts at once, we may easily
surfeit unto death, unless we evacuate one way or other after our exceedings;
And the rule in Philosophy holds true, Ari^^otel.
vehemens sensibile laedit sensorium, Moderate sounds, such as in Music, may
much affect the ear with delight, but vehement sounds, as in ringing of Bells
near hand, beating of Drums, rattling of Guns, Maurit. Bohem. medit. matut.
loc. Script. sele^t.
or blowing of Trumpets, dulls the hearing: Thus it is that moderate joys and
delights are ever best, least hurtful, most contentfull and comfortable to our
Spirits; whereas intemperance, immoderatenesse, and Excess, marrs all
pleasures and delight, though in themselves never so pleasant and delightful.


THere is mention made of Marquis Paulet, of Winchester, S. R. Nanton Fragm.
Regal.
who having successefully served four Princes, and still in the room of
favor, unshaken with the vicissitudes he had run through, being asked by one,
by what means he preserved his fortune, he replied; that he was made ex salice
non ex quercu, of the pliant Willow, not the stubborn Oak, always of the
prevailing Religion and a Zealous Professor: Paratus ad omni^ quare. Observat.
ex Machiavel. Borgia, etc.
Thus it is that the wicked State-Polititian sides with all parties. If
Religion be fashionable you can scarce distinguish him from a Saint. He will
not only reverence Godly Ministers, but (if need be) he will preach himself;
If cunctation prevail, he acts Fabius; If the buckler must be changed for a
Sword, he personates Marcellus; If mildness be useful, Soderini of Venice was
not more a Lamb then he; If Severities are requisite, Nero's butcheries are
Sanctities compared with his. Thus like a subtle Proteus he assumes that shape
which is most in grace and of most profitable conducement to his ends, Simulata
sanctitas.
only he has so much advantage of the Camelion that he can turn himself into
white, For he is often to be found wearing the Vest of innocence to conceal the
ugliness and blackness of his attempts.

Tyrants raising themselves by a seeming compliance with the People.
A Thenaeus tells a pretty story of one Athenion, born obscurely, who as long
as he was private and poor, Deipnosoph. lib. 6. cap. 13.
excelled in a soft and tractable disposition; but when by juggling he had
obtained the Athenian government, there was none more odious for a cruel,
Sueton.
barbarous, covetous Tyrant: Nero's quinquennium will never be forgotten, not
that which is reported of Caligula, that there was never a better servant and a
worse Master: Thus it is by woeful experience made out, Modern Policy.
that Tyrannically-minded Men personate goodness till they have accomplished
their ends, make a show of all goodness, till they have wrought themselves
into the good liking of all those whom they intend to deceive; And then off
goes the Vizard of dissimulation, and they appear in their native colors what
indeed they are, bloody, barbarous, inhumane.

True Obedience.
IT is reported of the old Kings of Peru, that they were wont to use a Tassell,
or Fringe made of red Wool, Levinus Apollon. de Regn^ Peruano.
which they wore upon their heads, and when they sent any Governor to rule as
Viceroy in any part of their Country, they delivered unto him one of the
threads of their Tassell and for one of those simple threads, he was as much
obeyed as if he had been the King himself; yea, it has so happened that the
King has sent a Governor only with this thread to slay Men and Women of a
whole Province, without any further Commission; For of such power and authority
was the Kings tassell with them, that they willingly submitted thereunto, even
at the sight of one thread of it: Now it is to be hoped, that if one thread
shall be so forcible to draw Infidel-obedience, there will be no need of
Cart-ropes to hale on that which is Christian; Exemplary was that Obedience of
the Romans, Maurit. Bohem. ut antca.
which was said to have come abroad to all men, Romans 16. 19. And certainly
Gospell-obedience is a Grace of much worth, and of great force upon the whole
Man, For when it is once wrought in the heart, it works a conformity to all
Gods will; be it for life or death; one word from God will command the whole
Soul as soon as Obedience has found admittance into the Heart.

The true improvement of Peace.
IT is observeable in Scripture, that Moses Altar was but five cubits in
length, and five in breadth, Exodus 27. 1. 2 Chronicles. 4. 1. M. Borrhaius in locum.
and three in height; but Solomon's Altar was much larger, Now the reason hereof
seems to be this, because Moses was in a warfar, in an unsettled condition, in
the Wilderness, in continual travel, full of troubles and could not
conveniently carry about an Altar of that bigness; But Solomon was on his
Throne in a tranquil estate, settled in quiet possession of his Kingdom, and
as his name was, so was he a true Solomon, that is, Peaceable: Thus it ought to
be with all good Men, M. B. A Christian's delight.
that when they have more Peace and prosperity then others, their service of
God should be proportionable; Solomon's Temple must outstrip Moses his
Tabernacle in beauty and glory, and Solomon's Altar must exceed the bigness of
Moses his Altar; In their Peace and plenty, their holiness should outshine
others that are in want and misery, when God lays not so much sorrow upon them
as upon others, they should lay the more duty upon themselves; If God send them
fewer Crosses and more comforts, they are to return more service and commit
less evil.


OBservable is that speech of King Agag, when Samuel sent for him, Surely the
bitterness of Death is past. 1 Samuel 25. 32. Fr. de Mendoza in loc.
Now the ground of this speech was either his ^alse hope, as thinking that the
worst was past, because he was fetched off the Kings guard of Soldiers and
brought to Samuel the Prophet who was Vir togatus a Man of Peace; Or else if
the Messengers did tell him, why he was sent for, then he set a bold face upon
it, and spoke out of stomach intimating his resolutenesse and contempt of
Death, that he was resolved to die bravely and like himself; P. Martyr in locum.
This now was carnal gallantry; And thus many a man may Agag-like contemn
Death and all Gods judgments out of stoutnesse and stiffness of heart; But all
true believing Christians may and do graciously despise Death, and say thus
from a principle of Faith and cer^ain hopes of Heaven, Surely the bitterness
of Death is past, Non potest male mori qui been vixit. August. de doctrina
Christ.
certainly Christ by his Death has taken away the bitterness of Death, and
has sweetly perfumed our graves by the burial of his own blessed body, so that
we shall taste nothing but the sweetness of Death, and may now courageously and
triumphingly sing and say not as Agag did, Surely the bitterness of Death is
past, but as S. Paul did, O Death where is thy sting? etc. and to me to dye is
gain, 1 Cor. 15. 55.
Phil. 1. 21.


JOsephus Phavorinus a learned Physician of Italy, In lib. de Hom. excellent.
marvelled at nothing in the World but Man, and at nothing in Man but his mind;
And Abdala the Saracen King of Toledo being asked what he most wondered at upon
the stage of the World? Leo. Heb. dial. de amore. Pythagoras.
answered, Man; One calls God an immortal Man, and Man an immortal God;
Another sets him out as (...) a little World, and the World (...) a great Man:
Now these Men were not certainly so wellknowing of Gods word and Man's sin, and
of the matter that Man was made of, as they should have been, Whereas such as
know God in his most excellent glory, and Man in his best estate to be but
Vanity, turned from his Innocence to Iniquity; Genesis 28. 27.
must and do acknowledge themselves to be less then the least of Gods mercies,
Psalm 39. 5.
such as he created being Nothing, recreated being worse then nothing, and
without great Mercy on his part are like to fall again to Nothing.


AS those that have the Iaundise see all things yellow by reason of the humor
of that di^ease, Ioh. Fernelius de humorib. lib. 6.
corrupting the sight by the overflowing of the gall over the whole body. So
men of corrupt Judgments misapply matters and persons, and are not able to give
a right Judgment according to truth, but run on according as their Fancy leads
them, just like a blind Man that can see no more light at noonday then at
midnight, and must needs there mis-judg day for night and night for day.

Wanton Hearers of the Word reproved.
SUch as have weak and sickly stomachs are always finding fault with the
Cater, S. Croke Visi^. Sermon. at Ba^h, 1615.
Cook, or Carver, and think they could feed a great deal better, if there were
better provision. And thus there are some queasy wanton Hearers of Gods Word,
Nisi Spiritus sanctus auditorum ^^rda repleat, ad aures corporum vox doctoris
incassum sonat, etc.
such as find fault with their Pastor, and think they could edify much better
by such or such an other, Wherein they say they know not what; For it is
neither Paul nor Apollos that can edify, that is, give increase, make the Word
effectual, God has reserved that work to himself that so his Ordinance not the
gifts, his blessing not the commendations of the Preacher might be regarded;
that the Treasure might not be esteemed for the Vessel, but the Vessel for the
Treasure, and so neither Paul magnified, nor Apollos despised, nor either or
both relied upon, and God himself neglected; Nor Hearing severed from Prayer,
for that makes Prayer abominable; Greg. in pastore.
nor Prayer from Hearing, for that makes Hearing unprofitable, but that both
being joined together, our obedience in Hearing may make our Prayers accepted,
and our fervency in praying may procure our hearing to be blessed.

The vast difference betwixt the Power of God and Man.
IN matters of Arithmeticall accounts, Steph. Go^^on Sermon at S. Paul's, 1598.
set one against ten, ten against an hundred, an hundred against a thousand, a
thousand against ten thousand, although there be great odds, yet there is some
comparison; but if a Man could set down an infinite number, then there could be
no comparison at all, because the one is finite, the other infinite: So it is
betwixt the Power of God and Man, set all the Princes and Powers of the Earth
in opposition to God, they shall never be able to withstand him; Plutarch. in
vita Pomp.
It was once the saying of Pompey, That with one stamp of his foot he could
raise all Italy up in arms; And the mighty Men of the World may have Nations,
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, at their command, but yet God is more powerful
then them all, If he do but arise, they shall all of them fly before him. If
he once fall to fettering of Princes, Psalm. 68.
it shall be done so sure, that no flesh shall be able to knock off their bolts
again. If he but once make fast the bars of our City gates, Psalm. 147.
we may trust to it, they shall be so fast, that no Invader shall be able to
break them open, so infinite is his power, that in David's thoughts it was not
to be matched, Psalm. 89.

The great danger of Apostasy.
IN the affairs of this life, it is a shame for a Man to begin an enterprise,
and not to go through; to begin a piece of Work, and leave it off in the
middle, it will give just occasion for every Man to point at him with his
finger, deride and jeer him, saying; This Man began to build, and was not able
to finish, Geo. Jay Sermon at Court, 1632.
that he has taken a great deal of pains to no other purpose, but to leave a
Monument of Fol^y and Vanity for the World to laugh at. And thus he that has
received the common graces of God, and many good gifts of his Spirit, which
have enabled him to do much good and faithful service, and then takes the grace
of God, and turns it into wantonness, Tunc vir Apostolicus nunc vilis
Apos^ata. factus.
and smothers and quenches the Spirit; Or having been in a fair way to Heaven,
having some time walked on Religiously and faithfully, till he come within some
sense of his Reward, and within view of the Crown prepared for him, Sedul. de
Judah prodit.
then to turn out of the way, and Apostatize in the broad way, What is it else
but to tread in a path, that without Repentance will lead to utter destruction,
Heb. 6.


IT is the part of a skilful Surgeon or Physician, R. Maverick Sermon. at S.
Paul's, 1617.
not only to take away any appearing Ulcer, or to cool the heat of a burning
Fever with outward applications, but to look into the inward causes and
malignity of the disease, and so to order the matter, that the cause being
taken away, the effect may necessarily follow. Now it is well known, that the
seed of all sins, and the Wellspring of all Wickedness arises from the Heart
of Man; Matthew. 15. 19.
the Heart is therefore to be washed as from all wickedness, Ier. 4. 14.
so from all wicked thoughts, they being the Sources and originals of all
unrighteousness, not that they are all so, For they may be sometime
accompanied with horror and detestation of Sin, Aquini. sum. part. 2da. 2dae.
quaest. 154.
or cast into our Hearts by Satan, yet not consented unto; but Men think too
little of such thoughts: the thoughts therefore that are to be thought on, and
cleansed from the Heart, are such as proceed from our own corrupt Nature, or
suggested into our minds by the malice of Satan, whereunto we give consent and
liking, or else they be the allurements of the World which we cherish and
delight in.


AMongst the Romans th^^e their proper goods and estates which Men had gotten
in the Wars with hazard of their lives were called Peculium castrense,
Wolfgang. Lazius de Repub. Romans
or a Field-purchase* Well then may the Church and every true Member therein be
called Chris^s Peculium castrense, Maurit. Bohemus. delit. Christ.
his purchase gotten not only by the jeopardy of his life, but with the loss
of his life and blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And if it were possible, he would
rather lose his life a second time, ere he would lose the least limb for which
his life was so laid down.


IF a Judge of an Assize should say to a Felon, Joh. Hill Penitent Sinners
entertainment.
or some Malefactor in the Goal, Confess but your faults, and become an honest
Man, I will pardon you, and not only so, but you shall be made a Justice of
Peace, or some great Man, whereby you shall have power to judge and examine
others. Surely, he would upon this promise be moved quickly to confess the
Felony, P^^nitentia est spes salutis, per quam De^s ad misericordiam
provocatur, etc.
and forgo his theft: Thus it is, that the Judge of all the World makes great
tenders of Mercy, that if a Sinner will truly, and from his heart confess his
sins, and resolve to leave them, he shall have pardon, and not only so, but he
shall be made a King and Priest unto God the Father, an heir of God, Isidor. de
sum, bon^.
and joynt-heir with Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 17.


PLutarch, though an Heathen, yet of Honorable esteem even to this day amongst
us, has a story, In lib. de Consolat. ad Apollon. ex Homer^.
How that upon a time, a Complaint was sent from the Islands of the Blessed to
the Judges of the superior Courts about certain Persons sent thither who
formerly had lived impiously; humbly entreating that this abuse thus offered
unto them might speedily be redressed; Whereupon these impartial Judges taking
the business into their considerations, found not only the complaint to be
true, but withal the reason and cause thereof, which was, that Judgment and
sentence was passed upon them here below in this life; Whereupon it often fell
out, that many Persons clothed with Honorable titles, Riches, Nobility and
other like dignities and preferments brought many Witnesses with them, who
solemnly swore in their behalf, that they deserved to be sent to the Islands of
the Blessed, when the truth was they deserved the contrary; To avoid which
inconveniency, it was decreed by an eternal doom, that for the time to come no
Judgment should be passed till after death, Tym. Oldn^ aya Sermon at the Fun.
of Ed. Lewknor, Esquire, 1636.
and that by Spirits only, who alone do see and plainly perceive the spirits
and naked Souls of such upon whom their sentence and I^dgment was to pass,
that so of what estate and condition soever they were, they might receive
according to their works: Here now was a great deal of light in a dark vault,
the divine eye of a mere natural Man discovering an Heavenly truth, which is;
That definitive sentence is not to be passed upon any here below, not that any
whosoever shall receive his full Reward of what he has done, whether it be
good or bad till after this life be ended.

Good meanings of bad Men, destructive.
THe Poets prate much of Plato's Ferry-boat, that never rested to carry Men
through the infernal River to the infernal place: So that what was then
feigned is now verified; For if there be any Ferry-boat to Hell, it is the
thing that Men call, a good Meaning; This is that which carries Men and Women
down to Hell by multitudes, Maurit. Bohem. medit. in loc. select. Script.
by Millions; There cannot be found so many Passengers in all the boats upon
any River, as there are in this one Wherry wafted down to the pit of perdition;
Many in all Ages have had their good meanings, and to this day, the Jews,
Turks, Pagans, Papists, the worst of them all do not want for good meanings. It
is the good meanings of bad Men, that brings them to an evil end, they think
they do God good service by abusing his People, but they are sure to find and
feel one day what disservice they have done to God and their own Souls for
ever, and that their good meanings before Man shall never excuse their bad
actings before God.

Gods readiness to maintain the cause of his Church.
AS in public Theaters, when any notable show passes over the stage, you
shall have all the spectators rise up off their seats and stand upright with
delight and eagerness, St. Gosson ut ant^a.
that so they might take the better notice of the same. Thus it is, that though
by an article of our Faith we are bound to believe, that Christ sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty, Mark 16. 19.
as a Judge to pronounce sentence; Yet he is said in the Scripture to stand
upright at the sufferings of his People, as at the stoning of S. Stephen, Act.
7.
either as an Advocate to p^ead the Church's cause, Ambros. lib. 10. ep. 82.
or as one in a posture of readiness to take revenge upon all her Enemies.

Men not to be proud of Honors and Preferments.
IT is Pliny's observation of the Pigeons, that taking a pride in the
excellency of their feathers, Not. hist. lib. 10. cap. 36.
and the height of their flying, they towr it in the air so long, that at last
they become a prey to the Hawk, whereas otherwise if they would but fly
outright, they are swifter of wing then any other bird. Thus Men that take a
pride in the height of that honor whereunto they are advanced, are many times
made a prey to the Devil, and a laughing stock to Men, whereas did they but
moderate their flight, and make a right use of their preferments, they might
become serviceable to God and their Country.


IT is the observation of S. Hilary, In Matthew. Can. 4.
that Salt contains in it is self the element both of Fire and Water, and is
indeed (says he) a third thing compacted out of both; It is water, lest we
should too much be incensed unto heat and passion; It is Fire, lest we should
grow too remiss and chill with neglect and carelessness: Hence is that advice
of our Savior to his Disciples, Have salt in your selves, and peace one with
another, Mark 9. 50.
that is, Col. 4. 6.
as S. Paul interprets, Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with
salt, let it not be rancid or unsavory, larded with bitter and unchristian
Invectives, W. S^later Remedy of Schism.
but tempered always with sobriety, meekness and temperance: And then when
the salt is first set upon the Table, Peace as the best and choycest dish will
follow after.


AS all Men, dwelling in houses of clay, and carrying about them the earthly
Tabernacles of their bodies, between whiles (will they, nill they) sleep, by
reason of bodily infirmity, Sam. Croke The Waking Sleeper; A Sermon. 1615.
and by a kind of unwelcome heaviness nod toward the Earth, as it were
pointing at their natural Element, whereunto they must in a short process of
time be reduced: So even the best of Gods children, compassed with Flesh and
blood cannot but at times bewray their folly and unsteadfastnesse; The best
Artist has not always his wits about him, quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus;
-- Non arcum semper tendit Apollo.
and the most watchful circumspect Christian does not always stand so fast
upon his guard of Faith and a good Conscience, but he may at one time or other
be taken napping.


AS when little Children do first learn to go alone, and feeling the weakness
of their feet, Nature ^eacheth them to thrust out the hand to the Wall, and
trust it only for a stay unto them. Steph. Gosson ut ant^a.
And thus it is, that especially in times of distress, Nature and Religion
teach us to trust to a stronger then our selves, that we shall have help at
Gods hands, and that without him there is no real, true help at all; Esaias 30.
3.
none in the smooth tongue of Man, Ier. 7. 4.
nor in his fair looks; not in the strength of Man, nor in his Riches; Ezech.
16.
nor in the wit of Man, that may be turned into Foolishness; Ier. 17. 5.
but in God alone, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
who is able and willing to relieve his People in the time of their distress.
2 Samuel 15. 31.



IT is reported of Julius Caesar, that as he passed over the Alps in his
journey to Spain, he took up his quarters one night in a little, poor
inconsiderable Village, where one of his Company came unto him, Coc. Sabel.
lib. 5. E^nead. 6.
and asked him merrily, If he thought there would be any contention in that
place for the Sovereignty? Whereunto he made this stout answer, I had rather be
the first Man here, then the second at Rome. Now it is much to be feared, that
there are many at this day thus affected, that they had rather be Kings, though
it were but of a Molehill, then to be in subjection unto any; Regnandi dira
cupido, Quid non?
yea, such is the heat of their Ambition, that the intemperancy of Nero's
Mother may seem to be revived again, who being very desirous that her Son might
be Emperor; And being certified by the Sooth-^ayer, that if he were so, he
should kill her; she brake out into this unstayed and outrageous speech, C.
Taci^. annal. lib. 14.
Occidat, dum imperet, Let him kill me, and spare not, so he may be Emperor;
so they stick not to say, Let us perish, so we may but bear rule and sway over
others.

Dead Men soon forgotten.
IT is a memorable Example, Matthew. Paris hist.
amongst many others that we have, of William the Conquerour's Successor, who
being unhappily killed, as he was hunting in New-Forrest, all his Nobles and
Courtiers forsook him, only some few that remained, laid his body in a
Collyer's-Cart, which being drawn with one silly lean beast through very foul
and filthy way, the Cart broke, and there lay the spectacle of Worldly glory,
both pitifully goared and all to bemired. Now if this were the portion of so
mighty a Prince, whom immediately before so glorious a troop attended; Tym.
Oldm^yn ut antea.
What then must others of meaner rank expect and look for, but only with
Death's closing up of their eyes to have all their Friends excluded, Mortu^s
e^iem gr^t^ sermones d^serunt. Menand.
and no sooner gone, but to be as suddenly forgotten; Hence is it, that
Oblivion and neglect are the two Handmaids of Death, and her Kingdom where she
principally tyrannizeth, is Terra oblivionis, the Land of Forgetfulness, Psalm
87. 8.

Man by Nature, lawless and ill-advised.
ORpheus in the Poet had no sooner tuned his Instrument, but all the birds and
beasts assembled; Ovid. Met. lib. 10.
and forgetting their several appetites, though some were of prey, some of
game, some of quarrel, yet they stood all together in a sociable manner
listening unto the sweetness of the Music, the sound whereof was no sooner
ceased, or drowned by some louder noise, but every beast returned to his
Nature, Gens human^ rui^ in Vetitum ne^as.
ready to devour and to be devoured one of the other. Such is the Nature and
condition of Man, lawless and ill-advised, full of savage and unreclaimable
desires of profit, lust, power, and Revenge, yet as long as he gives ear to
Precepts, Fr. Bacon de augment. Scient. lib. 1.
Laws and Religion, sweetly touched with Eloquence and divine persuasions, so
long is Society and peace maintained; but if these Instruments be silent, or
that sedition and tumult make them not audible, then all things dissolve into
Anarchy and mere confusion.

God the only object of his People's trust in time of distress.
THe Fish distressed slides into the Water, St. Gosson Sermon. at S. Paul's, Land.
1598.
and is relieved; The bird flies to the Dam, and is shrouded under her wings;
The Child runs to its Parents; strike the Dog, and he runs to his Master; Wound
the Soldier, and he flies to the A^my; And by way of Antiperistasis, cold
makes the heat retire into the Fire, and the force thereof is greater. Thus if
mere natural causes, whose goodness is finite; Tu vita, et geni^or vitae,
lucisque prosundae, Tu ^ux vera Deus, etc. Mar. Victor.
do cherish their effects, How much more shall God, whose goodness is
infinite; It is he, and he only, that is the object of his Peoples trust in
the midst of their distress, he is the first cause of all things, and all
things have recourse unto him, Psalm. 145. 15.

How it is, that God is more powerful then all the Creatures.
IT is a Rule in Philosophy, That, that is most active, which is most separated
from Earthly parts, Ven. Beda axiomata Philosoph.
most elevated a materia; The Physician distills his simples into waters, he
makes his extractions and quintessences, that the more they be elevated a
materia, Imbec^llis est omnis homo, si cum Dei manibus conferatur. Constable. annal.
the more they might be active, and work the better; hence is it, that Water is
stronger then Earth, Fire stronger then Water, Angels stronger then Men, God
stronger then them all; And why? but because he is actu purus, above and over
all, so full of activity, that none is able to inflict the least of passion
upon him.


HE that stands below and looks up to the top of St. Paul's London, or some such
high place, they that are upon the top of the steeple, appear to be out of
small stature, though in themselves they be tall and great, and they that are
at hand upon the same flat, seem to be great, and all this by reason of the
distance of the one and the nearness of the other: But e contrario if a Man
stood upon the top of S. Paul's and should look down, then they that are above
would seem great, and they that are below would seem little: So it is with Men
in time of trouble, if their eyes be fastened upon the Earth, their Enemies will
appear to be great and mighty, and God which is higher then the highest
Heavens, small and impotent; 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
but if their eyes be in Heaven, as Iehosaphats were, and that they look down
from thence upon their Enemies, then God will appear strong and mighty,
Animalia multa agunt, etc. Aristot.
and the Enemy weak and withered: It is the misapprehension of the Object that
makes many living Creatures here below do and suffer many things more then they
need to do. The Sheep at the first sight of the Woolf apprehends him for a
terrible object of fear, whereas the Lion passes by him and all other beasts
of the Forest with an honorable scorn and disdain; As for Men, the three
spies that were sent out to discover the Land of Promise having a sheeps eye
spied out more danger then they needed, Whereas Caleb having a Lions Heart
apprehended no terror at all. Numb. 13.
The Nobleman upon whom the King leaned in the siege of Samaria had so base an
eye, T. Jaggard. Sermon. at Petworth in Sussex, 1638.
that looking upon the present miseries, he took them to be greater then God,
and persuaded himself that although God should rain Victuals out of Heaven, the
Famine could not speedily be removed; But Elisha had his eyes in Heaven and
looking down from thence despised the present calamities, in respect of the
present help of God, that by next day would make the price of Corn to stoop so
low at the gates of Samaria, that it should be there at a very easy rate, 2
Kings 7.
and the siege removed. And there was a flattering Courtier, that looking upon
the Royal person of the King, held a Paradox, 1 Esdras 4.
That the King is the strongest thing in the World. But the good old Prophet
saw no such great matter in Kings and Princes, when they be compared with God,
they were in his esteem but as so many Grasshoppers skipping and leaping up and
down the Field. Esaias 40. 22.
By all which may be easily concluded, That in the apprehension of Fear and
courage, Man's eye mistaking of the Object spoils all.


THe Archer first takes a view of his mark, Tho. de Wann Se^m. de tempore.
then considers the distance of the ground, after that he carries his eye over
all the shafts in his quiver, he pulls out and puts in one after another,
until he have made choice of his Arrow; then he proves it with his finger and
judges by his ear whether it be fit to fly to the mark; then he considers how
the Wind si^s, whether to help him or to hinder him; When he has put his Arrow
into the bow and begun to draw, if there come a gust of contradiction in his
way, he has the discretion to bear with it, till it have spent it self; When
the blast is over, he sets his foot to the ground, Oportet ut Pra^dicatores
sint fortes in praeceptis, terribiles in minis, etc.
draws his Arrow up to the head, and sticks it up to the Feathers: Thus it is
that Preaching is a kind of Artillery exercise that requires strength and
knowledge, Ministers a kind of A^chers, and the Souls of Men are the fairest
marks that can be shot at; but it so comes to pass that many for want of
growth to draw the Bow of the Prophets and Apostles, Greg. moral. in Job.
or want of skill to shoot, or care to shoot when they have taken their aim,
many times miss the mark being either short or wide and so become despised.

Christ to be made our Example in bearing the Cross.
When Alexander the great marched through Persia, his way was stopped with Ice
and S^ow, insomuch that his Soldiers being tired out with hard marches, were
discouraged and would have gone no further; Which he perceiving, dismounted his
horse, and went on foot through the midst of them all, Quin. Curt. lib. 5.
making himself a way with a pick^xe; VVhereat they all being ashamed. First
his Friends, then the Captains of his Army, and last of all the
Common-Souldiers followed him; So should all men follow Christ their Savior by
that rough and unpleasant way of the Cross that he has gone before them, Te
pater Aeneas et avunculus exci^et Hector. Virgil.
He having drunk unto them in the cup of his Passion, they are to pledge him
when occasion is offered; He having left them an Example of his suffering, they
are to follow him in the s^lf-^ame steps of sorrow, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

The slavery of Sin.
IT is the observation of a learned facetious Italian, Petrarch. de vita
solitaria.
That they which lead a servile life, as bodily servants in Princes Courts, and
meniall in other houses; who being occupied in other Men's business, are ruled
by the Will of another Man's beck, and learn in another Man's countenance, what
they must do; All that they have is another Man's, another Man's threshold,
another Man's House, another Man's sleep, another Man's meat, and which is worst
of all, another Man's mind; They neither weep, nor laugh at their own pleasure,
but they cast off their own and put on another Man's affections; M. Pemberton
Sermon. at S. Fo^^ers, 1653.
besides, they do another Man's business, think another Man's thoughts, and live
another Man's life: Such and worse is the slavery of Sin and Satan; Malus etsi
regnat s^rvus est; nec unius hominis, sed quod gravius est, ^ot dominorum quot
vitiorum, Aug. de civit. Dei. lib. 4.
Never was there any Vassal endured greater villainy and drudgery, though never
so hard and cru^ll, then every impenitent Sinner does under Sin and the Devil,
who has them at such command, that if he bid them but go, they are ready to
run, he leads them as a Dog in a chain, he rules over them like a Prince, and
works in their hearts as in a shop, causing them to fulfill the will of the
flesh, Ephesians. 2. 23.

The great danger of not keeping close to Gods Word.
IT is a thing very well-known in the great and populous City of London, that
when Children, or some of bigger growth newly come out of the Country, and so
not well-acquainted with the streets, are either lost, or found straying from
their home, there is a sort of lewd wicked People, (commonly called Spirits)
that presently fasten upon them, and by falsehood and fair language draw them
further out of their way, St. Marshall Sermon. at Westminster. 1651.
then sell them to foreign plantations to the great grief of their Parents,
and Friends, who in all likelihood never afterward hear what is become of
them. Thus it is that when Men and Women are found straggling from God their
Father, Ioh. 13. 16.
the Church their Mother, and refuse to be led by the good guidance of the
blessed Spirit, Esaias 8. 20.
when they keep not to the Law and to the Testimony, nor stick close to the
Word of God, which is in it self a lantern to their feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light unto their paths, then no marvel if they meet with wicked
Spirits, seducers and false teachers that lead them captive at their will, and
that not receiving the Truth in the love of the Truth, God give them over to
strong delusions to believe alye, 2 These. 2. 11.

true service of God.
THe Sunbeams collected in a burning-glasse, kindle a fire upon certain
conditions; viz. that the Object be combustible and apt to take fire, that the
glass be held still and steady, and that it be in a just distance, neither too
far off, Luke 12. 46.
nor yet too near, but so as the beams may best unite their force: Such a
burning glass is Christ. Through him Gods Fatherly love shines upon us, he
stands as Mediator betwixt God and us, J. Bery sermon. at Exeter Assizes, 1615.
receiving the beams of his Father as his natural Son, and transfusing them
altogether upon us, his adopted brethren: Being then in so clear a Sunshine,
and having so perfect a burning glass; How comes it to pass that so many of us
continue so cold, so key-cold, so much failing in the true service of God?
Surely, there is some defect in the conditions, some hold the glass too far
off, and think of the Mercies of God in Christ, but slightly and confusedly;
some hold it too near, and being all upon Mercy, Mercy, make remission of sins
a plaster for presumption in sinning; Some hold it not still by steady and
fixed Meditations, but superficially glance upon it by spurts and flashes; And
some others are not of such combustible matter, not so fit to be fixed with the
fear of his Mercies, as to be feared with the fire of his Judgments.


IT is observed that when Sheep fall a butting one against another, Plin. not.
hist. lib. 1I. cap. 17. Aug. Hill Sermon. at S. Paul's, 1640.
a storm follows not long after; And they say of Bees, that when they stir and
strive amongst themselves, it is a sign that their King is about to remove and
leave the hive: Surely then prodigious must needs be all intestine Enmity; when
the sheep of Christ are so malignant one against another it is a fearful
presage of an ensuing ruin, when there are such stirs and schisms in the
Church, such tumults and hurliburlies in the State, it may be justly feared,
that God is about to remove from us.

Hypocrisy discovering it self in the end.
COunterfeit Diamonds may sparkle and glister, S. Bond, A Sermon. before the
Assembly of Divines, 1646.
and make a great show for some time, but their luster will not last long; And
experience shows that an Apple, if it be rotten at the coar, though it have a
fair and shining out side, yet rottenness will not stay long, but will taint
the outside also; It is the nature of things unsound, that the corruption
stays not where it begun, but putrifieth and corrupts more and more, till
all be alike: Thus it is that Sincerity tells the Christian, Nemo potest
personam fict^m diu far, etc. Sen. in cp. ad Neronem.
Nil fictum est diuturnum, Nothing counterfeit will last long, and that Man
that has a rotten heart toward God, his want of sincerity will in time be
discovered, and his outside be made as rotten as his inside; Fraud and guile
cannot go long unspied, dissembling will not always be dissembled, and
Hypocrisy will discover it self in the end.

day of Judgment near at hand.
AS some ill-minded Tenant, R. Pack Sermon. at Exeter, 1632.
whom if you should see to make havoc and spoil of every thing upon the
Tenement he holds, as to fell the Trees, rack out the ground, grub up the
hedges, tear down the gates, rifle the house, would you not be ready to think;
Surely, this Man's lease is almost expired, else he would never play such ^eaks
as he does: So now, that the Devil so ruffles abroad, stirs up contentions,
conspiracies, tumults, wars, labors to bring all kind of Sin into fashion,
Sa^vitia Diaboli pr^d^omus est judicii extremi. Bern. in Sermon. quodam.
to convert the World all into Pride, drunkenness, Whoredom, Epicurism,
Atheism, and attempts above all former wont, to do all the villainy and mischief
that he can; What implies it, but that the date of his time is even almost out,
his Lease very near out, and Christ near at hand, to Judgment.

The Simonist discovered.
THere is mention made of a certain sort of Indian people near unto the River
Ganges, Strabo. Geograph. lib. 5.
called Astomi who have no mouths, but a kind of hole instead thereof, whereby
they receive the sweet sent of flowers which is all the sustenance they receive
for the support of Nature: And just such are all Simonists and Simonaicall
parties, who have no mouths to show forth the praises of God, Plin. lib. 2.
cap. 7, 16.
but only a tonguelesse hole; by which they suck up the sweetness of
Church Livings, purchased by bribery at Steeple-fair; such as make their
Profession a mere Mechanic trade or Occupation, Franc. Rawlinson Sermon. at
Court, 1611.
and their Ministry a ladder only to climb to preferment; Mercenaries, no
true Pastors; Creepers in through the Window, no true Preachers; Men easily to
be known by their works, For they seek their own not Christ's; they feed upon
the fat of the Flock, and cloth themselves with the wool, but suffer the sheep
to starve for want of food; the People to perish for want of due Instruction.

The excellency of Justice.
THe Sages of elder times seated the Virgin Justice amongst the Constellations
of Heaven, Patricius de Regno. lib. 8. cit. 1. ex Nigid. Figulo.
betwixt the signs of the Lion and the Balance, 1. Power and Equity, receiving
the Comforter of the World, the Sun in Harvest time, and bearing in her hand an
ear of Corn, in token of Plenty to the Husbandman; And before her walks or
stalks Boots, the Heard or Pasture-man, holding up one hand as triumphing and
blessing his security under the protection of Justice, Omnes Virtutum species
uno justitiae nomine continentur. Hieron. ad D^met.
and with the other guarding the Crown against the Giant and the Serpent. 1.
Violence and Treachery; Wisely showing as by an Emblem, visible to the eye of
the World, that Justice, Laws and Magistracy are Divine and Heavenly things,
Mothers and Nurses of Piety, Security, Felicity; Justice being the very
life-breath, Augustine. de civit. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 4.
which many thousands draw, who else would be a very burden to themselves, and
a prey unto others; Do but take away Justice, and what are great Kingdoms but
great Thieveries? Justice is that which tames and bridles the fiercest, defends
and strengthens the weakest, keeps all quiet, secure, peaceable, happy.

God Predestinateth to the means as well as to the end.
THere is mention made of one Ludovicus, D. Maxey Sermon. on Romans 8. 30.
who was a learned Man of Italy, yet wanting the guidance of Gods spirit, and
so never considering advisedly of the means of his salvation, grew at last to
this resolution, Sisalvabon, salvabor, It Is no matter what I do, or how I live,
For if I be saved I am saved, If I be predestined to life I am sure of
Salvation, if otherwise I cannot help it; Thusbewit. ched with this desperate
opinion, he continued a long time, till at length he grew very dangerously
sick, whereupon he sent for a Skillfull Physician, and earnestly requested his
help; Laur. Beyerlinck in theatro magno Concionat.
The Physician aforehand, made acquainted with his former lewd assertion, how
he would usually say; If I am saved I am saved, directed his speech to the same
purpose, and said; Surely it will be altogether needless to use any means for
your recovery, neither do I purpose to administer any thing unto you; For if
the time of your death be now come, it is impossible to avoid it. Ludovicus
musing in his bed of the matter, and taking the Physicians speech into serious
consideration, mak^ out this conclusion to himself. That if means were to be
used for the health of the body, then much more had God also ordained means for
the Salvation of Men's Souls. And so upon further conference (with shame and
grief) he recanted his former opinion, took Physic, and was happily cured both
of Soul and body together: Thus it is that the determinate Counsel of God in
the matter of Predestination does not take away the Nature and property of
secondary causes, nor exclude the means of Salvation, but rather sets them in
order, and disposes of them to their proper end; And common sense and Reason
teach, Aristor. Rhet. lib. 7.
that in every action the end and the means of the end must go together; Now
the end which every one of us does aim at, is, Hac itur ad astra.
Eternal life, we must be sure then to lay hold upon Calling and Justification
as the means ordained to come to this end, For God has chosen us from
everlasting, there is Predestination, yet there he does not leave us, but then
he does teach us by his word, there is Calling; This Word (through his Spirit)
ingendreth Faith, there is Justification, And Faith lifts up unto God, there is
the Ultimate of all, Glorification.


A Man being sick and like to die, Gab. Inchini scala Coeli.
the Physician knowing his case, takes with him some preservative to comfort
him, and coming to the door falls a knocking; Now if he either will not, or be
not able to let him in, he must of necessity perish, and the cause cannot
properly lie at the Physicians door, who was ready and willing to relieve him,
but in himself that is not willing to be relieve^: Thus it is that Sin is a
disease, (...), Plato de leg. 10.
whereof we are all sick, we have all (...); Now Christ is the great Physician
of our Souls, he came down formerly from Heaven on purpose to heal us, and he
comes down daily to the door of our hearts, and there he knocks, Augustine. in
Matthew. 9. 12. Musculus in Matthew.
Rev. 3. 20. He brings with him (...) the bread of life, his eternal word to
comfort us, and if we but open the door of our (...) he will come in and sup
with us, as he did with Mary, and forgive all our sins, Luke 10. but if we will
not let him in, or through long contagion of Sin be not able to let him in, we
must of necessity dye in our Sins, and the case is evident, not because he does
not offer Grace, but because we receive it not when it is offered.


IN the Fourteenth Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel, our Savior walking on the
Sea, bade St. Peter come unto him, who being not any thing acquainted with such
a slippery path, and seeing a great storm arise, his heart failed him, and he
began to sink, but crying out for help, D. Maxey ut antea. Mari just
comparatur hic mundus.
Christ who was only able to give it, stretched forth his hand, took him into
the Ship, and saved him: This World (we know by experience) is a Set of trouble
and misery, Our Savior, as he did to Peter, so he most lovingly wills every
one of us to come unto him, but as we walk toward him, Cassiod. super Psalm 44.
storms and tempests do arise, so that through frailty of our flesh, and the
weakness of our Faith, we begin to sink, Christ stretches forth his hand, he
gives us (...), his Word, his Sacraments, the good motions of his Spirit to
save us from sinning, to keep us in the Ship of the Church, If we refuse these
means, we perish, we sink in our sins; And why so? Not because Christ does not
most kindly put forth his hand unto us, but because in want and distress we
lay not hold upon him. Job. 3. 19.
It is he that invites all Men to his great Supper, but if they make excuses,
or wilfully refuse to come, he may justly pronounce, None of them that were
bidden shall ever taste of my Supper, Luke 14. 24.

The giddy uncertain disposition of the Multitude or common People.
IT is said of the Roes and Hinds, that they are most tender and fearful of all
beasts, Philo ratus. Plin. lib. ^. cap. 53.
affrighted with any noise, checked with the least foyl, turned out of course
with the snapping of a stick, presently make head another way, and when they
are once out of their wonted walk, Erranti in via nullus est terminw, they run
they know not whither, even to their own death. Solinus
Such is the natural disposition of the Multitude or Common People, soon
stirred up, quickly awry, sometimes running full head one way, on a sudden
turned as much another, easily set a gogg, delighted with novelties, full of
alteration and change, one day crying Hosanna, the next day, Crucify him;
Whilst the Viper is upon S. Paul's hand, he is a Murderer; but no sooner off,
Act. 28.
in the turning of a hand, a God; One while the People wept, Tho. Westfield
Sermon. at S. Barth. great. Land. 1634. Ezra 3. 12.
because they had no Temple; and when the Temple was built again, they wept as
fast, because the glory of the second was not like the first. In the sad time
of Q. Mary, there was lamentation and crying out, That Idolatry was set up, the
Church polluted, and the Gospel taken away: Afterward, in the time of that
famous Q. Elizabeth, when through the great mercy of God, the Gospel was
advanced, and the light thereof did comfortably shine throughout the whole
Kingdom; Populi turba rerum novarum avida. T. Live. dec. 1.
then they murmured and cried out as fast again, That we had no Church, no
Ministry, Truth was wrapped up in Ceremonies, and all was Antichristian; so
giddy and uncertain, nay such is the madness of the People.

Sectarian, schismatical Seducers, their Company to be avoided.
AS a Man that travelleth with a great charge of Money in a way where many
Robbers haunt; Or happens to be in some great Market or Fair, where many
Cheaters and Cutpurses resort, had need look well about him, be very wary and
circumspect; J. Clark Sermon. at Lincoln, 1645.
Or in times and places of the Pestilence, where many be infected, shut up and
dye of the Plague, had need be very careful of himself in the provision of
Antidotes, to comfort and preserve his Spirits, and corroborate the vitals. So
had every sober, Melius est habere malorum odium quam consortium. Isid.
Soliloqu.
humble, discreet Christian, that carries in him a precious, immortal,
invaluable Soul, bless himself out of the Company, and carefully avoid all
contagious, schismatical Seducers, who truly are what Tertullus falsely said, S.
Paul was (...), pestilent Fellows, Act. 24. 5.

Sins Lethargy.
IT is said of those that are fallen into a Lethargy, Aegineta Trallianus.
that their bodies are subject to a continual drowzinesse, and their Memories
so taken off, that they do not remember any thing of what either they speak or
do, nay they forget the very necessary actions of life. G. Ressoldi Sermon. de
Peccati contagion^.
So deals Sin with the Soul of Man, it draws upon it such a deadly and fearful
sleep, that it makes Men to forget the most necessary thing, the Unum
necessarium, that which in a special manner concerns them, even all the ways
of God, all reverent fear and obedience to his Majesty, all peace of
Conscience, all salvation of their Souls, all eternal joy and Felicity; in a
word, all consideration of their lamentable estate and condition.


AS it is with some old, foul and wrinkled Dame, that is soothed up by her
Parasites in an admiration of her beauty, to whom no glass is allowed but the
Picturers, that flatters with a smooth fair and young Image: Let such a one
come casually to the view of a true glass, she falls out first with that
Miroir, and cries out of the false representation; Jos. Hall Exon. Sermon. on
Prove. 29. 23.
but after when upon stricter examination, she finds the fault in her self, she
becomes as much out of love with her self, as ever her flatterers seemed to be
enamoured on her. It is no otherwise with us, we easily run away with the
conceit of our spiritual beauty, of our innocent Intergrity, Index peccati lex
est Jac. Billii Anthalog.
every things feeds us in our overweening opinion; but let the glass of the
Law be brought once and set before us, we shall then see the shameful wrinkles
and foul Morphews of our Souls, and shall say with the Prophet, We lie down in
our shame, and our confusion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord
our God, Ier. 3. ult.


AS the stream in the River Jordan does carry the Fish swimming and playing,
till on a sudden they fall into the dead Sea, where by reason of the brimstone
and other bituminous matter, wherewith that Sea is infested, they presently
^ye. Joseph. in lib. contra Apion.
So there are many in the world, that suffer themselves to be carried away so
long with vicious thoughts; Plin. not. hist. lib. 5. cap, 15.
and wicked imaginations, that on a sudden the powers of the Mind be generally
tainted and infected; It may seem a small matter to lend the Devil an evil
thought: but it is very dangerous so to do; For he dares not tempt any one unto
murder, treason, or any such gri^^^us sin, till he has sent an evil thought
before, to try whether he shall be welcome.


IF a Man take in the Spring three or four plants, and set them altogether at
one time, Sh. Simson Sermon, at S. Marg, new-Fish-street, 1629.
if he come by and by, or within a while after, he may easily pull up one of
them; if he stay a Fortnight or a Month, he may pull up another, but it will
be somewhat harder; If he stay a year or two till it have taken deep root, then
he may pull and pull his heart out, his labor is all in vain, he shall never
be able to move it. And thus it is, that one Sin, one offense, if we labor to
pull it up in time, it may be forgiven, it may be taken away; And if we let
that one go on to two or three, yet with unfeigned Repentance, with bleeding
tears, with uncessant outcries to a gracious God, they may be raced out, and
wiped away, -- Longaque alit assuetudine flammas Ovid. Met. lib. 10.
but with greater difficulty: but if a Man give up himself unto Sin, accustom
himself to do evil, so that it take deep root in the heart, and be settled in
the Soul, he shall never be able to pull it up, nor arise from the death of
Sin, which has so fast seized on him.


AS common Drunkards, when they get in a temperate Man upon their
Alehouse-bench, entice him, tempt him, tole him on, first to taste, then to
pledge them, then when he is well whitled and come on, cup after cup, this
health and that health, R. Hooker's Eccles. polit. in preface.
till he be fully fudled, and his brains intoxicated. Thus the subtle
Sectarians are modest at the first, and very Maiden-like, they will not force
upon their Proselytes a full carouse of their Circean cups, but by degrees, by
little and little, they wind into their hearts, and privily bring in damnable
heresies. They do not violently rush, but slily creep into houses, and there
they begin at the apronstrings, with illiterate Mechanics, silly women, such
as are led more by a^^ection then Judgment, Mr. Edwards Antopology, p. 296.
then they let fall an apple to see if Atalanta will take it up, some general
received Truth, but withal secretly foyst in some ^rronious opinion, or
poisonous principle, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
scatter some sparks of their mild-sire, to see whether they will heat or
inflame; And having their methods and ways, Ephr. Pagett Heres^^graph. Ephesians.
6. 11.
(...) rules to go by: they grammar and ground their deluded Followers, (...)
admission in general and Fundamental principles of their black art, but let
them not see at what they drive, acquaint them not at the first dash the
mystery of Iniquity, the depths of Satan, Rev. 2. 24.

Men not to be proud of their Lands and Livings.
WHen Socrates saw Alcibiades proud of his spacious Fields and wide
Inheritance, he calls for a Map of the World, Aeliani Var. hist.
looks for Greece, and finding it, asks Alcibiades, Whereabout his Lands lay?
When he answered, Jos. Hall Exon. Sem. at Court, 1632.
They were not set forth in the Map: Why, says Socrates, are thou proud of
that which is no part of the Earth? And to speak truth, Why should any Man bear
himself high upon the greatness of his Revenue, the largeness of his
demesnes; For if the dominion of a King be but a poor spot of Earth, What a
nothing must the possession of a Subject be? some small parcel of a Shire, not
worthy the name of a Chorographer; Quid superbis terra ac cin^s? Bern. in Sermon.
And had he with Lycinius as much as a Kite could fly over, yea, if all the
whole Globe were his, six or seven foot would be enough to serve his turn in
the Conclusion.

Repentance to be Universal.
IF a Ship spring three leaks, and only two be stopped, the third will sink
the Ship; W. Jores Sermon. in the Isle of Wight, 1633.
And if a Man have two grievous wounds in his body, and take order to cure
only one, that which is neglected will kill him: Even so, if we having diverse
lusts, which fight against our Souls, do mortify but some of them, it is to no
purpose; If the guilt of many Sins lie upon us, (as in many things we sin all)
and we repent but of some of them, it will not avail us any thing; Hence is
that Counsel of Solomon, Prove. 4. 25. Universal^^ debet esse poenitentia, etc.
Let all thy ways be ordered. He that will make a true search, must search all
his ways, and try all his thoughts, words and deeds, repent of all Sin; For he
that favors himself in any one Sin, be it never so small, that Man hates no
Sin, perfectly, what show soever he makes to the contrary.

Wicked Men see the miseries, but not the Joys of Gods People.
AS a Man standing upon the Seashore sees a great heap of waters, one wave
riding on the back of another, Ben. Needler Sermon. at S. Giles Cripp^egate, 1655.
and hears too (especially if it be in stormy weather) the loud roarings
thereof but all this while, though he see the waters, he does not see the
wealth, the gold and silver, the infinite Riches that lie buried in the bottom
thereof. So it is that Wicked Men see the want, but not the wealth of Gods
People; Gaudium est Quod non datur impiis, nec ab impiis videtur. Isid. de sum.
bon.
their conflicts, but not their comforts; they easily take notice of the
miseries and troubles that usually attends upon the bodies of the Children of
God, but they cannot possibly discover the joys and rejoycings of the Spirit
that are in their Souls, neither indeed can they; For they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.


IT is reported of Sabbacus, Herodoti Clio.
a King of Ethiopia, who being by dreams admonished, that he could not possess
himself of the Kingdom of Egypt, otherwise then by Sacrilege, and the slaying
of the Priests; He chose rather to lay aside his claym and advantages of War
which he had gotten, Joh. Servilius de mirandis.
and to refer the Government of that Kingdom to twelve wife Men, who erected to
that Prince's piety one of the stateliest Pyramides of Egypt, which yet
remains: How much more will it become Christians in any way of power and
Magistracy, D. Joh. Gauden Apology for the Ministry.
not to make their way upon the spoils, nor lay the Foundations, or to carry
on the Fabric of their greatness and dominion upon the carcasses and ruins
of any, much less of the Church and Churchmen, such as are able, true, and
faithful Ministers of the true God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.


IT is a question put by Plutarch, Quaest. 9. Symposiat. lib. 6.
How it comes to pass, that the Fig Tree, being of that extreme bitterness,
the root, the branches, the leaves, the stock and stem, being all of them so
bitter, the fruit should be so sweet and pleasant to the taste? The like may be
proposed, How it is that the sweet fruits of the Spirit, should ever grow upon
the bitter stock of Nature: how Man by Nature being in the very gall of
bitterness, should ever become a sweet smelling favor in the nostrils of his
God; Pier du Moulin traicte de l'amour de Dieu.
Surely, no otherwise, but that by Faith an Repentance, being ingrafted into
the stock Christ Jesus, he sucks in juicy sweetness from thence, and so is
made a Tree of Righteousness in Gods Garden.


IT is said of Hagar, That when her bottle of Water was spent, she sat down
and fell a weeping, T. W. A Fast-Serm. at S. Giles Cripplegate, Land. 3655.
as if she had been utterly undone, her provision and her patience, her bottle
and her hope were both out together: O what must she do? What? Why there was
upon the very place, and that near at hand, comfort enough; a Well of water to
refresh her, had she but had her eyes open to have seen it, Genesis 21. 19. Thus
it is, that in the midst of A^^lictions and distress, Men whine and repine, as
if they were quite lost, they eye the empty bottle, the cross that is at
present upon them, but for want of spiritual sight, Iugum Christi grave cum
tuler is, leve cum tulitur.
they see not the Fountain of living waters, Christ Jesus with the open arms of
his Mercy ready to relieve them; they, as it were, groan under the heavy
burden of oppression, but for want of coming to Christ and believing on him,
they miss of that speedy refreshing, which otherwise they might happily enjoy.


PHilosophers observe, Aristoteles Is. Ambros. de Regenerat.
that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, is by virtue of the Moon, she flings
her fainting beams into the Sea, and being not able to exhale them as the Sun
does, she leaves them there, and goes away, and that draws them, and when they
grow wet, they return again, so that the Sea ebbs and flows not from any
principle in its self, but by virtue of the Moon. Thus the heart of every poor
Creature is like the Water, unable to move toward Heaven to think a good
thought, much less (...) act any thing that is good, till the holy Spirit of
Grace bring in its beams, and leave a supernatural virtue by them upon the
Soul, and thereby draws it up to it self.

Afflictions, Not to be altogether taken up with the sense of them.
IT is very observable of Jacob, That when his Wife dyed in Childbirth, she
called the child Benoni, Genesis 35. 18.
that is, a son of sorrows; But Jacob, in all probability, thought thus with
himself, If I should call this Child Benoni, every time that I name him, it
would put me in mind of the death of my dear Wife, which will be a continual
affliction to me, and therefore I will nor have my child of that name, Is.
Ambrose ut supra.
but will from henceforth call him Benjamin, that is, the son of my right hand.
And this of Jacob may serve to show us thus much, That when Afflictions befall
us, Tu ne cede malis sed contra aud^ntior ito, Qua tua te fortuna si^et. Virgil.
we should not give way to have our thoughts continually upon them, always
poring on them, ever thinking and speaking of them, but rather to have our
thoughts on those things that may comfort us, or that may stir up our
thankfulness to God for mercies, even in the very midst of our Afflictions
afforded unto us.

To suffer any thing for the Cause of Christ.
IT is said of Hormisda, a Nobleman of great eminency in the King of Persia his
Court, that because he would nor deny Christ, he was degraded of all his
honors, stripped out of his Lordly habit, clothed with sordid rags, and so
turn'a out to keep the Camels; After a long time, the King seeing him in that
base, slavish condition, and remembering his former estate, took pity on him,
caused him to be brought into his Palace, Si me hujus causa pietat. etc.
Theodoret. hist. Ecccles. lib. 5. cap. 28.
suited him like himself in rich attire, and then persuades him to deny
Christ; at which he rent his silken clothes, and said; If for these silly
things you think to have me to deny my Faith in Christ, take them again, I Will
none of them; And so with great scorn and reproach he was the second time cast
out. Thus it is, that all of us should be ready to suffer any thing for the
cause of Christ, be contented to be made a byword and laughing stock for
Christ, and to bear with willing shoulders the most disgraceful things that can
by the malice of Men and Devils be put upon us for Christ: Perfer et ^bdura;
dolor hic tibi proderit olim.
nay, to bear up our spirits, though all the World should frown upon us, cast
us off, scorn us, Ovid. 3. amor.
and account us as a disgrace unto them.

The sins of our Religious duties corrected by Christ, and then presented to
God the Father.
AS a Child that is willing to present his Father with something or other that
might please him, as a Poesy or Nosegay, goes into the Garden, and there for
want of judgment gathers sweet smelling Flowers, and noisome stinking weeds
together; but coming to his Mother, she picks out the weeds, Is Ambrose Media.
and thus it is, that whether we pray unto God, or hear God speak unto us in
his Word, or are otherwise employed in the performance of any Religious action,
Pro nobis apud Patrem interpellans ut Advocatus noster, etc.
Christ comes and picks out the weeds, takes away the iniquity of our holy
things, observes what evil, or failing there is in duty, and draws it out, and
so presents nothing but flowers, nothing but what is pleasing and acceptable to
God his Father. Romans 8. 34.



IMagine that you saw some Malefactor led along to the place of Execution,
wailing and weeping for his misspent time, for his bloody acts, for his
heinous crimes, and that his wailings and his weepings were so bitter, that
they were able to force tears from others, and to make all eyes shoot and
water, that did but look upon him; but then if this Man in this case should
suddenly see his King running and riding toward him with a pardon in his hand,
What a sight would this be? Is. Ambrose ut supra.
Surely, none like it. Thus, thus it is with Man, sorrowing and repenting for
Sin, Whilst he is weeping over the sadness of his condition, Christi passio,
solatium in tribulatione, internae devotionis exercitiam, etc.
and confessing what a little step there is betwixt him and damnation (as if he
were even dropping into Hell) in a maze he looks up unto Christ, whom he sees
with a Spear in his side, with thorns in his head, with nails in his feet, and
a pardon in his hands; this were a sight indeed, a most pleasant ravishing,
Heavenly sight, such as all the rich and curious sights on Earth, Tho. a K^^pis
not all those glittering spangles in Heaven could afford the like.


IT was the ingenuous confession of a R. J. Lightfoot in a Sermon. before the
House of Commons on Psalm 4. 4.
learned Divine, sensible of his neglect, but more especially of the difficulty
of the duty of Heart-communication; I have lived (said he) Forty years and
somewhat more, and carried my Heart in my bosom all this while, and yet my
Heart and I are great strangers, and as utterly unacquainted, as if we had
never come near one another; Nay I know not my own Heart, I have forgotten my
Heart; Ah my bowels, my bowels, that I could be grieved at the very Heart,
that my poor Heart and I have been so unacquainted: Thus he then, Aut nibil
aut. male, aut aliud agendo.
in a pious and conscientious manner expressing himself; but mutato nomine, it
is the condition of most Men now in this Athenian age of ours, such as spend
their time in nothing more then in telling and hearing news, How are things
here? Redi ad cor tuum, et subtiliter discute ^eipsum, considera unde venis,
qu^ tendis, etc.
how there? how in this place? how in that? None almost enquiring, how things
are with their poor hearts, few or none debating the matter, nor holding a
serious communication, clear intelligence, and acquaintance, with their own
hearts, saying; Heart, how do thou? How is it with thee for thy spiritual
estate? Heart, how will thou do? or what do thou think will become of thee,
Hugo de anima lib. 3.
when thou and I must part, and never have the happiness to talk with one
another again.


LOok how it is with two Watermen, the one hales his Boat about the shore, and
cannot g^t off, but tugs and pulls hard, yet never puts her forth to the ^ide;
the other having more skill puts off presently, (...) up his Sail, and then
sits still committing himself to wind and tide, which ea^^ly carry him whither
he is to go: Is. Ambrose ut antea.
Just thus it is with a Faithful Soul, and an Unbeliever, all the care of the
one is to puchimself upon the stream of Gods providence, to set up the Sail of
Hope, Per fidem attingit inaccessa, deprehendit ign^ta, comprehendit immensa,
etc.
to take the gale of Gods Mercy, and so he goes on cheerfully. And why, but
because he is not moved by any external Principle, it is Faith in Christ Jesus
that puts him on, it is by Faith that he has got a skill and a kind of slight
to put over all cares to another; and though he take up the Cross, yet he
hurls all the care upon Christ, and then it is an easy matter to lie under the
burden when another bears the weight; Bern. super Cant.
But the unfaithful, unbelieving Soul, thinking by his own wit and power, to
bring things about, tugs and pulls hard, yet finds neither ease nor success,
but sinks under the pressure of every carnal, Worldly, ^^^^rrent that betides
him.

Self-denial, the excellency thereof.
THere is mention made of a certain godly Man, that was in his time sore
tempted by Satan, Tho. de Wann Sermon. de tempore.
the Man was much in duty, to whom Satan said, Why take thou this pains?
thou do watch, and fast, and pray, and abstainest from the sins of the times;
But O Man, What do thou more then I do? Art thou no Drunkard, no Adulterer?
No more am I; Do thou watch and fast? Why let me tell thee, I never slept, I
never ate nor drank, What do thou more then I do? I will tell thee (said the
good Man) I pray I serve the Lord, nay more then all this (which is indeed the
sum of all) I deny my self: Nay then, says Satan, thou go beyond me, For I
am proud, I exalt my self, and so vanished: O the excellency of self-denial,
when Christ may be said to rule within a man, when in every way a Man subjects
himself to Christ, Is. Ambrose ut antea.
in his understanding to know Christ, in his will to choose and embrace Christ,
in his thoughts to meditate upon Christ, (...) cis satu est si coetera nescis.
in his fear to serve and honor Christ, in his Faith to trust and depend upon
Christ, in his love to a^^ect Christ, in his joy to delight in Christ, in his
desires to long after Christ, in his endeavors to exalt Christ, in all his
duties, graces, gifts and abilities to make them serviceable to Christ, so that
he may be said to live, yet not he but Christ that lives in him, Gal, 2. 20.

Graces divine, not parts humane, hold out in the end.
AS it is with two Children playing together in the day, when night comes, one
Child goes to his Father; and the other to his Father: Hier. Drexelius in
Zodaico Christiano.
It may be all the day they are so like that you cannot say, whose Child is
this or that, but when night comes, the Father then comes to his Child, and
says; Come my Child come in at doors, And if the other do but offer to come
in, No child, you must go home to your Father: Rich. de Mediavilla Progres.
Coeleslis. Gratia, sine qua nec insantes, nec aetate grave^, salvi fieri posunt.
So while we are living, Grace and gifts are mingled together, some men have
gifts and some Men have graces, and they look very like; Ah, but when night
comes, when Death comes, then says God to those that have Grace, Come my
Children, enter in; but if those that have gifts only come, he sends them
another way; so that if a Man have never such parts and gifts yet if he have
not Grace withal, Aug. (...) not. et. gratia.
he may go to Hell and perish to all Eternity.

How it is that Graces of the Spirit may at present seem to be lost.
AS in a Fire, the fuel may be quite burnt out, the flame abated and quite
extinguished; but yet there still remains an heap of Coals on the hearth, Jer.
Dyke Sermon on 1 Th^ss. 1. 19.
and in them a good Fire, though all may seem to be quenched; And it is obvious
to every eye, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 19.
that the Sun does not always shine out in its luster, a cloud may interpose,
and so intercept its beams, yet for all that the body of it is in the Heavens
as the Fountain of all other light whatever: So it is that the Graces of the
Spirit, such as Faith, Hope, Love, Gaudium salutis a^ittere, gratia Dei non
excidere possunt eecti. G. Frbricius in Psalm. 51. 14.
cannot be finally and totally extinguished in the Soul, when they are once
wrought there by the Spirit, yet their luster, their radiancy, their shine and
flame may be clouded for some time; And so it comes to pass that though a Man
cannot lose his hope, yet he may at present lose the comfort and confidence of
his hope; though he cannot lose his Love, yet he may cool the heat and fervor
of his Love; The flame of the Spirit, the feeling and sense of it may in the
secondary causes thereof for a time be quenched, but yet the Spirit it self,
and the Cardinal graces thereof remain still in their full glory and splendour.


IF a Man have a thorn in his foot, it puts him to a great deal of pain, Paul
Wann Sermon. de 7. Vitiis.
it swells and is full of anguish; Now let him anoint his foot, let him lap it
up and keep it warm, let him sit still and not walk upon it; yet all the while
the thorn is still in his foot, he has no ease, but it aches and throbs, and
goes to the very Heart of him; The way then for ease in such a case, is to
remove the cause of the sorrow, Alphons. ab Avendan. Com. in Matthew.
by all means to get the thorn plucked out, to get that drawn forth: So when a
Man's Conscience is in trouble and disquiet, he may use plasters of ease, may
seek to quiet his Spirit with merry Company, good fellowship, following his
Pleasures, minding his business, he may be padling with these plasters and
Poultesses that Men of the World seek ease by; Delinquendi materia debet in
omnibus praescindi.
but yet so long as the thorn is in the Heart, guilt in the Conscience, and Sin
in the Soul, all these slabberments will do not good, the ^horn must be plucked
out, Sin must be removed as the cause of all sorrows whatsoever. Cyprian. lib.
2. ep. 2.



IT was as easy for Boaz, Jer. Dyke Sermon on Prove. 23. 23.
and might have been done with as little charges, to have given Ruth as much
corn at once, Ruth. 2. 15.
as would have yielded her an Ephah of Barley, and so have sent her home without
any more ado; but he would have her to use her endeavors, to gather and to
glean it, and bear it out too when she had gleaned it. Thus God gives grace
and the knowledge of his Truth as Boaz gave Ruth corn, not but that he can (if
it so please him) give knowledge by immediate Revelation, Illud quod medium est,
atque inter utrumque probatur. Martial.
and Grace by immediate infusion, yet he will have us to use the means of
hearing, reading, conference, etc. and so leave the issue of all our labors
and endeavors to his good Will and pleasure.


AS we see in the siege of some strong hold, when Men have been long cooped up,
and have not had meat to eat, they have come out like so many dead carcases, as
it were so many Sceletons, so weak, so poor, with such ghastly looks, as it were
enough to scare any Man with the sight of them; But now eating mends all this,
1 Kings 19. 8. Aloys Novari^us in Elect. Sacrit.
upon eating follows strength to walk, and strength to work, upon eating
follows fatness, and goodness of Complexion. And thus it is upon eating of
the Word, when Men with r^adinesse and forwardness receive the Word of God,
Nehem. 9. 25.
and practice what they hear, Dan. 1. 13.
then it is that they have strength in their Souls to walk in the ways of God,
Ier. 15. 16.
then it is that they grow up, Romans 15. 24.
as Calves of the stall; full of good; fat and flourishing; and then it is that
they have fair and good complexions, Psalm 92. 14.
their Wisdom and other Graces cause their faces to shine in the fair and
lovely carriage of their lives and conversations.


AS in the heating of an Oven, the Fuel is set on fire, yet not without some
pains to blow it up into a flame; T. White Art of Divine Meditation.
but afterward when the Oven begins to be somewhat hot, the Fuel will catch
and kindle of it self; and no sooner is it thrown in, Nihil est quod ampliorem
curam postulet, qu^m cogitare quid gerendum sit. Auson.
but it is all in a blaze on a sudden. Such is the difficu^^^ of Meditation at
the first, When there is but (as it were) a little spark of Love in the heart,
it will cost a Man some pains to blow it up into a Flame; but afterward when
the heart is once heated with those flames of Love, then it will inflame all
the thoughts, and set the affections on fire, In so much, that the duty of
Meditation will not be only easy and delightful, but so necessary, that a
Man cannot tell how to avoid it.

Sathan's subtilty to ensnare.
THere is a story of an excellent Painter, Phil. Diez sum. Praedicant.
that to show the rarily of his Art. drew a white line so small, that it could
hardly be discerned; Whereupon another that was looked on as a very able
Artist, to show that he could excel him, drew a black line through the middle
of it so exactly, that it required an exquisite sight to discern either.
Mille-a^^sex est Satonas, Varias illius frauds res^rare nemo potess. Laur.
Justinianus de vita Monast. c. 12.
Thus it is that the Devil slily insinuates into, and craftily works upon,
the hearts of the sons of Men, the thread of his Policy being so finely spun,
the train of his subtilty so privily laid, and the black line of his
Temptations made so small, that it is almost impossible to discover the secret
destruction that runs through the plausibility thereof.

Purity of Heart, no comfortable sight of god without it.
AS the eye that has dust in it without, Vinc de ^a Nuzae tract. Evang.
or thick vapors stopping the nerves within, cannot see except it be cleansed
from the one, and purged from the other; And as the Glass, on which there is a
thick mist, does not represent ones face clearly before it be wiped off: So
neither can we see God in his Creatures, in his Word, in his Sacraments, or in
those secret, inward and sweet manifestations of comfort and joy, whereby he
often reveals himself even in this life to them that love him, Hinc illud
H^rmenii, Malo mori quam cord foedari.
so long as there is any impurity cleaves to us; The pure in Heart are the
only ones that shall see God, Matthew. 5. 8. It is not Learning, nor a clear
understanding, not Religious education, not any one of these, not all of these
together, but holiness and purity of Heart, that fits a Man for such a blessed
Sight at God is.

Active Christian, the best Christian.
PLutarch speaks of two Men, that were hired at Athens for some public work,
In libra Politic.
whereof the one was full of tongue, but slow at hand; and the other blanck in
speech, yet an excellent Workman; Being called upon by the Magistrates to
express themselves, and to declare at large, how they would proc^ed, When the
first had made a large speech, and described it from point to point, the other
seconded him in few words, Ioh. B. of Lincoln, Sermon. at Funeral of K. James,
1625.
saying; (...); Ye Men o^ Athens, What this Man has said in words, that will I
Make (...) in true performance. And as he was adjudged the better Artisan, so
is the Man of action the better Christian: It is not the Man of words, but the
Man of deeds; not the learie, but the fruitful; not the discoursing, but the
doing Christian, that shall be blessed here in this world, and happy in that
which is to come. Ioh. 13. 17.


The good Christians Hope at the death of a Child of God.
AS Papinius Statius reports of the old Arcadians, Thebaid. 4.
That mourning all night for the setting of the Sun, they were comforted
notwithstanding at the break of day when they saw him in his sphere again; And
as the People enraged at the death (...) ^omulus, were quieted by and by with
Proculus his news, that he saw him in glory riding up to Heaven; Plin. Secund.
de viris illustribus, cap. 2.
So it is that such as are without Hope are extremely troubled at the death of
their intimate Friend and acquaintance, as if he were lost, Piis mors ultra non
est mors, sed nomen tantum habet mortis, etc. Chrysostom. in Matib.
and they should never see him again; but the good Christian remains full of
Hope at the death of any Child of God, well knowing, that Mors janua vitae, he
had no way but by this Mortality, to cloth himself with Immortality, and that
as he is gone before into glory, they shall both meet in Heaven with comfort.


Physicians say, That the Mothers milk, Hippocrat. de not. pueri.
though not so weighty as another, if no noxious humor be tasted in it, is
more proper for the Child then any strangers can be, W. Gurnall Christ. Compl.
Armor. in Epist. ded.
because it is more natural; And certainly, it would not be an error, if a Man
should say as much of the milk which the Minister gives to his own Flock; and
that a People conscientiously lying at the breasts of their own Minister, (if
the milk he gives be wholesome, the doctrine preached be sound and Orthodox)
may expect the blessing of God for their nourishment, though it has not so
much lushiousnesse to please the curious raster, so much of Rhetoric to tickle
the itching car, as some others have.


IF a Ship that is lanch'd, Hieron. Drexelii Gymnasium Patientiae.
rigged, and with her sayls spread, cannot stir till the wind comes fair and
fills them; much less can the Timber that lies in the Carpenters Yard, hew and
frame it self into a Ship; If the living Tree cannot grow except the root
communicates its sap, much less can a dead rotten stake in the hedge, which
has no root, live of its own accord. And thus if the Christian's strength be
in the Lord (as most certainly it is) and not in himself, Natura, i. corrupta
nec dum regenita, nihil per se potest boni, etc. Eucher. Lugdunens.
then the Christlesse person must needs be a poor, impotent Creature, void of
all strength and ability of doing any thing of it self toward its own
salvation; If a Christian that has a spiritual life of Grace, cannot exercise
that life without strength from above; then surely one void of that new life,
dead in Sins and trespasses, can never be able to beget it in himself, or any
way concur to the production of it; so helpless is the state of unregeneracy,
so impotent the condition of every Man by Nature.


AS it is with the fighting of two Fencers on the Stage, W. Gurnall Christian
in complete armor.
you would think at first they were in earnest; but observing how wary they are
where they hit one another, you may soon know they do not intend to kill one
another; And that which puts all out of doubt, when the prize is done, you
shall see them merry together, sharing what they have got from their deluded
Spectators, which was all they fought for. Thus you shall have a carnal heart,
a Man in the state of unregeneracy make a great bussle against Sin, by
complaining of it, or praying against it, so that there seems to be a great
scuffle betwixt Satan and such a Soul; but if you follow him off the Stage of
duty (where he has gained the reputation of a Saint, the prize he fought for)
you shall see the Devil and him sit as Friendly in a corner as ever.

The Sinner's desperate madness.
TErtullian stood, as it were, In lib. de corona Militis.
amazed at the folly of the Romans ambition, who would endure all manner of
hardship in Field and fight, and run through any difficulty whatsoever, and for
no other thing, but to obtain at last the honor to be Consul, which he aptly
calls, Unius anni gaudium volaticum, O caecas hominum mentes, O pectora dura!
a joy that flits away at the years end: Desperate then must needs be the
madness of all wretched sinful Men, who will not endure a little hardship
here, but entayl on themselves the eternal wrath of God hereafter for the short
Feast and running-banquet their lusts entertain them here withal, which often
is not gaudium unius horae, a joy that lasts an hour, nay so transient, that it
hardly feems to be at all.

The difference betwixt Sermons preached, and Sermons printed.
THere is as much difference between a Sermon in a Pulpit, and printed in a
book, W. Gurnall Christian completely armed, in the Epi^^. dedicat.
as between milk in the warm breast, and in a sucking bottle, yet what it
loses in the lively taste is recompensed by the convenience of it; The book
may be had at hand, when the Preacher cannot; And that is the chief end of
Printing, that as the bottle and spoon is used when the Mother is sick or out
of the way; so the book, to quiet the Christian, and stay his stomach in the
absence of the Ordinance; Praedicatoris vox, corda torpentia hominum excitat
plus quam lectionis, etc. Greg. super Evang.
yet he that reads Sermons and good books at home to save his pains of going
to hear, is a Thief to his Soul in a Religious habit; he consults for his ease,
but not for his profit, he eats cold meat when he may have hot: He hazards the
losing the benefit of both by contemning of one, offering sacriledg for
Sacrifice, in robbing God of one duty to pay him in another.

The bare enjoyment of Church Priviledges does not make up a true Christian.
When a Statute was made in Q. Elizabeth's reign, Anno 1. Eliz. Pulton's
Collect. of Statutes.
that all should come to Church upon penalty of being looked upon as in a way
of Recusancy and so punishable by Law, The Papists sent to Rome to know the
Popes pleasure, W. Cambdeni Annal. Reg. Elizabet.
He returned them this answer; Bid the Catholics in England give me their
Hearis, and let the Queen take the rest; And withal a dispensation was
granted; so that very many came to Church, but it was more for fear then love,
more for the saving of their purses, then any thought at all of saving their
poor deluded Souls: W. Gurnall Christian in compl. armor.
And thus it is, that as Christ had his Saints in Nero's Court, so the Devil
his servants in the outward Court of his visible Church so that a Man must have
something more to entitle him to Heaven, then living within the pale of the
Church, and giving an outward conformity to the Ordinances of Christ; Re non
nomine Christiani.
There must be an inward conformity of the mind to the laws of God, a
subjection to the Scepter of Jesus Christ, and a readiness to be led by the
guidance of the blessed Spirit, otherwise he may be of the Church, but not in
the Church; a Partaker of Church privileges, but no true Proprietor of the
Graces and benefits thereby accrewing.


IT is and usually has been the manner of great Men (such as from baseness
and beggary have ascended to Kingdoms and Empires, Agathocles. Willigis. see
B. Smith's Sermons.
and from sitting with the hirelings and dogs of the flock have been seated on
Thrones of State and Tribunals of Justice) to be delighted to speak often of
their poor and mean beginnings, to go and see the low roof'd Cottages, Dr.
Prideaux late B. Wigorn.
where they were first entertained and had their birth and breeding; yea, there
was Dr. Prideaux late B. Wigorn.
one of late years that being got by desert into the Divinity chair, did
without superstition hang up in his Closet, some part of that mean apparel
wherein he first saluted his Oxford Mother: A good way no doubt, and being done
with a good mind, the ready way to have Mercies and blessings enlarged;
Beneficia Dei omnibus boris, et omni tempore consider and a sunt. Chrysostom. in
Genesis hom. 67
It would not be unusefull therefore for the Christian to look in at the grate,
to see the smoaky hole where once he lay, to view the chains wherewith he was
laden, and to behold the snares of Sin and Satan wherein he was once
entangled; but then to open his mouth with thanks unto God, who will be sure to
fill it with his tender and loving kindnesses.


IT is observeable, that when some great King or Potentate draws near unto
his Royal City, the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords, and others of the
Nobility and Gentry ride before him; Now if a stranger standing by should ask,
Who is this Man? and who is that? What power has that Man at Court? What place
has this? What means has a third? It would be answered; This is my Lord Duke,
Alphons. ab Avendano moralitat. in cap. 1. S. Matthew.
that, such an Earl, the other, such a great Lord, such a one is the Lord
Treasurer, that, the Lord Admiral, and that other the Lord Chancellor, etc.
but when the King comes, he says no more but only, That Is the King; And why
so? And why no more but so? because in that one slender word, Incassum laborat
in acqui. sitione Virtutum, qui eas alibi quam in Christo quaerit. Bern. in
Cant.
all the greatness of the rest is included, the King being the Fountain of
Honor from whence all their glory is derived: Thus it is that if all the
created goodness, all the Privileges of Gods children, all the Kingdoms of
the Earth and the glory of them, were to be presented at one view, they would
all appear as nothing and emptiness in comparison of the excellency and
fullness that is to be found in Christ Jesus.


IF it cannot but delight the Husbandman when he sees his plants grow, Sen.
ep. 24.
his fruits ripen, his Trees flourish; If it must needs rejoice the Shepherd
to behold his sheep sound, Ven. Beda. in ep. 1 Ioh. 2. 4.
fat, and fertile; If it glad the heart of a Schoolmaster or Tutor to observe
his Scholars thrive in Learning and increase in knowledge, It must needs be
matter of abundant joy to any Minister of the Gospel, when People are brought
to Fellowship with God in Christ Jesus when they are (as it were) snatched out
of the slavery of sin, the jaws of Death and Hell, Auditores benevoli, alacres
reddunt Pradicatores.
and brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; then it is that he
may be said to reap the fruits of his labors in the great comfort of his own
Soul. Chrysostom. in Heb.


Gods pardoning other Repentan^ Sinners, a great motive to persuade us that he
will pardon us also.
IF one should come to a Physician, J. Preston Breast Plate of Faith and Love.
of whom he has had a large report of his skill, and should meet with
hundreths by the way, such as were at that time his Patients, and all of them
should tell him how he has cured and healed them of their several
infirmities, this must needs encourage him to go on with confidence of his
skill, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13.
that he will recover him also: So should every Repentant Sinner run to Christ,
Lu^^ 7. 32.
the great Physician of his Soul, because so many thousands have been healed,
Act. 9. 18.
so many great Sinners have been forgiven, such as Manasses, Mary Magdalen, O
p^enitentia quid de te novi, referam, etc. Cyprian.
S. Paul, etc. This may be a great motive to persuade us all, that upon
Repentance he is and will be ready to forgive us also, according to that of the
Apostle; He has showed Mercy unto me that others might believe in God.

Men to be careful in the trial of their Faith, Whether it be sound or not.
IF one be told that his Corn is blasted, that all the Trees in his Orchard are
dead, Treat. of Effect. Faith, ut supra.
that all his Money is counterfeit, that the deeds and Evidences, upon which
his Lands and whole estate depend are false, it must needs affect him much, and
make him look about him to see if these things be so or no. And shall not Men
look then to the Faith they have, Non bove mactato, calestia numina gaudent,
sed fide qua praestanda est. Ovid.
upon which depends the eternal Welfare of their immortal Souls, seeing God
accepts none except it be sound, effectual, lively, and accompanied with
good works, such a Faith as works by love, purifieth the heart, and shows it
self in fruits worthy amendment of life, 1 These. 1. 3.

Men not to be ashamed of their Godly Profession, though the Wicked speak evil
of them.
SUppose a Geometrician should be drawing of lines and Figures, and there
should come in some silly ignorant fellow, J. Preston Golden Scepteer.
who seeing him should laugh at him; Would the Artist think you, leave off his
employment because of his derision? Surely no; For he knows that he laughs at
him out of his ignorance, as not knowing his Art and the grounds thereof: Thus
let no Man be ashamed of his godly Profession, because Wicked Men speak evil
of it; And why do they so, 1 Pet. 4. 4.
but because they understand it not, it is strange to them; they see the
actions of Godly Men, Id ma^^^ice quod in^ergo est non vident.
but the rules and principles that they go by, they know not, and hence is it
that they throw dirt in the face of Religious profession, but a Wife man will
soon wipe it off again.

God ordering all things for the good of his Church.
PUt the case, all were turned upside down, Rudis indigestaque moles. Ovid.
as it was in the confused Chaos, wherein Heaven and Earth were mingled
together, and the waters overcoming all the rest, yet as when the Spirit of the
Lord did but move upon the Waters, Sermon. at Linc. Inn, on Genesis 22. 14. ut
supra.
many beautiful Creatures we produced, and the Sea divided from the rest, so
that those waters which then seemed to spoil all, serve now to water all,
without which (...) cannot possibly subsist: Even so, were the Church in never
so confused (...), yet God will in his great Wisdom so order the things that
seem to undo us, that they shall make much for us, and bring forth something of
special use for the Churches good, something to water and make fruitful the
house and People of God.


IT is said of the Dove, that she is afraid of every Feather, that has grown
upon on Hauk, and brings as much terror upon her, as if the Hauk were present,
Ulysses Aldrovandi Ornitholog. lib. 14.
such a native dread is (as it seems) implanted in her, that it detests and
abhors the very sight of any such feather: So the Godly man that has conceived
a detestation against Sin, cannot endure any thing that belongs to it, or that
comes from it; No not the least motion or inclination, though it bring along
with it never so fair pretenses, never so specious shows shall have the least
welcome or entertainment.


TAke a beam of the Sun, the way to preserve it, is not to keep it by it self,
the being of it depends upon the Sun, take the Sun away, and it perishes for
ever; J. Preston Churches Marriage.
but yet though it should come to be obscured, and so cut off for a while, yet
because the Sun remains still, therefore when the Sun shines forth again, it
will be renewed again. Such a thing is the Creature compared with God, If you
would preserve the Creature in it self, it is impossible for it to stand, like
a broken glass without a bottom, Esse accidentis plus est in subjecto, etc.
Aristo^.
it must fall and break: It is well known, that the being of an accident is
more in the subject then in it self, insomuch, that to take away the subject,
the very separation is a destruction to it. So it is with the Creature,
Creatura sine Deo ni^il potest, etc. I fidor.
which has no bottom of it self, so as the sepaeration of it from God, is the
destruction of it; as on the contrary, the keeping of it close unto God,
(though in a case that seems to be the ruin of it) is its happiness and
perfection.


IT is observed, Pier du Moulin traicte d'Amour de Dicu.
That a Mathematical point has no parts, it is one indivisible. For let a
thousand lines come to one point, every one has the whole, and ye^ there is
but one that answers all, because it is indivisible, and every one has all. So
it is with God, though there be many thousands that he loves dearly, yet every
one of them has the Lord wholly; For that which is infinite has no parts, and
therefore he bestows himself not partly on one, and partly on another; but he
bestows all himself on every one, and expects that every one should do the
like unto him.


WHat heavy things are thundered against those curious Dames of Jerusalem by the
Prophet Isaiah, who being himself a Courtier, inveighs as puncutally against
the Noble vanity of Apparel, as if he had late viewed the Ladies Wardrobes;
And our Savior finds fault with the Scribes that loved to go in long
clothing. Mark 12. 38.
But to come nearer; In the year 1580, great ruffs with huge wide sets, and
cloaks reaching almost to the ancles, no less comely then of great expense, In
vita Elizab.
were restrained here by Proclamation, says Mr. Cambden; And need we not the
like Law now, when so many Prodigals turn Rents into ruffes, and lands into
lace, singulis auribu^ bina aut terna pendunt Patrimonia, as Seneca has it,
hang two or three Patrimonies at their ears, a pretty grove upon their backs,
Joh. Trap Com. on Matthew. 6. 29.
a reasonable Lordship or living about their necks, from whence both S. Cyprian
and S. Augustine drew up this conclusion, That superfluous Apparel is worse
then Whoredom, because Whoredom only corrupts Chastity, but this corrupts
Nature.

God to be seen in the works of the Creation.
A Godly Ancient being asked, Ant. Eremita apud Augustine. a^ doct. Christ. lib.
1.
by a Profane Philosopher, How he could contemplate high things, since he had
no books? wisely answered; That he had the whole World for his book ready open
at all times, and in all places, and that he could therein read things Heavenly
and divine: And most true it is, that God is to be seen and admired in the
works of the Creation, there is not a Flower in the Field, not a pile of grass
we tread on but sets forth God unto us in very lively colors; -- resert
quaelibet herba Deum. Ovid.
so that not to see him, is to incur the curse he has denounced against such
as regard not the work of the Lord, i. the first making; neither consider the
operation of his hands, i. the wise disposing of his Creatures for our good,
Esaias 5. 12.

To keep close to the Word of God in seeking after Christ.
IT is the observation of a good Man now with God, B. Hooper in a Letter to
Mistr. Anne Warcup.
That the Wisemen traveling to find Christ, followed only the star, and as
long as they saw it, they were assured that they were in the right way, and had
great mirth in their journey; but when they entered into Jerusalem, (whereas the
star led them not thither, but unto Bethlem) and there would be instructed
where Christ was born; Acts and Monuments of the Church, by J. Fox.
they were not only ignorant of the place, Where, but they had lost the sight
of the Star that should guide them thither. Whereof we learn in any case,
that whilst we be going to learn Christ, to seek Christ, which is above, to
beware we lose not the Star of Gods Word, which only is the mark that shows us
where Christ is, and which way we may come to him. These are the good Man's own
words; whereunto may be added, Psalm 119.
That whereas David made the Word of God a lanthorn to his feet, and a light
unto his paths, we would not suffer our selves to be led aside by every ignis
fatuus, Recurrendum est ad solas Scripturas. P. de Alliaco in Sent.
every false fire that presents it self unto us, but to keep close to the Word
of God, which will bring us to the Knowledge of Christ here, and the full
enjoyment of him hereafter.

What it is to trust in God really and truly.
THere was a King of this Land, J. Preston of Effect. Love on the 1 Thessalonians, 1.
3.
that being engaged in War, sent to the General of his Army to spare such a
City, yet he had a command under the broad Seal, and the King's own hand to do
it, and to disobey his warrant was death; but withal, the King gave him
private instructions to destroy the City, and in so doing, he would save him
harmless; The General did so, and trusted the King for his life, so that if
he had failed him, he had been utterly destroyed. Si saeviat mundus, si fremat
malignus, etc. Tu es spes mea Domine. Barnard.
Thus if a Man be brought to such an exigent, if he will trust God in such a
case, as wherein if he fayl him, he is undone; so to lean upon God, that if he
slip away, he sinketh; so to be unbottom'd off himself and every Creature, so
to cast himself upon God, that if he step aside, he is like to perish; this is
to trust in God really and truly.

The monstrous Sin of Ingratitude.
Q. Elizabeth in a letter of hers to Hen. 4th. King of France, amongst many
other expressions, Gulielm. Cambd. Eliz.
has this upon the sin of Ingratitude, That if there were any unpardonable sin
in the World, such as the sin against the Holy Ghost, it was, Ingratitude; Call
me unthankful, (said another) and you call me all that naught is* And without
all doubt, Ingratum si dixeris, etc. David Pareus in Matthew. cap. 5. v. 6.
such a Vice it is, that Nature frowns at, though she smile at many others;
Nay, It is a Monster in Nature, a Solecism in manners, a Paradox in Divinity,
an ugly sinl Insomuch, that Christ himself joined the Evil and unthankful
together, Luke 6. 35.


AS one that professes, J. P. Treat. of Effectual Faith.
That he has an art, and that he is able to do this, and that, by his art; Now
if he make up some exquisite piece of Workmanship, by that he is said to make
good his Art; Or as when we say, such and such Trees are good, because they
have sap in them, they are not dead Trees, yet for all this the Tree is made
perfect by the fruit. So Faith by Works is made perfect; Per fructum
dignoscitur arbor.
Not that works put life into Faith; the sap must first be in the Tree, and
then it brings forth fruit; so there must be first a life in Faith, and then
it brings forth good works; So that when it is said, Faith is made perfect by
Works; the meaning is, that Faith is made good by Works, that Works declare
Faith to be right, as the Fruit does declare the Tree to have sap.


TAke a cup of Wine, Rich. de Mediavilla clavis David.
and if you would know, whether it be good or not, drink it off; but if it heat
you not, warm you not at the Hear^, quicken you not, nor in any way revive your
spirits, you will say, It is ^aught, flat and dead, had it been good Wine, it
would have done all this; Then if you come to Plants, and find no fruit, nor
leaves, you say, This plant is dead; If you come to take a dram of Physic,
Tune enim fidel^s veraciter sumus, etc. Greg. hom. 29. Tu dicis quod credis,
sac quod dicis et fides est, etc. Aug. in Ioh.
and it do not work, you say, It is bad Physic; And so if you take leaven, and
put it into the dough, if it sour not the lump, you say, it is a dead leaven, a
counterfeit: Thus if a Man find not Faith in the operation thereof, that it
works not a general change in the Soul, that it fire not the heart with love
to Christ, if there be no life in it, then let such a Man know, that he is
deceived, his Faith is not right, not effectual, not any way conducing to life
eternal.


A Spouse that is considering with her self, Whether she should marry such a
Husband or not? begins to consider, What she should be without him, and what
she shall have with him: she considers him perhaps as one that will pay her
debts, and make her Honorable, etc, and yet, it may be, she considers not the
Man all this while: however, these considerations are good preparatives to draw
her on to give entertainment to him; but after some converse and acquaintance
with the person, she comes to like the Man himself so well, that she is content
to have him, though she have nothing with him, and so she gives her full and
free consent to him, J. Preston Golden Scepter.
and the match is made up betwixt them, out of true and sincere free love and
liking. Thus it is, that the proposals of Rewards and punishment are, Praemiis
etiam magnorum virorum animi excitantur.
as it were, a beginning, a Prodromus, a good introduction to the full sight
and frui^ion of God, When it is that Men begin at first to consider their own
misery most, and that if they should apply themselves to other things as
remedies, Arn. Ferron. lib. 2.
they would be still to seek; For there is a Vanity in all things; And if to
themselves, Eccles. 1. 5.
that they cannot help themselves in time of Trouble; therefore they judge,
that they must go to Almighty God, who is able to do more than all, and to rid
them out of misery; And they consider, that going to him, they shall have
Heaven besides; yet all this while they consider not the Lords power; however,
this consideration makes way, that God and they may meet and speak together, it
brings their hearts to give way, that the Lord may come to them, it causes
them to attend to him, to look upon him, Job.
to converse with him, to admit him as a Suitor, and to be acquainted with him;
And whilst they are thus conversing with him, God reveals himself; And then
being come to the knowledge of him in himself, they love him for himself, are
willing to seek his presence, to seek him for a Husband, though all other
things were removed from him; Iamque opus exegi, etc. Ovid. ult.
And now the Match is made up, and not till now, and then they so look upon
him, that if all other advantages were taken away, they would yet still love
him, and not leave him for all the Worlds enjoyments.

No Man a loser by giving up himself unto. God.
IT is said of Vapors, that arising out of the Earth, the Heavens return them
again in pure water, much clearer, and more refined then they received them;
Gab. Inchin^ scala Coeli.
Or as it is said of the Earth, that receiving the Sea water and puddle-water,
it gives it better then it received it in the Springs and Fountains; For it
strains the water and purifies it, that whereas when it came into the bowels of
the Earth, it was muddy, salt and brinish, it returns pure, clear and fresh, as
out of the Wellhead, waters are well known to come. Et tibi (creed mihi)
tempora veris erunt, Ovid. Fast. 1.
Thus if Men would but give up their hearts desire, and the strength of their
affections unto God, he would not only give them back again, but withal much
better then when he received them, their affections should be more pure, their
thoughts and all the faculties of Soul and Body should be renewed, cleansed,
beautified, and put into a far better condition then formerly they were.

Ignorance and Wilfulness ill-met.
IT is a Maritime observation, T. Fuller Sermon. at S. Brides, Land. 1655.
that if a thick Fogg darken the air, there is then (the great God of Heaven
and Earth, having in his providence so ordered it,) no storm, no Tempestuous
weather; And if it be so, that a storm arise, then the sky is somewhat clear
and lightsome; occasioned by a motion of bringing in of the Jews into England.
For were it otherwise, no Ship at Sea, nor Boat in any Navigable River could
ride or sail in safety, but would clash and fall foul one upon another. Such is
the sad condition of every Soul amongst us wherein Ignorance and Wilfulness
have set up their rest together; And why? because that if a Man were Ignorant
only, and not Wilful, then the breath of wholesome Precepts and good
Counsel, might in time expel those thick mists of darkness, that cloud his
understanding; And were he Wilful, Eheu, quam miseros tramite devio Abducit
ignorantia, etc. Boet. 3. 8.
and not Ignorant, then it were to be hoped, that God in his good time would
rectify his mind, and bring him to the knowledge of himself; but when the storm
and the fogg meet, when Wilfulness and Ignorance (as at this day amongst the
Jews, and too too many Christians) do close together, nothing without the
greater Mercies of God, can befall that poor Shipwrack't Soul, but ruin and
destruction.


IT is said of an intoxicated Man, Athenaeus.
who (the liquor being busy in his brain) fancied himself at Sea in a great
storm, in present danger of Shipwreck, and thought there was a necessity of
lightning the Ship, and throwing some of the lading overboard, and so threw
the goods of his house out at the Windows. Thus it is, that this Age has been
taken with an unhappy Vertigo, which has made some Men not keep the ground
they first stood upon; and wanton delight has possessed many Men to be
meddling, Geo. Hall Sermon, at s. Paul's, to the Sons of Ministers, 1655.
trying of experiments, and ringing changes; Nay, so distempered have diverse
been, that like the drunken Man they have fancied a great necessity of
abolishing and throwing away, what they would have done better to have kept.


AS it is with a Man, being come to some great Fair or Market, with a con,
siderable sum of money about him, who whilst he is walking in the throng,
St. Marshall Sermon. at Westminster. 1651.
considering with himself, how he should lay out his money to the best
advantage; some sly fellow either cuts his purse, or at unawares dives into his
pocket, and there is an end of all his marketting. So it is with the most of
Men, that whilst they are in the midst of all their secular employments, and,
as it were, crowded in the throng of Worldly contrivances, Heu mortem invisam,
etc. Maph. Vegius in appendice Virgil.
how to secure such a Ship, advantage trade, compass such and such a bargain,
purchase such and such Lands, etc. (things in themselves with necessary
cautions not unlawful) in steps Death, cuts the thread of their life, spoils
all their Trade, and lays their glory in the dust.


NUgas the Scythian King, despising the rich Presents and Ornaments that were
sent unto him by the Mich. Pale^logus.
Emperor of Constantinople, asked him that brought them, Whether those things
could drive away sorrow, diseases, or Death? looking upon them as not worthy
presenting, that could not keep off vexation from him. And such are all the
Riches and glories of this world, they cannot secure from the least calamity,
T. Brooks Unsearchable Riches of Christ.
not make up the want of the least Mercy: It is not the Crown of gold that can
cure the headache, not the gilded Scepter that can stay the shaking hand; not
the Honorable garter that can ease the gowt, nor the Neck-lace of Pearl that
can take away the pain of the teeth; And a bag of gold will prove but a hard
pillow to rest on; miserable Comforters are they all; only the useful Riches
of Grace that are to be found in Christ Jesus, give ease and refreshment under
all pains and torments whatsoever.


AS Crates reproved by the Athenians, Diog. Laert. lib. 6. cap. 6.
because (to countenance his professorship) he wore (...), that is, a Mantle of
Estate (being but a Philosopher) which Theophrastus before him was never seen
to do, answered them again, that Theophrastus (whom they all thought so well
of) did many times wear a lighter garment; Lib. 5. cap. 4.
The which when the Magistrates would not believe, he brought them to a Barbers
shop, and showed him unto them, all dight as he sat in his pyed napery;
Intimating hereby, that costly Apparel and other clothing in themselves are
things indifferent, but grow often necessitated by the circumstances of time
and place, Aquin. 1a. 2ae. qu. 169. art. 1. ad 3.
as soft clothing for the Court, and that which is courser for the Cart; a
fine suit for the Citizen, a plainer for the Countryman; every one wearing that
which is fitting for his place and Calling.

True comfort in God only.
GReat was the grief or C. Figulus who to his Friends that came to comfort him
about the loss of the Consulship, Val. Max. lib. 9. cap. 3.
said, Omnes consulere scitis, Consulem sacere nescitis; All can give me
counsel, but ye cannot make me Counsull. And could outward things rid us from
the troubles of this life, Dr. Stough^on Sermon. at S. Paul's, Lo^d. 1624.
from death the end of this life, from damnation after death, then said they
something worth the harkening to; but this they cannot do, they cannot make us
happy, there is no true comfort to be drawn out of the standing pools of outward
sufficiencies, but out of the living Fountains of the All sufficiencies of the
Lord Almighty.

The resolved constant Christian.
IN the Salentine Country is mention on made of a Lake brim full, Plin. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 103.
put in never so much it runs not over, draw out what you can it is still
full: Such is the condition of a resolved, Rob. Dallington Aphorisms Civil and
Military.
constant child of God, tide life, tide death, come what can come he is still
the same, so true to this primitive institutior, that if Adversity frown, he
entertains it as a trial of his patience; if prosperity smile upon him, he
looks upon it as a blessing extraordinary; whether it be peace or war abroad,
sickness or health at home he is resolved: Sort sua contentus abi. Superbus
secundis, dij^ctus adversis. Thucid.
Whereas a carnal Man who bears his Prosperity neither with moderation not
prudence, but is full blown like a bladder, with the wind of his own Pride, he
seldom in Adversity shows either courage or constancy: one small prick of
distaster empties his swola heart of all hopes, and like an unskillfull and
dejected Seaman upon every little storm, -- sonus excitat omnis Suspensum.
Virgil.
he cuts Cable and Mast, and throws all overboard, where but the flaking of a
few sails would serve the turn, Godly Resolution would do the deed.

The rage of War in the richest Countries.
IN natural bodies, Hippocrat. aph^ris. 3.
the longer they subsist in perfect health, the more dangerous is the disease
when it comes, and the longer in curing, as having none of those humors
spent, which by distemper give foment, and force, to the approaching malady:
Rob. Dallington ut supra.
So it is in bodies politic, when War once seizes on a Country, rich in the
plenties of a long peace, and full with the surfets of a continual ease, Nulla
salus bello. Virgil.
it never leaves purging those superfluities till all be wasted, and consumed.

The grace of God is all in all.
WE get Aqua-Vitae ready against qualms, Rob. Harri^s Peter's Enlargement.
Bezoar stone and Cordial against fits; It was well said of Reverend Dr. Lake
Lake B. of Bath. when in the time of his sickness a Cordial was tendered unto
him; O (said he) the Cordial of Cordialls which I daily take, is this; The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins; I John 1. 7.
And it is true, that Art is blind and often posed; Nature weak and often
foiled (like a bow that must not be drawn beyond compass): Ephesians. 2.
Only the Grace of God is all in all, helps all, get but that and you may
sleep in a Dungeon; want all, and yet have all: want that, and a Flea may break
your sleep, and a handwriting dash all your mirth in pieces.


IN the country Carinensis of Spain, Plin. hist. lib. 3. cap. 103. Sir Rob.
Dallington Aphorisms.
there is a River that shows all the Fish in it to be like Gold, but take them
into your hand, they appear in their natural kind and color: Such are
Promises, and specious pretenses of love in his mouth, that would obtain his
purpose; bring them to the touch, and thou shall find, All is not Gold that
glisters: Great boast and small roast will never fill the belly; Heu pati^r
telis vulnera facta meis. Ovid. ^p.
He therefore that will engage himself into any great action, upon promise of
great assistance if he be not as sure of his Friends ability in power, as
readiness in Will, he reckons without his Host, and sits down with the loss.


WHen God said to Paul, Act. 7.
that all the souls with him should be safe, there were diverse means used, all
were not able to swim to the shore, J. Preston Covenant.
and the Ship was not able to bring them all to the shore, but yet by broken
boards, and by one means or other all got to the shore: So the Lord brings
things to pass in a strange manner, sometimes by one way, sometimes by
another, if one way do not hold, Fata viam invenient. Virgil.
another shall; he breaks in pieces many times the ship that we think should
bring us to the shore, but then he casts us on such planks as we little thought
on, opens a door for our deliverance that we little dreamed on.


ALl the members of the body have care one of the other, but especially of the
Head, and the Heart: If the Head do but ache, all the humors of the Arms run to
the Head, and therefore the Arms become small and slender, because they want
their proper nurture: Joh. Evans Treat. of Nature and Grace.
And so if the Heart be sick, or in danger, or in fear, the outward heat
retires inward to comfort the Heart, so that the body looks outwardly pale: yea
if the Head, or the Heart be in danger ( periculis se exponunt) the other
members will hazard limb and life to save them: Thus should all subjects do for
the King their Head, they ought to have special care of him; They are to care
one for another, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
to pray one for another, and to do good one for another, but especially for
Kings and Princes, and those that are in Authority, they are to prefer their
lives before ten thousand of their own, as the People of Israel did; 2. Sam.
18. 3.
for if a Member, or some of the inferior Members, be cut off, yet the body
may live, and do indifferently well, but if the Head be taken off, if the King
be set aside, actum est de Republica, that Kingdom, that People cannot long
stand*


THere is no Agent that takes any rest or contentment but in its proper Object;
Aristor. Physica.
If a man had all the Musical raptures, and melodious Harmony in the whole
World before him, he could not hear it with his eyes, because it is the proper
object of the Ear; If never so triumphant shows, or Courtly Masks, he could
not see them with his Ears, because they are the proper Object of the Eye: So
it is with the Soul of Man, if it were possible that all the treasures,
pleasures, honors, preferments, and delights which the World does affect were
presented, and tendered to the Soul, yet would they not afford unto it any true
satisfaction, because they be not the proper Object and Center of the Soul;
Acts and Monuments.
it is the Lord only, or as a godly Martyr said once, None but Christ, can
compass the Soul about with true content and comfort.

Satan's aim at those that have most of God and Religion in them.
Pirates and such as are Robbers at Sea, slightly pass by smaller Vessels that
are but poorly fraighted, Gab. Inchini scala coeli.
whilst ships that are richly laden, and furnished with Merchantable
commodities, become the object of their greedy thoughts, at whom they make the
strongest opposition, and for the gaining of whom (rather then fail) they will
hazard their lives to the utmost of danger imaginable: Thus it is that Satan,
that Arch-Pirate, lets poor silly ignorant Souls alone, Aquila non capit
muscas. Frasm. adag.
such as by their own defaults are but as so many empty Vessels floating on the
Sea of this World; Oh, but when he spies out a rich Soul laden with the fruits
of the Spirit, that has much of god, Christ, and Heaven in it, there it is
that he bends all his Forces, Validis incum bit remis, omnem movet lapidem, etc.
and against such a Soul it is, that he raises all his strength, that so, if
possible, he may bring it under his more then miserable subjection.

Sin to be abhorred as the cause of Christ's Death.
AFter Julius Caesar was treacherously murdered in the Senate House, Antonius
brought forth his coat, all bloody, cut and mangled, and laying it open to the
view of the People, Niceph. Gregor as de vitis Caesarum.
said; Look, here is your Emperors coat, and as the bloudy-minded Conspirators
have dealt by it, so have they also with Caesar's body; whereupon they were all
in an uproar, crying out to slay those Murderers, then they took the Tables
and stools that were in the place and set them on fire, Agnosce homo quam
gravia sint vulnera tua, etc. Born.
and ran to the houses of the Conspirators, and burnt them down to the ground;
But behold a greater then Caesar, even the Lord Jesus himself all bloody, rent,
and torn for the Sins of the World; How then when we look on Sin as the cause
of his death, Tho. Brooks Precious Remedies against Sathan's Devices.
and seriously consider that Sin has slain the Lord of life, should our hearts
be provoked to be revenged on Sin? How should we loath and abhor it, as having
done that mischief that all the Devils in Hell could never have done the like.

A lesser Sin given way unto, makes way for the committing of greater.
IT is S. Augustines story of Manicheus, Exposit. in Evang. S. Ioh. tract. cap.
1. tom.
that being tormented with flies, was of opinion that the Devil made them and
not God; Why then, said one that stood by; If the Devil made flies, then the
Devil made Worms; True, said he, the Devil did make worms; But, said the
other, If the Devil did make worms, then he made birds, beasts, and Man; He
granted all; And thus says the good old Father, by denying God in the fly, he
came to deny God in Man, and consequently the whole Creation: And thus it is
that the yiedling to lesser Sins, Obstare primum est Velle, nec labi via, etc.
Sen. Hippol.
draws the Soul to the commission of far greater, as in these licentious days
of ours is too too apparent; How many have fallen, First to have low thoughts
of the Scripture and Ordinances of God? then to slight them, afterward to make
as it were, a Nose of Wax of them, and in conclusion to cast them quite off,
Tho. Brooks ut antea.
lifting up themselves, their Christ-dishonouring, and Soul-damning opinions
above them, so that falling from evil to evil, from folly to folly, and as it
is in all other cases of the like Nature, from being naught to be very naught,
A malo ad pejus.
and from very naught to be stark naught, till God in his most just Judgment
sets them at naught for ever.


IT is reported of that eminent servant of God Marcus Arethusus, Suidas.
who in the time of Constantine, Niceph. hist. Eccles, lib, 10. cap. 9.
had been the cause of overthrowing an Idoll-Temple, but Julian coming to be
the Emperor, commanded the People of that place to build it up again; all were
ready so to do, only the good Bishop dissented, whereupon they that were his
own people, to whom he had formerly preached, and who (as in all probability
any one would have thought) might have learned better things, fell upon him,
stripped off all his clothes, then abused his naked body and gave it up to
children and, School-boyes to be lanched with their penknives, but when all
this would not do, they caused him to be set in the Sun, having his naked body
anointed all over with honey, that so he might be bitten and stung to death by
Flies and Wasps, and all this cruelty they exercised upon him, Ut exiguam
pecunia portionem daret. Theodoreti^ hist. lib. 3. cap. 6.
because he would not do any thing toward the re-building of that Idol Temple;
Nay, they came so far, that if he would give but an halfpenny toward the
charge, they would release him, but he refused all, though the advancing of an
halfpenny might have been the saving of his life, and in doing thus he did but
live up to that principle, that most C^ristians talk of, and few come up unto.
And thus it is that all of us must choose rather to suffer the worst of torments
that Men and Devils can inflict, then to commit the least Sin, whereby God
should be dishonored, our Consciences wounded, Religion reproached, and our
Souls endangered.


A Father that had three Sons was desirous to try their discretions, Tho.
Brooks of Assurance, in Ep. dedicat.
which he did by giving to each of them an Apple that had some part of it
rotten, The first eats up his Apple, rotten and all; The second throws all his
away, because some part of it was rotten; But the third picks out the rotten,
and eats that which was good, Toll discretionem, et virtus vitium erit. Isidor.
so that he appeared the wisest: Thus some in these days for want of
Discretion swallow down all that is presented, rotten and sound together;
Others throw away all Truth, because every thing delivered unto them in not
Truth; but surely they are the wisest and most discreet, that know now to try
the Spirits, whether they be of God or not, how to choose the good and refuse
the evil.


What Alexander said of his two Friends Hephestion and Craterus is made good
in the practice of too too many in these days; Qui^tus
Hephestion, Curtius.
says he, Diodorus lib. 17.
loves me as I am Alexander, but Crat^rus loves me as I am King Alexander, so
that the one loved him for his Person the other for the benefits he received by
him: Thus some Nathaniels there be that love Christ for his Person, for his
personal excellencies, for his personal, beauty, for his personal glory, they
see those perfections of grace and holin^sse in Christ, that would render him
very lovely and desirable in their eyes, though they should never get a
Kingdom, or a Crown by him; Vix diligitur Jesus propter Iesum. Aug.
But so it is that most of those (which is to be lamented) do it only in
respect of the benefit they receive by him, scarce any loves Christ but for his
Rewards, some few there are that follow him for love, but many for the loaves;
few for his inward excellencies, many for his outward advantages, and few that
they may be good by him, but many that they may be made great by him.

The dangerous use of Riches.
IT was a wise and Christian speech of Charles the fifth, Phil. Nepos Impp. vile.
to the Duke of Venice, who when he had showed him the Treasury of S. Mark, and
the glory of his Princely Palace, in stead of admiring it, or him for it,
only returned this grave and serious Memento, Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos
mori, etc. These are the things that make Men so loath to dye, Matthew. 17.
so that they cry out with S. Peter, Bonum est esse hic, Phil. 1. 23.
It is good to be here; but that of S. Paul, Cupio dissolvi, etc. I desire to
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all, they cannot abide to
hear of. Thus it is, that Riches not well used prove very dangerous; If Poverty
with Saul has killed her thousands, Riches with David has killed her ten
thousands; they are called thorns, and that not improperly, as piercing both
head and heart, Tho. Brooks Unsearchable Riches of Christ.
the head with cares in getting them, and the heart with grief in parting with
them; Many are the Souls that Riches have pierced through and through with many
sorrows; Many are the Minds that Riches have hlinded; Many the hearts that
Riches have bardened; -- Plures nimia congesta pecunia cura Strangulat.
Juvenal. Sat. 10.
Many the Wills that Riches have perverted; Many the Affections that Riches
have disordered; Whereas the Riches that are to be found in Christ Jesus, are
such as will neither harm not hurt the Soul, there was never any that was ever
made worse by them.

God's Mercies to the worst of Sinners repenting.
There is a story concerning a great Rebel, Joh.. Bodin. Com, Weal.
that had made a great party against one of the Roman Emperous; A Proclamation
was thereupon sent abroad, That whoever could bring in the Rebel dead or
alive, he should have a great sum of Money for his Reward; The Rebel hearing
of it, comes and presenting himself before the Emperor, demands the sum of
Money proposed; The Emperor bethinks himself, that if he shouldput him to
death, the World would be ready to say, that he did it to save his Money, and
so he freely pardoned the Rebel, Quid est pecca^um ad Domini misericordiam?
and gave him the Money. Here now was light in a dark Lanthorn; Mercy in a very
Heathen; And shall such a one do thus, that had but a drop of Mercy and
compassion in him? Tela arancae quae vento flante nusquam apparet Chrysostom. in
psalm. 50.
and will not Christ do much more, that has all fullness of grace and Mercy in
himself? Surely, his bowels yearn to the worst of Sinners repenting, let them
but, come in, and they shall find him ready to pardon; yea, one that is
altogether made up of pardoning Mercies, Nehem. 9. 17.

Rulers, Magistrates, etc. to be Men of public spirits.
IT is written of Augustus Caesar, Macrobil Saturnal.
(in whose time Christ was born) that he carried such an entire and Fatherly
affection to the Commonwealth, that he called it Filiam suam, his own
daughter; and for that cause refused to be called Dominus Patriae, the Lord or
Master of his Country, Suetonius.
because he ruled not by fear, but by love, so that at the time of his death,
the People were very much troubled, and, much lamenting his loss, said; Utinam
aut non nasceretur, etc. Would he had never been born, or never dyed; And such
were Titus and Aristides, and many others both in Moses. N^hemiab. Daniel.
divine and humane story, that have been famous in their generations for
prefering the public good before their own private advantage. Nec ti^i nec tua
te moveant sed publica veta. Claud. 4. Hono.
And it were heartily to be wished, that all Rulers, Magistrates, etc. may be
so spirited by God, that they may be willing to be any thing, to be nothing, to
empty and deny themselves, and to trample their sinful selves under foot in
order to the honor of God, and the public good; that so neither Saints nor
Heathens may be Witnesses against them in that day, wherein the hearts and
practices of all the Rulers of the Earth shall be laid open and bare before
him, that shall judge the World in Righteousness and true Judgment.


SIdonius Apollinaris relates, In operibus cum Com. Joh. Savar.
how a certain Man, named Maximum, who arriving at the top of greatness, and
that by means sufficiently indirect, was the very first day of his Government
much wearied and perplexed in his thoughts, insomuch, that fetching a deep
sigh, he broke out into this expression; Oh, Vultu Tyrannus possit esse
latissimo, Intus dolores sed fovet gravissimos. Sophocles.
Damocles! how happy wast thou for having been a King but a dinnerwhile,
Whereas I have been so one whole day, and cannot possibly bear it any longer:
Thus without all doubt his heart and head too must needs ache, whose brows are
empailed with a Crown that is ill acquired, his shoulders bow whereon lies the
weight of a Government usurped, and his hands tremble that swayes the Scepter
of an ill-gotten power and dominion.


MElancthon tells a story of an Abbot that lived strictly, Exposit. in Evang.
S. Matthew. cap. 6.
walked demurely, and looked humbly, so long as he was a Monk, one in somewhat
a lower form in the Monastery, but when by his seeming extraordinary sanctity,
he got to be Abbot, he grew intollerably proud and insolent, that being asked
the reason of it, Tho. Brooks Precious Remedies against Sathan's Devices.
he confessed, That his former lowly looks were but to see, If he could find
the keys of the Abbey: Such is the case of many Worldly Professors at this day,
they lo^k low, that they may ri^e high, they put on Religion but as a Cloak to
cover their foul designs, so that they are not acted from spiritual and
intrinsecall Principles, as from the sense of divine love to act for God,
sweetness of the Promises to wait on God, excellency of Communion with God,
and precious discoveries that the Soul has formerly had of the beauty and
glory of God; but from poor, low, vain, external motives, as the ear of the
Creature, the eye of the Creature, the rewards of the Creature, and the keeping
up of a Name amongst the Creatures, and a thousand such like considerations; as
in Saul, Iehu, Judas, Demas, the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.


IT is said of a Spanish Ambassador, Gui^^iardino hist. di Italy.
that coming to see that so much cried up Treasury of S. Mark in Venice, fell a
groping at the bottom of the Chests and Trunks, to see, Whether they had any
bottom; And being asked the reason, Why he did so? answered, In this among
other things my Masters treasure differs from yours, Terrena substantia
aeternae foelicitati comparata, Greg. in homil.
in that his has no bottom, as I find yours to have; alluding to the Mines in
Mexico, Peru, and other parts of the Western India: So it may be said, and
Scripture, History, and Experience, do abundantly testify, That Men's Baggs,
Purses, Coffers, and Mints may be exhausted and drawn dry; but the Riches that
are to be found in Christ Jesus have no bottom, N. de Carbo de certitud.
gloriae.
all his baggs are bottomless; Millions of thousands feed upon him, and he
feels it not; he is ever giving, yet his purse is never empty; always
bestowing himself, yet never wanting to any that faithfully seek him.


AS we see Birds make their nests and breed up their young; B. P. The Prentices
practice in Godliness.
beasts make a ss^ffle for their fodder and pasture; Fishes float up and down
Rivers; Trees bear fruit; Flowers send forth their sweet odours; Herbs their
secret Virtues; Fire with all its might ascending upward; Earth not resting,
till it come into its proper center; Waters floating and posting with their
waves upon the neck of one another, till they meet in the bosom of the Ocean;
And Air pushing into every vacuity under Heaven. Shall we then think, or can we
possibly imagine, that God the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, having
assigned to every thing in the World some particular end, and (as it were)
impressed in their Nature an appetite and desire to that end continually, as to
the very point and scope of their being; O^ homini sublime dedit caelumque
tueri, etc.
that Man (the most noble Creature) for whom all things were made, should be
made in vain, as not having his peculiar end proportionably appointed to the
nobleness of his quality? yes, doubtless, that God that can never err, Ovid.
M^t. 1.
nor over-see in his Works, has allotted unto Man the Worship and Service of
himself, as the main object and aiming point, whereto he ought to lead and
refer himself all the days of his life.

Prudentiall part of a Man to do as well as he may.
PAlinurus in the Poet, Vir^il. Aeneid. lib. 5.
finding that he could not sail against the wind into Italy, steered his course
by the approbation of Aeneas into Sicily, a place where they had before been
friendly entertained. Thus it is a great point of Wisdom, the only
prudentiall part of any Man, who when he cannot sail by a fore-wind where he
would (and happily where he should) to tack about, -- Qu^ fata trabunt,
retra^unsque sequamur. Virgil.
and sail by a bowling or side-wind, or at leastwise to cast anchor where he
with most safety may, however to strike sail, rather then perish in the storm,
and to sit down contented with what he can do, when he cannot do what he
otherwise would.

Gods dwelling in the Soul that truly fears him.
IT has been an usual observation, that when the Kings Porter stood at the
gate, Rich. de Mediavilla Progres. Coelestis.
and suffered none to come in without examination, What he would have, that
then the King was within; But when the Porter was absent, and the gates open to
receive all that came, then it was an Argument of the Kings absence. So in a
Christian, such is the excellency of the Fear of God, that when it is present,
as a Porter shutting the doors of the senses, that they see not, hear not what
they list, it is an Argument, the Lord of that house, even God himself is
within; but when this Fear is away, a free entrance is given to all the most
dissolute desires, so that it is an infallible demonstration of Gods removal
from such a Soul.

The praise-worthinesse of reading and enquiring into the Scripture.
MAny have thought Agesilaus, Panormit. Xenophon in orat. de Laud. Agesilai.
that most wi^e and excellent King of Sparta' worthy of all commendations, that
he would never go to bed, not rise up before he had looked into Homer, whom he
called Amasium suum, his Sweetheart; but others have extolled Alphonsus King of
Arragon, for reading the Scriptures fourteen times over with glosses and
expositions; And the Emperor Theodosius the second, for reading Prayers, and
singing Psalms every Morning with his Family; Socratis. hist Eccles. Plutatch.
Moral.
Nay, Scipio Africanus was thought worthy of commendations, that he had usually
in his hands the books of Xenophon's Institution of Cyrus, which yet were
rather written according to the form of a just Empire, then the truth of the
history. O, but how much more praiseworthy are they that read and enquire into
the holy Scriptures, such as with David make the Law of God their delight and
Counselor, such as consult those blessed Oracles of Truth, and with those
noble Bereans are upon the search, Whether the things spoken, or any otherwise
delivered as concerning God, be so or not, Act. 9.


AS ingenious Florists, Ed. Water-house
to pick the purses of witty persons, delighted with their art, have so
heightened flowers by transplantations, preparations of mold, Discourse of the
Piety, Charity, etc. of elder Times.
adumbrations of them at unbenigne seasons of the year, by cutting their roots,
and sundry such, not uncommendable, feats of their skill; so that out of one
single root of a Lilly, has come forth an hundred and odd blowings, and
am^ngst Roses, gilly-flowers, and Pionies, incredible Varieties. So out of the
doctrines, the glorious and pure doctrines of Faith, which the Apostles and
their Followers comprised in, Repent and believe, there is put forth such an
Ocean of points of Religion, and all of them pressed on the People to be
believed, that that it is hard to find Truth in the crowd of contests about
her, and easy to mistake, Io^. 20. 15.
as Mary did the Gardener for Christ, Error for Truth, both pretending their
Ius Divinum's, their authoritative confidences, as their just titles to Men's
beliefs, and blaming Men as restive and sottish, if they resign not themselves
to a senseless, and universal credulity; When all this while, the truth of
Religion, is in the heat of so much contention, and in the midst of so much
contradictory Profession (as it were) quite lost and over-clowded.


IN the time of King Rufus, there was an Abbots place void, Radulph
Hollingshed, Chron. page 18, 19.
and two Monks of the Covent went to the Court, resolving to bid largely for
it; The King perceiving their covetise, looked about his Privy-chamber, and
there espied a private Monk that came to bear the other two company; and
looking on him, guessed him the more sober and pious Man: The King calling him,
asked; What he would give to be made Abbot of the Abbey: Nothing, Sir, (quoth
he) For I entered into this profession of mere Zeal, to the end that I might
more quietly serve God in purity and holiness of Conversation; Say thou so,
replied the King, then thou art he that art worthy to govern the whole Covent.
Thus it is, that every good Man is contented to be in his station, to sit below
till he hear the Governors voice calling unto him, Luke 14. 10.
Friend, sit up higher, to walk before God in the light of his own candle, to
keep in the warrantable circuit of his Vocation, and if he see dangerous
honors pursue him, Psalm. 55. 6.
he flies for it, and with David wishes, that he had the wings of a Dove, Ed.
Water-house, ut antea.
that he might fly away and be at rest: But what a sad thing must it needs be
then, to see Ministers, Men in holy orders, greedy after and trucking for
Church-preferment, ravelling out their lives in progging after great Friends
and Fortunes, as if Godliness were a Bustrophe, a course of going backward and
forward to the right and left hand for advantage sake.


A Smith that undertakes to make a Key to open such a lock that is out of
order, must of necessity first know all the wards, J. Preston Sermon on Eccles.
9. 1, 2, etc.
else he may make a key that will not fit; he may endeavor, but not be able to
turn the lock. Thus it is, that whereas there are in the heart of Man so many
windings, so many turnings, such a Labyrinth, such a depth in it, that in the
eye of humane reason there is no possibility to find out the bottom thereof; How
then is it to be imagined, that the most knowing quick-sighted Man should be
able fully to pers^ade the Heart? Act. 1. 2 4. Gomarus.
He cannot; that is peculiar to God only, He is that great (...) that only
knows all the inwards, all the secret passages, all the cunning contrivances,
and all the crosse-wards of the Heart, to him only belongs that especial
key of David; Apoc. 3. 7.
It is he that can best unlock the Heart, answer all objections, enlighten all
the corners, turn all the wheels of the Soul, suit and fit the Heart with such
arguments as shall be effectual to Persuasion.

Ingratitude condemned.
PHilip of Macedon, hearing of one in his Kingdom, Plutarch. moral.
that refused most unthankfully to receive a stranger, of whom he had been
formerly succored in a time of extreme need, as having lost all he had by a
wrack at Sea, caused him to be worthily punished, by branding in his Forehead
these two letters, Th. Zuingeri, ^^eat. hum. vitae.
J. H. i. e. Ingratus Hospes, The unthankful guest. Now if every unthankful Man
were thus used, there would be many a blistered Forehead amongst us; O the
unthankfulness that we show unto God, who, when we were strangers to him,
ship-wrackt even in an Ocean of Sin, sent his Son Christ Jesus to deliver us,
Quam cit^ mortalibus Beneficium perit, etc. Sophocles in Ajace.
yet we refuse to receive him, to relieve him in his distressed Members, and to
be obedient to his blessed commands; And then our Ingratitude to one another is
such, that though we come off with smooth fronts here in this World, yet such
characters of shame and confusion are engraven on our Souls, that Men and
Angels shall read them with amazement, when the books shall be laid open, Dan.
7. 10.

The unhappiness of a disordered Family.
IT is said of that right Religious and worthy George Prince of Anhalt, That
his very Bedchamber was a Church, Abrah. (...).
a University, and a Court, Phil. Melancthon in Praefat. 5. tom. oper. M.
Luther.
wherein besides the dispatch of civil business, there was daily praying,
reading, writing, yea and preaching too; so that it cannot be imagined, that
the noble Earl having a Church for God in his Chamber, should suffer a Temple
to Bacchus in his Cellar. But (which is to be lamented) in too too many
Families, Venus has her Altar in the Chamber, and Bacchus his Sacrifice in the
Buttery, which two having shared their Devoto's, What a poor third must be left
for God and his People to delight in? Joshua's resolution for the better
ordering his household; Iish. 24. 15. Psalm 101.
and David's vow for reformation of his Family are little set by; Let but a
servant fail in the neglect of his Masters profit, or in the careless
performance of his place, what ado is there? yet in the mean time, though the
same servant be ignorant, scandalous, and what not? altum silentium, there is no
notice taken of it at all.

Signs of Heaven, as Sun, Moon, with their Eclipses, etc. as we are not to be
dismayed at them, so not to be contemners of them.
PEricles the great and famous Athenian, who in the beginning of the
Peloponesian war, Plutarch in vita.
being ready with a great Fleet of an hundredth and Fifty Ships to Loyse up
sail, was presented (even as he went up into his Gally) with a great and
terrible Eclipse of the Sun, which made the sky so dark that some of the bigger
Stars appeared; At which the Governor of the Ship was sore affrighted, and the
reupon with therest of the company refused to set sail; which when Pericles
perceived (either truly contemning the threatenings of the Stars, or fearing
that the hearts of his Soldiers should fail) he put his cloak for a while
before the Governors eyes, and then by and by taking it away again, asked him;
If that which he had done with his Cloak portended any thing; To whom the
Governor answered, No; No more, says he, may thou think is signified by
this Eclipse though the Moon be now betwixt the Sun and our sight: Which being
said, he commanded that they should hoyse up Sail and be gone about the intended
expedition: But this of Pericles was surely an overbold presumption, as in the
end appeared, there being soon after not only misery brought upon his own
Country and dishonor upon himself, but all Greece wasted under the sad
calamity of a long lasting War: Thus it is, that; as the signs of Heaven, such
as the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Comets, etc. are not things whereat we
should after an Heathenish manner be dismayed, so should we not contemn them nor
the signification intended by them, Joh. Swan Signa Coeli, Sermon. 1652.
they are called by the name of influences, Job 38. 31. from the Greek word
(...) from (...) and (...) super et fluo, that is to flow into or upon; they
must needs then have some object to flow into, or work upon, and by their
working they speak to all those who will but lend an Ear to hear them, Praestat
tamen teipsum cognoscere quam siderum cursus, vim herbarum, etc. Bern. medit.
that is to us who are here below, who inhabit this dull dark Globe of
Mortality, over whose heads they hang, that casting our eyes upon them, we may
not only behold them, but according to that Wisdom which God has given us
look into their significations by considering their motions, configurations,
Risings, Settings, Aspects, Occultations, Eclipses, Conjunctions, and the like.


IT is usual and well-known that Children sport themselves and play with the
pictures in a book, gaze upon the golden cover, Psalm. 19. 1, 2.
and admire the Silken strings, but all this while they little mind what is in
the book: Thus it is that whereas God has four especial books, S. Rutherford
Sermon. at Westminster. 1643.
First that of the Creation a large and visible book. Secondly, that of
ordinary providence, which is a kind of Chronicle or Diurnal of a Godhead and
a testimony that there is a God. Act. 14. 7.
Thirdly, Dan. 6. 26.
that of the extraordinary works, Conscientia codex est, in quo peccata
conscribuntuy, etc.
reaching upon occasion even to Nations without the borders of the visible
Church. Lastly, the book of Man's Conscience, a book that though here by reason
of our sinful blindness, it may seem to be uncorrected, dim printed,
Chrysoft. in Psalm.
and written with white and waterish ink, so that God is not at present s^en
distinctly in it, yet this book together with the rest are but played withal,
slighted and neglected, the most of Men looking upon them but not into them,
are able to discourse of them, but have no mind to be truly informed by them;
so that if the Heathen be left without excuse, Romans 1. 20.
What shall become of Christians, knowing Christians, to whom is showed a more
excellent way, Psalm 19. 7?


SUppose a rope cast down into the Sea for the relief of a company of poor
ship-wrack't Men ready to perish, and that the People in the Ship or on the
shore should cry out unto them to lay hold on the rope, S. Rutherford ut supra.
that they may be saved; Were it not unseasonable and foolish curiosity for any
of those poor distressed Creatures, now at the point of death to dispute,
whether did the Man that cast the rope intend and purpose to save me or not,
and so minding that which helps not, neglect the means of safety offered; Or
as a Prince proclaiming a free market of Gold, fine linen, rich garments,
precious Jewels and the like to a number of poor Men upon a purpose to enrich
some few of them, whom of his mere Grace he purposes to make honorable
Courtiers, and great Officers of State; Were it fitting that all these Men
should stand to dispute the Kings favor, but rather that they should repair to
the Market, and by that means improve his favor so graciously tendered unto
them: Thus it is that Christ holds forth (as it were) a Rope of Mercy to poor
drowned and lost Sinners, and sets out an open Market of Heavenly treasure,
it is our parts then without any further dispute to look upon it as a Principle
afterward to be made good, that Christ has gracious thoughts toward us, but
for the present to lay hold on the rope, ply the Market, and husband well the
Grace that is offered. And as the condemned Man believes first the Kings
favor to all humble supplyants, before he believe it to himself; so the order
is, being humbled for sin to adhere to the goodness of the promise, not to
look to Gods intention in a personal way, but to his complacency and
tenderness of heart to all repentant Sinners; this was S. Paul's method,
embracing by all means that good and faithful saying; Jesus Christ came to
save Sinners, before he ranked himself in the front of those sinners, 1 Timothy 1.
15.


IT is observeable that by the place of that sign in the Zodiac, which
(according to the doctrine of the Astronomers) is called, Jos. Caryl Inaugurat.
Sermon. at Westminster. 1643.
The Virgin; the Lion is placed on the one side, and the Balance on the other;
The Lion bidding (as it were) the Virgin Justice, be stout and fearlesse; the
Balance minding her to weigh all with moderation and be cautious: Thus it is
that Justice may be said to be remiss when it spares where it ought to punish,
and such sparing is Cruelty; And Judgment may be said to be too severe, when it
punishes where it ought to spare; and rigorous, if at any time it be more then
the Law requires and if at all times it be so much. Extreme right often proves
extreme wrong, Summum jus summa injuris.
And he that always does so much as the Law allows, shall often do more then
the Law requires; -- Adsit Regula peccatis, quae poenas irroget aequas. Horat.
Whereas the Righteousness of God, calls not for an Arithmeticall proportion,
i. e. at all times and on all occasions to give the same award upon the same
Law, but leaves a Geometrical proportion, that the consideration of
circumstances, may either increase or allay the censure.

Neutrality in Church or State, condemned.
THere is mention made of a certain Despot of Servia (which in the Eastern
parts of the World is as much as a Governor or Ruler of the Country) that
living among the Christians, kept correspondence with the Turks, R. Knoles
Turk. hist.
was a public worshipper of Christ, yet a secret circumcised Turk, so that the
Turkish mark might save him if need were: Intus Nero, ^oris Cato.
And such are all Neutralists whether in Church or State, such as under
pretense of benefactors for Christ, drive a Trade for the Devil and
Antichrist, St. Marshall Sermon. at Westminster. 1643.
such as Trade in both India's, have a stock going on both sides, that so they
may save their own stake which side soever win or lose, and live in a whole
skin, whatever become of Church or State, and by this means procuring external
safety with the certain ruin of their most precious and immortal Souls.

The great danger of not standing fast in the Profession of Religion.
IT is observeable that an heard of Cattle being ship'^ for Sea, when the storm
does roll the Ship on the one side, Joh. Bond, Eshcola; A Sermon. at Westminster. 1648.
the brutish heard run all over to the other, thinking thereby to avoid the
toss; but their weight soon brings back the Vessel, and then they flee over to
the old side again, and so the ship is oft-times over-set, and all are drowned
at last: And such is the danger of all those who do not stand fast in their
holy Profession, that do not maintain their ground, keep close to their
station, and stand upright in the ways of God; Frequens migratio instabilis
est animi.
For whilst they are not true to their Principles, but affected with every
novelty in Religion, now of this Church or Congregation, anon of that, and it
may be after a while of neither; Paschal. de Virt. et vitiis.
no wonder, if being given over to strong delusions, they believe a lie, and
make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience to their eternal ruin.


IT is storied of Epaminondas, that exquisite Theban Commander, Trogus lib. 6.
Plutarch in Parallel.
that having received his deaths wound by a spear in a battle against the
Lacedaemonians, the Spears head remained in the wound, till he heard that his
Army had got the Victory, and then he rejoycingly commanded it to plucked out;
his blood and life issuing out both together, with these words in his mouth;
Satis vixi, Aemil. Pr^b. in vita.
invictus enim morior, I have lived enough, that dye unconquered; And being
told a little before his death, That however he had lost his life, yet his
shield was safe; he broke out by way of exultation, Vester Epaminondas cum sic
moritur, non moritur, your Epaminondas thus dying, does not dye. Thus it is,
that life, liberty, estate, relation of Wife, Children, Friends and all must be
laid aside, Quique, perit Christi causa, periisse juvabit.
when the Cause of God suffers, when Religion lies at the stake bleeding even
to death: And certainly that estate is well weakened, that strengthens the
power of Religion; and that life well lost, that helps to save the life of
Truth; and yet a life so lost, is not lost at all, but saved, Mark 8. 35.


Suppose a stranger, Joh. Green Fast-Serm. at Westminster. 1644.
one that never heard of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, should come to some
Navigable River, as to the Thames side at an high water, and should there
observe how much it fell in six or seven hours, Would he not conclude, Nihil
violtentum est perpetuum. Osiandri, Cent. 4. cap. 5.
That after that rate the River would run it self dry in a short time? Whereas
they that are acquainted with the Tides, know for certain, that when the Ebb
is at the lowest, the tide of a rising Water is upon the return. Thus it is
with the Church of God, it may seem to be at a dead low water, and in a sinking
condition, but even then its lowest estate is an immediate Forerunner of its
raising again: As for instance, the most raging and violent of those Ten bloody
Persecutions, Seth Calvisuis in Chronolog. 298.
was that of Dioclesian, but (by the great mercy of God) attended by the mild
and peaceable times of Constantius the Father, and Constantine the Son; All
Ages from time to time making this out for a Truth, that the darkest and
saddest night of sorrow that ever befell the Church of God, has been followed
with a gladsome and comfortable morning of joy, that its worst condition was
but as a leading card to bring in days of more rejoicing.


IT is said of Constantine the Great, That after God had blessed and honored
him with many Victories, Niceph hist. Eccles. lib. 12.
whereas the Effigies of other Emperors were engraven upon their loins in a
triumphant manner, he would be set in a posture of Prayer, kneeling, to
manifest unto the World, that he attributed all his Victories more to his
Prayers then his Sword. Judge. 20. 2.
And surely Prayer is a prevailing sword, Esaias 37. 36.
it can give Victory in doubtful battles, it can raise the most confident and
desperate Siege; Psalm. 57. 5.
What was said of the Wicked, their tongue is a sharp sword, swords are in
their lips, may be truly said of the tongues and lips of Gods people in Prayer,
Fl^ctitur iratus voce rogante Deus. Ovid, Amor.
they are as two-edged swords in their hands to execute Vengeance; And without
all doubt, Gods enemies have often found the power of this sword of Prayer; and
those which are the Lords people, may say of this, as David once said of that
which was Goliah's, There is none like that, give it me, 1 Samuel 21. 9.

The loss of good Men not laid to heart, condemned.
AS you may see a silly Hen go clocking and scraping in the midst of her
chickens; then comes the Kite and snatcheth away first one, then another, after
that a third, till all are gone, And the Hen brustles and flutters a little
when any of them is so snatched away, but returns instantly to her scraping and
picking, Funeral Sermons.
as if she had lost nothing. Even so do the most of Men, God has in these
later times made many great and lamentable breaches amongst us, top'd the
greatest Cedars in this our Lebanon, deprived us of many excellent Men both in
Church and State, and we (it may be for a moment) bewail their loss in some
such like passionate expression, Pretiosa debet esse mors bonorum etc.
There is a brave Man lost, I am sorry such a Man is dead, Isid. de sum. bono.
etc. and then every one goes on again in his own way, presently forgetting
the loss; but no Man sits alone by himself to enquire, What God has done,
and What he means to do with us, or What we have done to provoke him thus far
against us; We thrust such thoughts far away from us, passing by on the other
side, as the Priest and Levite did by the wounded Man, as if it nothing at all
concerned us.

The woeful gradation of Sin.
AS Mariners setting sail, first lose sight of the shore, N^mo fit repent
p^ssimus. Juvenal.
then of the houses, then of the steeples, and then of Mountains and Land; And
as those that are waylaid by a Consumption, first lose vigor, then stomach,
and then color. Thus it is, that Sin has its woeful gradations, None declines
to the worst at first; Lust having conceived, brings forth Sin, and so proceeds
to finishing: as thus, Iam 1. 15.
Sin has its conception, that is delight; and its formation, that is design; and
its birth, that is the acting, and Custom is the education of the brat, then
follows a reprobate sense, and the next step is Hell to all eternity.

The great danger of admitting the least Sin.
As when Pompey could not prevail with a City to billet his Army with them he
yet persuaded them to admit of a few weak maimed Soldiers, but those soon
recovered their strength, Plutarchi vitae.
and opened the gates to the whole Army. And thus it is, Will Price Sermon, at
Wesim. 1646.
that the Devil courts us only to lodge some small sins, a sin of infirmity
or two, which being admitted, they soon gather strength and sinews, and so
subaue us; How many have set up a trade of swearing with common interlocutory
oaths, as Faith and Truth? How many have begun thieving with pins and pence?
How many drunkenness with one cup more then enough? How many Lust with a
glance of the eye? and yet none of them ever dreamt they should be prostituted
to those prodigious extremities, they afterward found themeselves almost
irrecoverably ingulfed in.

Destruction is from our selves.
AS Noah was drunk with his own Wine; Goliath beheaded by his own swords; R.
Vines Sermon, at S. Laurence-Iury, Loud. 1654.
The Rose destroyed by the canker bred in it self: the breast by a self-bred
wolf: the apple by the worm: the dams belly eaten through by the young Vipers;
Agrippina killed by Nero, to whom the gave breath. So we are undone by our
selves, our destruction is of ourselves. Hos. 15. 9.
The cup of the bitter waters of Marah and Meribah, that we have and do drink
so deep of, is of our own mingling and embittering, the rods that scourge us
are of our own making; Sin like a Friar whips its self; Lipsius.
Punishment is connate, innate to Sin; Fools, because cause of their Iniquities
are afflicted, says David. Psalm 107. 17.
We may thank our own Folly for our own bane.

Man not to be trusted unto.
IT is reported of Caesar Borgis, Guicciardin. hist. di Ital.
one of Pope Alexander's ungodly bastards, that having built infinite projects
upon his interest in so holy a Father, when news was brought him of his sudden
death, cried out, This I never thought upon, O fallacem hominum fragilemque
Spem. Cic. de orat.
now my designs are all lost; which fell out accordingly. Thus for a certain,
Whoever it be that looks for much from Men, how great, how potent, how
excellent soever, will prove like those who go to Lotteries with their heads
full of hopes, and return with their hearts full of blanks, and be forced to
lay his hand upon his mouth, and say; What a Fool was I to expect any great
things from Man, whose breath is in his nostrils, Isay 2. 22.

Afflictions though grievous, yet profitable.
SUppose that a Man were driven to great straights in the want and need of
these outward things, as not knowing at present which way to turn himself, so
that walking sad and solitary in the streets, some Friend of his taking notice
of his condition, Alphons. Salmeron de miracul. in Ioh. 3.
should from a Chamber-window, or the like place, throw down a bag of money
unto him, and by the fall thereof should hurt his hands, or break his head, so
that the poor Man not perceiving at present what his matter was, should be much
daunted and grieved, at the multiplying of his sorrows; but after some small
time having recollected himself, and finding the bag not to be filled with
stones but silver, whereby he should be enabled to pay his debts and have
somewhat to spare for the better maintenance of himself and Family, Would he
not soon forget the breaking of his head, love his Friend never the less, and
fall into a serious and hearty thanksgiving, that ever he was so happily
wounded* Thus it is that there is no Affliction so grievous but it brings
comfort with it, there is no persecution be it never so bitter but brings a bag
of Gold, Sol nubibus obtectus, laetius postea splendet, etc. Nazianz. in orat.
de Cryprian.
joy unspeakable to Gods people, and though it may somewhat hurt them in the
fall, yet by that time they have picked out the Gold, tasted of the comfort
thereof, they will love God the more, and cry out with David; It is good for me
that ever I was afflicted, Psalm 119.

divine Meditation.
LUther relates a story of two Cardinals riding to the Council of Constance;
Mart. Luther declamat. popularis de tertio praecepto, tom. 1.
by the way they heard a Shepherd weeping and bewailing himself bitterly; One
of the Cardinals moved with compassion, turned aside out of the way to comfort
him as his necessity should require, and he found him looking on an ugly Toad;
and he told him, he could not but weep in consideration of the goodness of God
and his own unthankfulness, that God had not made him, such a Creature as that
Toad, with which the Cardinal was so affected that he fell off his Mule in a
swound, and coming to himself again, he continually cried out; Well said S.
Augustine, Indocti rapiunt coelum, etc. The unlearned take Heaven by violence,
W. Strong Sermon at Westminster. 1646.
and we with all our learning, wallow in the delights of Flesh and blood: Thus
it is that the meditating Christian makes out some spiritual advantage upon all
that he hears and sees, if he see nothing of God in those things which the
World counts great, Adversa rerum, vel secunda praedicat, Meditanda cunctis
comicus Terentius. Auson.
he looks upon them as nothing, as Honor a bubble, Wordly pomp a Fancy, the
Rich man a lie; There Is not a beast of the Field, a Fish in the Sea, a Foul of
the Air, no not the least pile of grass that he treads on but affords him a
meditation; And as to the matter of Providence, there is not the falling of a
Sparrow, the turning of the wind, the changing of Counsels, the alteration of
affections, or the answer of the Tongue, b^t he takes notice of them in a way
of Spiritual improvement.

God only to be worshipped as the great Creator of Heaven and Earth.
IT is the observation of one well skilled in the Jewish learning, Joh, Weemse
Christ. Synag.
that there is only one verse in the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremy which is
written in the Chaldee tongue, all the rest being in the Hebrew, Chap. 10. 11.
viz. So shall thou say to them, Iustum est ut creatura laudet Creatorem^ etc.
Aug. in lib. support. part. 3.
Cursed be the Gods who made neither Heaven nor Earth; and this so done by the
Holy Ghost on purpose, that the Jews when they were in captivity and solicited
by the Chaldeans to worship false Gods, might be able to answer them in their
own language, Cursed by your gods, we will not worship them, for they made
neither Heaven nor Earth: Thus it is that God only is to be worshipped as the
great Creator of all things, God must have the glory in all, being the maker of
all; The whole scope of Psalm 147. and 148. tend to this effect, that God must
be praised because he is Creator of all things; Let any make a World and he
shall be a God, De civitat. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 20.
says S. Augustine; hence is it that the holy Catholic Church makes it the
very first Article of her Creed to believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of
Heaven and Earth; and particular Churches abroad begin their public devotions
thus, Our help be in the name of the Lord who has made both Heaven and Earth;
Let us then with the four and twenty Elders fall down before him and say; Thou
art worthy O Lord to receive honor, glory and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4. 11.

The Religious Hypocrite discovered.
IT is observeable, that the Eagle soareth on high, little intending to fly to
Heaven, but to gain her prey: And so it is, pet. Bales Sermon. on Iam. 3. 2.
that many do carry a great deal of seeming devotion in lifting up their eyes
toward Heaven; but they do it, only to accomblish with more ease, safety, and
applause their wicked and damnable designs here on Earth; such as without are
Cato's, within Nero's; hear them, no Man better; search and try them, no Man
worse; they have Jacob's voice, -- Verbis aliud prodit quam mente volutat. Lat.
^x Homer.
but Esau's hands; They profess like Saints, but practice like Satan's; they
have their long prayers, but short preyings; They are like Apothecaries
gally-pots, having without the title of some excellent preservative, but within
they are full of deadly poison; Counterfeit holiness is their cloak for all
manner of Villainies and the Midwife to bring forth all their Divellish designs.

Men by Nature hardly brought to the Confession of their sins.
IT is said of the Elephant, that before he drink in the River, Plin. hist.
lib. 7. cap. 4.
he troubles the Water with his feet, that so he may not see his own
deformity; And it is usual with such as are well struck in years, not so much
to mind the Looking-glass; least therein they behold nothing but hollow eyes,
pale checks, and a wrinkled front, Biga salutis Dom. 8. post Pentecost.
the ruins of a sometime more beautiful Visage: Thus it is, that Men by
Nature are hardly drawn to the confession of their sins, but every Man is ready
to hide his sins by excusing them with Aaron, by coloring them with fair
pretenses, as did the Jews, by laying them on others as Adam did, or by denying
them with Solomon's harlots, they are ready to decline Sin through all the cases
(as T Adams in a Sermon. at S. Greg. Land. 1619.
one said wittily,) In the Nominative by Pride: In the Genitive by Luxury; In
the Dative by Bribery; In the Accusative by Detraction; in the Vocative by
Adulation; In the Ablative by Extortion, but very loath to acknowledge them in
any case, very hardly brought to make any Confession of them at all.


SUppose a Man to have a very fair house to dwell in, Seneca de tranquil. animi.
with spacious Orchards and Gardens set about with brave tall Trees both for
use and ornament; What a most unreasonable thing were it in this Man to
murmr, because the wind blows a few leaves off the Trees, though at the same
instant of time, they are fully laden with fruit? -- Superanda omnis fortuna
ferendo est.
Thus if God take a little and leave us much, shall we be discontent? If he
take an only Son, and give us his own Son; if he cause the Trees to bring
forth fruit; shall we be angry if the Wind blow away the leaves? -- dabit Deus
meliora. Virgil.
Shall we murmr and repine at light and momentary afflictions when God at the
same time is preparing for us a far more exceeding weight of glory?


IT is observeable in Scripture, that God has always had Saints be several
degrees and sizes, R. Venning Canaans flowings. Luke 9. 28.
and that some of them have had more communion with him then others; From among
the multitude he chose twelve to be with him; from among the twelve he chose
three (Peter, James, and John,) which were e secretioribus of the privy
Council; from among the three he chose out John as his peculiar darling and
bosom Favorite, of whom it is said five times, that he was the Disciple whom
Jesus loved: Ioh. 21. 7. 20.
So now to this day, God has his babes who eat milk and nothing else, Matthew.
21. 16.
his Children who know their Fathers will and are assured of his love, 1 Samuel
25. 12, 36.
his young Men who go out to war; and the Fathers in Israel, whose gray headed
experience and wisdom abounds, for they knew him from the beginning; But is
it not a great mercy to be one of Gods, though but one of his little ones,
Praestat esse serus Domini quam servorum Dominus. Aug.
yea the least of all, to be a Star though not of the first magnitude, to be a
Disciple though not a John, nor one of the three, nor one of the seventy; but
to be a John, a darling, to lean on his breast, to lie in his bosom, O how
great a mercy? it is mercy to be new born, though one be but newly and as one
newly-born, but to grow up to a perfect stature, to be a Man in Christ Jesus, O
how great a mercy.


EVen as a careful Mother, Ed. Dunstervile, A Sermon. at the Fun. of Sir Sim.
Harcourts, 1642.
who seeing her child in the way when a company of unruly horses run through
the streets in a full carrere, she presently w^ips up the child in her arms and
takes him home; Or as the Hen seeing the ravenous Kite hovering over her head,
she clocks and gathers her chickens under her wings: Even so when God has a
purpose to bring a lingering heavy calamity upon a Land, it has been usual
with him to call and cull out to himself such as are his dearly beloved; When
some fatal Judgment hovers like a flying fiery scrole over a Land, or people,
he gathers many of his choice servants unto himself, In vita per Anonym.
that he may preserve them from the evil to come; Thus was S. Augustine
removed a little before Hippo (wherein he dwelt) was taken; Paraeus dead before
Heidelberg was sacked; Melch. Adamus in vita.
And Luther taken off before Germany was overrun with war and bloodshed; Nay,
what else can be the meaning, that of late so many lights, so many eminent ones
have been extinguished in this Nation, but to fore-signify the great darkness
that without Gods great mercy is inevitably coming upon us.

Worldly-minded-Men little think of Heaven, And why so?
THere is a fable, how that a Wools being exceeding hungry, Meland^i Ioco-seria.
came into a Tanners yard, and there espying raw hides in the pit, had a great
mind to have eaten of them, but being covered with water could not tell how to
come at them; at last he resolves to drink up the water, but after a while his
belly was so full, that he had no mind at all to the hides: Alphons. ab
Avendan. in Psalm. 119.
This is the case of all Earthly-minded-Men that being filled with the things
of this World, they have no stomach to the things that are more Heavenly,
having dined with all the dainties as Earth can present, such as honors,
riches, and the like, they have no appetite to the supper of the Lamb Christ
Jesus, at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Christ ready to revenge himself upon the Enemies of his Church.
IT is said of Lions, Aeliani Var. hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. citat. per Ulyss.
that as they are mindful of courtesies received (witness the story of
Androdus that fugitive servant of Rome) so they will be sure to revenge
injuries done to them, They will prey on them that would make a prey of them;
Aldrovand. de quadruped.
When Iuba King of the Moors marched through the desert of Africa, a young Man
of his Company wounded a Lion; but the year following when Iuba returned, the
Lion again meets the Army, and from among them all singles out the Man that
hurt him, and tears him in pieces, suffering the rest to pass by in peace and
safety: Thus it is, that Christ Jesus that Lion of the Tribe of Judah is
always ready to revenge the cause of his Church, and take Vengeance on all
that have wounded him, or his People, Ecclesiae suae Deus judex est et vindex.
such as will prey on them shall be made a prey to him; And though they wound
them in their passage through the Wilderness of this World, Isid. de sum. bono.
yet certainly, when he comes again to judge the World, he will single out all
that shoot their arrows at him or his, or him in his Members, and will without
mercy tear them in pieces; But as for the peaceable, peace be to them and the
whole Israel of God.

Christ, the Saints wonder and admiration.
THe Sun is gazed on by all the World with admiration, yea it is so admired
that by many it is adored, Matthew. Dresserus de statu Relig. in Persias.
and worshipped for a God, as by the Persians at this day: And many insensible
Creatures (some by opening and shutting, as Marigolds and Tulips; others by
bowing and inclining the head as the Solsequy and Mallow flowers) are sensible
of its presence and absence; there seems to be such a sympathy, that, if the
Sun be gone or clouded, they wrap up themselves, or hang their heads, as
unwilling to be seen by any eye but his that fills them: Thus it is, and that
in a far more larger sense, Esaias.
that Christ's name is Wonderful; Angels and Saints for love, the World and
Devils for fear wonder at him; The Saints (duly and truly) adore him for their
God, R. Venning Mist. and Revelat.
and were there ten thousand Suns, the Saints would admire Christ ten thousand
times more then them all; He does so attract and ravish their hearts by the
beaming forth of his love-rayes on them, that they seem to be sick and dying if
they be not with Christ, they open when Christ comes and shut when Christ
withdraws, and will not be kissed by any lips, nor embraced by any arms but
his, Cant. 5. 8.


IT has been a tradition that Lions are insomnes, Oppianus. Plin. hist. lib.
3. cap. 5.
that they sleep not; It may be they sleep not so much as other Creatures do,
yet that they sleep not at all were absurd to think; however their eyelids
being too little to cover their great eyes, they do sleep with their eyes
somewhat open, and shining, which has occasioned it to be supposed that they
slept not at all: Ulyss. Aldrovandi. lib. de Quadrup^d.
But most true it is that Jesus Christ, who is the keeper of Israel, neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, never shuts his eyes but has them always open upon
the Just, he winks not so much as to the twinkling of an eye; He always stands
Sentinel for his People, and ever looking about him to see if any danger be
approaching, he watches over his People for good.


THere is mention made of Archias a Lacedemonian, Plutarch in lib. Moral.
that whilst he was riotting and quaffing in the midst of his cups, one
delivers him a letter, purposely to signify, that there were some that lay in
wait to take away his life, and withal desires him to read it presently,
because 'twas a serious business and matter of high concernment; Th. Zuingeri,
theat. hum. vitae.
Oh, said he, seria cras, I will think of serious things to morrow; but that
night he was slain: Thus it is very dangerous putting off that to another day,
which must be done to day, or else undone to morrow; Nunc aut nunquam, Qui ^on
est h^die, cras minus aptus erit. Hora senescimus, effugit aetas. Sen. Hippolyt.
Now or never was the saying of old; If not done now, it may never be done, and
then undone for ever; Eternity depends on this moment of time, What would not a
man give for a day, when it is a day too late: Let every Man therefore consider
in this his day, to day whilst it is day to do the things of his peace, least
they should be hid from his eyes, and so, whilst like a blind Sodomite he grope
to find a door of hope, sire and Brimstone rain about his ears from Heaven
against which he has so highly offended.


A Gentlewoman (some piece of Vanity no doubt) being told that the World and
all the glory thereof was but Vanity, R. Venning Milk and Honey.
Vanity of Vanities all is but Vanity, so said Solomon; It Is true (said she)
Solomon did say so, but he tried first whether it were so or not, Vanitas
vanitatus omnia vanitas, etc.
and so will I: Thus it is that most of us are very hardly drawn to believe the
Worlds vanity, as that he Wisdom thereof is but enmity with God, Hunc
versiculum si saperent homines, qui in potentia et divitiis versantur, etc.
the riches thereof nothing available, the Honors thereof but dependant and
apt to lie in the dust, the pleasures thereof but momentany, and all of them
such, whereupon may be truly written, Vanity; but here is the misery Men will
not take Gods word for it that it is so, they cannot believe till ( ^or scarce
when) they see, Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 20.
The World has bewitched them before they will believe it to be a Witch,
neither will they believe it to be a poison till they are poisoned therewith.


A Ristides was so famous amongst the Athenians for his Justice, Plutarch. in
lib. Moral.
that he was called Aristides the just; when two came before him, said he that
accused the other, O Aristides this Man did you such an injury at such a time,
as thinking by such a suggestion to have made him partial in the business;
Whereunto Aristides made answer, Friend I sit not here to hear what he has
done against me, but what he has done against thee. O that Christians were so
famous for holiness and Justice, Frequen^ius (quod dolendum est) boni
imita^tur ^al^s quam m^li bo^os. Erasm. Apophtbegm.
that it might be said, There Is such an one, The humble; such an one, The meek;
such an one, The holy; such an one, The just; such an one, The patient; It
could have been said so of Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Job, etc. And why should
not every Man strive to be the like?

The Will of God to be resigned unto in all things.
THere is mention made of a good woman, who when she was sick, being asked,
Whether she were willing to live or dye? answered, Which God pleases: but
says one that stood by, R. Venning Canaans Flowings.
If God should refer it to you, Which would you choose? Truly, said she, If God
should refer it to me, I would even refer it to him again. Here now was a good
Woman, and a good resolve, well met; And it were to be wished, that there were
many such in these loose licentious times of ours, that would not be almost,
but altogether persuaded to lay aside themselves and their self-will, and in
all occurrences of time, and all occasions of Interest (whether public or
private) to lie down in the dust, Fi^t voluntas tua, Domine.
and to submit to the good will of God, whether it be for good or evil that
shall in this life happen unto them.

The great benefit of Faith truly appropriated.
IN the Book of Judges there is mention made of a War betwixt the Men of Gilead
and the Ephraimites, Chap. 12.
wherein the men of Gilead had the Victory and pursuit upon the Ephraimites,
but the men of Gilead having gained a pass upon the River Jordan, over which
the Ephraimites were to run homewards, it so fell out, that every single Man
was forced to beg his way; whereupon the men of Gilead questioned their
Country, Whether they were Ephraimites or not? They poor Creatures being struck
with fear, answered in the negative, They were no Ephraimites; but the men of
Gilead distrusting them, commanded that every Man as he passed, Stella in Luc.
cap. 3.
should clearly pronounce the word, Shibboleth, (which signifies a Foord or
passage) whereby the Ephraimites were discovered, for pronouncing Sibboleth
instead of Shibboleth, two and forty thousand of them were put to the sword in
that day. Thus it is, that all of us are to pass through the gates of Death,
and to give an account for what we have done here in the Flesh, whether it be
good or bad; And then he that can clearly pronounce Shibboleth, that can say
with David, Daniel, and many others, My Lord and my God, C^. ^9. 25.
that can by Faith appropriate the merits of Christ Jesus unto his own Soul,
and say with holy Job, I know that my Redeemer lives, shall enter into his
Masters joy; whereas he that lispeth out Sibboleth, that with those five
foolish, Virgins, and those other hopeless Creatures, Matthew. 25. II.
shall without the least sense of Faith barely cry out, Luke 13. 25.
Lord, Lord, shall be shut out for evermore.

True Grace in the Soul may be seemingly, but not really at a loss.
AS it is amongst us in a Court of Record, the Seal being once passed is as
true a Seal, J. R. in lib. cui titulus (...) vel sponsa coe^estis.
and as good evidence in Law, (though the print be defaced, diminished, and not
so apparent) as any that is most fair, fresh, full, and not defaced at all. So
it is, that the least drop of true Grace in the Soul can never be exhausted,
nor the least dram of true spiritual joy be quite dried up or annihilated; And
why so? because that in the Court of Heaven, when on a sealing day the Graces
of Gods Spirit are stamped on the Soul, it may, and does, oftentimes so fall
out, that there may be afterward a dimnesse of the Seal, and the marks, Quoad
apos^asia^^ Sanctorum, in illis gra^^a possit suspendi non (...), etc.
as it were, may be worn out, so that the fair impression, once so visibly
seen, may not at present appear; yet all this marrs not the evidence, nor ought
to weaken the assurance of Heaven, for there it shall go current, and hold out
in the matter of right as a greater, fairer, and fuller, because it was once as
good as any; and once loved, ever loved to the end.


IT is reported of a certain godly Man, that living near to a Philosopher, R.
Venning Cana^n^ Flowings.
did often persuade him to become a Christian: Oh but, said the Philosopher; If
I turn Christian, I must, or may lose all for Christ: To whom and to which the
good Man replied, If you lose any thing for Christ, he will be sure to repay it
an hundred fold. I but, said the Philosopher, Will you be bound for Christ;
that if he do not pay me, you will; Yes that I will, said the other; So the
Philosopher became a Christian, and the good Man entered into bond for
performance of Covenants: Some time after it so fell out, Bonus ille
Samaritanus qui persolvit omnia. Isidor.
that the Philosopher fell sick on his deathbed, and holding the bond in his
hand, sent for the party engaged, to whom he gave up the bond, and said; Christ
has paid all, there is nothing for you to pay, take your bond and cancel it.
Thus it is that Christ is a sure, willing able Play Master; whatsoever any Man
ever did for him, has been fully recompensed; and put the case so far, that a
Man should be a loser for Christ, yet he shall be no loser by Christ, he will
make amends for all in the conclusion.


THere is a story of a Woman, who when her house was on fire, so minded the
saving of her goods, that she forgot her only child, and left it burning in
the fire; Rich. de Mediavilla Progres. Coeles^is.
at last being minded of it, she cries out, Oh my child, Oh my poor child. So
it is, that the most of Men here in this World scrabble for a little pelf, and
in the mean time let their Souls be consumed with cares, and then at the time
of their death cry out, uidin decentius qu^m ourvam re^to corpore gerere
animam, etc. Melius est corpus quam animum agrotare. Menand.
Oh my Soul, Oh my poor Soul; so mad are they, so bewitched with the things of
this life, that while they pamper their bodies, they starve their Souls; great
care is taken to neati^ie the one, when the other goes bare enough, not having
one rag of Righteousness to cover it, so that many times under a silken and
Satin Suit; there is a very coorse Soul; in a clean house a sluttish Soul;
under a beautiful face a deformed Soul; but all such will one day find, that
he that wins the world with the loss of his Soul, has but a hard bargain
of it in the conclusion.


RIvers that come out of the Sea, as they pass along, do lightly touch the
Earth, Jer. Dyke Com. on Philem verse. 5.
but they stay not there, but go on forward, till at last they return again
into that Sea from whence they first came. Thus it is, that our love must first
come from God to the Creature, yet being so come, it must not rest and settle
there, (however, like a River it may in passage touch it) no, it must return
back again into that infinite Sea, even God himself, whence it first came: All
Creatures therefore are to be loved in God, Omnia propter Deum, sed Deus
propter seipsum aman dus est. Bern.
and for God only; so that the love of the Creature must be so far from taking
any thing from the love of God, that rather it must confirm and increase the
same; And then is the love of the Creature truly regulated, when it is referred
to the Creator, when it may be said, We love not so much the Creature, as the
Creator in the Creature.

How to demean our selves after we are sealed by the Spirit.
LOok but upon a poor Countryman, how solicitous he is, L. Andrews Winton.
Sermon. at Court on Whitsonday, 1613.
if it be but a bond of no great value, to keep the Seal fair and whole; But if
it be of an higher nature, as a Patent under the broad Seal, or the like, then
to have his box, his leaves and wool, and all care is used, that it take not
the least hurt. And shall we then make slight reckoning of the Holy Ghost's
seal, vouchsasing it not that care, do not so much for it, as he for his bond
of five Nobles, the matter being of such high concernment? Let us then being
well and orderly sealed by the Spirit, Spartam nactus hanc orna. Erasm. Adag.
be careful to keep the signature from defacing or bruising, not to suffer the
evil Spirit to set his mark, put his print with his image and superscription
upon it; then not to carry the seal so loosely, as if we cared not what became
of it: And whereas we are signati, to be close and fast, not to suffer every
trifling occasion to break us up, not to have our Souls to lie so open, as all
manner of thoughts may pass and repasse through them, without the least
reluctation.

Rulers, Magistrates, etc. to stand up for the cause of the Poor and needy.
IT is an Honorable memorial, K. James Basi^icon Doron.
that James the fifth K. of Scots has left behind him, that he was called, The
poor Man's King: And it is said of Radolphus Habspursius, Schickardus de Jure
Reg. H^b. citat. ex Claud. Bern^q. ad cap. 4. Suetonii.
that seeing some of his Guard repulsing diverse poor persons that made toward
him for relief, was very much displeased, and charged them to suffer the
Poorest to have access unto him, saying; That he was called to the Empire not
to be shut up in a chest, as reserved for some few, Joh. Cuspinian. hist.
but to be where all might have freedom of resort unto him. And thus as great
Persons are in Scripture expressed by the Sun* which affords his influence so
well to the lowest shrub, as to the tallest Cedar, shines as comfortably upon
the meanest Cottage, as the stateliest Palace, that amongst other good things
done by them, they may be renowned to Posterity for being the Poor man's
Advocate, Prove. 31. 8. Job.
eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, always ready to right and relieve those
that have no other means to right and relieve themselves, but by flying to them
for shelter.

The Vanity of all Worldly greatness.
AS it is in a Lottery, H. Hardwick Sermon. at Funeral of Rich. More, Esquire. 1644.
the Place with the great basin and ewer make a glistering show, and are
exposed to the public view of all, and if a Man by chance light on a prize,
it is usually no great matter; only it is drummed out and trumpetted abroad,
to tell the World, and this is the glory of it. Even so, if some of those many
that venture hard for Honors, and struggle for greatness, do speed, it is no
such great matter, only the business is trumpetted out, told abroad, and the
World has some apprehension of it, but the wisest of Mortals found this also,
amongst other things, to be vanity, a supposed excellence, Ardua per pr^ceps
gloria vadit iter. Ovid. trist.
which has no true being, accompanied with cares and cumber, the object as
well of Envy as esteem, the happiness of all such greatness consisting in
this, that it is thought happy, rather then that it is so indeed.


THere is a story of one Marinus, a Soldier, Th. Zuingeri, theat. hum. vitae.
who having hopes of preferment to some place, being a Christian, it was
suggested unto him, that he must first forsake his Religion, before he should
be invested in his place; It was so strong a temptation to him, that he began
to stagger betwixt his Preferment and his Christianity: but by the good
providence of God, there comes one Theodistus unto him, brings him into the
Temple, and lays by a him a Sword, and the Gospel, the Sword being the ensign
of his place and preferment; Now says he, whether had you rather have the
Gospel, or the Sword? and dealt so seriously with him, Tho. Hill Spittle Sermon.
1644.
that it pleased God to overcome him, so that he chose the Gospel, and let the
Sword go; forsook all Worldly pomp, that so he might save his Soul, and
preferred the welfare there of before any Earthly enjoyments whatsoever, And it
is heartily wished, that there were many at this day to be found in the midst
of us, raised up to the pitch of such an Heroic resolution, that whatsoever
the competition be, whether place, preferment, Office, etc. they would lay the
Bible by it, Vis ut animae tuae caro tuae serviat, Deo serviat anima^ Aug.
and seriously consider, that if ever they mind the saving of their Souls, they
must let go their hopes and possessions, and deny themselves in them, rather
then let go their share in the Gospel of Christ Jesus, whereby they have a firm
title for the eternal happiness of their immortal Souls.


IT is said of the Ambassadors of the King of Persia, Conrad. zuingeri theatrum
hum. vitae.
that coming to Athens (the then Metropolis of learning) in the time of the
seven Wisemen, they desired that every one would deliver in his sentence, that
they might report unto their Master the wisdom of Greece, which accordingly
was done, only one of them was silent, which the Ambassadors observing,
entreated him also to cast in his symbol with the rest; Tell your Prince
(quoth he) there are of the Graecians that can hold their peace. and certainly
there is a time, though an evil one, when a Prudent Man is to hold his peace,
Amos. 5. 13.
that is, when speaking will do no good; nor can he be wise that speaks much,
Conticuisse nocet nunquam. ^ocet esse loquutum. Bil.
nor he known for a Fool that says nothing; It is a great misery to be a Fool,
but it is yet a greater that a Man cannot be a Fool but the must needs show it;
Some there have been, which have scorned the opinion of Folly in themselves,
yet for a speech wherein they have hoped to show most wit, Jos. Hall Med. and
Vows, cent. 3. medit. 32.
have been censured of extreme folly, by one that has thought himself wiser;
and another hearing his sentence again, has condemned him for want of wit in
censuring; Surely then, he is not a Fool that has unwise thoughts, but he that
utters them; Even concealed Folly is wisdom, and sometimes Wisdom uttered
is Folly: therefore while others care how to speak, let every Man's care be how
to hold his peace.


IT is almost incredible to believe how they that travel in long pilgrimages
to the Holy Land, Jos. Hall ut supra. Cent. med. 34.
What a number of weary paces they measure, What a number of hard lodgings and
known dangers they pass, and at last when they come to the view of their
journies end, what a large tribute they pay at the Pisan Castle to the Turks;
And when they are come thither, what see they? but the bare Sepulcher wherein
their Savior lay, and the Earth that he trod upon to the increase of their
carnal devotion; O but then, what labor should every Christian willingly
undertake in his journey to the true Land of Promise, Audendo bella expedias,
pigra extulit astris. Haud unquam ^ese uirtus. Val Flac.
the celestial Jerusalem, where he shall both see and enjoy his Savior
himself? What tribute of pain or death should he refuse to pay for his
entrance, not into his Sepulcher, but his Palace of glory, and that not barely
to look upon it but really to possess it.

Why it is that God affords some glimps of Heaven even in this life.
THe Jewish Rabbis report (how truly is uncertain) that when Joseph in the
times of plenty, had gathered much corn in Egypt, Joh. Plantavit. Florileg
Rabbinicum.
he threw the chaff into the River Nilus, that so flowing to the neighbor
Cities and Nations more remote, they might know what abundance was laid up, not
for themselves alone, but for others also: So God in his abundant goodness to
make us know what glory there is in Heaven, has thrown some husks to us here
in this World, N. Waker, A Sermon at S. Paul's, 1629.
that so tasting the sweetness thereof, we might aspire to his bounty that is
above, and draw out this conclusion to the great comfort of our most precious
Souls, that if a little earthly glory do so much amaze us, What will the
Heavenly do? If there be such glory in Gods footstool, what is there in his
Throne? If he give us so much in the land of our Pilgrimage, What will he not
give us in our own Country? If so much to his Enemies, What not to his Friends?

Comfort nearest, when Afflictions are at the highest.
IT may seem a strange course in the eye of common reason which Christ took at
the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, the guests wanted wine, Ioh. 2. 1.
he bids them fetch Water; cold comfort, when Wine was expected, to call for
water, yet for all that Wine was then nearest, when the Water-pots were filled
with water even to the brim: So oftentimes comfort is then nearest us, Jer.
Dyke Six Euang. hist.
when our Afflictions are at the highest; God works by contraries, as light out
of darkness, at the Creation; life out of death, glory out of shame, as in the
Redemption; the blind Man's sight out of clay and spittle; yea Heaven out of
Hell, Cum duplicantur lateres tunc venit Moses. Aug.
for when he brings his children into Heaven, he throws them first down into
Hell, first humbles them, and then exalis them; It is not then for any one to
be discouraged, though Christ pour never so much water on them, for look what
their water is, that shall their wine be, what their crosses such their
comforts, Psalm 90. 15.

The comfortless Hypocrite.
AS a Man can have very small comfort, to be thought by the World to be rich,
because he has a shop full of wares and drives a great trade, Joh. Downam
Preparat. to Sacrament.
when in the mean time, he knows, poor Man, that he is worse then nothing, and
owes much more then he is worth; or because he makes a counterfeit show of
rich wares, when as he has nothing but empty boxes with false Inscriptions, or
but pieces of wood and brickbars made up in paper instead of silks or other
costly wares: So is it with all those that seem to be Religious, that make a
goodly show of Godliness, yet in the mean time are very Bankrupts in Grace,
Prove. 137. Si castum me simulo, et aliud est in conscienti^, habeo gloriam
mercenatiam, etc. Aug. in Matthew.
and like one of Solomon's Fools that boast themselves of great Riches, when
they are indeed exceeding poor; but cui bono? Why do they so? what get they by
it? What comfort reap they by it? None at all, their Consciences bearing them
witness that they are none such as the World takes them to be.

The loss of an only Son or nearest relation, not to be overmuch lamented.
IT is said of Cleobis and Biton, Is. (...) V^^. hist. Plutarch in ^^at.
c^nsolat.
that in absence of the Horses, they drew their Mothers Chariot to the Temple
themselves, for which obedient act* of thei^s she prayed, that they might be
both of them rewarded with the greatest blessings, that could possibly happen
from God to Man, but so it happened that they were both of them found dead in
their beds the next morning; News thereof was brought to their Mother, as
matter of great misfortune, which she in a manner slighted, saying; I will
never account my self unfortunate, that was the Mother of two such Sons whom
the Gods have invested with immortality for their pious and obedient actions:
And shall then a Pagan Mother, Noli autem tuam et filii tui ^ptimam sortem
^ugere, ille iter ambiguum a tergo habet, etc. Petrarch. in dialog. 48.
having no other light but that of dusk nature, take it for a divine favor,
that her two Sons did so early quit this life? And shall Christian Parents, or
any others within the pale of the Church, such as are better enlightened, pule
and repine, and look sour upon Heaven, and upon God, when in mercy he has
done for theirs, not what is pleasing to them, but what is most fit and
commodious for both, nothing being done but for the best to them that love him,
so that for the most part, life is not so much taken away, as death given for a
special favor and advantage.

Noreturn from Hell.
THere is a story of an ignorant Man, Paul de Wan. Dom. infr. Oct. Alcea. Sermon.
47.
that being at Church, and hearing the Preacher set out the pains of Hell as a
just reward of all those that forget God, said; That he would not believe there
was any such thing as Hell, or any such pains at all; -- Faci^^^s discensus
Averni, Sed revocare gradum, etc.
To whom the Preacher replied, That if one should come thence, and tell him the
truth thereof, yet he would not believe, or take any care to avoid it. For as
the party came thence to tell him of it, so he would hope to do as much, when
he was there to warm another: But let no Man be deceived, that cannot be,
Vestigia null a retrorsum, there is no return from Hell; Dives being there may
make it his suit, Job. 7. 9. Prove. 15. 11. Psalm. 9. 17.
but all in vain, Luke 16. For as the Cloud is consumed and vanishes away: so
he that goes down to the grave or Hell (as it is sometimes expressed) shall
come up no more, i. e. shall never converse, or transact any business upon the
Earth again.

Powerful Preaching of the Gospel.
IT is said in the Revelation of S. John, Did. Stella i^ Luc. cap. 10.
that amongst many other visions, He saw an Angel fly in the midst of Heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the Earth,
and to every Nation and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, saying with a loud
Voice, Fear God and give glory to him, etc. And what next followed? Another
Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen is fallen, Babylon the great City is fallen,
etc. Apoc. 14. 7. 8. See here now the efficacy and power of Gospel preaching,
let but the Gospel be sincerely preached, Babylon must down; the Devil and
Dagon must fall before the Ark of Gods presence; Whatsoever the purposes,
projects, pretenses, policies, conspiracies, combinations, and consederacies of
l^ud, Atheistical, and wicked men be; yet they shall never be able to stop the
stream of Gods word, (...)
dam up the wells of Salvation, or hinder the free passage of the Gospel, no
more then to bind up the wind in their fists, or stop the rain of Heaven from
watering the Earth; It is true that the Ministers of the Gospel, (...)
may be the Instruments of Satan, be stocked, stoned, hewn asunder, burned
with fire, slain with the sword, clapped up in Prison, fettered in chains,
sequestered, plundered, decimated, etc. yet the Gospel it self may be, nay is in
lively operation, a light that cannot be put out, a heat that cannot be
smothered, a power that cannot be broken; For even then the constant sufferings
and patient bearing of the cross, does as by a lively voice publish and
proclaim the truth of the Gospel for which they suffer, and serves to win many
to the Faith of Christ Jesus.

Punishments of the Wicked in this life nothing in comparison of those in Hell
hereafter.
IT is said of Christ that going up to Jerusalem, Stephan. Menochius. Fr.
Tollet in locum. Intend nunc quascunque seculi poenas, dolores, etc. et
compara totum gehennae, etc. Bern. med.
and finding in the Temple those that sold Oxen and sheep, and Doves, and the
changers of Money, sitting; he made a scourge of small cords, quasi flagellum,
as it were a scourge (says the vulgar translation) made up of small cords,
such as he gathered up from amongst the People in the binding of their
Sacrifices, bearing the likeness and form of a Scourge, and with this he drove
them out of the Temple: And so it is that the sorrows, troubles, vexations and
punishments that befall the Wicked in this life, they are but quasi tales, as
it were such; they are but the type, the Figure, the similitude of such, the
mere beginnings of sorrows, but flea-bitings in comparison of what shall befall
them hereafter; For when Christ shall come to Judgment, he will make a whip
indeed, such an one that by the stripes thereof the Wicked shall be whipped
into Hell and all such as forget God.

Faith and Love, inseparable.
IT is a Rule published by the Heathen, Cic. de. offic. de quaest. lib. 3.
that all Virtues are so interwoven and linked together in a chain, that he
that has one has all, and he that wants but one wante^h all. So it is with
that worthy pair of Graces, that Heavenly couple, Faith and Love; Faith not
without Love, nor Love without Faith, but both together; Not Faith without
works, nor works, without Faith, but the one must be fruitful to bring forth
works, and the other thankful to confess them, Faith must work by Love, and
Love live by Faith, Vincent. de la Nuza tractatus Evang.
for Faith without Love is but seeming, and Love without Faith is disordered;
Then as it is Christ's own rule, that the things which God has joined together
no Man should put a sunder, so Faith and Love being lodged as two guests in one
house and locked up as two Jewels in one Cabinet, they should by no Man
whatsoever be dis-joyned or divided.

Sacrilegious persons, condemned.
THe ancient Romans by the light of Nature disliked and checked Quint. Fulvius
Flaccus, Tit. Live. Decas 2. lib. 5.
because he had uncovered a great part of Juno's Temple, to cover another
Temple of Fortune with the same tiles; they told him that Pyrrhus and Hannibal
would not have done the like, and that it had been too much to have done to a
private dwelling house, being a place far inferior to a Temple; and in
conclusion forced and compelled him by a public decree in Senate, to send
home those tiles again: What a shame then is it for Christians such as pretend
to be knowing Christians to come behind the Heathen, Coc. Sabel. hist. lib. 1.
Ennead. 8.
who did more for their Idols, then they will do for the honor of the true
God, such sacrilegious wretches as rob the Church and enrich themselves with
the spoils thereof, such as take the houses of God into their own possession,
Quis enim laesos impune putaret Esse Deos? Lucan.
and with that Whore in the Proverbs, wipe their mouths as if they had done no
hurt at all; but let all such know, that their wealth so gotten shall melt as
Snow before the Sun; and their Fields of blood purchased by the spoil of
Christ, shall prove as unfortunate to them and theirs as the Gold of Tholose
did to Scipio's Soldiers, Aurum Tholosanum. Erasm. Adag.
of which whoever carried part away never prospered afterward.

Prosperity attended by Fears and cares.
AS Winters thunder is, Did. Stella in Luc. c. 12.
in a Proverbiall speech, held to be the Worlds wonder, so in the extremity of
Summers heat, it may chance to thunder as it were afar off; but the main claps
and noise of Thunder, usually fall out in the Spring and Autumnal part of the
year, when the face of the sky is at the clearest: So it is that fears and
Jealousies, Feriuntque summos Fulgura montes. Horat.
restlessenesse of Spirit and distractednesse of mind are usual concomitants
with the prosperous conditions of men, and attendant upon such as in the
flourishing spring of temporal success, and fruitful Autumn of Wordly
increase, are lifted up on high, and puffed up with the vain conceit of their
own acquired greatness; whilst he that is pinched with the winter of
Adversity, Cantabit vacuus, etc.
and scorched with the heat of persecuting necessity, sings care away, comforts
himself in the Lord his God, lives contentedly and dies comfortably.

Perseverance in goodness, enjoined.
IT is the part of a good Workman not to leave his work imperfect; Jerem.
Whitaker Sermon. at S. Mary Magd^len Bermondsey Southwark, 1631.
A good Physician will not forsake his Patient when he has done but half his
cure; The Husbandman gives not over, when he has sown but some part of his
ground; And he that does but half build an house, is but half a Carpenter: So
he that enters into the way of Christianity, and stands still is but half a
Christian, the greatest part of his-work is yet behind; It is not enough to
begin well, but to continue in well-doing, It is not so much the entrance into,
as the Perseverance in goodness that is required; God left not that great work
of the Creation in the first or second day thereof, but in six days finished
it to the glory of his name; nor as then in the generation of the Creatures,
but now also in their Regeneration, Ioh. 13. 1. Phil. 1. 6.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end; and the good work that he has begun in
any shall be perfected; having then so fair a copy to write by, Incassum
quippe bonum agitur, si ante vitae terminum descratur. Gerg. moral.
so good an example to live by, let us so run that we may obtain, so sail in
the Sea of this World that we never give over till we arrive in the desired
Heaven, so to begin as to be sure to make an end; that it may be never said to
our great and just reproach, This Man began to build, but was not able to
finish, Luke 14. 30.

Temptations from within, or without, how to be dealt withal.
IF a Man find weeds growing in his Garden, Joh. Downam Christian Warfare.
addit. M. lib. 3. ^h. 11.
and naturally springing out of his own ground, he takes much pains to weed
them out; but if he sees that they have no rooting there, and are only cast
over the wall by some ill-willer, he cares not much for it, because he can
with as small pains cast them out again, as they took that cast them in: So, if
we perceive that the weeds of Temptation are rooted in our sin^ull Nature, and
spring from our corrupt Flesh, we must take the more care and pains to weed
them out, but if they be only injected by the malice of Satan, we are not to
be so much moved therewith, but to cast them out of our minds and hearts, as
often and as easily as he cast them in.

Justice to be purely administered.
THe Graecians placed Justice betwixt Leo and Libra, Coel. Rhodog. Var. lect.
Joh. Pierii Hieroglyph. Nich. Causin.
thereby signifying, that there must not be only courage in executing, but
also indifferency in determining; The Egyptians express the same by the
Hieroglyphical figure of a Man without hands, winking with his eyes; whereby is
meant an incorrupt Judge, who has no hands to receive bribes, no eyes to behold
the person of the poor, or respect the person of the Rich: And before our
Tribunals, we commonly have the picture of Man holding a balance in one hand,
and a sword in the other, signifying by the balance, Just Judgment; by the
sword, execution of Judgment; For as the balance puts no difference between
Gold and Lead, but gives an equal or unequal poyse to them both, not giving
a greater weight to the gold for the excellency of the metal because it is
Gold, nor a less to the Lead for the baseness of it because it is Lead: So,
they were with an eeven hand to weigh the poor Man's cause as well as the Rich;
W. Perkins Com. on Gal. chapter 6. Psalm. 122. 5.
but it is most notably set out by the Throne of the House of David, which was
placed in the gate of the City toward the Sunrising; In the gate, to signify,
that all which came in and out by the gate of the City, might indifferently be
heard, the poor as well as the Rich, and might have free access and regresse
to and from the Judgment seat: And toward the rising of the Sun, in token that
their Judgment should be as clear from corruption, as the Sun is clear in his
chiefest brightness.

There Is no fighting against God.
THere is mention made of the Psilli, a people of low stature and less wit, C.
Plin. hist. not. lib. 7. cap. 2.
silly ones no doubt, that being troubled with the Southern wind, went out on a
day to make war against the same; but the farther they went, the more it blew,
until at last it covered them all with the sands, and so they perished. And
the same end or worse, will betide all those that dare adventure to stand at
Variance with God, such as with the Pigmies dare contend with Hercules, and
with the Giants in the Poet (...) make War against God; Gr. Williams Delights
of Saints part 2.
but let all such know that impar congressus, there is no fighting against God,
no standing out against his power, no resisting his will, never any that did
so, prospered; It were then the best way to sue for conditions of peace, to lay
down arms, forbear all acts of hostility, and seek unto Jesus Christ, the
blessed peacemaker betwixt Man and God offended.

Death put off from one to another.
PLutark in the life of Solon tells a story, that on a time the young men of
Ionia, standing by the River side, where the Milesian Fishermen had newly cast
in their net, bought of them that present draught. And it so happened that when
they drew their net unto the shore, they found therein, Suidas. D^iog. Laert.
in vita Thaletis.
besides their Fishes, a Golden Table or Trivet, which Helena had let fall in
that place as she sailed toward Troy; Whereupon the buyers required the same
as part of their bargain, but the sellers would part with nothing but their
Fishes; The contention grew hot, and would have come to a height, had not both
sides concluded to rest satisfied with the arbitration of Apollo, who
determined it should be given to the Wisest of all Men, (...), and
so they sent it to Thales Milesius then looked on as the Wisest Man in all
Greece, but he refusing the same, caused it to be sent to Bias Prienaeus, and
he returned it to a third, the third unto a fourth, and so from one to another,
till at last it came to Solon, And he judging Apollo to be the wisest, caused
it to be presented for an Altar in the house of his Oracle: Now so it is that
as these Men did in modesty with the Golden Trivet, so all Men out of fear deal
with Death; M^rtis diem o^nes affuturum (...); ^um tamen o^nes aut pene o^nes
differr^ conantur, etc. Aug. de gratia No. Test.
When it knocks at the poor Man's door, he sends it to the Rich man's gate; The
Rich man pays dear to translate it to the Scholar; He with his learning
persuades it to the City; the Citizen will carry it himself to the Court; the
Courtier has no desire to bid it welcome, and therefore he poasteth it over to
his Page; he like a wild Buck runs away, and leaves it to take hold of his
Lord; the Lord had rather it should carry away his Lady, and the Lady would
more willingly prefer her Maid, and so of all the rest, all refuse it, none
will accept of it, every one puts it off to another.

The sad condition of the fearlesse Hearthardned Sinner.
IT is said of Nero that bloody Tyrant, Vita Neronis ex variis collecta.
when Seneca his Tutor dissuaded him from his Villainies, and exhorted him so to
demean himself, Ut facta Superi comprobent sua, that the Gods might approve of
his works, answered like a dogged Atheist and a wicked wretch; Stulte, verebor
ego Does, cum talia faciam? O fool, Do thou think that I believe there be
Gods when I do such things? And this is the case of every Fearlesse
Heart-hardned Sinner, who is so accustomed to his wicked ways, S. Chrysostom
de David, cant. tom. 2.
and so delighted with his own works, that he will believe nothing, know
nothing, fear nothing, being herein worse then the very Devils themselves, for
they believe and tremble; they believe there is a God, and tremble to think
that there is one, but the brawny-hearted, seared, obdurate Sinner if he
believe, does not tremble; or if he do believe, yet does not fear to commit the
greatest wickedness; were it otherwise he would fear more and Sin less.

Charity to be well and rightly ordered.
AMongst other things in the learning of the Egyptians, Ioh. Pierius. Horus
Apollo. Nilietus. Tacitus.
there is to be seen the picture and figure of Charity Hieroglyphycally set out
like a Child that is naked with a Heart in his hand, giving Honey to a Be that
wants wings. 1. A Child, humble and meek as Moses, not churlish and dogged
like Naball; 2. Naked, because the charitable Man must not give his Alms for
ostentation to be seen of Men. 3. With a Heart in his hand, because the Heart
and the hand of a charitable Man must go together, 2 cor. 9. 7.
he must be a cheerful giver. 4. Giving honey unto a Be, not to a Drone,
relieving poor Men that will labor, not lazy beggars that will take no pains,
Gr. Williams 7. golden Candlesticks. Sermon. 12.
And lastly to a Be without wings, to such as would gather honey if they were
able, would work if they could, but the want of wings lack of strength, health,
and other the like abilities make them unable to help themselves; thus to do is
not Charity mis-taken, mis-applyed, ill-bestowed but seasonable, suitable, and
well regulated.

How it is that Truth does not always apear.
TIme was when Truth lived in great Honor, but through the envy of her
Enemies, Peraldi sum. 7 virt. et vit.
she was disgraced, and at last banished out of the City; where sitting upon a
dunghill, sad and discontented, she espied a Chariot, attended with a great
^roop, coming toward her; she presently perceived who it was, her greatest
Enemy, the Lady Lie; clad in changeable colored Taffaty, her Coach covered
with clouds of all the colors in the Rainbow; Impudency and Hypocrisy were on
the one side, Slander and Detraction on the other as attendants; Perjury
Ushered all along, Speculum Exemplorum.
and many (more then a good many) were in the train; When she came to Truth,
she commanded her to be carried as a Captive for the greater triumph; At night
she fared well, and would want nothing; but when Morning came, she would be
gone and pay for nothing, affirming she had paid the reckoning overnight, the
Attendants upon examination of the matter justified their Lady; only Truth
confessed there was nothing paid and was therefore compelled to pay for all; The
next night the Lady did the like, but withal committed a great outrage, and
being for the same brought before the Judge, Impudency and Hypocrisy began to
justify their Lady, Perjury cleared her, Slander and detraction laid all the
fault on poor Truth, who must now suffer death for that it never did; The Judge
demands what she had to say for her self, she could say nothing but, Not
guilty, neither had she any friend that would plead for her; At last steps up
Time, a grave experienced Counselor, and an Eloquent Advocate, and desires
favor of the Court to sift and search out the matter a little better, Temporis
silia veritas.
lest the Innocent might suffer for the nocent; The motion was granted, then
Time began to expel the clouds from the Ladies Chariot, unmasked her ugly
face, unvailed all her followers, Gr. Williams ut antea.
and made it appear at last that the Lady Lie was guilty of all the Villainy, --
In apricam proferet aetas. Esaias 49. 14.
and poor Truth was thus by the help of Time cleared and set at large. And thus
it is that though Truth is great and will prevail at last, yet it does not
alwa^es appear, but may fall down in the street, and be trampled under-foot for
a time, may be abused, banished, and made to come behind lies and falsehood, yea
executed, buried when it cannot have time to clear it self, until it be too
late to save it; hence is it that the Apostle does not say, Now remains
Truth, Romans 13. 13.
because Truth is often banished, but now remains Charity; Faith, Hope and
Charity, graces which give a being to every Christian, of which sort, Truth
mainifested is none, for I can believe in Christ, hope for Heaven, and love my
Enemies, though I be belyed, but without these I can be no Christian.

Body and Soul sinning together, liable to be punished together.
THere was a Master of a Family, which committed the custody of his Orchard
unto two of his servants, Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. cap. 4. citat. lib. Iud.
Rabbinieis.
whereof the one was blind, and the other lame; and the lame servant being
taken in love with the beauty of the fruit, presently told his blind fellow,
that if he had but the use of his limbs, and his feet to walk as well as he
had, it should not be long ere he would be Master of those apples; The blind
Man answered, He had as good a mind to enjoy them as himself, and if his eyes
had not failed him; they had not rested all that while upon the Tree: Whereupon
they both agreed to unite their strength, and join their forces together; the
whole-blind Man took the well-sighted-lame Man upon his shoulder, and so they
reached the Apples, and conveyed their Masters fruit away; but being impeached
for their fault, and examined by their Master, each one framed his own excuse;
The blind Man said, Pares culpae pares poen^s.
he could not so much as see the Tree whereon they grew, and therefore it was
plain he could have none of them: And the lame Man said, He could not be
suspected, because he had no limbs to climb, or to stand to reach them; but the
wise Master perceiving the subtle craft of the two false servants, put them, as
they were, one upon the others shoulders, and so punished them both together.
S. Ambrose de fide et resurrect. cap. 19. Heidel sell. de peccat.
Thus it is, that Sin is neither of the body without the Soul, nor of the Soul
without the Body, but it is a common act both of Body and soul, they are like
Simeon and Levi, brothers and partners in every mischief; like Hippocrates
twins, they have idem velle et idem nolle, they do commonly will and nill the
same thing, and therefore God in his just Judgment will punish both body and
Soul together, if they be not repaired and redeemed by Christ.

How Christ by his death, overcame death.
IT is said of the Leopard, Ulyss, Aldrovandus de Quadruped. Aeliana. de
animal. lib. 2. cap. 23.
that he uses a kind of policy in killing such Apes as do molest him; First,
he lies down as dead, and suffers the Apes to mock him, trample upon him,
and insult over him as much as they will; but when he perceives them to be
weary with leaping and skipping upon him, he revives himself on a sudden, and
with his claws and teeth tears them all in pieces. Even so our Savior Christ
suffered the Devil and death, and all the wicked Jews, like so many Apes to
mock him, to tread upon him, and trample him under foot, to crucify him, to
bury him, to seal up his grave, and set a guard of Soldiers to watch him,
Psalm 78. Col. 2. 15.
that he should not rise any more, and did indeed what they list with him; but
when he saw they had done their worst, and that they could do no more, Then he
awaked as a Giant out of sleep, and smo^e all his Enemies on the cheek-bone,
spoiled Principalities and powers, led Captivity captive, and brought them unto
shame and confusion of face for ever.

Confession of Sins, irk some to the Devil.
THere is a story, how that on a time, Paul de Wann Sermon. de tempore.
a Sinner being at Confession, the Devil intruded himself, and appeared unto
him; And being demanded by the Priest, Wherefore he came in? made answer, That
he came to make Restitution; Speculum Exemplorum.
being asked, What he would restore? He said, Shame; For it is shame that I
have stolen from this Sinner, to make him shameless in sining, and now I am
come to restore it to him, to make him ashamed to confess his sins. And thus
it is that he deals with the most of Men, he makes them shameless to commit
sin, 2 Samuel 16. 22.
even with Absolon in the sight of all Israel, and in the sight of the Sun; but
he makes them ashamed to confess any sin, he persuades them to commit sin, and
he also persuades them to conceal sin, he cannot endure by any means that they
should confess their sins; Ioh. 1. 19.
And why? but because God is merciful and just to forgive them.

To depend upon Gods All Sufficiency in time of trouble.
ABraham considering that God ws El Shaddai, a God of All Sufficiency did
assure himself, Genesis 17. 1.
that although Sarah's womb was dead, yet God. was not dead, but was as able to
raise him a living son out of her dead womb, as he is to raise out dead bodies
out of the senseless Earth: So Moses, when he had six hundred thousand People
and upward to provide for in a sandy desert, which yielded them neither bread
nor water, Exodus 16. 47.
considering the power of God, did believe, that he could bring drink out of
the Rock, as out of a River; and meat out of the clouds, as out of a Cubbard:
So Jonathan, when he went against the Philistines that were thousands, 1 Samuel
14. 6.
had this resolution for his encouragement, That God could deliver with few, as
well as with many: And so Asa went as far as he, when he had a huge Army of
Ethiopians consisting of thousand thousands, besides three hundred Chariots,
(the greatest Army that ever was read of) come against him, he cried unto the
Lord his God, and said; Lord, 2 Chronicles. 4. 11. Gr. Williams 7. golden
Candlesticks, part. 2 chapter 4.
it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no
power, etc. And so it is, that every Man should depend upon his God, who can
help with few Friends, or no Friends, with small means or no means, as well as
if he had all the means, or all the Friends in the World; And therefore let no
Man be dismayed in the time of Affliction, nor faint in the hour of temptation;
but if his troubles be great, let him remember, that God is greater; If his
Enemies be mighty, let him know, that God is mightier then they, his hand is of
Iron; and his feet of burning brass, not only to tread upon, Rev. 1. 15.
but trample under foot the Enemies of his Church and People.

Simplicity of Men to be more affected with the loss of things temporal, then
spiritual.
IT is said of Honorium, Jo^. Zonaro hist. ^om. 3. Car. Sigonius lib. 2. Impp.
occident.
a Roman Emperor, that when one told him Rome was lost, he was exceedingly
grieved, and cried out, Alas, Alas; for he supposed it was his Hen, so called,
which he exceedingly loved; but when it was told him, it was his Imperial City
of Rome, that was besieged by Alaricus, and was taken, and all the Citizens
rifled and made a prey to the rude, enraged Soldier, then his Spirits were,
revived, that his los^e was not so great as he imagined: Now can it be
otherwise thought, but that this disposition, of Honorius was most simple and
childish? yet the most of Men are under the same condemnation, as being too too
much affected with the loss of a poor silly Hen, O vanas homiinum mentes* 6
pectora caeca*
with the deprivation of things temporal, nothing at all minding the want of
those which are spiritual; If they lose a little wealth, the least punctilio of
Honor, a little pleasure, a little vanity, things of themselves good for
nothing, because of themselves they can make nothing good, (and then as the
Proverb goes, That is too dear of a farthing, that is good for nothing) yet
for these things, they will vex and fret, weep and wail, and their mourning
shall be like that of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo; Zach. 12. 51.
but when they lose their precious Souls in the deserts of Sin, and God for
Sin, when they are rifled and stripped naked of Grace, not having the least rag
of Christ's Righteousness to cover them, then with the Israelites, they sit
down to eat and drink, Exodus 32. 6.
and rise up to play; so foolish are they and ignorant, even as the beast which
perishes, Psalm 49. 20.

The sufferings of Christ, as so many Examples to teach us to suffer.
IT is said of Antiochus, that being to fight with Iudar, 1 Mocha^. cap. 6. v.
34.
Captain of the host of the Jews, he showed unto his Elephants, the blood of
the grapes and Mulberries, to provoke them the bette^ to fight. And so the Holy
Ghost has set down unto us, what injuries, contumelies, and torments our
Savior Christ has born, and how patiently he did bear them, to encourage us
to endure whatsoever calamities shall betide us, during this our pilgrimage
here on Earth; It is well known, that he came into the World without sin, but
he went not out without sorrow; And therefore, What if we suffer reproaches,
poverty, Christo duce, et auspice sequar.
shame, death? What matter of shame can it be to us, seeing Christ has
suffered all for us? Nay, What a shame is it, Chrysostom. in Matthew. cap. 27.
if we will not be ready to su^^er any thing for his Names sake, that has
suffered so much for our Sins, that leaving us so fair an Example, we should
not follow his steps.


IT is observable, Levit. 23.
that there were three payments of first Fruits amongst the Jews; The first was
primitiae spicarum, the first Fruits of their ears of Corn early about Easter;
St. Menochius de Repub. Hebraeorum li^. 2. cap. 16.
The second was primitiae panum, the First Fruits of their loaves, and that was
somewhat early too, about Whitsontide; And the third was primitiae Frugum, the
fruits of all their latter fruits in general, and that was very late, about the
fall of the leaf, in September; In the two first payments, which were offered
early, God accepted a part for himself; but in the third payment, Toll moras;
semper nocuit differe paratis.
which came late, God would have no part at all. Even so, if we offer the first
Fruits of our young years early unto God, he will accept of them as seasonably
done; but if we give our best years unto Satan, sacrifice the flower of our
youth unto sin, Lucan. 22.
serve the World, and follow after the lusts of our flesh while we are young,
and put all the burden of duty upon our weak, feeble and decrepit old age,
give our first years to Satan, and the last, unto God, sure it is, that as he
then refused such sacrifices under the Law, he will not easily receive them now
in the time of the Gospel.


IT would seem preposterous, nay, Gr* Williams ut ante^.
ridiculous, that some inferior Man should present his Prince with a Horse
that were lame, a Clock out of order, or a Book that were torn and imperfect;
Yet thus all of us do, Our Flesh is our beast, the course of our life is our
Clock, Poeniten^ia sera, raro vera.
and the history of our actions is our book; And shall we offer then our Flesh
unto God, when it is lame, and tired out with excess of Wa^tonnesse? shall we
commend our lives unto him, when all the whole course thereof is out of order?
or shall we present the story of our actions unto him, when as a thousand sins
of our own, (for which we should be sorrowful) and a thousand blessings of God
(for which we should be thankful) are quite defaced and rased out of our
Memory? Or, Ph. Bos^ier tab. Nau^ragi.
if we should offer such unto God, Why should we think it strange that he
should reject them? We cannot: for continency, abstinency, temperance, and such
like, are in old age, no virtues, but a disability to be vicious; as to leave
good Fellowship when we are sick, and many other sins when we are old, is not
so much a leaving of Sin, as Sin leaving us; and surely such service will be
but hardly accepted.

Honesty, the best Policy.
THemistocles at a meeting of the Athenians, told them, Plutarch in vita
Aristidis.
That he had found out a way, which would make very much for the advance of
their glory and dignity, but it was not fit to be published to all the People;
The Senate thereupon determined, that it should be revealed only to Aristides,
and if he approved thereof, they would all receive it; so Themistocles told
Aristides, That the burning of all the Navall stations, that is, Diodorus, lib.
11.
all the shipping and Havendocks of the Graecians, would prove a notable design
to make the Athenians Masters of all Greece; Aristides having his errand, told
the Athenians in brief, Themistoclis consilio nihil esse utilius, sed etc. That
there could not be a more profitable Counsel for them than that of
Themistocles, but withal there could not be a more dishonest; Whereupon the
People charged Themistocles, that he should never speak of it any more. A most
excellent example of a Virtuous, Jos. Shute, Sermon, at S. Paul's, Land. 1624.
though Heathen People, that would utterly refuse all profit that came not in
by the way of Honesty, hearken to no Counsel that tended to any kind of
turpitude, nor lend an ear to any advice that was not just: And it is heartily
to be wished, that all such as profess themselves to be Christians, would
learn so much of the Heathen, as not to do evil that good may come of it,
Probus quasi probatus.
not to make Religion a stalking horse to Policy, not to raise themselves by
the ruins of others, nor to make use of their weaker brother as a stirrup to
mount them into the saddle of their so much desired greatness; but to be
honest, to do righteous things, do as they would be done by, always remembering
that of our K. James.
English Solomon, Honesty will prove to be the best Policy in

THE END.
An Alphabetical Table, pointing out the whole Matter.
A
FOr the Abuse of a thing, the use is not to be taken away, 47. How it is that
a man may be said to abuse the lawful comforts of this life, 358. Adoption of
Gods Children known by their Sanctification, 155. Gods-fundamental love of
Election and actual love of Adoption, how to be distinguished, 261. The great
benefit of timely accounting with God, 609. The glory of God to be the aim of
all our Actions, 14. Contemplation and Action, requisite for every good
Christian, 18. To be active in the service of God, 169. Every man to be active
in his place, 196. Active Christains, the only Christians, 271. Action, the
very life of the Soul, 349. The active Christian, object of the Devil and
wicked Men's malice, 410. The best Christain, 637. Christ, to be the sum of all
our action, 463. Men to be active in regaining their lost Souls, 607. The good
of Adversity, and ill of Prosperity, 79. Adversity seeks God, 112. Adversity
rather then Prosperity, is the advancer of Piety, 118. Great promises in
Adversity, without performance in Prosperity, condemned, 148. In times of
Prosperity to provide for Adversity, 425. To be affected with the falling of
others into sin, 296. Our Affections to be regulated, 105. A Child of God best
known by his affections to God, 120. Afflictions from God for his Childrens
good, 4. Not to be a^raid of Afflictions, because God sends them, 10. The godly
Man's a^^lictions, corrective, not destructive, 43. A^^lictions, the ready way
to Heaven, 47. The very approaches of A^^lictions torment the Wicked, 73.
Afflictions, if any thing, will make us seek God, 455. A good Man is bettered
by his Afflictions, 74. 174. 445. A true Christain, the more he is Afflicted,
the better he thriveth, 79. Afflictions and crosses not to be slighted, 84.
Afflictions, crosses, etc. a surer way to Heaven, then pleasures, 85. How it is
that afflictions lie oft-times so heavy, 632. Afflictions to be looked on as
coming from God only, 93. Afflictions lead to Heaven, 97. 452. Afflictions add
unto the beauty of a Christian, 105. God by afflictions drives us to Heaven,
114. The thoughts of Gods omnipresence, a great comfort in affliction, 118.
Afflictions follow the godly Man close in this World, 159. Gods trial of his
children by afflictions, 202. 215. God afflicts his Children for their good,
227. Afflictions happen both to good and bad, but to several ends, 241. God
only to be eyed in the midst of afflictions, 286. Not to be daunted at
afflictions, 296. Not to rejoice at the afflictions of others, 308. God
afflicting his Children for the improvement of their graces, 325. Not to be
troubled at afflictions, because God intends good by them, 356. God afflicting
his Children to try their sincerity, 403. Gods children afflicted, to make them
perfect, 406. Men to be prepared for Afflictions, crosses, etc. 408. When
lighter Afflictions will not serve, God will send heavier, 410. Afflictions,
the comfortable use that is to be made of them, 441. Christ the best shelter in
time of Affliction, 530. Afflictions, Gods Love Tokens, 599. Not to wait Gods
good time in Afflicting us, dangerous, 609. Not to be altogether taken up with
the sense of Afflictions, 633. Afflicti^ns, though grievous, yet profitable,
660. Not to murmur under Afflictions; and why so? 662. Comfort nearest, when
Afflictions are at highest, 669. How it is, that Age becomes truly honorable,
331. The dissolution of all ages past to be a Memento for Posterity, 100. Get
but God, and get all, 47. All things come from God, who is therefore to be
praised, 181. All sin to be repented of, and why so* 315. Alms^ gi^en to the
poor, are the givers ga^, 31. Almsgiving, how to be regulated, 402. Ambition
proves its own ruin, 41. The poisonous nature of Ambition, 82. The great heat
of Ambition, 622. Anabaptistical spirits, their madness, 416. Angels
ministering unto Gods people for their good, 322. God is not to be provoked to
Anger, 16. Not ^o answ^r one angry word with another, 305. Not to be angry with
our brother, 485. Not to take notice of every angry word that is spoken, 547.
Not to conti^ue angry, 72. 165. 196. How God is said to be angry with his
children, 86. Antinomians compared to Thieves, 46. Their madness, 576. The
great danger of Apostasy, 619. Wantonness in Apparel, ^eproved, 167. Excess
of Apparel, condemned, 192. 642. Christian Apparrelling, 280. Men and Women
not to wear each others Apparel, 292. The vanity of gay Apparel, 446. The
great ^olly of costly Apparel, 594. Apparel, whether richer or plainer, the
necessity thereof, 646. No Appeal from Gods tribunal, 141. The poor distressed
Man's comfort, by his appeal unto God, 198. Gods comfortable appearance to his
people at the time of their death, 554. The whole Armor of God to be put on,
115. The best Christian is the best Artist, 137. Not the Assurance, but the joy
of Salvation, gives content, 81. Assured Christians, must be patient
Christians, 351. God so ordering it, that few or none of his people live and
dye without assurance of their salvation, 352. Assurance of Gods love, the
only comfort, 370. Atheism advanced by the distractions of the Church, 152.
Atheism condemned, 243. Atheism punished, 242. A^heism will unman any Man, 303.
Atheistical, wicked men, at the hour of death forced to confess Gods
Judgments, 476. The great danger of relying upon foreign aid and assistance,
580.
B.
BAptismal water, the power and virtue thereof, 186. Bap^ism renounced by the
lewdness of life and conversation, 321. Children of persons excommunicate, to
be baptized, 470. How it is, that Godfathers and Godmothers undertake for
children in Baptism, 495. Infant Baptism asserted, 557. To be careful of our
Vow made in Baptism, 605 Better live amongst beasts, then beastly-minded Men,
161. God to be consulted at all times; but more especially in the beginning of
all public concernments, 1. The paucity of true Believers, 398. Bitter
spirits, are no gracious spirits, 21. Blamelesnesse of life, enjoined, 113. The
sins of Blasphemy and swearing, the commonnesse of them, 122. Blasphemous
language condemned, 230. A good Neighbor is a great blessing, etc. 6.
Governors, as they are qualified, are a curse or a Blessing to a People, 9. A
little with Gods blessing goes far, 11. Blessings turned into curses, 63. The
blessing of God, more to be eyed then our own endeavors, 70. The Ministers
blessing after Sermon to be attended, 71. Gods blessing upon the means does
all, 92. 581. Outward blessings do not always make a blessed Man, 107. A
blessed thing to have God for our Lord, 136. God has a peculiar blessing for
his children, 169. Gods spiritual blessing upon a Man's employment in his
calling, 200. To rely upon the blessing of God, notwithstanding all opposition,
611. The blessing of God, attending on people listening to their own Minister,
638. To bless God for all, 453. The Devils aim to strike every Man with
spiritual blindness, 12. The Sinners wilful blindness, condemned, 281.
Spiritual and corporal blindness, their difference, 414. The natural Man's
blindness in spiritual things, 485. The guilt of innocent Blood crying to
Heaven for vengeance, 19. Bloudy-minded Men, condemned, 130. A Caveat for
bloudy-minded Men, 611. The greatest boasters, the smallest doers, 434. More
care for the Body then the Soul, condemned, 11. 552. The Sinner's care is more
for the Body then the Soul, 171. Deformity of body not to be contemned, 193.
Young Scholars to mind their books, 40. Scandalous and seditious books and
pamphlets fit for the fire, 295. Books of Piety and Religion, testimonial at
the great day of Judgment, 476. The several books of God, slighted and
neglected by the most of Men, 656. The bountiful goodness of God to his
children, 606. The exceeding bounty of God, 119. The borrowers duty and
comfort, 612. The sin of Bribery condemned, 332. 373. The word Brother, how far
extended, 172. Not to be over-carefull for the place of our burial, 592.
Busybodies, condemned, 136. 147. A busie-body described, 285.
C.
THe great danger of taking up a false persuasion of our effectual Calling,
353. The certainty, not the time of our spiritual Calling, to be so much
looked into, 260. 612. The necessity of Catechizing, 119. Weak ones, how to be
catechized and instructed, 133. Catechizing, an excellent way to instruct
Youth, 422. Distrust^ull cares reproved, 125. Censurers condemned, 20. Not to
censure others, but look to our selves, 46. Censures not to be regarded, 69.
The Worlds hard censure of the godly Man, 128. How it is that one Man censureth
another, 225. To be careful in the censure of others, 232. Men, not to be
censurers one of another, 365. To be favorable in the censure of others, 477.
The danger of introducing useless Ceremonies in the Church, 168. Ceremonials
and circumstantials in Religion not to be much contended for, 93. Why God
delivered the Law with such Majestic Ceremonies, 93. The Romanists error in
the point of antiquity of Ceremonies, 151. Ceremonies in the Church, not to be
cause of separation, 440. It is Man, not God that changes, 117. Charity to the
poor, to be real, not verbal, 8. The Charity of former times, abused by these
times, 198. Charity mistaken, 239. To be well ordered, 561. 674. To be
Charitable Christians, and why so? 262. To be charitable to the poor and needy,
300. Why it is, that we must be charitable to all Men, 342. Charity rewarded to
the full, 373. Men to be careful of what they promise unto God in matter of
Charity, 494. Charity attended by the certainty of reward, 529. Children of
God, must have Gods qualities, 9. Why God suffers the dearest of his children
to want these outward things, 301. A true child of God, half in Heaven, whilst
he is upon Earth, 317. Being delivered out of the bondage of Satan, made more
careful for the future, 318. Children to be brought up in the fear of God, 48.
461. 481. To be well principled, 57. To be begged of God by prayer, 289.
Childrens Christian instruction, the great benefit thereof, 312. How it is that
Children are very hardly drawn from their natural inclinations, 336. Children,
to be ready to relieve their Parents necessities, 460. To have Children Male
and Female, Gods great blessing, 467. Children, to submit to their Parents
correction, 481. Children, to set their hands to all honest employments, 482.
To be fruitful in children, a great blessing of God, 496. Wicked children, a
great grief to their Parents, 576. Not to repine at a great charge of Children,
592. Christ voluntarily engaging himself to take away the sins of the World,
569. Men to be ready to dye for Christ, 578. The comfortable sight of Christ
Jesus crucified to the poor Repentant sinner, 634. The excellency of Christ
Jesus, 640. Christ, the Saints wonder and admiration, 663. Christ's
watchfulness over his people for good, 664. Christ a ^ure play master, 666.
Christ fully revealed in the New Testament, 6. Christ's Victory over Satan, 24.
Christ and the good Christian are companions inseparable, 18. Christ is the
true Christians, All in all, 63. How Christ's sufferings are made ours, 69.
Wisdom of Christ above all other wisdom, even to admiration, 102. Christ in
all his excellencies, to be the Christians object, 142. S. Augustines. Judgment
of the time of Christ's birth, 157. Christ compared to an Eagle, 174. All have
not the same measure of Christ, 175. The excellencies of Christ are theirs that
are in him, 185. Nothing but Christ to be esteemed, as of any worth, 195.
Christ is the proper food of the Soul. To make Christ our Lord and Master, 224.
Christ, the only object of the devout Soul, 273. Christ, nothing but love all
over, 299. Christ, the eternal Son of God properly and significantly called,
The Word, Ioh. 1. 1. 326. Christ making himself and all that he has, over to
the good of his Church and People, 327. The great love of Christ to be at an
high esteem, and why so? 344. Christ, the true light, 538. The joyful coming
of Christ Jesus in the flesh, 365. The all-sufficient goodness of Christ
Jesus, 385. The inestimable value of Christ Jesus, 407. Consideration of the
Name of Christ, to be a motive from sin, 448. The necessity of being found with
Christ's righteousness, 472. Christ's wounds, the only hiding place of a
Christian, 490. Christ Jesus, the good man's chief portion, 505. The excellency
of Christ's intercession, 518. Christ freely discovering himself to all that
truly seek him, 535. Christ's humanity, asserted, 537. A true Christian to be a
true picture of Christ, 92. The worth of a true Christian, 123. The best
Christian is the best Artist, 137. True Christians are fruitful Christians,
326. As we are called Christians, to bear up our selves like Christians, 348.
The weakness of a Christian without Christ, 393. The good Christians Library,
417. The Christians claim to Heaven, what it is. Christianity, the best
Nobility, 592. Every one to strive for eminency in Christianity, 664. The
Churches distress and comfort, 582. Gods readiness to maintain the cause of
his Church, 621. The bare enjoyment of Church Priviledges does not make up a
true Christian, 639. God ordering all things for the good of his Church, 641.
The Churches fall, the Churches rise, 658. Christ ready to revenge himself upon
the Enemies of his Church, 663. Ruin of the Churches enemies to be desired,
119. The fiery trial on the Church of God, 130. The Church's enemies, become
the Church's good, 131. Spoylers of Church and State, condemned, 209. Men, not
repairing to the Church of God, reproved, 245. The sad condition of Church and
State, not to be slighted, 270. 424. Reverend and devout behavior to be used
in the Church of God, 320. God looking upon his Church with a more especial
eye of Providence, 328. Gods ends and Man's ends, as to the persecution of his
Church, the vast difference betwixt them, 345. The not laying of the Churches
troubles to heart, condemned, 346. How it is, tha War there may, and must be in
the Church of God, but not contention, 364. The Church of the Gospel, its
amplitude above that under the Law, 437. The good Christians comfort in time of
the Churches trouble, 310. Church of God, still on the decaying hand, 6. The
Churches Enemies in Gods hands, 13. The Church robbed of her maintenance, upon
pretense of Reformation, 17. Peace of the Chruch, precious, 32. Prayers and
tears are the Weapons of the Church, 52. The Churches complaint for want of
maintenance, 63. Order both in Church and State commanded and commended, 101.
Careless Churchmen to be condemned, 62. The Church's conditions under the
two Testaments, 174. Church-spoylers condemned, 201. God seeks for his own
People, more especially in his own house the Church, 227. The great danger of
slighting Church Assemblies, 304. True comfort in God only, 647. A Caveat for
unworthy Communicants, 109. The danger of unworthy Communicating, 111. Unworthy
Communicants condemned, 142. 151. 156. 164. A good Man tedious to bad Company,
564. Godly Company, the benefit thereof, 539. How a Man should demean himself
in bad Company, 454. Ill Company to be avoided, 45. 187. 437. A godly Man is
bettered in evil Company, 106. Man to be of Company, or sociable, 188. How to
come off well in ill Company, 190. Evil Company a great hindrance in the ways
of God, 362. The confident Christian, 243. Confes^ion of sins, irksome to the
Devil, 676. The Laity abused by the Roman Clergy in Confession, 587. Men by
nature hardly brought to Confession of sin, 661. Contempla^ion and action,
requisite for every good Christian, 18. Gods savor above all Worldly
contentment to a godly Man, 7. Content is a great blessing of God, 29. To be
Content with our present condition, 41. A contented Christian is a courageous
Christian, 66. A contented Man, no base spirited Man, 105. Contentment brings
in all things on a sudden, 106. Contentment keeps up the Soul in the saddest of
conditions, 107. A contented mind suits with all conditions, 2^0. Consideration
of the brevity of life, to w^r^ the heart of Man to contentment, 392. To rest
contented with Gods good will and pleasure, 422. Content with Gods good
pleasure, a great blessing, 481. Men to argue themselves into a mood of
Contentment, 501. The quietness of Contentment, 502. The spiritual benefit of
divine Contentment, 504. A little with content, sufficient, 519. No true
content in the things of this World, 564. Commandments of God, the
reasonableness of them, 251. The commands of God to be obeyed, not questioned,
582. To compassionate others miseries, 528. 301. 613. How far there may be a
lawful compliance with men of other Judgments, 405. The pain of a wounded
Conscience, greatned by the folly of the patient, 563. Greatness of the
torture of a wounded Conscience, 565. Peace of Conscience not to be wrought out
by Company, etc. 567. Not to regard what men say ill, if Conscience say well,
315. Conscience to be looked on as a Register of all our actions, 307. To
bless God for the peace of Conscience, 33. The security of a good Conscience,
55. The Hell of a guilty Conscience, 75. The terrors of a guilty Conscience,
151. The sad effects of a wounded Conscience, 199. The great comfort of a good
Conscience, 270. Conscience spoils the wicked Man's Mirth, 376. Good Conscience,
a Man's best Friend at the last, 415, 507. The most silent Conscience will speak
out at last, 502. Not to consent unto Sin, 480. Consideration to be had in all
undertakings, 169. Consideration of eternal pain, to deter from the commission
of Sin, 122. Consideration of Gods omnipresence, to be the sinners curb, 128.
Consideration of death, will cure all distempers, 134. God to be consulted with
upon any great undertaking, 148. Controversies, especially in matters of
Religion, dangerous, 294. Corrections, Instructions, 141. Correction of
children and servants, how to be moderated, 445. No true comfort but in God,
166. A godly Christian is a constant Christian, 41. The danger of Conventicles,
115. The hardness of a Rich man's Conversion, 562. Conversion of Heathens to be
endeavored, 36. Conversion of a Sinner, wrought by degrees, 188, 305. The
meditation of Death, profitable to the Souls conversion, 282. Conversion of a
Sinner, painfully wrought, 283. Conversion of a Sinner, is matter of great
rejoicing, 312. The serious confession of one sinner to another, may be the
Conversion of one the other, 346. The Ministers joy in the Conversion of Souls,
640. More Converts made by Preaching, then by reading, 545. A covetous Man good
for nothing till he be dead, 67. Ministers and Physicians, of all Men not to be
covetous, 72. Covetousness and contentment, inconsistent, 199. A Covetous Man,
never satisfied, 317. Covetousness in the Clergy, condemned, 590. A great
comfort to have a Faithful Counselor, 54. To make God our Counselor, 229.
Every thing in specie made perfect at one and the same time in the Creation,
500. God to be seen in the works of the Creation, 643. Man since the fall of
Adam, subject to the Creatures, 255. No true happiness to be found in the best
of Creatures, 368. Vanity of the Creatures without God, 642. All Creatures
subject to God pleasure, 166, 609. All the Creatures are at peace with good
men, 96. The Use of the Creatures is conditional, 102. Not so much to eye the
Creature as the Creator in all occurrents, 170. Gods power, Wisdom, etc. to
be seen in all the Creatures, 205. The Creature moves not, but in and by God,
59. Cares and Crowns, inseparable, 202. Curses usually falling on the Cursers
head, 298. Custom in sin, makes content in sin, 90. Custom of sin, no excuse
for the committing of sin, 276. Men hardly drawn out of old customs and forms
in Religious worship, 344. Custom in sin, causes hardness in sin, 350. Hard
to be drawn from custom in sin. 366. 479, 630.
D
THe true Christians safety in danger, 214, 490. To be careful in the
prevention of danger, 248 That it is lawful to praise the dead, 45. A Man dead
in Sin, is a senseless Man, 45. To speak well of the dead, 206. Dead Men, soon
forgotten, 623. Commonnesse of the death of others, taking away the sense of
Death, 477. How it comes to pass, that Death is more generally excused, then
accused, 325. Death strips us of all outward things, 33, 123 Encompassed by
Death on all sides, 39. To look on every day as the day of Death, 66. In death
there is no difference of persons, 84. At the time of Death, to be mindful of
Heaven, 103. To be mindful of the day of Death, 119. An argument of extreme
folly not to be mindful of death, 121. Death, the good Man's gain, 123. A good
Man is mindful of his death, 126. Extreme folly, not to be mindful of death,
137. Death is the true Christians advantage, 153. How the good and the bad look
upon death in a different manner, 159. To be always prepared for death, 182,
298, 492. Meditation of death, the benefit thereof, 254. Insensibility of
death, reproved, 255. Ho^ it is that wicked Men are said to hasten death, 260.
All alike in death, 261, 493. Death, the end of all, 263. To be mindful of
death at all times, 265. Whether it be lawful to desire death, 266. Every Man
to be persuaded of his own death, 297. The impartiality of death, 301. Every
day to be looked on as the day of death, 324. Frequent meditations of death,
the great benefit thereof, 369. Men not to hasten their own deaths, but submit
to the Will of God, and why so! 370. The generality of Men, nothing mindful of
death, 376. The day of death, made the good Man's comfort, 396. The day of
death, better then the day of life, 407. The good Man's comfort in death, 417.
A Child of God triumphing over death, 487. The good Christians absolute victory
over death, 492. Christians to be careful that they may find comfort in death,
508. The smallest p^at of ground, sufficient for the greatest landed Man at the
time of death, 562. The generality of Men, not enduring to hear of death, 579.
Death of the Soul, mere to be lamented, then the death of the body, 608. The
true Christians confidence and contempt of death, 618. Death put off from one
to another, 673. Christ by his death, overcame death, 676. The poo^ Debtors
comfort, 306. To beware how we come into the debt of sin, 556. Not to admit of
delays in Religious performances, 592. Deliberation, to be used in all our
ways, 458. God is the only object of his childrens, Delight, 23. God is the
only delight of his children, 139. The Soul's delight once set upon God, hardly
to be removed, 183. Gods time, the best time for delive^ance, 5. God does not
only deliver, but comfort his Children, 25. In all deliverances, spiritual and
temporal, to give God the glory, 339. God raising up Instruments for the
deliverance of his people, 551. The workings of God in the deliverance of his
people, various, 648. Spiritual desertions, no distractions to the child of
God, 49. How it is, that there may be partial des^rtions of spiritual grace in
the Souls of Gods dearest children, but never total nor final ones, 383. Gods
love to his children in the midst of spiritual desertions, 395. Gods
comfortable presence in the midst of spiritual desertions, 397. Not to be
overhasty in the desire of Justice for wrongs sustained, 7. The godly Man's
desires are above his reach, 122. The true Christian's desires are all for
Heaven, 394. Desperation, the complement of all sins, 317. The desperate
Sinner's madness, 454. D^struction is from our selves, 164. 659. Not so much
the quantity, as the quality, of Devotion acceptable to God, 15. The great
benefit of devotion at bed time, 247. The Devil a deceiver, deceived by Christ,
30. The Devil suiting himself to all humors, 48. Satan's restless, uncessant
employment, 49. Satan tempts by degrees, 68. Desp^rate Devils, 85. Satan
subdued by Christ's death, 126. His policy to defile the Soul with sin, 289. The
Devil rewarding his servants, 500. The Devils cunning to deceive, 578, 637.
The Devils rage, and arguments of the Judgment day at hand, 626. Why it is that
the children of God, die usually sooner then others, 522. All must die, 341,
522. We dye daily, 162. Wisemen dye as well as Fools, 478. Many seem to be
willing, yet are loath to dye, 64, 76. Man always in a dying condition, 12. We
must learn to live well, before we desire to dye, 65. D^scretion, the guide of
all Religious actions, 574. A main part of true Wisdom, 650. Discord
ill-becomes the Disciples of Christ, 43. Discord in Church or Commonwealth,
prejudicial, 58. The deepest dissembler at one time or other, discovered, 478.
Civil Dissension attended by uncivil destruction, 13. Dissension, the
Forerunner of confusion, 626. Distractions will prove destructions, 8.
Englands distractions to be Englands peaceable directions, 193. Dangerous to
interpose with a divided People, 74. Division amongst Christians is the
disgrace of Christians, 44. All divisions are against Nature, 75. The danger of
Divisions, 94, 317. Divisions usher in destruction, 204. The evil of Division,
474. Divisions in Church and State to be prevented, 559. The stu^y of Divinity,
necessary, 220. The study of School Divinity, not altogether necessary, 241.
False doctrine is treason against God, 44. To do as we would be done by, is
praiseworthy, 163. Dreams not altogether to be slighted, 1. The right use
that is to be made of Dreams, 237. A drunkard hardly to be reclaimed, 87.
Drunkenness cond^mned, 140. Drunkenness the shame of England, 190. The
increase of drunkenness in England, 206. Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc. the
generality of them, 281. The scoffing drunkards sad condition, 472. To be
careful of extraordinary drinking, 474. Excessive drinking condemned, 475, 580.
Drunkenness, a great punishment of it self, 483. To be careful of our Duty of
God and Man, 10. Not to rest in outward performance of duty, because dangerous,
178. Complete Christian duty, 383. Neglect of the main duties of Christianity,
reproved, 388. Men to be constant in performance of holy duties, 396. Constancy
of holy duties, makes the performance of them easy, 442. Holy duties call for
holy preparation, 469. The sins of our Religious duties, corrected by Christ,
and then presented to his Father, 633.
E
GOds decree of Election, not to be made the proper obj^ct of Faith, 656. Man's
happiness consistech only in Gods free Election, 288. The true comfort of
Election, 586. How to be assured of our Election, 586. Election known by
Sanctification, 76. Gods fundamental love of Election, and actual love of
Adoption; how distinguished, 261. To make our calling and Election sure, 488.
Eloquence, if not affected, an excellent gift of God, 284. Eloquence, not to be
abused, 306. Good endeavors assisted by God, 157. All endeavors, to be
sanctified by prayer, 551. The Churches Enemies in Gods hands, 13. A Foreign
Enemy to be prevented, 34. To love our Enemies and do them good, 73. How it is
that we may hate our Enemies, 138. 112. The great good which comes by Enemies,
112. Not to envy each others gifts and prefermen^s, 29. The great power of
Envy, 173. The destructive quality of Envy, 518. The incorrigibility of Error,
184. To beware of erroneous doctrine, 243, 417. The obstinate Sinner deserving
Eternity of punishment, and why so? 12. Eternity of punishment in Hell, 97. to
be considered, 442. In all our doings, we should have our eye upon Eternity,
103, 443. Not to serve time, but Eternity, 202. Nothing but Eternity will
satisfy the gracious Soul, 438. In the midst of worldly enjoyments to mind
Eternity, 440. The evil of Excess, 616. A wicked Man hardly drawn to examine
himself, 107. Daily Examination of our selves, the comfort of it, 294. Gods
choice of eminent persons to be Exemplary to others, 13. Rulers actions,
Exemplary, 32. A good Man will be a good Example to others, 127. The dangerous
Example of wicked Governors, 192. The prevalency of a good Example, 256.
Christ, to be our Example, and pattern of imitation in life and death, 484.
Wicked men, reserved for exemplary judgment, 507. Magistrates and men in
authority, to be exemplary to others, 516, 531. Christ to be our example in
bearing the Cross, 624. The sufferings of Christ, as so many Examples to teach
us how to suffer, 677. Experience of Gods love, to be a motive unto better
obedience, 126. The experimented Christian, the only undaunted Christian, 596.
Man's extermity, Gods opportunity, 408.
F.
A Factious-spirited Man, unfit for the work of the Ministry, 21. Ringleaders
of Faction and Schism, their condition, deplorable, 391. Factious hearers of
the Word, condemned, 460. The happy succession of a Christian Family, 423.
Wicked persons may be in a good Family, 461. The unhappiness of a disordered
Family, 655. How to make trial of Faith, whether it be perfect or not, 644.
The great benefit of Faith truly appropriated, 665. Faith and love,
inseparable, 671. Complaint of the want of Faith, an argument of true Faith,
35. More comfort in a strong Faith, then a weak one, 435. The life of Faith,
the happy life, 40. Faith is the Fountain of all Graces, 51. The gradation of
Faith, 53. The trial of Faith, is the enlargement of Faith, 74. Justifying
Faith accompanied with good works, 98. The certainty of Faith, 111. Faith makes
partakers of every good thing in Gods ordinances, 113. Faith in the time of
trial, needful, 150. How Faith justifies alone, 163, 151. The power of Faith,
reviving the deadly sinsick Soul, 177. The great power of Faith seated in the
heart of Man, 229. The least measure of true Faith, rewarded, 230, 406. Christ
to be entertained in our hearts by Faith, 253. Without Faith, impossible to
please God, 261. Faith, the root of all Graces, 262. Faith, though weak
rewarded, and why so? 341. How it is that Faith is the first act of Repentance,
343. Faith to be preserved as the head of all Graces, and why so? 344. True
saving Faith, though never so weak, is all in all, 359, 590. How it is that
Faith challenges superiority, over all the Graces, 386. The force of
justifying Faith, 518. Directions for the strong and weak in Faith, how to
demean themselves as to the matter of Gods providence, 383. Faith, not always
sensible, 511. A sure anchor-hold in time of distress, 550. Faith and
Repentance to be daily renewed and increased, 555. The appropriation of Faith
is all in all, 599. The several degrees of Faith, 601. Men, to be careful in
the trial of their Faith, whether it be found or not, 641. The Faithful
servants of God, well rewarded, 273. God rewarding the least of Faithful
service done unto him, 285. Faithful servants of God, the paucity of them,
292. The Faithful soul, and an unbeliever, their difference in relying upon
God, 634. How it is that Faith is said to be made perfect by works, 644. The
Court- Favorites condition, 208. The Godly Man is Gods Favorite, 227. A Man
to be clear of that fault he condemns in another, 448. The apprehension of
Fear and courage, man's mistaking of the object, spoils all, 624. Fears and
jealousies, the danger of them, 94. God to be feared in his Judgments, 307.
Gods dwelling in the Soul that truly fears him, 65^. He that truly fears God,
passes not for the affronts of Men, 412. The sad condition of the fearlesse,
heart-hardned sinner, 674. There Is no fighting against God, 673. Flatterers to
be avoided, 439. A Caveat for Flatterers, 615. Flesh and Spirit, their
opposition, 185. The danger of Fleshly lusts, to be avoided, 330. 476. Flesh
and blood, not to be hearkened unto, 430. Forgiveness of others, an argument of
Gods forgiving us, 49. Injuries not only to be forgiven, but forgotten also,
97. Forgiveness of one another commanded and commended, 114. The great
diffi^ulty of forgiving one another. 153. A Formal specious Christian, no true
Christian, 100. Outward Formality only, in the service of God, condemned, 187.
The Formal Christian described, 403, 450. The deaths of Friends and
acquaintance, not to be slighted, 264. The hasty, unexpected death of Friends,
not to be made matter of excessive sorrow, 282. A Faithful, modest Friend, very
hard to be found, 371. Few, or no Friends to be found in time of Adversity,
432. God, a sure fast Friend, 610. Friendship to be made with God in Christ
Jesus, 300. True, real Friendship, very hard to be found, 372. Friendship
tried in the times of Affliction, 433.
G.
God loves a cheerful giver, 482. Excellency of the crown of Glory, 499.
Glory to be given to God only; and why so? 15. God is to have the glory of all
things, 83. 225. 288. The sad effects of not giving unto God, his glory, 553.
Gluttony reproved, 444. How it is, that God is to every one of his children,
alone, 642. God alone more powerful then all the Enemies of the World, 561.
God working the greatest of things without means, 485. God in wisdom ordering
all things to work together for the good of his children, 242. The workings of
God and Man, very different, 244. An account of Gods knowledge, not to be made
out by the wisest of Men, 318. God's Immutability, 464. Gods omniscience,
necessarily demonstrated from his omnipresence, 379. Watchfulness over his
people forgood, 496. Consideration of Gods omnipresence, a strong motive to
Christian confidence, 380. To be a disswasive from sin, 381. 436. God, a
merciful God, 234. 510. Gods special love to his children, 112. God, slow to
anger, 115. God, a jealous God of his honor, 535. The great goodness of God
in sending Jesus Christ to save Sinners, 167. Gods omniscience, 577. Gods care
over his children, notwithstanding their many aberrations, 171. God only to be
served, 584. God, a mighty God, 190. The only searcher of Man's heart, 498.
Gods Justice, what it is, and how defined, 231. How it is, that the proceedings
of God in his Justice, are not so clearly discerned, 231. The several
expressions of God in his mercies; And why so? 235. The generality of Gods
knowledge, 236. Gods great patience, notwithstanding Man's provocation, 382. God
only to be worshipped as the great Creator, etc. 661. God only to be seen in
Christ Jesus, 3. God and his Graces go together, 22. The manifestation of God
in several respects, 26. God is All in all, 42, Gods Eternity, 44.
Omnisciency, 52. 266. The certainty of Gods Will and promise, 69. The fullness
of God, 70. God, the proper Agent in all things, 85. God and his Attributes are
answerable, 97. Gods two hands of Mercy and Judgment, 130. God only wise 144.
The only searcher of the heart, 577. God slow to anger, and of great patience,
146. God, both powerful and merciful, 185. God, a just God as well as a
merciful God, 274. God to be feared in his Judgments, 307. God's Judgments,
the causes of them to be considered, 409. God brings good out of evil for his
Peoples good, 22. To make good use of good Men while we have them, 43. A good
Man is the prop and stay of his Country, 43. Carnal and spiritual Men, their
difference in doing good, The good Man's life, preserved for the good of
others, 158. The great difference of both good and bad Men in life and death,
158. To do good for evil, 501. Good Men, as the Pillars both of Church and
State, to be preserved, 200. The good Man rejoicing in death, 464. The falls of
good Men presage the Nations ruin, 221. 662. Goodnese, not greatness, that
holds out to the last, 525. Goodness and greatness seldom meet together,
108. The beginnings of goodness to be encouraged, and why? 150. Goodness, or
godliness, the best Friend, 214. The ways of Godliness more comfortable then
Worldly Men can imagine, 431. Godliness, a great mystery, and why so? 453.
Godliness, a very gainful Trade, 457. Fears of the loss of Gospel light more
at home then from abroad, 14. 95. To joy in the light of the Gospel, 20.
Gospel-promises are the poor Man's supporters, 117. How the Gospel propagateth
it self, 193. Christ seen more clearly under the Gospel, then under the Law,
258. How it is, that the preaching of the Gospel is of a double and contrary
operation upon different persons, 372. The different effects of the Gospel
preached, 481. Gospel invitation to comfort, 558. Powerful preaching of the
Gospel, 670. Government of Christ, a peaceable government, 31. Popular
Government, popular confusion, 49. The happiness of good Government, 51. 587.
The excellency of good Government, 65. Licentious Libertines impatient of
Government, 77. The good of Government, 122. Who fit for Government in point of
remporal estate, 223. Change of Government, not to be affected, 234. The sad
condition of people under Tyrannical Government, 310. A good wish to good
Government, 431. The great weight of Government, 452. The heavy weight of
Government ill attained, 652. Governors, as they are qualified, are a curse or
a blessing to the People, 9. Rulers and Governors support the Commonwealth,
29. Princes, Governors, etc. to be prudentially qualified, 110. Every
peaceable frame of spirit, and confident persuasion of Gods love, is not a sure
testimony, that such an one is in the state of grace, 324. Grace in the heart
is certain, though the feeling thereof be uncertain; And how so? 352. It is
Grace, not place, that keeps a Man from sinning, 324. Grace in the heart cannot
be smothered, 20. A total deprivation of Grace in the heart, deplorable, 23.
The doctrine of free Grace abused by licentious Libertines, 37. Grace, not
greatness, makes Magistrates glorious, 43. Grace of God above all Riches, 54.
The loss of Grace made up again in Christ only, 72. Saving Grace, and seeming
Grace much resemble one another, 30. True Grace is diffusive, 30. True Grace is
accompanied with humility 88. Graces lost in the Soul, to be made up only in
Christ, 112. Different measures of Grace in different persons, 139. Grace
sometimes seemingly lost to a Child of God, 145. 245. Weak beginnings of Grace,
not to be despised, 149. A sense of the want of Grace, a true sign of grace,
156. 177. Grace in the heart may be a long time concealed, 179. Grace of God,
the only armor of proof, 184. Graces to be stocked up against a day of
trouble, 254. God accepts the meanest of Graces, 285. Graces of Gods Spirit,
not given in vain, 311. Minding of good things, a notable way to increase
Grace, 511. Why it is that they which have the strongest graces, are subject to
the strongest corruptions, 374. Grace and goodness, to be highly esteemed,
even in Men of the lowest condition, 374. God exercising the Graces of his
Children, 404. Small buddings of Grace in the Soul, an argument of greater
growth, 538. Grace to be communicated, 557. Perfection of Grace to be
endeavored, 563. Graces of the Spirit, to be made the Souls furniture, 574.
Though seemingly lost, yet found at last, 607. Man by refusing the tenders of
Grace, becomes the cause of his own destruction, 628. How it is that the sweet
fruits of Grace come to grow on the bitter root of Nature, 632. Graces divine,
not parts humane, hold out in the end, 635. How it is, that Graces of the
Spirit, may at present seem to be lost, 635. 665. Means in the attainment of
Grace, and the use thereof enjoined by God, 636. The Grace of God is all in
all, 647. The way to greatness is full of danger, 10. Condiscension is the
great Man's glory, 90. Conversion of great ones to be endeavored, 185.
Greatness and goodness, well met together, 191. The vanity of Man in seeking
after great things, 598. Great Men and others, not to raise themselves by the
ruins of the Church, 632. Growth of sin to be prevented, 10. The not growing
in grace, reproved, 347. The Christian's spiritual growth, when seemingly dead
aed declining, 397. The Hypocrite and true Christian, their difference in
growth of Grace, 505. The Christian's growth in Grace, enjoined, 581.
H.
Happiness and blessedness, the only things desirable, 304. No way to
Happiness, but by Holiness, 395. Happiness of him that has the Lord to be
his God, 422. Others Men's harms to be our arms, 39. 67. 338. Miseries attendant
on the haters of Gods people, 361. Not to be careless Hearers of Gods Word,
21. 572. Sathan's endeavor to hinder the hearing of Gods Word, 34. Curiosity
in the hearing of Gods Word, condemned, 41. 135. Unprofitable Hearers of the
Word, described, 74. Ministers to distinguish their Hearers, 103. Hearers, and
not doers of the Word, condemned, 165. Hearing or listening after Vanity,
reproved, 173. Hearing the Word, and not meditating, thereon, dangerous, 187.
Partial Hearers of Gods Word, reproveable, 241. How to behave our selves in the
hearing of Gods Word, 249. Negligent hearing of Gods Word, condemned, 272. 585.
Needful requisites to make a profitable hearer of Gods Word, 299. Men to hear
the Word of God, though they come with prejudicate thoughts, 413. Partiality of
affection in hearing Sermons, condemned, 420. Attention in hearing of Gods
Word, commanded and commended, 469. Blessedness of the poor in spirit, in the
matter of hearing Gods Word, 484. To be diligent hearers of the Word of God,
and remember what we hear, 487. Good and bad hearers of the Word, their
difference, 506. Wanton hearers of the Word, reproved, 619. The great benefit
of hearing and practicing Gods Word, 636. How to know, Whether a Man belong to
Heaven, 4. A great folly not to provide for Heaven, 8. The things of this
World, a great stop in the way to Heaven, 11. A poor child of God comforted
with the hopes of Heaven, 13. The true Christian's hopes of Heaven, 28. The
Saints knowledge of one another in Heaven, 68. Heaven the best Inheritance, 80.
How to know Gods dwelling place, Heaven, 100. A child of God is restless till
he come to Heaven, 101. At the time of death to be mindful of Heaven, 103.
Hopes of Heaven, the good Man's encouragement, 104. A good Christian to be
Heavenly-minded, 136. The reward of Heaven will make amends for all, 136.
Heaven, worth contending for, 155. The Kingdom of Heaven an everlasting
Kingdom, 175. The great state of Heaven, 196. How to get into Heaven, 196. The
Heavenly co^queror, the happy conqueror, 197. Not to admit of impediments in
our way to Heaven, 222. But one sure way to Heaven, 222. Consultation with
Flesh and blood in the ways of Heaven, is very dangerous, 237. Heaven the
inheritance of Gods children, 242. The World to be contemned in regard of
Heaven, 296. Men desirous to be in Heaven, but will not take the pains to come
rhither, 300. The way to Heaven through tribulation, 302. The joys of Heaven,
not to be expressed, 312. A true child of God, half in Heaven, whilst he is on
Earth, 317. Heaven, the poor Saints comfortable Inheritance, 347. Whilst we
are here in this World, to provide for Heaven, 347. Heavenly happiness, not to
be expressed, 396. Heaven, not to be found upon Earth, 455. To be waited for
with patience, 460. Men upon hearing of the joys of Heaven, to be much taken
there with, 465, 466. Every Man to make himself sure of Heaven, etc. 575.
Heaven, to be always in our thoughts, 585. Heaven, a place of holiness, 610.
The signs of Heaven, as Sun, Moon, with their Eclipses, etc. as we are not to
be dismayed at them, so not to be contemners of them, 655. No pains to be
thought too much for the getting of Heaven, 668. Why it is that God affords
some glimpse of Heaven, in this life, 669. An Heavenly-minded Man looks through
all Afflictions, 458. Heavenly-mindednesse of a child of God, 459. How to know,
whether a Man be Heavenly or earthly-minded, 459. Christians having an eye upon
the Heavenly reward, not to be daunted at any outward troubles, 462. God only
able to persuade the heart fully, 654. How the heart of Man may be kept up
steady in troublous times, 549. The heart of Man, the ^eed-plot of all sin,
597. Heart-communication, the want thereof, deplorable, 634. A good heart is a
melting heart, 7. Remedy for a hard heart to cure it, 145. Heart and tongue to
go together, 166. God will have the whole ^eart in his service, 182. 310. Gods
trial of his children by cleansing their hear^s, 215. The Christian's heart,
never quiet till it be in Christ, 217. The heart of Man, author of all good and
bad actions, 276. The heart of a true Christian, restless without Christ, 284.
The heart of a worldly-minded Man never satisfied, 572. No comfortable sight of
God without purity of heart, 637. A faint- hearted Christian described, 139.
594. No return from Hell, 670. A wicked Man believes not that there is a Hell,
till he be in it, 69. Wicked Men take great pains to go to H^ll, 475. Eternity
of punishment in Hell, 97. Fear of Hell to be a restraint from the least sin,
382. One Man is to help another as God has enabled him, 162. 254. Job's true
Heraldry, 135. Heresies and moral vices to be timely avoided, 90. The benefit
of History, 527. Holiness, an excellent thing, 366. Honor and greatness the
vanity of them, 369. Hopes of Heaven are the good man's encouragement, 104.
Hope well, and have well, 180. Hope in God, the best hold-fast, 318. Hope of
future joy, sweetneth present sorrow, 486. Hope to be kept up in the midst of
all perplexities, 505. The good Christian's Hope at the death of a child of
God, 637. Honesty, the best policy, 679. Hospitality commended, 67. The want
thereof reproved, 587. The Christians humiliation, the Christians exaltation,
53. No harm in humility, 125. An humble heart is a contented heart, 135.
Humility, the way to glory, 195. Gods dwelling in the humble heart, 501. How to
be truly humble, 239. Humility occasioned, by the consideration of our former
and present condition, 269. The true nature of humility, 567. Humility
advanced, 271. The excellency of humility, 568. To appear before God in all
humility, how high soever our condition be, 343. Humility appeaseth Gods anger,
386. 510. 593. The sovereign virtue of Humility, 571. Humility exalted, 574.
Husbands to bear with their Wives infirmities, 34. 433. Not to be uxorious,
290. The head of the Wife, 497. Husband and Wife, each others Crown, 581.
Husband and Wife to bespeak one another kindly, 596. Husbands to love their
Wives, as they are Wives, 604. Gods Husbandry, 90. The unthankful Husbandman,
condemned, 223. Hypocrisy may pass for a time undiscovered, 66. Hypocrisy,
the generality of it, 230. The Religious Hypocrite discovered, 661. The
comfortless Hypocrite, 669. Hypocrites discovering their own shame, 607. How
it is, that the Hypocrite deceives himself in seeking after God, 360. The ways
of Hypocrite, not easily traced, 227. Hypocrites, in their saying well and
doing ill, condemned, 51. The Hypocrites inconstancy, 52. How to judge of an
Hypocrite, 124. The Hypocrite described, 169. The Hypocrites discovery of
himself, 174. 626. Hypocrisy discovered, 206. When the Hypocrite is
discovered, 214. The Hypocrite characteristically laid open, 232. 283. The
subtle Hypocrite, 384. The Hypocrite being true to none, is beloved of none,
424.
I.
AN Idle Man subject to the least Temptation, 7. 348. All men to be highly
affected with the Name of Jesus, 320. Ignorance of Gods mind will not excuse us
at the last, 197. Ignorant worldly purchasers, 494. Ignorant, upstart
Preachers, reproved, 604. Ignorance, especially in the ways of God, reproved,
609, 611. God, not to be set out by any representation or Image to the eye of
Man, 425. The strength of Imagination, demonstrated, 196. How it is that the
strength of Imagination prevails so much in matters of Religion, 323. Not only
the good, but the bad also are imitable in what they do well, 96. An impatient
condition is a discontented condition, 42. The sad condition of all impenitent
Sinners, 328. Man's Inconstancy, 228. The unresolved Man's inconstancy, 336.
Inconstancy in the ways of God, reproved, 563. No such thing as Independency
in this life, 83. Men to bear with one another infirmities, 255. The Saints
infirmities, 622. Every Christian to be an ingenuous Christian, 57. The
baseness of Ingratitude, 11. Ingratitude of England unto God, 189. The
Ungrateful Christian reproved, 218. Gods goodness, and Man's ingratitude, 236.
Ingratitude reproved, 261. 655. Peoples ingratitude to their Minister,
condemned, 277. The monstrous sin of Ingratitude, 643. Inhumanity condemned,
404. Innovations in Church or State, very dangerous, 444. Condonation of the
Injured, is a conquest over the Injurious, 12. Forgetting of Injuries past,
required upon the making of Peace, 23. The glory of a Christian to pass by
Injuries and offenses, 56. Forgetfulness of Injuries, commendable, 85.
Injuries not only to be forgiven, but forgotten also, 97. Courts of Judicature
to be free from all Injustice, 381. Interest in Christ, best of all, 145. A
good Christian will rather part with his life, then his Integrity, 467. Joy,
how to be regulated, 220. Joy comes in the midst of Affliction, 319. God's
judgment not as Man's judgment, 600. Men usually judging others to be like
themselves, 528. Men, though differing in judgment, yet not to differ in
affection, 45. Man's co^rupt Judgment upon the bare appearance of things,
condemned, 150. Prejudice in judgment, very dangerous, 232. Difference of
judgment has, and ever will be in the minds of Men; and why so, 305. Men of
corrupt Judgments, 618. Minding of the great Day of Judgment, a great means to
live godlily, 229. 595. Iudgment-day, the terrors of it to the Wicked, 257.
The day of the last Judgment, a terrible day, 527. The state of a Kingdom or
Commonwealth best known by the administration of Justice, 3. Not to be
overhasty in the desire of Justice for wrong sustained, 7. Magistrates to be
impartial in justice, 526. Excellency of the robe of Justice, 38. 627. Judges
and Magistrates are to be the Patrons of Justice, 121. Magistrates to be
advised in the point of Justice, 124. Magistrates to do Justice and right, 132.
Magistrates to be always ready to do Justice, 157. 268. Justice described,
176. Justice commutative, to do as we would be done by, 404. Justice duly
administered to the People, the benefit thereof, 615. Justice moderated, 657.
Justice to be duly administered, 673. The Just man's joy is more inward then
outward, 54. 215. Not to be dejected, though the joy of the Just be not perfect
in this life, 519. Justification by Christ, the extent thereof, 231.
K.
KIlling of Men, heretofore made ordinary, 24. King, Princes, etc. good and
bad, their difference, 546. To be regarded by those that are under them, 648.
King and Corrivals are inconsistent, 204. Cares attendant on the Kingly office
and Men in authority, 308. Kings, Princes, Rulers, etc. to hearken to good
Counsel, 520. Kings, Princes, etc. subject to death as well as the lowest of
the people, 526. The greatness of them, no protection from death, 526. The
state of Kingdoms and Commonwealths best known by the administration of
Justice, 3. A Kingdom divided within it self cannot long stand, 195. The
Kingdom of Christ, a peaceable Kingdom, 247. Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
their successions from God, 309. How it is to know, whether a Man belong to
Heaven, or not, 4. God knows his own People, however distressed, 46.
Impossible for a Man to know all his sins, 57. Impossible to know God perfectly
in this World, 96. How to know Gods dwelling place, Heaven, 100. How to know,
whether we are more troubled for sin, then for worldly sorrow and trouble, 356.
Knowledge very useful in the matter of Reformation, 4. Gods knowledge and Man's
knowledge, the difference of them in the event of things, 5. Zeal and knowledge
must go hand in hand together, 15. Difference betwixt a spiritual and carnal
Man in point of knowledge, 58. The Saints knowledge of one another in Heaven, 68.
Windy Knowledge and windy doctrine go together, 82. Notional knowledge of God, no
true knowledge, 100. Minister of all men to be men of knowledge, etc. 134.
Experimental Knowledge, the only knowledge, 156. 437. The confidence of much
knowledge, an argument of no knowledge, 159. Knowledge, not to be reserved, 168.
Knowledge and practice must go together, 173. The great danger of concealed
knowledge, 192. Knowledge without practice, reproved, 213. Christians and their
knowledge to be communicative, 227. Man losing himself in the pursuit after
knowledge extraordinary, 238. True knowledge never rests on the Creature, till it
center in God the Creator, 259. Knowledge in political affairs, very uncertain,
267. All knowledge but in part, 268. The keys of Knowledge much abused by those
that keep them, 509. To have a perfect Knowledge of God, impossible, 532. The
knowledge of God through Faith in Christ, the way to true happiness, 534.
Wherein the true Knowledge of Christ consists, 556.
L.
LAughter of the Wicked, but from the teeth outward, 52. How it is, that the
Law is said to be the strength of Sin, 491. How it is that Christ is said to be
end of the Ceremonial law, 534. The work of the law, preceding the work of the
Gospel, 559. The Law of God, abused by Libertinism, 487. Law of God, a perfect
Law, 19. The Law, Gods Rhetoric in the delivery of it; Man's duty to attend
it, 133. How to behold our selves in the glass of Gods Law, 246. 630. The Law
of God, bringing Men to the sight of themselves, 297. Multiplicity of
Law-S^its, condemned, 588. Good Laws and good Men, are the pillars of State,
150. Lex Talionis, 157. 416. Good laws obeyed, are the support of a
Commonwealth, 175. The great danger of Law suits, 207. The tedious length of
Lawsuits, 213. 524. The known laws of any Nation, to be the rule of obedience,
293. How it is that Men may be said to learn of little children, dumb thews,
etc. 409. Practice of the law abused, 430. The downfall of piety and Learning
to be deplored, 118. Not to admire our own Learning or parts, 168. University-
Learning to be countenanced by men in Authority, 219. The necessity of humane
Learning, 240. Learning and honesty to go together, 249. A Man of Learning
speaks little, 263. The Devils plot to root our Learning, 276. 576. Excellency
of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, above all humane learning whatsoever, 363. The
commodity and discommodity of learning, 366. Knowledge and learning to be owned
in whomsoever they be found, 412. The right use of humane learning, 421. No Man
too good to learn, 447. No Man so old, but he may learn something, 471. The
right use of humane learning in Divinity, 483. 577. The necessity thereof, 484.
Much learning to be found in few expressions, 567. Impossible to arrive at a
full perfection of learning in this life, 568. Liberty the cause of
licentiousness, 504. Christian liberty abused by the Sectarian party, 27. How
it is, that Men are so much mistaken in the thoughts of long life, 375.
Consideration of the shortness of life to be a Memento for death, 430. The
Life of Man subject to all sorts of calamity, 61. The precious life of Man to
be preserved, 62. An ungodly life, will have an ungodly end, 101. The brevity
of our life, may moderate our life, 104. The life of Man miserable, 219.
Changing of this life for a better, no matter of grief, 280. Man's great vanity
in proposing to himself long life, 334. The great difference betwixt life
spiritual, and life natural, 370. The uncertainty of Man's life, 602. Like to
like, 234. How to be made like unto Christ, 260. Likeness to be a motive to
loveliness, 414. God must be loved for himself only, 16. Love for the most
part is but complemental, 8. Want of Love is the cause of all our sorrows, 36.
Love the bond of all perfection, 49. The Love of Gods children is a sincere
love, 75. The wonderful Love of a true Christian to Christ Jesus, 106. The
strength of a true Christians Love to Christ, 112. Want of Love to be deplored,
132. 401. Great engagement to love one another, 152. Love to Christ, how to be
recovered when once lost, 236. Christ, nothing but Love all over, 299. Love, to
be preserved with all Men, 313. The abundant love of Christ in dying for our
sins, 360. Love, Peace and Unity, the best supporters of Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, etc. 375. The Love of God, the only true love, 409. The true
love of God will cause familiarity with God, 447. How it is, and why God loves
us, 536. The exceeding Love of God to Mankind, 550. The Love of Riches very
dangerous, 571. True brotherly love scarce to be found, 613. The difference
betwixt true and feigned love unto Christ, 650. How our love to the Creature is
to be regulated, 666. Christians ought to be loving one to another, 58. No Man
a loser by giving himself up to Christ, 38. God being once lost, not easily
found again, 185. The loss of a faithful Ministry not to be slighted; and
why so, 258. Loss of the Soul, irrecoverable, 505. The good Man's comfort in
matter of worldly loss, 464. Not to repine at the loss of Friends and
children, 522. 670. Loss of good Men not laid to heart, condemned, 659.
Simplicity of Men, to be more affected with the loss of things eternal, 677.
Not to mourn for any outward losses, because all is made up in Christ, 55. A
sad thing to lose both body and Soul together, 111. Not to mourn excessively
for the loss of any Worldly enjoyment; and why so, 356. To beware of the lusts
of the Flesh, 141. The liars reward and punishment, 443.
M.
A Good Magistrate or Minister, is the support of the place where he lives,
111. The great comfort of such, 539. Magistrates to look to their attendants,
144. To be Men of understanding, 523. To stand up in Gods cause, 541. 545. Not
to be found guilty of that which they forbid in others, 531. Magistrates,
Ministers, etc. their rule to walk by, 573. Their death to be lamented, 575.
Malice and Envy not fit for Gods table, 73. The great danger of Malicious
turbulent spirits, 79. Not to be malicious in the exercise of holy duties, 102.
Matter enough within us to condemn us, 154. A good Man, denominated from the
goodness of his heart, 555. The sad condition of Man falling away from God,
298. Man's being is from God, 37. Man, the best and worst of Creatures, 216.
The fall of Man described, 216. Married Men better Common-wealths-men then
Batchelers, 203. Marriage to be sought of God by prayer, 256. Children to have
a care how they marry without consent of Parents, 441. Marriage, not to be made
for money only, 527. The Martyr's welcome to Heaven, 450. Good meanings of bad
men, destructive, 621. Good means, how to be used, 114. Gods blessing upon the
means does all, 92. Want of matter not to hinder Meditation, 435. Natural wants
not to hinder divine Meditation, 434. The great comfort of Heavenly Meditation,
191. 430. The necessity of divine Meditation, 431. The beginnings thereof very
difficult, 432. 636. The excellency thereof, 660. God the proper object of
Man's Memory, 62. To bless God for our Memories, 63. Repetition of good things
helpful to Memory, 96. Memory must be active, 106. Memory ought to be the
treasury of all goodness, 149. The difference betwixt a good and bad Memory,
335. The excellency of a good Memory, 547. The general badnesse of Memory in
good things, 548. Gods Mercies to the worst of sinners repenting, 651. Gods
Mercy above his Justice, 144. To be mercifully-minded, is praiseworthy, 163.
To sin against the Mercies of God, is to double our Sins, 177. V Vorks of
Mercy, very rare to be found amongst us, 306. Not to be put off from one to
another, 307. God, as he is God of Mercy, so he is a God of Judgment, and
therefore, not to be provoked, 328. The consideration of Mercies formerly
enjoyed, an excellent means to bear up our spirits under present affliction,
355. Mercies of God in Christ Jesus, the danger of dallying with them, 425* The
mercies of God to be particularly recorded to posterity, 449. God showing mercy
even for Christ Jesus sake, 451. Mercies of God to be recorded to all
posterity, 512. The great tenders of mercy to Repentant sinners, 620.
Acknowledgment of mercies received, the ready way to have them further
enlarged, 640. A great exceeding Mercy, to be one of Gods Children, 662. A good
Man, merciful to his very beast, 513. Merit-mongers condemned, 269. 412.
Ministers to be active and vigorous in reproof of sin, 544. The Ministers
Calling, to be owned from God, 546. Ministers not to be verbal, but real in
their expressions, 547. A non-resident, sloathfull Minister, worthily
discouraged, 586. The Ministers calling full of labor and toil, 613. Ministers
to preach plainly, as well as learnedly, to the capacity of their Hearers, 281.
The madness of Ministers, Magistrates, etc. not to be guided by that counsel
they give to others, 299. 411. To see a necessitated Minister, is matter of
great grief, 321. How it is, that Ministers, find so little success in
preaching the Gospel, 326. Ministers to be accomptable to God for what they
have received, 337. Ministers not to be afraid of the faces of Men, 59.
Ministers of all Men to be painful in their calling, 219. Ministers, how to
preach profitably, 220. Lewd Ministers, what they are like unto, 221. Ministers
to be encouraged and protected against the plots of wicked Men; and why so?
253. The Ministers duty, 274. Ministers to be painful in the discharge of
their duty, 275. Ministers of Gods Word, to be constant in the preaching
thereof, 276. Ministers, to preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the
discouragements of their Auditory, 457. Ministers to be wise Master Builders,
28. To be Men of knowledge and understanding, 624. Young, raw Ministers,
blameworthy, 30. 513. The Ministers authority to be as much looked on as his
sufficiency, 35. An ill-lived Minister is a scandal to the Gospel, 56. A
fearful Minister is a Soul-murthering Minister, 60. Ministers and Magistrates
to be diligent in in their places, 63. Young Ministers to be well principled,
64. A Minister to be able and well furnished, 64. Ministers to be Men of
merciful dispositions, 76. A Minister is to distinguish his Auditors, 103.
Every Minister to speak a word in season, opportunely, 110. A Minister to be
careful in the delivery of Gods Message, 11. Ministers to cry down the Sins of
the time, 141. Ministers to teach as well the practice as the knowledge of
Religion, 176. The Ministers labor though insuccessefull, yet rewarded by God,
176. To be acquainted with the state of Men's Souls, 517. Ministers to live
according to that doctrine they teach unto others, 189. To be Men of gravity
and experience, 468. The Minister and Magistrate to go hand in hand together,
367. To be Men of courage, 429. Ministers to be of godly lives and
conversations, 421. The painful Ministers joy at the time of his death, 471.
Negligent Ministers advised, 514. Every Minister to keep close to his Text,
525. Ministers, to be as they are called, spirirual Men, 542. To be earnestly
Zealous in the Preaching of Gods Word, 543. A Factious-spirited Man, unfit for
the work of the Ministry, 21. Great safety in attending to the Ministry of the
Word, 205. The honor and dignity of the Ministry, And why so? 212. A wanting
Ministry will soon become a contemptible Ministry, 224. Men of other Callings
not to meddle with that of the Ministry, 239. The least Man in the Ministry,
not to be contemned, 366. Four sorts of Men undertaking the work of the
Ministry, 549. Miracles, why ceased, 39. Popish miracles, condemned, 597.
Moderation little set by, 178. The forerunner of peace, 622. Christian Modesty
commendable, 296. Morning-prayers, commended, 292. Mortalitie's memorandum,
108. 211. The greatest of Men, subjects of Mortality, 123. Mortality of the
sinners life to be considered and deplored, 126. All men and things, subject to
Mortality, 194. Sin mortified, the Devils terror, 2. Mortification of sin,
br^edeth sense of sin, 127. Mortification, the excellency thereof, 391. The
great necessity thereof, 401. A great fault in Mothers, not to nurse their own
children, 426. The greatness of Motherly affection to an only son, 532. Every
Motion toward God, is not a true motion toward God, 16. The godly and
ungodly, their different motions in goodness, 129. Murmuring at Gods doings,
the prejudice thereof, 558. Uncertainty of the Multitude, 36. The inconsiderate
Multitude, 167. The Multitude, not to be guided by them, 426. The Multitude
always desirous of change in government, 467. The Vanity of an unguided
Multitude, 606. The giddy uncertain disposition of the Multitude, 629. Tyranny,
oppression, Murder, etc. not long^ lived, 9.
N.
THe Name of God to be had in reverence, 285. Christians, to walk worthy the
Name of Christ, 599. A good Name once lost, very hardly to be recovered, 137.
Men to stand up for the good Name and credit of their places, 333. The good
Names of Gods people, though now obscured, yet hereafter will be cleared, 371.
The excellency of a good Name, 576. Men to keep up the credit of their proper
Names, 394. Proper Names, not to be so much regarded as Appellative, 475. How
the humane Nature, may in some sort be said to excel the Angelical, 465.
Nature cannot work out peace of Conscience, 566. Our own natural corruption,
the cause of sin, 608. Nature of Man altogether sinful, 19. Sathan's policy to
ensnare us by observance of our Natures, 180. Men, easily drawn by their
Natural corruptions, 295. Men by Nature, desirous of things unlawful and
prohibited, 490. Natural persuasions, the invalidity of them in the point of
true believing, 536. Men by Nature looking more to their bodies then their
Souls, 573. Man by Nature lawless, and ill advised, 623. State of Nature, an
absolute state of impotency, 638. For all its specious outside, a state of
Friendship with Hell, 638. Negligent hearing of Gods Word, condemned, 486. A
negligent Christian, no true Christian, 65. Negligence in the ways of God,
reproved, 394. A good Neighbor, a great blessing to all men, especially to a
Minister of God's V Vord, 6. Every Man to speak truth to his Neighbor, 11. In
the loving our Neighbor, we love God, 91. Every Man to labor that he may be a
New Creature, 313. Daily amendment of life enjoined to the making up of the new
Creature, 382. New Testament, an exposition of the old, 145. Neutrality in
Religion, enmity of Religion, 81. Neutrality in Religion, dangerous, 221.
Reproved, 605. Neutrality in Church or State, condemned, 657. Man's
Nothingnesse, 618. Affectation of Novelty in the ways of Religion, reproved,
591.
O.
Oath, or Covenant-breakers, not to be trusted, 335. Men to be careful how
they make Oath in Judicature, etc. 524. Universal Obedience unto God, enjoined,
551. True obedience, 617. The obstinate Sinner deserving eternity of
punishment; And why so? 12. Occasions of sin, to be avoided, 530. To pass by
the offenses of our brethren, 309. Officers to be honest in their places, 31.
Under-Agents and Officers to be looked unto, 314. Opportunity of sinning to be
avoided, 159. To make good use of Opportunity, 233. Tyranny, Oppression,
murder, etc. are not long-lived, 9. Order both in Church and State commanded
and commended, 101. God bringing Order out of confusion, 274. All out of order,
361. How every good Christian is to order his life, 413. Order to be in the
Church of God, 465. An Orthodoxal Christian has a like esteem of all Gods
Ordinances, 129. To attend upon God in his Ordinances, 321. Lewdn^sse of the
Preachers life, no warrant to slight the Ordinance of preaching, 418. Men, to
be forward in frequenting Gods ordinances, 436. The true love of God will cause
love to his ordinances, 446. Variety of gifts in the Ordinance of preaching,
540.
P
THe differences betwixt Papists and Protestants, not so easily reconciled,
186. The Papists blind Zeal discovered, 189. Papists and Sectarians, abusing
their followers, 316. Pardon of Sins, the only comfort, 110. The readiness of
God to pardon poor Repentants, 325. Gods pardoning other repentant sinners, a
great motive to persuade us, that he will pardon us also, 641. The relation of
Parents, Wife, Children, to be slighted, if they once appear in competition
with the Commandments of God, 603. Though the graces of godly Parents cannot
avail for bad children, yet their good example may, 66. Parents care, only to
enrichtheir Children, reproved, 179. Parents not to be over-carefull to make
their children rich, 252. Parents, to be careful what they say in presence of
their children, 279. Parents, to be careful in the education of their
children, 363. 533. Not to be much dejected for the death of an only son or
child, 408. Parents, not to be forsaken of their children, though they be
wicked and infidels, 449. Parents to show good examples to their children, 471.
How it is, that the sins of Parents are visited on their children, 523.
Parentall counsel has and ought to be prevalent with children, 543. Parity in
the Church or State, not to be admitted, 28. Parsimony in times of public
danger, condemned, 289. To wait with patience Gods leisure, 119. 126. 541. 566.
Patience of God provoked, turns to fury, 125. Gods wisdom to be attended with
patience, 210. To expect the event of things with patience, 248. The height of
Patience, 256. To be patient under Gods afflicting hand; and why so, 287. 557.
To be patient at the time of death, and why so? 560. Men or Women painting
themselves, condemned, 604. It is Peace that sets up Religion, 48. A prudential
piece of State Policy for the continuance of Peace, 330. The people of God to
be at peace one with another, 387. Peace with Men, will make our peace with
God, 17. No Peace to the Wicked, 32. Peace of the Church, precious, 32. The
endeavors of Christ are all for Peace, 98. How it is, that we must follow the
things that make for peace, 363. Not to be at peace with sin, 416. The Saints
everlasting peace, 488. Men to be at peace one with another, 614. Peace linking
the Church and Commonwealth together, 615, The true improvement of Peace, 617.
The Peaceable man's comfort, 4. The peaceable disposition is a God-like
disposition, 24. Magistrates, Ministers, and People, to be peaceably-minded,
138. Man to be peaceable, and why so? 143. Christian perfection to be attained
by degrees, 443. People, to love their Ministers, 416. How it is, that the
people are no competent Judges of the preacher and his doctrine, 337. People to
show love to their Ministers in vindication of their credits, 388. Perjury
attended by Gods Judgments, 277. To be ready to suffer persecution by Christ's
example, 427. Perseverance is the Crown of all good actions, 109. 556. To
persevere in goodness to the end, 272. Perseverance in goodness, enjoined,
559. 672. The Pharisee and the Publican, differenced, 208. Philosophy to be
subservient to Divinity, 57. The downfall of Piety and learning to be deplored,
118. Piety, not promotion, that makes up a godly Minister, 433. Progress in
Piety to be endeavored, 515. 589. Piety and policy, not inconsistent, 589.
Carnal pleasures to be changed into spiritual pleasures, 26. How to take
pleasure safely, 27. The very thoughts of former pleasures add to present
sorrow, 86. Temporal pleasures, a great hinderance to spiritual joys, 87.
Pleasures of the World, counterfeit pleasures, 90. Pleasures here in this life,
usually attended with pains hereafter, 94. How to take our pleasure, and serve
God too, 127. Momentany pleasure attended by sorrow eternal, 168. Pleasures of
sin, the misery of them, 386. Plots and contrivances of the Wicked turning to
the good of Gods people, 553. Worldly policy, not to be prejudicial to the
honor of God, 468. Not to prejudice the truth of a good Conscience, 469. Not
to be in any thing prejudicial to commutative Justice, 470. Policy above
strength, 3. Prudence and Worldly Policy uncertain, 154. The Pope's policy to
advance his Holiness, 177. A prudential piece of State- policy for the
continuance of Peace, 330. Satan's policy in keeping Men off from timely
Repentance, 392. Honesty, the best policy, 679. Politicians spoiled in the
height of wicked designs, 380. The wicked Politician discovered, 583. The
State- Polititian's Religion, 616. The State- Politician siding with all
parties, 616. Charity to the Poor, to be real, not verbal, 8. A poor child of
God comforted with the hopes of Heaven, 13. Alms given to the poor, are the
givers gain, 31. Christ, the poor Man's object as well as the Rich man's, 253.
The persons of poor men, not to be slighted, 474. The poors relief, Heavens
treasure, 495. Rulers, Magistrates, etc. to stand up for the cause of the poor
and needy, 667. Popery, a mere heap of confusion, 441. Popular Government,
popular confusion, 49. Great Men not to depend upon popularity, 50. The vast
difference betwixt Gods and Man's power, 619. How it is, that God is more
powerful then all the Creatures, 623. The benefit of spiritual poverty, 503.
How a Man may be said to pray continually, 25. When it may be said to be the
best time to pray, 516. Men to pray for others as well as for themselves, 541.
Prayer and endeavor, to be joined together, 578. Prayer, the only means to
supply all defects, 272. The danger of distracted prayer, 275. God only
hears and answers the prayers, of his people, 303. Prayer turning Earth
into Heaven, 309. Not the length, but the fervency of Prayer, required, 316.
Sinful prayers, not heard by God, 322. Rash, inconsiderate Prayers, reproved,
521. Prayer, a special prevailing sword, 638. Worldly thoughts in time of
prayer, condemned, 2. Prevalency of servent prayer, 3. The difference betwixt
carnal and spiritual prayer, 5. The blessed Trinity cooperating in the
Righteous man's prayer, 30. Prayers and tears are the weapons of the Church, 52.
Immediate-addresses unto God by prayer find acceptance, 60. Prayers to be made
for all Men, 86. Prayers of a Sin-regarding sinner not heard of God, 86.
Prayers of the godly, the unanimity of them, 109. Prayers not prevailing at
present with God, how to be regulated, 116. The certain prevalency of prayer,
143. The great return of a faithful prayer, 178. The sloathful contractedness
of our prayers unto God, reproved, 184. Gods moderate answer to the prayers of
his people, 186. Neglect of prayer unto God, condemned, 202. Prayers for the
dead, unavailable, 213. Prayers of the Wicked, ineffectual, 218. The great
power of fervent prayer, 219. The Devil most busy in time of prayer, 221.
Drowsinesse in prayer to be avoided, 230. Preaching and prayer to go together,
238. To be fervent in prayer, 252. Prayers to be made unto God in Christ's
Name, 265. To be deliberate in our prayers to God, 269. No comfortable return
of prayer till sin be removed, 411. How to think of God in prayer, 487.
Fervency in prayer, the prevalency thereof, 533. Gods gracious return to his
Peoples prayers in time of their distress, 540. Prayers for others in the same
condition with our selves, prevalent with God, 542. All things come from God,
and therefore to be praised, 181. Ministers to be advised in the profitable
method of Preaching, 381. Men through spiritual pride preferring one Preacher
before another, reproved, 393. Preaching and Prayer to go together, 238. The
sincere Preacher's courage, 228. The sincere Preacher's comfort, 227.
Conscientious Preachers not to be slighted, 207. Rash, inconsiderate
Preaching, condemned, 117. Plain preaching is profitable, 73. Preaching
Tradesmen, preaching-Souldiers, not sent of God, 77. The powerful effect to
Gods Word preached, 152. 178. The great danger of not listening to the Word
preached, 153. The painful Preacher's poverty, the idle Impropriators plenty,
297. How to make a right use of the doctrine of Predestination, 603. God
predestinateth to the means, as well as the end, 627. Magistrates and
Ministers, not to be forward for temporal Preferment, dignity, etc. 88. 654.
Men seeking preferment, not fit to be entertained therein, 578. Preparation to
Religious duties must be free from Worldly distractions, 74. U^preparednesse
for death, very dangerous, 102. Preparation necessary before Prayer, 132.
Public worship of God, not to be entered upon without due Preparation, 314.
The difference of good and bad men in preparation for death, 463. Pride, the
complement of all sins, 107. The vanity thereof, 427. 565. The folly thereof,
572. A main engine of the Devil, 566. The vast difference betwixt Pride and
humility, 567. Pride in Riches, honors, etc. the vanity thereof, 570, 621. In
apparel, condemned, 572. The printing of Learned Men's Works instrumental to
Gods glory, 450. Men to be careful of their Principles in Religion, 495.
Heavenly Principles tend Heavenward, 48. The benefit of keeping close to good
Principles, 203. A Man not well principled in Religion, is unstable in all his
ways, 250. Profit is the Great god of this World, 198. Prosperity attended by
cares and fears, 672. Prosperity of the Wicked, destructive, 31. 98. 191. 217.
Prosperity divides, affliction unites the hearts of Christians, 81. Prosperity
of the wicked, a stumbling block to the Godly, 161. Unhappy prosperity of the
wicked, 301. Uncertain prosperity of the Wicked, 302. 419. Men apt to be
unthankful in time of prosperity, 323. Prosperity will discover what a Man is,
345. Not to be troubled at the prosperity of the Wicked, and why so? 349. 428.
532. Prosperity for the most part draws envy to it, 504. To promise much, and
perform little, reproveable, 240. No promise to be made, but with reference to
Gods will, etc. 320. How to make a right use fo God's promises, 327. Promises
of God, the excellencies and comforts that are to be found in them, 329. Are
for the most part conditional, 491. To be careful of our Vows and promises made
in extremity, 491. The nonperformance of vows and promises, etc. condemned,
615. Promises without ability of performance, not to be regarded, 468. The
great danger of not standing fast in the profession of Religion, 657. Worldly
professors of the Gospel, reproved, 652. The carnal Professor, described, 583.
Men, not to be ashamed of their godly profession, though the wicked speak evil
of them, 641. Profession without practice, not acceptable, 36. 194. 284. Not to
be ashamed of the profession of Christ, 188. Profession to be joined with
practice, 270. Men easily taken off from their holy profession upon removal of
Judgment, condemned, 386. How it is, that there are so many Professors of
Religion, and so few practisers of Religion, 397. The trial of true and false
Professors, 472. Propriety in God, the only comfort, 24. The only comfort of
a Christian is his propriety in God, 72. Men to be provident Christians, 442.
To be provident in the days of trial, 47. The providence of God to be eyed in
all things, 224. 512. God is not to be provoked to anger, 16. The proud Man's
Memento, 565. Men not to be proud of their Lands and Livings, 631. Prudentiall
part of a Man, to do as well as he may, 653. God to be consulted at all times,
but more especially in the beginning of all Public concernments, 9. Public
Men to have public spirits, 32. The proposal of punishments and rewards, very
useful to the bringing in to Christ, 644. Punishments of the Wicked in this
life, nothing in comparison of those in Hell hereafter, 671. The place of
Purgatory, a mere dream, 489. Purity and the heart of Man seldom meet
together, 508.
Q.
THe vanity of needless and intricate Questions, 61. No Quietness in the
Soul, till it come to Christ, 19. The good of Quietness, and evil of
contention, 331.
R.
RAnters, Roaring Boys, their Conversion to be endeavored, 358. The Ranters
Religion, 439. Hell broke loose by swarms of Ranters, 512. How to read with
profit, 235. Reason must submit to Faith, 125. Reconciliation with God in
Christ to be made sure, 290. To be made with all Men, 488. Recreation, the
necessity thereof, 247. Lawful recreation the benefit thereof, 250. The high
price of Man's Redemption, 620. Men to labor that they be regenerated, 614.
Regeneration, the excellency thereof, 611. Carnal, unregenerate Men,
unserviceable in Church o^ State, 534. An unregenerate Man, a careless Man,
135. Regeneration, the necessity thereof, 263. Regeneration, the only work of
Gods Spirit, 264. Corruption of Nature left even in the most Regenerate to
humble them* 355. To rejoice with trembling, 157. No true cause of rejoicing in
this World, 293. Relapses into sin, dangerous, 89. Gods delight in a relapsed
Sinner's repentance, 155. To beware of relapses in sin, 279. A cheap Religion,
the Worldlings best Religion, 42. A cheap Religion, the best Religion with most
Men, 8. Religion and Unity, the only supporters of Church and State, 16.
Protestant Religion, the only comfortable Religion to dye in, 21. Peace sets
up Religion, 48. A seeming Religion, no saving Religion, 61. Not lawful to
fight for Religion, 77. The Christians inside Religion and outside to be all
one, 95. Talk^rs and not doers of Religion, condemned, 98. Religion pretended,
mischief intended, 130. 493. Religion, not Reason, is the square of all good
actions. Englands distractions as to the matter of Religion, 169. Sin attendant
on the best of Religious performances, 170. How to walk circumspectly or
Religiously, 206. Religion wasted by the want of Maintenance, 209. Not to give
occasion that Religion be ill spoken of, 258. Religion consisting in duty both
to God and Man, 398. The way of Religion irksome in the beginning, but
comfortable in the end, 417. Men to be forward in promoting the cause of
Religion, 435. Religion, not to be made a stalking horse to policy, 471.
Satan's aim at those that have most of God and Religion in them, 649. Truth of
Religion lost, as it were, in the crowd of many Religions, 654. Life, lib^rty,
estate, etc. to be undervalued, when Religion is in danger of losing, 658.
Women- Reformers intolerable, 516. Reformation pretended, deformation
intended, 116. Ignorant Reformers, whether in Church or State, reproved, 580.
Knowledge very useful in the matter of Reformation, 4. The Church robbed of her
maintenance upon pretense of Reformation, 17. A bad Reformation of the Church,
is the deformation of the Church, 26. To find out the impediments of Repentance
in our selves, 557. The great danger of Repentance put off till old age, 552.
Repentance not to be put off till old age, 329. 414. 489. The true R^pentant
Sinn^r's encouragement, notwithstanding all his former Wickedness, 349. The
great folly of late Repentance in any thing, 17. 248. What true Repentance is,
29. The time of Repentance not to be deferred, 34. The vanity and danger of
late Repentance, 68. National Judgments call for National Repentance, 68.
Repentance to be Universal, 91. 154. 631. Our whole life to be a life of
Repentance, 95. Seasonable Repentance is safe Repentance, 122. The fruits of
Repentance are to be as well outward as inward, 146. True Repentance will not
admit of any sin, 160. The prevalency of Repentant tears, 167. 446. Christians
not to revile and reproach one another, 445. How to bear the Reproaches of Men,
446. Reproaches, to be born cheerfully, and why so? 447. Reproaches and
sufferings for the Name of Christ, are marks of Salvation, 449. Reproaches and
sufferings made honorable by God, 451. Faults in manners, and errors in
doctrine, to be distinguished in the matter of Reproof, 257. The Ministers
partiality in the reproof of sin, condemned, 262. Reproofs of a Wise Man, not
to be slighted, 523. Ministers to be careful in the reproof of Sinners, 529.
Resurrection of the dead, asserted, 515. Gods i^finite power in the
Resurrection of the body, 14. Resurrection of the body proved by demonstration,
148. The happy meeting both of body and Soul in the Resurrection, 176. The
comfortable Resurrection of Gods poor people, 311. Resurrection of the just,
asserted, 406. Excellency of Resolution in the cause of God, 378. Resolution in
the cause of God, very requisite, 232. The Resolved Christian makes way through
all difficulties, 105. The Resolved Christian, 50. 647. Restitution, the
necessity thereof, 290. Neglect thereof condemned, 479. Revenge above all other
passions is of a growing Nature, 80. Not to be hasty therein, 545. The grand
impostory of pretended Revelations, 476. Reverence to be used in the service of
God, 25. 466. Reverence of Man more then God, a true sign of a decaying State
or Kingdom, 211. Reward of Heaven, will make amends for all, 136. God
regards and rewards his People, 209. God rewarding the least of good done
to his people, 434. Faithful and seeming servants of God, differenced by way of
reward, 461. Certainty of the good Man's reward, 584. God himself, the reward
of all good endeavors, 486. The fullness of reward, reserved till after this
life, 620. The powerful effects of Rhetorical elocution, 109. Gods Rhetoric in
the delivery of the Law, 133. Riches avail not in the day of Wrath, 3. Riches
honors, preferments, etc. transitory, 5. Riches, the deceitfulness of them,
15. Riches have wings, 29. Riches without content, yield no comfort, 54. Riches
oft-times prove pernicious to the owners thereof, 55. Riches without grace
yield no true comfort, 87. Riches are snares, 89. The safest way is to trust
God with our Riches, 95. The Vanity of heaping up Riches, 99. The readiest way
to get Riches, is to trust God for them, 128. The dangerous effects of Riches
being not well used, 131. Riches ill gotten, seldom prosper, 138. 495. How to
use Riches, 192. 590. Riches, honors, etc. the Devil's bayts, 201. Riches ill
gotten, never prosper, 303. Riches, beauty, etc. in comparison of God, are
lying Vanities, 319. How to become true possessors of Riches, 357. A blessed
thing to have Riches, and a heart to use them aright, 377. Riches, the great
danger of them, if not well used, 401. The great danger that attends them, 497.
Very dangerous in getting of them, 583. Riches, honors, etc. the different use
that is made of them, 570. The uncer^ain comfort of Riches, 601. Riches their
uselesnesse in point of calamity, 646. The dangerous use of Riches, 651. Riches
of Christ, inexhaustible, 652. A Rich Man had rather part with God then his
gold, 39. A Rich F^ol described, 71. A vain Rich Man, 125. A Rich Man is Gods
Steward, 129. Rich poor Men, 165. The unprofitable Rich Man, 242. Rich Men, to
consider their beginnings, and be thankful, 334. The wicked Rich Man's sad
condition at the time of death, 376. Rich Men, to be mindful of what they have
received, 456. How to be made truly rich, and truly Honorable, 463. An
uncharitable Rich man, no Heavenly-minded, 482. Better to be honestly, then
hastily rich, 496. A Rich Man pleading poverty, condemned, 531. Riot and
excess, condemned, 291. Rulers and Governors are the supporters of a
Commonwealth, 29. Rulers actions exemplary, 32. Rulers sins hasten the ruin
of a State, 38. A good Prince or Ruler, no advantage to a bad People, 106.
Rulers and Men in Authority, subject to many failings in Government, 405.
Rulers, Magistra^es, etc. to be men of public spirits, 651.
S.
SEven Sacraments of the Papists, not of divine Institution, 27. A special
Sacrament-duty to bless God for Christ's death, 76. Sacramental Bread and Wine,
how better then ordinary, 104. How to receive benefit from the Word and
Sacraments, 149. How to ben^^^t by the Sacraments, 152. Worldly thoughts to be
set aside before the Sacrament, 171. Sacramental Bread and Wine, how
differenced from others, 267. The great danger of Sacrilege, 51. 438.
Sacrilege never thrives, 60. Sacrilege cursed with a curse. 61. Sacrilege
condemned by the example of Cyrus, 70. 588. Sacriledg justly rewarded, to take
heed of it, 311. Sacrilegious persons condemned, 671. The safety of Gods
people, 480. A singular Saint is a precious Saint, 14. Saints in glory, what
they hear and see, 189. Invocation of Saints and Angels, condemned, 554.
Salvation is the Lords, 172. No salvation, but by the mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, 423. Sanctification not perfected all at once, 94. Sanctification not
wrought all at once; And why so, 144. Sanctification wrought by degrees, 181.
The Schismatics abuse of Scripture, 59. The excellency of the Scripture in its
fullness, 70. Scripture-knowledge, the only necessary knowledge, 89. Special
places of Scripture marked with Gods special authority, 103. Harmony of the
Scriptures, 116. The excellent connection of the Scriptures, 138. The holy
Scriptures not to be jested withal, 145. The power of Gods Word, the
Scriptures, 158. How to read the Scriptures and Books Apocryphal, 160. The
Scriptures Rhetoric, 160. Manna, the Heavenly food of Gods Word, how to relish
it, 114. Several varieties to be found in Scripture, 220. The Scriptures are
but a dead letter without the operation of the Spirit, 220. The Papists abuse
of Scripture by Traditions, etc. 223. Scripture-comforts, the only true
comforts, 264. Scripture-knowledge to be put in practice, 266. 283. Excellency
of the Scripture Phrase, 280. The great usefulness of Scripture Phrase, 282.
Scriptures, not to be played withal, 302. True comfort only in the Scriptures,
325. The holy Scriptures to be made the rule of all our actions, 373. To be
valued above all other writings, 436. How it is, that so many deceive
themselves in their not rightly searching the Scriptures, 384. The Scriptures
discovering sin and Satan in their colors, 392. The Scriptures only to be
rested on, 510. The Books of Scripture to be preserved above all other books,
535. To bless God for the revelation of himself in Scripture, 537. To keep
close to the Word of God, especially in troublous times, 549. And in seeking
after Christ, 643. Men and Women, to be knowing in the Scriptures, 605. The
great danger of not keeping close to the Scriptures, 625. The praise-worthiness
of reading and enquiring into Scripture, 653. Scholars not to be unthankful to
the University that bred them, 78. Scholars to mind their books, 40. No
personal Security to be had in the time of public danger, 9. 170. Security in
time of danger, condemned, 101. The great danger of security in times of
danger, 116. God chastises his Childrens security, 142. Carnal security,
reproved, 249. Security, the cause of all calamity, 570. The Secrets of Gods
Couns^ls, not to be pried into, 27. Dangerous to pry into Gods secrets and
Counsels, 162. Not to consult with Gods secrets, but his r^^vealed Word, 335.
Curious inquisitors into Gods secrets, deservedly punished, 554. The Sectarian,
schismatical seducers, to be avoided, 629. Sectarian subti^ty, Diabolical
delusion, 630. The doctrine of seducers, dangerous, 227. Selfishnesse
condemned, 33. Self-praises condemned, 35. Self-examination required, 53.
Self-tryal smooths the way to all other trials, 112. Self-conceited Men,
blameworthy Men, 129. Self-conceitednesse, condemned as dangerous, 151. The
giving up our selves, an acceptable sacrifice unto God, 154. The folly and
danger of self-conceitednesse, 180. The benefit of Self-examination, 207. The
danger of self-confidence, 275. Self-seeking Men, reproved, 277. 375. Men of
self ends, condemned, 278. How it is, that the self-conceited, vainglorious
Man deceives himself, 336. Self-conceitednesse in matters of Religion,
condemned, 340. How far Self-safety may be consulted, 543. Self-denial, the
excellency thereof, 635. No Man a loser by giving himself up to God, 645. Men
to be careful in the choice of servants, 483. God hardly accepting of late
service done him, And why so? 678. Men created for the service of God, 652.
Backwardness in the service of God, reproved, 398. No worldly thing must
hinder the service of God, 575. How it is that Men fail so much in the service
of God, 626. Service performed unto God, must be personal, 589. Service to God
must be like Himself, 58. Rash, inconsiderate service of God, condemned, 340.
Service of God is persect freedom, 378. The Ministers repetition in Sermons,
warrantable, 82. The difference betwixt Sermons preached, and Sermons printed,
110. 639. A Sermon preached many years before, may be the means of Salvation
many years after, 115. A good Sermon not to be so much questioned, as
practiced, 183. A Sermon not done, till it be practiced, 253. How to recover
spiritual sight, 82. Sickness, immediately inflicted by God, 506. Commendable
Silence, 332. 668. The Silent Christian, is the sound Christian, 23. Silence in
the cause of Gods honor, condemned, 478. The Simonist, discovered, 627.
Slandering of our brother, the danger thereof, 134. Slanders of Wicked Men, not
to be regarded, 238. Slanderers discovered, 286. Not to be ^econciled to God
before we sleep, is very dangerous, 83. The great danger of sleeping out
Sermons, 552. The sloathfull Christian, described, 217. Sloathful^esse, and
luke-warmnesse in Religion, forerunners of evil to come, 334. Spiritual
sloth in the ways of God, reproved, 398. Man to be a sociable, communicative
Creature, 316. The different conditions of Men in the matter of Society laid
open, 337. The sincere, upright man, described, 604. The scarci^y of such, 612.
How to deal with sin, being once committed, 603. Wherein the poysonfull nature
of Sin consists, 608. Sins lethargy, 629. Sin, to be removed as the cause of
all sorrow, 636. Sin, the godly Man's hatred thereof, 642. The woeful
gradation of Sin, 659. The best of Men, not free from sin in this life, 470.
548. Sin of the meanest Man in a Nation, may be the destruction of it, 509. The
extreme folly of Sin, 510. Sin may be excused here in this World, but not
hereafter, 514. Insensibility of Sin, the sadness thereof, 521. Sin in its
original, easy to be found, 582. How sins may be said to ou^-live the Sinner,
585. Sin, the strange nature thereof, 596. All Sin m^st be hated, and why so?
598. God, not the author of Sin, 599. How it is, that the singling out of one
beloved Sin, makes way to a full sight of all sin, 351. Sin, committed with
deliberation, premeditation, etc. greatly provokes the Holy Spirit of God,
353. To take heed of smaller sins, as bringing on greater, 354. 649. Men
covering their Sins with specious pretenses, reproved, 361. To beware of masked
specious sins, 368. Beloved Sins, hardly parted withal, 376. When it is, that
a Man is said thoroughly to forsake his Sin, 391. Men deluded by Satan in not
taking the right notion of Sin, 395. Every Man to confess, that his own Sin is
the cause, though not always the occasion of punishment, 421. New inventions of
Sin, condemned, 453. The great danger of living in any one known sin, 456. Sin
unrepented of, heavy upon the Soul at the time of death, 456. Consideration of
our secret sins, a motive to compassionate others, 457. No Man able to free
himself from Sin, 240. The great danger of sleighting the least Sin, 256. 597.
Sin not consented unto, excusable before God, 271. Sins of infirmity, how to be
known from other sins, 273. Great Sins attended by great Judgments, 286. Sin,
of a destructive Nature, 288. 531. 607. To be affected with the falling of
others into Sin, 296. The great danger of Sin, unrepented of, 298. How it is,
that every Man has one darling- sin or other, 327. The distemper of Sin, not
easily cured, 332. Godly and wicked Men, their difference in the ha^red of Sin,
350. The more a Man is now troubled for Sin, the less shall he be troubled
hereafter; and why so? 350. The sad condition of adding Sin to sin, 237.
The least of Sins to be prevented, 46. 593. Sin to be renounced as the cause
of Christ's death, 59. 649. Sin only is the godly Man's terror, 132. Sins of
Infirmity in the best of Gods Children, 143. Sin overthrowes all, 1^7. The
retaining of one Sin, spoyleth a great deal of good in the Soul, 149. One Sin
never goes alone, 172. Strange Sins, strange punishments, 183. Not to be in
love with sin, 199. One foul sin spoyleth a great deal of Grace, 203. When sins
are at the height, they come to destruction, 205. The great danger of little
sins, 218. 367. 659. The sense of sin, is from God only, 221. Sin, of a
dangerous spreading nature, 415. How it is, that one Man may be said to be
punished for another Ma^^ sin, 419. Sin, to be looked on as the cause of all
sorrow, 464. The slavery of Sin to be avoided, 499. 625. Sin to be looked on
as it is fierce and cruel, 535. Sin, and the Sinner, very hardly parted, 536.
Some one sinful quality or other, predominant, 548. The great danger and guilt
of lying under the guilt of any one eminent sin, 600. The sinsulnesse of sin,
601. As to beware of all sins, so of beloved sins, 602. The growth of Sin to be
prevented, 10. How Sin is made the prevention of Sin, 39. Sin trampleth on
Christ, 50. Little Sins, if not prevented, bring on great^r to the ruin of the
Soul, 56. Sense of Sin, is an entrance to the s^ate of Grace, 56. Impossible
for a Man to know all his sins, 57. The difference of Sins as they are Men
regenerate, and unregenerate, 60. The weight of Sin to be seriously peysed, 77.
Remembrance of sins past, the only way to prevent sins to come, 83. Relapses
into sin dangerous, 89. Every impenitent Sinner is his own tormentor, 50. A
sinful Man is a senseless Man, 80. The Sinners estate miserable, 89. A
graceless Sinner will continue to be a sinner still, 92. The wrath o^ God best
appeased, when the Sinner appear^th with Christ in his arms, 99. The Devils
charge, and the Sinners dis^harge, 131. The Sinner's Meme^to, 204. Desperate
madness, 639. The Sinner's security, 216. God's acceptance of Sinners through
Christ, 217. The incorrigible Sinner's stupidity, 264. His desperate condition,
590. The secure, carel^sse Sinner, 509. Sinners crucifying the Lord of life
daily, 537. The Devil's hard dealing with the ensnared Sinner, 594. How the
wounded Sinner is to be cured, 595. An ungrations Son not worthy to be his
Fathers heir, 40. The excellency of Sunday, or Lords Day, above other days,
539. To be more strict in the holy observation of Sunday or Sabbath, then
heretof^re; And why so 540. Sorrows of this life, not comparable to the joys
of another, 162. The best improvement of Worldly sorrow, 185. Sorrow that is
true, is for the most part silent, 293. The excellency of godly sorrow for
Sin, 362. For a Man to be sorry, that he cannot be sorry for sin, is a part
of godly Sorrow for sin, 519. The least proportion of godly sorrow for sin,
accepted by God, 520. Sorrow for sin must be in particulars, 559. Must be
proportionable, 560. Other men's sins, are the good man's sorrow, 581. A mere
Soldier, an enemy to peace, 107. The truly noble Soldier, 336. The Soul^ier's
Calling, honorable, 415. Wherei^ the true valor of a Captain or Soldier in
War consists, 544. The devout Soul will admit of none but Christ, 10. More
care for the body then the Soul, condemned, 11. No quietness in the Soul till
it come to Christ, 19. If the Soul be safe, all is safe, 42. The Souls
comfortable Union with Christ, 44. How the Soul lives in Christ only, 44. The
Souls sleighting of Christ offering mercies, condemned. 37. The winning of a
Soul unto God, very acceptable unto God, 153. The health of the Soul, is the
true health of the body, 162. To be careful for the Souls good, 182. To take
especial care for the Souls safety, 348. 458. Men living as though they had not
Souls to save, reproved, 368. How it is that Soul and body come to be both
punished together, 377. 675. The captivated Soul restless till it be in Christ
Jesus, 415, 420. The Souls comfortable enjoyment of Christ, 419. The Soul of
Man, precious in the sight of God, 462. Excellency of the Soul of Man, 502. A
foul polluted Soul, the object of Gods hatred, 503. The high price of the Soul,
503. The folly of Men in parting with their Souls for trifles, 504. The Soul,
not to be starved in the want of means, 506. The Souls safety, and danger, 506.
To be careful in the keeping and presenting our Souls clean at the time of
death, 514. Neglect of the Soul, reproved, 528. 666. To be much more careful of
the Soul then body, 555. Men to set an high value on their Souls, 566. Christ,
the proper object of the Soul, 648. The welfare of the Soul, to be preferred
before any Worldly enjoyment whatsoever, 668. How the Spirit is said to be
quenched in our selves, and in others, 18. Every Man, haunted with one evil
spirit or other, 208. The silent coming of Gods Spirit into the heart of Man,
215. The blessed guidance of Gods holy Spirit, to be implored, 322. A reprobate
and regenerate Man, their different enjoyment of the motions of the holy
Spirit, 353. The motions of the Spirit in wicked Men tend only to outward
formality, 354. How it is to be understood, that the holy Spirit dwells in
us, 354. The comfortable art of spiritualizing the several occurrences of the
World, and observing Gods providence therein, 343. The supernatural workings
of the Spirit, 632. How to demean our selves after we are sealed by the Spirit,
667. The danger of Stage Plays, 197. The lawfulness of Stage Player,
questioned, 274. The sins of swearing and blasphemy, the commonnesse of them,
122. Gods goodness to us, to be a motive from vain- swearing, 451. To su^^er
any thing for the cause of Christ, 633. Men to prefer suffering before sinning,
650.
T.
A Man full of Talk, full of Vanity, 235. Dangerous to be seduced by false
Teachers, 64. More Teachers then Learners, 428. Repentant tears purging the
heart from pollutions of sin, 295. The condition of Temporizers, 25. The
Temporiser, described, 93. Temperance cannot preserve a Man's life, when God
calls for it, 171. To be temperate in meat and drink, 429. An idle Man subject
to the least Temptation, 7. No Man free from Temptations, 373: Sathan's
subtilty in laying his Temptations, 377. Temptations from within and without,
how to be dealt withal, 672. Real Thanksgiving to be made unto God for
benefits, 553. How to be truly thankful unto God, 448. Impossible but that a
true Christian will be a thankful Christian, 21. Gods goodness satisfied with
Man's thankful^esse, 37. The not returning thanks for Grace received, is the
ready way to be graceless, 83. To be thankful unto God at all times,
especially in the time of Prosperity, 181. Gods goodness ought to procure Man's
thankfulness, 183. To be thankful unto God in all Conditions, 201. 225. 468.
The true cause of Christian thankfulness, 277. Good Christians are always
thankful unto God, 279. To commit our selves to God in all things, and to be
thankful to his holy Name, 331. Men to be thankful for the little strength of
Grace that God affords, 371. Wo^ldly thoughts and distractions in the time of
Prayer, condemned, 2. How to discover our thoughts in preparation to Prayer,
556. The very thoughts of former pleasures, add to pre^ent sorrows, 86. The
misgiving thoughts of a Worldly-minded man, in reference to the enjoyments of
Heaven, 458. How the Devil is said to know our thoughts, 461. Wicked thoughts,
to be carefully washed off from the heart, 620. God's time the best time for
deliverance, 5. Time to be well u^ed, 18. Shortness of Time, will not admit of
long discourse, 40. Time well spent, 120. Time ill-spent, 128. No time to be
misspent, 587. Not to make use of the present Time, dangerous, 133. Gods time
the best time, 140. Time to be well husbanded, 161. 270. Multitudes of
Time-servers, 200. Time present, to be well husbanded, 210. To take time while
time serves, 244. The least moment of time cannot be assured, 250. Present
occasion of time to be made use of, 358. 369. Time misspent, to be carefully
redeemed, 438. 664. How it is that a prudent Man may lawfully comply with the
times, 335. Government of the Tongue required, 22. 372. An ill Tongue never
speaks well of any one, 55. Tongue prayer, not the only prayer, 64. Study of
the learned Tongues, to be encouraged, 99. A Tongue nimble to evil, slow to
goodness, reproveable, 103. Government of the Tongue, commendable, 146. The
Tongue is the hearts interpreter, 205. The original and excellency of the
Hebrew tongue, 403. The tongue for the most part, a mischievous member, 440. To
be careful how we come under the reviling of an evil tongue, 444. Men to be as
well industrious in their trades, and Callings, as zealous in their devotions,
539. Every Man to follow his own Trade, 84. 33. Diligence in Trades and
callings, required, 139. Trades and Occupations, the Wisdom of our Forefathers
in the invention and keeping them up, 308. The poorest Man in his Trade or
calling, may do very good service unto God, 423. Deceit in Trade and commerce,
condemned, 455. The danger of loose travel into foreign parts, 156. The just
reward of Treachery and false dealing, 304. One God and three Persons in the
Trinity, faintly demonstrated, 46. The blessed Trinity cooperating in the
Righteous man's prayer, 30. The my^^ery of the blessed Trinity, unconceiveable,
286. Shadowed out in familiar resemblances, 462. Many are the Troubles of the
Righteous, 67. Troubles not so much to be questioned, how we came into them, as
how to get out of them, 79. The Souls breathing after Christ in time of
trouble, 186. Faith in Christ, the only support in time of trouble, 194. Easy
to come into trouble, hard to get out, 204. Men not to run themselves into
trouble, 246. Troubles and vexations of spirit, not to be allayed by wrong
means and ways, 345. God only to be sought unto for safety in time of
trouble, 360. Why God suffers his Children to be in want and trouble, 493.
Times of trouble and danger distinguishing true Prof^ssors from false ones,
562. To depend upon Gods All Sufficiency in time of trouble, 676. The danger of
trusting to Worldly greatness, 6. To take heed whom we trust, 82. To trust
God, who is the great Lord Pro^^ctor of ^is people, 190. To trust in God only,
255. 623. God only to be trusted unto in time of distress, 622. What it is to
trust in God really and truly, 643. Man, not to be trusted unto, 660. Every Man
to speak Truth to his Neighbor, 11. Truth seek no corners, 140. Ministers to
stand up for the Truth, 147. Truth beloved in the general, but not in
particular, 243. The telling of truth begets hatred, 245. Men of all sorts of
stand up for the Truth, 246. God fetching testimonies of Truth out of the very
mouths of his Adversaries, 498. Truth commended, Falsehood condemned, 588. How
it is, that Truth does not always appear, 674. Tyranny, oppression, murder,
etc. are not long-lived, 9. The sad condition of people under Tyrannical
Government, 310. Tyrants, Infidels, etc. forced to acknowledge God, 583. Tyrants
raising themselves by a seeming compliance with the People, 617. How it is that
Tyrants are usually long-lived, 2. The policy of Tyrants, in doing many good
things for the public, 233.
V.
Vainglory, remedy against it, 314. The Uncertainty of temporal Victories and
success, 489. The convenience of Virginity, 142. Prayers of the godly, the
Unanimity of them, 109. Unanimity, the excellency thereof, 402. The
Uncharitable Christian, described, 600. The Devils endeavor to darken the
Understanding, 131. Not to be children in Understanding, 165. The Souls
comfortable Union with Christ, 44. The great mystery of the Hypostatical Union
in Christ shadowed out, etc. 333. The Union and Fellowship of Gods Children,
etc. 499. Religion and Unity, the only supporters of Church and State, 16. The
excellency of Unity in Church and Commonwealth, 401. Unlawful things, not to
be asked of God in prayer, 561. God's goodness, Man's Unthankfullnesse, 596.
Christians, not to upbraid, and revile one another, 445. The great danger of
use and custom in jesting at Religion and Piety, 378. The biting Usurer
described, 682. The griping Usurer and his Broker, characterised, 329. The
griping Usurer and the Devil compared together, 580. The fad condition of
borrowing upon Usury, 598.
W.
THe sword of War, impartial, 452. The compleatest armed Man of War, naked
without God, etc. 305. The direful effects of War, 81. The event of War,
uncertain, 166. The rage of War, in the richest Countries, 647. Watchfulness
of life, rewarded, 249. Christian watchfulness enjoined, 530. God gives
warning before he smites, 192. How to prevent wavering-mindednesse, 179. Gods
Way, the safe Way to walk in, 5. The Way to God, crosse-way to the World, 100.
The difference betwixt a spiritual and worldly Man in the ways of God and
goodness, 362. Non-proficiency in the ways of God and Religion, condemned,
560. Though a weak Christian, yet a true Christian, 42. Strange Women, Harlots,
etc. the Devil's night-net to ensnare Men, 208. Laughter of the Wicked is but
from the teeth outward, 52. God suffers wicked Men to torment his People, 161.
The Wicked-worker hat^th the light, 172. Wicked Men, instrumental for the good
of Gods children, 201. A wicked life has usually a wicked end, 244. Wicked
Men, made by God isntrumental for the good of his People, 418. Every wicked
Man, a curse to the place he lives in, 42^. The implacable malice of wicked Men
against prof^ssors of the Gospel, 426. Cruelty of the wicked, no prejudice to
the godly, 524. How it is that wicked Men are said to be none of Gods Children,
561. Wicked Men see the miseries, but not the joys of Gods people, 631. The
Magistrate and Ministers duty in suppressing Wickedness and Vice, 614. A Wife
and no Wife, 606. To be careful in the choice of a Wife, 18. The Wi^e to be
subject to her husband, 130* 480. Every Man to think the best of his own Wife,
427. A Wife to be an House-wife, 432. Folly to repent the choice of Wife,
marriage being past, 529. Wives to love their husbands cordially, 479. God
only able to work Man to will and to do, 569. To rest contented with Gods good
Will and pleasure, 422. 584. To regulate our Wills by Gods Will, 342.
Submission to the ^ill of God in all things, e^joyned, 323. The way to have our
Will, is to be subject to Gods, Will, 65. God accepts the Will for the deed,
81. To submit to Gods Will in all things, 152. 665. God wills not the death of
a Sinner, 203. How God may be said to will and nill the death of a Sinner, 291.
Wit, how to make a right use thereof, 579. Wisdom of Christ above all other
Wisdom, even to admiration, 102. Wisdom of the World proves solly, 163. A Man
to be wise for himself, as well as for others, 287. Every Man to be wise for
himself, as well as others, 388. Wisdom, how to be regulated, 591. Good Works
are not the cause, but the way to true happiness, 78. Not to talk of our good
Works, or deeds, 233. Works of Mercy, very rare to be found amongst us, 306.
Men of few, and men of many words, their differ^nce, 522. The vanity of using
many words, 521. To depend upon Gods bare Word, 407. Swelling big words of
wicked Men, not to be regarded, 278. Riches cannot follow us out of this World,
6. Gods favor above the Worlds con^^ntments to a godly Man, 7. The things of
this World, a great stop in the way to Heaven, 11. The true Christian takes no
comfort in this World, 19. The World like a Fisher-mans net, 22. The works of
God in the Creation of the World, are to and beyond all admiration, 53. The
Worlds dangerous allurements, 70. In getting the things of this World, Gods way
the best way, 124. How to use the things of this World, 134. 500. The Worlds
opposition, no obstacle to a child of God, 164. Gods people meet with many
discouragements in the world, 191. Love of the World, enmity to God, 223. A
Child of God, preserved by God, though never so much slighted by the World,
259. The World to be contemned in regard of Heaven, 296. Why God suffers the
dearest of this Children to want the outward things of this World, 301. How it
is, that at the second coming of Christ to Judgment, the frame of the World
shall not be consumed, but repaired new, 338. Not to grieve, or be troubled at
the Worlds discourtesies; and why so? 342. The things of this World vain and
uncertain, 358, 459. The Worlds deceitfulness, 477. Not to be trusted unto,
544. Things of the World not to be so highly prised, 494. How the Devil makes
use of the World to destroy Man, 592. Men, not easily brought to believe the
Worlds vanity, 664. A Worldly-minded Man speaks of nothing but worldly
things, 69. Submission to the wisdom of God as concerning Worldly outward
things, required, 87. Worldly things dispensed by God in Wisdom, 89. Worldly
Men look after Worldly things, 108. The danger of VVorldly-mindednesse, 155.
The competency of Worldly things, the best estate, 165. A Worldly-minded Man,
no publique-spirited Man, 210. Worldly-Men easily taken off from the service of
God, 211. A Worldly-minded Man, no Heavenly-minded Man, 218. The secure
Worldlings sudden ruin, 259. Worldly things cannot really help us, 267.
Worldly things, their sudden downfall, 268. The sad condition of
Worldly-minded Men at the time of death, 314. Worldly-mindednesse, a great
hindrance to the comfortable enjoyment of spiritual graces, 351.
Worldly-crosses turned into spiritual advantages, 357. All Worldly things,
transitory, 357. The inconstancy of them, 497. The Worldling's inordinate
desires, and why so, 367. The emptiness of all Worldly delights without
Christ, 387. Men seeking after the vanity of Worldly things, reproved, 393. The
vanity of Worldly temporal things compared with those eternal, 439. The wicked
Man's folly in his Worldly choice, 479. The Worldling's woe, and the Just Man's
joy at the time of death, 517. No true joy in Worldly things, 518. The
uncertainty of Worldly things, 529. How the vanity of Worldly things may be
easily discerned, 530. The moderate use of VVorldly things, 558. Worldly
honors and greatness, their vanity to be considered, 571. Men in the midst of
their worldly contrivances, prevented by death, 646. Worldly-minded men little
think of Heaven; and why so, 663. The vanity of Worldly greatness, 667. The
danger of trusting to Worldly greatness in time of distress, 6. Dullness and
drowsinesse in the service or Worship of God, reproved, 173. The anger or Wrath
of God best appeased, when the Sinner appears with Christ in his arms, 99.
Y.
THe folly of Youth discovered and reproved, 187. The time of Youth to be given
up to God, 250. Youth to be catechized, 422. Youth to be seasoned with grace,
not giving the least way to the Devil, 507.
Z.
ZEal and Knowledge must go hand in hand together, 15. Zeal in Gods, service,
made the Worlds derision, 51. Zeal Anabaptistical, condemned, 179. Preposterous
Zeal reproved, 197. Want of Zeal in the Cause of God, reproved, 251. Men, to be
Zealous in God's Cause, 252. To be Zealous for the honor of Jesus Christ, as
he is the eternal Son of God, 379. The danger of immoderate Zeal against those
of another Judgment; And how so, 385. The Zeal of Heathens of their false gods,
condemning that of Christians to their true God, 411.

