A TREATISE CONCERNING THE LAWFVLL SVBIECT OF BAPTISM.

Wherein are handled these Particulars; The Baptizing of Infants confuted; and
the Grounds to prove the same answered. The Covenant God made with Abraham and
his seed handled, and how the same agrees with the Gentiles and their seed. The
Baptism administered by an Antichristian Power confuted, as no Ordinance of
God, and the Grounds to prove the same answered. If either Church, or Ordinance
be wanting, where they are to be found, and how recovered. The Covenant and not
Baptism forms the Church, and the manner how. There is no succession under
the New Testament, but what is spiritually by faith in the Word of God.


With some other things examined, and briefly discoursed.

By me J. S.

Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them,

Mat. 28.19. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved,

Mark. 16.16. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body,

1 Cor. 12.13. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good,

1 These. 5.21. Lord God the strength of my salvation, cover thou my head in the
day of battle,

Psalm. 140.7. LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1643.

The Epistle to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, have a favorable construction of my so bold attempt, of so
great a work, upon such weak ability, which may possibly seem to savor as
deeply of pride to some, as David's undertaking the challenge of Goliath did to
his brother Eliab, 1 Samuel 17.28. But I am contented to walk naked before the
world, and to under go the censure of men, to perform any service to God, or
his people.

The occasion that pressed me on chiefly to this work, was by reason of some
godly persons, whose consciences were scrupled about the baptizing of children
before they came to know what they do in the same; and others coming to hear
of it, did much insult upon them, in a reproachful manner, with much reviling
and despising of them; as I understood by a Letter received from them; and did
as it were make a challenge upon them, with certain Reasons and Arguments,
gathered up against them. Upon which occasion the said Reasons and Arguments
were sent to me from beyond the Seas to be answered, and pressed me with Letter
after Letter to the same, which at length I intended to do, only in a private
way, until some here at home had published their evil affections in a
reproachful manner; casting such unseemly aspersions upon the truth of God,
and godly persons for the truths sake, to make the same hateful in the eyes of
all men, in what them lies. And others also in resemblance of the truth, going
on in such a confused way, both in respect of corrupt doctrine, and as bad
order; by reason of which disorder, the blessed name of God, and his holy truth
are exposed unto much suffiring. And thus the glory of God, and the honor of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, lying as it were at the stake; and his people
grieving and suffering together with the same. I thought in such a case that I
was bound in conscience to come forth to the help of the Lord against the
mighty; and to free my self from the sin of withholding the truth in
unrighteousness; and according to that ability Christ bath given, to speak a
word in the defense of his blessed truth, against those ungodly aspersions cast
upon the same.

And thus having showed my courteous Reader, the grounds forcing me to attempt
so great a work with so weak mean^^, I trust he will sparingly consider,
rather then rashly censure, as the manner of too many is. And to judge as he
would be judged, remembering there is a righteous Judge, before whom we must
all appear, and give account every one for himself, as Romans 14.10.12. 2 Cor.
5.10. The subject controverted in the following Treatise, one part of it is
about Infants Baptism. And whereas I oppose the same as an unwritten tradition,
yet I would not be understood that I oppose Infants, in respect of either their
persons, or age, or salvation it self, between God and them invisibly, but
honor them with all natural respects, desiring their safety and well-being
here, and glory here after; but what their estate is in respect of grace, that
I do not know, but as the same appears by some effect of faith; until which
time, as I condemn none, no more dare I justify all, but leave them all unto
the good pleasure of God, that only knows who are his. And this I believe,
that God of his mere grace, before the world was, did elect and choose a
number in Christ to salvation. All which shall unavoydably come to glory, as
Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.30. But who these be, that I do not know, until God reveals
the same by some effect of his grace appearing in them. And all that I intend
by opposing Infants Baptism, is but only to forbear a while and wait upon
God in the use of means, until faith appears to meet with God in his holy
Ordinance, without which the same is void and of no effect; but profaned, God
provoked, and the party endangered. Friend, how came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment, take him, etc. Mat. 22.12, 13. And also that Baptism
administered in an Antichristian Church, and by the same power, is no ordinance
of God; so that all such so baptized, are to submit to the Lords ordinance of
Baptism, whenever God calls them to believe and receive the Gospel. And yet
not holding any rebaptizing; for he that is once baptized with the Lords true
Baptism, he needs no more. Nor yet a new way of baptizing, as some to please
themselves so call it; but only that good old way, which John the Baptist,
Christ and his Apostles walked in before us; and left the same as a Rule under
command in the holy Scriptures, for such as will be followers of them to walk
by.

And as it is recorded by the holy Ghost in the Scriptures of God; even so it
is the judgment of the most and best learned in the Land, so far as I have
seen, or can come by any of their writings. As in all the common Dictionaries,
which with one joint consent affirm, that the word Baptism or Bapti^o, being
the original word, signifies to dipp, wash, or to plunge one into the water;
though some please to mock and deride, by calling it a new found way, Yet truth
was before error.
and what they please. Indeed it is a new found truth, in opposition to an old
grown error; and so it is a new thing to such, as the Apostles Doctrine was
to the Athenians, Act. 17.19. But this being no part of the following
Discourse, I shall leave it, and turn such so mocking over to consider of
these Scriptures, Isa. 28.22. Pro. 17.5. Isa. 57.4. Act. 17.32. Heb. 11.36.
Jude 18. and Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4.29. and I doubt not but the wise hearted
Reader will thy and examine things of so high a nature by the Word of God, and
not to build upon dark unsound consequences, and false inferences, and lay by
the plain testimony of Scripture, that must decide all doubts and
controversies in matters of Religion.

For sure I am, there is neither command, nor example in all the New Testament,
for any such practice, as I know, and whatsoever is done in the worship of God,
or obedience to Christ, without his command, or apparent example approved of by
Christ, is of man, as a voluntary will worship, Col. 2 20, 21, 22. Mark. 7.7, 8.
after the commandments and doctrines of men; the which Christ testifies
against as a vain thing. This way the Gentiles are more forward in, then ever
the Jews were; and more bitter against such that do oppose their traditions,
then ever they were.

And therefore I beseech thee, Good Reader, beware of opposing the Gospel, and
Christ's holy order in the same. Romans 11.
For which thing God fell out with his ancient people the Jews, and threatens
to make the Gentiles drink of the same cup, if they oppose the power and
authority of his Son Jesus Christ, as they did: and do not the Gentiles
this? Yea, and much more then ever the Jews did.

The Gentiles are set forth in Scripture to be the greatest enemies that Christ
and his Gospel has in the world; Psalm. 2. Ezekiel. 38. Rev. 20.8, 9. Rev.
9.1-11. Rev. 12.4. Rev. 13.1, 2. Rev. 17.13, 14.17. Rev 11.2. Rev. 11.8. Rev.
17.17 Rev. 11.2. Luke 21, 24 Rom ^ 11.20, 21, 22.
for they rage, and bend up their forces against Christ, and his people: and
the Gentiles they compass the Camp of the Saints to devour them. Of them is
the bottomless pit, out of which come the Locusts, with a King over them: and
of them is the blouddie Dragon that stands against the Church, to suppress and
devour Christ's holy order, and Government, and her subjection to the same. Of
the Gentiles rises that beastly State, with which the Kings of the earth join
their powers, against Christ's Kingly power and Subjects, and they tread
underfoote the holy City. Not the earthly City Jerusalem, as some weakly
affirm, but the holy and heavenly order of the Gospel, and the true Subjects
thereof. The Gentiles Crucify Christ in his mystical body, which is more then
to slay him in his humane body.

There is a time set for the long suffering of God toward the Gentiles: Which
time being once expired, God will have as strict account of the Gentiles, as
ever he took of the Jews. Which day shall be as black and dark over the
Gentiles, as ever it has been to the Jews. And more in that their sin has
been greater against grace, Christ, and his members, by many degrees then ever
the Jews were. And therefore woe woe unto the Gentiles, because the day of
their account draws near. Therefore good Christian Reader, be well advised,
and do not take part with any that shall oppose Christ in his sweet and comely
order among his Saints, and kingly Government over his Subjects. We see by
apparent example, how dangerous a thing it is to oppose Kings; but Christ is
the King of Kings; therefore kiss the Son, least he be angry, Psalm. 2.12.

JOHN SPILSBERY.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THE SVBIECT OF BAPTISM. Wherein is handled, and also
disproved, Infants Baptism. The Covenant God made with Abraham, and his seed,
Genesis 17. And how the same agrees with Believers, and their seed, under the New
Testament, with the Privileges thereof. The Baptism administered by a false
Antichristian Power, no Ordinance of GOD. The orderly constitution of both
Church and Ordinance. With many other things briefly handled.
FOR a more orderly proceeding in the following Discourse, I shall first lay
down the Arguments and Objections, and then give Answer to the same. And for
some things in the beginning, I shall pass over briefly, they not much
concerning the point in hand. As the Scriptures being a perfect rule of all
things, both for faith and order; this I confess is a truth. And for the just
and true consequence of Scripture, I do not deny; and the covenant of life
lying between God and Christ for all his Elect, I do not oppose: and that the
outward profession of the said Covenant, has differed under several Periods,
I shall not deny: and of the Scriptures speaking of the disanulling and
abolishing the old Covenant and making a new, is to be understood of the Period
from Moses to Christ, and not of that from Abraham to Moses. This also in part
I confess, but not the whole; because that the abolishing of the old Covenant
or Testament, reached unto all that outward for me of worship, under any type
or shadow, by which the people professed their faith and obedience to God.

So that the abolishing of types and shadows, must reach so far as any types
and shadows were, and that was unto Circumcision it self: unto Abraham's
Period; and beyond; even to all those sacrifices in any part of the old
Testament, wherein God testified his pleasure unto his people in any dark and
typical way, or they their faith and obedience to him by the same.

So that the opposition the Scripture holds forth between Covenant and
Covenant, is between Testament and Testament, with reference to the order and
form of profession thereof. But I leave this as little concerning the matter
in hand, and come to that which follows. And the first to any purpose is laid
down thus.

That children are capable of the Spirit of God, and of the grace of the
Covenant, and whatsoever men of years are capable of, though not wrought in
the same way, and by the same means, yet the same things, and by the same
Spirit, so far as is necessary to union with Christ, and justification to
life thereby: else children were not elected, or raised up again in their
bodies, and be saved; nor yet the judgment we can have of men of years be
infallible, but we may be mistaken, as in the case of Simon Magus, and others
in the like nature.

In answer to this, by children, because the Scriptures speak of children in a
several respect.

If such children as the Scriptures call so, through weakness in the faith, as
Mar. 18.6. 1 John 2.12, 13. 1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.13.

Now if such children as these, then I confess, that such are capable of the
Spirit of God, and so of the rest, as aforesaid.

But if by children be meant of infants, then we are to consider what is meant
by capablenesse of the Spirit, the grace of the Covenant, and the rest. If
capable of the Spirit, so as opposed to the power of the Spirit to work upon
them, so is a stone as well as a man, as Mat. 3.9.

But if capable to comply with the Spirit, in hearing, receiving, and believing
the Spirits testimony; and so of Regeneration, faith, and repentance, etc. This
I shall deny, until some proof be produced from the Word of God for the same.

And to affirm this to be Gods way to brings persons to the faith, by working
so upon them by his Spirit in their infancy, argues some ignorance of the true
nature and work of grace, as the Gospel holds it forth.

And to be capable of the grace of the Covenant, which must be understood of
the promise containing the blessings and privileges thereof, in the holy
dispensations of the same.

We shall find in the Scriptures of God, all the sweet promises of Grace under
the New Testament, holding forth their blessings, and blessed privileges only
to such as believe. And that to the Elect themselves, as they are considered in
Christ, and appear so by some effect of grace, declaring their faith, and they
to be such as God approves of in his Son, and so to have visible right to
those privileges they are visibly justified by, and possessed in, as such that
have a visible right unto the same. Which can come to us Gentiles no other way
then by Christ, and faith in his Name.

And if any shall object from the testimony of John the Baptist, that he is
said to be filled with the holy Ghost from his Mothers womb, Luke 1.15.
etc. and hence conclude, that Infants may have faith.

To this I answer in a word; John is said to be, which is another thing then to
believe; as Act. 6 5. and 4 31.

Secondly, All such so testified of by God, as he did of John, I shall
acknowledge as much as is here meant to be in him, to be also in them so
testified of by the holy Ghost. But to affirm, because God so testified of
John the Baptist in the womb, therefore the same holds true upon all other
Infants likewise. This is indeed weaker then infancy so to affirm, Job. 31.18.
and grosser then ignorance for any to believe. Job is said to be a Guide to
the distressed from his Mothers womb. Shall it be concluded thence, that he
was a Guide to such when he was an Infant: or if he were so, must it needs
follow, that all Infants are capable Guides, because it is said so of him.

And lastly; I am not against any that have faith, but absolutely for all that
believe; whether Infants or others; so that their faith appears by such
effects as the Word of God approves of. Otherwise what have I or any man to
do, to meddle with the secret and unrevealed things of God, either to justify
or condemn.

And whereas in the former Proposition, there seems a restraint made of the
work of grace in an Infant over there is in other persons, by saying, only so
far as is necessary to union with Christ, and justification to life thereby.

Now for answer to this, we shall first consider what in this sense is to be
understood by Christ: and secondly, what by union with Christ, so as to be
justified thereby. By Christ here, I understand him so, as the Gospel holds him
forth in the work of man's Redemption, in reference to his death and
resurrection; and the only righteousness that commends such to God as believe
in the same. And so Christ thus considered, is the only subject of life to
every soul that shall be united unto him by faith. To which union with Christ,
these three things must be minded, as essential to the same.

First, Gods revealing and tendering of Christ, as the alsufficient and only
way to life.

Secondly, A heart fitly disposed by faith to apprehend and receive Christ so
tendered.

And lastly, The Spirit of grace uniting and knitting of the heart and Christ
togegether, as aforesaid.

And this I understand to be that effectual and substantial union with
Christ, to justification of life, which the Word of God approves of; that most
decide all differences in matters of Religion. For justification to life, ever
presupposes apprehension of Christ, as the subject of life, and a true
application of the same by faith, as aforesaid. The Gospel holds forth no other
justification to salvation, but what is or faith; and faith ever presupposes
the parties knowledge of the thing believed, Romans 10.14. Heb. 11.6.

Now let this be well examined by the rule of truth, and then let the Reader
judge, how capable Infants are of union with Christ, and justification to life
thereby. Now for to darken and obscure this truth, there are these evil
consequences, as absurdities brought in, as to follow upon the same.

First, If Infants should not be capable of those graces aforesaid, then they
were not elected, Secondly, Then their bodies should not be raised again to
life. And lastly, We have not infallible judgment, but may be mistaken, as in
the case of Simon Magus, etc.

To this in a word: and first I would know of such, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 8.29,
30. 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 These. 2.13, 14. And therefore the ground of Gods calling us,
and our believing is attributed unto out Election, Act. 2.47. Act. 13.48. Romans
8.28. Romans 11.7. And to the glory of God, as the cause of all, by the
dispensation of his grace upon his chosen in Christ, and their free obedience
unto him again, as Rom, 9.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.6.12.

These things God has revealed in his Word; and further, I dare not go, but
leaving the secret things to God, who gives not account of all his ways.

And for the raising of Infants bodies, does none rise but such as are in
visible union with Christ; as for invisible things we meddle not with. It is
the power of God that raises the dead, and not union with Christ, 1 These 4.16.
And when any of Gods Elect can by the Scriptures be showed to die in their
infancy, then it will be granted that their bodies are raised to life eternal,
only as they are Infants. Nor that I hold all that dye in their infancy to be
damned, but being a secret thing, I leave the same to God. And though that we
have not infallible knowledge to judge aright of the hearts of men, which thing
is proper to God alone: shall we not judge at all therefore? we are to go on
as near as we can by the Rule of Gods Word; and in so doing, we discharge our
duty, which binds us to judge of the tree by his fruit. And though we are not
infallible Judges, but may be mistaken yet this will not follow, that we should
justify a tree upon which no fruit at all appears, but rather to go on by
the rule of judgment; and if we do miss, to be humbled for our weakness
rather then leave all undone, because we are not sure to do it infallibly. But
I would not be understood to oppose Infants so, as to exclude them from
salvation; no, I am so far from this, that I do not so much as impose any
such work of grace upon them, as essential to life, in this or that way, as
many do, but leave all in respect of them as a secret thing to the wisdom and
grace of God in Christ; by whom the sin of all the Elect are for ever done
away at once.

And for faith, that I press for in all that challenge right to any privilege
of grace, is only to have some warrantable ground to judge by, and so to know
who God does approve of; as those unto whom such privileges belong. Seeing he
has proclaimed, that all by nature are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. And I
cannot believe that any are naturally borne in grace, and so believers from the
womb, though the opposite doctrine teaches and affirms the same. And so I
come to another Proposition, laid down thus:

That Baptism is not the first gra^e, but the second; neither does it confer
grace, but is given to confirm the former, which therefore must be
presupposed, or else not to be administered. And it is the seal^ of the new
Testament, or of the righteousness of faith, now to all that are partak^rs
thereof; as of old Circumcision was unto them. Rom 4 11. Only understand by
Baptism the outward part Administered by a lawful Minister of the Church;
which may and too often is^ s^parated from the inward, though it ought not to
be so, and yet remains true Baptism so administered; ^r else Simon Magus, and
those false brethren, Gal 2. being not baptized, and if they had repented, must
have been baptized a new.

I shall not say much to this particular, That it must be presupposed, or else
not administered. Now I suppose it is meant, that faith in such is to be
presupposed from some ground or visible effect of faith, in appearance at the
lest. For no man can properly presuppose a thing, without some appearing ground
from whence his supposition must arise, and specially in weighty matters. But
what ground any man can have to presuppose of child in the womb, or one that
is newly borne, to have faith, and so capable of a seal, as to be confirmed by
Baptism, I cannot conceive, but rather think it to be great weakness in such
that shall so presuppose or affirm. For it is a doctrine that confirms the
opinion of such as hold faith to be natural, and in a man from the womb; and
as some say, they have been be^eevers ever since they were borne: And so it is
here; for when an Infant is once baptized, it goes ever afterward for a
believer, as well as any that are never so clear in the faith, unless he
comes to commit such sin as to be excommunicated, until which time he was
ever a believer before. But I pass from this, to the next particular thus:

That as of old, more was required of Abraham and men of years when they were
Circumcised, then of Ishmael and Isaac, or of other Infants, continually
circumcised afterward; so now in the adminsstring of Baptism, more is
required of men of years, then is of Infants: of Abraham God required faith in
the blessed seed; but not the same of Isaac: Of men of years faith is to be
required, and must be that a man may be baptized, but not the same of Infants.

The substance of this particular lies thus; That more is required of men of
years, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, and others in like manner after them in
the order of Circumcision. I shall give a brief answer to this by an Argument
drawn from the same, thus; Upon the same condition, that Abraham, Ishmael, and
all the rest of his household received Circumeision, so are all now to receive
Baptism. But Abraham, Ishmael, and all the rest of his household were
circumcised upon one and the same condition, without requiring any thing more
of one then of another; as Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.23.25, 26, 27. Therefore
all are to be baptized upon one and the same condition, without requiring any
thing more in one then in another, which is faith and repentance in all alike,
Mar. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16. Act. 16.31, 32, 33, 34. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.12, 13,
37. Act. 10.47.

And whereas it is said, that faith in the blessed seed was required in
Abraham, but not in Isaac, who was to be circumcised at eight days old; It is
more then I find the Scriptures reveal, that such a faith was required of
Abraham at the time of his circumcision, or else he must not have been
circumcised; Or that the same faith in the blessed seed Jesus Christ, was so
required of all his household at the time of their circumcision, is more then
yet appears to me. And as it is said, that the same faith was not required of
Isaac, as aforesaid, no more was it required of Ishmael, who was 13. years old
when he was circumcised, Genesis 17.25. not of the Shechemites being men of
years, Genesis 34. So that this Proposition falls in it self; and so I leave it,
and come to the reasons and Arguments themselves.

The first Argument lies thus; If the Covenant now under Christ, 1. Argu.
be the same that was before Christ, with Abraham and his posterity in the
flesh; then as Infants were partakers of the Covenant then, and received the
seal thereof Circumcision: so are Infants now partakers of the Covenant, and
ought to receive the seal thereof Baptism. But the Covenant now under Christ,
is the same that was before Christ with Abraham and his posterity in the
flesh: Therefore as Infants were then in the Covenant and received the seal
thereof; even so are Infants now in the Covenant, and ought to receive the
seal thereof. Three things are to be cleared in this Argument.

First, That the Covenant made with Abraham and his posterity in the flesh
before Christ, and that now under Christ, is the same. Secondly, As Infants
were in that Covenant, so are Infants now. Thirdly, as Infants were sealed
then, so they ought to be now. Now for the proving of these aforesaid, there
are 3. other grounds laid down as follow.

First, That Gospel is the doctrine of the Covenant, but this being one, was
preached to Abraham, as Gal. 3.8.17.18. Rom 4.11. and so to the end; and to the
Jews in the Wilderness, Heb. 4.1.2. Heb. 3.7. and so in David's time, Heb.
4.7. etc. Therefore the Covenant is the same.

Secondly, If Abraham be the Father of the Jews and Gentiles, and equally as
he believed the righteousness of faith, and they his children equally as so
believing, and no otherwise: then the Covenant is the same. But Abraham is the
father of the Jews and Gentiles, and equally as he believes, as aforesaid,
Romans 4.11, 12.16, 17.23, 24. Gal. 3.3.9.26.29. Therefore the Covenant is the
same.

Thirdly, The standing of the Jews in the Grace of God, was the same with
Abraham; as is clear from Gods often expressing of himself to be the God of
Abraham and his seed; and praying to God for to remember the Covenant he made
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and acknowledging the accomplishing of the same
to them, as Luke 1.73, 74. Luk 1.54, 55. and ours in the same with the Jews,
as is clear from Mat. 21.41.43. and 22.1. Therefore the Covenant is the same.

Thus lies the Argument, Abraham and his seed, to be the same now to the
believing Gentiles and their seed; and Infants to be in this now, as they were
in that then.

In answer to which, I shall only touch at the three last grounds, briefly in
a word, as I come to the Covenant it self. The first is because the Gospel is
the doctrine of the Covenant, and was preached to Abraham, and to the Jews,
etc. therefore the Covenant is the same. For the first, if the preaching of the
Gospel, being the doctrine of the Covenant, can prove the Covenant to be the
same to them as to us, then all to whom the Gospel was and is preached, are in
the same Covenant. But I think it is the effectual believing of that which the
Gospel holds forth in the doctrine of it, that proves persons in the Covenant,
and not the preaching of it, because many may have the Gospel preached among
them, and yet not be in the Covenant. And for the second, that Abraham is the
equal father both of the Jews and Gentiles, only as he did believe, and they
his children only so believing as their father Abraham did, and not else. In
respect of which, the covenant is the same to the one as it is to the other.
This in a sense I confess is a truth, that none are accounted children of
Abraham, but only as they believe as their father Abraham did: and i^ this be
true, as the ground affirms it is, then let the Reader judge, how Infants can
be said to be the children of Abraham, and in the Covenant, and so to have
right to Baptism, as the scale to confirm their says, and whether they do
believe as Abraham did. But that Abraham may be said to be an equal father
both of the Jews and Gentiles, I think not so in all respects: the Jews were
the seed of Abraham, as they descended from his loins as well as from his
faith. But for the Gentiles they are called the seed or children of Abraham,
only as they walk in the steps of his faith, and not else; as 1 Pet. 3 6.

And lastly, that the standing of the Jews in the grace of God, was the same
with Abraham's, and ours the same with the Jews; therefore the Covenant is the
same.

This doctrine so generally laid down without distinction or exception, holds
forth a man's falling from grace, Abraham's standing was true and firm in Gods
gracious Covenant; and if the Jews was the same without exception, then the
Jews that did oppose Christ, and were cut off for the same, fell out of this
Covenant of grace. But I shall further clear this in that which follows; and
so I come to the Covenant it self, and to see how that God made with Abraham,
and this under Christ, will agree. In the handling of which, in the first place
this must be well observed, A double ^eed in Abraham.
that there was in Abraham a double secd when God made his covenant with him
and his seed, and confirmed the same by the seal of Circumcision. There was in
Abraham at that time a spiritual seed and a fleshly seed. Between which seeds
God ever distinguished through all their Generations. And as there was a
distinction thus made by God in Abraham's seed before they were circumcised, and
yet admitted to the seal of the Covenant by Gods special command. For Ishmael
and Esau were by God commanded to be circumcised as well as any of the rest of
Abraham's seed, Gen 17.10.13. Even so there must be the same respect observed
also in the Covenant, and that because the Covenant comprehends diverse things;
and Circumcision was a seal unto them all. Some of which were proper unto both
the seeds, and some not; as may be gathered from the several branches of the
Covenant expressed by God, Gen, 17.

As first, for the multiplication of Abraham's seed, Genesis 17.2. this was proper
as well to his fieshly seed, as his spiritual; as Genesis 21.13. Deuteronomy. 10.22.
Isa. 48.19.

Secondly, The land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8. This was proper also to both the
seeds of Abraham. And as it was only a temporal inheritance, the same was
conditional, as Heb. 3. And so confirmed by circumcision upon both the seeds
of Abraham, as Genesis 21.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 30.18, 19, 20. And as it pointed at a
spiritual inheritance, shadowed out under it. Now thus considered, it was
absolute, and confirmed only upon the spiritual seed; as Genesis 17.19.21. Genesis
21.12. Gal. 3.17.

Thirdly, That from Abraham's loins should come a seed, in whom all the Nations
of the earth should be blessed; as Genesis 17.16.19. and 18.10.18. and 21.2. This
blessed branch of the Covenant was proper only to the spiritual seed,
considered either in the cause, or in the effect; as Act. 3.25, 26. Gal. 3.7,
8.9, 16.

Fourthly, Abraham's fatherhood of the faithful; as Genesis 17.4, 5. This was
only proper to faithful Abraham and his seed, as they are found walking in
the steps of his faith; as Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 16. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.6, 7, 9
29. 1 Pet. 3.

Lastly, To be a God to Abraham, and to his seed after him in their
generations; as Genesis 17.7. That was faithfully to perform all that he had
promised, either to Abraham in particular, or his seed in general; as Neh.
9.8. Psalm. 105 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.42. Luke 1.72, 73, 74. In token of which
God annexed Circumcision, as a seal to confirm the same; as Genesis 17.11. These
are the several parts and branches of the Covenant that God made with Abraham
and his seed, and Circumcision in the flesh as a seal to confirm every part
to each seed, as was proper to the same.

But if any shall say, the Scriptures deny many seeds, and approve only of one
seed in Abraham, with whom the promise was made; as Gal. 3.16.

To this I answer and say, that this place well considered, will help forward
the truth; Abraham and to all his seed without exception; for then all his seed
must either be saved, or else such as are not but perish, must fall out of the
said covenant of Grace; for I suppose no man will say, that all the seed of
Abraham without exception were saved. And if not, then there was some of
Abraham's seed comprehended in the Covenant in one sense, and admitted to the
seal thereof, whom God excepted against in another: some of which was Ishmael
and Esau, signifying in Abraham's generation, a fleshly seed as well as a
spiritual; between which seeds God ever held forth a distinction through all
their generations, from Abraham until Christ, who put an end to the type and
the flesh, and all privileges of that nature thereunto belonging; Col. 2.
as 2 Cor. 5.16. Phil. 3.3, 4, 5. So that now all is laid up in Christ, as Gods
storehouse and treasury, and in him only for such as believe, and therefore
now first in Christ by faith, and then to the Covenant and the privileges
thereof; as Gal. 3.29. And none by the Gospel approved of now to be the
children of Abraham, but only such as walk in the steps of his says. For as
none invisible before God, are by him at all approved to have right to any
privilege of grace, but only as he looks upon them in his Son: No more are
there any visibly before men to be approved of, so as to have right to the
same, but as they appear to be in Christ by some effect of faith declaring the
same. And so much the more, in that God excludes all from his holy Covenant, is
to have right in the outward dispensation thereof, but only such as believe.
Romans 11.20. Heb. 3.18, 19. Heb. 4.1, 2, 3. Heb. 11.5, 6. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal.
3.22.26.29.

Let all this be well considered, and I doubt not but the difference between
the Covenant God made with Abraham before Christ, and this under Christ, will
appear very great, though in some respect for substance the same. Yet in the
outward profession of them, the difference is great, both in respect of persons
and things. Wherein our descent chiefly lies: that covenant admitted of a
fleshly seed, but this only of a spiritual, Genesis 17. with Romans 9. That in the
flesh, and this in the heart, Genesis 17.13. with Jer. 31.33. Romans 2.28, 29. The
seal and ordinances of that Covenant, confirmed faith in things to come, but
the seal and ordinances of this, confirm faith in things already done.

That Covenant was national, and admitted all of the same to the seals
thereof; but this personal, and admits of none but such as believe. That
Covenant begot children after the flesh, as all Abraham's natural posterity.
But this only begets children after the Spirit, and only approves of such as
are begotten and borne from above, in whose hearts God writes his Law, Jer. 31.
Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8. Joh. 3.5, 6. That covenant with Abraham and his posterity
before Christ, comprehended a civil State, and a worldly Government, with the
like carnal Subjects for the service of the same. But this covenant now under
Christ, comprehends only a spiritual State, and a heavenly Government, with
the like spiritual Subjects for the service of this also. That covenant held
forth Christ in the flesh to a heart veiled; this holds him forth after the
Spirit to a face open, 2 Cor. 3. In all understand, the visible profession of
the Covenant, in the out ward dispensation of the privileges thereof.

And now I come to the consequence gathered from the Covenants, being one and
the same, as aforesaid, That as Infants were in that covenant then, and
circumcised, so are Infants in this now, and to be baptized.

In answer to which,

First, the Covenant it self, is a Covenant of grace and salvation, by which
God of his grace takes a person or a people to himself for his own above all
others, and to be their God, and to man^^est upon them the riches of his grace
and glory: and the manner of which is in effect but only thus much; Gods
calling of a man to an agreement with himself in his Son, wherein he
promises to be his God, and to give him life and happiness, and all things in
Christ, and that he shall believe and rest upon his faithfulness and truth, and
so take him for his God, etc. And thus I say, God and man come to an agreement
in Christ, upon something passing between them, wherein they both agree, and
this is called a Coveannt; and I call it a covenant of grace, when the thing
agreed upon is a subject of grace; as Gods giving of man life and peace, and
all things in Jesus Christ, and that he will be his God, upon whom he shall
rely, and believe the accomplishment of all things in his due time; and that
he shall hear and know his will by his Son, and obey him in the same; and
man's free consent to God again, that he likes of all this well, and concludes
with God that it shall be so. For a Covenant presupposes two persons at least,
and also something to agree, or covenant upon: thus did God with Abraham, and
so he does with every believer; and chiefly when God takes any into a
Church Fellowship. So that the covenant consists of these essentials. First,
the persons disposed to agree. Secondly, something to agree upon. And lastly,
their mutual consent, which is the agreement it self. And so much for the
Covenant, and what the same is.

Secondly, What it is that gives right to enter, or admits any into the said
Covenant, What inrights into the covenant.
and that is the promise of God in Christ, and faith in the same, that gives
right of entrance, and only admits into Covenant with God; as Neh. 9.8. The
Covenant aforesaid, has these essential parts, and visible branches. First,
Grace in the agent, God. Secondly, faith in the Subject, Man. Thirdly, a
uniting or closing of these together, which is that mutual consent and
agreement by faith in the same grace, revealed by the Gospel, which is the word
of Reconciliation. So that it is the blessed word of life, and faith in the
same that gives right, and admits into Covenant with God.

Thirdly, Who are the true approved Subjects of this Covenant, and they are
only such as believe; for God approves of none in covenant with him by his
Word out of Christ, nor of any in Christ without faith. Nay, God denies his
approving of any in fellowship or communion with him, that do not believe; as
John 3.5, 6 36. Heb. 11.6. Romans 8.9. Thus God approves of none as Subjects of
his gracious covenant, but only such as he has elected and chosen in Christ,
and so appearing by some fruit and effects of the same; as these Scriptures,
(with many other) witness, Romans 8.29, 30. Romans 11.7. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. 2 These.
2.13, 14. 1 Pet. 1.2. Act. 2.47. Act. 13.48. So that such as are the chosen and
called of the Lord, are the only approved Subjects by him in his saving and
ever-blessed Covenant of life.

The fourth and last is this; Whether that all persons now under the Gospel,
have not one and the same way of entrance into the foresaid Covenant?

For answer to this, the holy Word of God must be Judge, and I finds the Gospel
of Christ to approve of none in the Lords holy Covenant of grace, but such as
believe; neither any approved of, as to be in the way of life, but such as are
in Christ by faith; and therefore no other way to come into the Covenant of
grace and salvation (as the Scriptures reveal) but only by Jesus Christ. For
in him are all the promises confirmed, and made over only unto such as believe;
as 2 Cor. 1.20. Romans 10 4 1 John 5.11, 12. Romans 8.9.

The holy Covenant of life consists of these three essentialls for entrance
thereinto. The essentials of the covenant.
First, the word of God to reveal the same. Secondly, Christ to open the way,
and to inright the party therein. And lastly, faith without which none can
enter thereinto. So that as there is but only one way of entrance into
Covenant with God, that the Scripture reveals now under the Gospel, and that is
by Jesus Christ, and faith in his name. Then all must enter this way that can
be approved in covenant with God; for none can come to the Father but by the
Son, nor any to the Son but by faith; as John 14.6. with John 6.44.45. Heb.
11.6. Let all this be well considered, and then see how Infants are discovered
to be in this Covenant, and what way of entrance has God by his word appointed
for them to come in, and denied the same unto others, except they be naturally
begotten and born in the covenant, and so were never out of the same: which
thing indeed the opposite doctrine affirms; for if Infants be in the covenant
of grace, and that by virtue of their being borne of believing parents who are
in the same, then such Infants are borne in a saving estate of grace, and were
never out of the same; which doctrine makes void many heavenly and divine
truths that speak to the contrary, which lay all under sin and wrath for the
same; as conceived in sin, borne children of wrath, and so under the curse,
until Christ by his blood and death redeemes them, and by his heavenly voice
calls them, and by his holy Spirit of grace, begets them unto a lively hope,
working faith in their hearts, to lay hold upon Christ, Gods arm of salvation
that carries them up to glory; and therefore all are said to be borne again
from above, of water and of the Spirit, before they can enter into the Kingdom
of God.

Now for such as are begotten and borne in the covenant, being the seed of
believers, as is affirmed, then such were never out of the same; which doctrine
disables them of any of the former privileges by Christ; for none can be under
grace, wrath and the curse at one and the same time, in the outward
dispensation of the same; the which all out discourse intends; for invisible
things belong to God: and so I come to some other grounds, tending to prove
Infants to be in the covenant now, as they were of old, and they are these.

First, If it were not so, then this Covenant would not be the same with that.

And for answer to this,

Another ground is this, else the state of the grace of God should be straightened
and made of less extent by Christ's coming then it was before, whereas it is
more enlarged, and of greater extent, there being nothing more required in the
state of the persons to interesse Infants into the covenant then, then is now.

This particular consists of two parts,

Again, It can not properly be said, that the covenant in the full
accomplishment of the same in glory, will be more strait and of less extent
then now in grace; and yet there shall be none but only such as truly appear
to be of the same.

The second part of the Proposition lies to this effect; There was no more
required in Infants then to interesse them into the Covenant, then there is
required of Infants now.

For answer to this in a word; Abraham, and lastly, a special command from God
for the same in particular; for though that the covenant had been never so
firm between God and Abraham, yet if he had not had a command in special to
Circumcise, I suppose he would not have done it: and if the command had bin
only to have preached the way of God to the people, and to circumcise such as
believed, and embraced the same truth preached unto them, and no other express
word of command for an Infant of 8. days old, and that the practice of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, had been the same, without any direct and apparent
example of their circumcising Infants. I do believe that none of the Jews that
truly feared God, would have been so bold as to have circumcised their Infants,
or if they had, let the indifferent reader judge, by the word of God, if it had
not been a sin of presumption to go above what was written: and for their
personal interesse into the covenant, this is required now, as was then, to be
of the seed, or children of Abraham, and visibly so appearing now, they did
then. And who these are, I appeal to the word of god for righteous judgment,
Romans 4.11, 12. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9.16.22.26.29. This I have showed
before, and shall more clear hereafter; and so I come to another Proposition
thus:

Abraham being the root, and the Jews and Gentiles the branches; When the
Jews Were broken off, as well Infants as men of years were so also: the like
when the Jews shall be planted in again, as well Infants as men of years
shall be so.

To pass over the difficulties, and things that will not be granted about the
Jews coming in, as this argument seems to import in the laying down of it, I
shall only speak a word to what is intended, of implied; and for the better
understanding of all in a word, let the Reader well consider, in what sense the
Gospel holds forth Abraham to be the root of Jews and Gentiles. Secondly, how
the Jews and Gentiles may be said to be Abraham's branches. Thirdly, the way of
their breaking off. And lastly, what way this will make for the Gentiles and
their Infants to come in, and for the Jews and their Infants coming in, I
shall let that stand by until the time comes, or for some Scripture to reveal
how the same shall be.

And first to see how the Gospel holds forth Abraham for a root of Jews and
Gentiles, and that is only in respect of his faith and faithfulness, and so
he is the pattern and father of the faithful, that resemble him in the same,
otherwise Abraham is not the root of the Gentiles, for they descended not from
his loins as the Jews did. So that the Jews and Gentiles are Abraham's
branches, only as they spring out of the same root by says, which declares
them to be his true natural branches, so far as they only appear to be of
the same faith as he was. This I have been upon somewhat before, and shall be
more fully hereafter. But now for the Jews breaking off, this was only for
want of their activall believing the Gospel; as Romans 11. and opposing the same,
Act. 13 46. Even so were the Gentiles received in, only upon their actual
believing and receiving the same. And as God rejected none of the seed of the
Jews that believed, for their parents unbelief; no more does god admit of the
Gentiles seed that do not believe, for their parents believing; for as the
word condemns none, but with respect to actual sin; no more does the word
justify any, but with respect to actual faith: and as every ones own faith
in Christ inrights to life, so every ones own faith in Christ inrights to the
privileges of life.

That the Jews and the Gentiles being incorporated into one body in Christ; as
Ephesians. 2.11. to 20. As the Jews Infants were in the same body, even so must the
Infants of the Gentiles be also. (...)


I answer, in a word, that the Church of the New Testament consists both of
Jews and Gentiles: this is a truth, and admits of all that believe, and rejects
none; and for the Gentiles Infants being in the same body as well as the Jews
Infants. This I also believe, both alike; for the Church of the New Testament,
though it cousists of Jews and Gentiles, yet she never admitted of any Infants
as members in her body, or to the privileges thereof, but as they appeared to
believe, and so capable, of the same.

Another Proposition li^s thus; If by this word to Abraham, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed, Infants are included, and therefore of old
circumcised, and the same promise be continued in the same state to the
Gentiles, then the Gentiles Infants are in the same also; but the first is
true, and therefore the second; and so Infants are to be baptized.

For answer to this, let the Reader consider well, that for a man to take this
unto Abraham, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, for a ground of
Circumcision; this cannot be so, but only the word of command that enjoined
the thing; for if God had but only made his covenant with Abraham, and not a
commanded him to circumcise, it had been sin for him to a circumcised any; so
that it was not the promise, but the command that was the ground of Abraham's,
and the Jews circumcising their Infants. And so the same ground must serve the
Gentiles to baptize their Infants, which is not the covenant, but the like
express command from Christ for the same; but as there is none, therefore the
first; yet the second is not true, and so Infants are not to be baptized.
Again, let it be minded, in what sense God did covenant with Abraham to be his
God, and the God of his seed. 2. How we are to consider Abraham's seed, with
which God made his covenant. For the first, God sets forth himself to Abraham,
to be the Almighty God, (...) 1.
and so an All-sufficient God, for Abraham to repose himself, and build his
faith upon: from which ground Abraham is commanded to walk before God, and to
be upright; which implies true faith, and holy obedience; with reference to
which God made his covenant with him, being a fit and capable subject for the
same; as Neb. 9.7, 8. And with respect to which faith and faithfulness, God took
in with Abraham, all his posterity for a people to himself under Circumcision,
and other Ordinances, by which God did distinguish them from all other Nations
in the world. And to be a God to Abraham and to his seed after him, that was
faithfully to perform his promise, in making of him great, and giving him a
seed, in whom the Nations should be blessed, with which seed he would establish
his covenant, for an everlasting covenant; and so he would be a God to his seed
after him, in doing for them all that he had promised, to multiply them, to
give them that fruitful Land of Canaan, and so to bless them with great
prosperity. And also I will be their God, that is, their God whom they shall
believe and obey, upon whom they shall depend for the performance of all that I
have promised unto them; by which faith and obedience they shall acknowledge me
to be their God.

Now these being the particular expressions of the covenant, and as they lie
barely in the letter, they art figurative speeches, and so considered only as
they were temporal; for so was Canaan a temporal inheritance, and so were the
other outward blessings, under which were figured our spiritual substances,
only to the like Subjects. And as they were outward or temporal, so
considered they were both general and conditional; for as the people did then
believe God, and obey him, so they did enjoy them, and not else; as Heb. 3.
Unto which covenant circumcision was added, as a token, to put the people
always in mind of the said covenant; as Genesis 17.11. and a seal to confirm
the covenant on both the sides, God to be a God unto them as aforesaid, and
they for his own people above all others, and so to perform the same condition
of faith and obedience, as Abraham their father did. And to walk as such
circumcised in heart, unto which they were engaged by that Ordinance; as Romans
2.25, 26, 27, 28 29. otherwise the covenant stood not in force for their
outward prosper it is, that was the glory of that people in general. In which
respect only, the covenant, the seal, and the inheritance, are all of a like
extent; as Genesis 17.7.8.13. and so ended in Christ, in whom all stands firm
only to such as believe; as Gal. 3. This covenant was accomplished by God upon
the Jews at three several times, as they were Abraham's seed. First, in
bringing them from Egypt to Canaan. Secondly, from Babylon to Jerusalem. And
lastly, Christ's coming in the flesh, as the seed in whom all Nations should be
blessed. This blessed seed according to the covenant God made with Abraham was
sent first to Abraham seed the Jews in general; as Mat. 10.5 6. Mat. 15.24.
Joh. 11.11. To bless them, by calling them to repentance, and so to turn them
from their sins; as Act. 2.38, 39. Act. 3.25, 26. Act. 13 23.26 32, 33. Thus
the King of heaven offered his Son first in marriage to the Jews; as Mat. 22.
and being refused by them, he sought him a wife among the Gentiles; as Act.
13.46. Act. 15.14. Romans 11. And so much for the promise or covenant God made
with Abraham and his seed, which for the right understanding of it, must be
considered in a several respect, according to the seed but not so to the
Gentiles and their seed, the Covenant lies not to them in a figurative way, not
in any fleshly or temporal respect, as it did to Abraham's seed in the flesh:
but to the Gentiles in substance, only as they are in Christ by faith, and so
upright as Abraham was when God made covenant with him; and if otherwise, that
the Gentiles, must be considered as the Jews, then they must have a fleshly
seed, under the same conditional respect as Abraham had, and have only one
public head, as Abraham's was to bring them in, and all stand in the same
relation as children to a father, to that one head, as Abraham's seed did unto
him, and come in the same way, both for covenant, and command, as Abraham and
his seed did: All which the Scriptures deny the Gentiles for coming in such a
way.

And so I come now to the seed; and first to begin in the fountain and
head-spring of all, at Abraham and Sarah, and see the Gospels discovery of heir
seed, compared with the Law, by which it will appear what the seed of Abraham
is, that God approves of to be in the covenant with him, and so to have right
to the seal there of. There was under the old Testament a general stated
people in an outward form of profession; among whom God owned but a remnant to
belong unto him in his gracious covenant of life; as Isa. 10.21, 22. Romans 9.27.
Against some of which in the general God excepted, as not so approved of in
his covenant, and yet admit them lawful members of that body, and so to the
privileges thereof, they being the seed of Abraham after the flesh; (...)
as Genesis 17.10.20, 21.23. Genesis 21.12, 13. Genesis 25.23. with Romans 9.11, 12, 13.

So likewise under the new Testament, there is also a stated people, (...)
whom God approves of for his own chosen and true spiritual worshippers;
against whom he lays no exception, but owns them as such whom he has
purchased with his own blood, and so approved Subjects in his gracious covenant
of life, as such who are called chosen and faithful, Joh. 4.23. 1 Pet. 2.5.9.
Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. and 4.16. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.25, 26, 27. Ephesians. 5.25, 26,
27. Act. 20.28. Rev. 17.14.

Now unto these two stated or bodyed people, there is in the Scriptures two
typical heads, namely, Hagar and Sarah, as Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25. Here Hagar
and Sarah, as the two Mothers, type out the two Testaments; even so their two
sons, IshmAel and Isaac, type out the subjects of the same, the one by the
bondwoman born after the flesh, but he of the freewoman was by promise, v.
23. Now as Hagar the Mother, signified the old state in general, so IshmAel
her son, signified the children of the same state, borne after the flesh, as he
was; for though that he was of the seed of Abraham, yet he was no child of
promise. Now for Sarah she was the lawful wife of Abraham, and so a
freewoman, with whom the Apostle compares the state of the Church of the new
Testament, the true spouse and wife of Christ, who is free from all servitude
and bondage, and stands only in subjection to Christ her husband, as Sarah did
to Abraham. And Isaac her son, signifying the true holy and blessed seed. Of
this holy stock according to the Spirit, and so as Isaac was true heir
according to promise; for the Gospel approves of none as true heirs of the
blessing, and so the right seed, and truly in the covenant, but only such as
the promise produces and brings forth, as it did Isaac; for Isaac came not by
an ordinary course of nature, but by virtue of the promise of God, and faith in
the same, which raised nature above it self to bring him forth; as Genesis 18.10,
11, 12. Genesis 21.1, 2. Romans 9.9. Heb. 11.11, 12. By this the wisdom of God in
the Apostle holds forth as in a figure, who are Abraham's seed, approved of in
the Gospel, and they are such as are brought forth by a power above nature,
which is by the promise of God, and faith in the same, as Isaac was. And
therefore such are said to be as Isaac was, children of the freewoman, the
true seed of Abraham after the Spirit, and so heirs according to promise; as
Gal. 4.28, 29, 30, 31. Gal. 3.29. Rom 9 8.

Now the promise in the letter, the land of Canaan, an earthly possession
answerable to the heir natural, and Circumcision in the flesh, as a seal to
confirm the same upon condition of the like faith and obedience, and so to
walk as such circumcised in heart. So God would be their God, to bless,
increase, and to bring them into their promised inheritance; as Deuteronomy. 1. But in
the substance, the heavenly Canaan, a spiritual inheritance, answerable to the
heir spiritual, and Circumcision in the heart, as the seal of the Spirit, to
confirm faith in the free and absolute promise of life, and faith required not
of man, as a condition, but in man, as the work of the Spirit of grace in the
heart, by which the same is made capable to join in covenant with God by
faith. And though that Infants were in the first, yet not at all in the last;
as visibly to appear in the covenant aforesaid, until their faith so declares
them

And further, (...)
consider of it thus; first, that no believer now can so stand to his seed, as
Abraham of old did unto his seed, except he assumes the place of Abraham, and
also his fatherhood over all the faithful. But if any believer should so far
presume as to assume Abraham's, place, and fatherhood upon him, yet another
cannot do so. Except we make may Abraham's, and so all fathers, and no children.

And if it be said, that every believer in his own family is an Abraham.

If it be so, then he is the same unto his servants as well as to his children,
for so was Abraham.

But some will say, that a believer is an Abraham only to his own personal
seed, as Abraham was.

Then a believer would have a greater privilege then ever Abraham had; for the
covenant was not founded upon Abraham's personal seed, for had it been so, then
the privileges thereof would have reached to all Abraham's personal seed, as
well as to Isaac. But this it did not, for Abraham begot many children of his
own body besides Isaac, who shared not with him, neither in the covenant or
privileges thereof; as Genesis 25.1. to 6. The like it is with the believers
seed, to which the covenant lies, not in any respect, as to a particular seed,
but jointly considered together as a body, and so the Church of Christ, and
their offspring, seed, or children, as aforesaid, considered, are the
generation of the righteous, succeeding them in the faith, not in the flesh.
And this is the seed that God so highly exalts in Scripture, and promises so
many blessings unto.

And secondly, (...)
it was not Abraham's personal being in the covenant, nor yet his faith that
brought in his seed, or admitted the same to the seal thereof, but only Gods
special commandment, for both Abraham and many others were in the covenant of
grace long before Circumcision was administered; and the reason why such were
not sealed with circumcision before that time, was be cause that God no where
had commanded the same. No more can a believers being in the covenant now,
bring in his seed, nor admit of the same to Baptism, without Gods special
command for the same now, as Abraham had then, otherwise they proudly assume a
privilege above their father Abraham. And though that believers are in some
sense under the same covenant now, as then, yet in no sense under the same
command, for then they must circumcise, and not baptize, and that Males only,
and not females also. But as there is a new King, so there must be a new Law,
and as a new covenant, so a new subject; a new Church must have a new state,
and a new ordinance, a new commandment; so that as all things are become new,
even so must all be of God, whose will is to be obeyed in whatsoever he
commands, which is the only ground of all man's obedience; for no man can be
said to obey God in doing that which he has not commanded: therefore seeing
there is no command from the Lord for the Baptizing of Infants, as was for the
circumcising of Infants, though by Abraham they were circumcised, yet by
Christ, they shall not be baptized. And so I come to the second Argument, thus:

If in the whole body of Israel, (...).
as well Infants as mon of y^ares were baptized, and with the same Baptism as
ours is, then Infants are now to be baptized as then thy were: But in the whole
body of the IsrAelites Infants were baptized, and that with the same baptism
spiritually that ours is: therefore Infants are now to be baptized, as then
they were. That it was the same baptism with ours spiritually is evident; the
other Ordinances there mentioned were the same spiritually with ours; for they
eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink with us,
1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore they were baptized with the same spiritual
baptism: Otherwise the Apostles argument were not of force against the
Corinthians, if they were not the same Sacraments with ours, nor the conclusion
contained that the Corinthians should be pun shed with the like punishment, if
they committed the like sins; therefore the argument is firm.

In answer to this, I shall endeavor to be brief, therefore let the Reader
consider well these particulars. First, here God took unto himself the whole
body of these people the Jews, who were his own people before by covenant; for
they were the seed of Abraham, and the family of Jacob that came into Egypt to
sojourne there; as Genesis 46. Act. 7. Now let the like be made to appear that
God ever took unto himself the whole body of the Gentiles, as he did the
Jews, and then it will be somewhat the same with the Gentiles and their seed,
as it was with the Jews and their seed. But if the one cannot be proved, then
the other will not be granted: and so this argument falls already. Secondly,
here was no ordinance of the new Testament, much less Baptism administered
upon any of the Israelites at their departing out of Egypt, but only Gods
great power and goodness, declared by leading of his people through the maine
Sea, in and by the which God did preserve them, and so delivered them up as it
were to Moses, and to his Government and direction, as a people preserved in
death. As in and by Baptism the party being by the grace and power of God
preserved, he is delivered up to Christ, to his Government and direction, as
one risen from death, with a new life to God; as Romans 6. Col. 2. Gal. 3. The
Israelites Baptism in the Cloud and in the Sea, was only in the type or
shadow, and so in the Letter of the old Testament, opposed to the Ministration
of the Spirit in the new Testament; as 2 Cor. 3. and is ours so far as the type
may agree with the truth and no further. So that in the type and figure it was
theirs, but in the truth and substance it is ours; Therefore that Baptism
which they had in the old Testament under a veil, was not the same Baptism
that we have in the new Testament with the face open, 2 Cor. 3. And though that
Infants were baptized with their Baptism, yet Infants are not to be baptized
with our Baptism; for we have an Altar where of they have no right to eat
which serve the Tabernacle. (...)
Thirdly, that Infants were then baptized with the same Baptism spiritually
that ours is; this I somewhat question, because to be spiritually baptized, is
to have the internal and spiritual part of Baptism, and so the substance as
well as the external part, and then all such so baptized as I think must be
saved. But many of them that were baptized in the Cloud and Sea, were
overthrown in the Wilderness, as a testimony of Gods wrath against them; as
Heb. 3. Therefore such though they had the outward external part, and so the
shadow, yet not the internal and spiritual part, the substance; and so not
the same Baptism with ours spiritually as affirmed. Again, they were not
spiritual simply in themselves considered, for then the Egyptians and the
cattle that went out of Egypt with them, should have so partaken of them; for
the Egyptians eat of the Manna, and the cattle drank of the water, and all
passed through the Sea. Therefore they were spiritual only as they served to
some spiritual end or use appointed by God, and that was as they signified and
held out some spiritual thing. So that such are said to eat of the same
spiritual meat, and to drink the same spiritual drink, which are capable
so for to eat and to drink of them, as they are spiritual things. And so the
blessed Apostle applies the same unto Fathers, as men of years and so capable,
and not unto Infants, neither do I find Infants punished among the Israelites
in the Wilderness, nor yet threatened by the Apostle among the Corinthians in
the Apostles sense. And this way carries the Apostles Argument in force against
the like sinners among the Corinthians, or any other people; for the scope of
the Apostles Argument is to inform the Corinthians, and so all others as well,
that no outward privilege whatsoever, shall secure any people from punishment
that go on in sin. And to make this appear to be true, he presents them
with an example of Gods dealing with his own people of old, even our fathers,
who had as great outward privileges as any the Corinthians had, and yet for
all this, upon their going on in sin, God punished them accordingly.

But what for all this; Suppose all be granted, that the whole body of the
Israelites, together with their Infants, passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. What can this make for the
proving of the Gentiles baptizing of their Infants now under the New Testament?
If this proves any thing for Infants Baptism, it must be upon the like
occasion, unto the same end, and by the like command, as all the former was;
for the Israelites had a special command from God for all that they did; to
depart with their Infants out or Egypt by name, and to pass through the Sea,
and to follow the Cloud, and to do whatsoever was done either by them, or their
Infants. Now if there be not the like occasion, end, and command from the Lord,
to the Gentiles, for them to baptize their Infants, as here was for the
Israelites, then the Argument is infirm, and of no worth; but there is no such
command from God for the same: Therefore, though that the Israelites Infants
were baptized then, yet the Gentiles Infants must not be baptized now. And so I
come to the third Argument, laid down thus.

There is one and the same consideration of the first fruits, (...)
and the lump, the root and the branches; but the first fruits and root
believing Parents are holy, and must be baptized; therefore Infants the lump
and branches are holy, and must be baptized also. The first part is clear from
the Law, of sanctifying the rest of the fruits, by offering the first fruits,
there being nothing more required. The second is clear from Romans 11.16. with 1
Cor. 7.14. Both which places are of a like consideration, and have the same
sense and meaning; and for the latter, it is I suppose mistaken, when it is
expounded to be the same with that which is spoken before, of Infidels persons
sanctified to the believer, so as that the believer might dwell with the
Infidel daily; for if the meaning were so, then the Apostles argument Were
none at all; for this might be questioned in the nature of the thing as well as
the former, and therefore if he intended nothing else, he said nothing to clear
the General, and the scruple from thence. Besides the Apostle says two
things; first, that to the pure, all things are pure and sanctified, therefore
a believing husband or wife might dwell With an Infidel yoke fellow.

The second thing is, that by virtue of a believers estate in grace, all his
fruit is holy, and partakers of the same state of grace with him; unless they
do by some evil act of theirs deprive themselves of it, as Esau and Ishmael,
and such like have done. The Apostle speaking therefore of a twofold holiness,
the one not in the thing it self, but to another use; the other of the thing
it self, it cannot be but sinful for to confound them. Thus lies the argument,
and the grounds proving the same Word for word.

In answer to which, I shall first call over again the Argument it self, and
speak a word to that, and then more fully examine the truth of it in the
grounds alleged to prove the same.

The Argument thus: there is one and the same consideration of the first fruits
and the lump, the root and the branches. But the first fruits and root
believing parents are holy, and must be baptized. Therefore Infants the lump
and branches are holy also, and must be baptized. Let the wise hearted Reader
observe the fallacy in this Proposition, and the strength which bears up all
the building that is laid upon the same, is only taken for granted without
proof. First for the root that is here taken for granted, but no way proved to
be believing parents, which I deny as hereafter I shall manifest to the
contrary by Gods assistance. Secondly, that Infants are put for the lump and
branches, which I also deny, as in due place will appear. These being
presupposed, the argument is grounded upon the words of the Apostle, Romans
11.16. As the first fruits are holy, so is the lump: and the root being holy,
so are the branches. Gathering from hence, that as the first fruits to God did
sanctify all the rest of the same lump; so believing parents sanctify all
their seed that proceeds from their loins. And so as the first fruits, and the
root being believing parents are holy: even so the lump and branches being
their Infants are holy also, and so to be baptized as their parents are; which
is a mere fallacy, and far from the intent of the Apostle in those words.
And for our better understanding of the same, let us a little examine the
Scriptures alleged: and first for Romans 11.16. The general scope of the
Apostles discourse in this Chapter is concerning the Jews breaking off, and the
occasion of it; as also their calling by the Gospel, who were the people of God
in a two fold consideration. First, as they were a national people according
to the flesh, with many outward privileges suitable to the same; by which God
declared himself to be their God, and they his people above all others in the
world. Secondly, some of them God owned in a more special manner, with
reference to his gracious covenant made with Abraham, and established with
Isaac, and his seed after him for an everlasting covenant: As Genesis 17. which
consideration cannot be of the Jews nationally considered, as I have formerly
proved. For if so, then all the whole nation must have been in a true and
saving estate of grace; and so all of them to have been saved, or else to fall
from an estate of grace. So that as God had then a national Church and people,
even so had he for the same also national privileges both for order,
ordinances and government. Which order cannot now be expected for us Gentiles
under the new Testament: and though that God admitted them all alike to the
outward privileges in the type, yet God had another consideration of them in
respect of the substance; as not to approve of them all in his holy Covenant of
grace. Yet of that whole body in general, Abraham according to the flesh was
the stock or root from whom they sprung as natural branches, as Joh. 8. Which
national people must be considered in a twofold respect. First, a civil
state or commonwealth under a civil government, as Kings, Judges, and other
the like Governers of that nature. Secondly, a Church consisting of an holy
Assembly of worship and worshippers: and so a spiritual state with the like
government and governors; as Priests, prophets, and the like of that nature.
All which held fellowship and communion together, because God took into one
body that whole Nation for his own people. Or rather one head comprehending
them all, which was Abraham, from whom they descended as children springing
from the loins of a father. All which so springing out of his loins did assume
to themselves an equal right and privilege in Gods gracious covenant made
with Abraham and his seed, supposing God had bound his covenant generally upon
him and his seed in his natural generation after the flesh. But God respecting
in the same only his chosen in Christ, with whom he confirmed his Covenant
with Isaac in reference to Christ. Genesis 17. Gal. 3.

Who in Gods own time he calls them to the faith, that they might appear to whom
they belong, Romans 8 28.29, 30. Gal. 4.4 6. These the Apostle ever defends
against the general rejection of that nation. For though such were rejected as
were not elected, this made not the promise of God of none effect to those who
stood firm in the covenant by grace in Christ Jesus as branches in their root.
Which grace the rest opposed, and were cast off for their unbeleef: and when
the fullness of Gods time is come to call them to belief, they shall be
received again into their former estate as alive from the dead, as Romans 11.23,
24. Luke 15.24.

Therefore the Apostle after he has proved the rejection of the Jews, he
labors to make good the faithfulness of God in his promise of grace, and the
effectual power of the Gospel in the saving effects thereof in such as
believed through grace, though the Jews in their national respect were
rejected, and so few of them gained to the truth: as Romans 3.3, 4. Romans 9.6.
Romans 11. And he gives a reason of it thus: though that the Jews were all under
an outward form of profession of Gods name and truth, and so his people in that
respect; yet there was but a remnant that he approved of in the Covenant
according to his election of grace, unto whom the promise of life did belong.
As Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Romans 11.5.7. Now to these Gods special care is to perform
his Covenant, and all that he promised to them in their father Abraham, with
reference to Christ, in whom as the root God established his holy Covenant for
these his holy branches. Romans 9.11.12.23. Romans 11.1.2. Romans 8.28, 29, 30. Romans
11.26.2. Pet. 3.9. Now the lump generally considered, comprehends all, both the
first fruits and the latter: for except the first fruits were part of the lump,
it could not give testimony that the lump was holy; which lump so considered
is Gods elect, and chosen in Christ, with reference to their believing in him:
and so the approved subjects of Gods gracious Covenant, and heirs apparent to
the kingdom of Christ. In which sense God had one and the same respect unto
all, and every part of the same lump, and that was as he considered the same in
a conformity to his Son, as the end of his election. Romans 8.28.29, 30. Ephesians.
1.8.4.5, 6.1. Pet. 1.1, 2. So that there is in the substance of truth one and
the same consideration in the first fruits and the lump, according to what is
laid down in the proposition; the lump being as aforesaid a remnant according
to Gods election, with reference to faith, and so approved subjects in his holy
covenant, appearing in Abraham's, Isaacs and Jacobs believing as the first
fruits of the same.

Now as those first fruits of that blessed crop in Gods holy Covenant were holy
only so appearing (for we speak of visible things) so is the lump out of which
these first appeared by faith, as a part of the same also holy in the same
consideration. Again, the lump which the Apostle spoke of, is to be understood
of the Jews, and not of the Gentiles, as he here applies it; For though he
speaks to the Gentiles, yet here he speaks of the Jews. For in the Chapter
before labors to provoke the Jews to receive the Gospel, as verse. 14.
Therefore he intends the Jews by the first fruits of the lump. The first fruits
the believing fathers, as aforesaid, that first appeared in the Covenant of
grace, in such a way by faith, and so holy was that remnant which God had still
among them, with reference to the same state the first fruits were in, and so
holy; the same consideration is to be had of the lump, with reference to that
state which God in his time shall call them unto by his Gospel, and so are holy
also: for this must respect a visible holiness suitable to that in the first
fruits, otherwise it makes nothing for the thing in hand.

All which well considered, will leave no place for Infants in this lump
according to the Apostles intent; for look what were the subjects of Gods
election, the same is the subject matter of this lump. But the first were
persons considered in Christ by faith, as has been proved, and therefore these
the same and not Infants. As Ephesians. 1.4.

But if any Will say that such as are elected and after come to believe, they
Were first Infants and then elected, and beloved of God, and so holy in their
infancy.

So it may be said of the reprobate, that he is first an infant, and the same
in his infancy: but we are to walk by a rule, and to judge of persons by the
word of god, and therein to see who they are that god by his Word approves of;
and we to do the same, and then as the Word of God condemns none but with
respect to actual sin, no more does it justify any without respect to actual
faith, and so to see in the Gospel what persons the same approves of to be true
subjects of grace, such as may be justified, and justly imputed members of the
body of Christ, redeemed by his blood, and so true heirs of glory, and to be
invested into all the privileges of grace by baptism. Now whether the Gospel
inrights or admits any persons unto these holy privileges, without respect to
their actual believing in Christ: but this no where appears in the new
Testament, which is the only will of Christ that is now in force, for the
approving or declaring the lawful subjects of the same; therefore no infants
there admitted, until they appear believers in Christ, and so the second
fruits of the lump, answerably to the first fruits: for the first fruits ever
imply a second of the same kind. As 1 Cor 15.20.23. Revel. 14.4. Romans 16.5. and
8.23.

Now for the root and branches, a word or two of that also.

By root here, is that from which the Jews were cut off, and the Gentiles
grafted in; and that is not only I eleeving parents, and so the same with the
first fruits, as the argument affirms, but Christ mystically considered, with
reference to the rules of order, ordinances and government, laid down in the
new Testament, for all such to believe, and submit unto, that God approves true
subjects of the same. In respect of which Christ is called a Vine, a root, and
the foundation. Joh. 15.1.5. Romans 15.12. Rev. 5.5.22.16. Isa. 28.16. 1 Cor.
3.11. Ephesians. 2.20. Upon which foundation the true prepared matter for the
building is laid, which are such as have a discernable principle of grace and
faith, by which they are only capable siances to be grafted in the stock or
root, and to be joined as members to their head, and so becomes an orderly
body, as 1 Cor. 12. In which respect it is called the household of faith, the
Church of God, and the body of Christ: Gal. 6.10. Act. 20.28 Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
Col. 1.24. Which body consisting of particular members, as so many branches
abiding in their olive tree, vine and root, Christ their head; who as the root
feeds the whole body, so with nourishment and fatness, that every branch
receiving of the same by faith becomes fruitful. As Joh. 15.5. with Romans
11.17. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 4.15.16. That the root is meant Christ as aforesaid,
with reference to the rules of the Gospel, and so as he is laid as the
foundation of the new Testament appears in this: first in that he is the root
or olive tree, cut of which the Jews are cast, and the Gentiles grafted in,
Romans 11.17.19.23.24.

Secondly, in that the Apostle charges the Gentiles if they boast in themselves
against the Jews, they bear not the root, but the root them: ver. 18. that is,
thou appearest not to have the truth of grace, and so not the true nature of
the root and life of Christ in thy heart, but only an outward form of the
profession of him. As Joh. 15.2.

Thirdly, from the consideration of that which the Jews refused, and the
Gentiles received, which was Christ aforesaid. Therefore it is Christ in his
mystical order and government amongst his Saints, that is here the root and
olive tree, with his Spirit in his ordinances, issuing forth sap and fatness
of life and comfort into every believing heart as a branch of the same.

This will yet more clearly appear, and consider what was the Jews own
natural root and Olive tree, whereof they were natural branches, only by
faith, as the Apostle so declares them, ver. 20, 21, 24. which was union and
communion only with God in all his divine ordinances of worship, the manner
and form of which was that mosaicall and typical order of the old Testament,
in which respect the Jews were the first that ever God took in communion with
himself in such a noly way of worship, and therefore called the first fruits
of his love in that respect, and natural branches. Which order and manner of
worship (but not the matter) being changed at the coming of Christ in the
flesh, and a new form and order set up by him, called the Gospel or new
Testament, which order they opposed and were rejected: thus was Christ the
precious tried corner stone, and sure foundation laid Sion; as Esa. 28.16. 1
Cor. 3.11. 1 Pet. 2.6. And was to the Jew a stumbling stone, and rock of
offense; as 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Act. 4.11. For which the Kingdom was taken from
them; as Mat. 21.41, 42, 43. That is, they were cast out of fellowship and
communion with God, in respect of his worship and service for this their
unbelief, and the Gentiles that did submit to the Gospel were taken in, for
the worshippers of God under the new Testament, and so stand in relation to
God, as heirs of the Kingdom both of grace and glory by faith in Christ. And
when God pleases to call them by the Gospel to believe in his Son, and submit
unto to him, as he is the Mediator of the new Testament, then shall they be
received again into their old fellowship and communion with God, as of old, to
serve and worship him again, according to the orders and rules of Christ in
the Gospel, as of old they did according to the order and rules of Moses in the
Law.

And thus the Apostle proves their first estate to be holy, as first fruits of
that holy and blessed relation they stood into God by faith. From which for
their unbelief they are cut off, and the Gentiles by faith admitted in, of
mere grace, and not to boast: and yet there is a remnant of them to be called
as the lump, and a second fruit, which are also holy in reference to the first
fruit of the same holy root, as aforesaid. And as the root it self is holy,
so shall these branches be when they come to be grafted in again to their own
root or Olive tree, as at the first, which is union and communion with God in
his holy way of worship, under the Gospel as of old under the Law. And so much
for the root or Olive tree, which must be understood of Christ mystically
considered, and not of believing parents, as aforesaid.

Now a word of the branches, which cannot be meant of Infants, but believers
only in the Apostles sense, being holy.

First, They are branches only in the same consideration as they subsist and
grow in the root or Vine, and so bear the true nature of the same, by which
they appear to be holy, by the fruits thereof. Christ, as aforesaid, being the
root or vine, the branches can no way be said to subsist and to grow in him as
their root, but only by says, and he in them by his spirit, without which
there is no holiness in the Apostles sense, who speaks of such as holiness as is
produced in the branch, by the holy root, in which ingrowes and so partakes of
the nature of the root, by virtue of the union and communion it has with the
same; all which is by says, as the Word reveals.

Secondly, There is no branch that is alive in the Vine, but partakes of the
life and sap of the same, by virtue of which the branch though never so young
and small, is discovered to be alive, and enabled to bring forth, in its
season, such fruit as by which the same may be discerned: so it is here by
these spiritual branches, they cannot properly be called branches in the
Apostles sense, but as they partake of the life and grace of Christ their true
vine and olive tree, by which they appear at the least to be alive in him by
faith, and enabled by the same to bring forth such fruits as may discover them
to be in the Covenant of grace, and so to be admitted unto the privileges
thereof, as Joh. 15.1.7. Nature it self teaches as much, for no man will admit
of dead plants to be set in his vineyard, or grafted into a stock, but only
such as are capable to comply with the same, in the sap, and nourishment
thereof, to the end it may grow and bring forth fruit: and so it is with
Christ, who comes not short of nature, and therefore he admits not of any dead
plants to be set in his spiritual vineyard, or dead members to be joined to
his mystical body, but only such as by faith capable to comply with the head.
Neither took he for himself a compounded body, consisting of both living and
dead members, which all are that have not a living principle of grace and faith
in him, which all believers Infants have not; nor any at all, until they are
borne again of the Spirit, as Job. 3.5, 6. The Church of God, which is the
mystical body of Christ, is not a mixed company, but only one substantial and
royal substance, suitable to her head and matter, by which she was produced,
being the immortal seed of the Word; and therefore one holy spiritual
uniforme compacted body, both for nature and form, Cant. 6.9. Mal. 2.15. Ephesians.
2.14. to 22. Joh. 4.23. All which considered, proves the body of Christ, or
Church of God under the new Testament, not to consist of Infants, neither in
whole nor in part; and so the branches aforesaid, not to be understood of
Infants, but believers.

And if any object from the words of Christ, Mat. 18.6. speaking there of some
little ones that believed in him, and from thence gather that Infants have
faith, etc.

The answer in a word is this; That I am for all that believe, and only for
them, whether they be Infants or others; so that their faith be visible, as it
may be discerned, otherwise it concerns nothing the point in hand; for we are
upon visible things, such as may be judged of by the Word of God. Again,
little children that believe, in the Scripture sense, are such as be little and
weak in the faith, and so babes in Christ; as 1 John 2.12. 1 Cor. 3.1.3. Heb.
5.12, 13.

But it is said, that the Church of the Jews of old, and the Church of the
Gentiles now, are one in nature, as they are both the Church of God, and so
Infants in the one, as they were in the other, and the same privileges to the
one, as to the other, etc.

I have before showed the large difference between the Jews and the Gentiles,
in respect of their outward privileges; but a word or two more, and so end.
The Church of God under the old Testament, and that now under the new, for
nature are one, in reference to the Elect of God, called to the faith, and by
the spirit of grace united to Christ, as the branches to their vine, and so an
holy plant of Gods planting; of which indeed the true Church of Christ
consists; and therefore God did ever put a distinction in Abraham's seed, even
from Abraham to Christ; as in Abraham, between Isaac and Ishmael, Genesis 17.20,
21. Genesis 21.11, 12, 13. in Isaac, between Jacob and Esau. Genesis 25.23. Romans
9.11, 12. in Jacob, between Ephraim and Manasse, Genesis 48.13, 14.16, 17, 18, 19.
And thus the holy Ghost figuratively pointed at a difference in Abraham's seed,
between the children of the flesh, and the children of God, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. and
though God did thus distinguish in Abraham's posterity yet there could not be
the like dividing in the same, they being national people, consisting both of
a Church, and so spiritual, and of a common wealth, and so all under a civil
worldly government. Which nation God crowned with many outward privileges, as
he never did any people in the earth, they being the first people that God ever
took into covenant with himself in such a way; by whom he raised himself a
name and same in all the world, and so his peculiar treasure, to whom he
committed great matters of trust, as Psalm. 135.4. Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4. Ephesians.
2.12. Of whom came Christ the Savior of man, and therefore salvation is said
to be of the Jews; as Romans 9.5. Joh. 4.22. In respect of which there was a
blessed promise passed upon the Jews, for the bringing forth of the Messiah,
and the promised seed, in whom all Nations should be blessed. And therefore all
of that nation were admitted to the outward privileges, as figures of him
which that Nation was to bring forth: so that a fruitful womb was counted a
great blessing among the Jews, not knowing who might be so honored as to bring
forth that blessed and all blessing seed. And therefore God honored the
natural birth among the Jews, with such outward blessings and privileges that
belongs not to the Gentiles at all. The Gentiles now are to look for their
bringing forth of Christ according to the Spirit, as the Jews did then
according to the flesh: and likewise their birth, and their seed in all things
suitable to the same. As Joh. 3.3.5, 6. Joh. 1.12, 13. and therefore we are said
now to know no man after the flesh, no nor Christ himself as the Jews did, not
Christ himself after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. and Circumcision was one
privilege of the flesh; as Phil. 3.4, 5. Therefore though that the Jews
infants were admitted to all those outward privileges being a national
people, and so a national body, with a natural birth, and the like seed in
general, yet the Gentiles infants cannot be admitted to their spiritual
privileges, they being a personal people, called by the Word of grace, and so
a spiritual body with a spiritual birth, and the like seed.

And so much for the meaning of the Apostle, Romans 11.16. which makes nothing
for the baptising of Infants, but altogether against the same, the words not
being well considered, and therefore misapplied; the first fruits being such as
first so appeared of Gods elect by faith in such a way of grace by gods
receiving and approving of them in his holy covenant, under so many gracious
promises. The lump, such a remnant in the election of grace, chiefly of the
Jews, with reference to the same state of grace and faith in Christ, as the
first fruits were in, when God so approved of them. And so a second fruits
following the first fruits of the same kind, which first fruits did ever
presuppose the same. And so for the root and branches, the root Christ
mystically considered as aforesaid, as the Scriptures hold him forth. The
branches such as grow in him by faith, and he in them by his Spirit, by which
they are alive in their vine. All which are understood of believers, and not of
Infants, and so with respect to their calling and not to their infancy; as Act.
2.39. which promise is in no other sense to the children then to the parents;
and that is either to turn them from their sins, by calling them to repentance.
As Act. 3.19 20.25 26. or to comfort them so turned; or repenting by tendering
and applying to them the promised Savior Christ Jesus; as Act. 13.23.26 32,
33.38, 39. And as God has not grounded his election of grace in the seed of
believers, but in the good pleasure of his will: no more has he the
dispensation of the same in his gracious Covenant, but in his free and
effectual call to believe in his Son, in whom they were elected to the same,
which call to the faith makes the only difference between them and others, and
not their being the seed of believers by a natural birth. For we are alike by
nature, children of wrath as well the seed of believers as any others,
considered in any personal respect; as Romans 3.9. Ephesians. 2 3. Whose happiness
depends upon that blessed change, and spiritual birth by which they are born
again, and called to believe in the Lord of life; and not their being the seed
of a believing parent; for so one may be and perish as soon as any others.

And now for the other Scriptures, 1 Cor. 7.14. if this be of the same
consideration with the former, then the same is answered with that and so they
are both void in respect of the end for which they are alleged, namely, to
prove the holiness of infants being in the Covenant of grace and life, by
virtue of their being the children of believing parents, and so to have right
to Baptism. But I do not understood this Scripture to be of the same
consideration with the former, and therefore a word or two of this also.

And for the understanding of the Apostle in the same, its good first to
consider what that holiness is which inrights persons to the privileges of
grace, and that is one of these two at the least; Either the holiness of
Christ in whom God looks upon his children, and approves of them holy in him,
and so to have right through his Son to all things both in grace and glory.
(...) generation, appearing in the holy fruits and effects thereof, by which
such persons appear, to to have right to the aforesaid privileges, before men
who must judge of the tree by the fruit, and of both by the Word of God. Ephesians.
4.24. Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 1.15, 16. Hebr. 12.14. There is no other holiness that
proceeds from Gods holy Covenant, or that can inright to any privilege of
grace now under the Gospel. For whatsoever can truly inright any person to the
privileges of grace, the same inrights to glory. For no less can inright to
grace, then what inrights to glory. So that if this be such a holiness, then
look how many it inrights to Baptism, it also inrights to glory: and so all
that are baptized, being children of believers, and so holy, must be saved or
else fall from grace. But neither of these d^ I believe for truth, and
therefore this holiness must be some other holiness then that which tends to
life eternal. It is said, the unbeleeving wife is holy, or sanctified which is
all one by the husband; and the unbeleeving husband by the wife: and if it were
not so, your children would be unclean also; but in that the unbeleeving
husband and wife is holy by the believers, so are your children by the same
means holy likewise. For the same way the children would be unclean, by the
same rule of contraries they are holy. But if unbeleeving husband were not
sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife by the believing husband; now
if they were not thus sanctified the one to the other, that so they might
lawfully continue together as husband and wife, their children would be
unclean, in that they were begotten in an unlawful way, for here the
uncleanness of the unbeleeving and unsanctified parents if in case they were
so: and the uncleannes of the children is the same: even so on the contrary,
the unbeleeving husband being sanctified by the believing wife, that so they
may lawfully continue together in that honorable way of marriage, and the bed
undefiled, hence your children are holy. Which holiness of the children and
the sanctity of the unbeleeving parents is the same; opposed to the
uncleanness in opposition to the same. So that as the one is uncleanness of
the flesh, so is the other the holiness of the flesh, compared with these
together: Ezra 10.2.3. 1. Sam. 21.4, 5. 1 Cor. 6.18. and 7.1, 2. 1 These. 4.3,
4. And for the twofold holiness that is noted in the Argument to be
considered in the Apostles words, the one not in the thing it self but to
another use; and the other of the thing it self, and therefore sin to confound
them.

This is in part true, for the holiness of the children is not only such a
relative holiness as to another use, as the unbeleever to the believers use,
and no more; but the holiness of the children rests in themselves, as the
subjects thereof by nature, being begotten and born in that lawful and
honorable way of marriage by Gods appointment, and so holy and clean in
opposition to such as are begotten and brought forth in a way of uncleanness,
as adultery, fornication, and the like. And whereas it is said, that if this
were the meaning of the Apostle, then he said nothing for the clearing of the
scruple, because this holiness of the children might be questioned as well as
their own, etc. To which I answer, and say, that to expound the Apostle this
way, makes only forth clearing of the scruple, which scruple befell the
Corinthians by reason of an Epistle, which the Apostle writ to them before, as
1 Cor. 5 9. wherein he so presses them from having any communion or fellowship
with any unclean person, in the worship of God; which they understood of civil
commerce with the world, upon which they questioned the lawful retaining of
their unbeleeving husband and wives, and to have communion with them in that
near relation of husband and wife in their civil commerce and society. And so
much the more, having an example of the like nature in the Law. Ezra 10.7.
about which thing they wrote to the Apostle for information, 1 Cor. 7.1. and
questioned not their children. Whereby it appears they held it lawful for to
retain their children. To which the Apostle answers from a double ground, thus.

1. In that all things are sanctified to such as believe; as Tit. 1.15. and so
is the unbeleeving wife to the believing husband. So that you may lawfully live
together in that comfortable estate and society of marriage which God has
ordained for man and wife to abide in.

2. If you judge your selves to live in such a way of uncleanness upon which
you must now part, then your children so begotten are unclean, and to be put
away also but in that you (...) it lawful to retain your children, and not to
put them away though you believe, and they do not. Then much more the
unbeleeving parents as aforesaid that bear them: for if the effect be holy,
then must the cause be also holy that produces the same; which is Gods holy
ordinance of marriage, and not his holy covenant of grace. Now it had been in
vain for the Apostle to have gone about to prove the lawful restraining of the
unbeleeving husband and wife from the holiness of their children being in the
Covenant; for nothing was more clear then this, that such children as are
begotten in uncleanness were not approved of in Gods holy Covenant of life,
not any way holy either by Law or Gospel. How then could this tend to remove
the Corinthians scruple, to tell them they might lawfully continue together,
because their children were in the Covenant of grace and life, and so were
holy; when as their scruple lay in matter of uncleanness upon which they were
to part. Now this must first be cleared, whether they were so or not in respect
of themselves, before ever they could believe the holiness of their children,
or any such to be in Gods gracious Covenant: for the children of adultery and
fornication are debarred the holy Covenant both in the Law and Gospel. But if
it be said that the scruple was about the unlawful commerce of the believer
with the unbeleever, and not of their marriage, as if they lived in adultery
and fornication, and so the uncleanness of the flesh in that respect as if
they were not married. Now if this be true, that they scruple not their
marriage; then it holds true also, that they did not question the lawful
retaining of their children: And so the Apostles argument from the same is of
force to prove the lawful continuing of their parents also; though the one
called to the faith, and so a believer, and the other not. In which respect
they judged their children free from that uncleanness the unbeleeving parent
was or might be guilty of: to which the Apostle answers and affirms, that the
condition of the parents and the children is one and the same in the aforesaid
respects. If they put away the one as unclean, upon the same ground the other
is unclean, and to be put away also. And as the one is holy, and to be
retained; upon the same ground the other is holy, and to be retained likewise.

And I conclude as I began, tht the holiness here both of the unbeleeving
parents and the children is the same for nature, being opposed to one and the
same uncleanness, which is only the holiness of the creature in a natural
respect; not the holiness of the gracious Covenant of life in a spiritual
respect, as it is affirmed. And so this Scripture also has nothing at all in
it for the proving of Infants true subjects of Baptism.

One thing more in the Proposition I cannot pass, which is this: (...)
That by virtue of a believers state in grace, all his fruit is holy, and
partakes with the same state of grace with him; unless they do by some act of
theirs deprive themselves of it, as Esau and Ishmael.

A word briefly of this, and so I leave it as answered already. (...)


1. If this be a truth, then one may be saved by another man's faith; for here
by virtue of a believers state in grace, all his fruit, that is, his children
partake of the same with him, and so fare as he does, only by virtue of his
grace or state in grace, which is the same. And so by the fathers says the
children share together with him in that grace which his faith instates him in,
which is salvation it self.

2. This doctrine takes away the being of original sin, for here they are
all holy, and partakers of grace until they commit some actual sin. Which
denies any original sin, for that would make them unholy, though they never
committed actual sin in their own persons.

3. It lays a ground of falling out of an estate of grace; for by this
doctrine Esau and Ishmael and all believers children are holy, and partakers of
the same grace with their parents, until they commit sin as Esau and Ishmael
did, and then to fall from the same as they did.

And lastly, this is false doctrine, for both Esau and Ishmael were excluded
from being subjects of Gods saving grace before they committed actual sin. As
Genesis 25.23. with Romans 9.11.12, 13. and so Genesis 17.20.21. Genesis 21 9.10, 12. But
as it tends to Popery and Arminianisme, so I shall leave it as an old Creed
bare error, not worth any further meddling with. And now to the fourth and last
Argument, thus.

If Baptism succeeds circumcision, (...). 4.
then as infants were to be circumcised, so are infants to be baptized; but
Baptism succeeds circumcision; as Col. 2.11, 12. Therefore as infants were
circumcised, so are infants to be baptized.

This Argument is somewhat weak, (...).
and therefore a weak answer shall serve; What though Baptism succeeds
circumcision, must it needs follow, that as Infants were circumcised, they must
of necessity be baptized. The new Testament succeeds the old, must it needs
follow therefore that the same order be observed now, as was then; All the
whole household of every family among the Israelites in Egypt, as well
children as others, were to eat the Passover, Exodus 12.3, 4. And the Lords
Supper succeeds that, (...).
and yet Infants are not approved as fit Communicants in the Lords Supper,
because they are not capable subjects. But it is a double mystery, how persons
are fit and capable of union in a State, that are not fit and capable of
communion in the ordinances of the same State. And more mystical, how one
should be a capable subject of Baptism, and no^ of the Supper. (...).
I can see no Rule for such a practice in all the book of God; and its against
the Rule of nature, that when a child is borne, to keep it from food. The
Church of the new Testament succeeds the old, but it will not follow that the
like order and subjects succeed each other also; for no rejected Ishmaelite or
Esau, are to be admitted either to union or communion in the Church under the
new Testament by Christ's appointment, therefore though that Baptism succeed
circumcision, yet the same subjects do not so. The two Testaments are as Wills
containing certain Legacies, given and bequeathed to such only as whose names
are expressly set down in the same; as Rev. 21.27. In the old Testament as the
first Will, a Male of eight days old, or a Prosolyte, Exodus 12.48.49. Genesis
17.10-44.23.25. Jo^. 8. Phil. 3.4, 5. So in the new Testament, as the last Will
of Christ, the Legacies therein contained, as the privileges and blessing of
Abraham, are given only to such as believe, and to none else, Gal. 3.14 22 29.
Romans 8 17. and 4.11, 12. and, 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.6, 7. These are such as are
begotten again by the immortal seed of the Word, borne of the Spirit, and so
children of God, and the only true ^ei^es of the Kingdom of Christ, with the
privileges thereof; as Jam. 1.18 1 Pet. 2.23. Joh. 1 12, 13. Joh. 3.5, 6 1 John 3.9, 10. Romans 8.17. These are the holy seed, which God so approves of in
the Scriptures, as subjects of grace, and heirs of life, and being in the
covenant, they only have right to the privileges thereof; and their children
or offspring are such as succeed them in the same says and truth, and so are
called the Generation of the righteous, as succeeding each other in the way of
righteousness, and not their Infants or personal seed proceeding from their
loins by carnal generation, as Esa 43.5 and 44 3. and 54.3. and 59.21. and
66.22. and 61.9. and 65.23. compare Rev 12.17. Gal. 4.26. to 31.

These and the like Scriptures show what is the right and true approved seed,
unto which the privileges of grace belong: so that although Baptism succeeds
Circumcision, yet the difference is great, both in matter and manner in persons
and things. Circumcision sealed to things temporal and carnal, as well as
spiritual, and so were the subjects, and things to come as under types and
shadows, and so in a cloud and darkness. Whereas Baptism has for its
subjects children of the light, in the clear evidence of the Spirit, with the
face open, and confirms faith in things come, and already done; for Baptism
seals only to faith in Christ, and grace in the new birth, which cannot be,
where there is not first a begetting by the immortal seed of the Word of life;
for which end God has ordained in the Gospel preaching and believing to go
before baptizing, as Mat. 28.19. with Mark ^6.15 16. And that way or order
which has not God for its Author, and found in the Records of Christ with his
image and superscription upon it, let us say as sometime he did, Give to Caesar
that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods; so say I, Give to
Antichrist his baptizing of Infants, and to Christ, his baptizing of believers.
What advantage will it be to Infants to come before they are called, to have a
name to live, and yet dead for ought any one knows, and to come to the
marriage-Supper, without a wedding Garment, shall the holy things of God be
forced upon such, as neither believe, know, or once desires them, will men set
a seal to a blanke? are children capable to receive meat before they be
borne, except we make Baptism the womb of regeneration, as many do, who
teach that Infants are regenerated and borne again of the Spirit of grace in
Baptism, whose doctrine is of the same stamp and authority, as he that sent
them so to preach. What can be more natural, then begetting and bringing forth
of the Infant, before feeding of it at the Mothers breasts? Is it not
sacrilege to press such upon the wise of Christ the Church, for her Paps,
with whom she never traveled, or bear of her body? Christ will deny himself
to be food and nourishment to any, where he has not been first seed to beget.
Let men take heed how they impute such folly to the wisdom of god, as to give
the milk of his breasts unto any that are still borne, or to set dead twigs in
his heavenly and divine stock, or natural branches in his holy and spiritual
vine. Let such beware how they fight against the God of order, least in stead
of finding the breast to feed before the womb to bear, they meet with a curse
upon the single emptiness of Christ, with a double barrenness, that will
admit of no conception or spiritual birth to succeed the natural. Not that I
intend the least to deny salvation unto Infants, no, I am so far from this,
that I testify against all such doctrine, nor yet affirm all Infants to be
saved, neither do I know among Infants, which shall be saved, and which not,
therefore I leave it as a secret thing to God, until he makes the same appear
by some visible effect of faith, which only gives a visible right unto any
ordinance of the new Testament: and therefore I cannot see by the Gospel, how
Infants void of visible faith, should have visible right unto the privileges
of grace; neither ought they to be admitted thereunto, as has been proved; and
also for these, and the like reasons following.

First, (...)
because there is neither command nor example for the baptizing of Infants in
all the new Testament: the order and government of which, in the
administrations thereof, is no way inferior to the old; but in the old
Testament there was an express Rule, by command from God, what communicants
were to be admitted to circumcision, and other ordinances of that nature, and
what not; but this order is no where found in the new Testament for the
baptizing of Infants, and therefore the same is not to be practiced.

Secondly, It is a high contempt and injury to Christ, as he is the husband of
the Church his holy Spouse, to force upon him an natural wife, himself being
spiritual, and desires the like associate, as such a Church is founded upon
the natural birth, namely, Infants, because commonly to one that is borne of
the spirit, there is twenty borne of the flesh.

Thirdly, It is a practice that overthrows, and destroys the body of Christ, or
holy temple of God; for in time it will come to consist of natural, and so a
nation, and so a national Generation, and carnal members, amongst whom if any
godly be, they will be brought in bondage, and become subjects of scorn and
contempt, and the power of government rest in the hands of the wicked.

Fourthly, because it is a ground both of ignorance and error, for it holds
people in blindness, that they cannot come to know the nature of that holy
ordinance, nor what the same requires in the subjects thereof: and also it
causes the simple to conceive that Baptism is of necessity to salvation.

Fifthly, it keeps up the State of Antichrist, by granting him this so chief a
cornerstone of the Lords house to lie in his foundation; for that church where
Baptism is the true ordinance of God, in the administration thereof, is by the
Rules of the Gospel a true Church; so that, if Antichrists Baptism which he
administers be Gods ordinance, then that Church wherein he does so administer
the same, must be also the Church of God, and in sin that refuses communion
with it.

Sixthly, Because it builds faith upon humane testimony in matters fundamental;
for such as are baptized in their infancy, have no other way to satisfy either
themselves, or others, but the bare word of man, that must stand in the place
of the word of God, for such to believe their true receiving of so holy
ordinance of God.

Seventhly, To Baptize Infants, makes the holy ordinance of God a lying sign,
because none of those things can be expected in an Infant which the said
ordinance holds forth or signifies in the administration thereof, which is the
parties regeneration and spiritual new birth; a dying and burying with Christ
in respect of sin, and a rising with him in a new life to God, and a
confirmation of faith in the death and resurrection of Christ, and a free
remission of sin by the same; as Romans 6.3, 4. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. Act.
2.38. (...)
None of all which can be expected in an Infant.

Eighthly, Because the subject of Baptism is to be passive, but an Infant is no
way passive, as that ordinance requires. (...)
I mean a passive subject threefold: 1. a thing incapable, and thus is a
stone. 2. a thing forced, and thus is an Infant, who opposes its Baptism to
the utmost of its ability, so far is it from being passive in the same. 3. A
thing is passive by a subjecting power producing the same in the subject, by
bringing it to a free and voluntary subjection; and thus is the true subject of
Baptism. None can be passive to receive grace, but by grace, because it
consists of self-denial.

And lastly, this doctrine of Infants Baptism opposes directly the express
word of God, by teaching that Infants are in the covenant of grace, being borne
of believing parents, and so an holy seed, by virtue of which they have right
to Baptism as a privilege of grace. Against which the holy Ghost affirms,
that all are conceived in sin, brought forth in iniquity, and so by nature
children of wrath, and under the curse, and except they be borne again from
above, they cannot see the Kingdom of God, Psalm. 51.5 Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Romans 3,
9. Gal. 3 10.13, 14. Job. 3.3.5, 6. Job. 1.12, 13. Here man says, that Infants
are clean and holy, in and from the womb, and so are subjects of grace and
glory: but God says that all Infants as well one as another, are first in
sin, and unholy, and so are subjects of wrath, until the second birth makes
the difference; as Joh. 3.5.6. And now which to believe, let the upright heart
to God judge.

But it is said, that as the Covenant was made to the Jews and their seed under
the old Testament, so in the same manner does the Apostle apply the said
Covenant to believers and their seed in the new Testament; as Act. 2.39.

Ans. The words are not, unto your seed, but unto your children: wherein there
is great difference. For by seed in the Scripture is very often put for a
natural generation, begotten and born after the flesh. And by children, a
spiritual generation, walking in the steps of the faith of such as have gone
before them: as Act. 3.25. Act. 13.26.33. and so Job. 8.37.39. with Rim. 9.7 8.
and so the words import as much, which is to you and to your children, and to
all afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. So that the
promise is only to such as God shall call, and to none else.

Again, its called the promise, and not the Covenant; and we know that every
promise is not a covenant: there being a large difference between a promise and
a covenant. And now let it be well considered what is here meant by the
promise, and that is Gods sending of the Messiah or the seed in whom the
Nations should be blessed; and so the sending of a Savior or Redeemer unto
Israel, as these Scriptures manifest compared together: Isa. 11.1. Jer. 23.5,
6. with Luke 1.68.74. Act. 13.23. Act. 3.25.26. This was performed by Christ's
coming first in the flesh, in which respect he came both of and to the Jews
only by promise: as Joh 4.22. Romans 9.5. Matthew, 10.5 6. Matthew. 15.24. Joh. 1.11.

Secondly in the preaching of the Gospel, by which he was held forth as a
Savior to all that by faith laid hold upon him, as the arm of Gods grace
stretched out unto them. And this way also Christ was first tendered to the
Jews for a Savior, to save them from their fins: Act. 4.12. and for to be
their King, as to save them: so unto whose state and government they were to
submit, as Luke 19.14.27. Act. 2.36. In which sense the Apostle speaks when he
says, the promise is to you and to your children, and to all far and near,
as God shall call, that is, the promise or promised Savior is come, and is now
according to Gods promise tendered to you by the Gospel, calling you, and your
children, and all else where the word of grace shall come, to believe and
receive him by says who is now come to save you, and all that believe from
their sins. Act. 3.25. 26. And therefore its said, as many as gladly received,
or believed this glad tidings, the same was sealed, or confirmed unto them by
baptism. Act. 2.41. according to Joh. 1.11, 12 13. By all which it is
manifest, that the promise, Act. 2.39. is meant the sending of the Messiah, or
a Savior to the house of Israel, to call them to repentance, and to save such
as believe from their sins, as is clear also by these Scriptures. Isa. 59.20.
Act. 13.23.26 32.38.39. And thus the promise is unto you and your children,
that is, the promised Savior is offered, and offers himself freely to save
you: notwithstanding your crucifying of him, yet now repent and believe, for
his promise is upon the same, freely to forgive, and to save you from all your
sins. Thus the promise is applied to says, which is the way of preaching the
Gospel, and not an absolute conclusion of persons to be in the covenant of
grace and life, whether they have faith or not. What is this but to keep the
wicked from leaving of his way, by promising him life. This God did not in
making of his Covenant at the first, nor the Apostle by his applying of the
same at the last. Otherwise to bring the personal or natural seed of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and so of all believers into the Covenant of grace, and that
by Gods appointment, whose word i^ like himself, both true and stable as a word
of faith; purely tried as gold seven times in the fire.

Hence observe the evils that attend this doctrine unavoidably. First it makes
void the stability of Gods Covenant of grace it self, thus: If the Covenant of
grace be absolute and stable, then all within the same must be saved. But all
within the said Covenant were not saved: ergo, the Covenant of grace is not
absolute and stable. The major is confessed, that a believers seed is in the
Covenant of grace without exception. The minor is proved from Ishmael, Esau,
and the rejected Jews, all which were the seed of believers, and yet not all
saved.

2. Its a ground of falling from grace, thus: All that God took into his
Covenant of grace, were in an estate of grace. But all that God took into his
Covenant of grace, did not there continue. Ergo, such fell from an estate of
grace. I prove this the same way with the former.

3. Its a ground of universal redemption, for it makes the death of Christ
equal as well to such as perish as to such as are saved: thus. All that are in
the Covenant of grace, Christ died for. But all that were in the Covenant of
grace were not saved. Ergo, Christ died for such as are not saved. The proof of
this is the same with the former, if God took Abraham and his seed into his
Covenant of grace without exception.

4. It makes God the author of man's believing untruth, by injoyning him to
believe the salvation of such as he himself knows, and reveals the contrary: as
Ishmael, Esau, and but a remnant among the Jews; nay none at all but such as
believe. Gen, 17. Genesis 25. Genesis 48. Romans 9.27. Against which opinion and evils
aforesaid, I argue thus. The Covenant of grace is absolute and saving unto all
once with in the same. But all the personal seed of believers are not saved:
therefore all believers seed are not in the Covenant of grace. The Proposition
is clear from these Scriptures. Jer. 32.40. Isa. 49.21. Jer. 31.3. Joh. 13.1.
Mal. 3.6. Joh. 10.28.29. The Assumption from these. Genesis 21.10. with Gal. 4
29.30. Genesis 25.23. with Romans 9.11, 12, 13.27. God requires no man to believe
untruth. But for a believer to believe that all his seed is in the Covenant of
grace, is to believe untruth. Therefore God requires no such thing. This
Argument is sully proved in the former. And so much for the promise, Act. 2.39.
which being well understood, men would never go about to build the baptising of
the Gentiles infants upon that Scripture.

But it is said that Christ admits of little children to come unto him,
blessing them, and acknowledging their right unto the kingdom of God, Mark
10.14. therefore such may be baptized.

To which I answer briefly thus. That the blessing of Christ upon these
children was for bodily cures, as is manifest by the desires of those that
brought them to Christ; which was not that he should baptize them, but that he
would touch them, and lay his hands upon them, and pray, as Mark 5.23. Matthew.
19.13.15. This was the ordinary way of healing in the time of the Law by such
as were enabled by God thereunto, as is clear by these Scriptures compared
together. 2. King. 5.11. with Matthew. 19.13. Matthew. 8.3. Matthew. 9 18. Luke
4.38.40. Never were any so brought to Christ but for some cure, and for his
blessing of them; that was in respect of that temporal mercy he bestowed upon
them according to that they came to him for: and to show his bounty and
humility that he was no respecter of persons; as such might seem to be, that
suffered others to come, and would have kept back children. And for such to
belong unto the kingdom, so those children did, and therefore they ought to
come as well as any other. For they were children of the Jews, and at that time
members of that Church, and so of that kingdom; and had as much interest in
Christ for outward blessings as any else.

And further, Christ is pleased to make use of childrens humility and
innocence, to reprove the high mindedness of his disciples, and to draw them
forth a pattern from the same. As Mat. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. with Mark 10.5. (...).
So that all this makes nothing for the baptizing of Infants: they being not
brought to Christ for baptism.

But its further objected, that the Apostles baptized whole households, as the
household of Stephanas, Lydia, and the Jayler, 1 Cor. 1.16. Act. 16.15 33. and
infants being a part of the household, therefore infants were baptized.

Answer. Though that Infants are a part of the family when there be infants in
the same; yet this makes nothing for the baptizing of Infants, except it be
first proved that infants were there in those households. And also upon the same
ground we may prove that the Jayler had a wife, and Lydia an husband, because
that husbands and wives are commonly in a household or family, and being there
they are a part of the same. and that the Jaylers wife, and Lydias husband and
servants, though never so wicked, were all baptized. But if it be said that
faith was to be required of them being of years. Hence it will follow, that no
infants were then baptized, because that one and the same condition is required
of all that are baptized: and so it is said of the Jayler, that the Word was
preached to him, and to all that were in his house; and that he believed and
all his house: and these are said to be baptized, Act. 16.32.34. and thus the
Apostle preached, and they believed, and such only were baptized, and none
else. And what the Apostles order and practice was in this family, it was the
same in all other households and families; for they walked always by one rule:
and therefore their order was not to baptize infants.

It is said, that Christ sent out his Apostles to teach and to baptize all
Nations, Matthew. 28.19. in which Nations there were infants as well as men of
years, and so commanded to be baptized.

Ans. In a word briefly to this: for this Scripture being well considered, and
rightly understood, would stop men's mouths for ever having a word to say for
the baptizing of infants. This blessed commission of Christ to his Apost^es was
chiefly for us Gentiles, saying, All power is given me in heaven, and in earth.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. etc. As if Christ had said, Go now into all
Nations, and preach the Gospel freely, (...) 6.
as well to one nation as to another; for the Gospel shall not now be confined
any more to one place or people, then to another. God is now a God of the
Gentiles, as well as of the Jews; go therefore as well to the Gentiles as to
the Jews, even unto all Nations, and there preach the Gospel, (...) 29
and so make Disciples by teaching them; and such so taught, them baptize in
the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, that is, into the true and
orderly profession of that which they have been taught and believed. So that
here teaching goes before baptizing. and presupposes understanding and faith
in that which is taught; this being the only place of Christ's instituting the
ordinance of baptism. And further explained. Mark 16.15.16. Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved. So that from these Scriptures brought to prove the
baptizing of infants, it is clearly manifest that infants are not the subjects
of baptism appointed by Christ: for all the external benefits and privileges
of the Gospel are given only to external and visible faith. And so the
sealing and confirming ordinances of Christ, ever presuppose faith in the
subject, to seal unto, and to be confirmed. So that here is no ground for the
baptizing of Infants, but the contrary.

But it is affirmed by some, that as God commanded Infants to be circumcised,
and the same command remaining still unrepealed, stands in force for Infants to
be baptized. To which I answer, and say, if that commandment must serve now
without alteration, then we must circumcise and not baptize, and that males
only, and not females; but if it be altered, then it has not the same way to
hold Infants forth in Baptism, as it had in Circumcision; but that command,
which enjoined circumcision, is repealed by a direct command to the contrary,
as Gal. 5.2. 1 Cor. 7.18. Romans 2.28, 29.

If any object, from the second Commandment, injoyning the worship of God,
though the said worship of God be changed in respect of the manner and outward
form, yet the same commandment continues still in force for the worship of
God now as it did then.

The answer is, These two commandments will no way agree so be compared; the
second commandment directly enjoined Gods worship, as the substance thereof,
and so still remains, and also retains the same thing it first commanded,
being the worship of God. But now for the command that enjoined circumcision,
which was the substance of that command, is now clean made void; for
circumcision in the flesh is now abolished, and that in the heart come in the
place; as Romans 2.28, 29. Col. 2. Again, as the old outward form of Gods holy
worship under the old Testament was abolished and done away, so likewise the
new order and form of Gods worship was erected and set up again by special
command; and when the manner of it is once set down, ^hen the commandment
comes on again, and not before, and binds only to that order and manner so
erected, and set up, and to none else, so that now the new state of the Church
and worship of God being established, and the subject of Baptism in the same,
expressed to be a believer. Now if that commandment comes on upon this state,
then it binds to this subject only and to none other. And to hold the subject
of Baptism by the same command, that enjoined circumcision, without the said
subject being expressly set down, and so confirmed and established by the New
Testament; this is more then will be granted in any other part of Gods worship
enjoined, or comprehended in the second commandment. All which say we, is so
far approved of by God, as is expressly set down in the New Testament, or
everlasting Gospel of Christ.

But let us examine a little wherein the authority of that commandment of
circumcision may be, that is brought to bear out the baptizing of Infants:
Circumcision it does not, for all agres that we are now to baptize, and not to
circumcise: the parties circumcising it does not, then the Master of the family
to circumcise; but now one authorized by Christ in his body the Church to
baptize; the same part of the body it does not, that the foreskin Baptism the
whole man; the age it does not, that the eight day, and this any day; the
subject it does not, that a male only, this both male and female. Now in that
it does not injoyne none of all these, wherein then can the authority of that
command consist now in Baptism, so as to injoyne Infants to be baptized; for
either it must be a thing indifferent, or else it must injoyne something. And
whereas men cry out from that command, Infants, Infants, Infants must be
baptized as they were commanded to be circumcised: why this command if it
should be so, serves for none but only males; so that if they will have the
female to be baptized, they must look out for another commandment for them,
and so there must be two commandments meet in one ordinance.

But I would demand of such as hold the baptizing of Infants from the command
that enjoined circumcision, that if in case there had been no word or command
given for baptizing of any, whether that they, or any other, might have
baptized either Infants or any others from that commandment; but I suppose
they will not so affirm, and if not, what do man wander under the clouds of
their own ignorance, when as the light shines so clearly, for what is more
clear then this, that the New Testament has sufficient express commands and
rules for the administration of Baptism, both for matter and manner, with out
any reference, much less dependency upon the law of Circumcision, they being
two distinct institutions. At two several times there is given command for
Baptism; the first was John the Baptist, who received his authority not from
the command of Circumcision, but had his Commission expressly from God, who
sent him to baptize; as Joh. 1.32, 33. And those that he baptized are said by
the holy Ghost to be such as manifested their faith and repentance; as Mat.
3.6. The second Commission which serves for us Gentiles, is that which Christ
gave to his Apostles, Mat. 28.18, 19. Which has no reference to the command of
circumcision, but by virtue of that power and authority given him of the
Father, for the ordering and disposing of all things in heaven and earth, for
his own glory and his peoples good. In which Commission the subjects of
Baptism are expressly set down, who they should baptize, and they are only
such as first were to be taught, and had faith to believe the same, as I have
sufficiently proved.

And now having these express commands, so fully held forth by Christ
himself, to gether with the whole practical order of the Apostles, and others
following the same in their administracions, and to go about to bring
authority or command from the commandment of circumcision, for the baptizing
of Infants, in more then ignorance, and for to plead the baptizing of Infants,
because that command is not repealed, which enjoined Infants to be circumcised,
is too weak for faith to build upon. But now I hope the removal of the same
appears, in that there is not only a command in the new Testament directly
against the same, but also a new command, and so a law from Christ the King of
Saints, and Lord of the new Testament, for the ordinance of Baptism, and all
the circumstances of the same. And yet for the further repealing of that law
which enjoined Infants naturally borne, and so from the womb to be
circumcised, without minding any other sprituall birth, but only that which
brought forth the child in the world; for 8 days after it must be circumcised
by command from God; which order is opposed by the Gospel, as Joh. 3.3. 5, 6.
Where Christ opposes the two births, the spiritual to the natural birth, and
excludes the natural from any admittance into the Kingdom of God, without the
spiritual birth. And that he might not be mistaken, he further explains
himself, saying, That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
born of the spirit is spirit. And further to know Christ's meaning in these
births, which he opposes the one to the other, he fully holds forth, Joh.
1.13. in these words of such as received him, which were borne, not of blond,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

This way and order the commandment of circumcision speaks nothing of, neither
required the same, but only the first birth; for no child of 8 days old was
capable to be borne again of the Spirit, in our Saviors sense. And thus the
Gospel excludes that which the law of circumcision commanded, even the first
birth which is natural, without the second birth which is spiritual. And it
is in vain for any to say that Christ speaks here of men of years; for he
opposes the two births, as aforesaid, and not the age of any, and so the whole
universe of mankind: for this place is generally taken for the doctrine of
regeneration, from whence many hold that children are regenerated in Baptism.
But generally those that baptize their Infants, hold that they are regenerated
before, for they baptize them as being holy before. And if any shall say, that
the Kingdom Christ speaks of, is meant the Kingdom of glory, and not of
grace; and therefore though he excludes such out of the one, yet not out of the
other. The answer is, that it is no where found in the Gospel, that any are
excluded the kingdom of glory, and yet are admitted into the kingdom of
grace. The door of grace in this sense, is no wider then the gate of glory by
Gods appointment: and what men do through ignorance, that alters not the truth
of God, as Romans 8.30.

And if any say, that Christ at this time had opposed Gods ordinance of
circumcision if such a truth had been put in execution, as is gathered from his
words, to exclude and put by an Infant of (...)

To this I answer, and say, that Christ speaks of many things before his death,
which did not concern the time present, but of the order and government of his
Church under the new Testament. And so he speaks here of the qualification of
his subjects and worshippers in his new kingdom that was at hand; all which
was to be spiritual, and therefore to be borne of the spirit, as Christ
affirmed. In which sense circumcision in the flesh ceased, and that of the
heart only remains, as Romans 2. Add to this the words of the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.3. We are, says he, all by nature children of wrath: Now if this be true,
then so long as nothing else appears, how can we judge otherwise, without
gainsaying the holy Ghost; and by the words of Christ, we are first borne of
the flesh, and so in an estate of nature, until grace recover us, and the
effects of Christ's redemption takes hold upon us. Until which time we are
judged of the Apostle to be children of wrath, and of the flesh, and so
unclean, and no unclean thing must come into the holy City of grace and
glory, Rev. 21. All which being well considered, I think will put a stop to
the commandment of circumcision, from having any footing in the ordinance of
Baptism, or for any to take a ground from thence to justisie their Infants in
their Baptism, until some evidence appears of their being inwardly washed in
the blood of Christ, that so the same may be confirmed unto them by that
outward washing with water; otherwise the ordinance is no way availeable to
them, but sin in such as impose the same upon them, who do neither desire
it, nor know what is done unto them, which is to set a seal to a blanke, a
thing condemned in nature.

And so I pass from this subject, of Infants Baptism, desiring the Lord
abundantly to extend his saving grace unto as many as belongs to him, that the
praise may ever abound to his glory, and their everlasting comfort in all
happiness and safety here, and glory hereafter.

We know no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. We are the circumcision, that
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh, Phil. 3. Marvel not that I say, a man must be borne again,
before he can enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.

And thus I desire to have Infants ever in honorable and reverent respect, so
far as honor and reverence belongs unto them, and so leave them to the grace
and good pleasure of the God of all grace, who only knows who are his, and
has the disposing of them, and all his creatures to his own glory, so be it,
Amen.

And now having examined the visible right that infants have to baptism, and
finding none by the Word of God but the contrary; I come now to a second sort,
and they are such as have been baptized in a false Antichristian estate, as
they say, and so challenge right to enter upon or assume a true Church with the
same baptism they received of the man of sin. So that the thing I deal with
now is only that opinion which holds a state to be false and Antichristian;
and yet Baptism there administered by an Antichristian power to be the true
ordinance of God: and so leave the state as false, and retain their baptism
received there as a true ordinance of God. And for a more orderly proceeding in
this discourse, I shall first set down my dissent, and the causes of it; and
then examine those grounds that are brought for the proving of the contrary.

And first for that ordinance of Baptism, which as aforesaid has been
administered, and received in a false Antichristian estate, and retained the
true ordinance of God; and such so baptized by the power of the man of sin, to
be admitted into the Church of Christ with the same baptism as the Lords
ordinance. This I cannot assent unto, because I see no such thing in all the
Word of God, by which I must be guided here, and judged hereafter. So that I
dissent from that baptism administered by the power of Antichrist, and cannot
own the same for Gods ordinance appointed by him, and instituted by Christ in
the new Testament, and that for these and the like reasons.

First, because in so doing, I shall approve of Antichrists matter and form,
(...)
and so of the state it self. As an infant for his matter, and the words with
water applied, his form. I have already proved that an infant is not the
subject of baptism appointed by God, though it be the child of a believer: but
how much less such who are the carnal seed of the wicked. The covenant of
grace and the parents faith is alleged to inright the former unto baptism;
but what inrights these unto it, and how came they by it?

Secondly, the ordinance of baptism instituted by Christ is so essential to
the constitution of the Church under the new Testament, that none can be true
in her constitution without it. Neither can that be a false Church where
baptism is truly the Lords ordinance in the administration thereof; as 1 Cor.
12.13. with Gal. 3.27. So that to approve of Antichrists baptism to be Gods
ordinance, is to approve of his Church to be also the Church of God. For as the
eaters of the sacrifice were of old partakers of the Alcar, 1 Cor. 10.17, 18.
and to receive him that is sent is a receiving also of him that sent him, Mat.
13.40. so it is with this essential ordinance of baptism in the church of
Antichrist; that whosoever approves of the one, by the same he approves of the
other also. For the ground and pillar that bears up the truth, and that truth
so born up, stands and falls together: as 1 Timothy 3.15. So that where there is
not a t^^e constituted Church, there is no true constituted Church ordinance:
and where there is a true Church ordinance in its constitution, as baptism is,
there is at least presupposed a true Church also. And therefore to condemn a
Church to be false, and altogether Antichristian, and yet baptism there, and
by the same administered, to be the ordinance of God; this I can see no rule for
in Scripture: and therefore I dissent.

Thirdly, (...) 6.
Christ has disclaimed and denies all communion with the man of sin, both in
respect of himself and his subjects; and has also proclaimed open war
against him in all his dominions: and therefore he calls home his subjects, as
Jer. 51.6.45. Revel. 18.4. Christ refuses to be laid as a chief corner stone
under Antichrists building, as he must be if he in his holy ordinance of
baptism be granted to lie in his foundation: For baptism is no otherwise
Christ's ordinance but as it depends upon him the ordainer. But Christ denies
Antichrist any such privilege, and also forbids his people from taking a stone
from Babylon to lay in the foundation of the I ords building; as Jer. 51.26.
But if Antichrists church be of himself, and so false; then all the parts
thereof must be of his own devising, and false also. For if in opposition to a
true Church of Christ, there is a false church of Antichrists: which thing
cannot be, if there be not in opposition to true ordinances of the one, false
ordinances of the other, that are essential to the same, as the ordinance of
baptism is. And so the like ministry proportionable to the same, as 1 Cor.
10.21. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Revel. 2.2. according to Matthew. 24.24. with 2
These. 2.9, 10.

Fourthly, I cannot approve of that baptism in the church of Antichrist to be
Gods ordinance, because in so doing I shall advance humane testimony above the
Word of God. For I have no way to satisfy my conscience whether I have that
ordinance or no, but only by Antichrists Church-book, or my godfathers and
godmothers: which if the one be dead and the other lost, then am I to seek my
baptism. But at the best if any should demand of me whether I were baptized or
not: all that I can say is, that men tell me so; in all which Christ must have
no voice, and the Word of God put to silence, as knowing no such thing: and
Antichrists Church-book come in the place, as a ground of my faith in a truth
so essential. Which thing I dare not approve of.

Fifthly, to justify baptism in the church of Antichrist to be Gods
ordinance, is to force men to sin against conscience; for if any man comes unto
such for fellowship in the truth, he must either justify the baptism he
received of the man of sin, as Gods ordinance, or else continue in that sinful
way in which he is, and desires to leave; I speak now in their sense whose
practice it is, which I cannot at all assent unto for a truth.

Sixthly, I cannot justify Antichrists baptism for Gods ordinance, because it
makes against Christ's baptism in these two respects. First, for the power by
which the same was constituted, and so authorized in the hand of the Minister,
being the power of the man of sin, rejected of God as an enemic to the crown
and dignity of Christ the King of Saints. Secondly, in respect of that body
into which the party was baptized, and so by the same made a visible member,
and that was in the body of Antichrist. In both which respects the baptism
administered en the false Antichristian state, in my judgment cannot be the
ordinance of God.

And lastly, I dare not go from that rule and order which Christ left in his
last Testament, for the constituting of his Church, and taking of members into
the same, which is by faith and baptism. All which grounds being well
considered, I cannot see by any rule of truth to approve of the baptism
administered in a false Antichristian church to be Gods ordinance, instituted by
Christ in his new Testament. That being there administered under a false power
by a ^^se ministry upon a wrong subject in a false body, and yet the same Gods
ordinance; this is more then I can find by the Word of God, from which rule I
dare not go.

Thus having showed my judgment, and some reasons why I so judge of the
baptism administered in a false Antichristian estate, cannot be the ordinance
of God, instituted by Christ in the Gospel. And now I come to give answer to
some of the chief grounds brought for the proving of the foresaid baptism in
the hand of Antichrist to be the ordinance of God.

And first it is said, that as Circumcision administered in Isreal's great
apostasy remained still the ordinance of God; so that when any of them did
repent, and turned unto the Lord, they were received without being circumcised
again: and the like is now to be considered of baptism in the apostasy of
Antichrist.

The answer is, first it is like to be a bad cause that must be maintained from
the corruptions of other persons or states: Is the order and government of
Christ's new state and kingdom under the new Testament more weak and imperfect
then that under the old, as we must go still unto Circumcision for a rule how
to make out our baptism? Is the light of the Moon become now more brighter
then the light of the Sun; and the heart veiled to see clearer then the face
open, and the servant to teach the Son? Again, it is worth our consideration,
from what church Antichrist did apostinate, and go away from, as the ten Tribes
did under Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. But I pass this.

Secondly, I answer. that Circumcision was not confined in the hand of the
priesthood then under the old Testament, as the administration of baptism is
to the ministry of Christ now under the new Testament.

Thirdly, Circumcision was then by them administered according as God had
commanded the same to be, both in respect of the matter and manner. 1. The same
order. 2. A right subject. 3. The due time. 4. the true place. And lastly, a
lawful Minister. But now the baptism administered by Antichrist is contrary in
all the foresaid respects, which is by a false power upon a wrong subject, by a
false minister in a false body. The like cannot be showed in circumcision, nor
yet in baptism, and God approving of the same to be his ordinance. And now to
oppose this, Zipporah the wife of Moses is brought for an example, to prove
that the baptism administered by a false Minister may be true baptism, as
circumcision was being administered by a woman. Exodus 4.25.

The answer is, first, that Moses wife was in the action the hand of her
husband for the preserving of his life: for had not Zipporah circumcised her
son it seems that God had slain her husband; as ver. 24.25, 26. compared
together.

Secondly, herein God sets forth his wisdom and justice in the subjecting of
his creature, to bring her so far to submit unto his will in that ordinance,
as for to do the thing her self; for whose sake it is like the same was so long
neglected, because there was nothing so contrary and opposite unto her the
Circumcision.

Thirdly, I see not but that in a case of necessity a woman might lawfully
circumcise she being no where prohibited.

And lastly, what of all this, say she did it unlawfully, and in so doing she
was a false Minister; all which is more then God says, yet this was not done
in a false Church, upon a wrong subject, authorized by a false power, as
baptism administered by Antichrist is, and therefore at the worst it makes
nothing at all for that which it is pretended, namely, to prove baptism
administered by Antichrist the ordinance of God, though the same be also
administered by a false Minister.

Again it is said, that the Scriptures are the ordinance of God, which he has
ever preserved, and still owns for his ordinance in hand of Antichrist: and so
does God of baptism there also.

To which I answer and say, that God indeed does preserve the Scriptures,
wherein is contained all Go^^ holy ordinances, as they are therein
comprehended, and laid forth in their instituted rules, and that in the hands
of wicked men, and so in the hands of Antichrist himself. But never in their
constituted order and forms out of the hand of Christ his Church and ministry.
And though that in many things Antichrist has corrupted the Scriptures, yet
they remain still in themselves the ordinance of God. But for the false
expositions, glosses, and doctrines they gather from the Scriptures, with the
Church ministry, worship and government they build upon the Scriptures; and so
their ordinances which they seem to constitute by them: now these I cannot see
to be the ordinances of God any more the one then the other. So that if
baptism with Antichrist, as they say, be Gods ordinance, then why not upon the
same ground the Supper, Church and Ministry, be Gods ordinances also, seeing
they have the Scriptures as well for the one as for the other? And for
baptism, as it is an institution of Christ, and contained in the Scriptures,
as a rule for the Lords people to walk by in their obedience to him; only so
considered it is an ordinance of God, in whose hand soever the Scriptures are.

But now for a false Antichristian Church, to constitute and administer the
like out of or apart from the Scriptures. Now so considered, it is not the
ordinance of God, but men's invention, composed from the Scriptures, as a pattern
drawn forth in the likeness or resemblance of Gods ordinance, but not the
same. For God has communion with none in his word, but by his Spirit and
faith; neither of which has Antichrist, and therefore though he has the
written Letter of the Scriptures, yet no communion with God in the same, so as
to receive his ordinance of him: neither can any man constitute, and so
administer an ordinance of God without authority from Christ the Lord and King
of his Church; which authority Antichrist has not, and therefore Gods
ordinance of Baptism cannot be administered by Antichrist in his false
Anchristian Church and State, as some do so affirm.

But it is said, that there is but only one Baptism, and having once received
that, though it be by Antichrist, we need not to receive it any more; for we
can have but the same again, and that which we have is the same for substance
with Christ's institution, which for the matter, there is Water, and for the
form there is the same words used as Christ instituted the same ordinance of
Baptism in.

The answer is, first, that there is but one true baptism, that is a truth,
and a man being once baptized by the same, he needs not to be baptized again:
this is also true, for I do not approve of rebaptizing. But now to conclude
from hence, that there cannot be a resemblance of that one true baptism, and
yet not the same, this will not follow: there is but one true Church and
Ministry of Christ, as the Word of God reveals. But it will not follow
therefore, that Antichrist cannot resemble the same, and set up one of his own
like unto that, or if that he do, the same must be a true Church and
Ministry, because God approves but of one.

But if Antichrist (as you affirm) may resemble the truth and set up a false
Church and Ministry, which is the greater. Upon the same ground do I affirm,
that he may, nay, that he must also resemble the true ordinances: by setting up
false ordinances, which are the lesser like unto the true, otherwise he could
not put off his ware, for none would trade with him in his merchandise.

Secondly, Antichrist has not the substance of Gods holy ordinance in his
baptism, though he use, or rather abuse the words of Christ's institution in
his administration, for then he should also have the substance of all other
ordinances of God, because he uses the words of the Scripture, wherein they
are instituted and contained. it is not the bare letter of Scriptare only, but
the true mind of Christ there set down, that bears an ordinance, which none
can know, but only he who has the Spirit of Christ, as Romans 8.1 Cor. 2. and
this has not Antichrist.

Thirdly, I deny the water to be the matter, but only the instrument in
Baptism; for as fire is the instrument of burning, even so is water of
washing; and as the matter of burning is the sewell that is burnt, so the
matter of washing is the party washed; for as the matter of the Church is the
Saints, and the matter of the Ministry, the Prophets, so the matter of
baptism, are the persons upon whom the same is conferred.

Fourthly, I deny the form of words, with the use of water, in a false
Antichristian Church, to be the form of the Lords baptism, instituted by
Christ in the new Testament; for then every foolish using of them words with
water, must be the true ordinance of God, as many ignorantly do affirm. But
for the form of Baptism, that is, authorized person, baptizing the true
matter into the true and orderly profession of Jesus Christ, as mat. 28.19. 1
Cor. 12, 13. Gal. 3.27. This being thus done by a true power and authority
from Christ, is the form of baptism in the administration thereof; but this
does not Antichrist, and therefore his baptism is not Gods ordinance.

The next ground alleged to prove Baptism administered in a false
Antichristian Church, to be the true ordinance of God, and so to be retained,
is the vessels of Gods house in Babylon, that as those vessels remained still
the Lords ordinance being in the hands of Gods enemies; and so may Baptism, as
a vessel of Gods house, being in the hand of Antichrist, which is spiritual
Babylon.

I shall answer to this in brief: first, for the vessels of the Lords house,
they were Gods ordinance, and that whiles they were in Babylon, but not so as
they only consisted in their instituted forms, and not in respect of their
constituted use: that is, as Belshazzar the King and his Princes made them
their drinking cups, as Dan. 5.2, 3. Thus considered with respect to this use
and service that the Babylonians applied them unto, they were not the ordinance
of God, for God never ordained them for such a use. Though in themselves simply
considered they were Gods ordinance, ordained by him to holy use. In which
consideration Baptism may be said to be Gods ordinance in the Church of
Antichrist, or where soever the holy Scriptures of God are; only as an
instituted Rule in the word of God, for his own people to observe, and obey
him, by using it in that way, and to the same end, as God ordained and
appointed the same ordinance unto.

But now for Antichrist to take the Scriptures, and according to his right of
authority and spirit, shall from the same compose a form of worship, with
ordinances suitable thereunto. Among which Baptism must be one, without which
all the rest are nothing worth. Now though that Baptism as a holy institution
of Christ, contained in the Scriptures, be the ordinance of God, yet considered
in Antichrists constitution, and false administration, it is not the ordinance
of God, no more then the Princes of Babylons drinking in the vessels of the
Lords house was his ordinance.

Again, secondly, God is said in the Scriptures to give or to send the vessels
of his house to Babylon; as 2 Chronicles. 36.17, 18.21. Jer. 27.2,.22. Dan. 1.2. Now
let the like be showed, where ever God is said to give or to send his ordinance
of baptism unto Antichrist, until then the vessels of Gods house remaining
his ordinance in Babylon, shall make nothing for them to prove Antichrists
sprinkling of water in the face of an Infant, to be Gods ordinance of Baptism.

But here it is said by some, that Antichrist as a thief has stolen away Gods
ordinance of Baptism out of his Church, for which he is said not to have
repented of his theft; as Rev. 9.21.

If this should be true, herein they condemn themselves, for whosoever
communicates with the thief in the thing stolen, he is as deep in the sin
as the thief himself.

But it will be said, that they having repented of the evil, God has accepted
of that, though they retain their Baptism, as his ordinance.

How can this be? which way does their repentance appear? so long as they
retain the thing that is stolen; for nature teaches thus much, that so long
as any man keeps in possession that which he knows was stolen, he is guiltle
of the theft.

Secondly, How do such know that God has accepted of their repentance, while
they Rill retain the thing stolen, and justify the same; and how can they
make it appear by the word of God, that he approves of that Baptism for his
ordinance, which they have received at the hand of Antichrist? All which is
worth the consideration how these things can be made to appear, that are so
commonly taken for granted truths.

Again, thirdly, Though Antichrist should steal away the Lords baptism out
of his Church, yet he could not steal away the power and authority of Christ,
for to administer the same upon any other; For though he should bring away
Christ's baptism, yet it was but only in his own person; which thing he could
not pass from himself upon any other, as an ordinance of God, without the
power and authority of Christ.

And lastly, let us consider a little what may be here meant by theft, together
with the help of other Scriptures, and that is men's bringing in their own
inventions, and humane traditions, and pressing the same for truth upon the
consciences of me^^ by which means the truth of God is displanted, and the way
of the Lord obscured, and so comes to loose its esteem and authority in the
heart of man, as Gal. 1.6, 7. and 4.17. In which sense the false Prophets are
said to steal the word of God every one from his neighbor, as Jer. 23.30.
that was by setting up their own traditions, and pressing the same for truth
upon the people; by which means the commandments of God were made of no
effect; as Mat. 7.13. Of which the Lord complains that the fear by which the
people feared him, was taught by the precepts of men, as Isa. 29.13. This way
Satan in his instruments lies at all advantage, to disable and prevent the Word
for taking effect upon the hearts of men; as Mat. 13.19. And this is the theft,
that the aforesaid thieves and robbers had not repented of, and not Antichrists
stealing of the Lords Baptism out of his Church.

But it is thought by some, that the gold and rich attire, by which Antichrist
is painted, and the golden cup in the Gentlewomans hand, are the ordinances of
God, as Rev. 17.4.

As there is little matter in this to any purpose, I shall answer in brief to
the same. And first, that this is a comparative speech, with reference to that
outward pomp and glorious state, wherein she sits triumphing as a Queen,
Rev. 18.7. And withal, the same wisely and cunningly composed by humane
policy, under a general form of an outward profession of Religion, yet
opposing the truth and power thereof, Cant. 5.7. Under a show of humility, and
pretense of zeal, by her forwardness in the executing of her power, against
all such that refuse subjection to her holy orders, and to worship God
according to that image and form which she has set up, Col. 2.8.18.20, 21,
22, 23. Rev. 13.15, 16. Thus by her policy she draws forth her form in some
resemblance of truth, so far as it suits with reason and humane wisdom; and
therefore it is, that the greatest Politicians and artificers are of her side,
Rev. 18.23. and so carries out things with a strong hand, against all that
shall oppose her, Rev. 13.4. and through her great wisdom, art, and policy,
she is exalted, and becomes famous, and in great esteem for the generality
of men; as Ezekiel. 2.8. Rev. 13.3. Rev. 18.18, 19. And therefore such are best
accepted of her, that are the strongest for reason, and the most skilfulst
artificers, to paint, and to trim her up, and to set her forth in her glory and
beauty to the eyes of men. And by this means she as an harlot deceives the
simple, and bewitches the Nations, as Pro. 7.16, 17. Nabum 3 4. Gal. 3.1. Rev.
18

All which is to be understood in a spiritual sense, and in matters of
Religion, and then her golden cup, and all her rich attire will appear to be
only of the Gentlewomans own devised painting, and not any of the Lords
ordinances, as Jer. 51.7. and Jer 2.33. with Jer. 4.30. and Rev. 18.12, 13.16.
So that here the holy Ghost sets forth her state to be Babylon spiritually
considered, as Rev. 11.8. and her Ministers are set forth under the name of
Merchants, because they buy and sell and trade for her in all the Merchandise
of her Religion, wherein all things are set at sale, as much as the souls and
bodies of men, Rev. 18.13. that is, the penal laws imposed to the forcing of
their consciences, and such as are rich to escape for money or friends, but
such as are poor or conscious to abide the punishment, as a Pet. 2.3. the
Merchants are styled or called The great men of the earth, ver. 23. that is,
great for humane learning, arts, and policy, to keep up her state and trade,
and make out the same against all gaine-sayers, and what they want in skill,
they have it in power, and so able to bear down all before them, for they are
the great men of the earth, and who is able to make war with the beast. The
things they merchandise withal, are all manner of precious stones, and the
like, which holds forth the curious art of nature, for the ordering and
composing of all those things concurring for the making up of that state and
form, in so near a resemblance to truth. All which is without substance, for
at length no man will buy their ware, which causes great lamentation among the
Merchants, Rev. 18.11. And so I shall now leave this subject to the wise and
godly Readers consideration, to mind well the truth of such a practice, that
leave a church as false and Antichristian, and yet approve of that Baptism
there administered by a false and an Antichristian power, to be the true
ordinance of God.

I must here conclude with Doctor Hall in his Apology against the Brownists,
page 17, 18.31. That either such must go forward to baptism, or else turn
back again from whence they came; for there is no middle way, nor the least
light in the word of God to bear out the same, but the contrary.

You shall not do whatsoever is right in your own eyes, for you are not as
yet come to your rest, and to the inheritance which the Lord your God gives
you, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9. Arise and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is
polluted, Micah 2.10. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believes on me, should not abide in darkness, Joh. 12.46. And now why tarry
ye, arise and be baptized, and wash away your (Antichristian) sins, calling
on the name of the Lord, Act. 22.16. or submitting to the order and way of
Christ. They resisted the counsel of God against themselves, being not
baptized of him, Luke 7.30. Arise therefore and obey the Lord, and think not
within your selves, we are baptized already, and that by Antichrist, for I tell
you that you are never able to prove your selves to be under the Lords holy
ordinance of Baptism, by all the light in Scripture, and art in nature, in
that way you go, namely, to deny the state as false and Antichristian, and yet
retain your baptism there administered by the same power, as the Lords
ordinance, and assume a Church to yourselves upon the same baptism. I speak
in subjection to better judgment, I think the last Church is as much against
the Rules of the new Testament as the former. For certainly, where there is a
false state, constituted by a false power, all that stative ordinances
essential to the same, and constituted by the same power, must be also of the
same nature together with the rest, which is all alike false; therefore if you
take hence a corner stone to lay in your foundation, and build you a resting
place upon the same, know this, that it will not lie firm, but ever be rouling
under you, that you shall not rest long upon it, therefore arise and depart,
for this is not your rest, because it is polluted, it will destroy you, even
with a sore destruction; look betimes, the higher you build, the greater the
fall will be, if it be not right upon the true foundation. I do believe that
God will cause his truth to shine forth with power, both to clear the dark
clouds of ignorance off the hearts of men, and bear down that which stands in
opposition to the same; and if such has been so hard put to it, in the dark
as it were, that they are forced to leave the holy and blessed word of God, and
betake themselves to Antichrists power and testimony, to prove them under Gods
holy ordinance of baptism, though the whole body of the Scripture lies against
them, what will such do when more light comes? they will then yield, or else
appear to be wilful opposers of the truth. The Lord give them hearts to
consider, and to put their cause to the trial of the holy and pure Word of
God, and to bring all his people into one unity of faith, and uniforme order
of truth, that God may have glory, the Gospel honor, the Saints comfort.

The subject of the former discourse has been about the right subject of
Baptism, and that the word of God has discovered to be a believer; only in
the proving of which truth, there in also disproved two sorts of persons, and
they are either believers Infants, or such that received their Baptism of
Antichrist, and yet all in their infancy: both which are by the Scriptures
disapproved, the one being incapable, and so without any Rule from God for the
same; and the other also unlawful, and so directly against the word of God,
which disclaimes all communion with the man of sin, in any of his divine
ordinances, who receives nothing of the Lord, and therefore all that he can
administer unto any, is both of himself, from himself, and for himself, and
so not to be justified, nor retained as the Lords ordinance. And this falling
out so, it follows that we are now to seek for the Lords true Baptism, and
for a case so difficult, as some would make it, two things in special are to
be inquired into; first, how, or where to find it; secondly, how it may be
obtained, being found: for the first, if any ordinance of God should be so
deceased in its constitution, as that we do not know where it is afoot in Gods
way in the world, so as to come by it with a good conscience. A people in such
a case, being convicted of the truth, and he necessity of their obedience to
God in the same, and yet know not the way, or manner how to accomplish their
holy desires, in the finding and obtaining the same. They are to go, as of
old, to Christ, and his Apostles, as the godly then did; that is, to the holy
Scriptures, which are the lively Oracles of God; the Spirit speaking in them
unto a believing heart; so they stand in the place of Christ and his Apostles,
with the same ability and authority, to furnish a man of faith with all
truth; as these Scriptures compared together sufficiently prove, 2 Timothy 3.15
16, 17. 2 Pet. 1.19 20. Romans 16.25, 26. Job. 5.39. Mat. 22.29. Luke
24.25.27.44, 45, 46. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.

By all which we see, that all things are contained in the Scriptures, unto
which the holy Ghost leads men to prove and find all things concerning faith
and obedience to God and man, which are the Prophetical mouth of Christ, that
all must have recourse unto, that will have any thing to do with him, Act.
3.22, 23. And the Rule by which all must be tried, though an Angel from heaven,
and the Apostles themselves, as Gal. 1.8, 9. So that the holy Scripture is the
only place where any ordinance of God in the case aforesaid is to be found,
they being the fountainhead, containing all the instituted Rules both of
Church and ordinances, so that, where or wheresoever any of these are wanting
in their constitution, and cannot be found in their outward orderly form, we
are to go directly unto its institution, and recover the same again from
thence, as Cant. 1.7. Isa. 8.19, 20. Romans 10.6, 7 8. And thus having found the
place or subject, wherein baptism, ever subsists, as an ordinance of God, we
are in the next place to know, how such as want it may come orderly by it; for
though that God has joined his word and ordinances together, yet he has also
ordained an orderly way for his people to come to enjoy them, which orderly way
I conceive to be only in the Church of God, wherein is the power of Christ to
set afoot his ordinances; as when God shall please to take a people to
himself, and by the power of his truth unite them to his Son, and so into an
orderly body among themselves, now such a people, so constituted, have right
unto all such privileges, ordained and appointed by God, for their mutual
comfort and well-being, as Romans 8.17. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. By virtue of this
union they have with their head Christ, the body thus jointly considered, has
the power and authority of Christ within her self, to choose and make use of
any one, or more of her members as occasion offers, and authorizes his or them
to administer baptism upon the whole body, and so upon themselves in the first
place, as apart of the same. Such may be truly said to be sent, and authorized
by Christ; as of old by Christ in his humane body, even so now by him in his
divine and spiritual body; for wheresoever a Church does rise in her true
constitution, there are her ordinances, and also power to administer the same;
and where a thing is wanting, there must be of necessity a beginning to reduce
that thing again into being. And thus briefly I have showed my judgment, in
case baptism should be wanting, where we should find it, and that is in the
holy Scriptures of God.

Secondly, How from thence to be obtained, and that is by Gods calling a people
into an holy fellowship with Christ, from whom they have power to assume, as a
Church, so the ordinance of Baptism upon themselves. I shall yet further
clear up this truth, by showing the manner of the foresaid constitution in the
causes of it.

But before I can do this, I must give answer to two sorts of persons that
oppose the aforesaid truth; first, such as stand for a personal succession;
secondly, such as will have no Church before Baptism, and so make Baptism the
form of the Church.

As for the first, that hold Baptism by personal succession, they have
received a sufficient answer, in proving of that Baptism administered by
Antichrist to be none of Gods ordinance; only a word or two to such as hold a
succession in the defection of Antichrist, as they call it, if they mean by
defection, the outward form of worship, and government Ecclesiastical, a I
think they do, then all the power and authority that ever has carried out
any administration, or constituted ordinance, has taken its being thence, and
depends upon the same; and if so, then the power and ordainer, and the
ordinance so ordained, must be both of one and the same stamp, as I have
already proved, if the one be Antichrists, the other must be also
Antichristian; and to dream of any approved Church by the word of God, in, or
under this defection, and yet a part of the same, is to look for a man in the
Moon, and to suppose a Church to consist in such matter that is destructive to
the form, and therein to hold a succession of truth, is against the very light
of nature, and to keep the Pope upon the throne of Christ, whether he will or
no; but to lay the chain of succession of truth this way, namely, through the
Popedom of Rome, as all such must do that hold a personal succession, or a
Church, and ordinances to consist in the same, from the Apostles until now;
what will such do, and where will their succession of truth lie? when the same
comes to the woman Pope, of whom the Papists themselves are ashamed; for when
we speak of personal succession of truth, as in reference to Church, and
Church ordinances, I look upon this in the power and authority that bears
the same: and to hold a Church to be true, and the ordinances there administered
the true ordinances of God, and to leave this, and set up a way of worship
apart from it, and deny communion with it, is in my dark understanding, a
mere schism, and the overthrow of all order in Religion; so far as I have
learned Christ, men are to stand in their place, and use all means to reform
and reclaim or disclaim by the word of truth; and all being done, and of
necessity I must by the word of God, leave off communion with them, I think by
the same rule, I must disclaim them, and so separate away from them, if they
do not repent, and not to leave a true Church, and true ordinances, and go
apart and erect another Church, ordinances and worship of our selves apart from
it, in opposition to it, this in my judgment is as far from any Rule in the
Gospel of Christ, as for a man to baptize himself, neither of which do I
approve of. Yet a word, by the way, because of such an error that some make,
and how far off from any rule or example, for a man to baptize himself, or to
baptize others, and himself unbaptized, and so thinking hereby to shut up the
ordinance of God in such a strait, that none can come by it, but through the
authority of the Popedom of Rome. But for the opening of this cloud that
seems so to darken the sky, let the Reader consider who baptized John the
Baptist, before he baptized others, and if no man did, then whether he did not
baptize others, he himself being unbadtized, and if he was baptized, whether
it were not by an unbaptized person; and all Scripture being written for our
learning, and this being one, we are taught by this what to do upon the like
occasion. And for the continuation of the Church from Christ's words, The gates
of hell shall not prevail against it, etc. I confess the same with this
distinction; which church is to be considered either with respect to her
instituted state, as it lies in the Scripture, in the Rules of the foundation,
or in her constitution, or constituted form in her visible order. Against the
first hell gates shall never prevail, the foundation stands sure; but against
the last it has often prevailed, for the Church in her outward visible order,
has been often scattered through persecution, and the like, in which sense she
is said to be prevailed against, as Dan. 7. Rev. 12. Act. 8.1. Otherwise, where
was their Church before it came from under the defection.

Again, that which once was in such a way of being, and cease for a time,
and then comes to the same estate again, is, and may ^ruely be said, to have
ever a continuance, as Mat. 22.31, 32. with Luke ^0.38. In which sense the
Church may truly be said ever to continue; for though she be cast down at one
time, yet God will raise her up at another, so that she shall never be so
prevailed against, as to be utterly destroyed. And this way, I suppose, Christ
may have and enjoy ever as good a wife as any can be preserved for him under
the defection of Antichrist. Though some have so wide mouths open against such
as ever wished them well; but I leave them to God, to whom they shall give
account of all their hard words against the Lord, and those that fear his name,
and out of conscience obey him in that way, as some please to call error, in a
reproachful manner. But men do in these days somewhat like to the tyrants in
the ten persecutions, whose cruelty was such, that they exposed the Christians
to be devoured of wild beasts, and God so overpowred the creatures cruelty,
that at length they ceased to hurt them: and when those bloody tyrants saw
that, they put Beares-skins upon them, thereby to insence and to stir up the
nature of those beasts to fall upon them: thus I have heard reported. But
whether this be true or not, sure I am, that such men can be little better
minded, that labor so to cover the godly with such filth, as they vomit out of
their own-selfe-sicke stomachs; but I desire the Lord to pass by all, and to
give men more love and patience to bear one with another.

And to conclude, I fear men put more in baptism then is of right due unto
it, that so prefer it above the Church, and all other ordinances besides, for
they can assume or erect a Church, take in and cast out members, elect and
ordain Officers, and administer the Supper, and all anew, without any looking
after succession, any further then the Scriptures; but as for Baptism, they
must have that successively from the Apostles, though it comes through the
hands of Pope Joane. What is the cause of this, that men can do all from the
Word, but only baptism? and that must come by man, yea, and that by the man
of sin. But we are to know this, that truth depends not upon Churches, nor
any mortal creature, but only upon the immortal God, who by his Word and
Spirit reveals the same, when, and to whom he pleases. And for succession of
truth, it comes now by the promise of God, and faith of his people, whom he as
aforesaid, has taken out of the world unto himself, in the fellowship of the
Gospel: to whom the ordinances of Christ stand only by succession of faith,
and not of persons; for the same power and authority the Apostles had in their
time for direction in godliness, the Scriptures have now in the hand of
Christ, as the head of his Church, which make up but one body, 1 Cor. 12.12.27.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. So that what the Church and the Apostles together
might do then, the same may the head and body, together with the Scriptures
do now, the Scriptures having the same authority in the Church now as the
Apostles had then, the same Spirit being present now to reveal them, as then
to write them. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

The Scriptures remaining in the place of the Apostles for us to have recourse
unto, and serve as the mouth of Christ to all believers, (...)
as the Apostles did before they were written, Mat. 28.20. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21.
Romans 10.6, 7, 8. And as the people of old conferred with the Prophets and
Apostles about their great affairs, so have the Lords people now Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles in their writings, as Luke 16.29, 30, 31.
Which are to us with the Spirit of life in them as effectual, as their
personal presence, if not more, as Job. 6.62, 63. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. Rev.
11.3.5.11. And thus all succession from the beginning came to Christ, and from
Christ to the Apostles, and from them to the Scriptures, which are the
head-spring of all to us; so that, all succession now is only spiritual,
according to faith, and follows not the personal succession of any, but only
the word, that gives being to all order and ordinances that is of God.

And so I come to such as will have no Church before Baptism, and so make
Baptism the form of the Church. I shall be brief in this, because the truth
of this will appear in the causes constituting the Church.

This I think we all agree in, that matter and form constitutes a Church, the
matter is a company of Saints, or persons professing faith in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, and living accordingly, that is, in holiness of
life. The form is that by which these are united and knit up together in one
fellowship, and orderly body, and that is the covenant of grace that lies
between God and his people, by which God visibly becomes the God of such
persons, and they his people above all other. That this is the form of a
Church, and not Baptism, I prove thus; that by which God and a people become
each others apart from all other people, that is the form of them; but the
covenant is that by which God owns a people for his, and they him for their
God, therefore the covenant is the form, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Act. 2.^1.
Genesis 17.11. Luke 1.72. Act. 3.25. (...)


Secondly, That which at the first was the form of a thing, ever remains the
form of the same thing without alteration, but the covenant was the form of
the Church at the first, before ever any ordinance was annexed, therefore the
same still, the Church remaining the same without alteration in the nature of
it.

Thirdly, That which both gives a being to a thing, and ever keeps the same,
that must be the form of the same thing, but the covenant both gave a being to
the Church, and ever keeps the same, therefore the covenant is the form.

Fourthly, That which makes a member to be a member or no member of a Church,
that makes a Church to be a Church, or no church, and so that is the form of
it, for there is the same reason for the whole, that is for every part, but the
covenant is that which makes a member, and so the rest, as Esa. 56.4.6.
therefore the covenant is the form.

Fifthly, That Which persons may have, and yet be no church, that cannot be the
form of a church, but persons may have baptism, and yet no church, ergo, not
the form; the church being the greatest ordinance of God, and the very center
of all ordinances, as Psalm. 87.7. with 1 Timothy 3.15. Cannot be formed by any
particular ordinance, no nor by any less then that which comprehends all the
essential parts and properties of a church, which is Gods gracious covenant,
that gives being to all true churches both first and last.

But some will say, that the Word speaks of no church before Baptism.

For answer to this, I must distinguish in Baptism between the truth in the
doctrine of Baptism, and the outward administration of the same. In the first
sense Baptism is one branch of the covenant, as a truth to be revealed, and by
faith to be received, as an essential truth, together with other truths, for
the constituting of the church, and no church according to the order of Christ's
new Testament, either without it, or before it.

But for the last, namely, the outward administration of Baptism, that ever
follows the Saints joining in fellowship, by mutual faith and agreement in the
doctrine, wherein consists the stating of the Church in her conjoyning in
covenant, which ever goes before the administration of Baptism, and gives
power and authority for the same. So that in the first sense, the Church is
not before Baptism; but in the last sense, the church is before Baptism. This
distinction being observed, I answer in a word thus; we are not to deny a
church to be a church until the Word so calls it; for the church in the old
testament, and most of the churches in the new Testament, were churches
sometime before they were so called. And why may not the same be so here, be a
church before Baptism be administered. Again, a church is only so a church
before Baptism, as that the end of her union, is for communion, and so an
immediate proceeding to the practice of the same truth she agreed upon by a
free and mutual consent in her conjunction. That which states a person or
persons in covenant, instates them in church fellowship: but faith and not
practice instates a people in covenant, for a people must first agree upon
truth in judgment, before they practice the same, therefore faith and not
practice, instates a people in church fellowship; and so a church in covenant
and fellowship before baptism be administered. A people are a church by
covenant, unto which ordinances are annexed, to confirm and establish the
same, as Genesis 17.11. Ezekiel 16.8, 9. Act. 2.41. as Ephesians. 4.5. So that here was a
church before ordinances, or that ever Baptism was administered either by John
the Baptist on the (...)

Some say from Act 2.41. They were added to the Church after they were baptized.

To which I answer and say, If it should b^ so, that they were after Baptism
added to the Church, then they should neither put on Christ by Baptism, not
yet be baptized into one body, not to the true profession of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, etc. directly against these Scriptures, Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 12,
13. Mat. 28.19. And for Act. 2.41. the words are these; Then they that gladly
received his Word were baptized, and the same day there were added unto them
about three thousand souls; which is nothing else but to show how many they
were that received the truth, and so by the same were added to them, holding
Forth the power and goodness of God, in making his word so fruitful, in
bringing in so many by one Sermon to the truth, as Act. 2.47. which is only a
repeating over the number of Persons God at that time added to the rest.

Again, it may be said, that Baptism signifies our regeneration, and new
birth. so that a child must be first borne, and brought forth in Baptism,
before it can be mad a living Member in Christ's body the Church.

Baptism indeed is a sign of the new birth, and so holds forth the same as a
thing done, and not as a thing to be done, and therefore Baptism requites the
appearance of the same, as faith and repentance to go before the
administration thereof, which cannot be until a man be borne from above, and
such as are spiritual alive, are the only subjects of Baptism. This will be
further cleared in the constitution of the Church, which now follows, which
constitution is the orderly collection, and conjoyning of persons into the new
covenant or visible union with Christ their head, and so consequently into an
orderly body among themselves; wherein the Saints are the matter, and the
covenant the form; from which two concurring, the Church arises, and is by
them constituted, as Ezekiel. 16.8. Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. Gal. 3.18.29. Heb. 6.17
Zech. 13.9. with Deuteronomy. 26.16. to 19 Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. and Romans 9.8. with Gal
4.28. By which it appears, that it is the promise, or the covenant of grace,
that produces a Christian, and gives him a being in such an estate of grace,
as in Church Fellowship, and so consequently the Church it self; for that
which is true in a part, is the same in the whole.

Now for the constituting causes by which God ordinarily uses to effect this
work; are these:

First, the word of God, which is to fit and prepare the matter for the form.

Secondly, the confession of faith, which is to declare the fitness of the
matter for the form.

Thirdly, the free and mutual consent and agreement of the particular persons,
upon the practice of the same truth believed and confessed, as aforesaid.

And lastly, the Spirit of Christ, uniting and knitting up their hearts
together, in and by the same truth; and of each of these a word.

First of the Word of God, sitting and preparing of the matter; and this
appears in the ministry of John th^^ Baptist, who was to go before Christ in
the spirit and power of Elias, for to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient unto the wisdom of the just, and to make ready a
people prepared for the Lord, as Luke 1.17 Compare with this Luke 3.4, 5, 6.
where he is said to prepare the way of the Lord, and to make his paths
straight. And now the manner how this is to be done, is to fill up every
valley, and to bring down every mountain and hill, and to make the crooked
straight, and the rough ways smooth: And so verse 6. by the valleys is to be
understood of such as whose hearts were possessed with fear, either of Gods
displeasure against them for sin; or fear of the dangers, straits, and
difficulties, that attends the Gospel of Christ, in the true profession of the
same. From both which the hearts of such are to be freed, that are fit to
follow Christ, and prepared subjects for his Kingdom, Luke 14.26. In which
sense the Gospel is a preparative means to fill up such valleys, by pouring in
the great abundance of Gods rich grace, and free love in Christ toward all
such as believe, and his all sufficiency to preserve such as suffer for his
Names lake. And for laying low the mountains and hills, that is, to humble and
to bring down the proud heart of man, that exalts himself, and cannot submit
unto the simplicity of the Gospel, and to that low and mean condition of
Christ upon his Cross, as Isa. 2.11-22 with 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. And for the
crooked to be made straight, that is, the crooked and Serpent like nature,
ways and evil dispositions of men, these shall be changed, and made
conformable to Christ And so for the making of the tough smooth, that is, the
hard and rough turbulent spirits of men, that will admit of no rule, order, or
peaceable society at all, shall by the word of God be made soft, smooth, and
of such a meek temper of spirit, as that all such shall live together in love,
innocent and harmless, with unity, peace, and uniformitie to Christ in all
things, as Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. All which Christ himself often affirmed, that
except a man deny himself; he cannot be his disciple. All which change thus
upon the hearts of men, is by the power of the Word of God, by which they as
matter are sitted and prepared for the form.

The second constituting cause, is the confession of faith, which declares the
fitnes of the matter for the form; which confession of faith is produced by
the power of the Gospel, shining into the heart of man, and draws away the
same after that which is by the Gospel revealed. Which truth is of such a
working nature, that will not be kept in, but like unto leaven which so seasons
and sweetens the whole man, that as fire at length it breaks forth and
discovers it self, or rather such as have it, and not only so, but it brings
them together, by which they come now to confer about the same, so that at
length they come to be of one and the same mind and judgment in it, and
withal convicted of their obedience thereunto. And upon this, here follows a
third constituting cause, which is their free and mutual consent and agreement
upon the practice of that truth, so by God revealed, and by faith received as
his will in their obedience thereunto: which agreement is between God and them
in his truth, who by his power subjects them to himself by the same, and where
this is in truth. Now comes the cause in the last place, which (...) and
concludes the whole work, and that is the Spirit of grace and power, going
forth in their hearts by faith uniting and knitting them up together in one,
for the manifestation of their obedience to God, in their practie all
subjection to Christ in the said truth, by them received and agreed upon as
aforesaid, and this is the Covenant that forms the Church, which ever goes in
order before the external administration of any other ordinance, then the
matters joining together for orderly practice; for persons must be informed of
the truth in judgment, and bound by the same in conscience, and agree upon the
practice, before the same can orderly be put into execution; which foresaid
union is the holy Ghosts conjoyning and uniting the said persons together in
one and the same truth, and so consequently into an orderly body among
themselves, immediately under Christ their head. Which conjunction is called in
Scripture the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. and the gracious covenant, by
which God becomes their God, and they his approved people in such a visible
relation, Genesis 17. as Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. with Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Ezekiel. 16.8. Ier.
31.3. This is called also, joining to the Lord, as Ier. 50.5 They shall ask
the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our
selves unto the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten. And
the son of the stranger that joins himself to the Lord, to serve him, and to
love his name, and to be his servant, etc. Isa. 56.6. And b^ that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. And of the rest durst no man join
himself unto them, Act. 5.13. And when Paul was come to Jerusalem, be assayed
to join himself to the disciples, Act. 9 26. And the whole body fitly joined
together, etc. Ephesians. 4 16. And a fitly framing of matter together for a house or
habitation of God, as Ephesians. 2.21, 22. All which is the Saints entering covenant
with God, which covenant is their form that gives them a being in such a
relation or fellowship, Isa. 43.21. 1 Pet. 2.9. And so much in brief of the
constitution of a Church, or of the Saints entering into Church Fellowship, and
the causes producing the same.

And now being come into her own land, as of old was signified, Ezekiel. 36.24,
25. which is, into a visible covenant with God, or union with Christ, and so
become his own, she is now to be washed with water in Baptism, as Ezekiel. 16.8,
9. Mat. 28.19. Ephesians. 4 5. And thus being in covenant with God by faith in Jesus
Christ, in which their state consists and so the agreement made, and the
covenant passed between them, now the seal is see to, which is the outward
ordinance of Baptism, to confirm the same; which being done, she is then to
enter upon her holy communion in all the rest of Gods holy ordinances thereunto
belonging, for her comfort and well-being.

And thus I have by Gods gracious assistance done with this subject charged
upon me, partly by such as fear the Lord in a far Country beyond the Seas;
and partly by my own conscience for the truths sake at home. And good Reader,
confider well before you judge, and what I see not, teach thou me, etc. Job
34.31. But let not my unweary Read^^ be offended with me, though I speak a
word or two more.

It may be some will ask me, if I condemn all Churches, but only such as I
have here described.

To which I answer, that I condemn no Church, which God approves of in his
word: secondly, I condemn no Church at all; for I go not about to show who
are false, but what is true, and it is enough for me if such a Church as has
been spoken of be granted to be true, and let all others alone, to stand and
fall to their own Master; and in regard of those reproachful clamours, cast
upon all without exception, that seem to be of my judgment about Baptism, I
shall yet make bold with my Reader, briefly to declare a word of my faith, what
I believe and hold to be truth, and desire to practice the same, and so leave
all to God, and for the godly Reader to judge, what difference there is between
him and me, in the maine, that men should be so incensed against me, as to
seek my life, as some have done, the Lord in mercy forgive them, and lay it
not to their charge. And now for my faith.

First, I do believe, that there is only one God, who is distinguished in
three persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; yet but
one in nature, or essence, without division, and uncommunicable, who made the
world, and all things therein, by the word of his power, and governes them all
by his wise providence.

Secondly, I believe that God made man in his own Image, an upright and a
perfect creature, consisting of soul and body: which body God framed of the
earth, and breathed a soul into the same. To whom God gave a law, upon his
keeping of which depended all his happiness; and upon the contrary attended
his misery, which soon took effect; for he breaking that Law, he fell under the
curse, and the wrath of God lay upon him and all his posterity. By which fall,
Man lost the knowledge of God, and utterly disabled himself of all ability ever
to recover the same again.

Thirdly, I believe God out of the counsel of his own will, did before he made
the world, elect and choose some certain number of his foreseen fallen
creatures, and appointed them to eternal life in his Son, for the glory of
his grace: which number so elected, shall unavoydably be saved, and come to
glory, and the rest left to themselves, in their sin, to glorify his justice.

Fourthly, I believe that God in the fullness of his own time, did send his
Son, the second person, who in the womb of the Virgin Mary, assumed man's
nature, and in the same he suffered death upon the Cross, only as he was man,
to satisfy his Fathers justice, for the sins of all his elect, and them
only; and that he lay three days and three nights in his grave, from whence
he arose the third day by the power of his Godhead, for the justification of
all for whose sins be dyed; and that in the same body Christ dyed, be arose
from tho dead, and afterward ascended into heaven, the place of glory, where
he was before, and there to remain until he comes at the last day to judge
the world in righteousness.

Fifthly, I believe that God of his grace, in his own time, effectually calls
such as shall be saved to the knowledge sive, as a child in the parents
begetting of it; and so God by his Spirit works faith in the hearts of all such
to believe in Christ, and his righteousness, only for justification. And thus
they are made righteous before God in Christ, and so conformable to the will of
the Father through the Son; and also made holy through the work of
regeneration, and the holy Spirit of grace dwelling in them; yet all such have
still as long as they live here in the flesh remaining in them, an old man,
that original corruption, the flesh that wars against the Spirit, which
hinders them in their obedience both to God and man, and many times draws them
to that which is evil, and contrary to their intentions; yet all of them shall
through Christ overcome, and safely be brought to glory at last.

Sixthly, I believe the holy Scriptures to be the word of God, and have the
only authority to bind the conscience to the obedience of all therein
contained, and are the allsufficient Rule by the Spirit of God, to guide a man
in all his obedience both to God and man.

Seventhly, As for the absence of original sin, and power in the will to
receive and refuse grace and salvation being generally offered by the Gospel,
and Christ's dying for all persons universally, to take away sin, that stood
between them and salvation, and so laid down his life a ransom for all
without exception, and for such as have been once in Gods love, so as approved
of by him in Christ for salvation, and in the covenant of grace, and for such
to fall so as to be damned eternally, and all of the like nature, I do believe
is a doctrine from beneath, and not from above, and the teachers of it from
Satan, and not from God, and to be rejected as such that oppose Christ and his
Gospel.

Eighthly, I do believe the resurrection of the dead, that all shall rise and
come to judgment, and every one give account of himself to God, and receive
according to the things done in their bodies, whether they be good or bad;
therefore no conscience ought to be forced in the matters of Religion, because
no man can bear out another in his account to God, if in case he should cause
him to sin.

Ninthly, I do believe the King is set upon his throne by God, who has given
him power and authority to reign and rule for God over all his subjects, as
supreme head over all persons in his Dominions; in whom is resident all power
to punish any that shall offend either against his royal person, crown, or
dignity, and that all his Subjects are to obey him out of conscience to God,
and all in lawful authority under him; and wherein they rule w^^l, I am bound
in conscience actually to obey and assist them to the utmost of my abiliaie,
both in my person and state; and wherein they go amiss, that I cannot with a
good conscience, actually obey them, as aforesaid, I shall passively submit my
body to suffer their pleasure (according to the Word of God) in what they shall
inflict upon me without resistance: this is my faith, and the faith of all that
I desire to have fellowship with.

And lastly, I do believe that there is an holy and blessed communion of
Saints, that God of his grace calls suck as belong to life by election, unto
the fellowship of his Son by the Gospel; of which matter, God by his Word and
Spirit joins them together in his covenant of grace, and so constitutes his
Church, as I have before showed: And as God has thus built for himself an
holy habitation of such pure matter, and also after ho holy a manner, even so
has he provided a way of preservation and safety for the same; as Isa. 26.1.
We have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulworks:
which City is said to have a wall both great and high, and built upon twelve
foundations; great that none shall break through, and high, that none shall
overtop or get over, and strong in the foundation, that nothing shall shake it;
(...) 5. (...) 3.
and God has said, that he will be a wall of fire round about, and the glory
in the midst of it, and that he will keep it, and watch over it by night and
by day, that nothing shall hurt it; and as God has built himself a house
after his own mind, and is a guard to the same; even so he also is said to
beautify the same with salvation, (...) 3. (...)
and to make the place of his feet glorious and that he will lay all her stones
with fair colors, and her foundations with Saphires, and her windows of
Aga^s, and her gates of Carbuncles, and all her borders of pleasant stones, and
all her children taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of her
children. Which City and the streets thereof are said to be of pure gold like
unto clear glass, (...) 11
whose light is like to a stone most precious, even as a Jasper stone, clear
as Crystal. Of which Christ says, Thou art all fair my love, and there is no
spot in thee: (...)
and that the Kings daughter is all glorious within, and her clothing is of
wrought gold.

And as Christ does thus signify unto us the nature of his Church, both in
respect of her matter, her form, her grace and comely order in him her head;
even so he holds forth his love to her, and delight in her, by these and the
like sweet expressions of comfort and solace. (...)
The Lord has chosen Zion, be has desired it for his habitation, saying, this
is my rest, and here will I dwell for ever. And so faith the Apostle, In Christ
all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the
Lord, (...) 1, (...).
in whom you are builded together for a habitation of God through the Spirit:
and therefore God is said to love the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings
of Jacob: and glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. Which
City is said to be Jerusalem which is above, bo is the mother of us all. And
so the mountain of the Lords house is said to be established in the top of the
mountains, and to be exalted above the hills. (...) 6.
For whose sake says the Lord, I will not hold my peace, nor rest, until I
cause the righteousness thereof to break forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns And so called by Christ, and holy
people, the redeemed of the Lord; a City sought out, and not forsaken. The name
of which City from that day shall be, (...) 12 (...) 8.
The Lord is there. And further, called his vine, his plant, his temple, his
flock, his pleasant portion, his first borne, his bride, his Queen, his
Spouse, his wife, his body, his love, his dove, his only joy, and place of
Rest. Consider, Some were persuaded with the things that were spoken, but some
believed not, Act. 28.24.

ERRATA
Faults escaped Page 8 line 5. Read as for is. p. 12. l. 4. r. therefore
though the first, etc. p. 19. l. 45. (...)


