THE Natures, Uses, and Doses Of Several APPROVED and EXPERIENCED Medicines,
Faithfully PREPARED By JOHN SPIRE, junr. Medicinae Professor.

To which is Added, A CATALOGUE of Various Chemical PREPARATIONS, By him always
ready Prepared.

LONDON, Printed by Benja. Harris, Senr. in Great East-cheap, for the AUTHOR,
School.

TO THE Courteous READER.
HAving, through the Blessing of God (from whom alone comes every good and
perfect Gift) upon my Endeavors, obtained (through much Labor, great Study, and
Experience) the Knowledge of several Specific Medicines, (or Arcanum's)
effectual for the Extirpating, and Rooting out the Original Causes of Tedious
and Chronical Distempers: Being Friendly to Nature, pacifying the enraged
Archeus; thereby Conquering the Fury of most Diseases incident to Human Bodies.

I might have Quoted the Names and Places of diverse Persons, that have been
Cured by these Medicines herein mentioned, but shall Desist, and leave every
Prudent Experiencer to speak of them as they find: (only Desiring they would
Communicate their Virtues to their Neighbors) Being Published for the
Necessities of such, who many times Languish under the Burden of Diseases, for
want of true Medicines.

So to that Eternal, Invisible, and Incomprehensible Word of GOD, by which, All
Things were Made, do I Recommend every One, Wishing them Health and Comfort
here, and Eternal Happiness hereafter; and Subscribe my Self, Thine in all Real
Service,

J. S.

THE Natures, Uses, and Doses Of Several MEDICINES,
I. Aqua-Vitae Magistralis: Or, Our Magisterial Water.
IT is an abstersive Medicine, of a powerful Nature, cleansing and strengthening
the Stomach, effectual in opening Obstructions: it is Sudorefick, and
Diuretic: it is very good in Fevers, especially in the Putrid; in Palsies,
Epilepsies, and the Plague; resisting Corruption; in Apoplexies, Lethargy, and
Stupification of the Spirits, stoppages in the Breast, Surfeits, Rheumatism,
Stone and Strangury, Chollick, Oppression of Wind, Loathing of the Food,
Pleurisies (without Blood-letting;) and for Women with Child, and in their
Travail, as also after they be Delivered. This Medicine has proved it self a
successful Remedy in many of the aforesaid Maladies; as many in several parts
of England can Testify, to their great Satisfaction.

It Is Use and Dose.
THe ordinary Dose to Man or Woman, (in any of the aforesaid Diseases) is
generally 2 or 3 Spoonfuls, [observing for those that cannot bear with the
strength thereof, they may allay it with 1 or 2 spoonfuls of Balm or Mint
Water, or white Wine, or clean Spring Water] in all Distempers that call for
speedy relief, as Surfeits, etc. take it 2 or 3 times in an hour: for the
Stone, take it every half hour for 2 hours space, then rest 2 or 3 hours, and
repeat it as before, drinking sometimes a little Chamomile posset drink, i. e.
the Flowers boiled. In Pleurisies, take every half hour till Relief be found
(observing to apply some hot Chamomile fried, or heated, being first sprinkled
with a little Vinegar, to the side) taking once in 24 hours, a dose of the
Balsamic Pill, in the method hereafter prescribed: For Women, when they go
with Child, take it in the morning, and 2 hours after Dinner, for a Week
together, then rest about 4 days, and repeat as before; in their Travail, the
pains being slow, give 2 spoonfuls 3 times in an hour; and for after-pains,
give it often. For Children that are troubled with Wind, mix a little of it
with Fennel, or Spere-mint water sweetened, that it may but just taste of it, and
then give a spoonful as often as need requires. In Windiness of the Stomach,
which causes Vapors in the Head, take 2 or 3 times in a Day. In Apoplexies
and Lethargies, take it frequently, and apply a linen Cloth dipped in the same
to the Temples. In the Gout pains, apply the same mixed with equal quantity of
strong Brandy, often to the place afflicted, and take of it about 4 times in a
Day as directed.

Observe. If in any of the aforesaid Diseases, the Medicine provokes Vomiting,
repeat the Dose immediately, and so take it again and again, till the last Dose
stays; never be Daunted, but go on with it, always minding to take this
Medicine in the beginning of any Sickness, in order to disperse the same. Price
Three Shillings the Pint Bottle.

II. Pilulae Samech: Or, The Friendly Balsamic Pill.
WHose Nature and Virtues are such, that it Operates as Nature would have it,
in order to cleanse the Body from the root of Diseases, viz. by Sweat, Urine
and Stool, sometimes by Vomit, and other times by insensible Transpiration,
according as the Occasional Matter wants to be carried off. It Is a most noble
Preparation, being exalted to the true Intention of Healing: For such is it is
Property, that it first works as an Anodine, and allays the enraged Archeus,
and then carries off the poisonous offending matter by Stool, or some other
gentle way. It totally corrects and destroys the virulency of vegetable
Poisons, either out, or in the Body; and being taken as a Corrector, shows it is
effects: For, if you are assaulted with the violent working of any Potion
vomative or purgative, 'twill so take it off, as to settle Nature in her due
Decorum: such is the Nature, Force, and Operation of this Pill, as a Corrector.

It Is Prevalency will be seen in helping Nature to discharge and expel those
things that offend her, for if you take a Pill, drinking a Cup of mull'd Sack
after it, and sweat in Bed, 'twill immediately disperse it self through the Body,
fortifying the Fountain of Life, and so expels Poison in any part of the Body.
-- It Is prevalent in most Diseases incident to the body, as has by long
Experience been confirmed: For by it is Abstersive Nature, and Pacative Virtue,
it pacifies the enraged Archeus, and by this means insinuates it self into the
languishing Fountain of Life, and per orms much to the Patients content and
satisfaction; especially in Colds, Coughs, Disenteria, or Fluxes of any sort,
or Gripings in the Bowels, Fevers or Agues, as the Tertian, (Quartan) and
Quotidian, Plurifies, Calentures, Headache, the distilling of Humors called
Catarrhus, which destroys the Lungs; also in pains of the Breast, tremblings
of the Heart, giving the Blood a Fermentation, and cleansing it from
Superfluities; and therefore prevalent in the Dropsy, Anasarca, Ascites,
Timpanites, Inflammation of the Reins, difficulty of Pissing: It brings forth
the Smallpox and Measles. It Is a very general Remedy, curing many Diseases,
and not hurtful in any, etc. In pains of the Limbs, Scurvy, Gout and inveterate
Gonorrhaea's, and several other Diseases, as may be seen by

It Is Dose and Application.
FOr any of the aforementioned Diseases, you must take the bigness of a gray Fea,
and drink it down with a Glass of mull'd Sack, or hot Mace-Ale, and being in
Bed, dispose your self to Sweat: This method does very well in the King's Evil,
Measles, Smallpox, or Swine-Pox, to bring the Venomn from the Heart. For
Agues, take a Pill the bigness of a large gray Pea, and drink it with 2 Ounces
of Cinnamon Water, and as much Peper as will lie upon a Groat, an hour before
the Fit, and Sweat plentifully in bed, drinking a little Rosemary, Marygold, or
Cardus Posset Drink; which being continued four or five times, generally takes
it off. -- For Fluxes, and such Distempers in Women, as debilitate their
Strength, take a Pill in a glass of Sack mull'd with Cinnamon.-For the Gout and
Rheumatisms of the whole Body, take a Pill in a glass of Rhenish-wine, drinking
sometimes of our Aqua-Vitae Magistralis; this generally eases at twice taking:
it divides also clods of Blood, and breaks inward Imposthumes, carrying off
their matter, and heals them; as also Bruises and Squats. -- For difficulty of
making Water, the Strangury, Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys, dissolve 2 Pills,
the bigness of 2 large gray Peace in a pint of White Wind, and sweeten it with 5
or 6 Ounces of Syrup of Marshmallows, and let it be for 2 draughts, with 3
hours Intermission in the most violent pain, drinking often a draught of
posset drink, wherein is boiled some Pelitory of the wall, and a few Gromwel
seeds, at the discretion of the Patient, keeping your self warm in Bed always
when it is taken, and so will the Offending matter be carried off. For Children
within 3 or 4 Years Old, you may give the bigness of a Pepper Corn, and so it
may be increased or diminished in it is Dose, according to the Wisdom and
Discretion of the Parent. Price 12 d. the Box.

Observe, Always when you take of this Pill, to take some of our Cordial Drops
in a glass of Sack, or other Cordial Water to refresh the Spirits.

III. Aqua Bezoratica: Our Cordial (or Plague) Water.
1 THis Cordial is good in Sadness, Melancholy, and Dejection of mind, pains
of the Spleen, reviving the Spirits. 2. It powerfully resists Poison, Plague,
Smallpox, and all sorts of malign Fevers: it cures the biting of Venomous
Beasts. 3. It is a good Stomachick; Comforts the Head, Brain, and Bowels: it
causes a good Appetite, taking away Sickness at Heart and Stomach: it is
profitable against Swoonings, fainting Suffocacations, and Fits of the Mother.
4. This Water is Sudorifick, Alexipharmick, and Antifebritick: It is also a
Cordial Cephalic, and a great Restorative; and is excellent against cold and
moist Diseases.

It Is Use and Dose.
YOu may take from half a Spoonful to ^ Spoonfuls, or more, in the morning
Fasting, a little before Dinner, and at bed time; it may be also taken at any
time of the Day, or Night, upon any Fainting, or Sickness at Stomach as
occasion requires, or in any languishing Conditions. It may be taken alone, or
in case of great weakness, in a glass of Canary. Price Sixpence the Ounce.

IV. Panacea Nostri: Or, Our Prevalent Emetick, and Cathartick Powder.
THe Virtue and Nature whereof is such, that it expells all Contagious and
Malignant Humors by the Emunctories; viz. by Vomit, Stool, Sweat, and Urine,
and that after a most friendly and pleasant way, few Doses whereof will
radically cleanse the Body and Blood from the original cause of old chronick
and Hereditary Diseases; as the Epilepsie, Convulsion, Madness, Schrophula, (or
the Disease called the King's Evil,) Leprosy, or any foulness or corruption of
the Blood, French Pox, and other most grievous Diseases, as Ulcers, Fistula's
Noli me Tangere's and in all kinds of Diseases in Men, and Women (except Women
with Child) of what Nature soever they be.

It Is Use and Dose.
FOr any of the aforesaid chronick Diseases, let the Body be once or twice well
purged with our Sal Lenitium, then after 3 Days respite, take a Paper of this
Powder in the pulp of an Apple, or prune, a little fine Sugar, or Syrup of
Gilly-flowers; and if in case at any time this Medicine should not have any
visible Operation at all, yet never the less it will perform its Office, and
drive forth the Distemper: Now if the Disease be Rebellious it must be
continued to be taken every 5th Day, and the intermitting 3d Day, take a Dose
of our Balsamic Pill, as it is prescribed; this method does very well For the
Scurvy, Pox, Gonorrheae, and inveterate Ulcers. -- For Agues, let it be taken 2
hours before the Fit, to cleanse the Body; and to perfect the Cure, proceed as
is directed in the use of the Pill. For Fits and Convulsions in Children, let
it be taken in Breast-milk, and not exceeding the weight of a Rape-seed: It may
be given to Newborn Infants; but as they increase in strength, so may the Dose
be somewhat increased, at the discretion of the Parent. For Children of 3 or 4
Years of Age, give the 3d part of a Paper: For those of 7, 8, or 9, give half a
Paper, always observing to take Posset Drink freely, during the Operation: The
Paper contains 3 Doses, at 2 s. 6 d.

V. Elixer Magnum Cordialis: Or, Our Great and Famous Cordial Drops.
BEing a wonderful Arcanum, whose Virtue and Prevalency has been powerful in
these following Diseases; as the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy,
Convulsions; and most other Diseases of the Head, Brain, and Nerves; they cure
the Vapors in Women, and Fits of the Mother; they remove Ostructions, and
pains of Spleen; they are also an admirable Remedy in the Plague,
Spotted-fever, Smallpox, and Measles, or any malignant Fever, resisting
putrefaction of the Blood, which have been confirmed by about 19 Years
Experience in our daily Practice etc.

It Is Use and Dose.
TAke as follows from 4 drops to 12, 14, 20, 25, or 30, to 60. in Canary, or
any other proper Cordial; and for the diseases of the Head, let it be taken in
a Cephalic Cordial; and also let the Temples and Nostrils be bathed therewith.
For Children that are like to have the Smallpox, give this Medicine to bring
out the Distemper; (increasing or diminishing the Dose as you see convenient)
in a glass of Sack, hot Mace-ale, or some convenient Cordial, disposing the
party for Sweat, drinking often a good draught of hot posset drink, and boil
there in Marygold-flowers, a top of Balm, Angelica, and Rosemary; in Surfeits
let it be taken in the manner aforesaid, (observing that the Stomach be first
cleansed by often taking of our Aq. vitae Magistralis) for Children that are
inclined to Rickets, or breeding of their Teeth, give some drops in a little
sir. of Cowslips or Poppies. -- In intermitting Fevers give above 60 drops in a
glass of Sack or Rhenish Wine. In continual Fevers give it every 6 hours in the
manner aforesaid; always minding to take at the hour of rest, a small Dose of
our Balsamic pill, as also our Pulvis Antefibriticus, according to directions
in its place. In Consumptions and great Weakness, take 40 or 50 drops Mornings
and Nights in a glass of Canary; as also 2 or 3 times a Day, for the space of
40 Days together.

Observe. Women with Child may safely take this Medicine. Price four Shillings
the Bottle.

VI. Pulvis Antifebriticus Noster: Or, our General Febrifuge.
1. AN admirable powder against Fevers of all sorts: A few Doses thereof (with
the use of the other Medicines) takes off the Fever beyond Expectation. 2. It
is something Sudorifick, but for the most part works downwards first, and
afterward provokes Sweat; it is a prevalent remedy against putrid Fevers,
Measles, Smallpox, Calenture, Spotted-fever, and other venomous Diseases. 3.
It is good against the Green Sickness, Dropsy, Melancholy, Scurvy, Jaundice,
and its profitable in Hectic Fevers. 4. It resists Putrefaction, fortifies the
Stomach, corrects Crudities, purifies the Blood, cleanses the Bowels of filth
and viscous Humors, by a gentle Purging way.

The Dose and manner of Using it.
1. LEt the Patient drink plentifully of our Aq. Vitae Mag. according to the
directions in its place: give a Dose of powder in the Morning, and at Evening
for 8, 12, or 16, days as you see occasion, more or less; you may give it in
form of a Bolus in a little Marmalade of Quinces, or pulp of Pruens, Jelly of
Hartshorn; or it may be exhibited in a Glass of Canary, or a spoonful of Sir.
of Saffron, or Clove-Gilly flowers.

VII. Aqua Ruba Mineralis.
IS an excellent Medicine of a preservative Nature, of great benefit in the
plague, and other contagious distempers; particularly against the burning
thirst in Fevers: Good against Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Ptysick, the
diseases of Throat and Mouth; as Angimas, Strumas, Inflammations of the
Palate, or Uvula of the Mouth, Thrush in Children, Quinsies, and such like
Inflammations; as also for an unsavory Breath.

It Is Use and Dose.
FOr Thrushes or sore Mouths in sucking Children, or any foulness of the
Tongue, or Throat, 2, 3, or 4 drops dropped into a little White Wind, or
Plantain-water, sweetened with a little Honey of Roses, and so drink it, and
wash their Mouths with the same; for People of riper Years, they must Gargle
their Mouths with it; it being composed to a Gargarism with White Wind, or
Plantain-water, and dulcified with Syrup of Mulberries, or Honey of Roses;
often taking from 6 drops to 40, or 50, in Beer, White Wind, or Plantain-water.
For the burning Thirst in Fevers, give from 6 drops to 40 or 50, or half a
Spoonful in so much Beer, or Ale, that it may taste sharpish of the Medicine; if
the Fever be violent, it may be given 3 or 4 times in 5 or 6 hours space; but
in continual Fevers it may be given as often as the party desires to drink,
observing in such cases to take often to procure Sweat, of my Elix. Magnum
Cordialis, and at Night to take a Dose of Vinum vitae, to cause rest, and
expel the venom of the distemper; for shortness of Breath, the Ptysick, and
Cough, give it in Hysop-water, with a little Liquorish, and 5 Figs decocted
therein; for a stinking Breath, and to create an Apetite, take it Mornings
fasting, and 2 hours before dinner; and an hour before supper; about 6 or 8
drops in Beer or Wine. Price One Shilling Sixpence the Bottle.

VIII. Potestates Succini: Or, our Powers of Amber.
1. IS a most admirable Remedy against Cold, and moist diseases of the Head,
Brain, Nerves, and Womb. 2. They Cure Head-achs, Lethargies, Dullness, and
Sleepiness, and other pituitous distempers of the Brain. 3. They are admirable
against Cramps, and Convulsions. 4. They are excellent in Palsies, Rheumatisms,
and Gouts. 5. Against Fits of the Mother in Women; and takes away pains after
their Deliveries, cum multis alijs.

The Dose, and manner of Using them.
FOr outward uses bath the place affected very well twice a day, till you find
Relief; inwardly, take them from 15 drops, to 30, 40, or 60, in a Glass of
Sack, Night and Morning: Continue the same for 40 days or more, as you see
occasion.

Price one Shilling sixpence an Ounce.

IX. Tinctura Hysterica: Or, our Hysteric Drops against Fits.
THese Drops are composed against those called Hysteric Fits, viz. Suffocation
of the Matrix, (alias, Fits of the Mother) for which its a most excellent
Remedy; as also against the Colic Megrim, Falling Sickness, palpitation of
the Heart, Obstructions, and Weaknesses of the Head, Nerves, and Womb: It
attenuates, opens Diseases, resists Poison, provokes Urine, and the Terms; and
is profitably given in the Green Sickness in Virgins, Rickets in Children.

The Dose and manner of takng it.
IN any of the aforesaid diseases, you may take it in White or Rhenish-wine, or
in Shery, or Canary, or other proper Hysteric Julep; give it when the Fits is
off, and in a Morning fasting, and last at Night; but when any Fit comes, give
it in the time of the Fit: For young Virgins, let them take in White Wind: For
the Rickets in Children, give it in Canary, or old Malago, Bathing the Joints,
and Backbone with our Vnguentum Rachitidem, or Ointment for the Rickets, twice
a day, before the Fits: The Dose is from 20 drops, to 30, 40, or 60, according
to Age, and Strength. Price three Shillings the Ounce.

X. Arcanum Chalybeatum: Or, our Steel Drops.
WHose Virtues are powerful in removing, and carrying off all Obstructions, of
what kind soever they be, which are incident to young Virgins; and also a very
safe Remedy in the Dropsy, provided it be taken with the other.

It Is Use and Dose.
WHich is from 10 or 12 drops, to 20 or 30, according to Age and Strength.
Mornings fasting in a draught of Water Gruel, warm Broth, or Mace-ale, keeping
the Body stirring by some moderate Exercise, always observing to take every 3d
Day, a Dose of our Sal. Lenitium; let it be continued for the space of forty
Days. Price Two Shillings Sixpence the Bottle.

XI. Gutta Lythontripticae: Or, our Stone-Breaking Drops.
THese Drops are a most incomparable Remedy for the Colic and Stone; being an
Arcanum fit for the Closet of a Prince, or any Noble Man; and is herewith made
public for the benefit of those that are afflicted with that deplorable
disease of the Stone, Strangury, Colic, and difficulty of Urine.

The Use and Dose of these Drops, with necessary Observations.
THe Dose is from 20 to 40, or 50 Drops in a glass of White or Rhenish-wine,
every four hours, and in the time of each four hours, drink a Dose of our Aqua
Vitae Magistralis, as directed in its place, and at the hour of Rest, take a
Dose of our Balsamic Pill, as in the directions of the said Pill in its place;
and by the blessing of God upon this Medicine thou will find the Stone to break
and dissolve, coming away in small pieces, and Sand: proceed in the same manner
for the Colic. And I need say no more it being so effectual an Arcanum; it
will sufficiently demonstrate its own Praise. Price Ten Shillings the Ounce.

Sal. Lenitivum: Or, A Famous Purging Salt.
BEing a Salt prepared of Mineral Subjects by apt mediums, purified and
reconciled to the Archeus and thereby becomes a Salutiferous Remedy, enobled
with Virtues sufficient for the Curing of many Diseases. It is neither an Acid
nor an Alcaly, but a Salt of a midling Nature, being able to pass the several
Digestions unchanged, and in its passage to resolve and absterge all
Preternatural Coagulations, for which reason I call it Sal. Lenitivum, it is
endowed with these 4 general properties, viz. Cathartick, Dieuretick,
Deobstruent, and allaying of all Preternatural heat and Acrimony: besides it is
a general easer of pain, (and extinguisher of Venom) as is manifest by what it
effects in alleviating the Pains of the Gout, Rheumatism, Colic, griping of
the Guts. 1st. It Purges the gross Excrements, and most viscous humors of the
first passages without nauseating the Stomach, or the least Griping Pains. 2ly.
It is singular in opening Obstructions of the Vessels and Viscera. It is of
great use in Fevers, especially those that proceed from Surfeits, occasioned by
Eating or Drinking. It also dissolves all Stagnant and Obstructing matter in
the Viscera. This Medicine does not only dissolve and expurge the Excrements of
the Stomach and Guts; but it also corrects the violence of all Preternatural
Purges, if you put but two drams of it in their Infusion, or drink the same
quantity in a draught of warm Ale, or Posset Drink, after any Potion, that will
Gripe or Operate Churlishly, etc. This admirable Salt never leaves the Belly
bound, as the common Purges do, but always Soluble, therefore excellent against
a Costive temper of Body. The 2d. intention of this Salt is to alter and open
Obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Pancras, Reins, Bladder, and
Womb, from which proceed many tedious and stubborn Diseases, as the Scurvy,
Dropsy, Jaundice, Hypocondriack Melancholy, Vapors, Green Sickness,
Rheumatism, inveterate Headache, Restlesness, Sleepiness, Vertigo, Frenzy,
Cramps, Convulsions, internal Inflammations, and Aposthumes, Piles,
Exulcerations of the Kidneys and Bladder, Gravel, stoppage of Urine, etc.
Together with many others, arising from Obstructions and Acrimony of the Blood,
and Vital Juices. This excellent Salt may be taken at all times of the Year,
and in all places, without loss of time, or hindrance of business; and although
it be of great Use and Service in very many Diseases, yet I have by experience
observed, that in some it is Specifically Potent; as in the Scurvy, Jaundice,
Dropsy, Suffocations, Green Sickness, stoppage of the Menses, Piles, Cholick,
Diarrhaea, Bloody Flux, Worms, Inflammations, and Rheums of the Eyes, Itch, and
other Choleric Eruptions, of the Skin, heat of Urine; in all which cases it
has signalized it self.

It Is Use and Dose.
FOr any of the aforenamed Diseases, to a Man or Woman is, from half an Ounce,
to three quarters of an Ounce, a Child of a Year Old, one Dram to two Drams,
and so on according to Discretion of the Parent, and Age of the Child, always
to be dissolved in Spring water, plain Posset Drink, or thin Water Gruel, (and
in Summertime) in Whey, which the Patient fancies best to take it in. In the
Scurvy it ought to be taken daily, or every other day, for a Month or six Weeks
together, taking in all their Drink a pure Spirit of Salt, (to the quantity of
40 drops in a Day) which may be had at my House for 12 d. the Bottle. For the
Jaundice I give it in Summer in Water or Whey, in Winter in warm Gruel, or
Posset drink; 5 or 6 drams while the Jaundice cease, observing to take it every
other Day; in the Dropsy in the same manner as the Jaundice, only in a less
quantity of the Vehicle, continue it for a Months time. In the Green Sickness
in Maids, it is necessary to dissolve an Ounce of the Salt in a Quart of pure
Spring Water, and to take half a pint every Night, and the same quantity early
the next Morning; continue taking, if need be a Month or 5 Weeks. In the Piles,
a quarter of an Ounce of the Salt dissolved in Water or Whey, and taken for
some time. In the Cholick, or griping of the Guts, take one Quart of
Spring Water, and boil therein two Drams of each of the Seeds of Annis, Fennil,
Caraway, and Coriander, then dissolve therein an Ounce of the Salt, and let the
Patient drink frequently thereof a small draught, that the whole Quant may be
drank in a Day; if the Party Vomit, continue the Dose while the Vomiting
cease. In a Diarrhaea, or common Looseness, boil Wheat-bran in Spring Water,
and take half an Ounce in the Decoction thereof, daily or every other Day,
according to Strength. In a Diassenteria, or Bloody Flux, give it in a
Decoction of red Rose-leaves, boiled in Water, giving a Clyster daily, made
with the Broth of a Sheeps-head, continue the use till the Party find Relief.
For Rheums of the Eyes, take it daily in the ordinary manner. In the Itch,
Botches, Boyls, and other Choleric Eruptions of the Skin, give half an Ounce,
or 5 Drams, dissolved in Fumatory-water, or Whey, for a Fortnight or three
Weeks together, taking sometimes in their Beer, a Spirit of Salt, till the Cure
be perfected. The Price of this Noble SALT is one Shilling the Ounce.

XIII. Vinum Vitae: Or, Our Anodine Drops.
BEing a sovereign Medicine against a Diassenteria, or Bloody Flux, Cholick,
Gripes, Vomiting, and Looseness in Young or Old; and to procure quiet Rest.

The Use and Dose.
FOr a Man or Woman, take always at Bedtime half a spoonful in a draught of
Mace-ale, or Mul'd wine. For Children in the Month, from 4 drops to 20 in
Brest-milk, or Ale; as they increase in Age, so may the Dose be increased; at
the Discretion of the Nurse, or Parent. Price one Shilling the Bottle.

XIV. Essentia Stomachia: Or, our Stomach Essence.
IS a great strengthner of the Stomach, and expells Wind, good against the
Cholick, Gripes, Pains at the Stomach, Stitches, and Pains in the Side: It
helps indigestions, and cures Surfeits, and attracts cold watery Rheums from
the Stomach.

The Dose is from 4 drops to 25 in a glass of Wine, or Ale, 2 or 3 times a Day,
as necessity calls for it. Price Two Shillings Sixpence the Bottle.

XV. Spiritus Paragoricus: Or, Our Bathing Spirit.
WHich is a safe sure and ready Medicine; it may be taken inwardly in
Paralitick and Appoplectick Cases; but I here chiefly design it, for external
Uses; it being a singular Arcanum in the Erysipelas and Gangrenes (it alayeth
the Pains of the Gout) Cloths being dipped in it and applied, if it be laid to
the Pulse at the Wrists, its good in ardent Fevers, it helps strained Limbs,
Pains and Aches in any part of the Body; with benumed Nerves, the shrinking of
the Sinews, and is very good to smell to, and Bath the Temples and Forehead
for the Headache, warming and comforting the parts where there seems to be a
decay of Life, or want of Nutriment. Price Two Shillings Sixpence the Bottle.

XVI. Pul-vis Antivermis: Or, Our Worm-powder.
BEing a certain Remedy killing and destroying the cause of all sorts of Worms
in the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children; it ought to be taken generally at
the New or Full of the Moon in the Morning Fasting; it works moderately by
Stool; you may give it to a Child of a year old a quarter of a Paper, for one
of 3 years half a Paper, for those of six or seven a whole Dose; so go on
according to discretion; it may be taken in the pulp of an Apple, Sugar, or
Syrup of Clovegilly-flowers, or warm Ale. Price one Shilling the Paper, which
contains 4 whole Doses.

XVII. Vngt. Anti podigra: Or, Our Famous Ointment against that Rebellious
Disease, the Gout.
IN the most violent pains of the Gout, let the part be well bathed before the
Fire Night and Morning with a warm Hand for a quarter of an hour, applying soft
Brown-paper to the part; then, Flannel-cloaths 2 or 3 times double, and Bind it
up, and after it has been used 3 or 4 Days, usually arises some small
Blisters, or Pushes, from whence the morbifick matter will be somewhat
discharged, Then cease from using this Ovntment, and proceed thus; first, take
every third day a dose of our Panacea, as its directed in its place, till about
7 or 8 doses be taken; then take Nights of our Balsamic Pill, as is
prescribed, for 2 or 3 Nights, till the pains are abated; and in the day time
take every hour after, of our Aq. vitae Magistralis, observing about once in 4
days after you begin to take the Pill to take a dose of our Sal. Lenitium and
doubt not by continuing the use of the Ointment, with the other Prescriptions
thou may be relieved from the dolors thereof with Success. Price Five Shillings
the Pot.

XVIII. Vngt. Rachitidem: Or, Our Ointment against the Rickets.
WHich is excellent for bathing down the Backbone, and all the Joints, (giving
them daily of our Hysteric Drops in old Malago, and sometimes of our great
Cordial Drops, as directed.)

-- Observe. This Ointment is of excellent use for curing any Cut, Rench, or
Strain; and for old settled Pains in the Joints, provided it be well chaffed in
by the Fire: For Cuts, or any Green-wounds, melt a little of the same and dip a
pledget of Lint and apply it warm once in 24 hours and it will heal the same.
Price one Shilling the Pot.

XIX. Vngt. Viridi: Or, A sovereign Green-oyntment for Burns, and Scalds, etc.
THis Ointment being melted, and the Burn or Sealed anointed with a Feather
Morning and Night, infallibly cures the same, observing after the anointing to
apply a piece of soft White-paper, and cut the Blisters, and if the Burn or
Scald be filthy or dirty, let it be washed with warm Milk. For an Erisipleas
(or St. Anthony's-Fire) with all other hot Inflammations, let it be used evey
six hours, and doubt not the Success. Price one Shilling the Pot.

XX. Vnguentum, and aqua occularis; Or, our wonderful Ointment and Water for
the Diseases of the Eyes.
BEing a Remedy inferior to none that is extant of this kind, but is a singular
Medicine for Dimness of the Sight, Pin and Web, Pearls, etc. it eases Pains,
and cures Diseases of the Eyes to a miracle; it takes away Suffusions, Clouds,
Blood-shot; it cures running Eyes, salt, hot and sharp Rheums etc. (I need say
no more) it having cured those that have been almost Blind, which we have often
Experienced; and (particularly in our own Family) it ought to be esteemed as a
Jewel.

The Use thereof as follows
FIrst, Let the Eyes be daily washed 3 or 4 times in a Day, letting some of it
drop into the Eyes, and after they have been well washed (especially at
Bedtime) take the quantity of a Pepper-corn of the Ointment and put it in at
the corner of the Eye and lie down, and it will disperse it self, and it
causes no Pain, but effects the cure in a little time; if the Party be
afflicted with violent Pains in the Head, we would have them to take a Dose or
two of our Balsamic Pill, and to Purge twice a Week with our Sal. Lenitivum.
The Price of the Bottle of Water, and Box of Ointment is two Shillings.

Necessary Directions (for the sake of those that are Poor) to make the Pearl
Cordial, and the cooling Purple Julep, etc. which any Apothecary's-Shop can
furnish you with. And may be properly taken, either of them, or both, with the
Medicines herein Prescribed, at the Pleasure and Discretion of the Patient.

XXI. Julapium Perlatum: Or, our Pearl Cordial.
TAke the Waters of Borage, Bawm, Black cherries, of each three ounces;
Compound, Peony-water, and Therical-water, of each one ounce; double resmed
Sugar, one ounce; Pearls prepared, one Dram and a half; being mingled in a
Glass-viol, and shaken together; you may take four or five Spoonfuls at a time
in any Fainting, it being a good Cordial, and revives the Spirits.

XXII. Julapium Purpureum: The Purple Julep.
TAke Syrup of Violets four ounces; Oil of Sulphur, per Campane thirty Drops;
Barley-water (or Plantain-water) two Pound mixed together, is very good to
quench thirst in Burning-fevers, and may be taken three or four Spoonfuls at a
time, as often as the Patient shall require.

A Catalogue of the Names and Prises of the Medicines contained in this Tract,
which is Published for the sake of those who are not of Ability to give great
Fees to a Physician; I therefore refer them to the use of these Medicines which
are able (by the blessing of God) to extirpate the most stubborn Diseases
incident to humane Bodies, provided they are taken in due Method, as they are
directed in their proper Places; the charge of which not amounting to much more
than some Physitian's Fees, if thou take them all together; which may be had,
or any one of them, or more, as People may have occasion at the Prises
mentioned.

AQua-vitae Magistralis; or our Magesterial Water; the Bottle being above a
Pint. 3 s. The Balsamic Pill, the Box 1 s. Panacea, the Paper 2 s. 6 d. Elixer
Mag. Cordialis, the Bottle 4 s. Pull. Antifeb. the Paper 2 s. 6 d. Aqua Ruba
Minaralis, the Bottle 1 s. 6 d. Potestates Succini, or Powers of Amber, the
ounce 1 s. 6 d. Tinctura Hysterica; or the drops against Fits the ounce 3 s
Gutta Lythontripticae; or our Stone-breaking Drops, by the ounce 10 s. Vinum
Vitae; or Anodine drops, the Bottle 1 s. Esentia Stomachia; or Stomach Essence,
the Bottle 2 s. 6 d. Pull. Antivermis; or the Wormpouder, the Paper 1 s. Ungt.
Antipodigra; or the Gout Ointment, the Pot 5 s. Sal. Lenitivum, the ounce 1 s.
Arcanum Chalybeatum; or our Steel Drops, the Bottle 2 s. 6 d. Ungt. Rachitidem
1 s. Pot. Ungt. Viridi, for Burns and Scalds, and other Inflammations. the Pot
1 s. Aqua and ungt. Occularis, the Box and Bottle 2 s. Spiritus Mundus per
ounce 1 s. 6 d. Spir. Mundus mixed per qut. 6 s. Spir. Sedativus per ounce 3 s.
Aqua Ruba 1 s.


A Catalogue of various Preparations.
1. ARgentum Cristalum. 2. Arcanum Helibori. 3. Aqua Antiscorbutica. 4. Aqua
Regina Hung. 5. Arcanum Goderani; or Dr. Goderd's Drops. 6. Antimonum.
Diaphyret. 7 Speties Generalis Ant. 8. Pull. Solaris Ant. 9. Speties Russeli
Ant. 10. Tinct. Antimony Emet. 11. Tinct. Antimoni Antisco. 12. Bals. Samech.
13. Bals. Sulpher nost. 14. Elix. Sulpher. 15. Spir. Sulpher. 16. Elix.
Propritatis. com. 17. Elix. Propritatis Medium Helmonti. 18. Elix. Prop. cum.
cor. cer. 19. Elix. Propritatis volatile. 20. Elix. Propritatis nostri. 21.
Elixer Salutis. 22. Ence veneris. 23. Spiritus Odontugiasus; or an excellent
Spt. for Teeth. 24. Tinct. Antifebritica. 25. Tinct. Cordialis Amar. 26. Tinct.
Corali Rub. 27. Tinct. Cordialis Regale. 28. Tinct. Benzonium. 29. Spirit
Lavendulae. 30. Castori. 31. Sambucini. 32. Cochlearae Simplex and purgans. 33.
Absinthi. 34. Vini com. 35. Vini. Tartarised. 36. Salis com. 37. Salis Dulci.
38. Nitri. 39. Nitri Dulci. 40. Vitriole Dulci et Volatile. 41. Crani Humani.
42. Cor. Cervi. 43. Salis Armonici. 44. Oleum Salis Tartari. 45. Salis nitri
Fixi. 46. Oleum Juniperi. 47. Oleum Succini. 48. Laudanum Volatile. 49.
Laudanum Liquid. 50. Laud. Starky vel Pill Mathei. 51. Laudanum nostri. 52. Sal
volatile Oleosum Cephalicum. 53. Sal Volat. Oleosum Stomachum. 54. Stypticum
pro. Gonorrha. 55. Stypticum Pulvis pro. vol. Neribus. 56. Gutt. Stypticum pro.
vol. Neribus. 57. Sal. Cathartici Amari. 58. Sal. Lenitivum nost. 59. Sal.
Mirabilis. 60. Sal. Solutivum. 61. Sal. Glauberi. 62. Sal. Tartari. 63. Sal.
Armonci Volat. 64. Sal. Cor. Cer.
Cum Multis Alijs.

Published from my House at the two Blew twisted Posts at Horsley-down
Fair-street, in Southwark, by John Spire.


