The Smoke in the Temple. WHEREIN IS A DESIGN FOR PEACE and RECONCILIATION of
Believers of the several OPINIONS of these Times about ORDINANCES, to a
Forbearance of each other in Love, and Meekness, and Humility.

With the opening of each Opinion, and upon what SCRIPTURES each is grounded.

With the several EXCEPTIONS which may be made against each Opinion from the
SCRIPTURES.

With one Argument for Liberty of Conscience, from the NATIONAL COVENANT.

With another Argument to prove the Gospel, or New Testament of Jesus Christ
the very Word of God; Tendered to all the Believers, to show them how little we
have attained, and that there is a more glorious Fullness to be revealed.

With a Discovery of the Antichristian way of Peace, etc. for Opinions.

With a full Answer to Master LEY One of the Assembly of Divines, against my
late NEW-QUERE.

With some spiritual Principles drawn forth of the Controversy.

Revel. 15.8. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and
from his power: and no man was able to enter into the Temple till the seven
plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.

By John Saltmarsh, Preacher of the Gospel at Brasteed in Kent.

THE SECOND EDITION CORRECTED.

London, Printed by Ruth Raworth for G. Calvert, at the sign of the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1646.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount SAY and SEAL, and Lieutenant General
CROMWELL.
Noble Patriots,
IF I mistake not, you may here single out something of the Lords from what is
mine, and discern some beams of God amongst many things of man. I know the
candle of the Lord cannot shine anywhere with more snuff then in me; however
since the Lord has lighted it, I dare not but let it shine (or rather glimmer)
before men. I have writ your Names to my Book that I may be one of your
Remembrancers amongst the rest to the advancement of Truth; not but that they
who know ye, know ye to be acted by a Spirit of Truth in your selves. The Lord
remember ye according to all the good ye have done (in your several
Ministrations) to this people; and do that for ye which gives you most, and yet
takes most from ye, even filling ye with himself, till he has emptyed ye of
all but his own glory, and gathered ye up into the fullness and righteousness
of himself in Christ, where we are only nothing in our selves, and every thing
in him; and surely the most, and best, and greatest thing he can do for the
sons of men, is, thus to make them nothing in their own account, that he that
glories may glory in the Lord. I may seem strange to wish ye thus; but I know
it is not strange to ye, who know the Mystery of the Spirit, and of Christ.

My Lord, and Sir, Go on still, yet still laying your designs in a glory above
that of States and Kingdoms, and involving all your counsels there, where there
is most of Heaven, and lest of the World.

So prays

Your Servant in the Lord JOHN SALTMARSH.

To the Believers of several Opinions for outward Ordinances or dispensations,
scandalously called Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Seekers.
Brethren,
I Have fairly set down how far each of you have attained in the Mystery of
Truth; and surely we are all short of the glory which shall be revealed in the
Temple or Church of God; and there are such clouds rolling about each opinion,
that may darken it, or something of it. So as things are not so clear as they
are commonly taken by each of us; If any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know. 1 Cor. 8.2.
So as the common ignorance and infirmity amongst us, may be a rise for a
common Unity amongst us: and seeing we all come out of Babylon (though in
several ways) to the glorious Temple or Tabernacle which God has sent down to
be with men, and walk thus diversely thither; yet our several and distinct
goings are but like so many Travelers to the City of London; some travel from
the North, some from the South, and from the West, some from the East, yet all
thither; though too, there may be some mistaking of the way in each, because of
the little light that is abroad. The gathering of the Saints into the Heaven,
or Kingdom below, in this day of Revelation, is like the gathering at the last
day, which shall be all into one glorious Body, though the gathering shall be
from the four winds or ends of the Earth, by the several Trumpets or Angels.

One thing I have more. Let us seek for the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, to
open to us the Mystery of the Scriptures called The Revelation; for in that
Book is the Prophecy of the Churches laid up, and the seasons and times for
Truth revealed. Let us search and seek out by the Spirit of Jesus, even that
Jesus which was in the Vision, and gave it out to John; for there is none found
worthy to open the Book with Seals but the Lamb. Surely in the Mystery of
Angels, Vials, Sea of glass with fire, Temple with Smoke, the Angel with the
everlasting Gospel, the Angel enlightening the Earth, the Whore in skarlet and
precious pearls, the Cup of abomination, the Beast like a Lamb, the Image of
the Beast, the Horns and Kings of the Earth, the mark in the forehead and in
the right hand, the buying and selling, the Tabernacle of God with men, the
first and second Resurrection, the Throne of God, the pure crystal River of
water, the Holy Jerusalem descending from God, etc. In these is much of the
glory wrapped up, and from these shall the Truth we contend for, appear to our
further enlightening.

Yet one thing more. We that are thus contenders for Ordinances, for the Temple
and the Vessels in it, let us take heed we forget not him who is greater then
the Temple; for one greater then the Temple is here. It would be spiritually
considered, that while we strive for the Vessels and Cups, we spill not the
Wine.

And it ought to be so carried by all of us, that, because we are so much in
opinion, we may not be thought to place Religion there, as I fear too many do,
making a Christ of the very Ordinance of Christ, and pressing some outward
Ordinances of the Gospel so legally; as some hearing such a power of salvation
put into them, and finding an outward dispensation more easily got then the
spiritual, make haste thither only, and then sit down as saved under a mere
outward Ordinance. The Lord grant that we may neither undervalue an Ordinance
nor the least Institution of Jesus Christ, nor raise it up into a Jesus Christ,
and set up the Law above or beside the Lawgiver. We must now learn to know
Jesus Christ less after the flesh, and not to embody salvation in a mere
outward dispensation, and so incarnate Jesus Christ over again from the glory
and spirituality he is in.

Brethren, farewell: For my part I am fully assured from Scriptures of the
Church of Christ here, or Gospel-fellowship of the Saints; and unto this
fellowship with the Father and the Son, I endeavor; If any man will do his
will he shall know of the Doctrine, Joh. 7.17.
and I have one way to reveal Truth to me which I cannot conceal, nor yet
cannot practice as I would, and that is this;

To see Truth by living in the power of Truth, and by first obtaining Jesus
Christ to live in us in the power of his suffering, death, and Resurrection;
for surely Jesus Christ must do all (though more gloriously and spiritually)
over again in his, which he did in himself.

If Jesus Christ the Light be in us, the Light by which every outward
dispensation is seen, will flow in; for where the Sun is, there will be every
beam with it.

THE CONTENTS.
A Way of Peace, or a Design for Reconciliation.
1 GOds Love the first and last glorious Union to be considered, to draw us to
Unity. Page 1. 2 Names of Sect and Division to be laid down. p. 2. 3 Passions
and Railings forborne. Ibid. 4 Reviling each other for infirmities forborne.
Ibid. 5 The sins of any not to be laid on the Cause. Ibid. 6 Liberty for
Printing and Speaking. Ibid. 7 Let all subscribe their names to what they
Print. Ib. 8 Let all be severally accountable. p. 3. 9 Free Debates, and open
Conferences. Ibid. 10 Let us call Believers, th^ugh of several Opinions, if the
name of Brethren cannot be justly allowed. Ibid. 11 No Believers to esteem too
highly of themselves for what they attain to. Ibid. 12 No assuming
Infallibility over each other. p. 4. 13 No Civil power drawn into advantages.
Ibid. 14 Tenderness in offending each other in things of an outward nature.
Ibid. 15 Several Opinions from the Gospels first discovery, yet all Believers.
p. 5. 16 No despising for too much Learning or too little. Ib. 17 We be one in
Christ, though diverse. Ibid. 18 The Spiritual Persecution to be forborne. Ibid.
The Unwarrantable Way of Peace, or the Antichristian Design for
Reconciliation.
1 TO believe as the Church or Councils. p. 6. 2 To set up one as the Pope, for
Infallibility. Ib. 3 To allow that all may be saved in their several ways. p.
7. 4 To forbid Interpretings and Disputes. Ibid. 5 By a compulsive power. Ibid.
The Opinions of these times.
PResbystery so called, what it is, and what they hold. p. 8. Exceptions
against Presbytery. p. 9. Independency so called, what it is, and what they
hold. Ibid. Exceptions against Independency. p. 10. Anabaptism so called, what
it is, and what they hold. p. 12. Exceptions against the grounds of the new
Baptism. Ib. Seeking, or Seekers, so called; what their Way is, and what they
hold. p. 16. Exceptions against them. Ibid. Conclusion. p. 19. The Gospel, or
New Testament, proved undeniably to be the very Word of God. p. 20. One
Argument from the National Covenant (Artic. 1. and 2.) for Liberty of
Conscience. p. 23. Objections against it, answered. p. 25, 26.
Spiritual Principles drawn forth of the Controversy.
Gospel Truth one and the same. p. 60. Prudence and Consequences, are the great
Engines of Will Worship. Ibid. The People are Brethren and Saints in Christ's
Church; but in Antichrists, Parishioners and servants. p. 61. Presbytery it
self is founded on Principles of Separation, which yet they condemn for Schism
in other Churches: nay, is the greatest Separation. p. 62. None to be forced
under Christ's Kingdom, as in the Kingdoms of the world. Ibid. The power of a
formal Reformation, in a Government, makes it not Christ's Government. p. 63.
The visible Church or Communion, is the Image of the invisible or mystical. p.
64. How Christ is a King of the Nations and of the Church, and how an Head.
Ibid. The Presbyterial Government and the World's, of the same equal Dominion.
p. 65. The National, and Congregational Church Covenant, both lawful, or both
unlawful. Ibid. We receive and give out Truth by parts. p. 66. All Covenanters
are bound to contribute to Religion as well as State. p. 67. We are to try
Truth, and so receive it in its degrees. Ib. No Church Way Independency. p. 68.
A spirit of Love and Meekness becomes Believers. Ib. When a State-conscience
is fully persuaded; doubtful, and so sinning. Ibid. A Postscript. With
Salmasius his Testimony against the present Presbyterial way. p. 69.
A WAY OF PEACE, OR A Design of Reconciliation; How the Believers of several
Opinions, scandalously called Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists,
Seekers, may be reconciled to forbear one another.
(1) Gods love the first and last glorious Union to be considered, to draw us
to Unity.
ONe way, is to consider love as it is in God, and flowing from him upon the
creature: God is love; 1 John 4.1. 1 John 4.16
and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Now the more
love there is in any, the more of God there is in any. Satan, the first
fountain of sin, made the first Schism in the glorious Communion: All was one,
and in one glory, till the first division, and till Satan fell like lightening;
and he envying the whole Creation, Luke 10.18. Matthew. 24.12.
which was in love with it self, and him that made it, drew it into sin, and
antipathies, and mutual persecutions; and when it began to leave loving him
that was pure and infinite love, it began to hate it self, and divide from it
self: So as the less love, the more of Satan, and sin. The consideration of
Gods love to himself which is infinite, 1 John 4.8. 1 John 3.6. John 13.1.
of his love to his, which is no less infinite, because to sinners; and of his
Sons love, spiritually uniting himself here, and gloriously hereafter, into one
Body and Communion; cannot but make us love one another.

(2) Names of Sect and Division to be laid down.
Let all names and notes of distinction taken up by way of scandal and
reproach, be laid down and forborne; names and notions are like Standards and
several Colors in wars, whereby men are gathered into several orders, Armies,
and bodies of division, one against another; one says I am of Paul, 1 Cor.
1.12, 13.
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; Is Christ divided?

(3) Passions and railings forborne.
Let a spirit of meekness run in the artery of Preaching and Printing: let
not passions, evil speaking, railings, which inflame and do not edify, Prove.
6.28.
be heard amongst us: the angry stir up strife; wherefore let all bitterness,
wrath, malice, with evil speaking, be put away from you.

(4) Reviling each other for Infirmities forborne.
Let there be no rifling into each others Infirmities, to the advantaging or
disadvantaging the cause: What is any thing of the man to the thing it self?
Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.
What is ones darkness to the light he professes? Any ones errors to a single
truth? There is rubbish enough everywhere if swept from every corner.

(5) The sins of any not to be laid on the Cause.
Let not the miscarriages, the failings, the sins, the hypocrisy, etc. of any
that profess a Truth, Luke 22.58, 60. Gal. 2.12, 13, 14.

See Master Bailey his Dissuasive.

Acts 1.25.


with others, be charged upon the Truth he or they profess, making such sins
to be the sins of the opinion, not of the Person, as one of late who has
charged the unfortunate end of one, as a fruit of separation, whereas he might
so argue against the very Doctrine of Christ, because of one Judas who did the
like to himself.

(6) Liberty for Printing and speaking.
Let there be liberty of the Press for Printing, to those that are not allowed
Pulpits for Preaching: 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
let that light come in at the window which cannot come in at the door, that
all may speak and write one way that cannot another: let the Waters of the
Sanctuary have issue, and spring up Valleys as well as Mountains.

(7) Let all subscribe their names to what they Print.
Let all that Preach or Print, affixe their names, that we may know from whom:
the contrary is a kind of unwarrantable modesty at the best: if it be truth
they write, why do they not own it? if untruth, why do they write? Some such
must either suppress themselves for shame or fear; and they that dare not own
what they do, Prove. 28.1.
they suspect the Magistrate, or themselves.

(8) Let all be severally accountable.
Let all that Teach or Print be accountable, yet in a several way; if it be
matter of immediate disturbance and trouble to the State, let them account for
it to the Magistrate, 1 Timothy 2.2.
under whom we are to live a peaceable and quiet life; if matter of Doctrine,
etc. let them be accountable to the Believers and Brethren who are offended by
conference, Gal. 2.11.
where there may be mutual conviction and satisfaction.

(9) Free debates and open Conferences.
Let there be free debates and open conferences and communication for all, and
of all sorts that will, concerning difference in spirituals: where doors are
not shut, there will be no breaking them open: so where debates are free, there
is a way of vent and evacuation, the stopping of which has caused more
troubles in the States then any thing: for where there is much new wine in old
bottles, the working will be such as the Parable speaks on: still allowing the
State to secure all tumults or disturbances.

(10) Let us call Believers, though of several opinions, if the Name Brethren
cannot be justly allowed.
Let all who pretend to come out of the Antichristian State, be acknowledged as
those several Jews and Christians, who came out of Judaism and Gentilism in the
Apostles times; Act. 21.20. 1 Cor. 8.7, 8, 10.
some were more and some less zealous of the Law, yet all Believers; some made
conscience of the Idol, and sacrifice, some not.

(11) No Believers to esteem too highly of themselves for what they attain to.
Because we are but yet in our comings out of Babylon, and the fall of Babylon
not yet, the Smoke yet in the Temple, Revel. 5.6. Revel. 18.1.
the Angels but pouring out the Vials, the Angel that enlightens the earth with
glory not yet flying through the heavens; let not any account of themselves to
have attained any thing yet as they ought, or to know there is not any Church
or Believers, but if one see more of one truth, another may see more of
another; if one see one thing for a truth, another sees another thing for a
truth, and yet all see short of the fullness of truth; there is so much want,
darkness, and so little light or glory in each, as is rather matter of
humiliation and praise, then glorying and exception one against another: If any
man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1
Cor. 8.2.

(12) No assuming infallibility over each other.
Let us not, being under no further degree of the revelation of Truth, and
coming out of Babylon, assume any power of infallibility to each other: so as
to force up all to our light or degree of knowing or practicing; for there lies
as much on one side for compulsion, as on another, respectively to one another;
for another evidence is as dark to me as mine to his, and mine to his as his
to me, till the Lord enlighten us both for discerning alike. So as when there
is no power in us to make that appear to another which appears to us, there can
be no reasonable equity for any enforcing or compelling in spirituals. Matthew.
7.1, 2.
The first great rent betwixt the Eastern and Western Kingdoms, began when the
Bishop of Rome would needs excommunicate the East, for not believing as they
believed.

(13) No Civil power drawn into advantages.
Let not those Believers who have the advantage of the Magistrate, strive to
make any unwarrantable use of it one against another, because
Scripture-principles are not so clear for it, and because they know not the
revolution of Providence, and we are to do as we would be done to: That very
day which should have been a bloody day to the Jews, was turned into the
contrary; Esther and the Jews had power over them.

(14) Tenderness in offending each other, in things of an outward nature.
Let there be much tenderness in not offending each other, but pleasing one
another to edification: 1 Cor. 9.20. Romans 15.2.
Paul would not offend the Idolatrous weak: The weakest and most superstitious
makes most conscience of outward things; and the strong should know, that Idol
or Idol-temple is nothing: Many a one are more offended at Truth by the
carriage of another, 1 Cor. 8.9. Romans 14.17.
who sometimes reforms with as much superstition, as the other offends. It is
as much below the glory of the Gospel to think one place unholy, as holy: No
place can defile now Salomons Temple is not standing; yet let all Truth be
brought forth peaceably: Truth and Peace can offend nothing but that which may
be justly offended; which is the corruption, not the person.

(15) Several Opinions from the Gospels first discovery, yet all Believers.
Consider the differences and several Opinions from the first discovery of the
Gospel: John 20 9.
Some believed not Christ's sufferings and Resurrection; as the Disciples whom
yet Christ took to him, and walked with, and counted as his: Some believed not
the Holy Ghost, Luke 24.26. John 3.25. Acts 21.20. Matt. 11.1, 2, 5.
nor Christ's Baptism, and were zealous of the Law, and yet the Disciples
counted them as Believers. John's Disciples would have followed John only; but
John sent two of them to Christ at one time, and told them again he must
increase, but himself must decrease. Mark 9.38. Luke 9.49.
Christ in his time would not forbid any that went about in his Name; There is
none that does any thing in my Name, can lightly speak evil of me. When the
Spirit was given, the Disciples bore one another out of the Church, as the
Believers of John's Baptism, and the zealots of the Law, Acts 19.2, 3.
and one another in the Church; they that did eat, them that did not eat; and
they that regarded a day, them that regarded not a day; walking together as far
as they attained by the same rule.

(16) No despising for too much learning, or too little.
Let not one despise another for gifts, parts, learning: let the Spirit be
heard speak in the meanest: let not the Scribe or Disputer of the Law despise
the Fishermen, nor they despise them because Scribes and Disputers: The Spirit
is in Paul as well as Peter; 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
in both as well as one.

(17) We may be in one Christ, though diverse.
Consider that we may be one in one Christ, though we think diversely; and we
may be Friends, though not Brethren: and let us attain to Union, though not to
Unity.

(18) The spiritual Persecution to be forborne.
Consider there is a twofold Persecution: There is a spiritual or that of
Believers, and a mixed Persecution, or civilly ecclesiastical: The spiritual
Persecution is that of the Spirit merely; and this kind of Persecution little
thought on and studied; this is when we cannot bear one another several
Opinions or soul-belief, in the same spiritual Society, or fellowship, but
they must either be of us, or out of us; and surely this kind of Persecution
is as unreasonable as any other; for what is this but soul compulsion, Phil.
3.2, 5, 16.
when another must only believe as we believe, and not wait till the Lord
reveal even this? This kind of spiritual compulsion will in time break and
dissolve the visible Communion of Saints, and Body of Christ exceedingly, if
taken up or continued; and it will be amongst Christians, as amongst the
Antichristians where they divide and ^ubdivide, and some cast themselves into a
Monkery from all the rest: Acts 15.3, 4.
Jerusalem and Antioch were not of this way, to cast out one another upon such
grounds, but to meet, reason, and counsel, and hear: And surely the Churches
can ill complain of a mixed persecution from without, if they persecute one
another from within; the Magistrate may as justly whip them both, as they whip
one another: Such grudgings, complainings, dissolvings, spiritual enforcings,
gives hint to the Civil power to compel, while it beholds them but a little
more spiritually compelling one another: Let all Church-rights, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Col. 3.13. 1 Cor. 8.2.
privileges, boundaries be preserved; all Heresy and Schism by the Rule
rebuked, but in all spiritual meekness and wisdom, and not call Heretic and
Schismatic too suddenly, since we see but in part.

THE UNWARRANTABLE WAY of PEACE, OR The Antichristian Design of Reconciliation.
(1) To believe as the Church or Councils.
THat all should believe as the Church believes; and this Church is the great
Councils of Bishops, Cardinals, etc. as if the souls of all were to be saved
only in the bundle of theirs, as if they could believe both enough for
themselves and all others.

(2) To set up one as the Pope, for infallibility.
Because there may be difference amongst many, and all may not agree, therefore
there shall be one (say they) with the Vrim and Thummim, one infallibly
decreeing, and interpreting, and unerring, to whom the Spirit of Truth is
successively derived; and his determinations, interpretations, shall be final,
conclusive; and this that Vicar of Christ, the Pope this one way in the
Antichristian State, and all Reformed Kingdoms were once under this Peace.

(3) To allow that all may be saved in their several ways.
Because there be several Believers, and several interpretations and opinions,
one saying This is the way, and another That, therefore say some, All in all
ways may be saved, every one believing every thing. Now this is one way to
make peace, but not the way; there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

(4) To forbid Interpretings and Disputes.
Because several opinions arise by interpretings and dis;putings about
Scripture, therefore all openings of the Word, all disputings must be forborne.
Because the Sunshine offends some weak sight in the house, shut up doors and
windows and make all dark. Thus the Papists and Prelates in forbidding
Scriptures and Marginal Notes, and thus fearing there may be something false,
they will hear nothing that is true.

(5) By a compulsive Power.
Some take the Civil power in to make peace, reckoning a compulsive Uniformity
for Unity, Peace, and Truth. This is one way to deal with the body indeed, but
not with the soul; to mind the outward man, but not the inward. This way of
Civilly Ecclesiastical peace is the Antichristian design, Revel. 17.17.
who having got the Kings of the Nations to give their strength and power and
Kingdom unto them, supplies that from the world which they want from the Word,
making the spiritual power of Jesus Christ to receive its honor, life,
efficacy, power, from the power of men. This way of peace is such as has by
experience troubled Nations, and troubled it self at length too; and broken it
self against that way which it aimed to break: For whosoever falls upon this
stone shall be broken, Luke 28.18.
and on whomsoever it shall fall it shall break, them to powder.

THE OPINIONS OF THESE TIMES. With the EXCEPTIONS each Opinion may be charged
withal; being the great Argument for Love, Meekness, and Forbearance one to
another, or of Peace and Reconciliation till the Lord reveal more.
PRESBYTERY So called; What it is, and what they hold.
THe Presbytery is set up by an Matt. 18.15. Act. 15.19, 28, 31. and 16.4. 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.6. Acts 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.17.
alleged Pattern of the Eldership and Presbytery of the Apostles and Elders in
the first Churches of the Gospel, strengthened by such Scriptures as are in the
margin, and by allusion to the Jewish Government, and to appeals in Nature.
Their Churches are Parochial, or Parishes, as they are divided at first by the
Romish Prelates and the Statute-Laws of the State. Which Parishes and
Congregations are made up of such Believers as were made Christians first by
Baptism in Infancy, and not by the Word: and all the Parishes or Congregations
are under them, as they are a Classical, Provincial, and National Presbytery:
and over those Parishes they do exercise all Church Power and Government Acts
6.6. 2 Timothy 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.14. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28, 29. Revel.
2.14, 20
; which may be called The power of the Keys.

Exceptions.
1. THe Apostolical and Primitive Eldership were not so Act. 15.21, 25, 29. 2
Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Timothy 5.1. Matthew. 20.25.
authoritative over their Congregations as these pretend, nor so compulsive or
forcing their respective Congregations.

2. The Apostolical Eldership and Presbytery were more Acts 15.29. Joh. 16.13.
Gal. 1.12. Acts 2.43.
infallible; they were more in the light, and the immediate way of the
revelation of Truth.

3. They took not in the power of the Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. Joh. 18.36.
Magistrate to help them, nor did they clasp it as one with their own.

4. They consisted of Acts 1.15. and 15.22. and 14.23.
Brethren as well as of the Presbytery, and both together had a joint interest
and concurrencie in all power.

5. The Presbyteries were not as now, Classical, Provincial, National: these
are no Scripture-forms, but devices of men. 1 Timothy 6.3. Matthew. 15.9.


6. The Acts 20.17. and 15.4.
Presbytery is of no more in the (...).
Greek then of a Matthew. 16.11. and 13.3. Joh. 6.12.
metaphorical or figurative signification, signifying Seniority or Eldership:
and the setting it up in a notion of power and office, is more then the
Scriptures will clearly bear: such Notions in the Word, are but Notions of form
and order, not of Office.

7. The Presbyteries now are not rightly constituted, because they consisted of
a Ministry from Revel. 13.16. Matt. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. Joh. 10.1, 5. Acts 19.15.
Antichrist, and the Bishops of Rome, ordaining one another by the same power
they received from them.

8. Their 1 Cor. 14.23. Acts 6.3. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Congregations are not such as before, so constituted; because Parishes are of
a Popish and Politic constitution.

9. Baptism is not to be received by Generation now, as Circumcision was, but
by Joh. 3.5. Acts 2.31.
Regeneration or visible Profession, as at first: Nor are the carnal seed now
any more children of Abraham, but the Gal. 3.7. Ephesians. 2.15. Acts 3 22.
faithful: And no Ordinance is now to be administered upon legal consequence,
but upon Gospel-precept.

INDEPENDENCIE So called; What it is, and what they hold.
THe People of God are only a 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 1 2, 9. Col. 1 2. 2 Cor.
6.16, 17 Act. 2.41, 42. Revel. 3 1, 17. Act. 9.26.
Church, when called by the Word and Spirit into Consent or Covenant, and
Saints by profession; and all Matt. 18.15, 16, 17, 18 20. Matt. 16.18, 19
Church Power is laid in here, and given out from hence into 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11.
Pastorship and Elders, etc. and a just Act. 6.3, 5. and 15.22. 1 Timothy 3.15.
distribution of Interest betwixt Elders and People. All spiritual Government
is here, and not in any power foreign or extrinsecal to the Congregation or
authoritative: Their children are made Christians first by Infant Baptism, and
after by the Word: and they are baptized by a 1 Cor. 7.14. Act. 2.39. Romans
11.16.
foederal or Covenant-holinesse, or Birth-priviledges, as under the Law: They
may enjoy all Act. 2.42. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Ordinances in this estate, and some may 1 Cor. 14.22, 6, 11, 4.
Prophecy.

Exceptions.
1. THat there is not such a power radically or fundamentally placed in the
Church to make Pastors and Elders, etc. because there is, first, no such
practice in the Word, but rather of an Apostolical or Matthew. 28.18. and 18.18,
19. Acts 14.21, 22, 23.
Ministerial power, which made or gathered Churches first, not Churches them.

2. The Eldership and Presbytery of Apostles and Elders did Acts 15.6. and
14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. Acts 6.2, 6.
principally act, and authoritatively act, and not the whole Church or people;
they in a lower and less Interest, in a way of choice or vote and consent.

3. That which is called Ordination, etc. was by the Apostles, and a power
established in the Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14.
Presbytery, not in the Church, as mere Believers.

4. They that were Baptized by an Revel. 13.16. Joh. 10.1, 5. Matt. 7.14, etc.
Antichristian power, are no right Baptized Members of Churches; and yet so are
all of their Churches as were Baptized under Prelacie; the power of the
dispenser being Antichristian, and the subject or Matthew. 28.18, 19. and 3.6, 9.
Acts 8.37.
Infant no visible Believer for that Ordinance.

5. Their Church consists not all of visible Saints or Believers, according to
their own 1 Cor. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.5. etc. Joh. 3.6.
Principle: for their children being baptized, and in that condition, are no
actual visible Saints; all their Church are not living stones, nor visibly
holy. And it may be more clearly proved that mere civil and moral men are
rather to be admitted of their Church-society then such as children are, who
are but merely naturally visible; neither spiritually, civilly, nor morally
visible.

6. That of foederal holiness in 1 Cor. 7.14.
1 Cor. 7.14. is only to satisfy a scruple, that if Unbeleeving made wife or
husband unholy, it made children unholy too; and so both, or none, must be put
away.

7. There is no carnal seed now to be sealed, Christ being come in the flesh;
which Gal. 3.16. Romans 4.16. Joh. 3.6.
flesh before, had a Seal of Circumcision; but there is no such Matthew. 3.9.
external privilege now, by any such right.

8. All Consequences drawn from Circumcision, are of no more force then from
the 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
cloud and the 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Sea, and the rock, and Noah's Ark, and other typical and figurative places in
the Word, nor can any legal or probable Scriptures make any Law or Rule for
any such Gospel-administration, which is not directly and in Joh. 15.14. Acts
3.22.
Scripture-words to be found.

9. Childrens Baptism in the Church is a way never to have a Church of such
Matthew. 3 5, 6. Acts 2.41. and 8.12. and 10.48. Ephesians. 5.26.
baptized Believers as in the Apostles times.

10. Baptism being a Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 14.22.
visible sign, cannot rationally be administered upon one that can neither see
nor discern what is done, to whom the water can be no Act. 22.16.
sign, but they are only told of it when they come to age: and how can it
hold proportion with Circumcision, when as that was a Rom 4.11. Genesis 17.11.
mark remaining in the flesh when they came to age to signify to them? But
water is like a flash of Matthew. 24.27.
lightening which must be taken by the Believer in that quick and Jam. 1.23.
vanishing act, or else it has no Romans 6.3, 4. Acts 22.16.
sensible efficacy to which it was instituted; nor does the Believer thus any
other way enjoy it but by way of History, or a thing past and done, which he
never saw. Baptism is as a flash of lightening, (as is well observed by one;)
Circumcision was as a fixed star; so much difference in these two rites.

11. Institution of Baptism is to Acts 2.38. Romans 6.3, 4. Gal. 3.27. Coloss.
2.12. Matt. 28.18, 1^ Heb. 6.2. Mark 16.15, 16.
duty as well as grace, which children cannot perform, and so answer the sign.

12. Institution of Baptism is doctrinall in the very act of it, as is
acknowledged by all of the present Baptism, Matthew. 28. baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc. Now this implies a capable and
teachable subject.

13. Their Churches are not distinct from other Societies Antichristian,
because there is no visible gifts by which their Churches are Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
visibly qualified from any other Societies, and according to the promises of
gifts in Ephesians. 4.11. nor no such Church-gifts as in 1 Cor. 12. etc. where
there was the 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Acts 2.38. and 2.34.
gifts of the Spirit powerfully and visibly spiritualizing that body, and
making it to excel all other bodies civil or Antichristian.

And that Prophesy was a more 1 Cor. 12.10, 29. and 14.29.
extraordinary gift then is now any where in the Churches.

ANABAPTISM So called; What it is, or what they hold.
THe Church of Christ are a Company of Heb. 12.22. Acts 10.48. and 2.41. and
16.32, 33.
baptized Believers; and whatsoever Matthew. 10.1. compared with Matthew. 28.18.
Joh. 4.1. Joh. 8.31. Isai. 1.16. Acts 9.10. and 1.15.
Disciple can teach the Word, or make out Christ, may baptize or administer
other Ordinances.

That the Church or Body, though but of two or three, yet may enjoy the Word
and Ordinances, by way of an 1 Cor. 12.5.
Administrator, or one deputed to administer, though no Pastor.

That none are to be baptized but Act. 2.38. and 10.48. Matthew. 28.18. Mark
16.16. Act. 8.37.
Believers.

That those commonly called Church Officers, as Pastors, etc. are such as the
Church or Body may be Act. 1.15. and 2.42.
without.

That none are to be called Brethren but baptized Believers.

All administrations of Ordinances were given to the Apostles as Matthew. 10.1.
compared with 1.28.18. Isai. 8.16. Acts 9.10.
Disciples; not so under the notion of Church Power as is pretended.

That none ought to communicate in the Ordinances of Christ till first Acts
2.41, 42 and 16.31.
baptized.

Exceptions against the grounds of the new Baptism.
1. THat those places commonly taken for the Commission for Christ's Baptism, as
Matthew. 28.18. Mark 16. and where they that now baptize ground their Commission
and practice, has no such thing in it; For the Baptism there is a Baptism in
the Name of the three Persons, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and not the
Baptism of Jesus Christ alone, which the Apostles only baptized in by water,
as in Acts 2.38. and 10 48. and 19.5. and 8.16. Romans 6.3.
Act. 2.38. Act. 10.48. Act. 19.5. Act. 8.16. Romans 6.3. where it is still said,
Baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus, or of Jesus Christ; and a Name of any
more Persons is not the least mentioned. So as to baptize as they commonly
baptize in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for Jesus Christ's Baptism,
is contrary to the full Acts 2.38. and 10.48. and 19.5. and 8.16.
practice of all that baptized by water, as they do, as in Act. 2.38. Act.
10.48. Act. 19.5. Act. 8.16. etc. and a confounding Scriptures together, viz.
several institutions and practicer.

2. That baptizing, in Matthew. 28.18. cannot properly, nor in the word, and
letter, be understood of baptizing by water, because there is no more mentioned
in the letter, or Scripture, then merely the word baptizing; and to expound it
as they do, by a baptizing by water, is to put in a Acts 3.22. Joh. 15.14.
Matthew. 15.9. Revel. 22.10.
consequence and interpretation of their own for Scripture; which way of
consequences they condemn in all others, Presbyterials, etc. as Will Worship,
and traditions of men, and justly too: Now there being no water, nor any
circumstance in the Text to make out any sense of water, as in other places, it
is an usurpation upon the Spirit and the Word, to put such a sense so
infallibly and peremptorily upon the Word which Jesus Christ himself uses in
other Matthew. 20.22, 23. and 3.11. 1 Cor. 12.13. and 10.2.
significations then that of water, as in Matthew. 20.22, 23. Matthew. 3.11. 1 Cor.
12.13. 1 Cor. 10.2. all these places are of Baptism and baptizing; yet not one
of them of baptizing by water, but of Metaphorical and figurative Baptism by
his sufferings, by the Holy Ghost, by the Spirit, by the cloud and sea.

3. That Matthew. 28.18. Mark 16. etc. are rather and far more probably to be
expounded of the Spirits Baptism, or the Joel 2.28. Isai. 44.3. with Matthew.
3.11. Acts 1.5. Joh. 1.33.
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, because it seems to be prophesied on by Joel 2.28.
Isai. 44.3. where the Holy Ghosts Baptism is promised to come by Christ; and in
Matthew. 3.11. Act. 1.5. Joh. 1.33. prophesied on to come by John, and Christ
himself to his Disciples, and was fulfilled in Christ's institution, and power
which he gave; in Matthew. 28.18. by baptizing with the Holy Ghost, which the
Apostles did accordingly practice, and by their Ministry was given, as in Act.
8.17, 18, and 10.44. and 11.15.
Act. 8.17. and Mark 16.16, 17. compared with Matthew. 28.18. does show that the
Baptism in Matthew. 28.18. is a Baptism of gifts, as Mark 16.15, 16, 17.

4. That the Baptism of Jesus Christ by water, was only in the Name of Jesus
Christ, as appears in all the places where such a Acts 2.38. and 10.48. and 19
5. and 8.16. Romans 6.3.
Baptism was practiced, as in Act. 2.38. Act. 10.48. Act. 19.5. Act. 8.16. Romans
6.3. all which is a Baptism only in the Name of Jesus Christ, of the Person of
the Son, not of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as they now practice, and
which was never practiced as appears in all the Apostles and Disciples practice.

5. That the form by which they baptize, viz. I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is a Matthew. 9.15. Revel. 22.19. Joh. 15.14.
form of man's devising, a tradition of man, a mere consequence drawn from
supposition and probability, and not a form left by Acts 3.22.
Christ, to lay over them at the dipping them in the water: If Christ had said,
When you baptize them, say this over them, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and unless Jesus Christ had left this form thus
made up to their hands, they practice a thing made up by themselves, and drawn
or forced out of Jesus Christ's words in Matthew. 28.18.

6. That to preach in the Name of Jesus Christ, or to do things in the Name of
Jesus Christ, is not always in that gross manner as it is taken, viz. naming
Jesus Christ, or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost over them.

But in the Matt. 18.20. Mark 13.6. Joh. 14.13. Acts 9.15.16. Joh. 17.6, 11.
Acts 9.14.
power, virtue, efficacy, Ministry of Jesus Christ, or the Persons of the
Godhead of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as in these Scriptures Matthew. 18.20.
Mark 13.6. Joh. 14.3. Act. 19.15, 16. Joh. 17.6, 11. Act. 9.14. Revel. 11.18.
So here they are at some more loss.

7. That though I deny not but water is a sign, and one of the 1 John 7.7.
witnesses that bear record; and in the Word though not yet clear, yet neither
can Christ's Institution of water, as his own Baptism, in his own Person, be
made appear out of all the New Testament; nor can the Apostles practice by
water yet be fetched from such a particular Institution, unless from John's:
And if so, I am sure they are then at as great a Controversy one with another
concerning Joh. 1.26. Mark 1.4. Matthew. 11.30. Acts 19.3, 4.
John's Baptism and Jesus Christ's, making them to be two several Baptisms.

8. That every common disciple cannot so baptize as the first disciples did,
because not gifted, or Mark 16.17. Acts 2.3, 4. and 16, 17.
qualified as they were. And there is as much necessity to make out the Truth
in the same power and way of evidence to an Antichristian estate, as to a
Jewish and Heathenish, and with a Word written as well as preached; speaking
and writing lieing both equally open to question and exceptions, without a
power Joh. 1.25. Matthew. 21.25. Heb. 5.4.
gloriously working in the behalf and to the reputation of it. Nor is there any
one Disciple in all the New Testament preaching and baptizing by way of
authority, but he was able to make out the truth of his calling and
dispensation, either by miracle or gifts. There are but three Exceptions, and
they have no weight in them.

1. Acts 8.6.
Ananias was a Disciple.

I answer: Yea, but he restored sight to Saul, and had vision.

2. Acts 9.17.
Philip did no miracle to the Eunuch.

I answer: We can neither conclude he did, nor he did not, from the Word; for
it is silent: but he did miracles in Samaria.

3. They that were scattered went every where preaching.

I answer: Who they were, or how they preached, or what power they manifested,
is not laid down in the Word neither for nor against: The Word is silent.

9. That there is not such an Officer as Administrator in the whole Word; but
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, 1 Cor. 12.29, 30.
Ephesians. 4.11.
Rulers, Deacons, etc. and therefore Administrator is an unwholesome word.

10. None ought to give the Baptism now, because there is none can give the
gift of the Holy Ghost with it, to make up that glorious supplement of gifts
which it always had; and they are joined both in the Word and practice, as in
Heb. 6.1. Doctrine of Baptisms and Laying on of hands: and in their practice
they were joined as in act, Act. 8.14, 15, 16. And it will appear in the Word
that the Apostles did not so reckon of them single, but together, as in Act.
8.14, 15, 16. where it is said they were only Baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; but they prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. So as
Baptism by water, and by the Holy Ghost, being joined together both in
Institution, Doctrine, and Practice, are not to be separated, nor given in such
a time wherein that of the Holy Ghost is not given: For, what God has joined
together, Matthew. 39.6.
let no man put asunder.

11. That it is as unreasonable to take any such Ordinance of Jesus Christ from
any that is not distinctly, specially, spiritually, powerfully enabled as the
first dispensers, as it is to take the word of any Joh. 1.25. Heb. 5.4. Matt.
10.1, 5, 8* Mark 16.16.
common man charging us in the Name of the Parliament, and cannot visibly make
out a visible excellency and supremacy of power by Ordinance or Commission.

12. That these Churches who enjoy Christ's mind, as they think, most fully in
the practice of Ordinances, yet have no greater gifts in their Revel. 15.8. 1
Cor. 8.2.
Churches then there are in those called Independent, or Separatist; Prayer,
Teaching, Prophesying being as fully and powerfully performed in the one as the
other. And being so, Whether must not the Churches of Christ be distinguished
by some more visible glorious power and gifts as at first, 1 Cor. 12.
by which they may be discerned to excel all other Societies?

13. That the fullness of time is not yet come for Ordinances: For as there
were several Acts 1.4. and 7.17. Gal. 4 4. M^rk 1.15. Revel. 15.8. and 16. and
18.1. Acts ^ 6, ^.
seasons for the givings out of Truth before, so now.

SEEKING, or, SEEKERS So called; What their Way is, and what they hold.
THat there is no Church nor Ordinances yet. That if they did not end with the
Primitive or Apostles times, yet they are to begin as in the Primitive times,
with Matthew. 10.1. Mark 16.16. 1 Cor. 12.
gifts and miracles; and that there is as much reason for the like gifts to
make out the Truth of any of the Gospel now to an Antichristian estate, as
formerly to a Jewish or Heathenish. That such a Believer as can dispense
Ordinances, must be qualified as the Believers in Mark 16. and as the former
Acts 8.6. and 9.17.
Disciples were. That there is a time and Revel. 15.8. and 18.1.
fullness for the Spirit, and for the latter pure spiritual dispensations, as
there was formerly for the first dispensations: And whether this shall be while
the Angels are but pouring out their Vials or not, or when Babylon is fallen.
And whether there is not as much need for Acts 2.4. Mark 16.17. Acts 19.6. 1
Cor. 14.22, 39.
new Tongues to reveal the pure Original to us, it being conveyed with
corruptions and additionals in Translations; by which, Truth may be more purely
discovered, and the waters of Life that now run muddily, may flow more clear
and crystal-like from the Throne Revel. 22.1.
of God.

The Exceptions.
1. THat Jesus Christ did promise to be ever with his Matthew. 28.20. and 16.18.
Church, and therefore cannot be reasonably presumed to leave them without Joh.
14.16.
Church and Ordinances.

2. That if Revel. 22.18, 19.
Scriptures were not so pure and clear to us, as the Word of Life were not
sufficiently there; God were less Heb. 7.22.
gracious to us now under Grace, and Christ come in the flesh, then before to
the Jews, who gave them a Book of the Law, which remained with them to the
coming of the Messiah.

3. That such gifts and miracles were rather for bringing the Word into the
world, and for glorifying Christ's first coming in the flesh, then for Joh.
20.29, 30, 31.
after.

4. That if we must have miracles to make us believe, and not believe any truth
till then; we must have for every Truth, as well as for one or two, a miracle
to give it evidence: and so there must be a continual and new miracle-working
for every new believing.

5. If there must be miracles for believing, Truth is not of that excellent
nature that it seems: for if it be not able to make it self evident, and cast a
native and spiritual Ephesians. 5.1^.
shine or brightness upon that soul it comes into, it is but weak, dark, and
insufficient.

6. If Truth be not discernable in it self by its own glorious light-some
nature, by beams from it self; it is of a worse condition then many things
b^low, as the sun, and stars, and candles, etc. which bring that light in their
own nature and dispensation, by which they are discerned.

7. If every Truth be a beam of Joh. 8.1^. and 9 5.
Christ the truth, then every beam has Revel. 22.5.
light in it self, because it streams from the fountain of light, and so is
discernable.

8. That it is more glorious to take evidences from the Spirit, then from any
thing without; which can at farthest of it self but convince the outward man.

9. That all shall now in the last times be in a secret, invisible, inward,
spiritual glory, no more in gross, carnal, visible evidences and material
beams, as gifts and miracles. And this is to know Christ no more after the
flesh.

10. No miracles can in their own nature make one believe, without a spiritual
conviction from the Spirit of Christ going along with it; so as we see when
miracles were wrought, some believed, and some believed not: So as then there
is no such reason for miracles as pretended, because that conviction which
comes from the Spirit through the work of a miracle, may come by any other
instrumental or organical way. Or, it is a more glorious operation, by how much
more single, or by way of immediate revelation it works.

11. To believe merely by the Joh. 20.29, 30, 31.
Spirit, is far more glorious then by any other outward means, though never so
outwardly glorious: by how much the Spirit is more excellent then any thing
else, by so much more divine and spiritual are the impressions of it.

12. That when miracles are wrought, yet a pretender may work a miracle for the
contrary; like the sorcerers of Egypt against Moses: and Antichrist is spoken
on rather to come Matt. 23.24.
with signs and wonders of the two, then Christ. So as here shall be a loss
to any that thinks to believe merely by miracle. So as the Spirit is that which
must make us believe beyond all the power of miracle, which can give out its
power but upon the sense at furthest, being merely outward and visible.

13. That there is no such power for Ordinances as is pretended; but Believers,
as Matthew. 10.1. compared with Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 8.31. Isa. 8.16. Acts 9.10.
Disciples, may administer; and so did the Apostles and Believers formerly, as
they were Disciples.

14. That the Scriptures of the Gospel, or New Testament, are of such a 2 Cor.
3.6, 8, 9. Romans 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Heb. 4.12. ^ Pet. 1.19.
divine and even spiritual glory in the letter, as no other word: There is a
power to discover the reason and secrets of the heart, which the reason and
heart of man witnesses unto: There is a power to convince, and accuse, and
terrify, and comfort, clearly, and undeniably, and experimentally known.

15. These Scriptures we have, as they are, do make a Discovery of such a way
of Religion as reason never yet in any age attained to: The men of purest
reason, as your old Philosophers, never attained further then the knowledge of
something infinite which they did not know, and a Religion of humane or moral
righteousness and purity, and some sacrifices of atonement, etc. And there is
not any Religion in the world, Jewish or Turkish, but they are made up of
carnal principles, and are founded upon reason and nature; but this
Gospel-Religion has opened a new way of righteousness in one that is both God
and Man in a most rational though infinite way of salvation, and a way of
Worship cross to all methods and ways of reason, and the world, opening new
ways by a new Spirit, purifying natural reason into more divine and glorious
notions then ever it yet attained, bringing in a way of b^leeving, and placing
a Religion upon a spiritu^l persuasion called Faith, which is more
proportionable to an infinite God, and an infinite way and depth of salvation,
then reason ever invented, viz. for the soul to believe upon one, even Jesus
Christ, in whom God has laid up all love and fulness^; and so for man to
become one with him who is God and Man: and there cannot be a more rational way
for man to become one with God, then by one who is both God and Man.

16. That though there be not such glorious powrings out of Spirit, and such
gifts as Believers both may and shall have; yet all Believers ought to practice
so far of the outward Ordinance as is clearly revealed they may. Phil. 13.16.


17. That the Scriptures or Gospel of the New Testament being as many hundred
years old as from the Apostles, even in that Original we have them, no very
material differences in Copies, as it seems; and though they have passed
through the great Apostasy, yet they have not had the power to corrupt them
materially in their Original, to advantage their heresies and corruptions;
which very constant preservation of Truth in the midst of the very Enemies of
Truth, is both a constant and standing miracle of it self; and so we need not
stay for a Ministry with miracle, being we have a Word with miracle, which in
its matter, subject, power, speaking of God, of his Son, God and Man, of his
Spirit the Actor in man from both, by ways of outward Ordinances, of the
depths, windings, and workings of reason, etc. is of as much efficacy to
persuade as any thing else we can have; and the way of the pure Spirit is a
more glorious way of operation then any other of a visible sensual nature: And
God may be more glorified by quickening and spiritualizing a word, and using
the spiritually glorious Ministry of that, then of man: and they are far too
low who look for their original teachings from man, and not from the Word and
Spirit.

CONCLUSION.
I Have drawn out this map of each opinion, that your eye may travel over that
in an hour, which otherwise you might be a year in going over. Thus each are
discovered in a narrow yet full Discovery; and I think all that are divinely
rational, 1 Cor. 8.2.
will see no such cause to think that each has attained so far, that either
they should presume in their degree, or look down from the pinnacle of an
infallibility upon each other. I have set the strength and weakness of each
opinion before it self, that on the one side as it may glory, so on the other
side it may fear and be humble. All I wish now is that we be all so far one, at
least in infirmity, and this Common weakness, as may be a ground of Common
embodying and associating against the Common Enemy, or Grand Antichrist; as in
States, who when they are at lowest, have least factions; and when weakest, are
most peaceable with one another.

The GOSPEL, or NEW TESTAMENT of JESUS CHRIST, proved undeniably to be the very
Word of God, without Miracles, to assure us of the particular duties in it.
Because there are some men now of more reason then sound belief, I cannot but
in a spiritual rationally way bear witness to our salvation in the written
Word.
1. IF there were not a Word or Will of God revealed in Laws and Ordinances
written, God were worse provided then the Lawgivers of Nations and Kingdoms,
and the world were left to their own wills; which is esteemed ridiculous in the
eyes of all the Nations of the world in their very politic condition.

2. The Laws and Ordinances contained in the Word, or New Testamens, bear only
the Image of a God, in their holiness, purity, righteousness, glory,
infiniteness, eternity, immortality, which are all, with many more things of
like excellency, there, which are as the beams of light to the Sun, or so many
things of God, revealing God.

3. The Word is so tempered into a middle nature betwixt God and man, as no
Word can be more revealing the most glorious, spiritual, infinite things from a
God, in a mean, literal, figurative, comparative, significative way to man.

4. To have a standing Word as the Gospel is, is more for the glory and
authority of a God then any ministry of man, though with miracles and signs;
because such a Word, where none can join themselves as Authors or Parties, as
in other ways of dispensation by men, men may join themselves, does
undoubtedly hold forth most of God and of divine Authority; and thus to
maintain or preserve a Law or Word in the world, is not so much with God as for
Kings and Princes to maintain Statutes and Laws in their Kingdoms.

5. A Word as the New Testament is, may be as well a way and dispensation to an
infinite God to make out himself by, as any other, either of dream or vision,
or Revelation or Oracle, all being but ways of a natural strain and condition,
no more then the Word.

6. The very manner of dispensation or writing, is such as has the authority,
power, wisdom, couns^ls of a God, the whole business of it being a work
discovered to be begun by God, and amongst men, to set forth the glory of God,
the mercy, love, and wisdom of G^d, and the way by the Son of God, and Spirit
of God, and all to be glorified with God; and thus treating only of things
divine, and a work divine, in a way divine.

7. We must either give up our selves to this Word wholly, or not at a^l; and
then let the world and experience judge what kind of Religion reason at large
unbounded, or unenlightened, will bring forth, by the former paterns of
Heathenish and G^ntilish Religion.

8. Why should it not be thought the most clean and direct w^y for God, to
manifest himself to man by Word, Gospel, and Epistle, and so by an infinite and
invisible power and hand commend and convey it from age to ag^, from generation
to generation, as well as for men to make out their art, reason, knowledge,
experience into books and words written, to their own and other generations?

9. This Gosp^l of Jesus Christ places Religion upon a more glorious
transcendent way, to suit with an infinite God, then ever any device of man, or
reason could invent, viz. upon faith, upon a believing or spiritual persuasion
wrought by the same God, by which men are carried out into depths of
infiniteness and glory, no way measurable nor discernabl^ but by this way of
believing; and there could never have been an engine contrived which could have
gone from man into God but this of faith by God himself; nor more for the
advantage of the glory of a God, taking all from the creature, employing it
wholly upon a God.

10. There is more reason in this Gospel, or New Testament, in the way of
Religion which it holds forth by Jesus Christ, then ever could be thought on by
the reason of man; as for instance, Each man's internal conscience has a light
or law in it which condemns or accus^^h for murder, etc. now if there be
accusations, against whom is the offense committed but against something
infinite? and what way is there more divinely rational to apply to the justice
of such an infinit^, being on God offended, but by one who is both man and God,
even Jesus Christ? So as the mystery of salvation is such as even reason it
self cannot contradict or gainsay, though it cannot comprehend to leave the
world inexcusable in their unbelief, because it commands them to believe in one
whom in reason they cannot deny to be a way proportionable betwixt God and
themselves for salvation.

11. It carries things in such a rare way of mercy, of justice, of love, of
piety; an^ as it is a salvation from God to man, so it is a salvation managed
by one who is God and Man; and every thing belonging to it, is accordingly
mixed or tempered, of Word and Spirit, of power divine and outward
dispensation, or ordinance; and all this for man who is of a mixed nature of
flesh and spirit: Thus things are carried in a way of proportion and
sutablenesse, so full, so suitable, and complete, and serviceable, as the
invention of men could never devise.

12. It discovers reason to it self in all its workings and ways, in its
purity and corruption, in its virtues and vices, conscience bearing witness to
the Laws and Commandments of it; it purifies and spiritualizeth reason, and
brings it into such a way of communion with God, as the souls that read it, and
are exercised in it, seem to be new born, to receive in another nature, an
immortal and incorruptible seed.

13. It manages all the design of salvation contrary to nature and the world,
upon contrary principles, dispensations and hands, by a Person poor, humble,
and crucified for the good, by Ministers and Dispensers, mean and contemptible
fishermen, tradesmen, etc. yet inspired by graces contrary, as self-denial,
humility, love to enemies; by conditions contrary, as weakness, affliction,
poverty, suffering, dying, carrying a treasure, a comfort, a riches, a life, a
glory, under all these.

14. It is accompanied by continued or standing miracles, though miracles of a
more spiritual nature, as discovery of the counsels and hearts of men, as
conversion from sin, mortification of sin, changing natures from evil to good,
planting in new dispositions, inclinations, affections into the soul. Now, if
such changes and conversions were in material or sensible things, as from water
to blood, from water to wine, how would it astonish? Which in spirituals is
more wonderful, though only less discernable, and not to be so sensibly
perceived, preserved by its very enemies, the Roman cruelty of Emperors, and
Antichristian Traditions.

15. It refers the discovery of all Truth in it self to the Spirit of God,
which no word but the Word of God would do, and will not take in men into glory
with it self which miracles do, which are done by the hand and ministry of
man; and the Spirit in this way must needs be a more glorious Interpreter of
the Will of God, then the mere ministry by man and miracles can be, by how
much it is of a more spiritual nature; and it is more excellent to seek things
in the Spirit, then in any out ward dispensation, which as it comes more
immediately from God, so it comes in more immediately upon men; and to take in
Truth by sense and sight, or miracle, is rather to know Christ after the flesh.

16. Yet after all, the Word it self is the best way to bring in evidence and
discovery in its own behalf to the souls of those that will come under the
power, operation, and experiments of it, under the enlightening, convictions,
impressions of it, in the reading, hearing, and meditating of it. These things
are written that ye may believe: John 20.
And they that are thus exercised, are above all miracle, and are persuaded
enough by it self without the help of an outward work.

17. To these I add the testimonies of the most ancient in witness of it.

Dionysius Areopagita, thought to live in the times of the Apostles, De divinis
n^min. c. 2.
and not daring to take his Divinity anywhere but from these Scriptures.

Irenaeus, Iren. lib. 3. c. 1.
who was in the year 180. affirming the fullness of these Gospel-Scriptures,
and accounted them the Pillar of Truth.

So Tertullian, who lived 1400 years since, Tertullian. lib. contra Hermogen.
does accordingly witness to their perfection.

Origin, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Constantine the Great, in the first
Nicene-Council, with thousands others all along to our own age.

18. The Jews, whose very Testament and condition answers to every Prophecy
and Gospel-Scripture.

19. The many of those most eminently ancient, learned, and godly, who have
shed their blood in testimony of it.

20. The power of God going along with it.

21. The confessions of the most learned in that, confess, that the Original
Copies are not corrupted, but continued pure.

One ARGUMENT from the National Covenant for Liberty of Conscience, yet with
all subordinate and just obedience to the State.
ART. 1.
THe first Branch of the Covenant is,

That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, etc. endeavor, etc. the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England, etc. in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, etc.

ART. 2.
The second Branch of the Covenant,

That we shall in like manner without respect of persons endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, etc. Superstition, Heresy, Schism, etc. and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, etc.

Now from these I argue,

1. Each one is personally and individually bound by the Covenant, and in his
own proper conscience is obliged to endeavor a Reformation according to the
Word of God, and so far to the example of the best Reformed Churches as they
are agreeable to that Word; I hope no further. Now who shall be the Judge and
Interpreter of this Word of God, to each man's conscience in the things of God,
but he who is Lord of the conscience, in things immediately divine and
spiritual? The consciences of men are under a spiritual and immediate
Interpreter of the Word, even the Spirit of the Lord, in all things of
spiritual cognizance, as every Scripture-truth, or Truth, in the Word is: and
this is not only strengthened and clear from the Word, but from a testimony
which some when they read, may know better then many others.

By the Clause, According to the Word of God, we understand, so far as we do or
shall in our consciences conceive the same to be according to the Word of God.

Now each man standing thus engaged in his own particular and in his own proper
conscience by a Covenant recommended and imposed, each is bound to bring forth
the evidence of their consciences in particular, concerning this to which they
are covenanted: So as I, or you, being covenanted against Popery, Heresy, and
according to the Word of God, you and I stand bound by our own private
consciences to reveal to the State, who has recommended such a Covenant unto
us, what our consciences interpret according to this Word, against Popery or
Heresy, unless there could be one universal or public infallible Interpreter
of the Word of God and Truth, who might determine concerning Heresy and the
Word of God, and whose determinations is as in the formerly inspired
Apostolic^l teachers we may rest.

So being thus engaged by Covenant, we are at the same time, by one and the
same Act, bound to liberty of conscience, in these particulars of the things of
God: and if there should be any persecution for the pious, modest, and
peaceable liberty, so taken and practiced, whether would it not clearly and
undeniably follow, that our consciences are not under the Lord Jesus, and his
Spirit immediately in the things of God, but under the interpretations of men.

And surely that one Clause, according to the Word of God, is most
providentially inserted; for if we be so closely covenanted to the Word of God,
how tender ought we to be? lest in this dark season of our discerning, we
oppose something of the Word, and so in ignorance, persecute what we covenant
to maintain. I wish our Assembly would press this equally with the Covenant in
their Sermons.

Object. But must every one be the Interpreter of the Covenant?

Answ. Nay, not every one, in every thing: The Magistracy in all things of a
civil cognizance, and in all spiritual things which go out from their mere
spiritual condition into a moral offense, as injustice or evil transgression
into tumult or disturbance of public or private peace, actually and
expressly, not interpretatively; for so the Nations interpreted the Jews as
troublers of the State; and the Jews, Christ and his Disciples, as movers of
sedition: The Papists and Prelates interpreted the Nonconformists or reproached
Puritans, as factious and tumultuous: So as in all things of Moral, Civil, or
Secular cognizance, which the Magistrate has clear rule for to walk by, He
ought to interpret and proceed by; partly, because he is the Legislator, and so
is the best Interpreter, and can best resolve us in things of Law and public
liberty; and in morals, his duty lies out more clearly; but in merely divine
and spiritual interpretations of Truth and Gospel-mystery, the Lord Jesus and
the Spirit of Jesus Christ are both the Legislators, or Lawgivers, and
Interpreters to the conscience.

Object. But shall there be no power to compel consciences into Uniformity?

Answ. I shall give light to this by propounding a Case. Suppose the several
godly parties, or believers, were equally principled for persecution or
non-toleration, and were equally numbered, and were equally strengthened by
parties of Magistracy on their side, What would come forth according to such
principles? I sigh to consider: There would be edge against edge, authority
against authority, power against power, and all the State or Kingdom involved
into blood and cofusion: So as we must consider things according to their
principles, not according to their temporary or occasional advantages.

Object. But you give not enough to the Magistrate.

Answ. Yea, more then any. He that gives him that which God has given him,
gives more then any that pretend to give him the most.

The pretenders that bid for the Magistrate at this time are,

1. They that put him as an help and government in the Church, as some, 1 Cor.
2.28.
viz. they of the Erastian way.

2. They that make use on him but as an help to the Church extrinsecally, and
by way of foreign assistance, as others, viz. they of the Presbyterial way.

3. They that give him power over body, goods, over all moral and civil
behaviors of men, Professors and Believers, of what sort soever, of what
opinion soever, as I and the rest of our Brethren do, praying with all manner
of supplication that under them we may lead a peaceable, godly, and quiet life.

Object. But why dare you not engage Civil Magistracy in Religion over
consciences, as some others do?

Answ. Yea, In all things morally good and evil, God has engaged them, and
has set the Law and Light of nature and conscience in all people to side with
them, condemning and excusing what they and their Law does condemn and excuse,
and thus to bear witness with their dominion and power.

But in things of pure Gospel-mystery and Evangelically good or evil, I dare
not engage them (whatever others do) over consciences, because I give more to
their just power, and because I dare not draw them into such principles, which
has broken more Magistracy, then all the other plots and devices of men.

For things of Worship which are laid up in the pure simple mystery, in the
Light of the Spirit, not of nature, as all mere Gospel-mystery is, to engage
the Magistrates sword into these, is rather a way to dash them against every
man's conscience, and so in time to lay in a fatal power or a fatal suffering.

We know that power which makes Kingdoms soundest in their Dominion, and most
lasting, is the truest and wholsomest; and surely that which ingages them lest
into that part of the soul, the conscience which can lest endure to be
oppressed, is the safest and most peaceable.

To my Reverend learned Friend Master LEY, One of the Assembly of Divines, at
Westminster, Author of a Book called The Resolution of the New Quere, published
by Master Saltmarsh.
SIR,
I Shall give you a public account according to your public charge in your
leaf concerning me, That I intended to make you my Censor for some papers
which I did not publish. Page 1.

Sir, those papers were an answer to Master Fullers last Book; and the Question
about Reformation betwixt him and me being so out of all Question, as Master
Herle observes, and he as I heared, being dead, made me rather put up my
Arrows into their Quiver, theen shoot them at such a mark.

For my contending with you in this, I hope it is but as that of Paul and
Barnabas, and Paul and Peter, a contention of Brethren, not of Enemies; for I
think you would oppose Truth no more then my self; but we both may be said to
contend rather for the Truth then against it, and rather with one another
reason, then with Truth.

In this Controversy you have much advantage of learning, and experience; but
there is a Spirit and the inspiration of the Almighty. which enlightens the
young man and the old; Elihu as well as Job or his Friends.

Your other advantages are, the Magistrate whom you have more on your side; we
only are more on the Magistrates side, then they are on ours; yet we cannot
but say, and bless the Lord for them, they are so far on ours, as we lead a
peaceable and quiet life under them.

Your other advantage is an Assembly of learned Divines, yet not so wholly
yours; the way of Truth we stand for, has a Party there; and I hope when the
veil of prejudice is taken away, and Truth is brought home to their souls in
its nakedness, power, and evidence, by a power more spiritual then is yet
given out from Heaven, our Party there will be greater: I willingly presume so
much of them.

I have labored that a Spirit of love and meekness might run through all my
Reply unto you, though in my traveling over your paper I have met with some
things in the way too sharp, and your way has more Briars and Thorns in it
then you promised in your first leaf: I had much ado not to be provoked, by
how much your promise had removed all offense on your part from my expectation.
If you find any passions in my Book, charge them on my unregenerate part; for
I find that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

You see my labors, deducting the time of their Printing, are of about two
weeks growth, younger by some six weeks (if I mistake not) then yours. I hope
where you could not expect much, you will not look for more then I here return
you in this time.

Sir, I salute you in the Lord, and with all due respects to your self, your
age, your learning, I begin my Discourse with you; and the Lord let me see the
failings on my part, while I seek to discover those on yours, that I may take
out the beam from my own eye, as well as the mote from yours.

You desired me in your Book to enter upon a way of Peace; and I have
accordingly presented my Model to be perfected and refixed by any that will
set upon the work: I do not love in any thing I write, to fume out merely in
Controversy; but in something if it may be to edification. I rest

Your Friend in the Lord JOHN SALTMARSH.

The Smoke in the Temple. Wherein is the Vindication of the NEW QUERE FROM
Master Ley's RESOLUTION.
Master Ley's Resolution, Page 2, and 3.

I Put a Question, Whether he were an Independent or no? He told me, He was
not; but that he had a latitude of charity for them of that way. Since that, I
had a glimpse more of his inclination by his Dawning of Light: but a full
discovery of his mind in his Book, The Opening of Master Prynns Vindication. I
will not entertain him as an enemy. To give him his due, in all that I have
seen set forth in his name, I find him rather opinionative then passionate.

Reply.

Your Question was accordingly put by you, and accordingly answered by me. And
for my appearing for Truth not all at once in my Treatises, you may see I was
not hasty to believe, nor to write in the behalf of a Truth before I saw it,
nor to plunge my self into any Way till I had examined it. The Apostles waited
for the full revelation of all truth by the Spirit's coming. Acts 1. and 1^. 1 John 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
The Bereans searched daily to see whether the things were so, or no. Apollos
preached not Christ clearly till he was instructed in the way of God more
perfectly. We are bidden to try the spirits, and prove all things: So as I
appeared in those degrees but by Scripture-warrant. And I could name to you
examples of another sort; Augustine, Luther, both finding truth but in degrees;
and the latter sweetly acknowledging how he was enlightened by beam after beam.
Angels, who lie more naked toward God, and take in the things they know, by
way of Vision; yet see not any of that will of God which gives Laws to them,
but as he reveals: Much less such as we who dwell in houses of clay, and whose
foundations are in the dust, and who come by the sight of things discoursively,
and by spiritual reasoning; God giving in the revelation of his Truths in a
natural, yet supernatural way.

But for that Notion of Independency you speak on, I dare not own it, because I
account my self both under a spiritual and civil Supremacy; under Jesus Christ
and the Magistrate severally, and exempt from neither. We are not of those that
despise Governments and speak evil of Dignities, not are we under any such
singular Notion that I know on, to be called Independents, etc. We all hold of
the Body of Christ, and of the Communion of Sain^s below, and we hold one upon
another, but not one over another. We dare not be Classical, Provincial,
National; these are no forms of wholesome words to which we are commanded, nor
know we any such power; but that of Brethren, and Ministry, and fellowship. We
dare not take out a Copy either from the States of the world, or the State of
Israel, to obey or rule by under the Gospel. And if you call the Churches of
Christ Independent for this, we must suffer till the Lord bring forth our
righteousness as the noonday. Yet this you and we both know, that when Truth
would not embody or mingle at any time with corruptions, it had presently the
name of Sect, Schism, Faction (all which are employed in the name Independency)
put upon it. Thus were the Reformed Nations of England, Germany, France, etc.
scandalized by Popish Writers, and the old Nonconformists by the Prelatical;
the Jews formerly by the Nations, and the Christians by the Jews. We have heard
enough of Independency and Presbytery; such notes of distinction are now become
names of reproach: and so I lay them down.

And whereas you say you will not entertain me as an enemy; it is more likely
then in the end both you and I may prove a better friend to the Truth. It is
possible many in this Age might have seen more, had they not cast so much dust
in one another eyes by their strivings: It were well such a Gospel Spirit
would walk more abroad, and that spirit which casts men sometimes into the
fire, and sometimes into the water, were not so stirring. Well, since you will
be no enemy to me, I shall not, I hope, contend with you, though I dare not but
contend earnestly for the Truth. And the Truth it self which I write for, may
(I hope) at length find you no more an enemy to it then you are to me. I
cannot but wish one of your experience and abilities, like Paul, to preach for
that Truth which before he destroyed. Our hearts desire and prayer should be
for any of Israel.

And for that you say of me in your Observation, that I am rather opinionative
then passionate, I cannot take it so ill from you that will needs be no enemy
to me: I interpret any thing from such a one on the better side of it. But I
shall allow you your liberty at my self: And if the Truth of God may more
abound through my opinion (as you take it) unto his glory, I have enough.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 4, and 5.

I wonder he, who has writ a whole Book of Policy, should be so unpolitick as
to think it seasonable, since it tends to retard the establishment of
Government, whereto the Parliament is so much engaged by Declaration, etc. by
Solemn League and Covenant, Art. 1. already setting it up in Ordinance for
Ordination, etc. Though the liberty of speaking lengthens the Debates, and
delays the Votes, etc. and so much the more, because they are more in number
then we, and because their determinations are final, as ours are not.

Answer.

For some things in my Book of Policy, I praise the Lord I can look on them as
on part of the darkness I was in: and I can freely join with any in censuring
any unregenerate part in me, as I esteem much of my Carnal reason to be. When I
was a child, I spoke as a child; neither have I any fruit now (as the Apostle
says) of some of those things. Nor would I have any go thither for direction,
but so far as they find Scripture or sound Reason. I cannot but give a Caution
concerning this Book, because I would have Readers to look on any thing from
me, as Luther speaks of himself, as I receive in light. And methinks I scarce
do any thing which I could not with Augustine, when it is done, find something
to retract in it: either something is too dead, or too dark, or too carnal.
Thus you see I willingly help you against my self; and I account it a part of
my condition here, not to see all at once.

For the unseasonablenesse of my Quere, you allege the Declaration of
Parliament, and the Covenant in Art. 1. wherein they are engaged to endeavor
Reformation; and the Ordinances, etc.

Now where is my unseasonablenesse? The Parliament is endeavoring, etc. May I
contribute my moneys, my vote, my pains, my informations to the Civil
engagements, and not my notions to the Spiritual? Are we not to bring in all
our disoursements, either Natural, Civil, or Spiritual, into that public
Treasury? Though you of the Assembly cast in of your abundance, may not the
poor ones cast in their mite? Are we not by the same Covenant bound to discover
anything against God and the State, and the glory and peace of both? And if I
find my conscience persuading me such or such a thing is not accordingly,
ought I not by all the Obligations that are upon me, of Gospel, Parliament, and
Country, peaceably and meekly to speak a word? May we discover any thing to
the State we conceive of malignity or danger in Civil things, and not in
Spirituals? Is not the Spiritual or soul-liberty, the more glorious liberty of
the Subject? We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts
4.20.
says the Apostle: And, What you hear in the ear, that speak you on the house
top, says Christ. We know who it was that said, Prophecy not here; for it is
the Kings Chapel. And for things of a Spiritual nature, we are allowed almost
the fullness of time for season. Be instant in season and out of season, says
Paul.

But, What better season could I come in, then such a one, wherein things were
but ripening and moving toward establishment? Where nothing is settled, there
can be nothing disturbed. Where nothing is concluded, there can be nothing
repealed. Where nothing is established, there can be nothing disordered. But
since you put me to a further account. I shall give it. My spirit was not my
own so wholly then, but his (I hope) whose motion I obeyed, the Lords. Such
breathings of Heaven who dare safely quench? It is as fire in the bon^^* says
the Prophet: and like that of Mordecai, If thou altogether hold thy peace at
this time etc.

And whereas you say, that the Parliaments determinations are final, That
holds better for me, who might have spoken to much less purpose, had I stayed
till all had been done, and the determinations ended, and become final; sure it
was time then to speak before determinations were final, or never, and by your
own account too; for you are pleased to reckon up the proceedings of State in
the business of Religion; which are such, as had I stayed, I had had a worse
season; however, as the Prophet says, I have delivered my soul: they were, you
know, the foolish virgins that came not with their oil till the door was shut.
Whatever my Oil or my Lamp was, yet I think it not agreeable to the wisdom of
that Parable, to come and knock only when the door is not open.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 6, 7 and 8.

The title of the Quere is baited with Truth and Peace. He a private Divine to
put such a Quere, both of State and Religion, and to suggest such a suspicion
of haste, and to tax the Ministers for putting in for a power not consonant to
Scriptures and Prudence, etc. His rendering the original word metaphorically:
His artificial colors, Rhetorical, etc. And my marshalling his reasons in a
right method.

Reply.

I have gathered up into one bundle your pieces of a lighter concernment: I
would not stay tything Annise and Cummin, but I hasten to the weightier matters
of the Law. A word only to each.

For baiting my Quere with Truth and Peace, you allude to Christ's allegory,
that we are fishers of men: and if I have no worse things to bait with then
these two, Truth and Peace, none need, I hope, be afraid of the hook. And for
the proof of them both, argument and time will evidence.

For me, a private Divine, to put a Quere of State and Religion. What were John
Hus, Wickliff, Luther, Paphnutius, who in their several ages gave out their
testimonies? They were but single men, compared with Councils and Synods. Not
that I would compare with them, who am less then the least of all the mercies
of God; yet they were but single, though singular men. And what if a private
Divine? Jesus Christ may bid a private man stand and speak to the people. There
is a law of the Spirit commands to speak as well as the Law of a State; and
though you speak by the later law, another may speak by the former. And what
though a Quere both of Religion and State? Is not our Covenant mixed accordingly
of Religion and State? Does not the State it self mix with Religion where
Churches are National? And how can I speak properly but to both, where both are
in interest?

For my suggestion of a suspicion of haste; you know, words and phrases are not
the same to all: one may interpret thus, another thus. I had no thought of
Jehu's driving, as you imply, when I wrote. I must lay the supposed crime at
your own doors; for it is none of mine; nor have I (nor any) reason to tax that
Honorable Senate, whose counsels are grave, and serious, and deliberate. Had I
looked for Jehu, I should have looked to another coast and quarter, where they
drive more furiously. Why deal you not more heartily? Why are you not more
faithful in your interpretation to the Original?

For that of my taxing the Ministers for desiring power; none have reason to
speak but the guilty; it concerns not the innocent. It is not strange for some
Ministers to affect Government, or rather ruling: we have so much of Prelacie
yet left, and working in the Country with us; and if not in the City too, I
refer you to master Coleman.

For the word rendered from the Original metaphorically; I quoted only the
Text, to my remembrance, to the Printer's hand; and how he came by the
metaphor, I know not; but I find fault as well as you: However, to make the
best of it now, translations of Scripture are not all Grammatical, as you know;
nor to the letter, as I could wish them with you.

For artificial colors, or Rhetorical, etc. You make me guilty of such vernish
as I have not laid on, to my knowledge; nor have much to lay on, if I would:
Truth and Peace, which were my subjects, are fair enough of themselves, without
any color of mine: and I desire not to bring forth either, but in the evidence
and demonstration of the spirit; and if there be any thing of their own beauty
there, call it not artificial; put not suspicions and jealousies into any, that
such things as they see are not so, to make men Skeptical. It is as much injury
to Truth and Peace to misreport them, as to counterfeit them.

And for your logical marshalling my reasons, I thank you; you took more pains
with them then I would do. I gave them out in that Notional order I received
them in. Nor dare I be too logical and notional in things divine. Systems and
forms of art, have done our Divinity some harm. Such Classes and methods of
reason have been found too strait for the more spiritual enlargements of Truth.
Yet I honor your Learning, though I thus speak.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 9 and 10.

His first reason taken from Rules of Faith, Romans 14.3, 13, etc. Now he should
have planted his reason directly against the imposing a Government, rather then
obedience to it; as thus, etc. Those that set up a Government which they are
not fully persuaded on, sin: But, they that now set up Church Government with
power, etc. do set up a Government whereof they are not fully persuaded on:
Therefore in so doing, they sin. The major is true, but the minor not, because
of their faithful learned Counselors, and Scripture-discussings.

Reply.

Since you will help me to prove, you are welcome: You have furnished me with
one Argument more: You are a fair enemy, to lend out your own weapon. And now
you have made your Argument half for me, I shall make the other half my self.
You say,

What the imposers of Government cannot do in Faith, is sin: This is your half
Argument. But you take it for granted, Our imposers of Government are not such,
but such as are fully persuaded, and can set up the Government in faith; and
you prove it thus, from those of their Counselors so near them, and from their
Scripture-discussions.

First, I know not what Counselors you mean; but they are too wise a Senate to
be carried by any interest but their own; and I wish them no other Counselors
then Truth and Peace: nor do I know that they are so fully persuaded of any
such Government. I believe some of them are not so fully principled for your
way; and then they all are not persuaded so of the Government: nor have you yet
been able to make out the evidence of every truth you presented them from clear
Scriptures, saving your Art of deductions and consequences, and prudence: and
if all cannot be persuaded that State conscience or Public conscience is not
so wholly nor fully persuaded: then, as you imply, a State or Public
conscience is like a Particular conscience; which if it does not Wholly
consent, is doubtful, or weak: for it is not in Spiritual things as in Civil:
Votes of major parts make Laws, and they stand good from any such forms of
Policy: but I never yet saw that rule in the Gospel for any such proceedings
in spiritual things: but that is a Law in Christ's Kingdom, not that which is
voted so, but that which is so in the truth of it: For else Popery were the
best; for it has most voices and counsels. So as unless you can prove the
Parliament to be of one mind in it, how can you prove a Parliament so fully
persuaded in mind as you imply? Let them prove a Truth by most voices that
please or can; but I wish the business of a State-conscience, in a thing of
this nature, were more enquired into then yet it has been.

But if the Parliament were fully persuaded of the truth of the Government, yet
there would be a new question, yea, and is, very learnedly discussed by our
worthy Brethren Master Coleman and the Commissioner, how they could be
persuaded of the imposing, and power of settling. For my part, if there must be
an imposing of Government (for I would have the State-consciences left to their
liberty as well as Particular, and yet Truth to have the liberty of access
unto them) I would have the power of the Parliament laid up there: we have had
too sad experience when it has been given out from thence, and trusted too
far. Paul referred himself thither, ( I stand, says he, at Cesar's
Judgment Seat) rather then to the Council of the Priests and Elders. Christ
had more favor from Pilate a Roman Governor, then from Caiaphas the Priest.

One word more. How can the Parliament properly be said to be fully persuaded,
etc. unless they could freely sign it with a Jus divinum, or divine Right?
Nothing but Scripture and the Word, can properly fully persuade. Now if they
cannot find so much Scripture as to warrant it for Christ's Government, how
can there be a purely Gospel-warrantable, a full persuasion, or faith, where
there wants a word of faith to secure it?

And now I shall form your Argument you half made to my hand thus, and return
another with usury.

Your Argument is this:

Those that set up a Government which they cannot be fully persuaded on, cannot
but sin.

But, the Parliament cannot be fully persuaded of this Government:

Therefore, if they set it up, they cannot but sin.

My proof is this, in behalf of your Argument.

That conscience which is not wholly consenting, is not fully persuaded.

But, such is the State or Public conscience, viz. not fully consenting at
this time:

Therefore, the State-conscience is not fully persuaded.

Note

Because some are more for it, some are less for it.

I prove the State-conscience not fully consenting.

That conscience which has not Scripture to secure it, cannot be fully
consenting or persuaded: viz. as full persuasion is taken in the Word.

But, such is the Public conscience at this time concerning this present
Government: viz. not fully persuaded from Scripture concerning it.

Therefore, the Public or State-conscience cannot be so fully consenting or
persuaded. viz. in a Scripture- sense.

Note.

Because they which cannot call it a Government by Divine Right, are not
secured concerning it by the Word; and then, by consequence, are not so fully
consenting, nor persuaded.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 9 and 10.

If we take his reason to stand immediately against obedience, and so
consequently against commands, etc. It is more formal, but still as feeble;
Repugnant to Religion and reason, against former Protestations, and the
Covenant; for some will always scruple, etc.

Reply.

Some of this might have been spared. Let us have as much reason, and as little
reviling as may be. Your reason is. Because then neither Protestations nor
Covenant of State can be administered; for some will always scruple. So as here
is the force of your reason; Because Protestations and Covenants in the State
are put upon a people unwilling and malignant, therefore Government should.

First, a truth of Government, and the establishment of it, is but indirectly,
unsutably, and disproportionably proved from Oaths and Covenants. Indeed, under
the Old Testament, and in the State of Israel, Covenants were more agreeable to
the way of that Church; they were part of the Worship then; and it was a way of
obligation and engagement sitted more to the Policy of that Nation: They were
a People or Nation of themselves, singled out from the world, and marked by a
carnal Ordinance: and their Discipline was sitted to the whole Nation by God
himself; and so Covenants, etc. gathered them up from the world into their
National way of Worship, etc. But now, the way of Church and Worship changing,
and the Laws of such kind of external Pedagogie ceasing, and a more inward and
spiritual Law coming in, you might have done well, ere you took things thus for
granted, to clear the way of Covenants under the Gospel, and not to prove one
probable thing by another. Those of your way are against a little
Church Covenant, and why not a great one?

For the imposing of Protestations now, etc. It is not my work here to
discuss; nor am I against any way of State-security that may consist with
sound Prudence: and for the spiritual part of them, wherein men covenant in the
things of God, let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind: That is the
Apostle's rule, I am sure, whatever any say to the contray, and will stand. In
civil things, I would have any way or design of assurance that is fairly and
justly Politic: in spiritual things, only such ways of assurance as are
Gospel-ways, and may suit with the New Testament-believers.

And now you are to prove more then perhaps you thought on; that is, to clear a
Church Covenant, which many of your Way are against: for though you condemn it
in some Churches, not of your Way; yet a National Church Covenant you plead
for. And how can this be both true and false, that a great Church Covenant is
lawful, and a little one unlawful? a National Church Covenant lawful, and a
Particular or Congregational Church Covenant unlawful? This only by the way:
To show you how one may mistake his way in a mist: you were proving a
Government, and now you are engaged to prove Chuch-covenants, which you are
both for and against.

And yet, after all this of Protestations and Covenants, there is no fair proof
of establishing a Government, or imposing it in your way and design from
these. It is not safe going to the State for a Pattern for the Church. If the
State in certain seasons of unfaithfulness and unsettlement, contrive any way
of security or assurance (necessity is often a lawmakers in States, yet not so
in the Church) will you from hence argue for a liberty in the Church? Will you
make Necessity your Gospel, your Lawgiver there? Necessity is sometimes a
suspender of Laws in the Gospel, but no Lawmakers.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.

But I answer: I wonder an ingenuous man, as M. Saltmarsh is, should make such
an Objection.

Reply.

These are good words; and I hope you shall have no worse then you bring: yet
we must speak truth.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.

I answer: The Church Government is such as in the chief parts of it is from
the Word.

Reply.

You grant then the Government is but in some parts warrantable by the Word: So
was Episcopacy and Prelacy in some parts of it. There is not any false Worship
or Way, but it has some parts of truth in it. The great Image had a head of
gold, etc. The Mystery of Iniquity sits in the Temple of God, etc. The Whore of
Babylon sits in skarlet decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls.
Truth must be all one and the same, and homogeneal, not in parts. The Jews had
the Law, but then their own traditions mingled. There is one Lord, one Faith;
not two.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.

Things of lesser moment in it, though they are not directly from Scripture,
yet not repugnant; they are of Prudence, and agreeable to the best Reformed
Churches.

Reply.

But, Why of lesser moment? All things are of moment in spirituals. Indeed if
they be such as be not the Gospel's, they are then, as you say, of lesser
moment: and yet of moment too, in another sense; for, Traditions of men make
void the Commandments of God.

Nor are grounds of Prudence any Scripture-grounds to rule by. Prudence has
let in more Will Worship then any thing. Prelacy had its Prudence for every New
additional in Worship and Government: And if Presbytery take Prudence too, let
the Reader judge what may follow.

And what is that, Not directly from Scripture, yet not repugnant? Surely
Christ's rule is not such; he opposes any Tradition to the Commandments of God.
Not directly from Scripture, is repugnant to Scripture: such is the oneness,
entirenesse, indivisibility, and essentiality of the Truth. He that is not with
me, is against me.

And for the Reformed Churches as a rule; that is to set the Sun by the Dyal,
and not the Dyal by the Sun. We must set the Churches by the Word, and not
Church by Church, and the Word by the Church.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10 and 11.

Because the practice of the Government belongs not to the peoples part, but to
the Ministers and Elders.

Because, so far as concerns the peoples compliance, they are to be instructed
before they yield submission.

Because if any remain unsatisfied, they are not to be put upon his Dilemma of
sin or misery, or to be ruled with the rod, but meekness, 2 Cor. 4.21. 2 Timothy
2.25.

Because the ignorance of the people generally, which he would have for a
reason to suspend it, ought to be rather a reason for expedition, that they may
practically know it: for while it is unknown, it is slandered, which might have
been more amiable.

Because his two Texts make not only against the suspending for a time, but
for ever. I wish he would preach such Texts as these to his people; 1 Thessalonians.
5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17.

Reply.

To your first, It belongs not to the people, etc. It seems then the people
must be kept out from all intermedling. But I would have the people mark well
what kind of Government that is that sits upon the waters or people: I am sure
Christ's Government takes in the people: and being once in a Church Way, they
lose their old capacity for a new, and are raised up from people to Brethren,
Act. 15. It is a worthy saying of Master Goodwyn and Master Nigh, That the
Clergy got the golden ball of Government amongst them; and I censure it is not
much mended in the Presbytery.

But you say The people must be instructed, that is, they must only know that
they must obey. But are they called, and consulted with, and owned, as the
Scripture holds forth, wherever there is any Church spoken of? But what though
instructed? they are only to be instructed and taught that this is the
Government to which they must submit. So the people under Popery, Prelacie,
etc. were instructed, with that limitation and restriction. But shall they be
thus instructed and taught in it? People, here is a Government which to some of
us seems to be a Government according to the Word; take it and examine it: if
you be so persuaded, and that the Word holds it forth clearly, embrace it; if
not, do not obey any thing in blind and implicit obedience. This were fair
dealing with Conscience; thus the Churches of Christ had their Government among
them.

To that of the pe^ples compliancy you speak on, it is not my work here to
dispute the Interests of Elders and People distinctly; but to make answer, that
the compliancy and submission which are the duties you set out for the people,
are such as they may easily see the Interest you allow them: viz. an Interest
of compliance only, and submission or obedience to what is done already; not
any liberty to examine and refuse.

And when people are instructed, still your work remains to prove your
Presbytery over congregations, or a Church gathered out of a Church to be over
a Church; which may upon the Presbytery more justly be recriminated then where
you do so often recriminate, upon gathered Churches. And methinks to me it is
unreasonable to tax any for church-gathering, when your very Presbytery is
maintained by such a kind of principle. What is your Classical, your
Provincial, your National Presbytery, but a church gathered out of the rest,
call it a virtual, or representative, or what you please?

For that of Meekness; how meek i^ will prove, and how meekly they shall be
dealt with under it, we are not to judge by any promises of Meekness, but by
Principles. Are the Principles such as naturally bring forth Meekness, or
rather such as invest the Ministers and Elders with a power supreme and of
dominion? But what if such as your self, and some other godly meek of your Way,
may propound nothing but ways of meekness to your selves? Can you undertake
to secure the people for hereafter, and for all of the Way, and for the Way in
its own nature?

There are things of meek appearances, as the Presbytery may be, yet prove not
so. The Lamb in the Revelation had two horns, though a Lamb. Hazael could say,
Am I a dog, that thou should think so harshly of me, that I should kill the
children in the womb, 2 King. 8? He as little suspected his own cruelty which
the Prophet foresaw in his nature would come to pass, as you do in your
Presbytery, which some, seeing into the nature of it, cannot but prophecy
accordingly. You know Episcopacy began in meekness, and Bishops were brought
in first for good and for peace: But how proved they? Tyranny had ever a
countenance of Meekness and Love, till it got seated in the Throne. So Absalon
was very fair spoken in the Gate; but how was he in the Throne?

For that of my Dilemma of sin and misery, which you say people shall not be
put upon; it may be some in your or another Classis may find more meekness, a
spirit of more love and ingenuity: But what is this to the nature of the
Government, that some in it are well natured?

And for that of sin and misery; surely, if the Presbytery be set on with
power, many a one will be in that snare, partly in fear, and partly in an easy
compliancy: For there are whole Parishes and Counties of this constitution: And
you your self say, The wilfully weak must have the rod. And who will this be?
Such as are so in the judgment and interpretation of the Classis? or how? I
would this were well cleared.

And for your Scriptures of 1 Cor. 4.21. 2 Timothy 2.25. Shall I come to you with
a rod, etc. and in meekness instructing, etc. These are full Scriptures for
ordering any Church Government: These are good Laws; but then men must be
rightly in Commission for ruling by them, and people rightly ordered and
disposed for such rules, as in all other Laws and Kingdoms. But what is this to
your purpose, till your Government appear to be all Christ's?

To that of the ignorance of the people, which you would have for a reason of
expedition rather then suspension, that they may practically know it; I answer:

In practical godliness, the Scripture-way is not so: Things must first be
known, before practically known, or else the obedience can be but mixed, blind,
and Popish. Who can practically obey, taking practically in a Scripture-sense,
that is, with knowledge, till they know and be persuaded? Indeed in things
civil, etc. or moral, practice may bring in knowledge; habits may be acquired
and gotten by acts; a man may grow temperate by practicing temperance, and
civilly obedient practicing civil obedience: But it is not so in Spirituals;
there, habits go before acts, spiritual infusions before practices.

And for the amiablenesse of it, look into other Reformed Kingdoms, and see
what power of godliness is there by reason of it. Do we not see the huge
bodies of Nations very sinful, corrupt, formal? For Scotland, our Brethrens
preaching and watchfulness, it may be more powerful in a Reformation upon
them, then their Government. And further, I deny not but a Government of that
nature may much reform the outward man: So may a mere prudential Government, a
mere civil Government, if sincerely executed. The Romans had a very moral
people under their Yoke, when their laws were well executed. Prelacy and
Bishops had a Government which was Antichristian, yet by an exact execution,
could chastise the outward man in some measure.

For your other reason, That my Texts make against not only the suspending for
a time, (...) for ever; I answer:

It is true, Principles and circumstances considered: For if neither the
Government be Christ's, nor the people Nationally a Church, when can you settle
it? And if there be no Gospel-promises that people shall fall in so nationally
as the Jews did, excepting some that concern the world in general, as Isai.
49.22. then how or when will you settle, or what will you settle, or upon whom?

And for the Texts you commend to me for preaching, 1 These. 5.12, etc. they all
concern peoples obedience to their Elders and Rulers; they are very material
and pertinent to that: And I shall in requital commend some other back to you;
as those of not lording it over the heritage: Against preeminence; as helpers
of your faith; of service, and ministry: We are your servants; we entreat you,
and beseech you, not seeking our own things, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, etc.

We must consider, Scripture must be taken in the wholenesse and entirenesse of
it; and we must not only mind people of their obedience, but Elders and
Ministers of their service, duty, Ministry, humility, self-denial, etc. And
thus in a just distribution, deal out both to Ministers and people their
measure.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 12.

Strange that he should plead for a delay in establishment of Reformation from
the covenant, wherein we are bound to endeavor it sincerely, really, etc. and
more strange, under the title of Popery too, which in the next Article of
Popery is disavowed.

Reply.

Not so strange as you make it; for we are covenanted to endeavor a setting up
the Government, not a Government; that is, as it is expounded in the Article,
the Government, or Reformation according to the Word of God, etc. not a
Government or Reformation of any other sort. So as I plead for a delay only in
setting up a Discipline, not the Discipline: or more plainly, that the
Discipline be such, that the covenanters may not violate that article, wherein
they are bound to do every thing according to the Word, and so prove unfaithful
in their covenant, while they are most zealous for it. There was such a kind
of mistake in the Jews, who would have stoned the Lord of the Sabbath in zeal
to the Sabbath, and following after righteousness, yet did not attain to the
righteousness of God.

And for the title of Popery which I put upon such obedience; which you say
cannot be, because discovered in the next Article of the covenant: I answer,
The Popery is not in the covenant, but in the Interpretations upon it, and the
mistaken practice of it, which is the thing which I only aver. O! How soon may
we be Popish under a Covenant against it! What are the maintenance of Ministers
by Tithes? Jewish and Popish undeniably, and yet no notice of this at all. I
had as great a Tithe once as another, but I could not hold it so, neither by
Covenant nor Gospel. Nor do I tax the Parliament, but those who are betrusted
to commend Spiritual grievances to their Senate, etc. Brethren, let us lay down
these grievances: Countries and Families are burdened: Let not the Ministers
have their hooks abroad in every thing of the peoples, like Elies sons. We know
the kingdoms of Scotland and the Netherlands take their Tithes to maintain
their wars, and will not let their preachers live by decimation, but by pension.
And methinks you that profess ingenuity, should be so candid to distinguish
where you see I distinguish, and not to force on constructions of this nature,
which neither any thing of mine nor the Covenant will bear.

And for what you say concerning the composers and penners of the Covenant, I
am willingly silent: I would not aggravate any thing against a Brother, as you
are, which might be only a failing in your Pen.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 12. and 13.

For that he says of peoples implicit obedience, etc. of their being devoted
to any thing the State sets up by Statutes, cannot be, for these Reasons:

Because, as in the former Reason, Instruction must go before.

Because, for that of their being devoted, it makes against setting up Doctrine
as well as Discipline, and Authority of Parliament as well as Authority of
Ministers: They, not Ministers, make Statutes.

Reply.

To your first, That instruction must go before, I have answered to this
before, as you propounded it before: One word more will suffice. What kind of
instruction is it you mean, but authoritative compulsive instruction, such as
the Schoolmasters, even your own instance, and here most pertinent, who teaches
and whips every one of those that will not understand as well as he? Something
an unreasonable way of correction in matters of pure belief and conscience, and
best among boys, as your instance implies: Men of Scripture-consciences cannot
bear it.

And for that you say it makes against Doctrine as well as Discipline: Yea, in
some sort it is granted; for neither Doctrine nor Discipline ought to be forced
but in a Gospel-way.

And for that you say it makes against the Parliament, because they make
Statutes: I answer, Nothing makes against a Legislative power, which reduces it
to purer, and clearer, and freer Principles: And thus the Parliament very
justly argues in all their Remonstrances touching the King, while they go about
to reduce him to his just Rights, from those exorbitancies he suffers himself
to be brought into. For instance: He that wishes the Parliament might only
proceed in a way, not grieving the Spirit, nor hazarding the persecution of
Truth, nor oppressing any Gospel-principles, to which they are covenanted, not
keeping on in any sin of former Parliaments, of severe imposing in matters of
Religion so controvertible: Is not he, I say, that so wishes, a better friend
to Parliaments, Laws and Statutes, then those of contrary Principles? Nay, I
must profess that to me that very one Article of Reforming to the Word of God,
most providentially inserted, is an Article of Caution, both against imposing
and punishing, lest through want of a clear discerning, we be found violaters
of that we covenant to maintain, and ought to be sadly considered by all.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 12, and 13.

His second reason of experience, That the speedy settling, etc. takes little
root but in the outward man, etc. concluding pathetically, Why, do not days
speak, and multitude of years teach knowledge? In answer,

1. That the fault was not in the over-speedy settling, but in the choice of a
wrong Government.

2. Because Doctrine goes on with Discipline, and so the power of the Word may
go deep into the conscience, as a Schoolmaster who teaches and corrects.

3. Because the Discipline is an hedge or wall about the Doctrine, a goad to
the Means of Grace, a curb to licentious courses; though with many it go but to
the outward man, that is not to be imputed to the Discipline, but their
corruptions, etc.

4. Because where the Discipline has been rightly chosen and settled, God has
blessed it with better fruits; as in Scotland, where there is no Heresy nor
Schism, etc.

5. For that of Elihu in Job, Why, do not days speak, etc. it makes not for
his purpose; but that Wisdom is with the ancient, and gray headed to be heard
before young or green-headed counselors, etc.

Reply.

To your first, That the fault was in the choice of a wrong Government, etc. I
answer, That is the fear now, lest there should be a choice of a wrong
Government, and so the same fault should be committed again: And this very
Government has no Image of Divine Right upon it, nor has it warrant in all
things from the Word, as your self acknowledge.

To your second, That Doctrine and Discipline go together etc. Yea, pure
Doctrine and pure Discipline go rightly together: and if either be impure or
unsound, there is so much the more danger: So as this is an Argument rather
against you, because where Doctrine opens the conscience, and lets in any thing
of Discipline but that of the pure Word, there is one evil only mended with
another.

And for your Instance of a Schoolmaster, who both teaches and corrects: You
know we are not to prove, but to illustrate by similitudes: And that of a
Schoolmaster is a fitter illustration for the Pedagogy of the Law and that
Discipline then the Gospels: You know the Apostle uses it only to that; The
Law was our Schoolmaste, etc. Gal. 3.

To that of your description of the Government that it is a curb, a goad, etc.
I answer, There is nothing you say of Government in these words, but may be
said of any civil Government, nay, of Prelacy, when it was in its primitive
form: But that only which you ought to say, and which only differences it
from all devised forms of men, as your Covenant binds you, and ought to be your
only reason for erecting and setting it up, is this: Is it the Scriptures form
or model? Is the people so in the exercise and capacity of it as in the Gospel
times? If so, then you prove something. And further: All this you say is true
in a kind too of Christ's government; but yet, in some sort communicable with
devised governments. The only distinguishing and essential marks are not to be
a curb and goad, but the Scriptures only mark, and image, and some spiritual
operations, etc. which no other devised form of man has.

To your other, of the blessings and blessed fruits in Scotland, that there is
no Heresy nor Schism there, Let Master Coleman (our learned and pious Brother)
speak for us both, from his experiences. And for that Kingdom, time will show
whether it will prove to be a blessing or no, to want that which you call
Heresy and Schism. Surely to be free from Heresy and Schism, in a Scripture
sense, it is such a blessing as the whole Gospel cannot pattern. What? No
Heresy in a whole Kingdom? No Schism in a whole Kingdom? Never such a pure
Church heard on? Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Jerusalem, Antioch, all not
comparable? The worst I wish our Brethren there, is, that all were so pure as
we hear on. Indeed Scotland had the honor to awaken us first in the work of
Reformation and Liberty; but lest Scotland should be puffed up, England shall
have the glory (I hope) to improve that liberty to a fuller light, which some
would close up too soon, in the narrowness of a Presbytery.

Methinks there is something of this nature considerable in the Lutherans, who
though they follow the first Light in Germany, yet the Lord has suffered them
to stick there without a fuller Reformation, that the first may be last, and
the last first; For if a State be covenanted so close to the Word, they had
need be favorable and free to all that are accordingly covenanted; for each
man's conscience is the Interpreter in himself of what makes for or against the
Covenant he takes; and by this very Covenant, you are all to be tender to
consciences, because the Spirit of God (not power of men) can interpret the
Will of God; but in their civil and prudential things only, they may intrepret
themselves.

To that of Job, That with the ancient is wisdom, and with the gray headed;
which you apply in way of reproach to the younger, whom you call as it were
green-heads: I answer, That the elder I esteem as fathers, and the younger we
know are such in whom the Lord speaks more gloriously, as he himself says,
Your young men shall see visions, and upon your sons and daughters I will power
out my Spirit, your old men shall dream dreams. Now whether is it more
excellent to dream dreams, or to see visions? The Lord delivered Israel by the
young men of the Provinces. Surely we may more safely hearken to the younger
that see visions of Reformation, then to the elder that dream dreams of it
only.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 15, and 16.

There is great disproportion of times. Men were then converted from Paganism,
and while they were so, they were incapable. Our Congregations in England are
professed Christians; and though there be many not so wrought on by the Word,
etc. That is rather a reason for the establishment of it, Ezekiel. 22.26. 1 Cor.
4.21. Prove. 23.13, 14. Nor can Sabbath nor Sacraments be administered without i^.

Reply.

To that of the disproportion (you speak on) of times, and conversion, etc. I
answer;

The Apostle's and primitive times are the times we are to look at for a pattern
and model. It Is true, there is great disproportion; for they were Apostles who
gave the government then; yet are but private Divines, as you say by me, if you
be compared with them.

For that of the conversion from Paganism to Christianity;

There is no such disproportion there neither, but that very proportion which
our Savior has himself foretold, and set forth: For how does a Jewish and
Antichristian State differ? Nay, how does a Heathenish or Paganish State,
differ from an Antichristian or Parochial State, as Parochial or Parish is in
that notion? Christ has put them that are out of the Church under that very
notion, Matthew. 19.17. and the spirit in the Revelation makes the Antichristian
State to be as unlawful as a Paganish, and calls out equally from that as from
the other, as by comparing 2 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4. together will appear.

So, as speaking of things and notions, I cannot but speak in a Scripture way;
nor am I uncharitable in this neither, though I thus speak; I look on thousands
in this State as godly believers: It is not the Pastors I write against, but
the way. There may be a Moses in Pharaoh's Court; a Joseph in Potiphar's house;
a Cornelius, or devout man, though out of the Church; a Luther even in Rome,
till the Lord enlighten.

So as government and discipline is a Churches right, and privilege, not the
worlds and nations privileges, as so and then. Where are all your quoted Texts
which are applied? Surely that of Corinth, is the Churches; and that of
Ezekiel, and Proverbs, makes not for the discipline of a Church at all.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 16, and 17.

He makes a comparison betwixt material and spiritual buildings, as stone and
timber should not be clapped together in the one, so one in the other.

1. Similitudes may illustrate, but not prove any thing.

2. Conformity betwixt material and spiritual things is not to be carried too
far.

3. In material buildings, or the Temple, there is not only squared stones,
but pieces and rubbish which have their use; not so in the spiritual; all
things there are homogeneal, and square, and living stones, etc.

4. Those that he accounts rough and unsquared, are in some conformity, though
not so polished as others.

5. The best stones are not to be taken from the rest, to make up a building by
themselves, as in separated congregations.

6. Let him show any such example in the New Testament where when there was a
mixture of holy and profane, as in Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.21. the Apostles gathered
out the holy part.

7. That of Axes and Hammers has a mysterious truth in it, but not to his
purpose, viz. That the spiritual building is built of the soft and secret
whispers and motions of the spirit.

Reply

To that of the similitudes;

I fully agree with you, they illustrate better then they prove.

To that of not carrying a conformity betwixt materials and spiritualls too
high;

I agree with you in that too, yet not so fully; for Jesus Christ the great
Prophet of the Gospel preached the glory of the Kingdom in material
comparisons, in salt, water, leven, mustard seed, sowers, husbandmen, vines,
vineyards, etc.

To that of spiritual buildings, which you say are to be made up only of
squared living stones;

I agree with you; and here the Controversy might be ended: If your Temples
shall be of living stones; the Controversy is granted: But because I will not
seem to mistake you, I believe the spiritual building you mean, and I, are not
the same here: You mean as it appears, the invisible spiritual, or Church
mystical; and yet there, all is not so Homogeneall and of the same kind
neither: The head of the body is both God and man, and one member like one star
differs from another in glory.

But, we are speaking of the spiritual building or Church here which is the
Image of the Church above; and as that is of true, real, essentially
spiritual living stones; so the Church below is to consist at least of such as
visibly and formally appear so; and therefore the Apostle calls them in his
Epistles Saints, and called to be Saints.

And to that of your pieces of Rubbish in the material building;

It is true; But what is that to Solomon's Temple, which my comparision drives
up to? How much Rubbish can you prove in that type, nay, square stones, pure
Cedar, gold, etc. to figure out the Gospel-building or Temple, as in Heb. 9. So
as your rubbish is only in your own allusion, not in mine

To that of your unpolished stones in your Parishes, which may fit the Temple
now; I answer:

It must be then only such a building as the material one you speak on, which
is made up of rubbish and broken pieces: and if that be according to Christ's
pattern, let these Scriptures in the margin, 1 Cor^ 2.9. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.22^
with many more, determine.

And for their submitting in deed, there is a national, blind, traditional
obedience in them, I cannot call it Gospel-submission.

1 Pet. 2.9, etc.
To that of the best stones not to be taken out to make up a building, I answer,

I am sure we are to take in no ill, unhewn, unpolished; and the Scripture
cautions and practice are clear, etc. then judge you what the stones must be.

Nor do we so pick and choose as if all stones were to be square alike, or
equally polished; that is not in any material building: Though we would take
in no rubbish, yet we take in stones differently squared. As in the body one
member differs from another; the eye, and hand, and foot, etc. and members
less honorable, 1 Cor. 12. so in the body of the Church, every one according
to his measure, and as every one has received.

Nor do we stand so for the first polishing as you pretend. You make as if we
set up such degrees of perfection as were only the degrees of the invisibl or
mystical body, when it is merely in the degrees of visible Gospel-perfection.
By this you would make the carnal to abhor, and the weaker to stumble and be
offended; as if the door of our Churches were not open for any such whom you
imply, were of a temper merely Spiritual, and of a size of our own, not the
Scriptures. Let the doors of our Churches be as strait as you imply, I am sure
your doors are set open, or rather cast off the hinges: but a pure
Gospel-entrance is neither too wide nor too narrow. We know there is smoking
flax and bruised reeds, measures of grace; if they can willingly submit to
Jesus Christ their Lawgiver, and walk as members of the body, there they may
receive polishing, and have honor, and building up, and many other degrees of
perfection which the Saints of God obtain when they are in fellowship with the
Father and the Son.

To that of your challenge that I should show any such example in the New
Testament of taking out the best, when there was a mixture of holy and profane;
I answer, Those were Gospel-Churches gathered by the Word and Spirit into
Gospel-fellowship: and when you make your Parishes to appear such Churches,
then I shall tell you more: till then, I suspend your challenge. The world, and
an Antichristian Nation, are both under Christ's fan for gathering them out.

To that of a mysterious truth you speak on in the Axes and Hammers; I agree
with you in that; and because of the mystery I therefore quoted it. And whereas
you sum up all the mystery into the soft whisperings and motions of the Spirit,
you can hardly warrant us, or secure us that your interpretation is the whole
mind of the Spirit, and that very interpretation of yours is part of it the
very same I aim at, viz. to show how the Gospel-building is softly gathered and
made up by the Ministry of the Word and Spirit, and not with Axes and Hammers,
tools of a compulsive, forcing, sharp, and authoritative nature, as, etc.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 17, 18, 19.

For that of his, etc. where he makes Christ's description of himself, etc. to
be against the establishment, and the sutablenesse Christ presses for; I answer:

1. If his reason be of force against a speedy Government, it is as well
against a Government at any time.

2. That Christ in his own nature, and his Government, differ exceedingly.
Christ came to suffer, Phil. 2.7.

3. Neither is Christ so remiss as not to take upon him a Government. The Head
must govern the Body. Nor so meek: He has an iron Rod as well as a golden
Scepter, Psalm. 2.9. Esth. 5.2. and though he was sometimes a servant, etc. yet
sometimes a Lord too, Joh. 2.14. and though he be a Lamb, yet he has a
formidable mouth too, etc. Revel. 8.15.

4. For his Scriptures produced, Matthew. 12.19. 1 John 5.3. they make nothing
against a speedy, but against a grievous Government. And though his yoke be
easy, yet not easy to flesh and blood, Matthew. 5.29. and 16.24. etc. as in
self-denial.

5. Nor has his other place any sober sense in it, Matthew. 9.17. nor makes it
against Government at this time, but any time. The wine will be always new at
the first; and the longer delayed, the older will the bottles be.

Reply.

To that If against a speedy Government, then against a Government at any time,
I answer,

How do you infer that? Nothing of those makes against the Government of Christ
rightly constituted, and ordered and settled upon those called to be Saints.
Indeed they make against any other Government at all times as well as now. Nor
will there be always such a People under Christ's yoke as you think on. But you
look further abroad then I, and in that we mistake one another. You look that
whole Kingdoms and Nations should submit, and I look only for one of a Tribe,
two of a City, etc. Your Horizon and the Scripture's, for Government, are not
equal.

To that of Christ's Nature and Government differing so much, and therefore my
Text prove nothing; I answer:

Every thing of Christ's, bears the Image of Christ. Every Truth of His has
something of Himself in it, who is Truth it self by way of excellency: I am the
Truth, says he. Every beam of light is light: Then how can Christ and his
Government differ so as you pretend?

Surely, if we observe well, there is not any Truth but it partakes of Him who
is The truth, and is a beam or sparkle of him. Truth is Homogeneal, and not so
unlike and contrary dispositioned and natured as you pretend.

And for your expounding the Text He shall not strive, etc. as a Prophecy; you
do well in part: but you know Prophecies have a latitude; and Scriptures have
not only one main and principal, but many subordinate aims: so as though this
Scripture concern his sufferings principally, yet it does in a latitude set
forth the nature of Him who is Truth; and in Him we may see how those things
which are pretended for truth hold proportion.

To that of Christ the Head, and taking the Government of his Body, etc. I
answer.

It is true, Christ is a Head, but he is not a Head to every Body. He will have
a Body proportionable to his Head. Is a Nation of all sorts a fit Body for such
a Head? Is he not a pure, holy, glorious Head in his Gospel Dispensation? and
is a Body so leprous, so wicked, so formal, so traditionally and
Antichristianly corrupted, a fit Body? Shall I take the members of my body,
says Paul, and join them to an harlot, to make one flesh? God forbid. What
then shall the Head do with such Members?

To that of His ruling with a Rod of Iron as well as a Golden Scepter, Psalm. 2.
Esth. 5. I answer.

And does He rule any in his Church with his Rod of Iron, who were not called
in first by his Golden Scepter?

And for that of his Iron rod in Psalm. 2. that is spoken of Christ, not as King
of his Church, but of Nations.

And that of Esth. 5. what is that Golden Scepter to Christ's? unless you bring
a Text only to prove that there is such a thing as a Golden Scepter in the
Scriptures.

For your other Texts of Christ's being a servant and a Lord, a Lamb and
terrible; you only prove what I grant, that he is more a King and a Lord in his
Government then in any other of his Gospel-dispensations: But all this will not
prove the Lordship of such a Presbytery or Government. Certainly you intend it
a terrible Government, because you bring in those Texts that have all the
judgment and severity in them which Christ threatens to the Nations and Kings
of the earth, not to his Churches. Will you make Christ rule in his Church as
he does in the world? well, let your Presbytery enjoy the Iron Scepter, while
the Churches of Christ enjoy the Golden; and try if you ruin not more then you
rule, and break not more then you bow.

To that of Matthew. 12.19. 1 John 5.3. The yoke easy, etc. they make not
against a speedy, but a grievous Government; I answer,

I cannot express my self better then in your own words, They make against a
grievous Government, which is all I aim at in the Quotation. And whereas you
say the yoke is not easy to flesh and blood, so say I too; it is very
burdensome, and the Commandments grievous to the unregenerate; and therefore I
prove from hence, that it is only a fit and suitable yoke for the Saints, and a
Commandment for them. And there is the same proportion of the outward
government to the outward man that there is of the other spiritual Laws in the
Gospel to the inward man, and none but the Saints can delight in either. Men
are to be spiritually molded and framed to the Law of Gospel-discipline: that
kind of Discipline is not like your civil Discipline: this way of Discipline
you would have, is too Politic and National; it takes in a people to subdue
as the Laws of Civil Policy, which finding a people unsubdued, subdues them:
So does not Christ as we read of; the dispensation of the Word (not the
government) subdues.

And thus with much ado, you only prove them to be as I intended them, no
Commandments for the mixed and unregenerate, or in a word, Christ's government
no National government.

To that where you say, Nor has his place any sober sense in it. Matthew. 9.17.
The new wine will be always new, and the longer delayed, the older the bottles
will be. I answer:

I wonder that one of your experience in the Majesty of the Word, should be so
pleasant with a Scripture allegory, because the Scripture is of wine. You jest
on it, as if it had made the sense less sober, I am sorry my younger pen
should reprove the aged for jesting, which the Apostle says is not convenient.
And truly it is not comely for the servants to play upon the Master of the
Feast, or any thing in his house, especially upon his wine, which alludes so to
his blood, and which he has promised to drink with us new in his Fathers
Kingdom.

Nor will the wine be always new to those that are renewed as they ought to be
indeed; for your Parishes which you call old Bottles, I am sure the wine, or
pure government, is too new for them.

Nor will the Bottles be older, as you say, the longer the government is
delayed, if the power of the Word be there for renewing them.

But you say, What sense is this? What logical connection?

I answer, that shall appear there is sense enough, and connection enough, and
Logike enough, though I had rather have more Scripture and less Logike; for
all I aim at, is what the Scripture aims at, that the bottles should be fit for
the wine, the necks for the yoke, and the subjects for the commands.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 23. and 24.

To that of his, That Jesus Christ could as easily have set up his government
by miracle, had there been such a primary etc. necessity, etc.

1. The acts and times for divine Providence toward his Church are various.
God had his Church at first and no written Word for it till the Law was write,
and Moses wrote, etc. And God added to the moral Laws, ceremonial and
judicial, diverse of which were not executed till forty years after, at their
coming into Canaan; so far was God beforehand.

2. Whereas he says, Christ could as easily have settled the government by
miracle; we grant it, yea, and more; without a miracle; and yet more that he
did so, in Matthew. 16.19. Joh. 10.23. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.

3. If Christ's delay of Government must be our example, then as well for the
Anabaptisticall delay of Baptism till his age Luke 3.23. nor was it John's
office to set up a Government, but to prepare the way, etc. And Christ's public
Ministry lasted but four years, or three years and a half, and he began then
to set up Government.

Reply.

All your proof reaches but to this:

1. That God dealt variously with his Church. They had first no written Word,
and after, a written Word.

2. That Christ could have settled his Government by miracle, but did not.

3. That Christ's delay of Government must be no more our example then his
Baptism.

My proof was to show there was no such moral necessity of the settling,
because it was not settled. Now, what have you overthrown here? Not that Christ
suspended his Government, and the settling of it; for, that you grant with me,
and prove it more at large then I did: so as all your rest will be answered in
two particulars.

1. To that of Gods Church and Government before his Word, etc. which you would
insinuate as some advantage to your settling, etc.

What is that to Gods dispensation now? if there wanted a Word, there was a
supplement of vision and dreams, etc. And I hope you will not go before the
Law, so much as you do for a Pattern: You go too far when you go to the times of
the Law: You have a Prophet now to hear in all things, Act. 3.22.

2. To that of Baptism to be delayed as well as Government from Christ's example:

I cannot dispute that here, Master Tomes will satisfy you at large in his
learned Examen, where he has made work for a whole Assembly, That he knows
not but it may be delayed till they be of years.

But, to answer you in your scope:

You bring this to prove, That Christ is not to be imitated in all things. I
grant it. But what is that to prove that Christ settled not his Government when
he began his Ministry, or John's? For the business on your part is to find out,
either that the Government was settled before, or with the Ministry; or there
was as much necessity of it as of the Word; but for some reason; and not from
any thing in the nature of the Government, but some other extrincicall reason;
it was delayed: Which ought not to take place now.

And this is yet to prove; al your proof summed up, reaches not to this

But you imply, The will of God in his dispensations was the cause. But the will
of God in his dispensotions carries a rule of righteousness along with it, and
of spiritual reason. And in Gospel dispensations and extrincicall proceedings
of Gods will, you will find a rule and golden reed of righteousness measuring
the Temple; and every dispensation, and even this of suspending Government,
has its rule in the Gospel, that a word of obedience must precede and go
before a form of obedience, and a word of faith before the obedience of faith,
and living stones before a living Temple.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 24. and 25.

Whereas he says the gifts for Government were not given till Christ ascended,
it is answered:

1. That he ascended 43. days after his ministration; and that added to the
year forementioned, makes but small difference, etc.

2. He put his Apostles upon neither of these offices, preaching or governing,
without competent gifts and qualifications.

3. For the model of it, which he says people fell under as they were
capable; If he mean the written model in the Word, though it were young in
Christ's time or his Apostles, yet not now, we have had 1500. years since. Why
should that which is so old in constitution, be thought too soon for execution?
And besides Scripture directions, we have had many years the Paterns of it i^
ma^y Reformed Churches.

4. It has by fast and slow degrees been brought in, as both in debates of
Assembly, Parliament, etc. And so for execution too, First an Ordinance for
ordination, and then a Directory, etc.

Reply.

You prove here,

1. That Christ gave gifts when he ascended, and not any long time in all his
ministration and sending gifts.

2. That he qualified his Apostles for government and preaching.

3. That the government of Christ now so old, should be seen set up as in other
Kingdoms.

4. That it proceeded by degrees in its setting up here.

Now all this thus gathered up, proves not any thing against my assertion, that
Christ proceeded by degrees in his Ministry, and giving out his government;
but rather strengthens my assertion.

And for your Arguments for settling employed in these particulars:

1. That Christ's government was but a while in bringing forth, the ye^rs
considered.

2. That the government in the Gospel being now so old, ought to be soon
executed.

3. That the Paterns of it are in other Reformed Churches.

I answer to all these in as few words:

1. Prove your Argument first to be Christ's, the particulars, and entirenesse
accordingly, and then I shall allow you your Argument; but you grant it to be
but partly Christ's, and partly the Assemblies, or of Prudence.

2. You must prove but the same again, that the government you have, is the
government, there withal Gospel-necessaries take in; else, though the
Gospel-government be never so old, yours is but new; and this Argument is no
better then the first.

3. Prove the other Reformed Kingdoms to be Reformed Churches, as Churches are
taken in the Gospel, and their Paterns pure Gospel-Paterns, which by your own
you acknowledge to be in part prudentiall or human as well as Evangelicall and
Divine; and then your reason may have some force in it. Till then, you see with
all you can do, you cannot prove but Christ's government was diverse years in
bringing forth by himself and his Apostles; and so by your own account, you
ought not to be before them, unless you assume fuller Revelations of truth
then they did.

Let the Reader judge whether any of these makes for the setting up your
government, or the taking down my reasons.

To your last; That this Reformation has proceeded by slow paces and degrees.

What? Would you prove it by its slow proceeding to be Christ's government, and
therefore to be settled? That were a strange kind of reasoning: Because Christ
proceeded by degrees in giving out the glory of his Kingdom here, therefore
every thing that proceeds by degrees, is Christ's government. Here is some kind
of Logic indeed, as you say, but no Scripture: as for instance; He that says
such a one is a living creature, says tru^ly; He that says such a one is a
beast, says he is a living creature: Therefore will it follow, He that says
such a one is a beast, says truly; So, He that says Christ's government
proceeded slowly, says truly; He that says your government proceeded slowly,
says truly; Therefore, He that says your government is Christ's government,
says truly. What have you got now by your Logic?

Whereas you say in your second, Christ gave gifts and qualifications for
government; I answer, If you and your Parishes have such gifts and
qualifications as in Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12. set it up when you please; if not
what haste?

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 26, and 27.

Now to his Rules and Considerations of Prudence; The more time (says he) for
trying spirits, the less danger to that State, etc. I answer

1 It is the duty of a State not only to try spirits, but to rule them.

And rather to rule them, than to try them, Prove. 29.15. and the longer they
live without the yoke of Discipline, the more enormous.

And for trying all things, there is a due proportion of time to be observed.

Though it has been the ill hap of our Church, etc. to have the government
fluttering on the lime-twig at Westminster, when it should be on the wing of
actual execution in all over the Kingdom.

2. He makes it a dangerous matter for the State to involve it self into the
designs of Ecclesiastical power.

But unseasonably applied to Presbyteriall-government, because both Popish and
Prelaticall power is abjured by i^ by Covenant.

3. Whereas he says, There can be no danger in the not too sudden
incorporating etc. since Moses is not aliv^ etc. a new star may arise.

It is a groundless conceit refuted already; and for that of Moses etc. he
bewrays his d^signe to debar the government for ever; and for that of a new
star arising, it prepares the way for some Barchochebas, who pre^ending to be
J^cobs star mislead the J^wes, and was called ^sword^ the son of a I^e.

Reply.

You prove against me,

1. That people ought to be ruled rather then tried, etc.

2. That some time is to be allowed for trial.

3. That the government has been fluttering too long at Westminster.

4. That there is no danger to fear the Presbyteriall government, which has
abjured Popery etc. Dominion by Covenant.

5. That some of this is refuted already.

6. That my design is to debar it for ever.

7. That a new star is a misleading star.

To your first I reply;

It is true in civil government, rule there rather then try: But what is that
to Church Government, or Discipline? The rule there, is the will of God, which
is the only rule in government, and legislative power in the Church; and that
is, Try all things before either you rule or be ruled.

To your second;

Some time you will allow (I see) for trial; but you ought not to measure and
deal out time but by the Standard of the Word; and before you call for such
quick obedience as you do, and as the Apostles did, prove your power, and
truth, and conclusions, and by such Apostolical and infallible evidence, and
then it is our sin if we submit not. And let the time you deal out not be like
that of States and Armies in their Treaties, who are final and peremptory in
the seasons they set: You cannot set such time; the Spirit breaths when and
where it lifts.

To your third;

What is that to the present Discipline what the Covenant abjures? Covenant and
Discipline are two distinct things; a Covenant may abjure in word, what yet a
government may practice indeed.

Nor is it enough to abjure Popery in gross, but in every part and parcel.
And now having abjured, it is not enough to sit down in that satisfaction that
we have sworn against Popery; but to search out, lest we be forsworn in the
practice of it. Such a duty begins from the time of abjuring; and it lies not
only upon the State to find out Popery; but every one in his own particular is
engaged, you and I, and every Covenanter: and therefore seeing you have engaged
thousands by conscience against Popery and to endeavor etc. you are bound to
give the same conscience liberty to bring in its result and enquiry; else you
make it a snare and trouble to Israel, and not a Covenant. And now I profess
here a just and undeniable liberty by Covenant to bring forth all of Popery,
Prelacy, or truth they know.

To your other;

Why should ye speak of the governments fluttering on a lime-twig at
Westminster?

Sure the State or Parliament may deserve better of any of the Assembly, then
to be thought their retarders or lime-twigs: How have they honored them above
their Brethren, printing their engagements to the world before every Sermon,
calling them into so near a capacity with themselves? though Divines have been
unfortunate before, and their Predecessors raised in the courtesy and piety of
former States and Parliaments into a law and power above their Brethren; which
I hope our Brethren will remember and beware of.

But because I would not wholly interpret you into so dangerous a sense against
the State, it may be you may call your dissenting Brethren the lime-twig; which
if you do, you are contrary to your own Argument; for you argued but lately the
slow proceeding into a very warrantable and Scripture way: and will you now mar
all, and defile your Argument with a lime-twig, and bewray rather your slow
proceeding to have been of constraint then conscience?

To your other; That this is already refuted:

I say no more; but as you have formerly refuted, so I have formerly answered.

To your other; That my design by that of Moses is to debar it for ever. I
answer:

Yea for ever would I debar a government not clear from the Word, and not one
hair would I debar a government that had the name of Christ in
Scripture-letters engraven upon it, pure Gospel-principles and proceedings.

To your other, that a new-star is to prepare for a misguider, and your story
of Barchochebas upon it, it has more lightsomnesse then light in it. But why
should you be so pleasant with my expression of truth by a star? it is the very
allegory of the spirit. Christ calls himself the morning star, the light which
springs from above. The Spirit is called the day star arising in our hearts;
and the Spouse is attired in a crown of twelve stars.

Nor do I call to any to look for a new created star of truth, but an old, yet
new appearing star to us; one of those stars in the Gospel-Firmament, which the
Clouds of Tradition and Ignorance hinder us from seeing: And now, what of your
story?

But what way is most likely to misle^d? That which bids you prove and try all
things, and accordingly follow? or that which says, This is the way, compel
them to come in, not only as the Gospel compells in the Parable by a Spirit of
power, but by a civil power; not a power of word only, but of state too: and
so twisting the Gospel with the Law, and humane Authority with divine?

Master Ley's Resolution, page 27, 28, 29.

To his other prudentiall rule, which is, That he makes the Civil and
Eccesiasticall power so linked that if there be motions in the one, there will
be no quietness in the other; I answer,

1. He aims at the perpetual prohibition, not at a temporal forbearance
only. He carries it on so, as if we must allow him the authority of a Politic
Dictator.

2. What if they reciprocate interests? must the Civil State leave every man
or Congregation to be governed? Judge. 17.6.

3. Because disturbances are communicated, therefore the Civil State ought to
settle the Ecclesiastical, that it may enjoy its own peace.

And for that he says of the Toleration of the Protestants of France; Henry
the fourth being a Protestant, though a revolter, and recovering his rights by
the arms of Protestants, he could do no less in humanity then allow them their
Religion; though now tolerated, because the trustiest friends to the Crown of
France.

For that of the State being most free where the Conscience is least straightened:
If free in indulgence to all Religions, he complies with the Author of The
Bloody Tenet: If free from Commotions, experience in several Ages and
Countries prove the contrary.

For that of his Parable of the Tares and the Wheat: If there must be such
mixtures tolerated, what warrant have they to pluck the Wheat from the Tares,
nay, Wheat, from Wheat, in their new gathering Churches?

Reply.

You prove against my reason the compliance and nearness of the Civil and
Eccesiasticall power, occasioning motions in each other.

1. By the authority I assume of a politic Dictator. But what does my
assuming prove against the compliancy and motions of the two Powers? This is no
proof against the two Powers of Church and State, but against me. I hope you
conceive not they are concentred in me a private Divine, as you call me; nor
would I give any thing out in way of Magistrality, but evidence: you and I, and
Assemblies of men, are not infallible.

2. By my aiming at the perpetual prohibition. But what does this prove
against the compliancy and motions in the two Powers? This is still against me,
not against my reason. And further, because I suggest a reason of not embodying
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers too suddenly, therefore, says he, I aim
at a perpetual prohibition. How does this follow? I aim to prohibit it, rebus
sic stantibus, therefore for ever? I aim to prohibit it, because as yet neither
the Discipline appears to be all Christ's, nor the Parishes fit matter for
Churches; therefore I prohibit it for ever. Is this good reasoning? They that
do over-desire the enjoying any thing, do measure time by eternity, and weeks
by Ages, and take a little deferring for everlasting. Why is his Charets, says
Sisera's mother, so long in coming?

3. Because they reciprocate Interests, therefore is every Congregation to be
left at liberty? Yea, at liberty in Spiritualls? and not as they will, but as
the Gospel persuades the will. Yea, and because they reciprocate Interests,
therefore to be left at liberty, say you. Rather, because they reciprocate
Interests, to be cautious how they mingle and incorporate Interests too soon.
And if any just liberty may arise to the people of God from such State-pauses,
why not such a liberty? Should the Churches be ever persecuted, and have no
rest? It was not so under the first Persecution, Then had the Churches rest.

Because, say you, disturbances are communicated, therefore settle the
Ecc^^si^sticall, that the Civil may enjoy peace.

But can you secure the Civil from the Ecclesiastical in peace? ought you to
have a State-being or a Church-being first? Is this good reasoning? Because
disturbances are communicated, therefore order it so, that the Civil may be
within the Line of Communication, or of Ecclesiastical disturbances, by
clasping and incorporating them together. So as it follows better thus:
Because they reciprocate Interests, therefore take heed how you establish,
because the State cannot but establish a way something of its own, in the
Ecclesiastical.

To that of Henry the fourth's humanity which you press, because the
Protestants helped him by arms: I answer;

Let but the same humanity be copied out by the State here, and press for it
here as you do there, and we are agreed. Surely you have the same and greater
engagements. Your Brethren whom you call Schismatics and Heretics, have not
been sparing of Arms and Blood in the high places of the field, and in a Cause
more glorious, with success more admirable, with cou^age as gallant: And sure
they have been found as trusty friends to this State, as the Protestants to the
State of France.

You say, That State is rather free in Indulgence, as the bloody Tenet, then
free from Commotions, etc.

For the freedom contended for by The bloody Tenet, when I undertake to prove
his freedom at large, then put us together; till when, deal fairly. I could as
easily draw something of yours under the Line of Prelacie; but I would not
force any man's notions, much less yours.

You see of what stamp the Liberty is I contend for. And for Commotions, let
the world judge, if all the broils and combustions kindled not from the Coals
on the Altar, and from the slame of an Ecclesiastical Interest, such as you
contend for.

For that of the Tares and Wheat, etc. where you charge us with mixture
tolerated, or rather with plucking up Wheat from the Tares, etc. in
Church-gathering: I answer,

We tolerate no mixture, but in the world where Christ himself tollerates,
as in the same Parable; not in the Church.

And for our plucking, it is not plucking, but gathering and calling out: Your
words are of more violence then the Word will bear; that is, more properly
plucking which is a destructive pulling ou^ a bloody Separation, a plucking of
Persecution; such a plucking as some contend for, and would requite our
gathering with plucking, and take us all not for a mixture of Tares and Wheat,
but all for Tares.

You say we gather out the Wheat; it is well you observe that we have Wheat
amongst us, which some of your Brethren will scarce allow us; and you very
hardly.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 29, 30, 31.

His other politic consideration is this, Our Parties, or dissenting Brethren
now together, and clasped by Interest, etc. I answer.

1. No clasping in the Camp must loose us to division in the City.

2. Mr. Saltmarsh in his Politikes advises to repress factions, etc.

3. The delay has occasioned a multiplication of Heresies and Schisms.

4. Many disposed to division, heighten their spirits to contumacie and
contempt.

To that other of his, it is possible while time is given, opinions may be
sooner at peace. I answer.

1. Possibility is no plea against probability, nay, clear experience, that
by the Brethrens amiable carriage, they have driven on their design with a
politic activitie, and gained more by their adversaries slownesse, than the
goodness of their cause.

To that of his Fire let alone under wood, and so to dye out, etc. I answer.

1. Will fire under dry wood quench it self, or the settling of a Government
be as the Bellows?

2. The contrary is plain by examples of Anabaptists and other Sectaries in
Germany, whom Luther at first mediated for with Frederick Duke of Saxony; but
after he was glad to stir up the Princes and people of Germany for
extinguishing a common combustion.

To that of his, etc. The contentions of Brethren are like the Bars of a
Castle, Prove. 18.19. I answer.

1. This is his seal to his politic Aphorism: But will the bars of a Castle be
taken by letting alone? We have not found it so in our wars, etc.

Reply.

To your first, That we must not clasp in the Camp, and divide in the city.

You say well; we are to agree, or clasp, both in camp and city, and to divide
in neither.

To your second, Mr. Saltmarsh in his Politikes, I told you before, I dare not
allow my self the privilege of an Aphorism of light then, when it was rather
night than day with me, as I told you. You know Paul's regenerate part or law of
his mind, quarrelled with the law of his Members; so does mine; so Luther,
Augustine, etc.

To that of delay occasioning heresies, Whether may not your settling things
thus, be as great an heresy as you complain against? Be sparing. You may call
these Truths, which you now call heresies; Paul preached that doctrine after,
which before he destroyed,

To that of many heightning their spirits into contempt.

Do not aggravate against your Brethren; remember your own professed
ingenuitie, in these words, I would not excite Authority to needless
severitie.

To that of the Brethrens politic advantage on your slow pace, and amicable
carriage, as you say.

Give not over your amicablenesse for that, their policy is no warrant against
your duty; and if they be politic, blame them in print: For my part, I hate
to see in any too much of man in the business of God; but if some of the
Brethren be politic, what is that to the rest, who wait for the Spirit in the
simplicity of their own?

But it may be you mistake the advantages, and put their increasing upon
Brethrens policy, which is the power of the Gospel. You know in Christ's time
many believed on him, and the people went after him; and yet not policy, but
his power gathered them.

To that of your fire and dry wood, and that your settling a Government would be
no bellows.

Who are the dry wood you mean? and what fire? and what by the bellows? If it
be this, that the settling a government will quench our contentions; yea, and it
may quench more then it ought, even something of the Spirit may be quenched by
it: Persecution may put out many a candle of the Lords lighting, and many a
coal kindled from his Altar. But take heed there be not more fire in the
bellows then in the wood.

To that of the Anabaptists and Sectaries, quenched by Luthers mediation:

I dare not believe your Historian, nor take all against them from the Pen of
an enemy. He that takes the Parliaments Battles from an Oxford Pen, shall
read nothing but Rebellion, rather then Religion, And me thinks I observe much
here in your observation to the contrary: We may rather think that Germany is
a field of blood to this day for shedding the blood of so many consciences for
some points of diff^rence. And for Luthers mediation against them; Look well,
and tell me how much the Lutherans there have advanced in the Reformation: Have
they not rather stood like Joshua's Sun, where he left them? Let England take
warning by Germany.

To that of the Brethrens contentions, which are like bars of a Castle; and
must not then be let alone (you say) as in our Wars:

Yea go on, take these offended Brethren, these Castles, in your military way;
but then, let your Warfare be spiritual, your weapons not carnal; put on the
armor of light, etc. and take them by a Gospelsiege, and we are satisfied.

But if you take them with the power of the Magistrate, with sword and staves,
as they took Christ; if you come in this Gospel-Controversie to take them as
the Parliament takes in their towns and cities, by force of arms and
compulsive Artillery, as your instance seems to imply; take heed lest you shed
more spiritual blood to that under the Altar that never ceases to cry How
long, Lord, how long?

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 32.

To that he says, We have not yet any experience of our new Clergy. Answ.

How can there be experience of them, if there be no government to try them
withal?

Reply.

So as you will have an hazard run both in State and Church for a new
experiment upon the Ministers: but sure, your Statists will tell you, it is not
safe trying experiments with States; they are too vast bodies for that. What
think you of that Physician that will cast his Patient into a disease, to try a
cure on him? You know the old moral adagie, Turpius ^jicitur quam non
admittitur hospes: One is sooner kept out, then cast out.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 32.

To that, It is not safe trusting a power too far into those hands. Answer.

He need not much fear, the government will be so qualified, so disposed for
the persons that manage it, etc.

Reply.

These are fair promises. It is pity that government should ever be set up,
that cannot tell beforehand how well it will carry it self. Oh I says
Absolon, If I were King, it should not be thus.

But, what is a qualified government that is not Christ's? I can never hope to
gather grapes of thorn^s, or figs of thistles. Sure it can never be well for
the trees of the Forest when the Bramble will reign.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 33.

There are many of note who affirm the best way to suppress the multiplicaity
of Sects is to let them have scope, and they will run themselves out of breath;
but I cannot give my Vote, false teachers are not be tolerated, no, not for an
hour, Gal. 2.5.

Reply.

I would there were more such, of that mind; I am sure it is safest and
soundest. It is safest, there is no such danger in that of crucifying Christ in
ignorance, of fighting against God. And soundest, for so they die out most
naturally by their own unsoundnesse, without noise and commotion. Sometimes
the cure makes the greater disease, when the cure is not natural but violent.
For that of Paul's withstanding Peter to the face, I allow you all such
Gospel-wayes of contention, so you only withstand them to the face, and do
not as the high Priest did command them to be smitten on the face. Oppose with
words as Paul did, but not with swords, taking and turning the Edge of
Authority against us.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 33.

We experience, says he. But where reads this Writer this phrase?

Reply.

You criticize on words; I cannot take time to do so; I wonder you (an
Assembly-man) have leisure for that; this is logomac^ice, or word-fighting: and
why not We experience? You know our times have found out such ways of elegancy
in the English, though I thought not any such thing when I wrote: But why do I
triffle too? To your matter.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 33.

But it appears by his etc. Whether it be safe to commit the power, etc. That
to commit any power or establish any government, especially the Presbyteriall,
is too soon or suddenly done, if done at all.

Reply.

Yea, and it is not too suddenly if done at all, and not done as it ought, or
in Christ's way; I am for any thing of Christ's, when, and where, and how soon
you will.

Master Ley's Resolvtion. Page 34.

We may say as he, Some may like be the ten yet others like the two Brethren.
For two ambitious Presbyterians, there may be ten more modest.

Reply.

But how come you by such plenty of the better sort? It is not thought by most
of your way. I am sure some of your way were taking care how to furnish their
Presbytery, their 10000 Parishes. And this I know, that if there were such
plenty, Why do you make shift with so many of the Episcopal stamp, who keep
their Parishes, and resolve while they live, to try out all turns of
government, rather then turn off a tithe of two hundred per annum? But I
believe the English Presbytery and Prelacy are well agreed in that.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 34.

Besides, the Presbyteriall government is framed directly according to the
Resolution of our Savior.

Reply.

Not so directy neither. It is rather directly according to the prudentiall
design of your Ass^mbly, as you say: so as all yet is but So you say, and we
say the contrary; there is You say, and We say Authority, not Scripture and
evid^nce, carries it on your side: And let the Reader judge betwixt us. Indeed
you are able to prove by the Magistrate that your Presbytery is some of it
Christ's way: That is an Argument of power, not of Scripture.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 34.35, and 36.

To that he says, The Controversy is hottest abou government, etc. It may be
so without fault in those that are for it, but not without crime in those that
oppose it.

To that of his, Is it good parting with the stakes?

The Question presupposes evennesse betwixt parties, whereas the difference is
betwixt government and no government. The high Court of Parliament and all the
Orthodox Churches etc. on the one side, and a small inconsiderable party on the
other.

Nor is it so much injury to resolve for government against them, as the
Bishops, who had possession of Prelacy by a prescription legally, etc.

To that of his, It is to be feared there is too much of man:

It is likewise to be in those who despise government, etc.

And if the Bias run most to this truth of government (as he says.) it is but
as it should be.

The Bishops government being put down, it is necessary some other should be
set up, and before all the Presbyteriall.

And if (as he says) some other truths are wholly set by, it may be the fault
of those who set themselves too much against government, I am sure not in such
as are for the Presbytery.

And for his caution as he concludes with, I wish he had had more caution in
his mind, and his paper; he had had few faults, and a shorter refutation would
have served.

Reply.

You say, The Controversy may be hottest, yet no fault in those that are for
it, but against it.

But, is all the heat in those that oppose it? Nay sure. Witness the
importunity, the petitioning of your party, etc. we silent all the time.

You say, The difference is not so equal but betwixt government and no
government; Parliament and all Orthodox-Divines against an inconsiderable party.

Indeed it is unequal: It is betwixt a government of man of Prudence, as you
confess, and a Scripture-government; betwixt an huge National Government, and
Christ's little flock, or Church. Nor is it a Controversy with the high Court
of Parliament; we contend not with them, but humbly petition and represent the
truth unto them: but this is the old way to wind in under the wing of
Authority, and to engage them. But they are wise to discern, and not to be
engaged as their Predecessors were by the Churchmen, as they called them;
there are too many sad stories.

But what of our inconsiderable party? We had rather be a few with truth, then
a multitude against it. And how inconsiderable soever we are in number, the
stone cut out without hands may fill the earth: the Kingdom of Christ, and the
Worlds, are not so one as you would make them. Vnus homo totius orbis impetum
fustinuit; It was said of Luther; He was but one against a world. Your
non-conformists were but inconsiderable to the Kingdom of Prelacy almost. A
pebble in the hand of David, may do more then a mighty spear in the hand of
Goliath.

You say, The Bishops had a better prescription even by Law for their
government then we.

But how is this? Is a legal prescription better hold then a Gospel
prescription? Is it more privilege to be founded upon a Statute, or Act of
Parliament, then Scripture?

You say, If too much of man be in this Controversy, it is in those that
oppose and despise Government.

But what is that to our Controversy? We are not of those that speak evil of
dignities, or despise governments, unless you count your Presbytery to be that
government and digniny spoken on by the Spirit; and that remains to be proved:
That which cannot be proved to be a Scripture-government, cannot challenge a
Scripture-law to defend or secure it.

You say, If the Byas run most toward government, it is but as it should be.

Yes, if toward a Scripture-government; else it is as it should not be, and
not as it should be.

You say, The Bishops government's put down, some must be set up; and that is
Presbytery.

But there is one set up already, a civil Parliamentary government; and will
you set up another above that? or cordinate with that? Will you set up one
government to rule another? or tutour another? And must you needs set up as
large a Dominion as the civil Power has? Must our Presbytery be full as
ample, as high, and supreme, as our Parliament? Will no less territory or
Kingdom serve it but all England? Whole Nations? Must Christ's government be
just as broad and long as the worlds? You find not the golden Read for the
Temple of that length. Now Reader, judge, Which government affects Dominion?
Which brings in whole Nations under the Scepter of it? Poor
Scripture-government can be content to sit down in a Village; To the Church in
thy house, says the Spirit; In a City as Corinth; and over but a few there,
the Saints only in fellowship; to the Church in Corinth: In a Country, not
over a Country: To the seven Churches in Asia, not to the Church of Asia, or
the Church Asia, a Church taking in half part of the world. Sure if Christ
would have had such a National comprehensive Church, he could have converted
Kings and Princes first, and they should have given up their Scepters and
Kingdoms to Jesus Christ, in the way of a Presbyterian: Nay, it ought to have
been so; Jesus Christ was bound in the way of righteousness, to have begun the
practice and model ^o us, over whole Kingdoms, having not left it in precept
in the whole Gospel; and we ought either to have had practice or precept to
order and command us in what we obey.

You say, If other Truths be set by, it is by those that so oppose Government,
and not by the Presbyterial.

I see the Presbytery must be in no fault: Happy men! that have nothing but
Truth on their side.

You wish I had more caution in my mind and paper, and a shorter Refutation
had served.

Cautions are not amiss both for you and me; and I think you had need of more
caution of the two, by how much more vast and national the Government is you
manage. You that put yoaks upon whole Nations in a day, had need to have the
cautions of a years provision laid in beforehand.

And for your Refutation of my paper; do not bear witness of your self; let
Truth judge betwixt us, and let the Reader pray for a spirit of discerning to
judge both what is Truth, and which is Truth; that which you, or I, affirm.
Nor will I say I have made here a Refutation of yours. If I have done well,
What have I that I have not received? And if I have not, the Lord enlighten and
enable me to refute my self.

Master Ley's Resolvtion, Page 36.37.38.

To that of his, that the material Temple was more clearly left and known then
the Gospel pattern; etc. Answer,

1. He would not be thought to side with Sanballat and Tobijah, and so
endeavors to show some considerable difference.

2. If it be too soon now for the Government, will he set a time for it when it
will be seasonable? or will he have it stay till it be a material building, or
till we have inspired Prophets?

3. It cannot be of too quick dispatch, if we set it up by the dictates of the
holy Ghost in the New Testament; nor the determination sudden, if after
consideration with Scriptures, with the best Divines, and collation of the
exactest paterns, after long debates in the Assembly of Divines, where the
dissenting and liberty to object; and lastly, recived by Parliament.

4. By the builders, special regard has been had to Jesus Christ for
Foundation, etc. And now by Master Saltmarsh his consent the work may go on,
etc.

Reply.

You say, I would not seem to side with Sanballat and Tobijah.

You say true, I would not. But every building is not Temple-work. And though I
would not with knowledge hinder the Temple of the living God, yet if another
kind of frame were in building, I would do my best to hinder, and be no
Sanballat neither. But they are Sanballats, not whom man, but whom the Lord
counts so. But surely they hinder more, that set up another kind of Temple
then Christ's, then he that advises to look well that all be right and
Temple-worke that is set up.

To the difference I made of the material and Gospel-paterns, you say nothing;
and that is the only considerable. It may be, as you said you said by me, you
are best able to deal with the other.

You say I should set a time then for the setting it up.

Yea, I shall set you a time, yet not in mine own authority but Cerist's: When
your Pattern is all Gospel, and your people all qualified that in*
Gospel-patern, then is my time for setting up, and then is Christ's time too.

Nor would I stay you for a material building, as you say. You know I call you
on to the Gospel: I am very far from turning you back to the Law. I call you on
to Christ; I would not turn you back to Solomon.

And for the inspired Prophets you tell me I stay for, and would have you stay
too:

Is not that a very Gospel-way to stay for the Spirit's coming into the
servants of the Lord? Take heed of denying inspired Disciples. You know it is
part of the fulfilling of the great Prophecy, Acts 2. Indeed some of the
Prelates, many of them being uninspired themselves, and having little of the
Spirit, or none, would needs say therefore All inspirations and Spiritual
enligthnings, etc. were ended in the Church, because ended in them: and because
they were so carnal themselves, they thought none was Spiritual. And you
remember how they made Laws even against the Spirit in Prayer.

I speak thus, only to remember you who spoke most against inspiration and
the Spirit, lest you may let fall some words which may be taken up by some of
that Way, to countenance them in their Invectives. Not but that I esteem of
you as one inspired your self in a measure, and having the Spirit of God in
you; and herefore I know the Spirit will be very tender in opposing the Stpirit.

You say you ought to dispatch the Government, because you have followed the
dictates of the holy Ghost, of the Assembly, and Parliament.

Then let me put one Question; Why is it not called Christ's Government? Why
has it not a Jus divinum, a Divine Right put upon it, if all be of the holy
Ghost in it? But I would not mistake you; you say only that all is by the
dictate of the holy Ghost, of the Assembly and Parliament. So it is but part
then, by your own confession, of the holy Ghost; the rest is of the Assembly
and Parliament.

You say The builders have had special regard to Jesus Christ the Foundation.

I will not suspect the Counsels and Debates of any of the builders. I know the
Disciples of Christ were true Disciples, though they had not all of the Spirit
at one time which they had at another. I hope and I pray that the Lord will
make up to the builders what of the Spirit he has not given them, that they
may both see to build right, and see where they have builded wrong; and so pull
down again, as well as set up.

And whereas you say The building may go on, by Master Saltmarsh his own
consent:

I say Your building will go on, it seems, whether Master Saltmarsh consent
or no. Master Ley, in his capacity, is better able to put it on at this time
then Master Saltmarsh is to put it off to another time, unless the Lord who is
above all, and has the mighty, even the Princes of the earth to command, work
for his own glory above all that we can or think.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 38, 39.40.

To the second Objection and Answer of Heresies and Schisms, and so they might
have done from John's first Sermon, he says,

1. Why does he begin at John's first Sermon? Were not the Esseans, etc.
Heretics and Schismatics? See Epiphanius, etc.

2. He makes Paul's Epistles the terminus ad quem, which from John's first
Sermon to the last, make up Twenty nine years. After the Epistles, he brings in
the sending the Spirit, etc. which was but five years after the first Sermon
of John Baptist.

3. Before the end of the Epistles, that Government was not which we find in
Scripture; and if so, the Church Government was not long suspended.

4. Nor would it prejudice our expedition: People of that Age could not be so
easily gathered as with us they may be.

5. What was long in establishing in Primitive times, cannot be said to be
hastily done now, after so many discussions and delibrate resolutions.

Reply.

You say first, Why begin I for Heretics and Schismatics from John's first
Sermon:

I begin there, because there began the mystery of the Gospel. And yet I show
you that no Government began with that Gospel manifestition; by which I made
appear that if Government had been of such moral necessity, why was it not
given out with the Gospels first giving out?

Now you prove in a chronologicall discourse the space of time from John's
Sermon to Paul's Epistle, to make the time appear for government. And, after
you have summed up all the time and periods, and find it no two or three years
work, you conclude People of that age could not be so easily gathered as now:
Nor the long establishing then to be an hasty establishing now.

And now, after all this discourse and ravellings out of time from John's
Sermon, etc. What have you gained? Not that the government was soon settled.
Then you have proved (much to my advantage, and in a clearer and fuller
computation then I did) the contrary. So as you have only been taking some
learned pains, if you well observe, and the Reader well observe you, to prove
that the Government at first was not suddenly cast into model nor brought
forth in practice, which is the very thing I aimed at; and truly your pains
in it have been more exact then mine; and I thank you for it.

But you say, It ought not to be so now; nor can it be said to be hastily done
now, that was done so long ago.

You say true in that: But you know the same Spirit must reveal it that formed
it; and it formed it at first by degrees: and the way of Revelation has been
more years then the first forming; reckon but your Antichristian years as
exactly as you have done your first Christian and Primitive years, and you may
be more satisfied. So as all, both the first Revelation of it from Prophesies,
and the latter from Antichristianism, makes all for the not hastening, which I
aimed at.

Indeed if you can as infallibl assurey us this form and model is the very
form then given out, it were very true that you say, That it cannot be said to
be hastily done now, what was done so long ago: viz. If it be that very one
which was done so long ago.

For your exception against me, concerning my placing the giving of the Spirit
so late, if you interpret sense by the strict order of words, you will lose
many a Scripture truth in the words, as you well know.

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 40. and 41.

To that of Heresies, etc. he says;

What if they do not stir up their Patrons against the State, etc. but they
busily poison the souls of the people; and shall they (if as Paul Best) be
suffered to blaspheme, and reproach, and perturb the public Peace? An
Indulgence much like old Elies, etc.

If Truth be not more precious then Peace, Why does our Savior say, He came
not to send Peace? and why do the Fathers contend so against the Arrians about
a letter? And why we so with the Romish Religion rather then be at Peace with
them?

For that of moral transgressions, he would have the Magistrates set on.

Set on? By whom? We have not such mean thoughts of the Magistrate as to make
mention of him in such terms of disparagement.

And for all his Disciplines regulating men for religious walking, there will
be work enough for the Magistrate to bring them under civil trial for
contumacy, etc.

Reply.

You say, What? If heresies stir not up, they poison souls.

If they poison, let the Gospel antidote be applied then, and no other way
which the Gospel will not bear nor allow; there is the sword of the Spirit, and
weapons not carnal, but mighty and spiritual.

For that of old Elies indulgences which you speak on, you are still looking
upon Moses, though you tell us of Christ. Make the Kingdom of Israel and of
England the same; a Jewish and Christian State the same; and then we shall
allow you both Elies sin, and his sons maintenance by tithes and offerings.

You say, Truth is more precious then Peace; yet there is a Peace precious as
well as Truth, even the Peace of Christ as well as the Truth of Christ.

But to the business; You would prove Truth to be precious, to the
disadvantage of Peace; and therefore you bring in the Fathers against the
Arrians, and us against the Papists, and Christ against peace: But what would
you prove? Would you prove that truth ought to be established against Peace?
and Peace to be no way to Truth? Surely Truth and Peace do meet together; nay,
they are so much one, as there is even a Truth in Peace. He that was Truth it
self could say, My Peace I leave with you.

But, What of the contentions spoken on of the Fathers and us, etc. If there be
any quarrelling for Truth either by the Fathers or us, but in a Gospel-way, we
are not excusable; neither does Christ speak of Truths drawing swords, but of
swords drawn against Truth; which is no Argument for you. When Peter would draw
a sword in the defense of Truth, Christ bid him put it up. So far is he against
your way of defending Truth.

You say, By whom should Magistrates be set on? and that you cannot speak in
such disparaging words.

By whom be set on? By the legislative power, by the Parliament: The Parliament
can set on their respective Committees, Justices, etc. and is this any
disparagement? I speak of subordinate Magestrates, not of the supreme.

You say, There will be work for the Magistrate enough, to punish the
contumacious, etc.

That is in English, the Presbytery will keep the Magistracy doing: and now who
disparages the Magistrate? Who set them on work? Who makes them their
Deputy-punishers? Nay, Who is the Satan to whom the excommunicate are
delivered? It is an expression not much besides your principles: and who
disparages the Magistrate in that?

Master Ley's Resolution. Page 41, and 42.

To that of Truth being otherwise armed from Heaven, I Answer.

We think it not meet to divide the subservient means from the supreme power,
nor the exercise of Discipline from his assistance who can make it effectual,
the sword of God and Gidion.

To that of the imputation of jealousy, etc.

There is a godly jealou^^e, which would set up as many securities as may be
against Heresy and impiety.

The faulty jealousy is theirs that would stifle the Government: but there is
a fear which we profess of Gods anger for connivence and communion with
heretical men etc. There is in some an averseness to Heresy in a true zeal
and love of God.

There be many other causes of jealousy, but I will take but that one of the
Lords and Commons, p. 43.

If Master Saltmarsh had well considered who were engaged, etc. he would not
have under-valued their piety and prudence, to compare them with Papists and
Prelates.

I will conclude with a piece of his own politic advice, etc. Upon such
principles is Church Government ordained; for his Text out of the Revelation,
Revel. 18.1. As he began, so he ends with mis-application of Scripture.

Reply.

You say you cannot divide Discipline from his assistance, who can make it
effectual.

That is from the Magistrates. This is a sign without further Argument, that
you do not hold your government for Christ's, because it cannot be effectual of
it self, without help from below, and the world, and to another power then its
own; nor is the sword of God, and Gideon any fair and just proof for joining
Presbytery and Magistracy; it joins only God and the Magistates.

You say, Your godly jealousy will set up as many securities as may be.

But then they are warrantable and Gospel-ways of security. That is no godly
Jealousy which sets up other ways; as Herod killing all the children to
secure his Kingdom; David dissembling to escape; Jacob to get a blessing:
there is Jealousy, but no godly Jealousy nor warrantable security. So to
secure any way, though of truth, by a power not allowed on in the Gospel, as no
such compulsive power is in your way, is not to be jealous with a godly
Jealousy; though I deny not but some of those may be godly who are so jealous,
but not in that.

You say that some fear Gods anger for their Communion with Heretics, etc.

You know all such fear is only warrantable in the Church, not in the world:
It is not so with the Nations now as with the Jews. Now if we have not
communion with them in the Nation, we must go out of the world. But, What
communion is this you mean that will bring Gods anger? You have your liberty to
withdraw, to separate, as they from you: If it be national or civil
communion, then you pluck up the tares before the time of harvest.

But whom you esteem Heretics, they it may be think they have as good
Scriptures to esteem you so; and this is Heretic for Heretic, interpretation
against interpretation. And since there is only a sufficiency but no
infallibility now as before; since there is no Apostles for interpretation as
at first, for Revelation, why do we thus cry out Heretics, Heretics; the
Sword, the Sword? Let me put one Question here.

Suppose those you call Heretics, were of equal number to you, and both of you
equally numbered with Magistrates, and both of you equally principled for
Persecution, and both equally calling out for the Magistrates Sword; what
clashing of swords would there be! What edge against edge, what authority
against authority, what power against power! What bloody doings, what sad
workings, what confusion would there be! This is an Image of your Incorporation
of your two powers that you so plead for in this kind. If we were equally
principled and armed for Persecution, as you are, and acted by your spirit; Ah
what a Kingdom would here be!

You say Some have averseness to Heresy in a true zeal to God.

These are but general notions of Heresy. Every thing is not Heresy that is
called so. And for true zeal to God in that averseness, all this is granted,
if that be Heresy indeed. But how if it be such a zeal as Paul says the
Jews had, a zeal, but not according to knowledge? how if it be such a zeal
to God as crucified the Son of God? and such a zeal there has been, we know.
The Jews did much in zeal to Truth, even against Truth.

But you close up with that of the Lords and Commons in an Ordinance, etc.

I am afraid these are such proofs as you intend most in your Presbytery, to
make your supplement to Scripture from Authority, and so to make us believe
what you cannot persuade us to believe, and to make it out by an Ordinance what
you want by Scripture.

But I hope that honorable Senate will rather let you argue from the Scripture
against us then from their Authority.

But I have not to do here with answering Ordinances of Parliament. I contend
not, but submit to them in every Ordinance for the Lords sake; nor does my
Argument lie against any thing of theirs, but yours. I dare not undervalue them
to count them as Parties, but Judges in our difference. I appeal to the
Parliament, as to Caesar: nor in it a fair proof of Truth, to draw the
Magistrates Sword out of the Scabbard.

You say You wonder, considering who was engaged, I would so undervalue them to
compare them with Papists and Prelates.

I did consider who was engaged, a Parliament, etc. and had I not highly valu^d
them, I had not ventured so far in my Quaere. I considered the sad and fatal
troubles which attended the Magistrates engagements with the Ministers; the
blood which has been poured out by National compulsion of tender Consciences;
and like a Spiritual Watchman I could not but blow my Trumpet, and give
warning. And for my comparison of Papists and Prelates, I appeal to the world
if there be any reproach; whether it be not in the Interpreter rather then in
the Author. But I know no such thing by my Paper: And if it be lawful to draw
in consequent conclusions, and then father them, I could prove you to speak
Treason, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism, Heresy, nay, Independency, which some
of your Way think worse, Anabaptisme, Separation, which would seem to be as
hateful to you: But I judge you not in any such sort; nor had I spoken so far
now, but in a just Vindication.

You say You will conclude with my Politics; and upon such Principles as mine,
Church-govenment is ordained.

I have told you my Politics were written by my dimmer light. And if your
Government be built upon no better Principles then mine, I cannot but be out of
conceit with that Government, being so far out of conceit with mine own
Principles; and it makes me think the worse of it, because my former
Principles fit it so well. Those Principles you speak on, are partly of Civil
power and the Sword; and the Dominion or Scepter in the Gospel, is more
Spiritual.

You say of my Text in the Revelation, Revel. 18.1. that as I began, so I end,
with misapplication of Scripture.

Misapplication is a word soon^r writ then proved; and my Reasons were rath^^
crowded then ordered in my Paper.

The Scripture was this: For the Angel that came down from heaven has great
power, and the earth is lightened with his glory.

Which Scripture there applied, does hint to any that will not rather cavil then
interpret, that my only reason for delay of Government was in this: An Angel
was yet to come with power and glory; or, the Gospel would fill the earth with
more light; so as we should not shut up our selves too soon in the dark.

And now Reader, judge whether it be my misapplication, or his
mis-interpretation.

SPIRITUAL PRINCIPLES drawn forth.
Gospell-Truth is one and the same.
THat which is only in some parts of it warrentable by the Word, is not
purely, nor in a Scripture-way warrantable: For there is not any Will Worship
but it has something from the Pattern of the true. The Samaritaine-worship was
copied after the Jewish; and the Jewish, when Christ came, had Priests, and
Temple, and Sacrifices, and was copied by the Law: but then there was
Traditions and Commandments of men. That is pure Gentilism, which has no Image
of Gospel nor legal Truth. Antichrist sits in the very Temple of God, though
rather upon it. False Christ's call themselves Christ's as well as the true. The
great Image had a head of Gold, though feet of Iron and Clay. Every Heresy
has a Scripture-Word in it. But Truth must be all one and the same, and
Homogeneal; not in parts so, but all so. There is but one Lord, one Faith, etc.

Prudence and Consequences, are the great Engines of Will Worship.
THings of Prudence merely, are not to be admitted into the Spiritual way and
Gospel-designe. Prelacy had its Prudence for every new additionall in Worship
and Government. And once let Prudence open a door, and then will more of man
crowd in, then the Law of God can keep out. Nor is that to be admitted which is
so received a Maxim, Though not directly, yet not repugnant to the Word.
Christ's rule is not such: he opposes any Tradition to the Commandments of God.
Not direct from Scripture, is indirect and repugnant though not to the very
letter of such words, yet to the form and Analogy of truth to the general
Scripture-law, viz. the will of God that nothing shall be added nor diminished;
and ye are only my friends, says Christ, if ye do what I command you; and the
Lord will raise you up a Prophet, him shall ye hear. For if any thing of
Prudence is to be let in, then something of Tradition; for Prudence can make
nothing higher, nor purer, nor better; man can but give his own Image to the
things he makes himself: though he make them up of divine materials from
Scriptures, yet the form none but the Lord himself can give; and the form is
that which stamps Christ's Image upon every Truth. Every thing in the Word has
a form; that is, it is such a thing of truth, and not another. Nothing but Gods
power and will can make a thing Truth: his power creates it, and his will
creates it such a Truth. Nothing is agreeable to the will of Christ, but the
very will of Christ. The will of Christ is the only Legislative power in the
Gospel. Nothing is agreeable to his will but what he wills; and every thing is
repugnant to his will but what he wills: So as this will is the supreme
general Law, and indeed the very form or essence of Scripture and the Word of
God. And whatsoever is devised by Prudence, though upon Scripture-materials,
yet being not the work of this will, nor having the Stamp or Image upon it, is
none of Christ's, but as repugnant as any other Trad^tion or Invention of men.

And here let us look to that new, though old design against Truth, the most
subtle undiscernable, and divinest kind of Will Worship in the world: that
which some call Scripture-consequence, an unwholesome word as it has been used:
for under color of consequence, what Conclusions may be promoted! What may not
Reason draw from Scripture, and what may it not fashion like a Truth! But
consider, in Parliament Laws, or Ordinances, or Commissions, is it lawful to
take them, and from every part of them to draw out results of our own; and when
there is but one Law, make many subordinate Laws of our own; and frame Laws out
of Laws, and Ordinances out of Ordinances, and Commissions out of Commissions?
No sure: But we must keep to that one, general, entire litterall Law and Will
of the Parliament. Is it thus in Laws humane, and not much more in Ordinances
divine? Yea ^here is the same oneness, entirenesse, indivisibility, and
essentiality of the Truth.

Nor do I here disapprove any Scripture-consequence, if merely consequent and
not formed up into a Law by mere reason; for then man makes Laws from the Laws
of God; and this is not the least engine that Antichrist has wrough^ with.

The People are Brethren and Saints in Christ's Church; but in Antichrists,
Parishioners and Servants.
WHat kind of government is marked out in Scriptures for sitting on the
waters, or people? Christ governs by the people ministerially, not over the
people authoritatively only; and the people being once in his Church Way, lose
their old capacity for a new, and are raised up from people to Brethren, to
Churches. It is a saying of Master Goodwins and Master Nigh, not so pleasant as
true, The Clergy had at first the golden ball of government amongst themselves,
and it is not much mended any where but in that Church where the people have
their interests as well as others; they are the Clergy properly, a notion which
the Ministers got only to themselves till of late: The interest of the people
in Christ's Kingdom is not only an interest of compliancy, and obedience, and
submission; but of consultation, of debating, counselling, prophesying, voting,
etc. and let us stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

Presbytery it self is founded on Principles of separation, which yet they
condemn for Schism in other Churches; nay, is the greatest separation.
WHat is a Presbytery over Congregations or a Congregation, but a Church
gathered out of a Church? Nay Is not that the only Church; and the remainder
of people made but an accessory, or something of another kind, or rather the
Nation or Kingdom which is only subject to this power supreme? And though
Presbytery be but a very Church-gathering, and founded on a Principle of
separation, yet do they not disapprove, and condemn separation and semi or
half-separation and Church-gathering for Schism, etc? when their own power is a
Schism respectively to the Parishes that are distinct; and whatever distinction
is formed to make them appear as part of their Congregations, yet is it indeed
so. Is not their whole power defended to be entirely, essentially,
dispensatively in the Presbytery called by themselves the Church, and by the
very authority of one whom I name with reverence to his learning and
moderation, Master Herle?

So as I wonder why there should be such envyings, rayilngs, accusings,
dissentings, betwixt us that are believers, though of several ways, when as
each is principled, founded, administered upon the same ground and way of
Schism, separation, and Church-gathering; nay, the Presbytery has more Schism
and separation in it then the rest, by how much it is constituted from the
people and Brethren, and acts in its ministration apart too, viz. over the
people, rather then with them.

None to be forced under Christ's Kingdom as in the Kingdoms of the world.
IN a Spiritual Government the ignorance of people which some would have for
expedition, that they may practically know it, is no Scripture way of knowing:
in practical godliness, things must be known before practically known; and
practice is to begin from faith, and faith from knowledge; else the obedience
can be but blind, mixed, and Popish. Indeed in things civil or moral, practice
may bring in knowledge, habits may be acquired and gotten by acts; a man may
grow temperate by practicing temperance, and civilly obedient by practicing
civil obedience; but it is not so in spirituals there, habits go before acts,
spiritual infusions before practices.

Indeed the Laws of States and Kingdoms and Civil Policy, teach men best by
ruling them practically; but it is not so in the Church; men are not to be
forced into Christ's Kingdom as into the Kingdoms of the world; the Kings of
the Nations exercise their Dominion; it shall not be so among you.

The power of a formal Reformation in a Government makes it not Christ's
Government.
A Government, though not purely Christ's, may be made up of such Scripture and
prudentiall materials as may much reform the outward man, even as a mere
prudentiall Civill-government may do, if severely executed. The Romans by how
much they excelled other Nations in Laws, so much the more they excelled them
in a people reformed, moralized, and civilized; in many Civil States, merely
from their wholesome Policy and administration, excellent and precious flowers
spring up, many moral virtues, as prudence, temperance, obedience, meekness,
love, justice, fortitude: Yet all this makes not a Government to be Christ's;
but only that which is merely the Discipline of Christ, and Policy of Christ.
Prelacy in its Primitive time did reform; the beast like a lamb, which
compelled the Nations to Worship, and made even fire to come down from Heaven,
or was religious in the eyes of men, and did miracles; yet was no true nor
heavenly Power neither.

There are certain parts and degrees of Reformation common and communicable
with the Government of Christ and other Governments; but then, there is a form
and Image of Christ in it which no others have, and some certain spiritual
operations and workings which exceed the power of all other Governments; and
this makes the difference and puts on the essential, true, and individual
form upon it; so as in choice of Governments they are not to be chosen by some
Summer- fruit in the outward man, but by the Word and Spirit.

The visible Church or Communion, is the Image of the invisible or mystical.
THe invisible or mystical Church is made up of pure living stones; all is
spiritual, and yet all not spiritual in the like kind, nor degree; Jesus
Christ the corner stone is both God and man; and some of his differ in glory as
one Star differs from another: and as it is here, in this spiritual,
invisible, glorious building; so it is in the outward, visible Communion below,
or building here, which is the Image of that above: The Temple here is
according to the Pattern there; and as that is of true, real, essentially
spiritual living stones, so the Church here is to consist of such as visibly,
formally, and outwardly appear so, and therefore called Saints, and golden
Candlesticks, and holy Nation, etc. and though all the materials in this
building are to be proportionable, and pure, to make up a representative of the
Church above, yet all is not of one square, and measure, and polishing; some
are greater, and some less; some Babes and children in Christ: some smoking
Flax, and bruised Reeds: and as this Church bears the Image of the heavenly, so
the material one bore the Image of this; there was pure stones, gold, and
Cedar; so as there is room in the Church now for any small stone or the lest
piece of timber, if it be but lively or squared, if Cedar or firr.

How Christ is a King of the Nations and of the Church, and how an Head.
Christ is a King to the Nations, and to the Church; nor does he rule the
Nations as the Church, nor the Church as the Nations; he rules ministerially in
his Church, and monarchically in the Nations; he rules with a golden Scepter in
his Church, with an Iron Rod in the Nations; nor does Christ rule as the Kings
of the Nations, who finding people rude, barbarous, uncivil, subdue them into
obedience and civility; but so does not Christ in his Church, that we know on;
the dispensation of his Word (not of the Government) first subdues.

And it is true, Christ is an Head, but not an Head to every body; he will have
a body proportionable to his Head both here and hereafter, in earth as well as
in heaven; he is a pure, holy, glorious Head in his Gospel dispensation, and
well have a body suitable pure.

Not only is the visible body of Christ thus pure, but every truth of Christ
bears the Image of Christ; every truth of his has something of himself in it
who is Truth it self; I am the Truth, says Christ; every beam of light is
light; every truth is a sparkle of truth it self. Thus we may judge of truth,
by what of Christ we see in it. They who break a Crystal, may see their face
in every piece and parcel; so in every thing of Christ there is an Image of
Christ, either of his purity, or holiness, or love, or humility, or meekness,
etc.

The Presbyteriall Government, and the Worlds, of the same equal Dominion.
WHat kind of Church Government is that, which will set up it self with the
Civil and State-government, even coordinate with it, if not to the ruling and
tutoring of it? which has as large a Dominion as the other? which is as full,
as ample, as high, and as supreme? which no less territory then a Kingdom
will serve, then a whole Nation? Must Christ's Government be just as large as
the worlds, which Government affects Dominion? which brings in whole Nations
under the Scepter of it? This, or that little one in the Scripture which sits
down sometimes in a house, to the Church in thy house; sometimes in a City as
Corinth, and over a few there, to the Church in Corinth; in a Country, not
over a Country; to the seven Churches in Asia, not to the Church of Asia, or
the Church Asia, a Church a fourth part of the world. Sure if this National
and comprehensive Church were the Pattern we should walk by, Why did not Christ
begin first at Kings and Princes and so bring Nations and Kingdoms, and make
Churches of them? But we see no such thing; he begins lower, at the base and
weak, and foolish, and few; and raises up his Kingdom from the bottom of the
world, and not from the top or pinnacle of Princes, Kingdoms, and Nations.

The National, and Congregationall Church covenant, both lawful; or both
unlawful.
HOw can a Church Covenant be unlawful if the National Covenant be
warrantable? and why do any plead against that, who are for this? A Covenant is
condemned in the Congregationall Church, and yet commended in the National.
Now, How can a Church Covenant be both true and false? Is a great
Church Covenant lawful, and a little one unlawful? a National
Church Covenant warrantable, and a Congregationall unwarrantable? But Covenants
in their nature were a dispensation more of the old Testament-strain; a
National Church had a Covenant to gather them up into their National way of
worship, and were under the Laws of an external Pedagogie; and now the
spiritual dispensation being come, even the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there is a
fullness of spirit let out upon the Saints and people of God, which gather them
up more closely, spiritually, and cordially, then the power of any former
dispensation could: the very Covenant of God himself, of which the former were
typical, and Prophetical, comes in nakedly upon the spirits of his, and draws
them in, and is a law upon their inward parts, sweetly compelling in the
consciences with power, and yet not with force; with compulsion, and yet with
consent; and surely where this Covenant of God has its kindly and spiritual
operation, there would need no such external supplement as before; but because
of the hardness of our hearts, it is thus; from the beginning it was not so;
the Spirit tied up thousands together then.

Let States then have any prudential security, any design of sound wisdom, to
consorate people together; but let the Church only be gathered up by a Law of a
more glorious and transcendent nature, by the pure Covenant of God himself with
the souls of his.

We receive and give out Truth by parts.
MEn are to be judged and followed according to the degrees of light they
receive; and if any have some light, that light is not to be used as an
advantage to all their other darkness, as if all their darkness might pass
under that one beam of light. The light rises upon the Prophets, as the Sun
upon the Earth, it is dawning, and morning, and noon with them, Thus came the
Gospel; John preached Repentance, Jesus Christ Faith and Repentance; John came
with Water, Christ with the Spirit, and first in Parables, and after in power:
the Apostles they knew first Christ for Messiah; then that he should suffer,
and die, and rise again; and then the Kingdom of God. Luther knew first that
Indulgences were unwarrantable; and after, that Popery was Antichristianism,
and Rome was Babylon, and works could not justify; and after, conscience was
not to be compelled in spirituals, Thus we grow from Faith to Faith, to the
fullness of stature in Christ, to a perfect man in him, growing with the
encreasings of God: The Kingdom of God is like a little leven, like a grain of
mustard seed. So as wh^le we see but things in degrees, we are neither to be
too suddenly admired by others, nor our selves.

All Covenanters are bound to contribute to Religion as well as State.
WHosoever has Covenanted, is bound to assist the Public to his utmost in
every Condition, and Calling, and Place, and Way accordingly; from natural
abilities to his relations, from one relation to another, even to all: to that
of Christian and Spiritual; his Prayers, Counsel, Notions, with Contributions
of all sorts, Civil, Natural, Temporal, Spiritual: He is bound by Covenant to
discover malignity in State, in Church; enemies to God as well as man;
endeavors to any thing of Popery and Prelacy, under what visage, habit, form
of Words, of Doctrine, Discipline, be it Presbytery or whatever, if repugnant
to the Word of God, as we are persuaded in conscience who have personally
Covenanted. The breathings and speakings of the Spirit, are not to be quenched:
Every season is for the Lords service; in season and out of season: Watchman,
watchman, what of the night? The Spirit is poured upon sons and daughters.
Synods of men are not infallible: Not because more men, more of the Spirit. The
liberty of the subject is that of soul as well as body; and that of soul more
dear, precious, glorious, The libery wherein Christ has made us free. Be not
ye then the servants of men in the things of God.

We are to try Truth, and so receive it in its Degrees.
ENquiries for Truth ought to be according to Scripture-rule; and that rule
lights us on to the trial of all things, and prooving spirits, and judging
between the precious and the vile. The water that is mingled with the wine, the
tares with the wheat, will require sound trial, lest we make but an exchange of
one Error for another. The Apostles waited for the Spirit, the Bereans searched
the Word: we are bidden to try and prove. The Prophecies of seducers, false
Christ's, Antichrist with lying wonders, are as real cautions given out by the
Spirit. The examples of former Ages, Luther. etc. were enlightened by degrees.
Angels, who see by vision, see but as God reveals; much less men who take in
Truths by spiritual reasoning as well as revelation. Arise, why tarriest thou,
is a Text only for him who had such a Vision as Paul to obey by, and such a
Vision as Ananias had to preach by.

No Church Way INDEPENDENCY.
THe Believers for the Church Way falsely called Independents, they hold on
Christ for a spiritual Head, on the Magistrate for their civil Head, on the
Body of Christ above and below in the Communion of Saints here: their
Dependency is Spiritual, Ministerial, communicative; not Classical, Provincial,
National: Their power is for one another, not over one another. They cannot
mingle or embody with those in a Way not of Truth. Their separation is not from
men but manners; not from believers themselves, but their practices and
corruptions. Nor go they out, but they are called out: Come out of her, my
people, etc. And thus the Jews were Independent to the Nations, the Christians
to the Jews, the Reformed to the Papists, the Nonconformists to the Prelatical,
and these to the Nonconformists.

A spirit of Love and Meekness becomes Believers.
THey that write not as enemies, are likely to prove better friends to the
Truth, because they raise not so much dust with their striving as others, to
blind one another sight. Those spirits which cast men sometimes into the
fire, sometimes into the water, are not from Christ; it were happy the Lord
would cast out those, and let a more Gospel Spirit walk amongst us; we might
then sooner attain to that of the Apostle, To walk by the same rule so far as
we have attained together, till the Lord reveal, and the stronger to bear
with the weak; and to please one another to edification, rather then our
selves, in all things wherein the Lord may not be displeased in the way of his
dispensation. I know no advantages we have got, but the reviling our selves
before our enemies as well as one another. And oh! why do we tell it Gath, and
publish it in the streets of Askalon, to make the uncircumcised triumph? Was
the Lord in the wind, or in the fire, or in the still small voice, when he
spoke to the Prophet? only in the still voice. How was the Lord heard in the
time of his indignation. Man heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the
garden in the cool of the day. Oh! could we find out the coolest times to
speak and write one to another in, and not in the heat of the day, as we do.

When a State-conscience is fully persuaded; doubtful, and so sinning.
IT is with a Public or State-conscience, as it is a personal or particular
conscience: What is done, must be done in Faith, or else there is weakness,
doubting, and sin. Now where there is not a full consent and persuasion from
the Word of faith, there cannot be faith properly; and where there is not a
Word of faith for that Conscience to be grounded upon, there cannot be a purely
and ^piritually full persuasion. And one may question whether in Spirituals, as
in Civils, Votes and Voices are to make Laws; for in the Gospel we find that
divine Laws have their subsistence there, without the Vote of any: and that is
only to be a Law or Truth in the Church and Kingdom of Saints, not what is so
in the common consent or voice, but what is a Law in the very Gospel Truth of
it. If the Laws of truth were founded as the Laws of Civel States, in a mere
Legislative power; then Popery has had as good assurance as any; they have had
most voices, most Counsels: and so Arrianism, when the world went after it.

Postscript.
The Testimony of Salmasius the approoved German writer of the Presbyteriall
way, and employed by the States of Holland to write.
THat the Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not that
way of Baptism practiced by the Apostles.

The Baptism of Apostolical use and institution, is in the Rivers not with
invocation of the three Persons, seeing the Apostles Baptized only in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In his own Latin thus

Baptisma in aquis perennibus Apostolici instituti and moris sed non invocatio
Trinitatis super Baptizatum, cum Apostoli in solo nomine Jesus Baptizarent.

Salmasius in apparatu ad libros de primatu papae, fol. 193. Salmasius his
Testimony against the present Presbyterial-way.
DVobus modis hac Independentia ecclesiarum accipi, si vel respectum non
habeant ad vicinas ullas ecclesias, aut si non pendeant ab authoritate aliquot
Ecclesiarum simul in unam Classem vel Synodum conjunctarum unius conventus
cujus partem and ipsae faciant. Prior modus similior reperitur primitivae
ecclesiae praxi consuetudini ac usui quo voluntina haec communio inter
ecclesias fuit. Posterior magis convenit cum instituto quod postea a juris
humani dispositione introductum est.

Hoc posteriore modo libertas perticularium ecclesiarum magis imminuta videtur
quam priore.

Sed quod ab initio fuerit voluntatis b postea factum est juris.

The beginning of this Postscript witnesses to page 13. Exception 4.
Hoc jus sane positivum atque ecclesiasticum humanumque, non divinum: juris est
quidem divini ut una sit ecclesia christo, unitas autem ejus non gregalium aut
c concorporalium plurium adunate collectione consistat sed in fidei ac
doctrinae unanimi consensione.

Page 265.266. in apparatu. In English thus:

THis Independency of Churches may be taken two ways; Either as not having
respect to any neghbour Churches, or as not depending on the authority of some
Churches that are joined in some Classis or Synod, of which the Churches
themselves may make a part; The former way is found to be more like the
practice, custom, and use of the Primitive Church, whereby this voluntary
communion was among the Churches. The latter way does more agree with the
institution which afterward was introduced by a humane authority.

By this latter way the liberty of particular churches seem to be less
diminished then by the former.

But that which from the beginning was arbitrary afterward is made necessary
[as a law.] This law truly is positive and ecclesiastical and humane, not
divine. It Is by a divine law that the Church of Christ should be one, but the
unity of it does not consist in the union [or collection] of many that are of
the same flock or body, but in the unanimous consent agreement in faith and
doctrine.

Page 265.266. in apparatu. FJNJS

