THE HISTORY OF THE Church of Scotland, Beginning the Year of our Lord 203, and
continued to the end of the Reign of King JAMES the VI. of ever blessed Memory.

Wherein are described, The Progress of Christianity; The Persecutions and
Interruptions of it; The Foundation of Churches; The Erecting of Bishoprics;
The Building and Endowing Monasteries, and other Religious Places; The
Succession of Bishops in their Sees; The Reformation of Religion, and the
frequent Disturbances of that Nation, by Wars, Conspiracies, Tumults, Schisms.

Together with great variety of other Matters, both Ecclesiastical and
Political.

WRITTEN By that grave and Reverend Prelate, and wise COUNSELOR, JOHN
SPOTSWOOD, Lord Archbishop of S. Andrews, and Privy Counselor to King CHARLES
the I. that most Religious and blessed Prince.

Res in exitu aestimantur, and cu abeunt ex oculis, hinc videntur. LONDON:
Printed by I. Flesher for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. MDCLV.

blazon or coat of arms

AEtat: suae 74

Ao 1639



HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

Aspice, non frustra Veneranda haec pingitur Icon,
Vivit adhuc tanti qvaelibet umbra Viri.
Prisca nitet Vultu Pietas, Virtusque Sepulchri
Nescia, in Effigy nescit et ipsa Mori.
Sic vno Intuitu Vultus, Morumque Volumen
Perlegis, et Pictor transit in Historicum.


IOANNES SPOTISWOODE ARCHIEPISCOPVS St. ANDREANVS, TOTIVS SCOTIAE PRIMAS ET
METROPOLITANVS, EIVSDEMQVE REGNI CANCELIAus.

W. Hollar fecit



THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THis History being wrote in calm and quiet Times, and by a person whose temper
and disposition was not unsuitable to them, had the ill hap to have an hideous
storm tread upon the heels of it; which, among other greater Wrecks and Ruins,
might very likely have buried this, never to have been raised up again: But
Providence had so disposed of it, that a Copy of it lighting into more
Ingenuous and Noble hands, it was thought a sin by them to stifle, and conceal
it from the World, which now being in dotage, and infinitely in love with
Change, may read here (if they do not feel it already) the sad Effects which
an unruly and a misgovern'd Reformation, ushered in by Tender Consciences,
brings upon them.

Nor does it come forth now to cast any Obloquy upon that Church or Nation,
famous in former Times for so much Piety, that the devotion of the Natives
under so cold a Clime (whether you consider the rich Endowments, or magnificent
Structures of Places dedicated to Gods Service) can hardly be matched, but to
show rather the variation of all Humane Things, and how easy it is to slide
from something that might look like Superstition, into the contrary Vices of
Sacrilege and Profaneness, for which they have felt so remarkable a Scourge,
that unless it be in the same Island (and, all Circumstances considered, scarce
in that) can the whole World, and the Stories of it, suit them with a Parallel.

But there is less to be said of this, because if the Times become patient of
hearing Truth, you may possibly by the Industry of some good hand, have the
latter and more Fatal part of the Story: For though this Cloud in the North
was at first no bigger then a Hand, and might have been grasped, and easily
dispersed by the Authority then in being (had it not miscarried in being too
tender toward it) has since, for the sins of both Nations, rolled it self
into a more Universal Darkness, and poured down such a sweeping Rain upon us,
as has carried away all that is Sacred with it. And for us that live to see
the Desolation on all hands, our only portion left us, is to mourn in secret,
for -- Nihil, praeter plorare, relictum est.

And that you may know to how innocent and unbyassed a person you owe this
Story, do but impartially read it, and you shall find it woven with so even
thread, and so much of the spirit of meekness in all the passages of it, that
neither the Rage of the first Reformers, nor the Fury of them who in after
^imes did second them, could tempt him to dispense so much with his own nature,
as to pass any bitter Reproof upon them, but leaves them upon the Stage with
the bare Narrative of their actions, and trusts the judgment of the Reader,
either to condemn or to acquit them.

What the Life of this Author was, has been diligently and faithfully
collected by a Reverend Person of that Nation, who out of the midst of the
Ruins of his Church, has gathered out of the Rubbidge of it, the substance of
these following Particulars; that this world of ours being now grown barren of
such Examples, might at least have an excellent Copy set before them, which if
they have not the Will to imitate, yet let them use it as they do their
Pictures, and commend the Hand, though they neglect his Virtues.

There is no more to say to thee, but this, That if there be so much Devotion
in thee, as to melt thee into Prayers and Tears for the Sufferings of thine own
Church; Let there be so much Charity too, as to bestow some of them on our
Neighbor Nation, from whom our Ruin came; and have since so deeply smarted
for it, that a discreet, and a very considerable person among them, has so far
in my hearing expressed his Penitence for it, as to say, That it was true, that
he with the rest of his Nation had buried Episcopacy, and their Ancient
Monarchy in one and the same Grave, but upon the sad consequences of it, they
could be content to tear up the very earth of that Grave with their Teeth, so
that they might raise up Both again.

And when this single Vote shall come to be the Vote of the whole Nation, God
is where he was, and without the attending the Revolution of Plato's Great
Year, can when he pleases, and by what means he pleases, restore them to
their former Happiness.

Non, si male Nunc, and Olim sic erit. The Authors Life.
THough Buildings are looked upon with more pleasure when they are reared, then
in their foundations, yet that this Reverend Prelat, raised in his own Country
to the highest honor that his condition was capable of, may not seem obscurely
to have stole into the World, as a Mushrome of a nights growth, or as that
Roman did, of whom it is said in Tacitus, Videtur Curtius Rufus e se natus, It
can no way be impertinent to mention that he was descended from the Lairds of
Spotiswood in the Merse, an ancient race of Gentlemen, and the chief of that
surname. His Grandfather died in the bed of honor with his King, James the
fourth, in the battle of Flodden field, a battle that might have been looked
upon as most unfortunate to that Nation, had not their latter contests by the
sword proved infinitely more unhappy.

His Father was no sword-man, but betook himself to the study of the Arts,
passing his course of Philosophy in the College of Glasgow, with a purpose the
better to enable himself for Theology, to which, by the guidance of Gods Spirit
over him, he stood most affected. But matters of Religion being at that time in
his Country like the eddies of waters, rolling, and confused, (the old way
questioned, and the new persecuted) none knowing in this turning tide which
ways the times would run, he withdrew himself into England, where bringing
with him an unsettled mind, and doubtful what party he should incline to,
Providence cast him upon a familiarity with Archbishop Cranmer, who soon
confirmed him in those truths which afterward he never varied from. About the
time of the death of King James the fifth he returned into Scotland, whereby
occasion given by the Earl of Glencarn (to whom he had applied himself) he
became known to Matthew Earl of Lennox, who finding him a person judicious, and
discreet, and fitted by these qualities for managing of business, employed him
to Henry the eight of England, when France upon some jealousies was so unkind
to him as to cast him off. Affairs upon this succeeding to the Earl of Lennox
his mind, the Earl came into England, with whom some months he there remained:
But longing to see the smoke of his own Country, he returned once more to
enjoy himself among his friends; where being known to Sir James Sandilands of
Calder, (a person of great authority in those times) he was moved by him to
accept of the Parsonage of Calder, which upon the beginning of the Reformation
was then void. Not long after this, he was made Super-intendent of Lothian,
Merse, and Teviot-dale, where he exercised fully the power, and discharged
faithfully the Office of a Bishop, though under another style; For it was not
the Office, but the name, which the first Reformers out of humor startled at,
though they who have succeeded them (for in errors of this kind, the last
comers think they have done nothing, unless they out-bid the former) have since
to their own ruin cast out both. He continued in this holy function, with the
approbation of all good men, till his death; when being full of days, and
leaving the persume of a good name behind him, he peaceably departed out of
this life on the fifth of December, in the year 1585. His Wife was Beatrix
Crichton, a grave and a discreet Matron, daughter to the Lord of Lugton an
ancient Baron of Scotland. And from these Parents John Spotiswood, the Author
of this History, descended.

Born he was in the year of our Lord 1565, when he was no sooner brought into
the World but a remarkable passage accompanied it; For among the rest that were
present (not ordinary Gossipers, but women of good note) there was one among
them who in a sober, though in a prophetic fit, taking the child in her
arms, called aloud to the rest in these or the like terms, You may all very
well rejoice at the birth of this child, for he will become the Prop, and
Pillar of this Church, and the main and chief instrument in the defending of
it. From what principle this praediction came, or how she was thus inspired, I
will not search into, but that her words came really to pass, may evidently
appear to him that reads this short story of his life.

His education was answerable to his birth, for being a child of a pregnant
wit, great spirit, and good memory, he was by the care of his parents brought
up in the University of Glasgow, where he came so early to perfection, that he
received his degrees in the sixteenth year of his age: for though the fruits of
the earth under that Northern Clime do not mature so soon, the men generally
are of a better mold, and mellow as early into a ripeness, as any of those
Nations, who because they have more of the Sun plead for a priority, forgetting
that some kind of grain are ripened best by Frosts. And this so many excellent
men of all sorts, as have been of that Nation, are so many examples of.

But to revert to this one among the rest, who having laid his foundation in
humane Arts and Sciences, did not make his period there, but used them as the
rundles of a ladder by which he might climb higher to the knowledge of diviner
things, to the practice of which by way of charge he was sooner called then he
expected; for his father being by age and weakness of body unable to appear any
more in public, none was thought fitter to succeed in the Parsonage of Calder
then his son; though otherwise in a well-governed Church, his age (being then
but eighteen) might in an ordinary course have been a bar against him; but
his early parts, and his conscientious diligence in attending this cure,
supplied his defect of years, and the greenness of his youth was corrected, and
tempered by so sober a gravity, as no man could either despise his youth, or
think him unfit for the employment.

Nor were these virtues of his buried, and confined within the boundaries of
his Parish; for having formerly had a relation to the Noble family of Lennox,
An. 1601.
he was looked upon as the fittest person of his quality, to attend Lodowick
Duke of Lennox as his Chaplain in that honorable Ambassy to Henry the fourth
of France, for confirming the ancient amity between both the Nations: wherein
he so discreetly carried himself, as added much to his reputation, and made it
appear that men bred up in the shade of learning, might possibly endure the
Sunshine, and when it came to their turns might carry themselves as
handsomely abroad, as they whose education being in a more pragmatick way
usually undervalue them. In the retinue of this Noble Person he returned from
France through England, where Queen Elizabeth being in her declining age, was
in his Masters name saluted by this Ambassador, who seeing her night draw on
so fast, could the easier guess that his Masters rising in this Horizon was not
then far off.

Some two years after this, An. 1603.
Queen Elizabeth (after the glorious reign of forty four years) by her death
made way for King James her successor, and when all the World stood at gaze
what would become of the Crown of England (which the Jesuit under the name of
Dolman had bandied over into Spain, and some of the contrary extreme, were then
in consultation (though upon different purposes) to make a game of it at home)
there was a diviner hand of Providence, which so unexpectedly ordered it, that
without any contest at all, it settled on the right heir, to the admiration of
the neighboring Nations, and (had we known our own good) to the infinite
happiness of this. This King being to take possession of his hereditary Crown
here, chose out for his attendants, the most eminent persons of all kinds: and
among his Clergy this Author (being then no farther advanced then to his Cure
of Calder) was summoned to this service. That year, James Beaton Archbishop of
Glasgow dying, the King (who being of excellent parts himself, could the better
discover and value them in others) not only preferred him to that See, but
farther admitted him for his prudence and dexterity in Civil things to be one
of his Privy Council in Scotland. And being graced with these honors, he was
sent back from England the same year to attend Queen Anne in her journey to
London, who knowing his integrity made him her Almoner for the better
dispensing of her Charity, which could not confidently be credited but to clean
hands and an incorrupt heart, such as his really was.

Not long after this, An. 1610.
he presided in the Assembly at Glasgow, where the power of Bishops, ex Iure
postliminii was restored. The same year upon the Kings command, he with the
Bishops of Brechin and Galloway repaired to London, where he received the
solemnities of consecration from the Bishops of London, Ely, and Bath, in the
Chapel at London^house.

At his entry to the Archbishopric of Glasgow, he found the Revenues of it so
dilapidate, that there was not One hundred pounds sterling of yearly Rent left,
to tempt to a new Sacrilege: But such was his care and husbandry for his
Successors, that he greatly improved it, and yet with so much content to his
Diocese, that generally both the Nobility and Gentry, and the whole City of
Glasgow were as unwilling to part with him, as if he had been in the place of a
Tutelar Angel to them. An. 1615.
But part with him they must; for after eleven years presiding there, the Sea
of S. Andrews being vacant, King James (who like another Constantine thought
himself as highly concerned in providing Successors for Churches, as Heirs for
his Crown) removed him from Glasgow (being then about the age of forty nine
years) to be the Primate and Metropolitan of all Scotland.

The next year after this, An. 1616.
he presided in the Assembly at Aberdene, where the Earl of Montross being the
Kings Commissioner, the excommunicated Marquis of Huntley was upon his
Penitence received into the Bosom of the Church. And at the same Assembly
there past an Act for the drawing up a Liturgy for the Church of Scotland, and
some of the most learned and grave among the rest (William Cowper Bishop of
Galloway being designed the chief) were deputed to that Work, wherein the
Service of God, and the Peace of that Church was so deeply concerned: Which I
the more willingly mention, that the deceived party might know, that the
design of a Liturgy, which was afterward looked upon as the dangerous Trojan
horse, sent in by their suspected Neighbors, might have proved more properly
such a Palladium to them, as might have preserved them to this day, had they
not only scornfully, but seditiously rejected it, and have therefore found the
same fate as they of Troy did; of whom it was observed, Peritura Troja perdidit
primum Deos.

Being invested by the Kings favor in this Primacy, he made so much farther
use of it, as he procured Three hundred pounds sterling of yearly Rent (being
by the Sacrilege of former times swallowed up in the Crown-Revenues) to be
restored to his See: Nor did he find any difficult business of it; for
certainly these latter Ages have not produced in any Nation, a Christian Prince
that understood better then he the horror of Sacrilege, and the Concernments of
Religion, which never suffers more, then when the Professors of it are exposed
to Scorn and Poverty. For, however this was the portion of the best and
Primitive Times, when the Christian Faith had no public Civil Authority to own
it, yet after it had pleased God to make Kings the Nursing-Fathers, and
Churches were endowed by pious men, their Revenues were ever held Sacred, till
the Covetousness of some, and the Profaneness of others, had consulted with
that subtle Oracle, that delivers it tanquam e Tripode, that there can be no
such sin as Sacrilege; for as Nothing can be given to God, so Nothing can be
taken from him.

All King James his time he lived in great favor with him, and was the prime
Instrument used by him in several Assemblies, The Assembly of Perth 1618.
for the restoring the ancient Discipline, and bringing that Church to some
degrees of Uniformity with her Sister Church of England; which had we on both
sides been worthy of, might have proved a Wall of Brass to both Nations. Nor
was his Industry less for the recovery of some remnants and parcels of the
Churches Patrimony, which (though they were but as a few Crumbs in comparison of
that which at a full Meal Sacrilege had swallowed) he found to be an hard
Province, yet by his zeal and diligence he overcame many difficulties, and so
little regarded his own ease, that for the effecting of this, and what else
conduced to the recovery of that Church in Patrimony and Discipline, they who
knew the passages of his life, have computed that he made no less then fifty
journeys from Scotland to London.

Nor was he less gracious with King Charles his blessed Son, An. 1633.
who was Crowned by him in the Abbey Church of Holyrude-house, with such high
applause and acclamations of that Nation, that it could not have been possibly
imagined, that such an Hosanna should ever be turned into a Crucifige; or that
a Prince, so passionate a lover of his own native Country, should find such
enemies in the bowels of it, as either to contrive, or to assist his Ruin. But
thus God had ordered it (as in the case of Josiah) rather as a Punishment for
our sins, then his, that leaving his earthly Crown (which to him really proved
but a Crown of Thorns, whatever it may prove to others) to the bold Hand that
would next venture to take it up, he might be put in possession of a more
glorious Diadem, and sit Crowned there, where (if the joys of heaven admit of
such a diversion) he looks down upon things below, and all that happens here,
with so much unconcernment, as what was said of the brave Roman, may in a
Christian sense be more suitable to him, -- Illic, postquam se lumine vero
Implevit, stellasque vagas miratur, and Astra
Fixa Polis, vidit quanta sub nocte jaceret
Nostra dies, ridetque sui ludibria trunci.


But to return to this pious man (who was so happy as to have his eyes closed,
before the Crown which he so solemnly set upon his Masters Head, was to the
astonishment of the World snatched from him) there must be added to this story,
That as he enriched his See of Glasgow, so he did the like for S. Andrews,
procuring the Revenues of the Priory (being then in Lay hands) to be added to
his Church. But having compassed this, to show that it was done rather for the
Churches interest then his own, he dealt by way of humble Petition with the
King, that of his large Diocese of S. Andrews, so much as was of the South Side
of the River of Forth might be dismembered, for the erecting of a new
Bishopric: which accordingly was done, and being amply endowed, was seated in
their Prime City of Edinburgh.

Two years after this, An. 1635.
the Earl of Kinnoul being Chancellor dying (a Person of singular Prudence and
Integrity) his Majesty knew not where to fill the place with a Successor, with
whom he might more securely trust his Conscience, then with this aged Prelate,
near to God by his Function, and by his age (being then arrived to David's great
Climacterick) so near to his end as might well put him in remembrance, that the
account which he was to give of his Stewardship could not be far off. And this
honor he enjoyed to his death, with the approbation of all, only such
excepted, whose evil eye at the Clergy, and their own particular ambition wrapped
into such a fancy, as made them think every honor to be misplaced that was not
settled on their own shoulders.

He had not fully measured out four years in the discharge of the duties of
this place (which did not so entangle him but that the danger of the Church
which then was drawing on filled him full of thoughts which way he might divert
it) when that unhappy design which had been so long hatching under the wings
and warmth of a mal-content and seditious party, began to be ready to fly
abroad. And what could be called for as a fitter Midwife to this birth, then
something that at least might look like Religion. For the rule was given long
ago, before ever Macchiavel lived to vent it, and is likely to hold to the end
of the World, -- Quoties vis fallere Plebem,
Finge Deum.


And from hence rose that storm, which with so much violence fell on this
Reverend good man, that he was forced by it for safety of his life to retire
into England, An. 1639.
where age and grief, with a sad soul in a crazy body had so distempered him
that he was driven to take harbor in New Castle, till by some rest, and the
care of his Physicians, he had recovered so much strength as brought him to
London. But this proved but a short reprieve, for being come thither he fell
into a relapse, and the sentence of death being to be executed on him, he took
his bed some nine days before, waiting for that blessed hour, when being freed
from any farther heart-breakings for those evils he could not prevent, he might
be admitted into his Masters joys, where future calamities could not reach him.

In this time of his sickness, and preparation for his end he was visited by
the Archbishop of Canterbu^y, and some other Bishops, with whom, with great
devotion, he received that blessed Viaticum, the Bread that came from Heaven,
in the strength of which he was to pass unto Eternity.

After which though his desire was rather to compose himself for privacy and
silence, then to admit of any company, he could not prevent the visits of many
honorable Persons. Among whom the visit of the Marquess Hamilton (being looked
upon by the eye of the World as disaffected to the whole Order) deserves more
particularly to be remembered; and the circumstances of it you shall have in
those terms as they are related.

The Marquess coming near to his bedside, was pleased to say, My Lord, I am
come to kiss your Lordships hands, and humbly to ask your blessing To which the
Archbishop with a soft voice answered, My Lord you shall have my blessing, but
give me leave to speak these few words to you; My Lord I visibly foresee, that
the Church and King are both in danger to be lost, and I am verily persuaded,
that there is none under God so able to prevent it as your Lordship: And
therefore I speak to you as dying Prelat in the words of Mordecai to Esther, If
you do it not, Salvation in the end shall come where else, but you and your
house shall perish. To whom the Marquess made this worthy reply, That what he
foresaw was his grief, and he wished from his heart he were able to do that
which was expected from him, though it were to be done with the sacrificing of
his Life, and Fortunes. After which upon his knees he received the Archbishops
blessing and departed. I shall make no Commentary upon it, for the best
interpreters of words are actions,

As he lived, so he died in peace, with a stilness so much more then ordinary,
that they who were about him, could not by any outward agony perceive when that
peaceable Soul of his departed. But before that last minute (sad to his
friends, but to him infinitely joyful) had closed up those eyes, which had so
long been watchful for the Church he governed, his Intellectuals and best
Faculties being clear and undisturbed, and desiring to leave the world a copy
of the faith he died in, he premised it to his last Will and Testament in this
form following:

First, for that I esteem it the duty of every Christian (especially of those
whose service it has pleased God to make use of in his Church) to make some
open declaration of his Faith wherein he lives and dies, I profess that I
believe all the Articles of that ancient Christian Creed, commonly called The
Apostles Creed; the sum whereof is, That God is One-in Three Persons; the
Father, Creator of all things; the Son, made Man in fullness of time, who by his
bitter Possion and Death having redeemed Mankind, rose from death, and
ascended to Heaven, from whence he will come to judge all flesh; and the Holy
Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, the Sanctifier of all that
believe; That this God has chosen to himself a Church, the Members whereof
living in Communion, though never so dispersed, shall by his infinite mercy
receive remission of all their sins, and being raised again in their Bodies, at
the last day shall enjoy everlasting life.

This is the sum of my faith: Other Additaments which Ignorance and Corruption
have super-induced into Christianity, I simply refuse, beseeching God to purge
his Church from the Errors and Superstition that has crept into the same, and
at last to make us all that are called Christians, the Sheep of one Fold.

For matters of Rites and Government, my judgment is, and has been, That the
most simple, decent, and humble Rites should be chosen, such as the bowing of
the knee in the receiving the holy Sacrament, with others of the like kind;
Profaneness being as dangerous to Religion as Superstition. As touching the
Government of the Church, I am verily persuaded that the Government Episcopal
is the only Right and Apostolic Form; Parity among Ministers being the
breeder of all Confusion, as experience might have taught us. And for those
Ruling-Elders, as they are a mere humane Device, so they will prove (when the
way is more open to them) the Ruin of both Church and State.

In the simplicity of this Faith he lived, and in this he died, like one of the
Bishops of those Primitive Times, when the modern names of-Faction were not
known; and whosoever agreed to these Fundamentals, the Church was not so nice a
Mother as to cast them out. And though in the passages of his life, enough has
been said already to give you the Character of this excellent Person: yet
because Pictures drawn at length, where nothing of the figure or proportion is
left our, are the most graceful Pieces, I shall so far enlarge it for the
Readers sake, as may with more advantage induce him to copy it out into his own
life and manners.

And for this, though the voice of public fame be loud enough to give
directions, yet I shall rather ow them to those persons of integrity, who in
his Life time being admitted to be nearer witnesses of his conversation then
others, may with more security be hearkened to. For flattery follows no man
farther then his grave, and it were well if malice went no farther.

And this he had the less reason to fear, because in his Life he had set so
severe a watch upon himself, that his conversation was without reproof, even in
those times, when the good name of every Clergyman was set at a rate, as
formerly were the heads of Wolves. Only one has been found (that ever I heard
of) who thought he could not sufficiently vindicate his Diana the new-modeld
Church of Scotland, (which under the notion of the kingdom of Christ were then
busy to set up a kingdom of their own) unless he raked into the grave of this
innocent person, and violated his dust, whom in his Life time he could not look
upon without reverence. Nor shall I do him the honor to name him, much less to
answer him, but rather leave him to the Tribunal of his own Conscience, where
if the Court be not infinitely corrupted, he stands condemned already. And this
I forbear the rather, that writing his Life, I might in this particular imitate
the Life I write of, which had so much of moderation and calmeness in it, that
though he had many encounters with those (...) (such as Bishop Nazianzen
complains of) yet he never dealt with them at their own weapons, but borrowed
his from the Armory of his Savior, from whence he was furnished with humility
enough to oppose their pride, and meekness enough to answer their choler.

As for his Patience in suffering, which is a neighbor virtue to the former, he
is a rare example; for living in those tumultuous, and undistinguishing times,
when Rapine, and Malice was called Zeal, and Sedition wore the colors of
Religion, and being thereupon driven both from his native Country, and from
the honors, and preferments which he enjoyed, he was never so much as heard to
complain of his enemies, but upon his deathbed made it his solemn prayer to
God, that he in his own particular might be forgiven upon no other terms, then
as he for Christ's sake forgave them.

For piety he was more for substance, then for show, more for the power of
godlyness, then the bare form of it. Frequent he was in his private Prayers,
and in the public worship of God of such an exemplary carriage, as might warm
the coldest congregation to gather heat, and to join with him in the same
fervency and height of his devotion.

For preaching he was rightly gifted, though not in the Modern sense, where
ignorance and impudence, without any farther commission, make up the Preacher.
For his constant way was to deliver much matter in few words, not affecting or
looking for applause from them, who dote upon the best lungs, and the longest
Preacher, but considering seriously whose message he brought, he discharged it
with so much judgment and yet with such simplicity of spirit, as might sooner
get Souls for God, then Praise from men.

For outward works of Charity, he looked upon them as the proper Badge of his
heavenly Master, and could no more esteem him a Christian, who boasted of his
faith without them, then he could believe a Thorn or Brambleto be a Fig Tree.
And in his own particular he acted in this way to the utmost of his means, for
besides the dispensing of his private Charity, where the right hand was not to
know what the left hand did, he publicly upon his own charges built, and
adorned the Church of Darsy after the decent English form; which if the
boisterous hand of a mad Reformation has not disordered, is at this time one
of the beautifullest little pieces of Church-work, that is left to that
now-unhappy Country. Nor is it to be buried in silence, what he did in a time
of famine, for the relief of the Isles of Orkney, when he did not only incite
others to a liberal Contribution, but led the way to them by his own example,
in such a proportion as suited rather with the largeness of his mind then of
his fortunes.

There remain but two things more to be accounted for, The Children of his
Body, and the Issue of his Brain: The former was numerous, but of these, three
only came to perfect age, whom he had by Rachel Lindsay daughter to David
Lindsay Bishop of Rosse, of the house of Edzell, an honorable family in
Scotland. His eldest Son Sir John Spotiswood lives yet, though not in a
plentiful, yet in a contented condition, not any way cast down, or ashamed of
his Sufferings, but comforting himself rather, that in this general Ruin
brought upon his Country, he has kept his Conscience free, though his Estate
has suffered.

His second Son was Sir Robert Spotiswood, a great ornament to his Nation, for
his many and rare abilities, who after he had studied nine years abroad, was
for his great wisdom and knowledge in the Laws, preferred first by King James
to be Lord of the Session extraordinary, and afterward by King Charles not
only to be the constant President thereof, but to be his chief Secretary for
that Nation. And although he suffered a violent death upon the Scaffold at S.
Andrews, yet seeing he was found guilty of no Crime but that of Loyalty and
Fidelity to his Master, which in no Records of Law, nor in any Age but this
(ubi ipsa rerum nomina perdidimus) was ever reckoned among Treasons, let his
Memory he had in honor, as of a Martyr that suffered for Righteousness sake:
for which he had so great a zeal, that upon that very Scaffold where he was to
suffer, he showed such a religious and honest boldness toward his Countrymen,
as to call to as many of them as curiosity had brought thither to see his end,
That they should keep fast their Duties to their God, and to their King, and
beware of those seditious Ministers, into whose mouths, as into the Prophets of
Ahab, the lying spirit had entered, both to seduce them, and to ruin that noble
Nation.

The third left of his Progeny was a Daughter, who being virtuously and
religiously bred, was happily married to Sir William Saint-clare of Rosline,
one of the ancient Barons in Scotland.

As for any Works that he left behind him (besides the memory of his life,
which might have made the greatest Volumn) I hear of none extant but this
excellent History: For though he were a person both of great Place and Parts,
he was not easily tempted to trouble the Press, and to show himself abroad. Nor
was this History undertaken by him by any free motion of his own, but by the
instance and command of King James, whose discerning spirit had singled out him
as a person best qualified for an Historian, with Prudence, and Candor, and
clearness of style, and so much innocent courage, as neither to fear to speak
the Truth, nor to dare to speak a Lie. And though his obedience to the Commands
of his Sovereign had a very powerful influence upon him, yet being to deal with
a King who made not his Will his Law, but being a great Master of Reason, was
as ready to hear, as to give it; he took the liberty in an humble way to
propound several Objections, one of which more especially deserves to be
remembered, not only for the Historians sake, but for his that set him on work:
and it was thus; It is not unknown to your Majesty (says the Bishop, being
willing enough to find an hansom excuse) that your Majesty's Mother being
defamed by the bold Writings of a malicious Party, and the credulity of easy
people (who to avoid the trouble of searching into them, use to swallow such
Reports as these without chewing) has not left a clear name behind her: And
as in mine own pa^ticular judgment I cannot join with them in those Scandals
which they have with so malicious a falsehood cast upon her, so your Majesty
must give me leave to say, that in all things she did I cannot approve her: And
being of necessity to speak of her in the Series of this History, what to do
therein I know not. To whom the King replied, Speak the Truth man, and spare
not.

And upon this encouragement from so excellent a King (which few of the Rulers
of this present world dare give to their Historians) he cheerfully set about
this Work, and laying aside all Partialities, that he might more faithfully go
through with it, he had not only the use of all the Registers both of Church
and State in Scotland, but of all Letters of State that could any way concern
the Work he was about, which either were sent to him, to be surveyed by his own
eyes, or transcribed by sworn Officers, and attested by the Clerks hands. With
this caution, and with these advantages he undertook, continued, and finished
this History, as the Intervals of public business, and his own private Studies
and Devotions would give him leave. And the Work being of that nature, as not
to be Res Ingenii, and to be woven out of his own Brain, but such as required
search and deliberation, and such helps as were not always ready at command,
but were to be waited for, let not the Reader wonder that this History begun by
King James command, should not come into the world till both King James was in
his grave, and the Writer too; but let him rather wonder that it comes out now:
for it was left like an Infant of the Israelites in an Ark of Reeds, and if
Providence had not found out very tender hands and heart to save it, it had
been lost. And now it is time to bring this Reverend Prelat to his grave,
though his good name and story may be longer lived. The manner of his burial by
the command and care of his religious King, was solemnly ordered, for the corpse
being attended by many mourners and at least 800 Torches, and being brought
near the Abbey Church of Westminster, the whole Nobility of England and
Scotland (then present at Court) with all the Kings servants and many Gentlemen
came out of their Coaches, and conveied the body to the West-dore, where it was
met by the Dean and Prebendaries of that Church in their Clerical habits, and
buried according to the solemn Rites of the English Church, before the
extermination of decent Christian burial was come in fashion:

Above his Corpse these words following are engraven in brass.

MEMORIAE SACRUM DOMINUS JOANNES SPOTISWOOD ECCLESIAE SANCTI ANDREAE
ARCHIEPISCOPUS, SCOTIAE PRIMAS, ET REGNI CANCELLARIUS VIGINTI ANNOS PRESBYTER
UNDECEM ANNOS ARCHIEPIS COPUS GLASGOENSIS VIGINTI QUIN QUE ANNOS S. ANDREAE ET
PER QUATUOR ANNOS REGNI SCOTIAE CANCELLARIUS EX HAC VITA IN PACE MIGRAVIT ANNO
DOMINI 1639 SEXTO CALENDAS DECEMBRIS REGNI CAROLI 15. AETATIS SUAE 74.

PRAESUL, SENATOR, pene MARTYR hic jacet
Quo nemo Sanctior, Gravior, Constantior
Pro Ecclesia, pro Rege, pro Recta Fide
Contra Sacrilegos, Perduelles, Perfidos
Stetit ad extremum usque Vitae Spiritum,
Solitumque talium Meritorum Praemium
Diras Rapinas Exiliumque pertulit.
Sed hac in Urna, in Ore Posterum, in Deo
Victor potitur Pace, Fama, Gloria.
D. M.

The Authors Dedication To The High and Mighty Monarch Charles by the grace of
God King of Great Britain France and Ireland Defender of ye Faith.
portrait Per Ecclesiam Petor
To the KING His most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES, By the Grace of God King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MOST DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THere is not amongst men a greater help for the attaining unto wisdom, then
is the reading of History. We call Experience a good Mistress, and so she is;
but as it is in our Scottish Proverb, It seldom quits the cost: History not
so; it teaches us at other men's cost, and carries this advantage more, that
in a few hours reading, a man may gather more Instructions out of the same, then
twenty men living successively one after another, can possibly learn by their
own experience. Therefore has History by all wise men been ever held in good
estimation: and none thought to deserve better of the Church and State wherein
they lived, then they that have taken the pains to record unto Posterity the
things fallen forth in their days: For there is no new thing under the Sun;
what has been, or is, the same also shall be, says the Preacher.

To know the success and event of every course, there needs only the knowledge
of things past, and a fit comparing of them with the present. Now this
knowledge is chiefly got by History; The want whereof has bred in our Church
many strange mistakings: For did men understand how things went at our
Reformation, and since that time, they would never have been moved to think
that Episcopacy was against the Constitutions of this Church; One of the first
things done in it, being the placing of Superintendents with Episcopal Power,
in the same, and no act so often iterated in the General Assemblies of the
Church, as that Ministers should be obedient to their Superintendents under
pain of deprivation. Then for the Consistorial Discipline brought from Geneva
some sixteen years after the Reformation; did men know the troubles raised
thereby, both in the Church and State, with the necessity that your Majesty's
Father of blessed Memory was put to for Reforming that confused Government,
they would never magnify nor cry it up as they do. To remedy this want, and
let all that desire to be truly informed of things fallen out in our times, I
took the pains to collect this History, which I do now humbly present unto Your
Sacred Majesty: If the same shall be graciously accepted, as I cannot but
presume upon Your accustomed humanity to all, I have that I desire: for with me
it is a small thing to be judged of others; God knows, I have followed the
Truth, and studied to observe the Laws of History.

The Collection premitted in the two first Books, concerning the planting and
progress of Christian Religion in this Kingdom, with the worthy Instruments
that God raised to propagate the true Faith, both here and in the neighboring
Countries, contained no great matters: as of those first Ages, whereof we have
few or no Records remaining, how should any great things be truly affirmed? Yet
the little I have found and brought together, may let us see the exceeding
goodness of God toward this Nation, having so soon after the Ascension of our
Savior unto the heavens, made the Gospel here to be Preached, and a Church
thereby gathered, which to this day has found a safe harbor under Your
Majesty's Royal Progenitors. Fourteen hundred years and above we reckon, since
King Donald the first of that name his embracing the Christian Faith: All which
time there has not been wanting in the Royal Stock a most kind Nursing
Father to this Church: or if a careless and dissolute King (which in so long a
succession of Princes is not to be wondered) happened to reign, the same was
ever abundantly repaired by one or other of the Kings that followed; neither
did this bring them less happiness then honor; For give me leave, Sir, to
speak it, which I hold not unworthy of your Majesty's consideration, the
Scottish Kingdom once the least of nine Kingdoms that ruled in the Isle, by the
wonderful providence of God, is now so increased, first in the person of your
Majesty's blessed Father, and now in your own, as the Scepter of the whole is
put into your Majesty's hands, which that you may long happily sway and your
posterity after you to the worlds end, is the hearty wish of all loyal
Subjects. For my part (next to God his undeserved love) I do ascribe this
happiness to the piety and devotion of your princely Ancestors, and to their
zeal in maintaining the rights and liberties of this Church. Your Majesty
keeping the same course (which blessed be God you hold) you may be confident of
God his protection against all dangers whatsoever, for he will honor them that
honor him, and never turn away his face from his Anointed.

God Almighty I beseech to multiply his blessings upon your Majesty and your
Royal Progeny, to give you the desire of your heart, and clothe all your
Enemies with shame.

So he prays that is Your Sacred Majesty's Most humble Subject and Servant S.
Andrews.
From the place of my Peregrination 15 November. 1639.
The Contents of the several Books.
THe First Book contains the planting and progress of Christian Religion in
this Kingdom, unto the subversion of the Picts, which fell out about the year
of our Lord, 840, Fol. 1. The Second Book contains succession of Bishops in
the several seas of this Kingdom, especially in the sea of S. Andrews, with
other principal things that happened in their times. fol. 25. The Third
shows the History of the Reformation, of the Church, and how it was wrought.
fol. 117. The Fourth Book shows the things that fell out after Queen MARY her
coming from France into this Kingdom, unto her resignation of the Crown to
King JAMES her Son. fol. 176. The Fifth declares how matters passed in the
State and Church, during the Government of the four Regents, His Majesty being
yet Minor. fol. 213. The Sixth contains the things that happened after his
Majesty's assuming of the Government in his own person, unto his happy
Succession to the Crown of England. fol. 282. The Last and Seventh Book
rehearses the proceedings after his Majesty's going into England unto his
dying. fol. 473.
THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Contents.
The planting and progress of Christian Religion in this Kingdom, unto the
subversion of the PICTS, which fell out about the year of our Lord 480.

HAving purposed to write the History of this Church, The Preface.
I have thought meet to begin at the time in which this Kingdom did first
receive the Christian faith; for albeit we have few or no Records left us of
those first times, yet as much is to be found in stories, as will show what was
the condition of this Church in every age. And herewith we must content our
selves, till we come to the times that yield greater plenty of matter, when I
shall come to our own time. I purpose to set down at length the things that
have happened both in the Church and State, together with the counsels and
causes of those events, without the which, the History should be of little use;
For take away from story the causes whereupon, the manner how, and the purpose
wherefore things were done, that which remains is more like a Fable then an
History; delighting the Reader, it may be, for the present; but giving little
or no instruction at all. I am not ignorant how unsafe it is to write of
matters so recent, and what offense it may give to diverse persons; but the
desire I have to give posterity a true information of things, and to have them
made wise by our errors, weighs down with me all such fears; wherefore
without further prefacing, to begin.

IN the year of our Lord 203. Anno 203.
(which was the fourth of Donald the first his Reign) the Faith of Christ was
in this Kingdom first publicly embraced; Scotland converted to the faith of
Christ, Anno 203. Boeth. li. 6. Buch. li. 4. L^st. l. 3.
King Donald with his Queen and diverse of his Nobles, being then solemnly
baptized. Yet was not that the first time wherein Christ was here made known:
for Tertullian who lived some years before, speaking of the propagation of the
Gospel throughout the world, does reckon among the countries the parts of
Britannie, unto which the Romans could not find access; and what these parts
were we cannot doubt, all the Inland of Britannie being then made subject to
the Romans, and no part free, but that little corner of the Isle which the
Scots did inhabit. Moreover, it cannot in reason be thought, that the
conversion of this Kingdom was all wrought at one instant, great alterations,
such as that must needs have been, not being made, but by little and little; so
as we may well think that numbers of people have been won to the Christian
profession, before the same was publicly embraced by the King and his Nobles.

But who they were that God used as instruments in that work, The Planters of
Christianity in this Kingdom.
is not certainly known; Nicephorus writes that Simon Zelotes (after he had
traveled through Egypt, Cyrene, Afrique, Mauritania, and Lybia) came at last
ad occidentalem Oceanum, insulasque Britannicas, and there preached the Gospel;
Dorotheus adds, that he was crucified in these parts. There be Authors
likewise of no small credit, who write that S. Paul the Apostle after his first
imprisonment at Rome, did visit this Isle, and preach the Gospel in the utmost
parts thereof.

The opinion most commonly received is, Reasons why Pope Victor could not be
the worker of our conversion.
that Pope Victor, upon the entreaty of King Donald, did send hither some
Preachers, and that these were the men that wrought our conversion: but this
cannot hold, for diverse reasons. As first, if the King did move the Pope in any
such business, it must needs have been upon some knowledge and liking he had
of the Christian profession; and if so, the Preachers that he sent hither,
could not be the first that taught us the faith of Christ. Again, the estate of
the time makes this opinion improbable; for the year, in which the King is
said to have sent that legation to Rome, was the very last of Pope Victor (for
he suffered Martyrdom in the year 203.) and hardly we can think, that in the
heat of persecution, which then did rage in all the Roman^ Provinces, the King
would have employed any in such a message. Thirdly, if our conversion had been
wrought by Pope Victor, how came it that our Church was not fashioned to the
Roman in outward Rites, especially in the observance of Easter, whereof Victor
was so zealous, as he excommunicated all the Churches of the East for their
disconformity with the Roman in that point? And it is clear, that for the
space of many ages our Church did keep a form different from the Roman, and
with much ado was brought to accept their Customs and Rites. Last of all, the
learned Cardinal Baronius, although he will have our conversion to be made by
some one of the Roman Bishops, esteems this which is said of Victor no
better then a fable; for how is it, says he, that neither Beda, nor Marianus,
nor S. Hierom have made any mention of it? In all likelihood, if any such thing
had been, some one or other of them would have remembered the same. Leaving
therefore this conceit, and not deeming these other opinions very warrantable,
if place may be given to conjecture, I verily think that under Domitians
persecution, when the Apostle S. John was relegated to Pathmos, some of his
disciples have taken their refuge hither, and been the first Preachers of the
Gospel in this Kingdom. And this I am induced the rather to believe, because
in that hot contention moved about Easter, some two hundred years after, I
find our Church did still retain the custom of the Oriental, and maintain
their practice by the authority of S. John, from whom they pleaded to have
received the faith. But whatsoever be in this, sure not long after the
Ascension of our Lord, at least whilst the Apostle Saint John yet lived, the
faith of Christ was known and embraced in diverse places of this kingdom, so as
we may truly glory in this, that we were inter primitias, as Origin speaks,
amongst the first fruits of the Gentiles gathered unto Christ, An. 277.
this made that venerable Abbot Petrus Cluniacensis, call the Scots antiquiores
Christianos, of greater Antiquity then many others.

But to return to King Donald; Buchan. li. 4.
it was in his purpose to have rooted out Paganism, Severus his expedition
into Britain.
and planted the Christian Faith every where in his Kingdom; but whilst he
was about to do it, the Emperor Severus put him to other business; he
thinks to take in the whole Isle, and join the same to the Roman Empire,
entered into Britain with a mightier Army then had ever here been seen, and
leaving his son Geta in the South, went himself in expedition to the North
parts, making no stay (though he was gowty and compelled to travel in a litter)
till he was come to the utmost ends of the Isle; The Scots in the mean time
keeping the Marshes, and Mountains, though they durst not encounter the Roman
forces because of their numbers, yet did annoy them much, taking them at
advantages; which Severus perceiving, and that there were no means utterly to
subdue them, as he had first intended, he made offer of peace, if so they would
quit what they possessed betwixt the Wall of Adrian, and the River of Forth.
The condition, though hard and unreasonable, was yielded unto by the Scots, who
desired to be freed of so mighty an enemy; and he to exclude them from the rest
of Britain, did raise a wall of stone betwixt the Rivers of Forth and Cl^yd,
two and thirty miles long, fortifying the same with Bulwarks and Watchtowers in
many places: Nor was it long after this peace obtained, that King Donald
departed this life; whereupon the Christian Religion for many years was little
or nothing promoted.

For Ethodius that succeeded was a Prince of no government, and the Kings that
came after him all unto Cratilinth, either wickedly inclined, or entangled with
wars and troubles; King Cratilinth expulses the Druides.
but Cratilinth coming unto the Crown in the year 277. made it one of his first
works to purge the Kingdom of heathenish superstition, and expulse the Druids,
a sort of Priests, held in those days in great reputation. Their manner was to
celebrate sacrifices, and perform their other rites in Groves, with leaves and
branches of Oak, and thence says Pliny, they were called Druides; for (...)
in the Greek language does signify an Oak. Caesar in his Commentaries does
further write, A short description of the Druides.
that besides the managing of sacrifices which were committed to them, they
were trusted with the decision of controversies, private and public; and that
such as would not stand to their judgment, were interdicted from being present
at their sacrifices and holy rites; which was taken for a grievous punishment.
It is likewise testified of them, that they were well learned in all natural
Philosophy, men of moral conversation, and for Religion not so grossly
ignorant and superstitious, as other heathen Priests; for they taught, That
there was one only God, and that it was not lawful to present him in an image:
That the souls of men did not perish with the bodies, and that after death men
were rewarded according to the life they led on earth. Some also have written
that they did prophecy of the conception of a Virgin, and of the birth of him
who should be the Savior of the world: But that such mysteries were revealed
unto them, and so plainly as the Prophets of God in the Old Testament had
scarce the like, is not credible. They lived likewise in great respect with all
sorts of people, and ruled their affairs very politickly; for being governed
by a President, who kept his residence in the Isle of Man, (which then was
under the dominion of the Scots) they did once every year meet in that place to
take counsel together for the ordering of affairs: and carried matters with
such discretion, that Cratilinth found it difficil enough to expulse them,
because of the favor they had among the people.

But that which furthered not a little the propagation of the Gospel in these
parts, Diocletian his persecution.
was the persecution raised by Diocletian, which at that time was hot in the
South parts of Britain. This brought many Christians, both Preachers and
Professors, into this Kingdom, who were all kindly received by Cratilinth, and
had the Isle of Man given them for their remaining, and revenues sufficient
assigned for their maintenance. In this Isle King Cratilinth erected a stately
Church to the honor of our Savior, Sodorense fanum.
which he adorned with all necessary ornaments, and called Sodorense fanum,
that is, the Temple of our Savior; Boeth li. 6.
hence it is, that the Bishops of the Isles are styled Sodorenses Episcopi. For
so long as that Isle remained in the possession of the Scots, An. 360.
the Bishops of Isles made that Church their Cathedral. After their
dispossession, the Isle Iona, commonly called Hecombekil, has been the seat of
the Bishops, and continues so until this day.

In this Isle Amphibalus sat first Bishop, Amphibalus the first Bishop of Man.
a Britain born, and a man of excellent piety; he lived long, preaching
carefully the doctrine of Christ both amongst the Scots and the Picts, and
after many labors taken for promoting Christian Religion died peaceably in the
same Isle. Our stories report that at the same time there lived in this Kingdom
diverse zealous and notable Preachers, of which number they name these six,
Modocus, Priseus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and Carnocus; that seem to have
been men of principal note, and of them all generally it is witnessed, that
living solitary, they were in such a reputation for their holiness of life, as
the Cells wherein they lived, were after their deaths turned into Temples or
Churches. And of this it came that all the Churches afterward erected, were
called Cells, which word I hear is yet retained amongst the Irish Scots;
Culdees, why so called.
The Priests they termed Culdees, Boeth, l. 6.
which Hector Boeth thinks to have signified as much as Cultores Dei, the
worshippers of God; but it is more like this title was given them for their
living in these Cells, whereas people assembled to hear service: somewhat it
makes for this, that in certain old Bulls and rescripts of Popes, I find them
termed Keledei, and not Culdei.

The same Boeth, Bishops in Scotland at the first planting of the faith.
out of ancient Annals, reports that these Priests were wont for their better
government to elect some one of their number by common suffrage, to be chief
and principal among them, without whose knowledge and consent nothing was done
in any matter of importance; Boeth ibidem.
and that the person so elected, was called Scotorum Episcopus, a Scots Bishop,
or a Bishop of Scotland. Neither had our Bishops any other title whereby they
were distinguished, before the days of Malcolm the third, who first divided
the country into Dioceses, appointing to every Bishop the limits within which
they should keep and exercise their jurisdiction. After that time they were
styled either by the countries whereof they had the oversight, or by the City
where they kept their residence.

But to return to Cratilinth; during his Reign, Christian Religion did prosper
exceedingly, and Fincormachus his Cousin-germane that succeeded, keeping the
same course, gave in his time a perfect settling unto it: So great a happiness
it is to have two Kings of qualities alike good, succeed one to another; for
what the one begins, the other does perfect and accomplish.

Yet this felicity endures not long, the state both of the Kingdom and
Church, being within a few years after his death quite overturned by this
occasion; Maximus the Roman prefect practices with the Picts against the Scots.
Maximus a man born in Spain, but of Roman education, being sent Lieutenant
into Pritaine, and presuming to bring the whole Isle under his power, did
practice secretly with the Picts for rooting out the Scots, promising that all
the lands which the Scots possessed should be given to them. Bouch. li. 6.
The Picts a perfidious people, greedily embracing this offer, Buchan. li. 5.
did join their forces with the Romans, and both made invasion upon the Scots;
who doing the best they could for their own defense, after diverse sharp
encounters, in a battle fought at the water of Dun in Carrick were wholly
defeated, and King Eugenius, with the most part of his Nobility, slain.

This defeat was followed with a rigorous edict, The Scots exiled
commanding all the Scots, of what age, sex, or condition soever, to depart
out of this Isle before a certain day: which was so precisely executed, Buchan.
li. 4.
as neither man nor woman, young nor old, were permitted to stay; nay not a
Churchman (though all of that profession were in good esteem among the Picts
themselves at the time.) Thus all the Scots went in exile, betaking themselves
some into Ireland, others into the countries of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, or
where it was in their fate to be cast: only some few Churchmen, after they
had long wandered from place to place, got privately into Iona one of the West
Isles; where living in a poor condition, they laid the foundation of a
Monastery, which in succeeding ages became famous by the beneficence of our
Kings, and the sanctity of the Monks that there professed. Never was any Church
or Kingdom brought to a greater desolation, but how long it continued, our
writers do not agree; for Boeth will have the Scots to live in exile the space
of 44. years, An. 370.
and says, that they returned in the year 422. Buthannan casts their return
into the year 404. and so makes their exile to have lasted 27. years only.

Now whilst they lived thus exiled, Regulus arrives into Albion.
it happened that one Regulus a Greci^^ Monk arrived in these parts. This man
(as they write) living in Achala, had warning given him in a vision by night to
forsake his country and go into Albion, an Isle fited in the utmost parts of
the world, and to carry with him the arm-bone, three fingers, and as many toes
of S. Andrew the Apostle. The man troubled at first with the strangeness of
the vision, did after a little time resolve to follow the warning, and take a
little box in which he put those Relics, went to se^, taking some persons in
company with him; The story names Damia nus a Priest, (...) Thebaculus, and
Mermacus, brother to Damianus, Deacons; (...) and (...) a Cretain, Merinus and
Silvin^s his brother, Monks by profession: Some eight more are said to be in
his company, but their names are not expressed. The ship wherein they sailed
being tossed with grievous tempests, was driven at last into the Port or Haven
called then (...), now St. Andrews.

Hergustus King of Picts, Hergustus King of the Picts, gave his Palace to
Regulus.
under whose dominion that part of the country as then was, advertised of the
strangers arrive, and the Relics they had brought with them, came thither,
and pitying their losses, (for besides the Relics they had nothing saved)
When he beheld the men, and the form of their service, did so like it, as he
took order for their entertainment; shortly after he gave unto Regulus his own
Palace, with certain lands adjoining, and nigh thereunto erected a Church (the
same whereof we see a part yet remaining on the South of the ruined Cathedral,
called to this day The Church of St. Rewle.) Here did Regul^s and his company
abide, serving God devoutly, and for the austere life they led, were in great
reputation with all men.

Whether Regulus had such a vision or not, I leave it to those that list to
believe. But that he did bring with him such Relics is not improbable; for in
these times Christians did hold the bones and relics of Martyrs in a
respectful reverence: which does in no sort justify the abuses which afterward
crept into the Church, when from the keeping of Relics, they grew to worship
and adore them; yea, and in many places, Priests out of their covetousness did
use impostures, fo^^^ing in the bones of Asses and other beasts in stead of the
Relics of Martyrs and saints departed. These and the like abuses did justly
bring the keeping and carrying about of Relics to be detested. In the time of
persecution, when the bodies of Martyrs were thrown into the fields and cast
into dung hills, it might be held a charitable and pious work to gather and
preserve them: but now that those things are superstitiously used, and vile
receipts therewith practiced, no wise man will allow such follies. Better it
were, as Cassander advised, to incite people to the imitation of the Saints
virtues, then to reserve their bones which can serve is no use, and savoureth
only of vain often^^^^^^.

But leaving this, let us follow the story. In the battle wherein E^genius
fell, Echadius, or as others call him, Ethodius, his brother being sore wounded
and found among the dead, was saved by the clemency of the Roman Prefect, and
flying into Denmark with his young son E^hus, was received by the King of that
Country, and kindly entertained. This E^^hus Marching with one Ra^a the
daughter of a Nobleman in these quarters, had by her a son called Fergus, a
Prince of much valor, who growing in years, and his Father and Grandfather
both deceased, out of an hatred against the Romans, joined with the (...) in a
war they made upon the Gauls, that were subject to the Romans. That
expedition not succeeding, he followed Alarick King of G^^es, and was with him
a^ the s^ek of Rome; Alarick dying, he served under (...) his successor, and
by the Fortunate exploits he made, purchased the reputation of a great Captain.
The fame whereof (with the news that were daily brought of the defection of the
Roman Provinces, and of the irruptions made upon the Empire by the G^^es,
(...), and other Barbars) gave the Scots encouragement, and put them^^ some
hopes of returning to their country. Once or twice by the help of the Irish,
having sought to repossess themselves, still they were put to the worst: But
(...) proclaiming himself Caesar, An. 404.
and transporting beyond Sea the whole power of Britain, they resumed new
courage, and upon advertisemement of Fergus his return to Denmark, did entreat
him to take the opportunity, and do somewhat for himself, and for his country.
The Picts in the mean time being held in miserable subjection by one Victorinus
a new Governor sent into Britain, and so repenting the course they had taken,
did secretly reconcile with Fergus, offering restitution of all they possessed
belonging to the Scots, and their assistance for recovering the rest.

Fergus upon these advertisements prepared to return, and with him diverse
voluntaries of the Danes, King Fergus came to the Firth of Mur^ray.
Norwegians, and others did join; besides the Scots that lived exiles in those
parts. Boeth. l. 7.
With this company taking Sea, on the eight day after his embarking he landed
in the Firth of Murray; and from thence marching directly to A^gyle, where the
Chair of Marble was kept, was placed therein, and crowned with the Rites
accustomed. The news hereof dispersed, there gathered to him from all parts
numbers of people, with whom in a short time he recovered all the countries,
out of which the Scots had been expulsed. The Britains upon this sent to
implore aid of the Romans; of whom they obtained the supply of a legion under
the conduct of Heraclianus; but he making no long stay, one Placidius was left
in place, whom Fergus overthrew in battle, and forced to seek peace. This
concluded, Fergus dividing the lands among the Scots; He repaired the Churches.
and strangers that had ventured with him, did reorder all things according to
the ancient form. The Churches that were ruined or defaced, he caused repair,
restored the Churchmen to their places and in the Isle Iona erected a
religious house, with a Library furnished with the books that he had brought
with him from Rome. Never was any Prince more nobly given, nor in so short
space performed greater actions, having regained the Kingdom that was lost,
King Fergus vanquished and slain.
and reduced it to a better estate then before: neither had he ceased there,
Boeth li. 7.
if the Romans had not fallen upon him with a fresh power, and sent one
Maximianus hither, by whom he was in battle vanquished, and slain in the
sixteenth year of his Reign.

This overthrow did so terrify the Scots, that they looked for nothing but to
have been chased again forth of the Isle; but the irruptions made upon all the
parts of the Empire, did not suffer the Romans to make long stay, wherefore
having repaired the Wall of Severus, and made it much stronger then it was at
first; they departed, advising the Britains to use their own forces without any
more expectation of succor from them. Upon intelligence of their departure,
Greem a Nobleman of Britain, Greem battereth the wall of Severus.
who had lived long among the Scots, Buch. l. 5.
and whose daughter King Fergus had married, raised an Army, and battering down
the Wall which the Romans had fortified, chased the Britains beyond the Wall
of Adrian an hundred miles more inward, and forced them to accept that for the
march, and content themselves with the lands lying in the South of that Wall.
Peace on these terms made with the Britains, Eugenius the eldest of King Fergus
his sons was declared King: and because he was yet within years, the Regency
of the Realm committed to Greem his Grandfather; which he discharged so well,
as whilst he lived, there was no trouble either within or without the Kingdom.

But he dying, Eugenius assisted by the Picts, overcomes the Britains.
Eugenius (who was then grown to some years) laying claim to his Grandfathers
lands, did repeat the same by his Ambassadors, and the Britains defending
themselves by the conditions of the late peace; when after diverse messages no
satisfaction could be had, war was of new raised. The Picts assisting the
Scots, a sore overthrow was given to the Britains, and they compelled to
resign all the lands lying betwixt Tyne and Humber: which the Scots and Picts
did peaceably enjoy unto the coming of the Saxons, Anno 450.
about the year 450.

The Church notwithstanding these wars did flourish all this time by King
Eugenius his favor. St. Ninian.
Ninian (he who with the posterity had the reputation of a Saint) was of great
fame at that time. This man was born in Britain, and had his education in
France under Martine Bishop of Towers his grand Uncle: having remained there
some years, and made good profit in letters; he returned into Britain, and
became a zealous Preacher of the Gospel. His chief residence was amongst the
Picts in the country of Galloway; there he built a Church all of white stone
(a sort of structure not usual in those parts) and called the same by the name
of St. Mar^ine, not meaning to have him taken for the tutelary Saint of that
place, (which in after-ages, when superstition prevailed, was the conceit of
the people) but to preserve the memory of his virtues, and incite others to the
imitation thereof: This was the chief respect in those first times that
Christians had in denominating their Churches by the names of Saints departed;
St. Augustine, de civitate Dei. li. 22. cap. 10.
that other they utterly disclaimed. Nos Martyribus nostris, (says St.
Augustine) non templa sicut diis fabricamus, sed memorias sicut hominibus
mortuis, quorum apud Deum vivunt spiritus; We do not build Temples to our
Martyrs as unto Gods, but memorials as unto dead men, whose spirits with God
are still living.

Bid in his Ecclesiastic story speaking of this Ninian, Beda his Ecclesiast.
Hist. li. 3. cap. 4.
says, that he learned at Rome, and was there taught the mysteries of truth.
But we cannot think that he went a novice thither, being trained up under so
kind and learned an Uncle: as ever that was, he proved a notable instrument in
the Church; for he converted the Southern Picts to the faith of Christ; and for
his continual labors in preaching (not among them alone, for he traveled also
among the Scots and Britains) but especially for his innocence and holiness of
life, he was in so great regard, as to which of the three soever he came, they
did reverence and accept him as the messenger of Christ. Among the Bishops of
Galloway he is reckoned the first, and thought to have been the Founder of that
College; for from that Church which he built all of white stone (as we said)
the Bishops of that See have still been, and to this day are styled
Episcopicandide casae.

It was in the time of this Eugenius that Palladius came into Scotland,
Palladius sent into Scotland by Pope Celestine.
employed, as they write, by Celestine Bishop of Rome, for resisting the
Pelagian heresy, which began to spread in this Church. This man a Grecian by
birth, learned, moderate, and singularly wise, Beda li. 1. c. 13.
as appeared in all his actions, did purge the Church from those errors, and
won such love and credit, as by the space of 24. years he governed all
Ecclesiastic affairs in these parts without any grudge or opposition.

Buchannan is of opinion, Buch. li. 5.
that before his coming, there was no Bishop in this Church; Nam (says he)
adid usque tempus, Ecclesiae absque Episcopis per monachos regebantur, minore
quidem cum fastu and externa pompa, sed majore simplicitate and sanctimonia:
that is, The Church unto that time was governed by Monks without Bishops; with
less pride and outward pomp, but greater simplicity and holiness. What
warrant he had to write so, I know not, except he did build upon that which
Ioannes Major says, Buch. his opinion refelled.
speaking of the same Palladius, Per sacerdotes and monachos, sine Episcopis,
Scoti in fide erudiebantur; The Scots (he says) were instructed in the
Christian faith by Priests and Monks, without any Bishops. But from the
instruction of Scots in the faith to conclude, that the Church after it was
gathered, had no other form of government, Monks not reckoned among the Clergy.
will not stand with any reason. For be it as they speak, that by the Travels
of some pious Monks the Scots were first converted unto Christ; it cannot be
said that the Church was ruled by Monks, seeing long after these times it was
not permitted to Monks to meddle with matters of the Church, nor were they
reckoned among the Clergy. As to the pride and pomp which he taxes in Bishops,
of later times it might be truly spoken; but after Palladius coming for the
space of six hundred years and more, there was no such excess to be noted in
them.

But to return to Palladius; Servanus and Tervanus, ordained Bishops by
Palladius.
he was a man most careful in promoting Christian Religion, Boeth. li. 7.
and the first that made Christ to be preached in the Isle of Orkney, sending
Servanus one of his disciples thither. Hist. li. 4.
Another called Tervanus he employed, among the Northern Picts, and ordained
both of them Bishops. His own remaining for the most part was at F^rdon in the
country of Mernis, where he built a little Church, which from him is to this
day by a corrupted word called Padie Church: There was his corpse after his
death interred. In the year 1494. William She^ez Archbishop of St. Andrews,
visiting that Church, did in reverence of his memory gather his bones, and
bestow them in a silver shrine; which, as the report goes, was taken up at the
demolishing of the Churches, by a Gentleman of good rank who dwelt near unto
that place. The people of the country observing the decay which followed in
that family, not many years after, ascribed the same to the violation of
Palladius grave.

Much about this time was Ireland converted to the faith of Christ, An. 491.
by the labors of Pat^ick a Scotchman, born upon the River of Cluid, not far
from Glasgow. They write of him, St. Patrick the converter of Ireland.
that being thirteen years of age only, he was taken prisoner by some Irishes
at an invasion they made upon the West parts of Scotland, Ba^. cent. 1.
and sold to M^l^^, one of their Kings: Bacon. to. 5. in Anno 431.
being kept there as a slave the space of four years, he was ransomed by his
parents,, Sect. 191.
and sent to school; where having made a reasonable progress in letters he
went to France, Camden in the description of Ireland.
and there remained 18. years in the company of German Bishop of Auxerre, under
whom he attained to a great perfection of knowledge, especially in the holy
Scriptures. Thereafter traveling to Rome, Pope Celestine (the same that sent
Palladius to Scotland) hearing of his qualities, and how he had lived some
years in Ireland, made choice of him as the fittest person to work the
conversion of that people. Patrick accepting the employment, addressed himself
shortly after to the journey, and in his way by Scotland, took with him Columba
(who came afterward to be in great esteem.) Diverse upon the report of his good
success, followed him thither; and ere many months passed, all the country
almost was brought to embrace the profession of Christ.

He was doubtless a notable person, Ioh. Bi^sans in descriptione Britanmae.
and most worthy to be remebred; some idle and ignorant Monks have pitifully
wronged his memory by their Legends. But what a singular man he was, and what
pains he took to do good in his lifetime; the Churches he founded, reckoned to
365. and the Priests he ordained, numbered to be three thousand, may
sufficiently witness. He lived 122. years, and ended his days in the city of
Down within the Province of Ulster, in the year of our Lord 491. That fabulous
Purgatory (the invention whereof is falsely ascribed to him) was the device of a
Monk of Glastenbury Abbey in England, who bare the same name, but was of a much
later time, and lived about the year 850. For the opinion of a fiery Purgatory,
in which souls are tormented after their going forth of the body, was not then
known among Christians; nor did the ancient Irish believe any such matter.

In our Church at the same time, Sedulius educated under Hildebert a Bishop.
one Hildebert a Bishop was in great account for his learning and piety. Celius
Sedulius had his education under him, a man of excellent qualities, as his
works yet extant both in prose and poesy do witness: how long Hildebert lived
he abode in his company, but after his death he betook himself to travel, Bal.
cent. 14. Lesl. li. 4.
and journeying through France and Italy, sailed unto Greece; there he wrote
certain explanations upon the Epistles of St. Paul, and returned from thence to
Rome, Anno 494.
made his abode in that city. In a Synod gathered by Gelasius Bishop of Rome,
Gratin decret. par. distruct.15.
in the year 494. one of the Canons then made touching books allowed, we read
these words: Venerabilis viri Se^ulii Paschale opus quod heroicis descripsit
versibus insigni land proferimus. We esteem the Paschal work, that venerable
Sedulius composed in heroic verses, worthy of singular recommendations. And
even at this day in the Church of Rome, certain hymns compiled by him, are
sung in the Festivals of the Nativity, and Epiphany; which shows in what
esteem he was held.

Some Irish writers contend, Sedulius proved to be a Scottish man against the
Irish writers.
that this Sedulius was their country man born, as the like they affirm of all
that were of any note in our Church in those first ages. And albeit in diverse
of his works he does entitle himself Sedulius Scotigena, and that Sixtus
Senensis Trithemius, Baronius, and diverse others, do all witness him to be of
the Scottish Nation, yet they will have him to be an Irish, because forsooth in
those elder times the name of Scoti was common to the inhabitants of the
greater and lesser Scotland; But this reason is naught: for granting that the
countries were so distinguished of old, and that Ireland was called Scotia
major, and the part of Britain which the Colonie deduced from thence did
inhabit, Scotia minor, whereof there is some appearance: yet that will not
infer him to be an Irish more then a Scot. This I trust they will not deny,
that Scotland was Christian long before Ireland, and that Sedulius of whom we
speak, was come to a good age before Patrick went about their conversion. Now
if he had been an Irish by Nation, would not he much rather have employed his
travels to instruct his country men in the truth, then have spent his time
abroad among strangers? Further, I should desire these who plead so earnestly
to have our men esteemed to be of their country, to name any one another
worthy of credit, An. 500.
that since the Scots were reduced from their exile by Fergus the second, did
ever call Ireland, Scotland the greater. They will not find any of trust:
Scotland a Colonie deduced from Ireland.
the name of Scots being long before appropriated to the Colonie reduced from
thence, and quite extinct among the Irish. It is true, that we oftfinde the
Scots called Irishes, like as yet we term commonly our Highland-men, in regard
they speak the Irish language, and retain diverse of their customs. But that
the Irish were called Scots, or the country of Ireland called Scotland, since
they grew to be different nations, and were known to be so, I am confident will
not be showed. To close this; howsoever Ireland be the Mother, and Scotland the
daughter, as a reverend Prelate has written, and we deny not: (for our first
progenitors we hold came from that country) there is no reason why the sons
which the daughter has brought forth, should be reckoned the sons of another
Mother, and she thereby robbed of her honor.

But to our story; the condition of this Church in those times was most happy,
all the care of Preachers being to win souls unto Christ; Avarice and
Ambition, the two main pests of the Church, had not as yet seized upon them; so
as they were held with all people in great veneration. Beda says, that
whosoever did meet them by occasion, either in the streets, or otherwise in
journeying by the way, they would not depart without their blessing. And which
increased greatly the felicity of the time, the Kings who then reigned, were
all wise and religious.

Congallus the second deserves by the rest to be mentioned; Congallus an
excellent Prince.
Vir ob egregias virtutes (says Buchannan) omnium seculorum memoria dignus;
Buch. in vita Congalli.
Nam praeter aequitatem in jure dicundo, and animum advers^is avaritiam
invictum, certabat moderatione vitae cum Monachis, qui ea aetate severissima
disciplina utebantur. Thas is; he was a man for his notable virtues worthy to
be had in everlasting remembrance; For besides his equity in the ministration
of Justice, and the incorrupt mind he carried, being free of all covetousness,
in moderation of life he was nothing inferior to the Monks, who in that age
observed a most strict discipline. This good King considering how easily people
are brought to contemn Ministers, that stand in need of their supply, and that
the contempt of Ministers breeds ever contempt of Religion; did carefully
provide for their necessities, appointing to them Mansion places at the
Churches where they served, Tithes declared to appertain to the Church.
with a competent portion of land thereto adjoining, and declaring the tenth of
all corns, A law for the safety of Churchmen.
fruits, herbs, and flocks, which did either produce or nourish, to appertain
properly to the Church. He did further enact for the safety of their persons,
That if any should happen to smite a Churchman, his hand should be cut off;
and if the Churchman was killed, that the murderer should lose all his goods,
and be burnt alive. For the greater reverence of Church Censures, it was
likewise his ordinance, That whosoever were by the Church excommunicated,
should not be admitted to stand in judgment, nor credit given to their
testimony.

The fame of this Kings pious disposition, Columba returns into Scotland.
Scotichron. li. 3.
drew Columba back from Ireland where he had lived a long time. There came with
him some twelve in company, of whom the principals were, Sibthacus and
Ethernanus, his nephews by his brother, both of them Presbyters, Domitius
Rutheus, and Comineus, men of excellent learning, and good behavior, Boeth li.
9.
who were all well accepted of the King. But of Columba he made such account,
as he did nothing in any matter of importance, till he had first consulted with
him. Monks placed in Monasteries.
By his advice the Monks that in former times lived dispersed, were gathered
into Cloisters or Colleges, and had Rules prescribed unto them: which falling
afterward to be neglected, in place of religious Monks, there crept in a sort
of idle-bellies that disordered all things, and made the profession which in
the beginning was well devised, to be misliked and hated of all.

King Congallus after a little time sickning, Columba sent to bring Aidanus the
heir of the Crown from Ireland.
sent Columba into Ireland to bring home Aidanus the right heir of the
Kingdom,) who had fled thither after the murder of his Father Goranus) that he
might possess him with the crown before his death: But ere he returned, the
King was dead, and his brother Kinnatellus crowned King. This accident troubled
Columba, and made him doubtful what to do; For if he should send Aidanus back,
Congallus dies to whom his brother succeeds.
he knew not how Kinnatellus would takeit; and to go on, not knowing how the
King stood affected toward Aidanus, he held it dangerous. After a little
debating with himself, he resolved to hold forward, and taking Aidanus in
company, An. 603.
did present him to the King; who against the expectation of most men, accepted
him most lovingly, bidding him be of good heart, for he should in a short time
inherit his fathers Crown; Boeth li. 9.
mean while because of his own age and infirmity, Buchan. l. 5.
he committed to him the administration of affairs, and designed him his
successor. Lesl. li. 4.
After a few days Kinnatellus dying, Aidanus was crowned King, Aidanus crowned
King.
Columba performing the ceremonies; at which time he is said to have made a
most pithy and eloquent speech, exhorting the King to the love of Justice, the
Nobles to the observance of Peace, the people to obedience, and them all to
constancy in the Christian profession: wherewith the whole Assembly was so much
affected, as by holding up their hands, they did solemnly swear to continue
loyal subjects to the King, and to be obedient to him as their spiritual Pastor.

The Coronation ended, Columba retired to the Isle Iona.
Columba retired to the Isle Iona (for he loved to remain in that place) and
Aidanus applying himself to order the Estate, went through the countries of
Gallaway, Cathnes and Loqhaber, holding Justice-Courts in all these parts, and
reforming what he found amiss. But, as no prosperity is lasting, it happened
in a sport of hunting, that some Noblemen falling at discord, there was a
great slaughter committed, Aidanus makes war against the Picts.
the Authors whereof fearing the severity of Law, fled to Breudeus King of the
Picts, and being remanded according to the conditions of the league, were after
some delays directly refused. Aidanus taking this to heart, whilst he sought
to recover them by force, had his son Arthur (Buchannan calls him Griffin) a
Prince of great hopes, and Brenden his Nephew, with diverse of his Nobles,
Aidanus rebuked by Columba.
killed. Columba grieved with this accident came to the King, and rebuked him
bitterly for making war with his neighbor upon so light an occasion;
wherewith he is said to be no less moved then with the loss he had received:
for Columba striving to be gone, he caught him by the hand; and confessing he
had been too hasty, entreated his best advice, and counsel how to repair
things. But he replying that no advice could redress the harm that was done;
the King burst forth into tears: Columba fell also a weeping; and after a
little space, said that he would counsel him to make peace: which he was
content to do at his sight. The matter moved to Brudeus, Aidanus forced to take
up Arms against the Picts.
he likewise agreed to remit all to Columba, who shortly after brought them to
be friends. But the heart-burning between the two people ceased not, which
Ethelfrid King of Northumberland (a wicked and avaritious man) craftily
entertained, The Picts overcome, and Aidanus gets the victory.
stirring the Picts to make fresh incursions upon the Scots, so as Aidanus was
compelled to take Arms; Columba being advertised of the necessity the King was
put to, gave order that private supplications should be made for his safety,
and the overthrow of his enemies: which falling out according to their wishes,
was generally ascribed to Columba his devotion. For as the report went, in the
same hour wherein the enemies were defeated, he did call his Colleagues
together, and willed them to turn their prayers into thanskgiving, for that the
King had obtained the victory: yet was the place of the conflict distant from
Iona, where Columba lived 200. miles at least.

The year following, Columba dies in the year of our Lord, 603.
which was the year of our Lord 603. Columba died being of a good age; neither
did the King Aidanus long survive him. The Irish contend that Columba died in
the City of Down, and was buried in St. Patricks Tomb; and for verifying the
same, Boeth li. 9.
allege an old Distick, which was (they say) engraven upon the Tomb, and
defaced only in the days of King Henry the eighth.

Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.
But it carries no likelihood that Columba being so far in years, would make
a journey into Ireland, or that Aidanus, who loved him so dearly, would suffer
him to depart whilst he lived; It may be that upon some occasion his bones
were translated thither, yet the pilgrimages made in superstitious times to the
Isle Iona for visiting his grave, do show what the received opinion was of his
death and burial.

Kentigern, Kentigern, or St. Mungo.
commonly called St. Mungo, was famous also at this time, and one most familiar
with Columba; he was the son of Thametes daughter to Loath King of Picts
begotten (as was supposed) by Eugenius the third King of Scots his father not
being certainly known, An. 500.
posterity not being willing that his birth, whom they so greatly esteemed,
Boeth li. 9.
should be in any sort stained, gave out that he was born of a Virgin: which
was believed of simple and credulous people. But the reproach which lay upon
him that way, he overcame by his singular virtues; in his younger years being
trusted to the education of Servanus Bishop of Orkney, he gave tokens of his
rare piety; for he was in prayer more frequent then young ones are usually seen
to be, Mongah in the Norish tongue signifies dear f^^^nd.
of a spare diet, and so compassionate of the poor, as all that came in his
hands he distributed among them: Servanus his Master loving him beyond others,
was ordinarily wont to call him Mongah, which in the Norish tongue, signifies
a dear friend; and this way came he to be called Mungo.

After Servanus death he went to the country of Wales in England, Kentigern
his journey to Wales.
where living a solitary life, he founded a Monastery betwixt the Rivers of
Elwid and Edwy. They write that in his Monastery there were daily entertained
six hundred threescore and three persons; of which number three hundred were
kept at some manual work within the Monastery; other three hundred did labor
in the fields, and practice husbandry; and the rest being appointed for divine
service, had the day and night divided among them, so as one company succeeding
to another, there were some always in the Church, praying and praising
Almighty God. Having stayed there a few years, he resigned his place to Asaph,
a godly and virtuous man; and returning to Scotland, he made his abode at
Glasgow, where he laid the foundation of a stately Church, and was therein at
his death interred. Kentigern his austere life and death.
It is affirmed that after he came to years of understanding, he did never eat
flesh, nor taste wine or any strong drink; and when he went to rest, slept on
the cold ground, having a stone for his pillow; and that notwithstanding he
lived thus hardly, he did attain to the age of ninescore and five years. Many
lying miracles have been ascribed unto him; but certainly he was a man of rare
parts, and worthy to have been made a subject of truth to posterity, not of
fables and fictions, as the Legends of Monks have made him.

Baldred and Convallus were his disciples, Baldred and Convallus were
Kentigerns disciples.
and zealous preachers of the truth; the first served for the most part in
Lothiaen, which as then was under the dominion of the Picts, and was so beloved
and honored in his life, as after his death the Parishes of Aldham, Tuningham,
and Preston, did contend who should have his corpse to bury. Boeth li. 9.
As they grew to some heat, the Bishop of the bounds (the story does not
express his name) intervened, Lesl. li. 4.
and willed the people to defer the funeral to the next morrow, and in the
mean time be earnest in prayer with God, that he would declare his will in that
business. The next day they found three Coffins with as many corpses, betwixt
which, no difference could be perceived; and interpreting this for a miracle,
went away each of them with a Coffin, well satisfied and pleased. What policy
the Bishop used in this is not known, but hereby we may see how easily people
were in those times led with their teachers. The other, Convallus lived at
Inchynnan some seven miles from Glasgow, and made the Oration at the funeral of
King Aidanus; in which he foretold many things that came afterward to pass,
touching the state of the Kingdom.

There lived at this time in the Isle of Iona one Convallanus who was Governor
of that Monastery, Convallanus Governor of the Monastery in Iona.
a man of excellent holiness and learning; from under his hand as they write,
Boeth ibidem.
prodierunt examina sanctissimorum virorum; hives or multitudes of most holy
men came forth. Among these are named Mornanus a Bishop, Cormachus a Presbyter,
Hebred, Dunstan, Jonas, Gabrianus, Gallus, and Columbanus; all famous men for
their holiness of life. Gallus traveling into Switzerland was in great
esteem, and having converted many to the faith of Christ, laid there the
foundation of a Monastery, which was afterward greatly enriched, and to this
day is called by his name St. Gall. Columbanus in Burgundy did found the Abbey
of Luxeule, resolving to make his abode in these parts; but the licentiousness
of King Theod^rick, whom by no means he could reclaim from his unchaste life,
did enforce him to change, so that going to Italy, in the borders thereof he
settled himself, and there erected the Monastery of Bobie.

Neither lacked there in the female sex examples of rare piety. Brigida.
Brigida, commonly S^ Bride, An. 518.
was above the rest renowned, both among the Scots and Picts: this woman was
born in Cathnes of honorable parents, and the heir of a fair patrimony, which
she voluntarily forsook, Boeth li. 9.
that she might be consecrated to God. Diverse Virgins moved by her example, did
in like sort apply themselves to the solitary life; not as the Votarists that
in after times rose up, for they did not bind themselves by vows to that which
was not in their power, nor did they think to merit thereby at Gods hands; and
the chastity they professed, they kept inviolate. Did the times wherein we live
afford such Virgins, so far are we from disliking that state of life, as we
think it should bring a great benefit to the Kingdom. But the bondage of vows,
with the opinion of merit and perfection is it we discommend, things unknown to
the holy women of those primitive times. Another Brigida, or rather Brigitta,
there was born in Sweden; who, as Trimethius writes, came to Avignion in the
year 1362. Brigida dies at Abernet^^^ ^y,
to sue for the Popes confirmation to an Order of Nuns by her invented: But
our Brigida was of a much older time, and died at Abernethie in the year 518.
where she was also interred.

Now are we come to the time in which Augustine the Monk was sent into Britain:
Anno 600.
Gregory Bishop of Rome did choose this man for planting Religion among the
English Saxons, Augustine the Monk sent into Britain.
who had at that time subdued the Britains, and driven them beyond Severn into
narrow bounds. Beda l. 3. c. 2.
At his first arrival, he converted King Ethelbert to the Christian faith, and
wrought much good. But whilst he strove to conform the Britain Churches to the
Roman in rites Ecclesiastic, The Britains refuse to conform themselves to the
rites of Rome.
and to have himself acknowledged for the only Archbishop of Britain, he did
cast the Church into a sea of troubles. After diverse conferences, and much
pains taken by him to persuade the Britains unto conformity; when he could not
prevail, he made offer, that if they would yield to minister Baptism, and
observe Easter according to the Roman manner, and be assisting to him in
reforming the Saxons, for all other things they should be left to their Ancient
customs. But they refusing to make any alteration, he fell a threatening, and
said, That they who would not have peace with their brethren, should find
war with their enemies. This falling out as he foretold, (for Edelfrid King
of Northumberland invading them with a strong Army, slew at one time 1200.
Monks that were assembled to pray for the safety of their contrymen) made
Augustine to be suspected of the murder, and did purchase him a great deal of
hatred; whether he foreknew the practice or not, is uncertain, but shortly
after the murder of these Monks, he himself died.

There succeeded to him Laurentius, A letter from the Bishops of England to the
Scottish Church.
a Roman also, who followed the business of conformity no less earnestly,
Beda l. 2. c. 4.
and with his fellow Bishops, ^ellitus and Iustus, wrote to the Church of
Scotland in this manner. Dominis charissimis, Fratribus Episcopis, and
Abbatibus per universam Scotiam Laurentius, Mellitus, and Justus Episcopi,
servi servorum Dei. Dum nos seeds Apostolica, more suo, sicut in universo orb
terrarum, in his occiduis partibus ad praedicandum gentibus paganis dirigeret;
atque in hanc insulam, quae Britannia nu^cupatur, contigit introisse, antequam
cognosceremus credentes, quod juxta morem universalis Ecclesiae ingrederentur,
in magna reverentia sanctitatis tam Britones quam Scotos venerati sumus; sed
cognoscentes Britones, Scotos meliores putavimus; Scotos vero per Dagamum
Episcopum in hanc quam supra memor avimus Insulam, and Columbanum Abbatem in
Galliis venientem, nihil discrepare a Britonibus in eorum conversatione
didicimus. Nam Dagamus Episcopus ad nos veniens, non solum cibum nobiscum, sed
nec in hospitio quo vescebamur sumere voluit. In English thus: Laurence,
Mellitus, and Justus Bishops, servants of all the servants of God; to our Lords
and dearest brethren the Bishops and Abbots through all Scotland. while as the
Apostolic See according to the custom it has observed in the rest of the
world, did send us to preach the Gospel unto the Heathen in these Western
parts, and that it happened us to come into this Isle which is called Britain,
we held in religious reverence both the Scots and Britains, believing that they
did walk after the custom of the universal Church. But after we had known the
Britains, we judged the Scots to be better minded; yet now we perceive by
Dagamus the Bishop who is come hither, and by Columbanus the Abbot in France,
that the Scots differ nothing in their observations from the Britains; for
Bishop Dagamus being here, refused not only to eat with us, but even to stay
in the same Inn, or Lodging.

I find no answer returned to this letter; some thirteen years after, Honorius
Bishop of Rome did move the matter of new, and in his letters directed to the
Church of Scotland, Honorius writes to the Church of Scotland.
exhorted them; Ne paucitatem suam in extremis terrae finibus constitutam, Beda
l. 2. c. 19.
sapie^tiorem antiquis, sive modernis, quae per orbem terrae erant, Christi
Ecclesiis aestimarent; neve contra Paschales compu^os, and decreta Synodalia
totius orbis Pontificum, aliud Pascha celebrarent. That they being a few, and
seated in the utmost borders of the earth, would not think themselves more wise
then the Ancient or Modern Churches of Christ through the whole world; and that
they would not celebrate another Easter contrary to the Paschal compts, and
Synodal decrees of the Bishops of the whole world.

Pope Honorius dying, A letter from the Clergy of Rome to the Church of
Scotland.
Severinus that succeeded insisted for an answer, which was sent; Beda ibidem.
but he also departing this life, before the same came to Rome, the Clergy
there replied as follows: Dilectissimis and sanctissimis, Thomiano, Columbano,
Chromano, Dimao, Bathano Episcopis; Chromano, Hermanno, Laustrano, Stellano,
and Sergiano Presbyteris; Sarano, caeterisque Doctoribus seu Abbatibus Scotis:
Hilaricus Archipresbyter, and servans locum sedis Apostolicae, and Johannes
diaconus in nomine Dei electus, item Joannes primicerius, and servans locum
sanctae sedis Apostolicae, and Joannes servus Dei, Consiliarius ejusdem sedis
Apostolicae. Scripta quae latores ad sanctae memoriae Severinum adduxerunt, eo
de hac luce migrante, reciproca responsa, ad ea quae postulata fuerant,
siluerunt. Quibus reseratis^, ne diu tantae quaestionis caligo indiscussa
remaneret, reperimus quosdam provinciae vestrae contra orthodoxam fidem novam
de veteri heresin renovare conantes, Pascha nostrum in quo immolatus est
Christus nebulosa caligine refutantes, et quarta decima luna cum Hebraeis
celebrare nitentes. etc. Deinde exposita ratione Paschalis observantiae, de
Pelagianis subdunt. Et hoc quoque cognovimus, quod virus Pelagianae haereseos
apud vos denuo reviviscat: quod omnino hortamur, ut a vestris mentibus
hujusmodi venenatum superstitionis facinus auferatur. Nam qualiter ipsa quoque
execranda haeresis damnata est, latere vos non debet; quia non solum per istos
ducentos annos abolita est, sed and quotidiano nobis anathemate sepulta
damnatur; and hortamur, ne quorum arma combusta sunt, apud vos eorum cineres
suscitentur, That is, Hilarious the Archbishop conservator of the privileges of
the Apostolic See, and John the Deacon in the name of God elect of the same
See; likewise John the pronotary and conservator of the said privileges, and
John the servant of God, Counselor of the Apostolic See; to our best beloved
and most holy Bishops, Thomianus, Columbanus, Chromanus, Dimaus, and Bathanus;
and to the Presbyters, Chromanus, Hermannus, Laustranus, Stellanus, and
Serganus; also to Saranus, and the rest of the Doctors or Abbots of Scotland.
The letters which were brought unto Pope Severinus of blessed memory, have to
this time received no answer, by reason of his decease; We having now unsealed
them, lest questions of such consequence should be too long unsatisfied, do
perceive some of your Province to be renewing an old heresy, against the
Orthodox faith, and ignorantly refuse to celebrate our Easter, in which Christ
was offered, observing the fourteench Moon, after the manner of the Hebrews.
Then showing how, and when Easter should be observed, they subjoyn touching the
Pelagians these words: We further understand that the poison of Pelagian
heresy is again breaking out among you; wherefore we exhort you to beware, and
to keep your minds free of that venomous superstition; for ye should not be
ignorant how that execrable heresy is condemned^ and by us every day
anathematised; notwithstanding that two hundred years since the same has been
abolished: therefore we beseech you not to stir the ashes of those who have
had their Arms once burnt and consumed.

Beda setting down this letter says, Beda his judgment of the letter.
that it was full of learning and contained evident proofs that Easter should
be kept upon the Sunday which falls betwixt the 15. and 21. of the Moon;
Whereas it was the custom of the Scots Church to keep it upon the Sunday
falling betwixt the 14, and 20. which he calls an heresy, and takes our
Church to have been newly infected therewith; neither yet the whole Church, but
some certain in it only. But in this last he does not agree with himself; for
speaking afterward of Bishop Aidan, he thus excuses his disconformity with
Rome in the keeping of Easter, quod suae gentis authoritate devictus, that he
was overcome with the authority of his own Nation, and contra morem e^rum qui
ipsum miserant facere non potuit, and could not keep Easter contrary to the
custom of them who had sent him. So he ackowledgeth it to have been the
custom of the Scots Church, and not of a certain in it only. And whereas he
says that it was an error, or heresy newly sprung up, he greatly mistaketh;
for in the contention about the keeping of Easter, which grew afterward very
hot, we shall hear them plead the Antiquity of their custom, and derive it
from the very first times of the Church. But that we may know how this
contention grew, and who they were that withstood the alteration desired, we
must make a little digression.

The Saxons having overcome the Britains, and brought the country of England
to an Heptarchy by the partition they made of it, Buchan. l. 5.
were never quiet, encroaching still one upon another state, Boeth li. 9.
till at last one got all. Ethelfrid King of Northumberland the mightiest of
the whole, Lesl. li. 4.
after he had reigned 22. years with great ava^ice and cruelty, was killed by
Redwald King of the East Angles, and Edwin (whom he had expelled) placed in his
room this Ethelfrid left behind him seven sons: Eufred, or Eanfred, Oswald,
Ossaus, Oswin, Offas, Osmond, Osik, or Osrick, and one daughter named Ebba,
Buchan. l. 9.
who upon their fathers death fled into Scotland, and were liberally
entertained by King Eugenius the fourth, notwithstanding the enmity betwixt him
and their father whilst he lived. Eighteen years they remained in Scotland
exiled from their country, and were by the care of the same Eugenius
instructed in the knowledge of Christ, and baptized.

Edwin being killed in the 17. of his Reign by Penda King of Mercia, they
returned all home, Ebba only excepted, who remained still in Scotland. The
successor of Edwin named Osrick, parting the Kingdom with Eufred, the eldest
son of Ethelfrid, was made King of the Deirians, and Eufred King of this
Bernicians; these two turning Apostates, and forsaking the Christian
profession, which they had once embraced, were the summer following deprived
both of their lives and Kingdoms.

Oswald the second son of Ethelfrid did upon their deaths succeed in both the
Kingdoms, Beda l. 3. c. 5.
a noble and virtuous Prince, whose chief study was to promore Christian
Religion. To this effect he sent his Ambassadors unto Donald the fourth then
reigning in Scotland, and entreated him by the old familiarity that had been
among them, Cormanus sent into Northumberland.
to help him with some worthy and learned man, that could instruct his people
in the faith of Christ. The King recommending the matter to the Clergy, one
Cormanus was elected to go thither. But his labors proving unprofitable, he
returned about the end of the year, and in a Synod of the Bishops and Clergy,
informed that they were a people indocile, and froward, that the pains taken
upon them were lost, they neither being desirous nor capable of instruction.

It grieved the Synod exceedingly to hear this, and while they were consulting
what to do, Aidaus sent for the conversion of Northumberland.
Aidanus a learned man and reverend preacher, is said to have advised them not
to give over the work at any hands, for that the bad success of Cormanus
labors might possibly proceed from himself, that had not used the people
tenderly, nor according to the Apostles rule, fed them at first with milk; and
therefore desired some other approved man might be employed of new, who would
possibly do good among them.

This opinion allowed by all, none was thought fitter for this service then he
who had given the advice, Aidanus ordained Bishop, and sent into Northumberland.
and so with common consent was Aidan ordained Bishop, and appointed to that
charge. Being come thither, he set himself to amend the fault which he supposed
Corman had committed, and so tempered his doctrine, as multitudes of people
daily did resort unto him to be instructed. It was a great hinderance unto him
at first that he was not skilled in the Saxon tongue, neither did the people
understand his language; but this defect the King himself supplied,
interpreting to the auditory all that Aidanus delivered in his Sermons. So by
the Kings zeal and Aidanus his diligence, such numbers were brought to the
Christian profession, as in the space of seven days ^ifteen thousand persons
were by him baptized.

Whether this people was more happy in their King, The virtues of King Oswald.
or in this Bishop, it is difficil to say. For the King; he did so excel in
piety and prudence, that, as Beda writes, all the Nations and Provinces within
Britain, were ^t his devotion; and not the less, his heart was never lifted up
within him, An. 651.
but still he showed himself courteous and affable, and of the poor most
compassionate. Among examples of his liberality toward these, the same Beda
relates, That sitting at Table on Easter day, and Aidanus by him, when it was
told that a number of poor men were at the gate expecting his Alms; he
commanded to carry the meat that was set before him unto them, and the platter
of silver wherein it was, to be broke in pieces, and distributed among them.
Aidanus beholding it, took the King by the right hand, and kissing it, said,
Nunquam marcescat haec manus, never let this hand consume or wither. Which, as
he writes, came also to pass. For being killed in battle, and his arm and his
hand cut off, the same was enclosed in a silver shrine, and remained for many
years uncorrupted, in the Church of St. Peter at Bamborough. This and the other
miracles he reports, I leave upon the credit of the writer, who is too lavish
oftentimes in such fables and fictions.

As to Aidanus, The commendation of the Bishop Aidanus.
he was an ensample of abstinence, sobriety, chastity, charity, and all other
Episcopal virtues; for as he taught, so he lived, was idle at no time, nor did
he admit any of his retinue to be so, but kept them in a continual exercise,
either reading Scripture, or learning the Psalms of David by heart. If he was
invited to any feast (as rarely he went) he made no stay, but after a little
refreshment taken, got himself away. In preaching he was most diligent,
travailing through the country, for the greater part on foot, and instructing
the people, wheresoever he came. In a word, he was deficient in no duty
required of a good Pastor; and having governed the Church in those parts most
happily the space of 17. years, died in the Isle of Lindisfarne (now called
Holy-Island) the place he choosed for his residence; where he was also buried.

After his death, Finnanus succeeded Aidanus.
which happened in the year 651. Finnanus was ordained Bishop, and sent to the
Northumbers from Scotland: he followed his predecessor in all, and was greatly
troubled by Romanus, or Conanus (as other name him) about the observing of
Easter. This Conanus born in Scotland, had lived some years beyond Sea, and was
much taken by the Roman rites; for advancing whereof (so zealous he was that
way) he left his station in Kent, and coming to Northumberland, did challenge
the Bishop to a dispute. The Bishop answering, that he would not refuse to
dispute, but to admit an alteration in Church rites, whilst he lived, he would
not; the dispute ceased, and so for the time that he sat Bishop, Easter was
celebrated after the ancient manner of the Scots: Finnanus in the mean time
applying himself to better exercise, did work the conversion of the
East Saxons, and Mercians. For having baptized Penda the Prince of Mercia, he
sent with him four preachers, who reformed all that part of the country.
Divina, or Duina a Scottish man was one of those preachers, and consecrated
Bishop of Finnan in the year 656. In the catalogue of the Bishops of Lichfield,
I find him first placed. There succeeded to him, Kellach a Scottish man also;
but he renouncing his charge because of the contentions that arose, returned to
his country.

Now Finnan having governed the Churches of Northumberland the space of ten
years, Finnan dies, to whom Colman succeeded.
died in Lindisfarne, and was buried in a Church which he himself had there
erected: so great was the affection of these Northumbers to these preceding
Bishops, as they would accept of none other but a Scottish man. Whereupon
Colman was brought, The controversy about Easter wakened.
and placed in that See. In his time the controversy of Easter was again
wakened, and more hotly followed then before; great dealing there was to work
him to a conformity, but he would not forsake the course that his predecessors
had kept. After diverse conferences a public dispute was in end condescended
to, A dispute for the time of Easter.
for deciding the question. The place was chosen at Whitby, (Beda calls it
Sternshalt) a Religious house in Yorkshire, whereof Hilda a learned and devout
woman was Abbess; she was a professed adversary to all the rites of Rome,
especially Clerical tonsure; which made Colman more willingly to agree unto the
meeting. Oswy King of Northumbers, with Elfred his son, were present in person,
and many Ecclesiastic men of all degrees. The reasoners were Colman on the one
part, who was assisted by the Scottish Clergy, and Hilda the Abbess. On the
other part, Agilbert a Frenchman born, Bishop of the East Saxons, Wilfrid and
Agath. Presbyters, with Jacob and Romans, two learned men. Cedda lately
consecrated a Bishop by the Scots was choosed to be part is utriusque
interpres, that is (as I take it) the Recorder of all that should be spoken by
either party, or enacted in that conference, and meeting. The King himself did
incline to Colman, but his son favored the other party, for that Wilfrid had
been his Tutor.

When all were placed in their seats, Os^py King of Nu^thimbers his speech to
the di^puters.
the King using a short speech, said, That it was meet, they who served one
God, and looked to be heirs of one Kingdom in the heavens, should keep one
rule, and form, and not vary in their rites and ceremonies: Therefore desired,
seeing they were come together for composing of differences, especially
touching the celebration of Easter, that they should calmely enquire what was
the most ancient and best form, to the effect all might observe and follow the
same. Then turning toward Colman, Colman his reasons for the observing of
Easter after the Scottish manner
he willed him to deliver his opinion, and reasons; who answered, as follows.
The Easter which I observe, I received from my elders, who did send me hither,
and ordained me Bishop; all our forefathers, men beloved of God, are known to
have celebrated Easter in the same manner that I do; and if any think light of
this, the blessed Evangelist St. John, the disciple whom our Lord especially
loved, with all the Churches whereof he had the oversight, observed the same,
which to us is a warrant sufficient.

Agilbert being desired next to declare his mind, ^ilfrid his rep^y to Colman.
excused himself by the want of the English tongue, entreating the King the
Wilfrid might be allowed to answer for them all; which granted, Wilfrid began
in this sort: The Easter which we keep, we have seen observed at Rome, where
the holy Apostles Peter and Paul did preach, and suffered Martyrdom. As we
traveled through France and Italy, we saw the same order every where kept, and
by relation we hear, that the Churches of Africa, Asia, Egypt, Greece, and to
be short, the whole Christi^n world does observe the same time: only these men
and their followers, the Britains and Picts, with some remote Islands, and not
all these neither do foolishly contend in this point against the whole world.

Here Colman interrupting his speech, Colman interrupteth wilfrid for calling
their observation foolish.
said, It is a marvel you should call our doing foolish, seeing we follow the
ensample of that great Apostle who was held worthy to lie in the Lords bosom,
and is known to have lived most wisely.

Wilfrid replying, Wilfrid excusing himself, persisteth in his reply.
said, Far be it from me to charge S^. John with folly; he observed the rites
of Moses Law, according to the letter, the Church as yet Iudiazing in many
things, and the Apostles not being able to abdicate upon the sudden the whole
observations of the Law which God had ordained; for this cause did S^. Paul
circumcise Timothy, offer sacrifices in the Temple, and shave his head at
Corinth, with Aquila and Priscilla; which things he did only to eschew the
offense of the Jews. In this consideration, S^. James said to the Apostle St.
Paul, Thou see brother that many thousands of the Jews do believe, yet are
they all zealous followers of the law. But the light of the Gospel now shining
throughout the world, it is not lawful for a Christian to be circumcised, or to
offer carnal sacrifices unto God. Thus S. John keeping the custom of the law,
began the celebration of Easter upon the 14. day of the first month, at
evening, not caring whether it fell upon the Sabbath day, or any other day of
the week: But S^. Peter preaching at Rome, when he considered that the Lord did
rise from the death on the first day after the Sabbath, thought good to
institute Easter on that day. And that this is the true Easter to be observed
by all Christians, it is clear by the Nicene Council, which did ratify and
confirm the same by their decree. But you neither follow the example of St.
John, nor St. Peter, nor does your celebration of Easter agree either with the
Law o^ Gospel; for St. John observing it according to the Law, had no respect
to the first day after the Sabbath, whereas you keep not Easter but on the
first of the Sabbath; Saint Peter did celebrate Easter from the 15. of the Moon
to the 21. which you do not; for you keep Easter from the 14. to the 20. day,
and often you begin Easter on the 13. day at night, whereof the Law makes to
mention, neither did our Lord the author of the Gospel eat the Passover on the
13. day, but upon the 14. at night, and at the same time he did celebrate the
Sacrament of the New Testament in remembrance of his death and passion; So, as
I have said, you neither agree with Law, nor Gospel, with St. John, nor with
St. Peter, in the celebration of the greatest festivity.

To this Colman answered; Colman his answer.
And did Anatholius then, who in the Ecclesiastic history is so highly
commended, go against both the Law and the Gospel, when as he said that Easter
ought to be kept from the 13. day to the 20? or shall we think our most
reverent father Columba, and his successors who were all dear unto God, did
transgress in observing Easter after that manner? They were men of great piety
and virtue, and their miracles have declared; and I making no doubt of their
holiness, will endeavor to follow their order and discipline.

Then said Wilfrid, Wilfrid his reply.
It is known that Anatholius was a godly and learned man; but what have you to
do with him, that observe not his customs? for he followed the true rule of
keeping Easter, and observed the circle of 19. years, which either you know
not, or if you do, ye set at naught, although the same be observed in the
universal Church of Christ; he did so account the 14. day as he acknowledged
the same to be the 15. at night after the manner of the Egyptians, and so the
20. day he believed to be the 21. in the evening; which distinction you know
not, as appears by this, that sometimes you keep Easter on the 13. day before
the full Moon. As to your father Columba and his followers, whose rule and
precepts confirmed by miracles, you confess to follow, I may answer, That in
the day of judgment the Lord will say to many that prophesied in his name, did
cast out devils, and wrought other miracles, I know you not. But God forbid I
should speak this of your fathers, seeing it is better to believe good of those
we know not, then ill. Therefore I will not deny them to have been the servants
of God and be loved of him, seeing they served God with good intent, though in
simplicity. Neither do I think the order they keep in Easter did hurt them
much, so long as they had none among them, that could show the right
observation thereof; If the truth had been showed them, I doubt not they would
have followed the same, as well in this matter, as in others which they knew.
But if you and your associates should refuse the decrees of the Apostolic Sea,
or rather of the whole Church allowed by holy Scripture: now after you have
heard the same, without all question you sin heavily. Howbeit your fathers were
holy men, you must not think that a few dwelling in a corner of a remote Isle,
are to be preferred to the universal Church of Christ. And if Columba your
Father, yea and ours also if he was of Christ; was mighty in miracles, yet is
he not to be equalled to the Prince of the holy Apostles, unto whom the Lord
said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, against which;
the gates of hell shall not prevail; and will give unto the keys of the
kingdom of heaven.

The King who had hearkened diligently unto all which they spoke, The King
determines the question.
taking hold of these last words, asked Colman if it was so, that the Lord had
spoken these words unto Peter; he answered, that it was truth: And can you
show, says he, that the like authority was given to your Father Columba?
Colman answered, Not. Then said the King, Do both agree in this, that these
words were spoken to St. Peter, and that the Keys of the kingdom of heaven
were given to him: They answered that they did. Then said he, Seeing St. Peter
is the dorekeeper of heaven; I will follow his rule in every thing, lest when I
come to heavens gates, the doors shall be shut against me. These speeches of
the King, full of simplicity, were seconded with the acclamations of many of
the hearers, and the victory adjudged to the adversaries of Colman.

But he nothing moved therewith, Colman resigneth his place.
retained still his opinion, and would not change; yet fearing that some
trouble might arise, if he should make longer stay in those parts, he resigned
his Bishopric, in which one Tuda a Scottishman succeeded, who was content to
submit himself to the Roman observation of Easter, and to receive the Clerical
tonsure, but he lived not one whole year, and died of the Plague.

Colman returning into Scotland was welcomed by his countrymen; for he was in
great esteem, and bare no small authority, both in the Church and State, before
he went into England; Colman returns into Scotland. Buchan. l. 5.
as appeared in the insurrection made against King Ferqhard: the Nobility
having consulted to depose him from his Kingdom for the detestable cruelties he
had committed, by Colman his authority they were only kept back, who told
them, That the punishment of Kings belonged to God, and that he ere it were
long would take vengeanee of his wickedness: which as he foretold came to
pass; for the King after a few days being at hunting, happened to be bitten
by a Wolf, and falling into a fever, such a putrefaction ensued in his body,
that out of every part there issued abundance of lice, and vermin, which made
him abhorred of all men. Languishing in this consumption a long space, and
touched with a bitter remorse for his wicked life, he sent for Colman, to whom
he expressed a great sorrow for the ill life he had led, entreating the help of
his prayers, and to testify his humiliation, would needs be carried forth to
the next fields wrapped in sackcloth; where after an open confession made of
his wickedness, he was absolved by Colman, and shortly after yielded up the
ghost.

The memory of this, which was yet fresh in the minds of people, together with
the report of his constancy (for so it was interpreted) did purchase unto him
great love and reputation; but he making short stay at home, went soon after
into Ireland, where he built a Monastery for the English and Scots that
followed him thither. They not well agreeing, he bought a piece of ground and
founded a religious house for the English apart. Bishop Lesly in his Chronicle
writes, that after this he passed into Germany, and having traveled through
Boheme, Hungary, and a great part of Greece, as he returned by Austria, he was
killed by some Pagans in those parts: for this he cites Johannes Stabius the
Historiographer of Maximilian the first. But whatsoever became of him, he was
certainly a man of great integrity, and therefore much respected of all men.

After this time we find a continual declining in the Church; A declining in
the Church by the dissensions that grew in the same.
for the decision taken in that conference of Whitby, touching the controversy
of Easter, increased the dissension, and put all out of frame; they that were
in place urging the rites more strictly then was convenient, and others
choosing rather to quit their places, then to give way unto them. Theodorus
then Archbishop of Canterbury, is blamed for exercisiug the authority of his
place too peremptorily about these things, Godwin de Praesulibus Angliae.
and forcing the British Bishops to conform themselves; Wilfrid Archbishop of
York, dealing in like sort with the Scottish preachers, that had planted the
Gospel among the English, thrust them all from their places. Nam optione data,
maluerunt loco cedere, Buchan. lib. 5.
quam Pascha Catholicum caeterosque ritus canonicos Romanae Ecclesiae recipere;
It being given to their option, whether they would stay and admit the
observation of Easter, and other rites of the Church of Rome, they made choice
to leave their places and depart. The Clergy at home became also divided: for
Adamannus or Adamnanus a Bishop, who had been Tutor to Eugenius the sixth, being
sent in Embassage to Alfrid King of Northumberland, fell in such a liking of
the rites he saw there used, as at his return he became an earnest perswader of
his countrymen to receive them, and prevailed with many. Yet the Monks of
Iona, whose governor he had sometimes been, did strongly oppose; others that
loved not to be contentious, retired themselves; among whom Disybodius, and
Levinus are said to have been two: Disybodius going into Germany lived a Monk
in the Abbey of Fulden many years.

Adamannus, Adamannus a Bishop.
whom even now I named, is much commended for the care he took to keep the
Picts and Scots in peace, which albeit he did not effect according to his
desire (for they were ever making incursions one against another) yet so far he
prevailed, as during his life no public war arose amongst them. To bind the
two people in friendship, he was a means to make Eugenius the seventh take to
wife Spondana daughter to Granard King of Picts; but she not long after being
killed as she lay in bed, by two Athol men, that had conspired to kill the
King, and were mistaken in the execution; the friendship contracted had almost
turned into deadly enmity, because of a rumor that went, that she was made
away by the Kings knowledge. The Picts complaining of the injury done to their
blood, and many of the subjects apprehending it to be the Kings own fact, An.
689.
he was forced, with some indignity to his person, to plead his innocence in a
Parliament called to that purpose. It happened that in the mean time the
murderers were discovered and taken, and by the punishment they suffered, the
Kings innocence was sufficiently cleared; wherewith he not contented, would
needs be avenged of his subjects that had called his name in question. This
raised a great stir, and had doubtless burst forth in a civil war, if
Adamannus by his wisdom had not mitigated the King, and wrought the subjects
reconcilement. Beda speaking of this Adamannus says, that he was Vir ^nitatis
and pacis studiosissimus, a man most careful to preserve unity and peace: And
indeed he showed as much; for having the favor of the King, although he stood
divided in opinion from his brethren, he never moved him to use his authority
in these matters, as easily he might have done, judging as he did rightly,
uniformity to be a work of time, and that constraint and violence are not the
means to bring it to pass.

Chilianus, Chilianus:
or Kilianus, a man of great learning, taking a contrary course, fell into the
dislike of many, for his too great forwardness in advancing the Romish
ceremonies, and out of indignation conceived against those that maligned him,
left his place, betaking himself to travel with C^lonatus, or Columbanus, a
Presbyter, and Theotrianus a Deacon. After a v^ew taken of England, and France,
he took journey into Germany, and coming to Herbipolis, now called W^rtsburg,
where one Gosbertus governed as Deputy to Theodorick king of France, he was
informed that the Governor had lately taken Geilana his brothers widow to
wife; which he esteeming a great wickedness, and not to be endured where
Christianity was professed; he went to Rome, and meaned the matter to Pope
Conon; who liking well the zeal of the man, did consecrate him Bishop of
Wirtsburg, and sent him back thither. At his return showing the Governor what
an unlawful match he had made, he labored earnestly to have him dimit Geilana,
and was in likelihood to prevail: whereupon the malicious woman having conduced
some murderers to make him away, both he and his two companions were strangled
in their Chambers; and lest the fact should be disclosed, their bodies, books
and vestments, were all hidden under the ground. But God who never suffers
murder to be long concealed, brought the same shortly after to light, by the
means of one of her maids. Baron. in an^^ 689.
Whereupon Burchardus his successor made the corpses to be raised, and laid in
the great Church of the City, with these verses appended nigh unto their
Sepulcher.

Hi sunt, Herbipolis, qui te docuere Magistri,
Qua verum coleres religione Deum.
Impia quos tandem jussit Geilana necari,
Celavitque sub hunc corporacaesa locum.
Ne turpi, sine laud, situ defossa jacerent
Corpora, Burchardus sub monumenta locat.
But to proceed; as it falls out commonly at such times, Baron. in anno 632.
there were not a few that upon hope to raise their fortunes, and gain
preferment, were after this, still gadding to Rome. Baronius tells us in his
Annals of two of our countrymen, Wiro and Plechelmus, that came to Rome to
visit, as he speaks, Limina Apostolorum. Wiro he says had been earnestly
entreated to accept the charge of a Bishop, but it being a custom in the
Scottish Church first to elect their Bishops, Wiro and Plechelmus consecrated
Bishops by Pope Honorius.
then to send them to Rome for seeking confirmation; he took this occasion to
visit the holy City. But by the Cardinals leave, our Church had no such custom
before that time, nor will it be showed that before these two, any did go to
Rome, either to be consecrated, or confirmed. They indeed obtained what they
sought, and were consecrated by Pope Honorius, who used them with much respect;
that upon the report they should make, others should be allured to keep the
same course. Wiro returning, made an ample discourse of their entertainment,
and incited many to try the same way, yet made no long stay at home; for we
find him shortly after turn Confessor to King Pipin, with whom he found such
favor as he did build a Monastery in Franconia to the memory of St. Peter; An.
697.
and retiring thither in his age, did there end his days. What became of
Plechelmus I read not, only I find both him and Wiro present at a Synod in
Utrecht, A Synod at Vtrect.
called by Pope Sergius in the year 697. and in the Records, Plechelmus styled
Episcopus candidae casae.

There came about the same time into Scotland, Bonifacius an Italian came into
Scotland.
an Italian named Bonifacius, a grave and venerable person as he described, and
was judged by the vulgar sort to be the Pope; some has written that he was
elected successor to Gregory the great, but declined the charge out of a
desire to promove religion in these Northern parts. I rather think he came
hither to confirm our acquaintance with the Roman Church. As ever that was,
for the pains he took in preaching the Gospel, and the Churches he erected in
this Kingdom, he deserves of us an honorable remembrance. For landing in the
River of Tay at the mouth of a little water that divided the countries of
Angus and Mermis, he there built a Church to the memory of St. Peter the
Apostle, another not far from thence, he built at Telin, and a third at
Restennoth; and having finished these works, he did visit the countries of
Mar, Bughan, Murray, and Bogieland, preaching the Gospel whithersoever he
came, neither did he rest till he came to the country of Ross, and choosing
Rosmarkie for the place of his residence; erected there a Church, where after
his death he was buried. Molochus a learned Bishop of his country, taking
delight in his company, followed him in all these ways; and that he should not
be separate from him in death, gave order that he should be interred in the
same Church and near unto Boniface; for he outlived him many years, and died in
the 94. of his age, his bones were afterward translated to Lismore in Argile,
because of his labors employed in reforming that Church.

Whether or not I should mention among these, Bonifacius made Archbishop of
Mentz.
that Boniface who was by Gregory the second preferred to be Bishop of Mentz, I
know not, so many writers affirming him to have been born in England; but of
what country soever he was, none did ever adventure more for the Pope then he
did; for he is said to have brought the Bavarians, Thuringians, Hessians, and a
great part of Germany more, to submit themselves in all matters Ecclesiastic
to the Sea of Rome; yet was he therein greatly opposed (besides some Germans)
by two of the Scottish Nation, Clemens and Sampson, who at the time remained in
those parts. These did openly in their Sermons inveigh against him as a
corrupter of Christian doctrine, charging him, First, for that he studied to
win men to the subjection of the Pope, and not to the obedience of Christ. 2.
That he labored to establish a sovereign authority in the Pope his person, as
if he were only the successor of the Apostles, whereas all Bishops are their
successors as well as he. 3. That he went about the abolishing of Priests
marriage, and extolled the single life beyond measure; and, 4. That he caused
Masses to be said for the dead, erected Images in Churches, and introduced
diver rites unknown to the ancient Church. For this Clemens in a Council holden
at Rome, was excommunicated and condemned for an heretic, The sentence is to
be seen in the third Tome of the Councels, wherein none of these particulars is
mentioned, but other false aspersions are cast upon his fame, as has been the
custom of handling those, that oppose the corruption of the Roman Church.
Bonifacius always going on in his course, and seeking to make the like
reformation amongst the Frizons, was with 54. of his followers killed in the
64. year of his age, and has therefore a chief place in the Roman
Martyrologie.

But this did so little terrify others, as about the same time certain
Scottish Monks, did adventure upon the Saxons, to bring them under the Popes
obedience; Palto, Tanco, Korvila, and Haruchus, (so they name them) being
consecrated Bishops of Verden in Saxony, one after another, did all of them lay
down their lives in that quarrel; Quasi exoptante^ coronam Matyrii, says
Bal^us; longing for the Crown of Martyrdom, and counting it their glory to
suffer in the Bishop of Rome his cause. Nor were they Monks only that were so
given, but even of the Bishops, Sedulus and Pergustus were vehemently set that
way, and having assisted in a Synod called at Rome, by Gregory the second, in
the year 721. (as their subscriptions extant in the books of Councels do
testify) after their return, made great disturbance in the Church for the
erecting of Images, and put diverse preachers from their livings for resisting
that course.

In all this time, which is not a little to be admired, the Eremitical life was
in such esteem, not with Clergymen alone, but with the greatest Nobles and
Princes, that they forsaking their honors and dignities, betook themselves
thereto, as the most contented and desirarable sort of life. Of these last our
stories do name Drostanus, the Uncle, or as others say, the Nephew of King
Aidanus; Prince Fiacre, the second son of Eugenius the fourth, and Florentius a
Gentleman of honorable birth and estate, who did all, nigh at one time,
sequester themselves from the world, not out of any grief or discontent,
whereof they had no cause, but upon a mere apprehension of the vanity of
worldly greatness. The story of Fiacre.
The story of Fiacre, as Boeth rehearses it, is especially memorable. This
Prince being committed to the education of Conanus Bishop of Man, after he came
to some years, did steal away privately to France, and his intention being
discovered to Pharo, Bishop of Meaux, he had by his gift a little Cell in a
solitary place appointed for him. There separating himself from all company he
spent his time wholly in prayer and divine contemplation. It happened after a
little time, his elder brother King Ferquhard to be deposed for his Tyrannical
government; whereupon Commissioners were sent to recall him as being the next
heir of the Kingdom. He getting intelligence of their coming, did betake him to
his prayers, and with many tears besought God to confirm his mind in the
resolution he had taken, and divert them by some means from disturbing his
rest: So as when they came unto him, he appeared unto them leprous; looked so
deformed, as they were amazed to behold him; but they (notwithstanding this,
did not judge him unfit for government) resolved to deliver their Commission,
entreating him to return to his country, where he would find the air more
healthful, and in a short time by the help of Physicians recover his health.
Fiacre at first excusing himself by his infirmity, when he perceived them
insist for his return, and relinquishing that sort of life; did cut them off
with this answer: I have, said he, made choice of this condition of life, which
you see, and am contented with this little Cell for my dwelling, these garments
(pointing to his apparel) serve me for clothing, and my food is a simple
pottage of herbs, which I dress to my self; more I desire not, nor would I
change this state of life with the most fortunate King in the world. I seem to
you deformed, yet is my body sound, and my blood uncorrupted, but it is the
will of God I should look so, that I may be kept humble, and learn to amend my
life. Go you therefore home and show my brother and the Noblemen that sent you
hither, that I live content in this private manner, and will not change it with
any state whatsoever; and from me, desire them to serve God purely, to live
justly, and entertain peace among themselves: which if they do, they shall be
always victorious over their enemies. This said, he withdrew himself into his
Cell, and they finding that there was no means to prevail with him, departed.

The Commissioners at their return making report of that they had seen, and his
resolution; his only sister Syra was so much moved with it, as taking with her
some Virgins in company, she went to visit him, and after some conference
rendered self and those that came with her religious in the city of Meaux. This
Fiacre is the same, to whose memory diverse Churches in France are dedicated,
and is said to have died in the year 665.

Florentius (whom I named) taking the like resolution went into Germany, Bal.
cent. 14.
and in the country of Alsatia upon the River Hasel, built a little Chapel
for his private use, where he lived, retired from all company, and purchased to
himself great reputation. It happened Rathildis the daughter of Dagobert King
of France to fall sick in the time, of a disease that deprived her both of
sight and speech, and being recommended to Florentius prayers, she within a
little while recovered. Whereupon King Dagobert did build a magnifick Abbey,
called yet The Abbey of Haselah, and committed the Government thereof to
Florentius. There was difficulty enough to win him from his solitary life,
yet so earnest were the solicitations used unto him, that in end he yielded,
and was after that made Bishop of Strasburg, upon the death of Rotharius.
Twelve years he governed that See most wisely, giving proof of his virtue, and
worth, as well in the active, as contemplative life. Before his death he
founded a Monastery for Scottish men at the river Bruschius in Alsatia, and
placed therein Argobastus, Theodotus, and Hidolphus, who had accompanied him
from Scotland, his body according as he directed, was there interred after his
death.

Never did this country abound more in learned men, then at this time; our
writers speak of Mocharius, Glacianus, and Gervadius, Bishops of great
reputation: they name likewise Divinicus, Conganus, Dunstanus, Medanus, and
Modanus, as famous men all for their piety and learning. But they that King
Achaius sent to Charles the Great, upon his earnest entreaty, did excel all
the rest; Johannes Scotus, Claudius Clemens, Rabanus Maurus, and Flaccus
Albinus, otherwise called Alcuinus; these four he sent with Prince Gulielme his
brother into France, at the time of the league made with that people, which to
this day remains inviolate: and by them it was, that the University of Paris
was first founded. The Universities of Paris, and Pavia, founded by Scottish
men.
Scotus after he had stayed some years at Paris, was employed by the same
Charles for founding an University at Pavia, and was in great respect with all
(the Roman Church excepted) who could nto away with the liberty he used in his
reproves of the errors then springing up: his Treatise of the Eucharist, a
pious and learned work, was by Pope Leo the ninth condemned in Synodo
Vercellensi in the year 1030. long after his death. Claudius Clemens was
afterward preferred to the Bishopric of Auxew, where he lived to his death in
great esteem.

Alcuin, Alcuin.
commonly held to be Charles the Great his Master, was made his Eleemosynar,
and lived in special credit with him. The book that came forth under Charles
his name against Images, was thought to be penned by him; for he was a man of
great learning, as the many books left by him to posterity do show. Ubique
pius, ubique doctus, says Balaeus, succinctus, gravis, and ante multos alios
praecipue dignus, qui in manibus hominum habeatur. The English writers will
have him born in their country, not far from the city of York; To which I
only say, that the English at that time, being adversaries to the French and
Scots, speaking of them as common enemies to both people; it is not probable,
if he had been of the English Nation, that he would be so inward with Charles
the Great.

Rabanus Maurus was his Auditor many years, Rabanus Maurus.
and under his hand grew to such perfection of learning, that it is said, Quod
nec Italia similem, nec Germania aequalem peperit; That neither did Italy breed
his like, nor Germany his equal; Tantam viri eruditionem, says Bruschius,
omnes Bibliothecae nobis commendant; and quantum ingenio valuerit, edita ab eo
valumina demonstrant. Bibliothecam enim Fuldensem tanta librorum multitudine
lacupletavit, ut dinumerari vix queant. All Bibliotheques do witness the rare
erudition of that man, and what a fertile ingenie he had, the volumes published
by him do show. The Library of Fulden he enriched with such multitudes of Books
as can scarce be numbered. And certainly who shall but read the catalogue of his
works, will wonder how any one man should in his life have penned so much, and
upon so diverse subjects; for besides that he did illustrate the whole Books of
Scripture with his Expositions, he left a number of profitable tractates in
every Science to posterity. After Clemens was gone from Paris, he continued in
the University some years; and being made Abbot of Fulden, upon a displeasure
he conceived against the Monks, he went to the Court of Ludovicus the Emperor,
where he had not long attended, when upon the death of Otgarius Archbishop of
Mentz, he was elected to the government of that See. Ten years he ^ate Bishop
having no opposition made to him, nor to his doctrine, though he taught no
other then what is with us in these times taught and professed; as in his work^
yet extant may be seen.

In this reckoning we must not forget our countreyman Maidulphus Scotus,
Maidulphus Scotus. Camdens Antiquities.
who was of great fame in these days, for his skill in training up the youth in
letters, and kept a public school at Caerbladon in Wiltshire, there being as
yet no University in England: he also is said to have been a strong defender of
the Bishop of Rome his authority, and placed in that part by Eleutherius Bishop
of the West Saxons, for withstanding the British Doctors that opposed the
Roman rites. After some time bestowed that way, embracing the Monastical life,
he erected an Abbey at Malmsbury, which Aldelin his disciple and successor did
much increase: and from him it is thought that Malmsbury took the name, An. 800.
being at first called Maidulphsbury, or Maidulps city.

We are now at the 800. year, Wars renewed between the Scots and the Picts.
or thereabout, when as the wars were renewed betwixt the Scots and the
Picts, which brought in end the utter subversion of that people; I mean the
Picts. Their Kingdom had continued near 1200. years, under the Reign of 65.
Kings, and was fortunate enough till the days of King Feredeth; who I know not
by what ill counsel bare an heavy hand upon the Church, and made spoil of her
rents, especially of the ornaments bestowed by his predecessor King Hungus
upon the Church of St. Andrews: the occasion of these troubles I shall briefly
set down after I have remembered the magnificence of Prince Gulielme, which
ought never to be forgotten. Religious houses founded by Prince Gulielm.
After the league contracted with France, which he was sent to ratify, he
followed Charles the Great in all his wars, performing notable services,
especially in Italy, where he was made Lieutenant for the King; upon the end of
the wars, being grown in age, he went to Germany, resolving to bestow his
means (which were very great) in founding religious houses, which he did at
Coleyn, Boeth li. 10.
Franckford, Vienna, Herford, Luneburg, Wirtsburg, Muleren, and Ratisbone:
fifteen Abbeys and Hospitals they reckon, founded by him; some in Italy, but
the most part in Germany: all which he endowed with a reasonable proportion of
lands and rents, but with this Proviso, that none should be admitted therein
but Scottish men born. This for many years according to his appointment was
observed, and even at this time, notwithstanding the manifold alterations that
have happened, there be some of these foundations that are no ways changed from
their first institution. They also may possibly decay, yet the magnificence of
that Noble Prince, shall ever be recorded to his everlasting honor.

And now to the occasion of these troubles I mentioned; Hungus King of Picts
supplied by Achaius King of Scots.
There reigned in the time of King Achaius amongst the Picts, Hungus a Prince
well inclined, and a great lover of Religion and Justice. Athelstane King of
the West Saxons, having usurped upon diverse of his neighbors, and enlarged his
Kingdom by subduing the Northumbers, did likewise invade the Picts, intending
the conquest of that part of their Kingdom, which lay next unto his. Hungus
hereupon did move King Achaius, who had married Fergusiana his sister, for some
supply; and he no less offended with Athelstans oppressions, then was Hungus
himself, sent to his aid ten thousaud men, under the leading of of Prince Alpin
his son. Hungus supplied with this power; entered into Northumberland, and
having made great depredations, returned home with a rich booty; Athelstan
following upon his heels, overtook him at a little Village not far from
Hadington; which put Hungus in a sore fright, for a great part of his Army was
dismissed and gone home; yet not seeing a way to eschew the fight, he gave
order for the battle against the next day, and in the mean time betook himself
to prayer, spending most part of the night in that exercise. A little before day
falling into a slumber, it seemed to him that the Apostle St. Andrew stood by
him, and assured him of the victory; which vision being related to the Army,
did much encourage them. The History adds, that in the joining of the battle
there appeared in the air a Cross, in form of the letter X; which so
terrified the enemies, as presently they gave back: King Athelstane was himself
there killed, whereupon the Village took the name, which at this day it
enjoys of Athelstan Foord.

Hungus to express his thankfulness for the victory gave to the Church of
Regulus, Hungus his thankfulness for his victory.
now called St. Andrews diverse rich gifts, as Chalices, Basins, the Image of
Christ in gold, and of his twelve Apostles in silver. He gave likewise a case
of beaten gold for preserving the Relics of S. Andrew, and restored to the
Spirituality the tithes of all corns, cattle, and herbage within the Realm;
exempting them from answering before any temporal Judge. Further, he did
appoint the Cross of St. Andrew, to be the badge and cognizance of the Picts,
both in their wars and otherwise; which as long as that Kingdom stood, was
observed, as is by the Scots as yet retained. But all this was spoiled, as we
said, by Feredeth the third in succession from Hungus, after which time nothing
prospered either with him, or with that people.

For the line masculine of their Kings failing, Alpin the son of Achaius did
claim the Crown as next in blood by virtue of an old Covenant betwixt the Scots
and Picts; the Picts refusing to accept him being a stranger, made choice of
this Feredeth, The Scots claim the Kingdom of the Picts.
whom we named; and thereupon war was denounced. The first encounter was at
Restennoth in Angus; where in a cruel fight, which continued from the morning
until night, Feredeth was killed: his son Brudeus who succeeded, was made away
by the Picts themselves in the first year of his reign, and Kenneth his brother
that succeeded to him, came to the like unfortunate end. After Kenneth, another
called Brudeus was elected King; and he in a battle fought not far from
Dundy, took King Alpin and many of his Nobles prisoners: which victory he used
most foully, putting all the Nobles to death, killing the King, and causing his
head to be set upon a pole in Abernethy, or as others write, in the city of
Camelon.

The Picts upon this victory supposing that they had utterly broken the courage
of the Scots, Kenneth utte^ly overthrows the Picts.
did purpose nothing less then their extermination, which after the death of
Brudeus, his brother Drusken that succeeded, went earnestly about. But Kenneth
the second the son of Alpin, a Prince of a brave and heroic spirit, pursued so
hotly the revenge of his fathers death, as having defeated the Picts in diverse
battles, he drove them all in the end forth of the Kingdom, and united that
Crown to his own of Scotland. This Kenneth was a most wise and valiant King,
and so circumspect in his business, that from that time forth none of the
Picts were ever heard to resume the title of a King: The countries which they
inhabited, he divided amongst the Nobles, and others, whose labors in these
wars had merited a recompense. He established good and wholesome Laws. To
the Church he gave another face, Boeth li. 10.
and a greater outward splendor then the former ages had seen, translating the
Episcopal See (which whilst the Pictish Kingdom stood, was settled in
Abernethy) to the Church of St. Reul, and ordaining it from thenceforth to be
called The Church of S. Andrews, Lose. l. 5.
and the Bishop thereof Maximus Scotorum Episcopus, The principal Bishop of
Scotland: Churches, Chapels, and Oratories, with their Priests, and all sorts
of religious men he caused to be held in great reverence; and in a word, did so
nobly perform all actions, both a War and Peace, as he may rightly be placed
amongst the best Kings, and reckoned the third Founder of the Scottish Monarchy.

THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Contents.
The Succession of Bishops in the several Sees of this Kingdom, especially in
the Sea of Saint ANDREVVS, with other principal things that happened in their
times.

HAving made a collection of such things as I found dispersed in stories, The
succession of Bishops in this Church after the subversion of the Picts.
and warranted in any sort, for the first six hundred years of our Church, and
being now come to the time wherein this Church by enlarging of the Kingdom
received a further extention in bounds, and therewith an addition of more
wealth, and state; I will, as beginning with a new account, follow the story
thereof by the succession of Bishops, especially in the Sea of Saint Andrews,
upon which the rest did depend.

The first Bishop who fate in this See, Adrian the first in this account killed
by the Danes.
was Adrian, killed by the Danes in the Isle of May, in the year 872. An. 872.
with Stolbrandus a Bishop, Monanus an Archdeacon, Glodianus a Presbyter, and a
number of other Churchmen, who fled thither for their safety. Whilst this
Bishop lived, Constantine the second the son of Kenneth did keep a convention
in Scone, A convention at Scone for reformation of the State.
for reforming the disorders which the loose and dissolute government of his
predecessor Donald the first had caused. In that convention beginning was made
at the Clergy, and concerning them it was ordained, That they should reside
upon their charges, An. 860.
and have no meddling with secular business. That they should instruct the
people diligently, and be good ensamples in their conversation. That they
should not keep Hawks, Hounds, or Horses for pleasure. That they should carry
no weapons, nor be pleaders of civil causes, but live contented with their own
provisions. And if they were tried to transgress in any of these points that
for the first fault they should be fined in a pecuniary mulct, and for the
second deprived from their office, and living. Thus was it not held in that
time a diminution of Ecclesiastical authority, for Princes to give Laws to the
Clergy, and to punish them, if they were found guilty of any offense or crime.

Diverse other statutes for redressing abuses crept into the Realm, Statutes
for redressing abuses.
were then also concluded: as, That drunkenness should be punished with death,
that none should eat above one meal a day, nor accustom themselves to lie
softly, or use any recreations, but such as might inure them to sufferance and
labor. Whereby that good King did banish all riot and luxury, and in a short
time brought the Kingdom again to a flourishing estate. But the Danes (as we
said) invaded the country, and practicing many cruelties whilst he did pursue
them, who had entrenched themselves not far from the Town of Carrail, he was
unfortunately with all his Army overthrown; An. 904.
and being taken prisoner the day following, beheaded at the mouth of a little
cave, which in detestation of that fact, is to this day called The Devils Cave.

2. Unto Bishop Adrian succeeded Kellach; how long he lived, I find not.

3. After him Malisius governed the Sea by the space of eight years. Scon. l.
2. in Catalogo Eipis. S. Andreae.
This Bishop had the happiness to live under Gregory called the Great, a King
endued with all the virtues that can be wished for, or desired in a King. The
privileges and immunities granted by him to the Church, King Grego^y his
favors to the Church.
do witness his piety; for in a convention held at Forfare, by an unanime
consent of his Estates, he ordained, That all Priests should from thenceforth
be exempted from paying tribute, Boeth l. 10.
keeping watch, and going in warfare. That they should not be drawn before
temporal Judges for any civil cause, but that all matters concerning them
should be decided by their Bishops; the judgment of Matrimonial causes, right
of Tithes, Testaments, Legislatory actions, and all things depending upon
simple faith, and promise, should be committed to the Bishops, with power to
them to make Canons, and constitutions Ecclesiastical, to try heretics,
blasphemers, perjured persons, and Magicians, and censure such as they did
find delinquent in that kind; And that all Kings succeeding should at the time
of their coronation, take oath for maintaining the Church in their liberties.
These favors had the Clergy in the following ages used with that moderation
and equity which they ought, we should not have seen nor felt the interruptions
that have been made upon Church liberties, with the encroachments which in our
time have been justly complained of.

In this time lived that famous Scholar Ioannes Scotus, Io. Scotus called
Aerigena.
called Aerigena, from the place of his birth, which was the town of Air in
the West parts of Scotland. This man being very young, went to Athens, and
followed his studies there some years, attained to great perfection in the
Greek, Boeth l. 10.
Chaldaick, and Arabic languages. Returning afterward to France, at the
request of Carolus Calvus, he translated in Laetine the work of Dionysius de
coelesti Hierarchia; Lesl l. 5.
at which Pope Nicolaus took exception, and wrote to King Charles on this
manner. Relatum est Apostolatui nostro, quod opus Dionysii Arepagitae, quod de
divinis nominibus, vel coelestibus ordinibus, Graeco descripit eloquio, quidam
vir, Joannes genere Scotus, in Latinum transtulit: quod juxta morem nobis
mitti, and nostro debuit judicio approbari; praesertim cum idem Joannes, licet
multae scientiae esse praedicetur, olim non sanus in quibusdam frequenti rumore
dicatur. We have been informed that one called John of the Scottish nation has
translated the work which Dionysius the Areopagite did write of the names of
God, or of the heavenly Orders, into the Latin tongue: which book ought
according to the custom, have been sent to us, and approved by our judgment;
especially since the said John, albeit he be esteemed of good learning, has
been of long time held to be unsound in certain points of doctrine. Now the
point which the Pope did chiefly quarrel, was his opinion of the Sacrament; for
he had published a Treatise, De corpore and sanguine Domini, wherein he
maintained Bertram his doctrine of that point. Scotus having knowledge of this,
and thinking he could not be safe in those parts because of the Popes dislike,
came into Britain, and was welcomed by King Alfred a great favourer of learned
men, by whom he was employed to teach the languages at Malmsbury Abbey, and by
some Scholars who could not endure the severity of discipline, was stabbed to
death in the year 884. and buried in the same Abbey.

4. Bishop Malisius dying, Kellach the second, the son of one Ferlegus
succeeded in his place: he was the first Bishop of this Kingdom that went to
Rome to seek confirmation, King Constantine the third forsakes the public
life.
and lived to a great age, for he sat Bishop 35. years. In his time
Constantine the third King of that name, wearied with the troubles of a public
life, renounced his temporal dignity, and betook himself to solitude among the
Culdees in St. Andrews; with whom he spent his last five years, and there died.

After this Killach these successively were Bishops. Paslet. l. 6. c. 27.


5. Malmore.

6. Malisius the second.

7. Alwinus, who fate three years only.

8. Maldwin the son of Gillander, and

9. Tuthaldus.

In this time the coelibate of the Clergy was violently urged, An. 977.
and married Priests thrust from their livings; which raised great stirs in
the Church, but the particulars are not recorded, Camd, ant.
nor the broils which thereupon insued. I read in the Antiquities of the
Britannick Church, that in the year 977. a Council was gathered at Calne in
Wiltshire for that business, to which Beornellus a Bishop of Scotland was
called by Alfrithe the widow of King Edgar, who favored the cause of married
Priests. This Bishop, a man of great learning and eloquence, is said to have
defended the conjugal life of Priests by solid reasons taken out of Scripture,
and to have put all the opposites to silence. But Dunstane the Archbishop, who
presided in that Council, when he saw that reason could not bear out the
earand, fell a threatening, and said that notwithstanding all their arguments
they should not carry away the victory; which he had no sooner spoken, then the
beams of the house wherein they sat at Council, bursting asunder all were
overturned, and fell headlong to the ground; many were bruised, and some killed
with the fall; Dunstan himself only escaped without harm, the beam whereon he
stood remaining whole and entire. Such as favored the cause of Monks, did
interpret this accident to be a sentence given by God on their side; others
said that Dunstan had wrought this mischief by sorcery, (for many supposed him
to be a Magician.) However it was, the married Priests (though repining) were
forced indeed to yield and submit themselves. What became of Beornellus, I read
not, nor whether he returned to his country.

The names of some other Bishops we have, who were in good account at that
time, such as Blaanus, Englatius, Colmocus, and Moveanus Confessor to King
Kenneth the third, a wise and valiant King, and one who might have been
reckoned amongst the best Princes* if about his latter end he had not stained
his fame with the murder of Malcolm his Nephew, whom he made away by poison;
but the ambitious desire he had to settle the succession in his own posterity,
let him to work this villainy: which he carried in so covert a manner, as no man
did once suspect him thereof (the opinion of his integrity being universally
great:) but as wicked facts can never be assured, though possible they may be
concealed; his mind was never after that time quiet, the conscience of the
crime vexing him day and night with continual fears. In end (whether it was so
in effect, or if his perplexed mind did form the self such an imagination)
whilst he lay asleep, he heard a voice speaking to him in this sort: Do
thou think, that the death of Malcolm that innocent Prince treacherously
murdered by thee, is hidden from me, or that thou shall pass any longer
unpunished? No, there is a plot laid for thy life which thou shall not escape:
and whereas thou did think to transmit the Crown firm and stable to thy
posterity, Boeth l. 11.
thou shall leave the Kingdom broken, distracted and full of trouble.

The King awaked with the voice was stricken with great terror; in the morning
early calling Moveanus, he laid open to him the grief and vexation of his
mind: who giving the King his best counsel for the pacifying of his
conscience, Buchan. l. 6.
did advise him to bestow alms upon the poor, visit the graves of holy men,
have the Clergy in greater regard then he was accustomed, and perform such
other external satisfactions, as were used in those times. The King following
his directions did carry himself most piously, not thinking by these outward
deeds of penance to make expiation for his sin; for they were not become as yet
so grossly ignorant, as to believe that by such external works the justice of
God is satisfied; albeit some idle toys, such as the visiting the graves of
the Saints, kissing of Relics, hearing of Masses, and others of that kind,
which Avarice and Superstition had invented, were then crept into the Church;
yet people were still taught, that Christ is the only propitiation for sin, and
that by his blood the guilt thereof is only washed away. King Kenneth murdered
in the Castle of Fettercarne.
This being still the doctrine of the Church, to think that Kenneth was any
other, is scarce charitable. Always as he was visiting the grave of Palladius,
being invited to lodge in the Castle of Fettercarne, he was there treacherously
murdered. But to return to our Bishops.

10. Fothadus succeeded next after Tuthaldus, a man greatly respected for the
opinion conceived of his holiness. An. 1004.
In the competition which Grimus had with Malcolme the second for the
succession of the Crown, by his wisdom and the trust they reposed in him,
Buchan. l. ^.
they were brought to an agreement, and a most perilous commotion stayed. Scon.
li. in Catalog. Episc. S. Andrews.
How long he sat Bishop, is not recorded; in his time lived Vigiamus a Monk,
an eloquent Preacher, Coganus an Abbot, and Onanus a Deacon, men of especial
account.

11 After the death of Fothadus, Buchan. l. 6.
Gregorius was elected and consecrated Bishop: he lived in a troublesome time;
for soon after his election, the Danes did of new invade the country, Boeth l.
11.
and landing in Murray, had such success at first, as they did think to make
conquest of the Realm. But Malcolm the second having repulsed them at a battle
fought at Pambride in Angus, The Danes defeat at Mu^t^lack in Angus by Malcolm.
did pursue them unto Buchane, where at a Village called Murthlack he gave them
an utter overthrow, and forced those that escaped to swear, that during the
reign of Malcolm, and the life of Swane their King, they should never return
into Scotland.

To memorize this victory, An Episcopal See at Murthlack.
the King did Found an Episcopal See at Murthlack, enduing the same with rents
forth of the adjacent lands: and calling the Clergy to an assembly in the Town
of Bertha, (now Perth) he enacted by the advice of Bishop Gregorius diverse
Canons for their better government. At the same time in a convention kept at
Scone, to reward those that had done well in the late wars, he gave away all
the Crown lands, reserving little or nothing to himself. The Barons to requite
his liberality, did grant to him and his successors Kings of Scotland, the
Ward of all their lands, with the benefit that might accrue by the marriage of
the heir. But this being casual and uncertain, proved unsufficient for
maintaining his Royal estate, so that necessity (the sure companion of
immoderate largition) did force him to make unlawful shifts: Boeth l. 11.
whereby he came to be as much hated in end, Past. l. 4. c. 44.
as he was loved at first; and by some villains that thought themselves wronged
by him, was murdered in the Castle of Glammes after he had reigned 30. years.
Before his time the titles of Thane and Abthane, Buchan. l. 6.
were the only titles of honor and dignity in the Realm: whereas he to give a
greater splendour to the State, did introduce all these offices which are now in
use, and are commonly called Offices of Estate.

Duncan the first his Nephew by Beatrix his daughter succeeded to the Crown,
An. 1034.
whose weakness and simplicity made way to Mackbeth his Cousin-germans
usurpation; Buchan. l. 7.
for he conspiring with Bancho a man of great place, deprived the King both of
his Crown and life, in the seventh year of his reign. The Kings two sons,
Malcolme, Boeth l. 12.
surnamed Canmore, and Donald Bane, fearing the cruelty of the Tyrant, withdrew
themselves and fled; Malcolme into Wales, and Donald into the West Isles. Thus
none being to oppose, Mackbeth did assume to himself the Crown, and for the
first ten years governed the Kingdom better with justice then he got it.
Afterward growing suspicious, and seeking to rid himself of those that might
prove his enemies, he began his cruelty at Bancho, who had an hand with him in
the Kings murder: and inviting him on a night to supper with his son Fleanche,
as they were returning to their lodgings, made some lie in the way to murder
them. Bancho doubting no harm was killed, but his son Fleanche through the
darkness of the night escaped. The Nobles detesting this treachery, and
fearing it might turn to be their own case, retired home to their dwellings.
Mackbeth finding himself to be forsaken of his Nobles, and knowing that he was
hated by the people, fell then to practice open Tyranny, and forging quarrels
against the better sort, did upon light causes put diverse to death.

The Thane of Fife, called Mackduffe, a man of great power, out of a suspicion
he conceived fled into England; where meeting with Malcolme the lawful heir of
the Crown, after he had exponed the misery whereunto the country was brought
by the cruelties of Mackbeth, and the reasons of his own flight, did persuade
him to return and repeat his Fathers Kingdom. Malcolme who often before had
been solicited to return, by such as Mackbeth did suborn: made answer, That he
understood all these things to be true which were related; but if, said he, ye
knew how unfit I am for government, you would not be so earnest as you seem, to
call me home; for not to dissemble with you, An. 1057.
whom I esteem my friend, the vices which have overthrown many Kings, Lust and
Avarice, do reign in me: whilst I live obscure, and in a private sort, these
faults are not espied; A discourse between Mackduffe and Malcolme.
but if I were in place of Rule, the same would soon appear, and break forth.
Mackduffe replying, That these were no reasons to keep him back, for that
marriage and time would quench Lust; and for avarice, when he should have
abundance, Boeth. l. 12.
and be out of fear of want, it would cease. That, said he, possible may be,
Pas^. l. 5. c. 3, 4.
but I have an imperfection greater then these; for I can trust no man, and
have found such falsehood in the world, as I am jealous of every one, and upon
the smallest suspicions, (for I measure every man by my self) I break and alter
all my courses. Away then, Scotichron. l 7.
said Mackduffe, I am unfortunate, and thou unworthy to Reign: and with this
word he made to depart. Then Malcolme taking him by the hand, said, I do now
know thou art a man worthy of trust, and will not refuse to undergo any hazard
with you; for as to these vices we have been talking of, I thank God none of
them do reign in me, only I speak this to discover your mind and disposition.
Thus both agreeing upon the enterprise, they gave private notice to their
friends of their coming; and obtaining a supply of ten thousand men, from King
Edward under the leading of Sibard Earl of Northumberland, Malcolmes
Grandfather by the Mother, they entered into Scotland. The rumor of this Army
did cast Mackbeth into a great terror, and not knowing what to do, (for he was
deserted of all) he shut up himself at first in the Castle of Dunsinnan, a Fort
that he had lately built. The Army marching thither, how soon they came in
sight, Mackbeth out of a new fear forsook the Fort, and made to fly by horse;
but being pursued by some of Malcolme his friends, he was overtaken and killed.

Upon this victory Malcolme was declared King, and crowned in Scone the 25. of
April, 1057. Buchan. l. 7.
Soon after his Coronation, calling the Estates together at Forfar he restored
the children of those that Mackbeth had forfeited: and to correct the
intemperances of the people, and to recall them to the ancient frugality, made
diverse good statutes, repealing that beastly Act of Eugenius the third, which
appointed the first night of the new married woman to appertain to the Lord of
the ground, and granting the husband liberty to redeem the same by payment of
an half Mark of silver, which portion they call Marchetas mulierum, and is as
yet disponed by superiors in the Charters they give to their vassals.

In this Convention likewise the Bishops, Dioces appointed by the Bishops.
who, as we showed before, did indifferently administrate their functions in
all places to which they came, had limits appointed to them for the exercise of
their jurisdiction. To Saint Andrews was committed the oversight of Fife,
Louthian, Merce, Striveling-shire, Angus, and Mernis. Glasgow had the charge
given him of the West parts and Borders; Galloway this country which yet
bears the name: and Murthlack all that is now of the Diocy of Aberdeen.
Cathnes and Murray erected by King Malcolme the third.
Besides these, the King did erect Murray and Cathnes in two Bishoprics,
appointing able men for the discharge of the service, and providing them with
maintenance sufficient, he gave the Lordship of Momemusk, the superiority
whereof belongs as yet to that See. The Church of Dunfermling he built from the
ground, and laid the foundation of the Cathedral in Durham, advancing great
sums to the perfection thereof. In all which, he was much furthered by that
blessed Lady Queen Margaret his wife.

That we may better know this Lady, The History of Queen Margaret, and her
marriage with King Malcol^.
and how she came to be married unto Malcolme I must relate a few things
belonging to that purpose. Edmond King of England surnamed Ironside, being
treacherously killed at Oxford, Canutus a Dane, who reigned in a part of that
kingdom, attained the absolute dominion of the whole. This Edmond left two
sons, Edwin and Edward, whom Canutus in the beginning entertained very kindly,
but afterward seeking to establish the Crown in his own posterity, he sent
them to Volgarus the Governor of Swain to be murdered. The Governor pitying
the estate of these innocent youths, conveyed them secretly unto Solomon King
of Hungary, giving out to Canutus that they were made away; Edward (surviving
Edwin his brother) married Agatha sister to the Queen of Hungary, and daughter
to the Emperor Henry the second, by whom he had a son called Edgar, and two
daughters, Margaret and Christian. After Canutus his death succeeded Harold his
eldest son, whose reign was cruel and short, and four years only. And after him
Hardicanutus, who died suddenly in the second year of his reign, and was the
last of the Danes that ruled in England.

Upon his death Edward brother to Edmondlronside living then in Nomandy, was
recalled and Crowned King of England at Winchester, in the year 1042. This is
he that is called Edward the Confessor, a most pious King, who having no issue,
sent to Hungary for his Cousin Edward, and for his children. Edward soon after
his coming died, so Edgar surnamed Atheling remained, to whom King Edward would
willingly have resigned the Crown; but such was the modesty of that young
Prince, as he did absolutely refuse to reign during the King his life: That
lost him the Crown, for upon the death of the King, Harold son to Earl Godwin
was preferred, Prince Edgar his right utterly misknown. But Harold his reign
continued not long. William Duke of Normandy commonly called the Conqueror,
having killed him in a battle fought in Sussex the next year, usurped the
kingdom to himself. Edgar fearing the Conquerors cruelty, took sea with his
mother Agatha, and his two sisters, Margaret and Christian, intending to return
into Hungargy, but were by Tempest driven upon the coast of Scotland, where
King Malcolme that had learned by his own sufferances to compassionate the
distresses of others, did most courteously receive them, and shortly after
their coming took Margaret the eldest sister of Edgar to wife, a Lady of rare
virtue; who though she brought him little or no portion, made both him and his
kingdom happy.

How soon the Norman had settled his dominion in England, he sent to King
Malcolme to require Edgar his competitor and fugitive (as he termed him) to be
rendered. Malcolme refused, holding it an unseemly deed in a King, to deliver
any person that took their refuge to him, King Malcolm and the Conqueror at
War.
much more to betray a Prince allied to himself, unto his mortal enemy.
Hereupon War was proclaimed, and one Roger a Nobleman of Normandy sent to
invade Northumberland, which was then in the possession of the Scots. Richard
Earl of Gloucester did second him with a great power, but both these were put
to the worse. Odon the Normans brother, who of a Bishop of Bayeux was made Earl
of Kent, as likewise his own son Robert, whom he employed with several Armies,
did prosper no better; so as wearied of the wars, he began to think of peace:
Peace concluded amongst them.
neither was Malcolme unwilling unto it; and after some treaty, it was
accorded, That King Malcolme should retain Cumberland with the same right that
his predecessors did enjoy it: and that the subjects of each kingdom might
know their limits, and how far they were to pass; a stone-crosse was erected
in Stammore, which was called the Ree Cross, that is, the Cross of Kings; for
on the North side thereof, the Arms of the King of Scotland were graven, and
upon the South, the Arms of the King of England.

This peace held firm all the Conquerours time, The contrary disposition of
King Malcolm, and William Rufus.
but William called Rufus his son succeeding, it quickly dissolved; neither
could it be otherwise, considering the contrary disposition of the two Kings;
for as Malcolme was religiously given, and a great Benefactor to the Church, so
Rufus in all his carriage, manifested no affection that way: For to enlarge his
Forest at Winchester, he demolished thirty Churches, and forced Anselme that
good Bishop of Canterbury to quit the kingdom, for the liberty he used in his
reprehensions. It was also thought that the interview of the two Kings at
Gloucester did further their dislike (as has been often observed to fall out
in the meetings of Princes.) For Malcolme departed from him in displeasure,
Rufus by some secret practice got the Castle of Anwick, whereupon arose the
war; in which King Malcolme and Prince Edward his son did both perish.

A little before the beginning of this war, Bishop Gregorius dies.
Bishop Gregorius died, and in his place one called Edmundus was elected, who
deceased before his consecration.

12. After him Turgot Prior of Duresme was chosen Bishop: Turgot elected in his
place.
he wrote the history of King Malcolme, and Queen Margaret, who some few days
after the death of the King her husband, Buchan. l. 7.
departed this life in the Castle of Edinburgh, and was buried in the Church of
Dunfermlin; whither also the bodies of Malcolme and Edward his son were
afterward translated; for at first they were buried in Tinmouth Abbey.

Never was more lamentation made for the death of two Princes, An. 1117.
then was for this Queen and her husband, Malcolme. To speak of his piety,
justice, and magnanimity, The virtues of King Malcolm the third.
he outwent in all these the Princes of his time: and for courage, he gave a
noble proof of it in the first entry of his reign, when upon a conspiracy
detected against his life, riding one day in the fields, he called the chief
conspiratour; and taking him aside from the rest of the company unto a secret
place, he did challenge him as a Traitor, willing him, if he had any valor, to
show the same, and rather take his life in an honest manner, then
treacherously. The man confounded with the boldness of the King, fell upon his
knees and entreated pardon; which the King granted, retaining him still in his
service as before. The magnificence of his Court whilst he lived was great;
and in the State to distinguish the degrees of Honor, he introduced the titles
of Earl, Baron, and Knight, in the place of Thane, and Abthane, which were the
titles before in use.

His Queen Margaret was in her place no less famous in all the virtues that
became women, The praise of Queen Margaret.
devout toward God, charitable to the poor, and exceeding liberal in the
advancing of public works. The Church of Carlisle she built upon her own
charges; and was esteemed not to be the least cause of all that the King her
husband bestowed that way. By her the King had a fair issue, six sons, and two
daughters; Her issue by King Malcolm.
the first called Edward, died with his father at Anwick; the second called
Edmond, did render himself religious; Etheldred the third deceased young: the
other three, Edgar, Alexander, and David, reigned successively one after
another; continuing all of them in the same course of goodness. The names of
the two daughters, were MAUD, and MARY. MAUD entering into the Cloister, wherein
Agatha her Grandmother, and Christian her Aunt lived retired; was with much
difficulty won to descend into the world, and to be joined in marriage with
Henry the first King of England; a Lady of incomparable virtues, and of so good
a disposition, Buchan. l. 7.
as she was commonly termed MAUD the good Queen. Having lived 17. years with
her husband in great love, Sa. Daniel in his Collection.
she deceased at Westminster the first of May, 1118. and was buried on the
right hand of Edward the Confessor his Tomb, with this Epitaph affixed.

Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem:
Aspera risus ei, prospera terror erant.
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam:
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
Maii prima dies nostrorum nocte dierum,
Raptam perpetuum fecit inire diem.
The other sister MARY was married to Eustathe Earl of Boloign, who went to the
recovery of the Holy Land, with that noble Prince GODFREY his brother, she bare
to him one only daughter, named MAUD, who was afterward matched to Stephen King
of England, and departed this life at London three years before her sister,
having her corpse interred at Bermondsey Abbey in South^ark, with this
inscription.

Nobilis hic tumulata jacet, comitissa Maria:
Artibus hac nituit, larga, benigna fuit.
Regum sanguis erat, morum probitate vigebat;
Compatiens inibi, vivat in arce poli.
Thus much we owed to the memory of those good and glorious Princes, and now
return; Turgot after he had governed the Sea of St. Andrews with good
commendation some 25, or 26. years, Scon. lib. in Catalog. Epis^ S. Andrews.
died in the year of our Lord 1117. his corpse according to his appointment, was
honorably conveyed to Duresme, and there interred.

In his time lived Veremudus Archdeacon of St. Andrews, a Spaniard by nation,
and well learned according to those times; he wrote the history of Scotland,
from the beginning of the kingdom unto the reign of Malcolme the third, An.
1098.
and is greatly commended for his diligence and fidelity in that work, but by
the injury of time the same is lost.

In Germany much about the same time lived Marlanus, Paternus, Ammichadus,
Sigebertus, and Helias, all of them Scotch men, and well respected. This last
had the government of two Monasteries in Coleyn, called S. Pantale and S.
Martin. The severity and rigor that he used toward his Monks, brought him in
dislike with Pilgrinus Archbishop of the City, who upon some false informations
determined to expulse him and all the Scottish Monks that were in the City,
after his return from the Emperors Court, where he was for the time. This
being reported to Helias, he is said to have uttered these words; Si Christus
in nobis peregrinus est nunquam viuas Coloniam veniet Piligrinus: which falling
out according to his prediction purchased to him the reputation of a Prophet.
After that, he lived many years in peace, and died at Coleyn in the year 1042.

Sigeberius having governed the Monastery of Fulden some years, was preferred
to the Archibishopricks of Mentz, and being urged by Gregory the seventh,
called Hildebrand, to depose the married Priests that would not separate from
their wives, was in danger to be detruded by his Clergy, and had much ado to
cause that Law of single life to be embraced by them.

Ammichadus a man nobly born, and greatly affected to the solitary life, lived
a Recluse in the Abbey of Fulden, spending his time in the meditations of
morality, and died in the year 1043.

Paternus was a Monk in the City of Potelbrum, which in the year 1058. was
consumed with fire: Ambiens Martyrium, says Marianus, in a foolish affection
of Martyrdom, refusing to come forth of the Monastery, was therein burnt alive.

Marianus, Marianus.
he was first a Monk in the Monastery of St. Martin at Colyn, founded by
Ebergerus the Archbishop of that City, for a Seminary of Scottish students, in
the year 676. and having continued there two years, went to the Abbey of
Fulden, where he lived ten years. After that he went to Mentz upon the
Archbishops visitation, and stayed there some 15. years. All this time he
employed in the study of letters, especially of Story and Chronology, wherein
he attained to such a perfection, as he was accounted the only Chronologist in
his days; the Chronicle he wrote from the beginning of the world, unto the
year of Christ 1183. yet extant, does testify no less. He died at Mentz in
the year 1186. and was buried in the Church of St Martin within the City; and
thus much for the learned men of our country, that lived in the time of Turgot.

13. Next after Turgot Godricus succeeded in the Sea of Saint Andrews: this
Bishop did anoint King Edgar the son of Malcolme, in the year 1098. after the
manner of other Christian Princes; which rite had not been formerly used in the
Coronation of our Kings, and (as they write) was obtained from Pope Urban the
second, at the request of Queen Margare^: for the Popes of Rome having as then
advanced themselves above Kings, did take on them the conferring of these
Ensigns of Majesty to whom, and where they pleased. This Edgar was a good
King, and greatly beloved of all his subjects. King Edgar erected the Abbey of
Cauldingham in a Priory.
The Abbey of Cauldingham, which in former times had been a sanctuary of
Virgins, he gave to the Church of Duresme, but upon the ungrate behavior of
Ranulph Bishop of that See, a man noted of much corruption, he recalled his
gift, and erected the same into a Priory.

Upon the death of Godricus, King Alexander the Fierce, seeks advice of the
Archbishop of canterbury.
King Alexander surnamed the Fierce, sent to Radolph Archbishop of Canterbury
to have his advice for the promoving of some worthy person unto the place; and
in his letters directed to that effect, complained of the Archbishop of York
his encroaching upon the Church of Scotland, through the oversight of Lanfrank
Archbishop of Canterbury, that had given way to the consecration of some of the
Bishops of Saint Andrews at York, whereas in old times they were not wont to
receive Consecration, but either from the Bishop himself, or from the
Archbishop of Canterbury; Therefore desired his assistance in redressing that
abuse, which he said he could not any longer tolerate. Now this Radolph was at
the same time in question, with Thurstan the elect of York for his
consecration, to which by no means he would assent, unless Thurstan would make
profession of obedience to the Sea of Canterbury. The Archbishop of Canterbury
and York at difference.
And about that was so much business made, that Radolph, though he was then
both aged and sickly, did undertake a journey to Rome, to debate his right. At
his return, which was some four years after (so long did the Sea of Saint
Andrews remain void) the King sent to him Peter Prior of Dunfermlin, and one of
his own Gentlemen to congratulate his safe return, and request that Eadmerus a
Monk of Canterbury, a man well reported of, might be sent hither, for filling
the place. Radolph knowing that Eadmerus had neither by himself, nor by any
other indirect means moved the business, and so taking it to come of God;
howsoever it grieved him, that the Church of Canterbury should lack the benefit
of his service; gave his consent, and having obtained King Henry his license
(without whose knowledge he would not have him go into a strange country) sent
him to Alexander with an ample recommendation, Archbishop of Canterbury his
letter to king Alexander.
in substance this: We give unto God (said he) everlasting thanks, for that it
has pleased him to open the eyes of your mind, and make you know and seek that
which you should; and to your Highness self we esteem our selves greatly bound,
because of your friendly and familiar usage: for albeit your desires tend to
our hurt, and are not less grievous to us, then if you should pull out our
eyes, or cut off our right hand, we cannot but commend your desire, and so far
as we may in God, obey the same. Therefore unwilling, and yet willing, we yield
unto your will; willing in so far as we perceive it is Gods will which we
dare not withstand, nor will we in any thing willingly displease; yet
unwilling, for that we are left alone, and deprived of his fellowship, who as a
Father ministered unto us consolation in time of grief, giving us sound advice
in many perplexed cases, and was to us a most helpful Brother in this our
infirm and old age. If any other should have required him of us, we would no
more have parted with him, then with our own heart; but there is nothing, which
in God we can deny you. Thus we send unto you the person that you desired, and
so free, as you may lay on him what charge you will, so as it be to the honor
of God, and to the credit of the Mother Church of Canterbury. Do therefore what
you purpose wisely, and remit him unto us with diligence to be consecrated,
because delay in that errand may breed impediments, that we desire to eschew,
etc.

Eadmerus bringing with him this Commendatory letter, Eadmerus hist. l. 5. and
6.
was the third day after his coming elected Bishop by the Kings license, and
with consent both of the Clergy and Laity; but the next morning whilst the
King conferred with him apart touching his consecration, he began to magnify
the Church of Canterbury, and the authority it had over all the Churches of
Britain; declaring that by his leave, he would seek the Episcopal benediction
from the Bishop, and not receive it at the hands of any other: King Alexander
offended that Eadmerus would not be consecrated in Scotland.
which offended the King greatly; for by no means could he endure to hear of
this Churches subjection to the English. Thereupon the Monks who had been
trusted in the years preceding with the intromission of the rents, were
charged to uplift the same, and to impede the elect his possession. Yet within
a few days the King going in an expedition against some rebels in the country
of Ross, He is invested in the Bishopric by the intercession of the Noblemen.
by the intercession of Noblemen it was agreed that Eadmerus should receive the
Ring out of the Kings hand, and the Crosier being laid upon the Altar, he
should take up the same, and that way be invested into the Bishopric. In this
sort was he entered to his charge, the Clergy and people accepting him for
their Bishop.

Mean while, Thurstan the Archbishop of York opposes the consecration of
Eadmerus.
Thurstan the Archbishop of York, who was then beyond sea, ceased not to
solicit King Henry of England by his letters to impede the consecration; for
which effect, three several messages were sent to King Alexander. Eadmerus upon
the distaste the King had taken of him, was not much respected: which he
perceiving, and withal considering that the King being his unfriend, his
service could not be very profitable to the Church and Kingdom, resolved to go
unto Canterbury, and seek the advice of his brethren and friends in those
parts. This signified to the King, he said that the Bishop had nothing to do
with Canterbury, nor so long as he lived should any Bishop of Scotland profess
subjection to that See. An. 1124.
Which being reported to the Bishop, he replied in passion, That not for the
Bishopric, nay not for all Scotland, would he deny himself to be a Monk of
Canterbury.

Falling thus more and more in the dislike of the King, Eadmerus departs into
England upon the Kings dislike.
and jarres daily increasing, he employed the Bishop of Glasgow to try the king
his mind toward him: who told him that he found the King greatly displeased
with his courses, and if he continued in the same mind, he was not to expect
his favor. Hereupon Eadmerus resolving to depart, delivered back the Ring
which he had received from the King, and laid down his Crosier upon the Altar,
with a protestation that he was forced thereunto, and so went away. The King
did by his Letter purge himself to the Archbishop of Canterbury, declaring that
it was not his fault, but wilfulness on Eadmerus his part, which made him
relinquish his charge. But the Archbishop a man of courteous nature not willing
further to enquire of the reasons of Eadmerus his departure, passed over the
business with a gentle answer to the King for that time. I find upon better
advice, that Eadmerus made offer to return, and give the King satisfaction in
all he required; but herein he was prevented by a new election, which the King
had caused to be made.

15. For how soon it was advertised that Eadmerus had a purpose to return, He
purges himself to the Archbishop.
the King for his own peace did think it most sure to have one of his Subjects
preferred to the place; and so recommending to the Chapter Robert Prior of
Scone, he with an uniform consent was chosen Bishop, and stood elect two years
(for before King Alexander his death, Robert Prior of Scone elected Bishop of
Saint Andrews, and consecrated at York.
which happened in the year of our Lord 1114. he was not consecrated;) then he
received the benediction at the hands of Thurstan Bishop of York, with
reservation of the privileges of both Churches which if the King had lived,
would not have been permitted; for he was a Prince that stood much upon his
royalty, The Abbey of Scone and Saint Columbe founded.
and would not endure at any hand the least encroachment either upon his
Kingdom, or upon the Church. The Abbeys of Scone and S. Columbe were founded
by this King. To the Sea of S. Andrews he was a great Benefactor, and gave the
lands called Cursus apri, Cursus Apri given to Saint Andrews.
the Boars chase, and was resolved to do more in that kind, if he had not been
taken away by death.

But what may be thought lacking in him was abundantly supplied by his brother
and successor King David, King David succeeded to Alexander, and his
beneficence to the Church.
whose beneficence that way exceeded all others; for besides the repairing of
these Monasteries which was either by age become ruinous, or were defaced by
injuries of war, he erected the Bishoprics of Rosse, Brichen, Dunkeld and
Dumblane, with the Abbeys of Iedburgh, Kelsoe, Melrose, Newbottle,
Halirudhouse, Kinlosse, Combuskenneth, Dundrennan and Holmecultram in
Cumberland; he founded likewise two religious Houses at Newcastle, one for the
Benedictins, another for the white Monks; and for professed Virgins, two
Monasteries, one at Berwick, and another at Carlisle: all which he provided with
competent Revenues.

Some of our Writers have taxed this most worthy King for his immoderate
profusion, King David taxed of profusion.
as they call it, on these Monasteries; and Holinshed says that his
unmeasurable liberality toward the Church, made his Successors oppress their
Nobles at home, lay impositions upon the people, and do many other things
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, that they might have wherewith to maintain
their royal estates. But herein he erreth greatly, for let an examination be
taken of the behavior of our Kings in the ages succeeding, it will appear that
their proceedings either with their own Subjects at home, or with their Enemies
abroad have been more justifiable then the doings of any of their Neighbors:
neither can it be showed, that any one of them did ever take those indirect
courses which he mentions, for penury or want. But it is easy to speak ill,
and deprave the actions of the best Princes.

It is true, that profuseness in any person, especially in a King, is not to
be allowed, His magnificence vindicate from these ^spersions.
for that it brings a great mischief both to the King and Subjects; but the
bestowing of sixscore thousand Franks (that is the highest estimate they make
of his donations) cannot be called an immoderate profusion. He was certainly a
most wise King, and knew well his own work, and could proportion his Gifts to
his Revenues. Neither was his liberality an hindrance to his Successors in the
doing of the like pious works; An. 1159.
for Malcolm who succeeded did erect the Abbey of Couper in Angus, Santray in
Lothian, and a religious house at Manwell for professed Virgins. King William
erected the Abbey of Aberbrothock, and his Queen Emergarda the Abbey of
Balmerinoch. The like did the following Kings in their own times, which showed
that he did not leave his Successors destitute of means to support their royal
estate. This further will I boldly affirm, that if there be any profusion
excusable in Princes, it is this: for besides that these foundations are the
most lasting monuments to glorify their memories, they are the readiest helps
which they shall find to supply their necessities at all occasions.

Now whereas some have disapproved these donations because of the fruits that
ensued, Buch. l. 7.
meaning the abuses that crept in by the corruption of the persons, who did
afterward enjoy them; The faults of person ought not to be cast on things
abused.
if this reason should hold, the best of Gods creatures, and the most pious
institutions which ever were in the world, should be all condemned; for what is
it that was ever put in the hands of men to use, that has not been corrupted?
and to cast the faults of men upon the things themselves, is a great iniquity.

But this superfluous enriching of Monasteries whereof they speak, Whence the
superflous enriching of Abbeys proceed.
came not by this mean. The foundations at first were moderate, and no way
excessive; but in after t^mes the Prelates growing sluggish, and shaking off
the care of preaching, as a work not beseeming their dignity, they to flatter
the Predicans, who had then all the way among the popular, and to be
recommended of them for charitable and devout Prelates, gave away almost all
their own Churches, and impropriated them to Abbeys, Buch. l. 7.
leaving a poor Priest to do service in the Parish: and of this did spring a
world of evils, which since that time could never be remedied. This I thought
needful to be said for vindicating the same of that good King, who in all his
actions, both private and public, lived beyond all censure, so as it is truly
said of him, That the most learned wits who have gone about to frame the
character of a good King, could never devise nor imagine such a one, as he did
express himself in the whole course of his life.

But to follow our purpose; Bishop Robert living under this King, and some six
years after, Bishop Robert dies.
did carry himself in all the parts of his charge commendably; he founded the
Priory of S. Andrews, and obtained to the City the liberties of a Burgh Royal,
placing therein one Mainard a Fleming to be Provost, and departing this life in
the year 1159. after he had sat Bishop 35. years was buried in the Church of
S. Rewle, the Cathedral not being as yet built.

There flourished in this time two of our Countrymen, Richardus de sancto
Victore with David a Presbyter.
Richardus de sancto Victore a Channon regular of the order of S. Angustine,
and David a Presbyter. This David lived in Germany, and was chosen by the
Emperor Henry the fifth to accompany him in that expedition which he made to
Italy against Pope Paschal; the Story whereof he wrote, as likewise a Treatise
de regno Scotorum, both which are perished.

Richardus was a professor of Divinity at Paris in the Abbey of S. Victor a
great Philosopher, and left many books that witness his learning, the Titles
whereof you may read in Baleus. He died in the same Abbey, and was buried with
this Epitaph: Moribus, ingenio, doctrina clarus, and art,
Pulvereo hic tegeris, docte Richard, situ.
Quem tellus genuit foelici Scotica partu,
Te fovet in gremio Gallica terra suo.
Nil tibi Parca ferox nocuit, quae stamina parco
Tempore tracta gravirupit acerba manu.
Plurima namque tui super ant monumenta laboris,
Qua tibi perpetuam sunt paritura decus.
Segnior ut lento sceler atas mors pelit aedes:
Sic propero nimis it sub piatecta gradu.


16. Bishop Robert deceasing, Walthemius Abbot of Melrosse was earnestly
entreated to accept the Charge, but would not forsake the Monastery, saying,
That he had washed his feet, and could not contaminate them again with the dust
of earthly cares. Whereupon Arnold Abbot of Kelso was elected, and in presence
of King Malcolm the fourth consecrated by William Bishop of Murray. This Bishop
had been the year preceding directed to Rome with one Nicholaus the Kings
Secretary, to complain of the Archbishop of York his usurpation upon the Church
of Scotland, and being then returned, carried himself as Legate to the Pope;
which power he resigned to Arnold after his Consecration, as he was enjoined by
Engenius the third, who then held the Chair.

In a Convention of the Estates kept the same year, Arnold did earnestly insist
with the King to make choice of a wise for assuring the royal succession, and
to that effect made a long speech in the hearing of the Estates; but the King
had taken a resolution to live single, and would not be diverted. Edward Bishop
of Aberdene was much blamed for confirming him in that course, and for that
cause hated of many. The Cathedral of S. Andrews, a fair and stately Church
whilst it stood, was founded by this Arnold, but before the work was raised to
any height he died, having sat Bishop one year, ten months, and seventeen
days only.

17. Upon Arnold his death the King did recommend his Chaplain Richard to the
place, who was immediately elected by the Convent, but not consecrated for the
space of two years after, because of the Archbishop of York his pretensions.
One Roger held at that time the Sea of York, a man ambitious beyond all
measure, who from being Archdeacon of Canterbury was by the means of the
Archbishop Thomas Becket preferred to that place; no sooner was he advanced,
but he procured of Pope Anastasius the fourth a Bull, whereby he was designed
Metropolitan of Scotland; but the King and the Clergy (notwithstanding the
Popes authority was in those days greatly respected) refused to acknowledge
him. Anastasius dying, by whom the Archbishop Roger was maintained, the
Prelates of Scotland did convene, and by themselves performed the Consecration.
Roger incensed herewith sent to Rome, He cites the Scottish Clergy to Norham.
and complaining of this contempt, found the favor to be made Legate of
Scotland: by virtue whereof, he caused cite all the Scottish Clergy to appear
before him at Norham in England, whither he came in great pomp.

Angelramus Archdeacon of Glasgow (accompanied with Walter Prior of Kelso, The
Clergy by some Delegates appeal to Rome to the Pope.
Solomon Dean of Glasgow, and some others of the Clergy) went and kept the
Diet, and in the name of the Church of Scotland appealing to the Pope, took
journey to Rome. Pope Alexander the third gives sentence for Scotland.
Where the business being debated before Pope Alexander the third, sentence was
given against Roger his pretended Legation, and the Church of Scotland declared
to be exempted from all spiritual Jurisdiction, the Apostolic See only
excepted. This exemption Angelramus, who in the mean time was promoted to the Sea of Glasgow by the death of Bishop Herbert, Angelramus elected Bishop of
Glasgow.
and consecrated at Rome, brought back and presented to the King. The Bull is
yet extant, and begins thus:

Alexander P. servus servorum Dei Malcolmo Regi etc.

A few days after the Bishops return King Malcolm died at Iedbrough, King
Malcolm the fourth his death.
in the 25. year of his age, and 12. of his reign: a sweet and meek Prince,
uncourteously used by King Henry the second, King of England, but more rudely
by his own Subjects. This Henry, by nature ambitious, and one that could not
keep himself within bounds, took many ways to wrong this good King, and make
him despised of his own people; yet for that he had sworn to King David,
Malcolms Grandfather, that he should never molest him, nor any of his posterity
in the possession of the lands they held in England, and could not for shame go
against his oath; A Bishop placed at Carlisle by the Archbishop of York.
he stirred up the Bishop of York to place a Bishop at Carlisle, thinking the
King of Scots would not endure that wrong. John Bishop of Glasgow, under whose
charge the Country of Cumberland then was, did exceedingly offend with this,
and finding that the King would not break with Henry for so little a cause, nor
seeing a way to repair himself, abandoned his charge, and went unto the
Monastery of Tours in France, where he abode till he was forced by the Popes
authority to return.

King Henry finding this injury dissembled, Buch. l. 7.
went afterward more plainly to work; An. 1165.
for having desired Malcolm to come to London to do homage for the lands he
held in England, he compelled him to follow him in the War he made upon
France, Boeth. l. 13.
thinking thereby to alienate the mind of the French King from the Scots.
Again, when he had returned home, inviting him of new to a Parliament kept at
York, upon a forged quarrel, as if he had crossed King Henry his affairs in
France, he was declared to have lost all his lands in England: And not content
to have wronged him in this sort, to stir up his own Subjects against him, made
the report go, that King Malcolm had voluntarily resigned all those lands.
Which did so irritate the Nobles, as presently after his return putting
themselves in Arms, they did besiege the Town of Bertha, where the King
remained, and had not failed to use violence, but that by the intercession of
some wise Prelates matters were composed. The Nobility being grieved to see the
King so abused, did urge him to denounce war, but he loving rather to have
matters peaceably agreed, was content to accept Cumberland and Huntington, and
suffer Northumberland to go to King Henry. This displeased the Subjects, and
diminished much of the regard that was formerly carried to him, which he took
greatly to heart, and shortly after died, as was thought, of displeasure.

The good King being thus taken away, Buch. l. 7.
his brother William succeeded in the year 1165. The first thing he undertook,
was the repetition of Northumberland; for which Ambassadors were sent to King
Henry. His answer was, That he should have right done him at his coming to
London, King William secketh to have Northumberland restored.
after he had performed his homage for the Countries he held in England. King
William taking journey thither with David his younger brother, found the King
at his Easter in Windsor: where insisting for the restitution of
Northumberland, he had many good words given him, and promise made, that at the
meeting of the Parliament a course should be taken to his content. In this hope
he followed King Henry, going then in expedition to France, and staid there
with him some months; but when he perceived the King was not shortly to return
unto England, and that he was sed only with fair promises, he took his leave
and came home. Presently after his return, he sent an Herald to denounce war,
unless Northumberland were restored. King Henry being then engaged in the
French wars, and not willing to make himself more business, was content to
quit that part of Northumberland which King William his great Grandfather had
possessed. Yet suddenly forethinking what he had done, he stirred up underhand
those that lived in the Borders to make incursions upon the Scots. This being
complained, and no redress made, King William raised an Army, King William
surprised at Anwick.
and went into England, and at Anwick as he was taking the air, suspecting no
Enemy to be at hand, he was surprised by some English, and sent Prisoner to
King Henry in France, Boeth. l. 13.
who put him in the Castle of Calice in Picardie, where he was some months
detained. A great dysaster this was, and how grievous to the whole State, may
appear by the Articles condescended upon, for obtaining his liberty, which were:

1. That for his redemption there should be paid one hundred thousand pounds
sterling money, the one half in hand, the other half after a short time; and
for assurance thereof, the Counties of Cumberland, Huntington and
Northumberland be morgaged to King Henry.

2. That the Scots should move no war against England for retention of these
Counties.

3. And for the more security the Castles of Roxburgh, Berwick, Edinburgh and
Sterling should be delivered to the King of England, or unto such as he should
appoint to receive the same.

Hollinshed sets down other Conditions besides these: as, Hollinshed History
of Scotland.
That the King of Scots should acknowledge the King of England for his supreme
Lord; That the Prelates of Scotland and their successors should be subject to
the Church of England; And that the Lords and Barons of Scotland should swear
fealty to the King of England and his successors: which are mere forgeries, it
being certain that the Scots, howsoever they loved their King, and for his
liberty would not refuse to undergo very hard conditions, yet would never have
renounced their liberties, maintained so long and with so much blood, An. 1175.
and yielded themselves in any case to such a slavish subjection. Always the
agreement concluded in Normandy the 8. of December 1175. by Richard Bishop of
S. Andrews and diverse Noblemen sent thither to treat in that business, was at
August thereafter confirmed in York by both Kings, all the Bishops, Abbots, and
Nobility almost of Scotland being present.

In January thereafter at a meeting in Norham where King William was also in
person, Buch. l. 16. 7.
the King of England dealt earnestly to have the Clergy of Scotland accept the
Archbishop of York for their Metropolitan; but they p^etending the absence of
many of their number, Sa. Daniel.
and the want of the inferior Clergies consent, deferred to give any answer at
that time. The next year the same matter was renewed, and followed earnestly by
a Legate sent from the Pope, with Commission to reform the abuses he should
find in the Churches both in England and Scotland. This Legate called Hugo,
and styled Cardinal de sancto Angelo, having sent his Apparitors with a
citation to the Bishops of Scotland, A meeting of the Scottish Clergy at
Northampton.
for their appearing before him at a certain day in Northampton, they went
thither with a great number of their Clergy. The Assembly being met, and all
ranked in their places, the Cardinal (who had his seat somewhat higher then
the rest) made a long speech in commendation of humility and obedience, showing
what excellent Virtues these were, and how much to be desired of men of
spiritual profession; whereof when he talked a while, he came in end to
persuade the Clergy of Scotland to submit themselves to the Primate of York:
which he said was a thing very convenient for them, and would turn greatly to
their ease and commodity; for having no Superior amongst themselves, nor
Metropolitan to decide Controversies that possibly might happen, there could
none be fitter then their neighbor the Archbishop of York, a Prelate of great
respect, and one whose credit in the Court of Rome might serve them to good
use; therefore besought them to lay aside all grudges and emulations, and
dispose themselves to live in all times after, as members of one and the same
Church.

The Bishops who feared to offend the Legate made no answer, Gilbertus
Canonicus his reply to the Legate:
and after a long silence, a young Chanon named Gilbert rose up, and spoke to
this effect: The Church of Scotland, ever since the faith of Christ was
embraced in that Kingdom, has been a free and independent Church, subject to
none, but the Bishop of Rome, whose authority we refuse not to acknowledge. To
admit any other for our Metropolitan, especially the Archbishop of York, we
neither can nor will; for notwithstanding the present peace, which we wish may
long continue, wars may break up betwixt the two Kingdoms; and if it shall
fall out so, Boeth ibidem.
neither shall he be able to discharge any duty amongst us, nor can we safely
and without suspicion resort to him. For the controversies which you my Lord
Cardinal say may arise amongst our selves, we have learned and wise Prelates
who can determine the same; and if they should be deficient in their duties, we
have a good and religious King, who is able to keep all things in frame and
order, so as we have no necessity of any stranger to be set over us: And I
cannot think that either his Holiness has forgotten, or you my Lord that are
his Legate, Scon. l. 8. c. 16.
can be ignorant of the late exemption, granted unto Malcolm our last King;
since the grant whereof, we have done nothing which may make us seem unworthy
of that favor. Wherefore in the name of all the Scottish Church we do humbly
entreat the preservation of our ancient liberberties, and that we be not
brought under subjection to our enemies. These speeches he delivered with an
extraordnary grace, and in so passionate a manner, that all the hearers were
exceedingly moved, the English themselves commending his courage and the
affection he showed to his Country. But the Archbishop of York, who looked not
for such opposition, called the young Chanon to come unto him, and laying his
hand upon his head, said, Ex tua pharetra nunquam venit ista sagitta, meaning
that he was set on to speak by some others of greater note. So the Legate
perceiving that the business would not work, and that the opposition was like
to grow greater, he brake up the Assembly. After which the Prelates returning
home, Boeth. l. 13.
were universally welcomed; but above the rest the Chanon Gilbert was in the
mouths of all men, and judged worthy of a good preferment; and soon after was
promoved to the Bishopr^ck of Cathenes, An. 1178.
and made Chancellor of the Kingdom.

The year following one Vibianus a Cardinal (titulo sancti Stephani in monte
Caelio) came into Scotland, Scon. l. 8.
in show to reform abuses, and do some good to the Church, but in effect to
extort moneys from Churchmen. For at this time it was grown to be an ordinary
trick of the Popes, when they stood in need of moneys, to send forth their
Legates unto all Countries, sometimes under a color of reforming abuses,
sometimes for the recovering of the Holy land, and sometimes upon other
pretexts. This Cardinal having stayed a while in Scotland, took his journey
into Ireland, and in his return would needs make a new visit of this Church;
for which effect, he convened the Clergy at Edinburgh in the month of August,
and established diverse Canons; which the Clergy esteeming prejudicial to their
liberties, did incontinent after he was gone revoke and disannull; but what
these Canons were, our Writers do not remember.

18. It was a fatal year this to many of our Churchmen, The Archdeacon of S.
Andrews elected Bishop.
both Bishops and Abbots; amongst others Richard Bishop of S. Andrews
deceasing, King William recommended Hugo, one of his Chaplains (whom he much
favored) to the Convent. But they taking another course made choice of the
Archdeacon John Scot, who was an English born. The King displeased makes his
Chaplain to be choosed of new.
The King displeased therewith, did swear by the Arm of S. James ^this was his
ordinary oath) that so long as he lived Scot should never enjoy that place: So
he sent a Command unto the Chanons to make a new election, appointing Ioceline
Bishop of Glasgow their assistant; and thus was Hugo his Chaplain elected.

The Archdeacon appealed to Rome, The Archdeacon appealeth to Rome.
and going thither complained of the wrong done to the Church, entreating the
Pope for redress. Hereupon Alexius Subdean of the Roman See, was dispatched
to try and examine the cause. At first the King made difficulty to admit him,
but afterward yielding, the two elections being tried by the Legate, sentence
was given for the first; and Iocelin Bishop of Glasgow with the rest of the
Clergy that assisted the second, excommunicated. This done the Legate called an
Assembly of the Bishops, Abbots, and whole Clergy at Haliroudhouse, and made
Matthew Bishop of Aberdene publicly to consecrate the Archdeacon upon Trinity
Sunday 1178.

He not the less fearing the Kings displeasure left the Realm, His journey
thither.
and went to Rome, where he was honorably entertained by Pope Lucius the
third, who sent Letters to the King, Pope Lucius his Letter to the King.
and admonished him not to usurp upon the Church, and to remit the Bishop who
was lawfully elected and consecrated, to enjoy his place with quietness. This
Letter the Story says was conceived in mild terms, for the Pope feared to
incense the King, lest he should follow the ensample of his Cousin Henry King
of England, that some 8. years before had made away Thomas Becket Bishop of
Canterbury for his obstinate and wilful opposition in some matters not unlike:
yet the King nothing moved with the Letter, to make his displeasure the better
known, did confiscate all the revenues pertaining to the Sea of S. Andrews, and
banished those whom he understood to favor the Bishops cause.

The Pope advertised hereof, The Pope purposes to interdict the Realm, is
stayed by the entreaty of the Archdeacon.
resolved to put the Realm under Interdiction. But the Bishop prostrating
himself at his feet, besought him not to use any such rigor, saying, That he
would much rather renounce his dignity, then have so many Christian souls for
ought that concerned him, defrauded of spiritual benefits. The Pope highly
commending the goodness and patience of the Bishop, held him from that time
forth in more regard, The Bishop of Dunkeld dies, and the Bishopric offered
by the King to the Archdeacon.
and at his request forbear the Interdiction. Mean while it happened that
Walter Bishop of Dunkeld departed this life; whereupon the King taking
occasion, sent to recall the Bishop with offers of great kindness, protesting
that if it had not been for the oath he rashly made, he would willingly have
contented to his enjoying of the Sea of S. Andrews: But seeing it did touch him
in Honor and Conscience (as he esteemed) to be yielding thereto, he requested
the Bishop to accept the Benefice of Dunkeld, which was then fallen void, and
was in value not much inferior to the other.

This the Bishop communicated to the Pope, who desired to have the matter
quieted, advised him to return, An. 1188.
and accept the offer. Thus was the Archdeacon by the Popes consent preferred
to Dunkeld, having the rents of the Archdeaconry reserved to him during his
life, The Archbishop accepted Dunkeld.
in recompense of his losses. Hugo this way coming to be possessed, Andrews
took journey to Rome that he might be reconciled to the Pope, Bishop Hugo dies.
and being absolved for his intrusion, in his return died some six miles from
the City of Rome, the 6. of August, 1188. ten years and ten months after his
election.

At this time news was brought from the East, of the prevailing of Sultan
Saladine of Egypt against the Christians in the Holy land, which moved Philip
the second of France, The Kings of England and France prepare to recover the
Holy land.
and Henry King of England, to undertake the recovery of the Holy land, and to
employ all their credit and means, as well in their own countries, as with
other Christian Princes their neighbors, for the furtherance of that
enterprise. To befray the charges of the voyage, both Kings by consent of their
Clergy and Nobles ordained, that all their subjects, both Clergy and Laity,
(such excepted as went in the voyage) should pay the tenth of all their
movables either in gold or silver. King Henry having laid this imposition upon
his subjects at home, sent Hugh Pusar then Bishop of Duresme with other
Commissioners to collect the tenths of the Clergy and Laity in this kingdom:
which the King and States, interpreting to be an encroachment upon their
liberties would not permit, yet for advancing that holy action, Sa. Daniel.
they did offer a supply of 5000. Marks sterling, which King Henry refused but
the enterprise upon a quarrel that arose betwixt the Kings of France and
England, was at that time dashed, and so the collection was no further urged.

King Henry a little after this, Buchan. l. 7.
ended his life, and Richard his son who succeeded, resolving to pursue the
action of the holy War, to assure the King of Scotland, who he feared would
take some advantage in his absence, restored all the Castles which were
delivered to King Henry his Father, Sa. Daniel.
and released him and his posterity of all Covenants made and confirmed by
Charter unto King Henry, as extorted from him being then his prisoner,
reserving only such rights to himself, as had been and were to be performed by
Malcolme his brother to his Ancestors Kings of England. Lesl. l. 6.
King William to requite his kindness, gave unto Richard ten thousand Marks
sterling, King of Scots his kindness to the King of England.
and caused his brother David (to whom he resigned the Earldom of Huntington)
go in company with him. There went under his charge 500. Gentlemen, who were
all in their return cast away by a tempest at sea, only the Earl himself having
his ship driven upon the coast of Egypt, was taken prisoner, and led to
Alexandria; where being redeemed by some Venetians, he was brought to
Constantinople, and freed by an English Merchant in the City, that had known
him in former times. From thence he returned safe unto his country, the fourth
year after his setting forth, to the great joy and contentment of the King his
brother, who took him to be lost. The part where he arrived being, as Boethius
writes, Boeth. l. 13.
before that time called Alectum, had the name changed, and upon that occasion
was called Dei donum. But the opinion of Buchannan is more probable, that the
Town now called Dundy, is a compound word of Down and Tay. As ever this was,
the Town there situated received many privileges of King William at that time
for his brothers happy arrival, The Abbey of lundors founded.
which to this day they enjoy. Likewise in memory thereof, was the Abbey of
Lundors founded for the Benedictine Monks, and diverse lands gifted thereto by
the King and the Earl his brother.

The King of England after many distresses being returned home, King william
goes to England to congratulate King Richard his return.
King William to congratulate his safety went into England, where he contracted
a great sickness; the rumor whereof being dispersed, and his death much
suspected, gave occasion of diverse insolences at home: amongst others Herald
Earl of Orkney and Cathnes, upon a malice conceived against the Bishop of that
country, (who as he alleged, had impeded the grant of some thing he demanded
of the King) took him prisoner, The Bishop of Cathnes cruelly used by the Earl
of the country.
put out his eyes, and cut forth his tongue. This inhumanity the King at his
return punished most severely; for the Earl being apprehended and brought to
his trial, had his eyes in like sort pulled out, and was thereafter publicly
strangled by the hands of the hangman; The King punished it severely.
all his male children being gelded, to extinguish his succession. His kinsmen
and others accounted accessors to the fact, for not rescuing the Bishop, were
fined in great sums of money. This exemplary justice reported to Pope
Innocent the third, he sent unto the King by his Legate Ioannes Cardinalis de
monte Celio, Buchan. l. 7.
a sword richly set with precious stones, a purple hat in from of a diadem,
Pope Innocent the third his thanks to the King for the justice of execution.
and a large Bull of privileges, whereby the Church of Scotland was exempted
from all Ecclesiastical censures, the Pope himself and his Legate a latere only
excepted. It was also declared, That it should not be lawful to any to
excommunicate the King and his successors, or yet to interdict the kingdom, but
the Pope or his Legate: and that no stranger should exercise any legation
within the Realm, except a Cardinal, or such a one as the Conclave did appoint.
This Bull is yet extant, and begins thus. Innocentius Episcopus servus
servorum Dei, charissimo filio Gulielmo illustri Scotorum Regi e^usque
successoribus.

This Cardinal before his departing forth of the Realm, A Convocation of the
Clergy at Perth.
kept a Convocation of the Clergy at Perth, in which all the Priests were
deposed, who were found to have taken Orders upon Sunday; The Abbot of
Dunfermlin called Robert was removed from his place, Boeth l. 13.
(the cause whereof is not mentioned) and one Patrick Superior of Dur^sme,
Lesl. l. 8.
appointed Abbot in his stead. In this convention also it was decreed, That
every Saturday from twelve of the clock should be kept as holy day, Saturday
from 12. of the clock, to be kept as holy.
and that all people at the sound of the Bell should address themselves to
hear service, and abstain from all handy work until Monday morning. After this
meeting he took journey into Ireland, taking with him Radolph Abbot of
Melrosse, a man of good respect, whom he preferred to the Bishopric of Down,
which at his coming thither happened to fall void.

Bishop Hugo dying, An. 1189.
Roger son to the Earl of Leicester succeeded; he had been Chancellor to the
King, Bishop Roger succeeds to Hugo after his death.
and at his election to the Bishopric, resigned the office to one of the King
his Chaplains. For in those days the office of a Chancellor was not in that
reputation, to which afterward it grew; in some old Records I find at one time
two officers in that kind, the one called Cancellarius Regis, the other
Cancellarius regni; but which of the two was in greatest dignity I know not,
nor in what their charge did differ; only my conjecture is, that he who is now
the writer of the Great Seal, and is called The director to the Chancellary,
was then styled Cancellarius Regis.

But remitting this to others of greater skill, Roger consecrated in the year
1198. dies in July, 1202.
Ten years this Roger stood elect, and was not consecrated before the year of
God 1198. at which time Richard Bishop of Murray performed the ceremony; the
reason of the delay is not mentioned by writers: four years only he lived after
his consecration, and died at Combuskenneth the ninth of July, 1202. his corpse
with great solemnity convoyed to Saint Andrews, was interred in the old Church
of Saint Rewle.

20. William Malvoisin Bishop of Glasgow, William Malvoisin translated from
Glasgow to S. Andrews.
a Frenchman born, was after the death of Roger, by the Kings recommendation,
translated to S. Andrews, a man of singular wisdom and courage; he lived a
long time for he sat Bishop after his translation 35. years) and governed the
Church most happily. The rents alienated by his predecessors, or lost by their
negligence, Scon. l. 8.
he recovered to his See, advanced the fabric of the Church (which was then a
building) more then any that went before him, and suffered no man, of what
quality soever he was, to usurp upon the Church or possessions of it.

Some years after his translation, King William died at Striveling, to the
great regret of all men, especially those of the Clergy, to whom he had been
very beneficial; Pasl l. 6. c. 27.
for besides the Abbey of Aberbrothock, which he founded to the memory of
Thomas Becket, King William dies, his pious devotion.
then generally held to be a Martyr and Saint; he gave diverse lands to the Sea
of Argyle, which had been in his time erected; and to the Monasteries of
Newbottle, Boeth l. 13.
Halyrudhouse, and Dunfermlin, many richgifts; as likewise for the Trinity
Monks of Aberdene, Buchan. l. 7.
an Order lately invented, and then confirmed by Innocentius the third, he made
a competent provision. Never were the funerals of any of our Kings performed
with greater solemnity. All the Prelates and Nobles of the kingdom attending
the corpse from Striveling to Aberbrothock, where he had appointed his body to
be buried. There they continued 14. days, spending that time in the devotions
accustomed; and before their parting by a common consent ordained, An. 1214.
that for a year thereafter no public plays, nor feasts should be made in any
part of the kingdom; such a sorrow they showed, notwithstanding he had reigned
long, and died being of a great age, for it was the 74. of his age, and the the
49. of his reign when he departed this life.

The funerals ended, King Alexander the second Crowned at Scone.
his son Alexander the second, accompanied with all the Prelates and Nobles of
the kingdom, went to Scone, and received the Crown by the hands of the Bishop
of Saint Andrews. This King did no ways degenerate from the virtues of his
predecessors, and was a great protector of the Church against the rapines and
extortions of Rome. Boeth l. 7.
Guallo, others call him Waldo, a Cardinal sent Legate into England by Pope
Innocentius the third to assist King John, Buchan. l. 13.
who was then become his vassal, The Kingdom interdicted by the Popes Legate.
did put the kingdom of Scotland under interdiction, because the King had
supplied the French in his invasion of England, and as he pretended, robbed
some Churches and religious places in his return from that war. The Churchmen
ceasing by this occasion from their ordinary services, Scon. l. c. 33.
no religious exercise was performed by any through the whole Realm, The
privilege of the white monks suspended.
but the white Monks, whose privilege did warrant them to celebrate at such
times; which the Legate hearing, did suspend, inhibiting them by one Weshbeck
Archdeacon of York to do any service under pain of the highest spiritual
censures, till the rest of the Clergy were absolved.

But King John dying, and Henry his son Crowned, by mediation of certain
Prelates peace was made betwixt King Alexander and him upon the conditions
following: Peace concluded betwixt the King and Henry the third of England.
That Ioane the sister of Henry should be given in marriage to Alexander King
of Scots, and Magaret his sister to Hubert de Burgh Justiciar of England, (the
man who then ruled all affairs) That Berwick should be rendered to the Scots,
and Carlisle to the English; The Kingdom of Scotland absolved from the
interdiction.
The King of Scots absolved from the Legates censures, and his kingdom
released from the Interdiction. For performing the last Article, the Bishops of
York and Salisbury, (by whose means especially the peace was concluded) had
Commission given them by the Legate, which presently they discharged. But
Guallo being displeased that the Interdict had passed so easily (for he was a
man extremely avaritious, Boeth l. 13.
and one who made his profit of every business) since he could not retreat
what was done, Buchan. l. 7.
took him to the Clergy, saying, That the absolution granted did not comprehend
them; and thereupon did summon them to appear before him at Anwick. The Diet
was kept, and thither went all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and beneficed men
in great numbers; Absolution was offered, but not without the payment of large
sums; which were at first denied, but after some menacings, that he should
make them answer it at Rome, the most out of fear did transact. A few Prelates
only standing out, went afterward to Rome to justify their Cause.

With the inferior Churchmen he took a course, in show beneficial, and for
their ease; The course taken with the inferior Churchmen.
that some one or two should go with Commission and absolve them in their own
Provinces at home; but it turned to their great molestation; for the Prior of
Duresme and Westbeck the Archdeacon, who were employed in that business,
beginning at Berwick, went through all the Realm and making the Priests and
Canons convene at the principal City of the bounds, Scon. l. 9. c. 32.
caused them to take oath, that they should confess themselves, and answer
truly unto every particular enquired of them; which done, and their several
depositions taken, what by terrifying some with deprivation from their places
for faults confessed by themselves, what by wearying others with the
protractions they made from day to day, great sums were extorted from them,
and the poor Priests forced, notwithstanding all this oppression, to go
barefooted to the door of the principal Church, where they were convened, and
ask their absolution in a most base and abject form.

The Clergy offended herewith, sent Walter Bishop of Glasgow, Brice Bishop of
Murray, The Scots Clergy complain of the Legates extortions.
and Adam Bishop of Cathnes to complain at Rome; where finding Pope Innocent
dead, and Honorius the third preferred in his room, they exhibited in name of
the Church of Scotland a grievous complaint against Guallo, charging him to
have been the especial cause of these miserable combustions, which both the
kingdoms had endured, to have abused his legation unto his private commodity,
and to have extorted moneys from Churchmen and others, An. 1219.
under color of absolution. Guallo brought to his answer, because he did not
clear himself sufficiently in diverse points, was declared not to have carried
himself as became his Holiness Legate, Buchan. l. 7.
and fined in a pecuniary mulct: so as he escaped by dividing the spoil which
he had made in those parts) betwixt his Master and himself. The Bishops who
preferred the complaint, were upon confession of their fault absolved one of
the Cardinals who stood by, Scon. ibide^.
scornfully commending their humility, and saying, Quod piarum mentium esset
crimen agnoscere, ubi nec culpa reperitur, That it was the part of devout men
to acknowledge an offense, even where no fault was committed: and for some
recompense of their pains, a confirmation was given them of the old privileges
granted to the Church of Scotland by four Popes. This privilege is dated at
Rome in the year of Christ 1218. and in the second of Pope Honorius his
Pontificat.

Yet the next year Egidius a Spaniard by nation, and by place a Cardinal, was
sent to gather contribution for the holy war; wherein both the Clergy and
Laity showed themselves so forward, as in a short space great sums were
collected: all which he spent most prodigally in his return to Rome, giving out
for an excuse that he was robbed by certain Brigants in the way. And no sooner
was this Cardinal gone, The King offended with the contributions of Rome.
then another followed, having the like Commission; but the King considering
how prejudicial these contributions might prove to the kingdom, and that
through the easy yieldings of the State, the Sea of Rome was grown impudent in
their exactions, would not permit him to enter into the Realm, till he had
propounded the matter in Council: at which time one of the Bishops (his name is
not expressed in the story) made a long speech against the rapine of these
Legates; where in recounting the insolent oppressions of Guallo, and the
riotous profusion of Egidius, The Popes Legate discharged from entering into
Scotland.
he dissuaded by many good reasons his admission, or the receiving of any other
who should afterward happen to come about the like business. This speech
seconded with the applause of all that were present, an Act was made
prohibiting the reception of the Legate, or any others without license from the
King.

The Bishop of St. Andrews being all this while in France, Orders of S.
Dominick and Francis, brought into Scotland.
did now return bringing with him some of the order of S. Dominick, some
Franciscans, Iacobins, and of the Monks called Vallis umbrosae. These Orders
not being known before in this Church, by their crafty insinuations with
people, and the profession they made in leading an austere life, did supplant
the credit of the Priests, drawing to themselves all the force and credit of
the spiritual Ministry, and were upheld by the Popes, whose designs they
studied especially to advance. The King, who looked no further then the devout
profession they made, Scon. l. 10. c. ^. Foundation of religious houses.
gave them all a kind reception, and to the Monks Vallis umbrosae, he erected
a Monastery in Pluscardy within the country of Murray. In the country of
Rosse, the Lord Bisset founded Beawly for Monks of the same order; And one
Maccolloch a man of great wealth, did found the Priory of Archatton in Lorne.
About the same time did Ada or Adhama Grandmother to the King, found the Abbey
of Haddington for consecrated Virgins. The like was erected at Northberwick by
Malcolm Earl of Fife, who also founded the Abbey of Culrosse for the
Cistercian Monks. Dornagilla the daughter of Allan Lord of Galloway erected for
the same order a Monastery at New Abbey; Gilbert Earl of Stratherne his
donations to the Church.
and by a rare example, Gilbert Earl of Strathern, having divided his
inhereitance in three parts, gave one third thereof to the Sea of Dumblane, and
another to the Abbey of Inchaffray, reserving to himself and his heirs a third
only of the whole. Scon. l. 8. c. 73.
Shortly after in the year 1327. died William Malvoisin at Inchmurtach, and as
he himself had directed, was buried in the new Church of S. Andrews.

21. Galfrid Bishop of Dunkeld, An. 1238.
being earnestly desired both of the Clergy and Laity, David the Kings
Chamberlain elected Bishop upon Malvoisin his death.
the King would not permit his translation: so David Benham Chamberlain to the
King was elected, and on S. Vincents day in the year 1238. consecrated by
William Bishop of Glasgow, Gilbert Bishop of Cathnes, and Clement Bishop of
Dumblane. This Bishop kept a severe hand over the Clergy, especially the Monks
and others that lived in religious Orders; and calling an assembly by the Kings
consent at Perth in the 1242. (where the King himself with diverse of the
Nobility did assist) made many good Constitutions as well for reformation of
abuses, as for securing of Clergy men in their possessions and rights. In his
time fell out great troubles betwixt the Emperor Frederick the second, and
Pope Gregory the ninth; for which a general Council was called by the said
Gregory at Rome, and thither were summoned all the Bishops of Christendom. The
pretext was, the relief of the Holy land, which at that time was in great
distress; but Frederick apprehending the intention to be against himself,
resolved to hinder the meeting of the Council, and having belayed the ways,
made the Bishops of S. Andrews and Glasgow prisoners, as they traveled through
Germany. Upon their promise to return home, they were afterward set at
liberty: not the less they sent their procurations thither by some religious
persons, who took another way; but the Council held not, because of the Popes
death that intervened.

Some few years after this King Alexander deceased at Carnire in the West
Isles; King Alexander the second buried at Melrosse.
and, as he had appointed, was interred in the Abbey Church of Melrosse, with
an Inscription according to the rudeness of the time, yet such as showed how
greatly he was beloved of his Subjects.

Ecclesiae clypeus, His Epitaph.
pax plebis, dux miserorum,
Rex rectus, rigidus, sapiens, consultus, honestus.
Rex pius, Rex fortis, Rex optimus, Rex opulentus.
Nominis istius ipse secundus erat.
Annis ter denis and quinis Rex fuit ipse.
Insula quae Carneri dicitur hunc rapuit.
Spiritus alta petit Celestibus associatus,
Sed Melrossensis ossa sepulta tenet.
His son Alexander the third by Maria the daughter of Sir Ingram de Consey (for
his first wife died without children) succeeded, King Alexander the third
crowned.
and was crowned of eight years old; at the age of ten years he was married to
Margaret the daughter of Henry the third of England, Sa: Daniel in the life of
Henry the third.
The marriage being solemnized at York, and the Bishop of Saint Andrews sent
thither with others of the Nobility to see all things duly performed, fell
there in a Fever, and departed this life on the first of May 1251. his Corpse
brought from thence was buried in the Abbey Church of Kelsoe, Scon l. 10. c. 8.
some thirteen years and three months after his Consecration.

22. The Prior and Chanons convening to elect a new Bishop, Abell Archdeacon of
S. Andrews elected Bishop after David.
did all give their voices to Robert Sutevile Dean of Dunkeld, a man of great
virtue and learning; but this election took no effect; Abel Archdean of S.
Andrews by the favor of some that ruled the Court, having procured an
inhibition to the Bishop to proceed in the Consecration, with a Mandate to the
Chanons to make a new election. The Chapter refusing made their appeal to Rome,
and Abell posting thither, by the bribes he bestowed in that Court, got himself
preferred, and was Consecrated by Pope Innocentius the fourth.

At his return, Abell his rigor exercised upon the Chanons.
to be revenged of the Prior and Chanons, he behaved himself well insolently,
calling them in question for every light occasion, and censuring them with
great rigor; whereupon he became extremely hated. They write of him that in a
vainglorious humor, as he was walking in his Church one day, he did with a
little Chalk draw this line upon the gate of the Church; Haec mihi sunt tria,
Lex, Canon, Philosophia; Bragging of his knowledge and skill in those
professions: and that going to Church the next day, he found another line drawn
beneath the former, which said, Te levant absque tria, fraus, favor,
vanasophia. This did so gall him as taking bed he died within a few days,
having sat Bishop ten months and two days only.

23. After Abels death Gamelinus was elected to govern the Sea, An. 1255.
and by a warrant from Rome was consecrated on S. Stephens day, in the year
1255. Two years he stood elect, Gamelinus elected Bishop upon Abels death.
his consecration being stayed by the Rulers of the Court, who had sent also to
Rome for cassing his election. A time this was (such as usually falls out in
the minority of Princes) full of choppings and changes. Under the last King the
Cummings had ruled all public business, Pasl. l. 6.
for they were of great power, the Earls of Monteth, Boeth. l. 13.
Bugha^, Athol and Mar being all of that name, besides thirty two Barons and
Knights. Robert Abbot of Dunfermlin Chancellor of the Kingdom for the time,
Buch. l. 7.
enclining to their course, had legitimated a base sister of the Kings who was
married to one Allan Dooroward, and for the same was put from his place,
Gamelinus being preferred thereto; but he enjoyed the same a short space, for
upon some discontents he was likewise thrust out, and Richard Bishop of Dunkeld
made Chancellor. This made the Court to oppose Gamelinus his election; not the
less he prevailed by his gifts at Rome, and procured a warrant to William
Bishop of Glasgow to proceed to his Consecration.

The Court highly displeased at this, The Court displeased with the Bishop.
there fell out another occasion which did greatly incense them against him; a
Knight called Sir John Dinmure for some oppressions committed upon the Prior of
S. Andrews was excommunicated; he complaining to the King obtained by Moyen a
command to Gamelinus to absolve him; who simply refused, unless satisfaction
was made for the offense; and because no redress was offered, a new intimation
was made of his cursing through the whole Province. A Legate sent from Rome.
This the King and the Court took so ill, as forthwith a messenger was sent to
charge the Bishop to depart forth of the Realm; which as he was preparing to
obey, the news of a Legate sent from Rome into England, made the Court take a
more moderate course, fearing the consequence of so rigorous a proceeding.

This Legate called Ottobon being employed for pacifying the troubles raised
betwixt the King of England and his Barons, Scon. l. 2. c. 24.
did summon the Clergy of Scotland to appear before him by their Commissioners,
Boeth. l. 13.
and to bring with them a Collection of four Marks for every Parish within the
Realm, and six Marks for every Cathedral Church. The Clergy meaning themselves
to the King, he did prohibit any such Contribution, and sent his Chancellor to
the Bishop of Dunkeld, and Robert Bishop of Dumblane, partly to declare the
reasons of his prohibition, and partly to observe the proceedings of the Legate
with these of England. At their return some Acts were showed, which the Legate
had set down to be observed by the Clergy; all which they rejected, saying,
That they would acknowledge no Statutes, but such as proceeded either from the
^ope, or from a General Council.

Ottobon was not well gone, Buch. l. 7.
when another Legate named Rustaneus was sent to demand a tenth of all the
Church rents within the Kingdom, Boeth. l. 13.
for advancing the journey of King Henry's son, who had undertaken the holy
War at the solicitation of Ottobon: but this seeming to cross the liberties
granted by former Popes unto the Church, and it being notorious, that the Pope
was to employ the moneys to other ends, (for he was then warring against
Manfred King of Naples and Sicily) therefore the same was denied, and Rustane
prohibited to enter into the Realm. The King not the less in token of his
affection sent to the Pope 100. Marks sterling; and for the furtherance of the
holy War did levy 1000. men, which he sent to Jews the French King, who had
determined to adventure himself of new against the Infidels, under the charge
of the Earls of Atholl and Carrick. All these dyed in that War, partly of the
plague, as did Jews himself, and partly by the sword of the Enemy.

In this Bishops time the Carmelite Friars came into Scotland, The Carmelite
Friars received in Scotland.
and had a dwelling assigned them at Perth, by Richard Bishop of Dunkeld. The
Crosse-Church at Peblis was at that same time built, and endowed by the King
with large Revenews: The reason why this Church was erected, Crosse-Church at
Peblis erected.
was a Cross, as they write, found in that place enclosed in a little Shrine,
on which the name of Nicolaus a Bishop was written. The Church was dedicated
with many pompous Ceremonies, Boeth. l. 13.
diverse Prelates being present, Scon. l. 30.
amongst whom was Gamelinus, who at his return home was taken with a Palsy,
and died in Inchmurtach, having sat Bishop 16. years: his Corpse was laid in
the new Church of S. Andrews nigh to the high Altar. An. 1271.


24. William Wishart elect of Glasgow was upon the death of Gamelinus preferred
to S. Andrews. William Wishart elected Bishop upon Gamelinus his death.
Pope Urban the fourth had not long before ordained, That every Bishop and
Abbot elect should travel to Rome for Consecration; but the Papacy then vacant
by reason of a Schism, that continued two years and nine months after the
death of Clement the fourth, Scon. l. 10. c. 30.
he was unwilling to go thither; four other Prelates being kept there
depending at the same time: Pasl. l. 6.
William elect of Brichen, Matthew elect of Rosse, Bishops attending a Rome for
Consecration.
Nicoll elect of Cathnes, and Hugh Benham elect of Abredene.

The elect of Brichen died at Rome, Aberdene and Rosse were consecrated by
Gregory the tenth upon the ending of the schism at Viturbium, Nicoll was
rejected, and the Chapter of Cathnes appointed to make a new election. The
Agents that Wishart sent for license to be consecrated, were detained a long
time, and had returned without effectuating their errand, if Edward the first
of England, who coming from the Holy land was then at Rome, had not by his
intercession prevailed with the Pope, and obtained license for the
consecration, which was performed at Scone in the year 1274. in the presence of
the King and diverse of his Nobles. At the same time, William Fraser Dean of
Glasgow, was preferred to be Chancellor.

The Pope shortly after this having convocated a Council at Lions, A Council
at Lions.
caused cite all the Prelates thereto; to this effect a meeting of the Clergy
was kept at perth, where it was concluded, Scon. l. 10. c. 34.
that the Bishops (Dunkeld and Murray only excepted) should address
themselves to the journey, and be at Lions before the first of May. Hopes were
given of great reformation to be made in that Council, especially of the Orders
of Mendicants, who were mightily increased and grown to the highest of
depravation. The Council was frequent, there being present (as my Author
says) two Patriarchs, fifteen Cardinals, five hundred Bishops, and a thousand
other mitred Prelates, besides the King of France, and the Emperor of Greece,
and many other Princes.

The first proposition was for the holy war, A supply for the holy War.
and concerning it the Council decreed, That a tenth of all the Benefices in
Christendom (the privileged Churches not excepted) should be paid for six
years; That all Penitentiaries and Confessors should urge offenders to assist
that holy business with their wealth and riches; and that every Christian,
without exception of sex or quality, should pay a yearly penny during that
space, under pain of excommunication.

For remedying abuses in the Church, The Acts of the Council.
the Council ordained, 1. That no procurations should be paid to Bishops or
Archdeacons, unless they did visit the Churches in their own persons. 2. That
no Churchman should possess more Benefices then one, and should make his
residence at the Church he retained. 3. That without the Popes license no
Clergy should answer the impositions, which might happen to be laid upon them
by Princes or States. 4. That the Mendicants should be reduced to four orders,
the Minorites, the Predicants, Carmelites, and Heremites of S. Augustine, who
should continue in their present state, until the Pope should otherwise think
good. And 5. a geneprohibition was made to advise or admit any new orders,
besides those which the Council had allowed.

Some other Acts of less moment were passed, All the Acts overturned by
dispensations.
whereof the extract under the hands of the public notaries of the Council was
sent to this Church; but all these statutes turned in a short time to smoke:
pluralities being of new dispensed with, with the clause of Non obstante, which
then first came in use. The orders of the Friars and Monks restored one by one,
as first the Cistertian Monks, who redeemed their order by the payment of
500000. Marks; Scon. l. 10. c. 35.
then the Bernardines with the sum of 600000. Crowns: the other Orders made
in little sort their Compositions. Whereby it appeared, that the statutes there
enacted were only devised to raise sums of money, and not out of any purpose
those Fathers had to redress abuses. The same year was one Bagimund a Legate
directed hither, who calling before him all the Beneficed persons within the
kingdom, caused them upon their oath give up the worth and value of their
Benefices; according to which they were taxed. The table (commonly called
Bagiments rolls) served for the present collection, and was a rule in after
times for the prizes taken of those, that came to sue for Benefices in the
Court of Rome.

Wishart not long after his return from this Council, An. 1279.
being employed by the King and State in a Commission of the Borders sickned at
Marbotle in Teriotdale, and there died. Bishop Wishart dies.
He is commended to have been a man careful in his charge, and a great lover of
peace, Scon. l. 10. c. 31.
then which there is no virtue more required in a Churchman; he continued
Bishop 5. years and 8. months only, his corpse was honorably conveyed from
Marbotle, and interred in his own Church nigh to the high Altar in the year
1279.

There lived in the kingdom at this time Michael Scot and Thomas Lermouth men
greatly admired, Michael Scot and Tho. Lermouth.
the first for his rarest skill in the secrets of nature, the other for his
predictions, Buchan. l. 13.
and foretelling of things to come. Picus Mirandula, and Cornelius Agrippa do
make honorable mention of Michael Scot in their writings, Lesl. l. 6.
and account him to have been a subtle Philosopher, and most expert in the
Mathematick sciences. The prophecies yet extant in the Scottish Rymes of the
other, whereupon he was commonly called Thomas the Rymer, may justly be
admired, having foretold so many ages before the union of the kingdoms of
England and Scotland, in the ninth degree of the Bruces blood, with the
succession of Bruce himself to the Crown being yet a child, and other diverse
particulars, which the event has ratified and made good. Boeth in his story
relates his prediction of King Alexanders death, Boeth l. 13.
and that he did foretell the same to the Earl of March the day before it fell
out; saying, That before the next day at noon such a tempest should blow, as
Scotland had not felt many years before. The next morning, the day being clear,
and no change appearing in the air, the Nobleman did challenge Thomas of his
saying, calling him an Impostor: he replied, that noon was not yet passed.
About which time, a Post came to advertise the Earl of the King his sudden
death. Then said Thomas, This is the tempest I foretold, and so it shall prove
to Scotland. Whence, or how he had this knowledge can hardly be affirmed, but
sure it is that he did divine and answer truly of many things to come.

25. William Fraser Chancellor of the kingdom, William Fraser elected Bishop
after Wishart.
was after Wishart elected Bishop, and going to Rome was consecrated by Pope
Nicolaus the third, in the year 1280. The office of Chancery upon his
resignation was given by the King to M^. John Pebles Archdeacon of S. Andrews.
At his return from Rome a pestilential fever (never before known in this
kingdom) brake up to the destruction of an infinite number of people. This
visitation was scarce ceased, when all the Kings children were taken away one
after another; Buchan. l. 7.
first David his youngest son died, then Alexander the Prince, who had married a
daughter of the Earl of Flanders, after him Margret Queen of Norway, The death
of of King Alexander the third and his children.
who left behind her one only daughter; and last the King himself, who had
taken to wife (after the death of his Queen) Iolet a daughter to the Count of
Dreux in hope to restore his issue, was most unfortunately killed by the fall
of his horse, a little space from the town of Kingorne.

So many deaths falling out together in the Royal family, Two Knights of Fife
directed to the maid of Norway, whom they found dead.
did presage great calamities to ensue. The only hope that remained, was in
the Norvegian maid, for whom Sir David Wemis, and Sir Michael Scot, two Knights
of Fife, were directed by the Estates. The administration of affairs was in
the mean time committed to William Fraser Bishop of S. Andrews, Duncan Earl of
Fife, and John Coming Earl of Bughan, for the countries on the North side of
Forth, and to Robert Bishop of Glasgow, John Lord Comin, and John Lord Stewart
for the South parts; but it was not long before that these Gentlemen that were
sent to Norway returned, Boeth l. 14.
bringing word that the maid of Norway was likewise departed this life. Buchan.
l. 8.
At which news it cannot be told whether the fears or sorrows of the subjects
were greater: for as their sorrow for the loss of so worthy a King was great,
so their fear was no less, because of the uncertainty of the succession:
Competitors for the Crown.
for so many Competitors (six they were in number) claiming the inheritance of
the Crown, and all of them men of power and friendship, they could not but
divide the Realm, and so beget a civil war; yet they who were trusted during
the interreigne, did by their mediation work them to a compromise, and to remit
the decision of the controversy to King Edward the first of England, a Prince
of long experience, and much respected in that time. To this purpose the Bishop
of Brichen, with the Abbot of Iedbrugh, and Galfred Mowbray a Gentleman were
sent to King Edward, who finding him at Xantoign in France, did expone to him
the inconveniences that were feared to fall out in the kingdom, Scon. l. 11.
c. 2.
and the course they had taken to prevent the same, entreating his help for
quieting the State.

King Edward glad to have an hand in the making of a King in Scotland, King
Edward his speech at the meeting in Norham.
dimitted them with many loving words, assigning a Diet to the Competitors at
Norham upon Tweed, which he promised to keep; The day come, and the Competitors
all present, with the Prelates and other Nobles, the King by a long and
premeditated speech, declared, That albeit he might justly claim the
superiority of the kingdom of Scotland, as belonging to him by right, yet as a
friend, and arbiter elected by themselves, he would labor to compose the
present controversy in the best sort he could; for the right, said he,
howsoever there be diverse pretenders, belongs to one only; and for my self,
I determine to wrong no man, but to do that which is just, assuring my self,
you will all acquiesce and take him for King, who shall be pronounced so to be.

This said, Robert Bishop of Glasgow his reply.
Robert Bishop of Glasgow arose, and gave the King most hearty thanks in name
of the rest, for the good affection he bare to their country, and the pains
he had taken to come, and remove their debates; showing that out of a
persuasion they all had of his wisdom, Scon. l. 11. c. 10.
and equity, they were well pleased to submit to him as sole Arbiter, the
judgment and decision of that weighty affair. But where it had pleased him to
speak of a right of superiority over the kingdom; it was sufficiently known
that Scotland from the first foundation of the State, had been a free and
independent kingdom, and not subject to any other power whatsoever. That their
ancestors had valiantly defended themselves and their liberties against the
Romans, Picts, Britains, Danes, Norishes, and all others who sought to usurp
upon them; and howbeit, said he, the present occasion has bred some
distraction of minds, all true hearted Scotch men will stand for the liberty
of their country to the death: for they esteem their liberty more precious
then their lives, and in that quarrel will neither separate nor divide;
wherefore as he had professed in way of friendship, and as an Arbiter elected
by themselves to cognosce and decide the present controversy, they were all in
most humble manner to entreat him, that he would proceed to determine the
question, which they and their posterities should remember with their best
affections and services. King Edward, although he was not well pleased with the
Bishops free speech, made no speech thereof at the time, but continuing his
purpose, The right of the Crown found to lie betwixt Baliol and Bruce. Buchan.
l. 8.
desired the competitors to be called. They all being severally heard, the
right was found to lie chiefly betwixt John Baliol and Robert Bruce, and the
rest ordained to cease from their claim. Of Baliol and Bruce an oath was
taken, that they should abide by the sentence which King Edward should
pronounce. The like oath was taken by the Prelates, Nobles, and other
Commissioners of the State, who swear all to accept him for their King, that
should be tried to have the best right; and for the greater assurance, all
their Seals were appended to the Compromise. Then Edward proceeding, made
twelve of either kingdom, men learned in the Law, to be elected for
examination of the right, declaring that he would take the opinions also of the
best Civilians in the Universities of France. In this sort was the business
carried in public, but privately, and amongst some few, the consultation was
how to bring Scotland under his subjection.

Five years and some more were spent before the controversy was brought to an
end, A meeting at Berwick for determinating the right.
at last every one longing to have it concluded, the King returned to Berwick,
and calling the 24. who had been named at the first meeting; he did enclose
them within the Church, Sa. Daniel.
commanding them to debate the matter, and permitting none to have access unto
them, Boeth. l. 14.
he himself went in now and then to feel their minds, and perceiving the most
part inclining to Bruce his right, he dealt first with him, promising to invest
him in the kingdom, Bruce refuses the offer, which Baliol embraces.
so as he would hold the same of the Crown of England. Bruce answered that he
was not so desirous of rule, as he would therefore prejudice the liberties of
the country. The like offer he made to Baliol, who being more greedy of a
kingdom, then careful of his honor, did yield thereunto, and so was Crowned
King at Scone; all the Nobility, Bruce excepted, doing him homage. Some days
after his Coronation he went to Newcastle, to do the homage (as he had
promised) to King Edward as unto his Sovereign Lord. The Nobles that
accompanied him thither, fearing to withstand the two Kings so far from home,
Baliol hated for swearing subjection to the King of England. Buchan. l. 8.
did likewise swear subjection to King Edward. Which as soon as the rest of the
Nobility and others of the State (who were tender of their countries liberty)
understood, they grew highly displeased: they that were in Baliols company were
excused, as not daring oppose the fact in that place; but he himself having
done it upon a secret paction, which then began first to break out, he became
so universally hated, as after that time could he never purchase their love;
nor was it long before he felt the smart of his own error. For being cited to
answer before the Parliament of England, upon a complaint exhibited against
him, he appeared; and having desired to answer by Procurator, the same was
denied him, and he forced to descend to the ordinary place of pleading, and
stand as a subject. This affront did so vex his mind, Baliol breaks with
England.
that from thenceforth he did meditate upon nothing but revenge, whereof a good
opportunity was offered him by the war, which then burst forth between France
and England.

The Ambassadors of both these Kings coming at one time into Scotland,
Ambassadors from France and England.
(the French to seek the renewing of the ancient League, and the English to
crave a supply of men to be sent unto King Edward, by virtue of the late
allegiance sworn by Baliol) the desire of England was utterly rejected, as
unjust; Because the allegiance sworn by their King was, as they said, forced;
and granting, he had done it willingly, it was not in his power, without
consent of the State, to do any such act. Therefore whatsoever was done by him
that way, both he and they did recall, renouncing Edwards friendship, both for
that and other wrongs committed by him. Thereupon it was concluded, that two
Ambassadors should be sent, one to France for renewing the League, and
confirming it by new alliance of Edward Baliol the Kings son with the daughter
of France; another to England for defying King Edward, and renouncing his
allegiance. Boeth. l. 14.
Toward France, William Bishop of S. Andrews, Matthew Bishop of Dunkeld,
Scon. l. 11. c. 18.
Sir John Sowlis, and Sir Ingram Umphraville Knights, were employed. The
Ambassador to England being declined by many, Henry Abbot of Aberbrothock, a
man of great stomach, undertook and performed.

Upon this defection of Baliol, Baliol cited to Newcastle.
King Edward summoned him to appear at Newcastle; and upon his refuse entered
into Scotland with a mighty Army, took Berwick with the slaughter of 7000.
Scots, and had delivered into his hands the Castles of Dumbar, Roxburgh,
Edinburgh, and Striveling. Baliol thus overthrown, was again by the persuasion
of John Cumin of Strathbogy, Scotland invaded by King Edward.
brought to submit himself, and swear fealty of new to King Edward. After
which, the Parliament of Scotland was called to meet at Berwick, there did all
the Nobility that were present, perform homage to the King of England. Buchan.
l. 8.
William Douglas, a man nobly born, and of great courage, Boeth. l. 14.
only refused, and was therefore cast in prison, where he died. This done,
King Edward turned home, leaving John Warren Earl of Surrey and Sussex,
Governor of the kingdom, Hugh Cressingham Treasurer, and Ormsley chief
Justice.

The Bishop of S. Andrews who was lately come from France, not enduring to see
the country so thralled, returned thither, appointing Mr. William Knigorne;
and Peter de Campaigne his Chaplains to supply his absence in all spiritual
affairs; Robert Bishop of Glasgow, The Bishops of Glasgow and Isles sent
prisoners to London.
and Maurice Bishop of Isles, were taken and sent prisoers to London. The rest
of the Churchmen, though permitted to attend their Cures, were held under
miserable bondage: whereupon they secretly dispatched a message to the Pope
with William Archdeacon of Lothian, Baldred Bisset, and William Egishame, A
message sent to the Pope from the Clergy.
willing them to lament the oppressions of the Church, and the usurpation made
upon the country, and so entreat him as the universal Father of Christendom;
to use his authority with the King of England, ever whom he had power, and take
the matter to his own hearing, Scon. l. 11. c. 36.
unto whose judgment they would simply submit themselves. Pope Boniface the
eighth, The Popes letters to King Edward and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
who then ruled that See, moved with their prayers, sent immediately to Edward,
and desired him forbear any further proceeding against the Scots, alleging
with a strange impudence, the Sovereignty of Scotland to belong unto the
Church. The Commissioners nothing pleased with the Popes claim, did
notwithstanding forbear to take notice of it, lest they should make him also
their enemy. An. 1300.
To the same purpose did the Pope write letters to Robert Winchelsey then
Archbishop of Canterbury, willing him to deal with the King for settling the
Bishops of Glasgow and Isles at liberty, and the submitting of all
controversies between him and the Scots to the judgment of the Apostolic See.

Kings Edwards answer to the Popes letter was, King Edward his answer.
That from all antiquity the direct and superior dominion of Scotland did
appertain to the Kingdom of England, even from Brutus unto his own time. That
it was never yet heard that the Kingdom of Scotland belonged to the Church,
nor did he think the Scots would confess so much. And that if he should yield
to his desire, he would unquiet his own Kingdom, and draw upon himself the
hatred of his subjects; which he knew his Holiness would not wish. Therefore
prayed him to hold him excused, and to be persuaded of his affection to the Sea
Apostolic. He moved likewise his Nobility, who were then met in Parliament at
Linclne, to write to the Pope to the same effect. Albeit somewhat more roundly
they told him, That the King their Lord ought not to undergo his judgment in
matters of that kind, neither send his Procurators about that business as he
had been required, seeing that was to call in doubt their Kings title, to the
prejudice of his Crown, the royal dignity, the liberties, customs, and laws of
England, which by their oath they were bound to observe; and would defend with
their lives. Nor would they permit the King, although he would, in any way to
attempt the same. Wherefore they besought his Holiliness to meddle no more in
that matter. The Pope having his hands full otherwise at the time, did upon
this dimit the Scottish Commissioners, who had made a long stay at Rome with
great promises of favor, when he should see it to be convenient. The
supplication directed to the Pope, is by some of our Writers said to be sent
after King Edwards second expedition into Scotland, but I rather think it was
at the first.

Whilst these things were a doing, William VVallace a Gentleman well descened,
William Wallace.
but of no great estate, began to show himself, and gathering (out of a desire
to free his country from the subjection of England) a company of such as would
adventure with him, effected things beyond all expectation; for he slew Sir
Hugh Cressingham, S. Daniel.
who was left Governor of the Realm, recovered most of the strengths and
Castles, Boeth. l. 14.
won again the Town of Berwick, expulsed the English Clergy that had planted
themselves in the kingdom, Buch. l. 8.
and if he had not been hindered by his own countrymen, had made his victory
absolute. King Edward being all that time in Flanders, and informed at his
return to England of the distractions amongst the Scots themselves, fell of new
upon them; and after a sore defeat given them at Falkirk, A Parliament S.
Andrews.
called a Parliament at S. Andrews, where all the Earls and Barons did again
swear obedience unto him, not one of any note (VVallace excepted) standing out
in the whole kingdom.

And now did the State seem to be wholly ruined, King Edward his course for
^^tirpating the Scots.
for Edward intending to make sure his conquest, led away captive all that had
the least ability to stir, and to extinguish (if it had been possible) the
very memory of the Nation; he abolished all the ancient Laws of Scotland,
traduced the Ecclesiastical r^ites to the form of England, destroyed the
antique monuments erected either by the Romans, or by their own progentitors;
burnt all the Registers, with that famous Library of Restennoth, (wherein,
besides many other volumes, were reserved the books which King Fergus the
second brought with him from Rome) removed the Marble Chair in which (as the
vulgar believed) the fate of the kingdom did consist; and to be short, left
nothing which might incite generous spirits to remember their former fortunes,
or encourage them in any sort to virtue and worthiness.

The Bishop of S. Andrews (who then remained at Artevile in France) upon the
report of this pitiful vastation, Scon. Catal. Episc. S. Andre^.
did contract such a melancholy, as within a few days he died; Pasl. l. ^.
his body was interred at the Predicants Church at Paris, and his heart brought
into Scotland, and entombed by Lamberton his successor in the wall of the
Church of S. Andrews, nigh to the sepulcher of Gamelinus. He was a man careful
of the Church, and sought by all means to better the estate thereof. At his
first admission to the Sea he purchased the Priory of May, from the Abbot of
Reading in England, which he gave afterward to the Prior, and Chanons; and had
he falled in peaceable times, would have performed many good works.

26. William Lamberton Parson of Campsey, and Chancellor of the Church of
Glasgow, was then preferred to the place. This man, after the Bishop of Glasgow
was sent prisoner to London, William Lamberton preferred to S. Andrews upon
the death of Fraser.
made his own peace with King Edward, and swear fealty unto him; which was the
thing that wrought his advancement; yet the Culdees, who claimed a chief voice
in the election of the Bishop, withstood him mightily at the first. Before the
Abbey was founded, the Culdees were the only electors of the Bishop:
afterward being excluded by a Bull of Pope Innocent the second, the election
was committed to the Prior and Chanons; Pasl. l. 6. c. 2.
whereupon arose a great controversy amongst them, which by the authority of
good King David was agreed in these times, that so many of the Culdees as would
become Chanons, and enter in the Monastery, The Culdees and Chanons strife.
should have voice with them. But to elude this appointment, a Mandat was
procured from the Pope to admit none in the Convent without the advice of the
Prior, and most part of the Chanons: by which means the Culdees were kept out,
and deprived quite of all voice in the election. William Comin their Provost
supposing to get some advantage of the Prior in these troublesome times, did
strongly oppose Lambertons election, and the matter by an appeal drawn to the
Consistory of Rome, they both went thither to debate their rights: in end
Lamberton prevailed, and was consecrated by Pope Boniface in June 1298. This
turned so to the disgrace of the Culdees, as after this time we hear no more of
them, the name and Order being by little and little quite extinguished.

About the same time were the Templars, The dissolution of the Templars.
otherwise called the Red-friers, made away; an Order instituted by Baldwin^
King of Jerusalem some 200. years before for the defense of that city, and the
safe conveying of all such as traveled thither, by the pious liberality of
Princes and others well affected; they were in a short time greatly enriched,
and for their wealth sore envied. Some report, that degenerating from their
first institution, they became execrably vicious. But Bocatius, Villanus,
Antonius, Na^clerus, Aventinus, and other Authorus do all purge them of the
crimes laid to their charge. The rumor in that time went, that Philip King of
France, to get one of his sons made King of Jerusalem, and possessed with their
revenues, did labor to have them and the Order condemned. But others say, that
the Pope (this was Clement the fifth) was mightily offended with them for
inveighing against the corruptions of his Court, and sinfulness of the Clergy;
which they maintained to be the only cause of all the miseries of Christendom,
especially of the Holy land. But howsoever their destruction was wrought, all
Authors testify that notwithstanding the cruel torments which diverse of that
profession were put unto, none of the crimes laid to their charge could ever be
made out against them.

Paulus Emilius in his history writes, Paulus Emilius.
that James Burgond the Principal of that Order being brought forth to die, and
whilst the fire was kindling before him, having his life offered, if he would
quickly declare, that what he had deponed in the time of his imprisonment, both
of himself and of his whole Order, was true, did utter these words; In these my
last actions, it being unpardonable impiety to lie, I freely and frankly
confess, that I committed a great offense, both against my self and my Order,
and that therein I have deserved a most tormenting punishment, because in
favor of them for whom I should not, and allured with the sweetness of life I
have in my tortures slanderously imposed many impieties, and detractions upon
the Order, which has ever deserved well of the Christian world. I have no need
of life obtained by entreaty, much less retained by lying, and defamation. This
said, and he being set to the pile, and fire kindled about the nether parts of
his feet to wring out from him a confession, even when the flames began to
waste and fire his entrails, he never swarved from the constancy of his former
speech, or showed the least change and alteration of mind. With him two other
of the same Order did suffer (one of them being of a great family, and brother
to the Daulphin of Vienna) who showed the like constancy. Plessis.
There be other Authors of no small esteem says Plessis, who report, That two
Cardinals being present at their execution, the great Master did summon Pope
Clement before the Tribunal of God, to answer for the wrongous judgment and
sentence given against them, and that the Pope died the same day to which he
was cited, being the 40. day after their execution. Partly by these
testimonies, and partly by the clause insert in the condemnatory Bull of Pope
Clement, in which it was said, Quanquam de jure non possumus, tamen pro
plenitudine potestatis dictum ordinem reprobamus, Albeit by way of right we
cannot, yet of the fullness of our power we reprobate and condemn the said
Order; by this I say it would appear that they were rigorously used: But
howsoever all the Kings of Christendom as combining together, caused them at
one instant to be apprehended within their dominions, and put from their
estates, which afterward were given to the Hospitalers and Knights of S. John.

But to return to Lamberton; B. Lamberton loses K. Edwards favor.
he stood not long in King Edwards favor, being suspected for the
entertainment he gave to James Douglas the son of Willam Douglas, who died in
Prison at Berwick. This Gentleman at the time of his fathers death was in Paris
following his studies, Buchan. l. 8.
and being advertised that his father was dead, and his estate given away to
strangers, returned home; where finding no means to maintain himself, Lesl. l.
7.
he took his recourse to the Bishop, who pitying the Gentleman's estate, Bo^th.
l. 14.
did accept him amongst his followers, and in the next expedition which King
Edward made into Scotland, taking the Gentleman with him to Striveling, did
present him to the King, entreating that he might have his lands restored, and
be admitted into his service; King Edward answered, That he could not look for
good service of him, whose father had proved such an enemy; and that the lands
were disponed to others that had merited better. So the Gentleman despairing to
find any favor with the King, did await still upon the Bishop.

Afterward hearing that Robert Bruce had taken the field, The Bishop committed
to Prison.
he stole away secretly, taking with him the Bishops horses and moneys, and
went to assist Bruce. King Edward apprehending this to be done with the Bishops
knowledge, did commit him to Prison, where he remained till the death of King
Edward, which happened in the year 1307.

King Robert Bruce was in this time crowned King, Robert Bruce crowned King.
and by the troubles which Edward the second found in the beginning of his
Reign, got leisure to settle himself in the Kingdom; so as when King Edward
returned (which was not till seven years after his fathers death) to take
possession of the Country, and came with a world of people, (they are reckoned
to be no fewer then two hundredth thousand) they were encountered by King Robert
at the River of Bannockburn, Boeth. l. 14.
and wholly defeated. Buchan. l. 8.
This victory did so much discourage the English; as after a long surcease of
war, when some eight years after they attempted to repair themselves, they
were forced with much dishonor to return and become suitors to the Pope to
intercede for peace.

To this effect a Legate was sent into Scotland, The Popes Legate sent to
dissuade the King from troubling England.
who had audience given him at Aberbrothock; his Proposition was, That the
Scots should desist from troubling England, till the Pope should hear the
questions that were amongst them, and be informed of the right which King
Edward had to the Crown of Scotland. King Robert answered, That the Pope could
not be ignorant of the estate of that business, the same having been often
exponed by the Commissioners of Scotland to diverse of his predecessors, in the
hearing of many Cardinals then alive, who could relate, Boeth. l. 14.
the insolent answers which Pope Boniface received, The King his answer to the
Legate.
when he desired the English to forbear their cruel oppression of the Scots:
And now, says he, when it has pleased God to give us the better by some
Victories, and that we have not only recovered our own, but are in a
possibility to make them live as good neighbors, they have recourse to such
Treaties, seeking only to gain time, that when they have settled their affairs,
they may fall again upon us with the greater force; but in this his Holiness
must excuse me, for I will not be so unwise as to let the advantage I have,
slip out of my hands.

The Legate not satisfied with this Answer, The Kingdom interdicted.
and interpreting it as a disobedience to the Apostolic See, did put the
Kingdom under Interdiction, and so departed. But the King to show how little
he esteemed these proceedings, followed the Legate at the heels, and entering
into England, wasted all the adjacent Countries with fire and sword. At his
return from that expedition an Embassage was sent to Rome for reconciling the
Kingdom, and a Letter subscribed by the Nobility and Barons to the Pope, Buch.
l. 8.
the Copy whereof I have thought good to insert. Sanctissimo in Christo Patri
and domino Iohani etc. filii sui humiles and devoti, A Letter sent by the
Nobles and Barons of Scotland to the Pope.
Duncamus Comes de Fife, Thomas Ranulphus Comes Moraviae, dominus Manviae, and
dominus Wallis Annandiae, Patricius Dumbar Comes Marchiae, Malisius Comes
Strathern, Malcolm us Comes de Lennox, Gulielmus Comes de Rosse, Magnus Comes
Cathannon and Orcaden, and Gulielmus Comes Sutherlandiae, Walterus Senescallus
Scotiae, Gulielmus de Souls Buttelarius Scotiae, Iacobus de Douglas, David de
Brichen, David Grahame, Ingelramus Umphravile, Johannes Monteith Custos
Comitatus ejusdem, Alexander Fraser, Gilbertus de Haya Constabularius Scotiae,
Robertus Marescallus Scotiae, Henricus de Santo Claro Panitarius Scotiae, Scon.
l. 13. c. 1.
Johannes Grahame, David Lindsay, Patritius Grahame, Johannes de Fenton,
Gulielmus de Abernethy, David de Weymis, Gulielmus de Montefixo, Fergusius de
Androssen, Eustathius Maxwell, Gulielmus Ramsey, Alanus de Moravia, Donaldus
Champell, Johannes Cameron, Reginaldus Loquhoir, Alexander Seaton, Andreas
Leslie, and Alexander de Straton, caeterique Barons and libere tenentes and
tota communitas Regni Scotiae etc.

Thereafter they said, That Scotland being an ancient Kingdom governed by a
continued succession of 97. Kings, and amongst the first that embraced the
faith of Christ, living under the patronage of S. Andrew the brother of S.
Peter, and graced with many privileges by the Popes his predecessors, had
always been free from usurpation of any stranger, before that Edward the father
of him that now reigns in England, did in the time of the interreign, when
the question was of a successor, labor by violence to establish the Kingdom
to himself: since which time they have endured many injuries, having their
Churches spoiled, their Monasteries burnt, and their Country intolerably
oppressed, till of late it has pleased God to stir up King Robert Bruce, who
as another Joshua or Judas Maccabeus had redeemed them by his valor; with whom
they resolved in defense of their Country to spend their lives. And if he
should forsake them (which they knew he would not do) so long as they w^ere any
of them in life, England should never bring them in subjection. Wherefore they
besought his Holiness to make the English content themselves with the spacious
bounds they possessed, in which there reigned sometimes seven Kings, and suffer
the Scots quietly to enjoy that little piece of ground which their progenitors
had long defended, and left free unto them. In end they entreated, To be
received again into his grace and favor, promising all dutiful obedience to
him, and to the Sea Apostolic. This was the tenor of the Letter, which the
Pope favorably accepted, and thereupon gave order that the ^nglish and Scots
should both be warned to a certain Diet for debating their rig^^s. The Diet
come, and the English not appearing, The Interdiction released.
the Pope after he had examined the case, and perused the rescripts of diverse
his predecessors, released the Interdiction which his Legate had published,
and declared the Scots to be reconciled to the Church.

The great discontents which were then amongst the English for the government
of affairs under Edward the third (who was then made King upon his Fathers
resignation) brought them to sue for peace: The English sue for peace.
which after a short Treaty was concluded, and the Peace confirmed by a Match
betwixt David Prince of Scotland, The conditions of the peace.
and Jane sister to King Edward. The Conditions of the Peace were these: That
King Edward should surrender by Charter his Title of Sovereignty of the Kingdom
of Scotland; Restore whatsoever Acts, Deeds, and Instruments he had of Homage
and Fealty done by the Kings of Scotland or their Nobility to any of his
antecessors; especially those which Edward the first his Grandfather had by
force extorted; and leave the Kingdom of Scotland as free as it was at the
death of King Alexander the third: That the Scots should quit and renounce all
the lands they held in England, and Stanmore be taken for the March both in
Cumberland and in Northumberland: That no Englishman should enjoy lands in
Scotland, unless he dwelt in the Country; And that in satisfaction of the
lands possessed by some of them who would not remain in Scotland, the King of
Scots should pay 30000. Marks. An. 1328.
Peace thus made, and the marriage with great solemnity performed (though the
Prince was then but seven years old) King Robert waxing sickly lived private
(in a sort) until his death, King Robert Bruce dies.
which happened some two years after. He was a King of incomparable wisdom and
valor, whose worth and virtue no pen can express.

Whilst this Peace was treating, B. Lamberton his death and virtues.
Lamberton departed this life, having continued Bishop thirty years: a Prelate
wise, active, and a great Benefactor to the Abbey, wherein for the most part he
kept his residence; The buildings, whereof now we only behold the ruins, were
erected upon his charges. It is reported, that being asked by one of his
servants on a night, Scon. l. in Catalogo episc. S. Andreae.
Why he did lay out so great sums for the Monastery, and forget to build for
himself? he answered, That ere he died, he hoped to build more then his
successors should well maintain. Which he indeed performed, for besides the
repairing of his Palace in S. Andrews, he built at Monymaill, Torrey, Dersey,
Inchmortach, Mufchart, Ketins, Lincon, Monymusk, and Stow in Twaddale, houses
of good receipt for himself and his successors. He finished the Cathedral
Church which had been many years a building, and dedicated the same with great
solemnity in the year 1318. He adorned the Chapter house with curious seats,
and ceeling, furnished the Chanons with precious vestments for the daily
service, stored their Library with Books, and at the Dedication of the Church
procured of the King (who honored the same with his presence) a yearly rent of
100. Marks to be paid to the Abbey forth of the Exchequer; which annuity was
afterward redeemed by the donation of the Church of Fordon in Mernis: he
himself the same very day gave unto the Prior and Convent the Churches of
Dersey and Abercromby, as the donations yet extant do testify; and dying at
the last in the Priors Chamber within the Monastery, was buried in the new
Church on the north side of the high Altar, in the year 1328.

The famous Doctor Ioannes Duns, Io. Duns.
alias Scotus, lived in his time; he was born in the Town of Duns in the
Country of Mers, Bal. cent. 14.
and being yet a child, after some taste he had got of the Latin Tongue,
Lesl. l. 7.
by the persuasion of two Minorite Friars, went to Oxford, studying Logic in
Merton College: then applying himself to Scholastic Divinity, grew to such a
perfection therein, as he was called The subtle Doctor; and was followed of a
number, who after his name are called to this day Scotistae. After he had
professed a while at Oxford, he was called to read Divinity in the University
of Paris, and from thence went to Colein, where he died of the Apoplexy. They
write that after he was laid in grave, his spirits did return, Camd. Brit.
and that striving to get forth, he was there smothered; whereupon an Italian
did write this Epigram: Quaecunque humani fuerant jurisque sacrati,
In dubium veniunt cunct a vocante Scoto.
Quid? quod and in dubium illius sit vita vocata,
Morte illum simili ludificante stropha,
Quum non ante virum vita jugularit adempta,
Quam vivus tumulo conditus ille foret.


The English Writers contend that this Scotus was born in England in Dunstane
Village within the Parish of Emilden in the Country of Northumberland; Duns
proved to be a Scottish man born.
and confirm it by the Manuscripts reserved in the Library of Merton College,
in one whereof are written these words; Explicit lectura subtilis Doctor is in
Universitate Oxoniensi (super libros Sententiarum) Doctor is Joannis Duns, nati
in Villa de Emilden vocata Dunstan contract a Duns in Comitatu Northumbriae,
pertinens ad domum scolasticorum de Merton Hall in Oxonio, and quondam dict ae
a domus socii. Thus ends the Lecture of the subtle Doctor in the University of
Oxford (upon the book of sentences) Doctor John Duns born in a Village of
Emilden callen Dunstan, or by abbreviation Duns, in the County of
Northumberland, pertaining to the house of Scholars of Merton Hall in Oxford,
and sometimes one of the Fellows of the said House. But this is no sufficient
proof; for it may be probably supposed that he living at Oxford in England, An.
1341.
when the wars were so hot betwixt the two Kingdoms, did dissemble his
Country, and pretend himself to be an English born to eschew the hatred of the
Students. In Colein where he might without danger show of what Country he was,
he did profess himself a Scot, and the Minorites (of which Order he was) did
therefore upon his Tomb erected in their Church, at the end of the Quire nigh
unto the high Altar, set this Inscription, which is there yet to be seen:
Scotia me genuit, Anglia suscepit,
Gallia edocuit, Germania tenet.
What a fine subtle wit he had, the Monuments left by him to posterity do
witness. He died young in the year 1308.

27. The Chapter after Lambertons death meeting for the election of a new
Bishop, Sir James Bane elected in Lambertons place.
went into factions, the one half giving their voices to Sir James Bane
Archdeacon of S. Andrews, Scon. l. in catal. episc. S. Andr.
the other half to Sir Alexander Kinnimmouth Archdeacon of Lothian; but Bane
being then in the Court of Rome, and advertised of the Bishops death, obtained
the Bishopric of the Pope, who in those times disposed all Church livings as
he thought good, having no regard to Canonical elections.

This Bishop lived four years only after his Consecration, The Bishop dies at
Bruges in Flanders.
and died at Bruges in Flanders: for upon breach of the Peace with England, and
the Coronation of Edward Baliol, when David with his Queen went into France, he
withdrew himself to the Low Countries. He was buried in the Monastery of the
Regular Chanons within Bruges.

28. How soon Bane his death was made known, The Sea of S. Andrews void nine
years.
the Convent meeting, elected William Bell Dean of Dunkeld. The Pope refusing
to confirm the election, William Landels chosen Bishop.
the Sea remained void for the space of nine years and more. At last William
Landells Provost of Kinkell upon the recommendation of the Kings of France and
Scotland, was preferred and consecrated by Pope Benedict the tenth at Avignion
in the year 1341.

This Prelate was nobly born, and the heir of great possessions in Scotland, of
a generous mind, and given to all goodness: he lived Bishop 44. years, and in
that time saw many alterations; King David Bruce peaceably repossessed in the
Kingdom; taken captive in the Battle of Duresme, (where he himself was made
Prisoner^ set again at liberty for the payment of one hundred thousand Marks
sterling: to the help whereof he procured from the Churchmen, with the consent
of Pope Innocent the sixth, the tenth of all Ecclesiastical livings within the
Kingdom for the space of three years: and after King David his death, his son
Robert Stewart called Robert the second crowned King; to the fifteenth year of
whose reign he attained, and then died in the Abbey of S. Andrews: his body was
buried in the Cathedral Church at the ^hancery door.

It was a custom before these times, The Bishops obtained liberty to dispose
of their goods by Testament.
that when any Bishop deceased, all his moveable goods were seized on by the
Kings Officers, as belonging to the King: this he got discharged, and liberty
granted to all the Prelates to dispose their goods by Testament to whom they
pleased; or if they should happen to die intestate, it was made lawful to
their nearest kinsmen to call and pursue for the same. The benefit of this
privilege he himself first enjoyed.

29. In his place the Prior of S. Andrews called Stephen, Stephen chosen Bishop
of S. Andrews, he dies at Anwick.
a man of great experience and wisdom, was chosen Bishop; who going toward
Rome for Confirmation, was taken Prisoner at Sea by the English, and died at
Anwick of sickness in the year 1385.

30. Walter Traill was then attending Pope Clement at Avignion, Walter Traill
elected in his stead.
a man singularly learned, and well expert both in the Civil and Chanon Law.
So great an opinion the Pope had of his worth, as at his preferment he did say
to those that stood by him: Scon. l. in Catal. episc. S. Andr.
This man deserves better to be Pope, then Bishop; the place is better
provided then the person. Which proved true in effect; for when he came to
govern the Sea, he administered all affairs most wisely. Nor had he the charge
only of the Church, but the whole affairs of the Kingdom being cast upon him
he governed the same in such sort as the Realm was never remembered to have
been better and more peaceably ruled. An. 1401.
Writers describe him to have been a man of courteous behavior, His virtues
and qualities.
affable, pitiful, and compassionate of those that were in any sort distressed,
a hater of vice, and of most sincere conversation. He lived unto a great age,
in much esteem, and died in the Castle of S. Andrews (built by himself) in the
year 1401. his body was interred with great solemnity amongst his predecessors,
with this inscription engraven upon his monument: Hic fuit Ecclesiae columna,
fenestra lucida,
Thuribulum aureum, Campana sonora.


31. Thomas Stewart son to Robert the second elected Bishop.
After him was Thomas Stewart son to King Robert the second (being then
Archdeacon of S. Andrews) elected Bishop; but he affecting the retired life,
refused to accept the place, which thereupon remained void the space of three
years (for the Chapter would not in his life time proceed to a new election:)
the rents were in the mean time assigned by King Robert the third (with the
Convents permission) to Walter Danzelston in recompense of the Castle of
Dumbriton, Scon. li. in Catalogo Episc, S. Andreae.
which he enjoyed by an hereditary title, and did at that time resign unto the
King.

32. Henry Wardlaw provided by Pope Benedict the 13. to the Bishopric.
Thomas Stewart deceasing, Gilbert Grinlaw Bishop of Aberdene, and Chancellor
of the kingdom, was postulated Bishop; but Henry Wardlaw presentor of Glasgow,
being then at Avignion, was provided thereto by Pope Benedict the thirteenth.
There was at this time a fearful schism in the Church, of all that we do read
the most scandalous, A Schism in the Church.
and of longest continuance; two, and sometimes three Popes warning one against
another, and condemning each another Ordinances; which did so divide the
Christian world, Martin the 5. chosen Pope by the Council of Constance.
and made such partakings as were pitiful. This schism lasting 29. years and
more, was at last quenched in the Council of Constance, and Martin the first
chosen Pope.

Scotland at that time living in the obedience of Benedict, The Abbot of
Pontiniac directed to intimate the election.
the Abbot of Pontiniac was directed to intimate the election of the Council,
and had audience given him in a Convocation of the Clergy at Perth; thither
came also one Harding a Minorite Friar, sent by Benedict to solicit the
Churches adherence to him against the decree of the Council, who taking for his
Theme these words, My son, do nothing without advicement, Harding a Minorite
persuades the Scots to continue in the obedience of Benedict.
so shall it not repent thee after the deed; held a long discourse of the
proceedings of the Council, and the informality thereof, affirming that none
was bound to obey and acknowledge the same. Master John Fogo a Monk of the
Abbey of Melrosse, replying to his Oration; began his speech with that precept
of the Apostle, John Fogo a Monk of Melross, refuses Hardings Oration.
Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and
refuting all the Minorites reasons brought against the Council, concluded that
whosoever did procure for Peter de Luna (this was Benedicts name before he was
elected Pope) was a very disturber of the Churches peace, and not to be
countenanced in any sort. The Clergy in end disclaiming Benedict, promised
obedience to Pope Martin, whom the Council had elected.

By occasion of this schism, The schism made way to the reformation.
the mouths of many were opened against the corrupt doctrine and manners of
Rome. John Wickliffe in England, John Hus and Jerome of Prague in Bohemia, did
openly preach against the Tyranny of the Pope, and the abuses introduced in the
Church, and in this country one called Ioannes Resby an English man, John
Wickliffi, Hus, and Jerome of Prague.
and de Schola Wickliffi, as the Story speaks, was brought in question for
some points of doctrine which he taught, and condemned to the fire. He was
charged by Master Laurence Lendors with forty heretical opinions, whereof we
have two only mentioned; James Resby Martyr.
One, that the Pope was no^ Christ's Vicar: The other, that he was not to be
esteemed Pope, if he was a man of wicked life. For maintaining these two
points, Paul Craw Martyr.
he suffered in the year 1407. Some 24. years after Paul Craw a Bohemian came
into Scotland, and for venting certain opinions touching the Sacrament of the
Supper, the adoration of Saints, and auricular Confession; he was also
condemned, and burnt at S. Andrews in the year 1432.

The death of these two Martyrs lies heavy upon the memory of this Bishop, The
Bishop his qualities.
who otherwise deserved well of the country and Church, for in his time he
labored much to have the riotous forms crept in among all sorts of men
repressed, An. 1412.
and was a man most hospitable; They report of him that the Masters of his
house complaining of the great numbers that resorted unto him for
entertainment, and desiring that for the ease of the servants he would
condescend to make a bill of household, that they might know who were to be
served, he condescended; and when his Secretary was called to set down the
names of the household, being asked whom he would first name, he answered, Fife
and Angus, (these are two large countries, containing millions of people:) his
servants hearing this, gave over their purpose of retrenching his family, for
they saw he would have no man refused that came to his house. The bridge at the
mouth of Eden was his work. And besides, he was the first that opened the
public Schools at S. Andrews, making Divinity, Laws, Logic, and all other
parts of Philosophy to be there taught.

In the founding of this University he took his example from that of Paris, The
University of S. Andrews founded in the year 1412.
and obtained the Popes confirmation thereof, which in the year 1412. being
brought from Rome by Alexander Ogilvy Master of Arts, was received with solemn
processions, fires of joy, sounding of bells, and all the tokens of gladness,
that could be expressed. Boeth. 1. 16.
Master John Sheves Official, Master William Stephen, afterward Bishop of
Dumblane, and Sir John Lister, a Chanon of the Abbey were appointed to read
Divinity; Master Laurence Lindors was ordained to read the Common law, and
Master Richard Cornwall the Civil; Master John Gaw, Master William Fowlis, and
Master William Crosier were chosen for Philosophy men, worthy to be remembered
for being the first instruments that were employed in that service, and the
attendance they gave upon it, having no allowance at all for their labors.

King James the first, King James the first a great favourer of the University.
at his return from England, 12. years after, did greatly advance this work by
the encouragement he gave to studies; for not only did he countenance
professors with his presence at their Lectures, but also took order that none
should be preferred to any Benefice, unless it was testified by them, that the
person recommended had made a reasonable progress in learning: Bucban. l. 10.
and for that effect kept a roll of the most qualified persons by him for the
filling of places that happened to fall void. The King his admonicion to the
Churchmen.
This that good King esteemed to be the most sure and easy way for banishing
ignorance forth of the Church, and ceased not to admonish the Churchmen that
were in places to live as they professed, and not to shame the bountyfulnesse
of Princes by abusing their Donations unto Riot and Luxury. Further, to allure
them by good example, he brought home the Carthusian Monks, who were at that
time greatly respected for their preciseness of living, and erected for them a
beautiful Monastery at Perth, Buchan. l. 10.
bestowing large revenues upon the same. The Bishop surviving the King some
seven years (for the King was treacherously murdered at Perth in the year
1437.) Boeth. l. 17.
departed this life in the Castle of S. Andrews the fixed day of April, Bishop
Wardlaw dies, A^^^ 1444.
1444. having governed that See 35. years, and was buried in the wall betwixt
the Chore and the Chapel called Our Ladies Chapel.

33. James Kennedy Bishop of Dunkeld, and Nephew to King James the first by his
sister the Countess of Angus, Bishop James Kennedy translated from Dunkeld to
S. Andrews.
was after Wardlaw his death elected Bishop by the Prior and Chanons; he
himself was then at Florence with Pope Eugenius the fourth, and had gone
thither out of a desire to have the disorders crept in among Churchmen
redressed, hoping to be strengthened with greater authority from thence. But
finding all things troubled in these parts, Eugenius keeping a Council at
Florence, whilst another was held at B^sile, and each of them condemning
another as unlawful; he returned with a resolution to do the best he could at
home by his own credit. Buchan. l. 12.
Upon his translation to S. Andrews, he did put all things in such order; as
no man then living did remember to have seen the Church in so good an estate;
Kennedy his just praises.
for partly by his own ensample, partly by the strict observance of discipline,
he induced them all to live as became men of their profession. And as he was to
the Clergy a pattern of virtue, so was he a great supporter of the King and
Kingdom by his wise and prudent counsel: For in that insurrection of the Earls
of Douglas and Crawford against King James the second, when the King had
determined to leave the country and fly into France; he found the means to
disunite the rebels, and break their forces, restoring the King to his estate,
and the kingdom to peace. An. 1466.
And in the beginning of King James the third his reign, when matters were very
troubled, he did so carry all things by his prudence, as whilst he lived, the
public estate received no harm. Of what and how great worth he was, it
appeared soon after his death, all things turning to confusion both in the
Church and State. A monument of his piety and magnificent mind toward the
advancement of letters, is the College he erected in S. Andrews, (now called
Saint Salvators College) which he built from the ground, Bishop Kennedy his
death, the year 1466.
provided with large revenues, and furnished with most costly ornaments. Thus
having lived a great benefactor to the public, and in much glory, he died at
S. Andrews in the year 1466. 22. years he sat Bishop in this See, and was
interred after his death in a sepulcher prepared by himself within the Chapel
of the same College.

34 Patrick Grahame his Nephew, Patrick Grahame chosen to succeed.
Buchannan calls him his brother (saying that they were born of one and the
same mother) being Bishop of Brichen for the time, a man of singular virtues,
was chosen to succeed. The Boyds, who then ruled the Court, envying his
preferment because of the variance betwixt the Kennedies and them, withstood
his journey to Rome, where he was to get his confirmation: but he not staying
upon the Kings license, which he saw without their favor could not be
obtained, took his way thither, and at his coming was well accepted of Pope
Paul the second.

Whilst he abode there (for he stayed a long time, The Sea of S. Andrews
erected in an Archbishopric
fearing to return so long as the Boyds were in credit) the old controversy of
the Archbishop of york his superiority over the Church of Scotland, was renewed
by George Nevill Archbishop of that See for the time. The matter drawn in
dispute before Pope Sixtus the fourth (for Paul the second was then dead)
sentence was given for the Church of Scotland, whereby it was declared a thing
unfitting, that an English Prelate should be Primate of Scotland, by reason of
the wars that might break forth betwixt the two kingdoms. And to the effect
a Primate should not be lacking from thenceforth in Scotland, the Sea of S.
Andrews by the Bull of Sixtus was erected in an Archbishopric, and the rest of
the Bishops of Scotland, twelve in number, ordained all to be subject unto that
See. Further, the Pope for the Bishops more graceing, did appoint him his
Legate for the space of three years, with commission to reform all abuses in
the Church, and to correct the dissoluteness of the Clergy.

How soon the Bishop was advertised of the alteration of Court, The Bulls of
Lega^ion and Primacie published.
and that the King was begun to govern of himself, he made haste to return,
sending before him the Bulls of Primacy and Legation to be published, thinking
the same should have purchased to him a great respect. Buchan. l. 12.
But he found himself deceived; for upon the publication (made at Edinburgh in
September 1472.) the Bishops out of spite and emulation, because of the
Primacie, the inferior Clergy fearing his rigor in executing the Legation,
and the Courtiers who made sale of all the Church Livings, apprehending that
the same would be reformed, combined all against him, and went to the King,
informing that he had accepted a Legation from the Pope without his license,
which was prohibited by the Laws of the kingdom, and might prove hurtful to
the king, and that in contempt of his Majesty he had gone to Rome without once
asking him license.

The King possessed with these informations did inhibit the Bishop how soon he
landed to exerce any part of his Legation, The King inhibiteth the exercise of
his Legation.
till the King should try the complaints preferred against him, assigning the
first of November for his compeirance. At the day he exhibited his Bulls, and
showed the power he had to reform abuses in the Ecclesiastical state entreating
the King not to impede him in the execution of his charge; but his adversaries
having corrupted some of the Kings Officers, and given (as it was said) the
sum of eleven thousand Marks in hand, his petition was not regarded: his
accusers to color their proceedings the better, made an appeal to the Pope,
offering to qualify before him the invalidity of the Bulls which he had
purchased. So he was dimitted with express charge not to use the title and
dignity of an Archbishop, nor to attempt any thing but that which the Bishops
his predecessors had been accustomed to do, by virtue of their places, until
the decision of the controversy.

A while after a fresh and bitter enemy was raised against him^ An. 1444.
William Shevez a young man of a quick and active spirit, having studied some
years at Lovaine under John Spernick (who was famous in those days for his
knowledge in the studies of physic, William Shevez recommended to the
Archdeaconry of S. Andrews.
and astrology) did insinuate himself in the favor of the Court, which then
was madly given to all sorts of divination; and the Archdeaconry of S. Andrews
falling void in the middle time, procured the Kings recommendation to the Bishop
for the same.

The Bishop toek exception at his studies, The Bishop rejects him as
insuf^^cient.
and in end gave him an absolute denial, as being insufficient for the charge,
and otherwise not trained up in the knowledge of Divinity. Shevez taking to
heart this disgrace (for so he did account it) combined with one Locky, Shevez
conspireth with the Rector.
Rector at that time in the University, and a professed enemy to the Bishop;
these two conspired against him, and Locky who pretended he was the Bishops
equal in jurisdiction, forging a quarrel, denounced him excommunicate: but the
Bishop contemning the sentence of his inferior, The Bishop contemning the
censure, has his goods confiscated.
carried himself both at home and abroad as he was wont; whereupon his enemies
(as the custom is, when Church censures are despised) did implore the Kings
assistance. Who being made to their effect, discharged the Bishop from coming
into any sacred place, declared his goods confiscat, and sequestring all his
servants, did appoint to him other attendants.

The rest of the Bishops to witness their gratitude, did present the King with
a sum of money, The ^^hop taken in favor.
which they had collected (with grudge enough) amongst the inferior Priests;
not the less, shortly after by the intercession of friends, and the advancing
of moneys to the rulers of the Court, the Bishop was taken in favor, who then
thinking all his troubles to be overpast, withdrew himself to his house of
Monymaill; where he was scarce well settled, Buchan. l. 12.
when the bankers of Rome stirred up by his adversaries, charged him with
payment of the moneys, wherein he stood obliged for his Bull of privileges.
The Bishop of new troubled by the bankers of Rome.
He not able to give satisfaction (for the most of his rents had been taken up
yearly by the Kings Factors; and what he could purchase from his friends, was
all bestowed at his late reconcilement amongst Courtiers) was of new accursed,
his person arrested, his rents lifted by the Kings Officers, and a guard
appointed to attend him in his own Castle at S. Andrews.

In this miserable condition not knowing what to do, The Bishop falling in some
distraction is committed to Shevez.
he fell in some trouble of mind, and thereupon committed to the custody of
Shevez his mortal enemy, who was declared his coadjutor, by reason of his
distraction; yet the malice of his adversaries not satisfied herewith, at Rome
they accused him of heresy, schism, simony, and a number of other scandalous
crimes; the trial whereof was commended to one Husman the Popes Inquisitor, and
to Shevez.

Diverse light and ridiculous accusations were brought against him, Buch^ n. l.
12.
and amongst other points, he was charged to have said three Masses in one day;
whereas in those times it was difficile to find a Bishop, that in three months
did say one Mass; yet the process going on, witnesses were brought, who
verified the accusations, and his enemy sitting Judge, The Bishop condemned to
lose his dignity.
he was sentenced as guilty of schism, simony, heresy, and other crimes, and
thereupon decerned to have lost his dignity, and condemned to perpetual prison.

35. The sentence pronounced, Shevez provided to the Archbishopric.
Shevez posted to Rome, got the sentence approved, and was himself provided to
the Archbishopric. All these crosses this innocent Bishop sustained most
patiently: which his adversaries perceiving, they procucured him to be put in
close prison within the Isle of Inchcolme, where he had four keepers watching
him that he should not escape. War afterward breaking up with England, out
of a fear that the English Navy (which was then at Sea) might fall upon the
Isle, he was transported to Dunfermlin, and from thence to the Castle of
Lochleven, where at last he died. This end had that worthy man, in virtue and
learning inferior to none of his time, oppressed by the malice and calumnies
of his enemies, Patrick Grahame dies at Lochleven.
chiefly for that they feared reformation of their wicked abuses by his means.
The title rather then the Prelacie it self, he enjoyed 13. years, and was
buried in S. Servanus Isle, within the Chapel of Lochleven.

All things went now in the Church daily from ill to worse, for these who did
affect a reformation^ An. 1478.
and lived in some hope thereof, beholding the course of things, betook
themselves to a private life. At Court benefices were sold, or then bestowed as
rewards upon flatterers, and the Ministers of unlawful pleasures; and in the
Church Canonical elections, especially in the Monasteries, were quite
abrogated. The King presenting Abbots and Priors unto the Pope, none were
refused that came with his recommendation. The Church altogether in disorder.
Thus was Alexander Thomison Abbot of Dunfermlin (canonically elected by the
Monks some years before) extruded from his place, and Henry Chrichton then
Abbot of Paisley surrogated in his stead by the Pope at the Kings intercession.
Likewise Robert Shaw of Minto was in the same manner preferred into Paisley,
the consent of the Convent not once required. So as the Monasteries, which were
founded for pious and charitable uses, came by little and little in the hands
of fecular men, who having had their education in the Court, brought with them
from thence the manners thereof, shaking off all care of discipline, and
neglecting the duties of hospitality. This begat great offenses, and made the
foundations themselves abhorred; partly through the dissoluteness of those
that lived in the places, and partly because men saw them inverted to other and
contrary uses, then the first Founders had appointed. Neither were the
Monasteries only corrupted, but the whole Ecclesiastic state became also
infected; Ignorance and Impiety every where prevailing, till in end the Laity
putting their hands to the work, made that violent and disordered Reformation;
whereof in the next book we shall hear.

But to return to Shevez; he receiving the Pall from the Pope in sign of
Archiepiscopal dignity, Shevez receives the Pall, and is invested Anno 1478.
was publicly invested therewith in the Church of Halirudhouse, in the year
1478. the King and diverse of the Nobility being there present. How he governed
the Sea, I find not, but his entry being such as we have seen, did not promise
much good. Lose. l. 8.
I read in some Writers, that he was induced by the King and the Duke of
Albany, to dimit his place in the favors of Master Andrew Stewart Provost of
Linclowden, (the Kings Uncle) and to content himself wirh the Bishopric of
Murray, whereunto the said Master Andrew was provided; but it seems this
charge took not effect, for both the one and the other possessed their own
benefices until their deaths.

Some years before Shevez his death there arose a controversy betwixt him and
Robert Blacater Archbishop of Glasgow, Archbishop of S. Andrew and Glasgow at
diffension.
concerning their jurisdictions. For Blacater had obtained of Pope Alexander
the sixth, the erection of the Sea of Glasgow into an Archbishopric, and
thereunto were the Bishops of Galloway, Argyle, and Isles ordained to be
subject. Shevez refusing to acknowledge him for an Archbishop, both the Clergy
and Noblemen went into factions, some taking part with the one, and some with
the other. But this dissension was soon appeased; howbeit with the grudge of
both parties, and Glasgow declared to be Metropolitan Church, the honor of
precedencie reserved always to S. Andrews.

Now whilst the Prelates were contending for pre-eminence, The History of the
Church of Scotland.
certain Articles were dispersed in the countries of Kile and Cunningham
against the doctrine taught in the Church, which stirred up diverse to examine
the truth of Religion then professed.

The Articles were these.

1. That Images ought not to be made, nor worshipped. 2. That the relics of
Saints ought not to be adored. 3. That it is not lawful to fight for the faith.
4. That Christ gave the power of binding and loosing to Peter only, and not to
his successors. 5. That Christ ordained no Priests to consecrate. 6. That
after the consecration in the Mass there remains bread, and that the natural
body of Christ is not there. 7. That tithes ought not to be paid to
Ecclesiastical persons. 8. That Christ at his coming did abrogate the power of
secular Princes. 9. That every faithful man and woman is a Priest. 10. That the
Unction of Kings ceased at the coming of Christ. 11. That the Pope is not the
successor of Peter, An. 1513.
except in that which our Savior spoke to him, when he said, Go behind me
Satan. 12. That the Pope deceives the people with his Bulls and Indulgences.
13. That the Mass profits not the souls that are in Purgatory. 14. That the
Bishops blessing is of no value. 15. That Indulgences should not be granted to
fight against the Saracens. 16. That the Pope exalts himself above God, and
against God. 17. That the Pope cannot remit the pains of Purgatory. 18. That
the excommunication of the Church is not to be feared. 19. That in no case it
is lawful to swear. 20. That Priests may have wives according to the Ordinance
of the old Law, and that true Christians receive the body of Christ every day.
The maintainers of these Articles were by an opprobrious title called
Lollards; but whether or not they did hold all these opinions, may well be
doubted, seeing we have them only from the report of adversaries, whose chief
study was to make them and their doctrine odious; and granting that they held
the same, we are not to wonder, that in the first breaking up of the light men
saw not the truth in every point, considering the darkness and gross
ignorance of preceding times.

For dispersing these Articles, The dispersers of these Articles cited before
the Council.
some thirty persons were cited before the Council, of whom the principals
were, George Campbel of Sesnock, Adam Read of Barskining, John Campbel of
Newmilus, and Andrew Shaw of Polkennet. The Archbishiop of Glasgow laying these
things to their charge, they answered all with such confidence, as it was
thought safest to dimit them, with admonition to take heed of new doctrines,
and content themselves with the faith of the Church. Of Shevez I find nothing
said all this time, only that he departed this life at S. Andrews in the year
1496. and was buried in the Cathedral Church before the high Altar.

36. James Stewart brother to King James the fourth, James Stewart brother to
King James the fourth elected Bishop, Anno 1503.
was provided after Shevez to the Sea, being yet very young, and lived but a
short space, for he died at S. Andrews in the year 1503. his body was interred
in the Cathedral Church amongst the Bishops his predecessors. In an old Charter
produced by one of the vassals, I have seen him thus styled. Iacobus sancti
Andreae Archiepiscopus, Dux Rossiae, Marchio de Ormond, Comes de Ardmannach,
Dominus de Brichen and Never, Commendatorius perpetuus Monasterii de
Dunfermline, ac Regni Scotiae Can^ellarius. The Charter is dated in this
manner; Apud Ecclesiam nostram Metropolitanam sancti Andre^, 7o die Mensis
Februarii, An. Dom. 1502. and nostrarum administrationum quinto.

37. To him succeeded Alexander Stewart, B. Alexander Stewart succeeds.
base son to King James the fourth, a youth of great hopes; he died with his
father in the unfortunate battle of Flowdon, Anno 1513. and was much lamented
by Erasmus Roterodamus, under whom he had studied some years. I find him
styled Chancellor of the Kingdom in one of the vassals Characters, which is
dated in the year 1512.

38. Three strong competitours fell then at strife for the place, A Competition
for the Archbishop.
Gawane Douglas Bishop of Dunkeld, John Hepburn Prior of S. Andrews, and Andrew
Forman Bishop of Murray. Gawane Douglas was nobly born (for he was brother to
the Earl of Angus) and greatly esteemed for his virtue and learning. He upon
the Queens presentation (who at that time governed all public affairs)
possessed himself with the Castle of S. Andrews. Buchan. l. 3.
Lest. l. 3.
Hepburne a factious man and of great power procured the Chanons to elect him,
and under this color expulsed Douglas his servants, fortifying the house with
a Garrison of soldiers. Forman was provided by the gift of Pope Julius the
second, and made Legatus a latere, (for by his many employments in France, and
at the Court of Rome, he had gained to himself much credit) But the Power of
Hepburn was such as for a while no man could be found to publish Formans Bulls;
Alexander Lord Home (who some write was Formans Uncle) was at last moved by the
dimission of Coldingham in favor of his brother David to take his part, and
coming to Edinburgh proclaimed the Popes gift, and Formans Legation with great
solemnity.

This Act divided the Homes and the Hepburnes, The Bishop of Dunkeld quiteth
his interest.
who after that time were never in sound friendship. Douglas not willing to be
seen more in that contention, did quit his interesse, An. 1522.
leaving the quarrel to the other two, who did pursue it both. Hepburn posting
to Rome. labored to have his election confirmed, but prevailed not. Forman
because of his Legation was followed of the Churchmen for the most part, and
acknowledged by all the vassals of the Sea; yet the jarring still continued
until the Duke of Albany his coming into the country, The Duke of Albany
pacifieth the Competitors.
who at his acceptance of the Regency^ brought them to a submission, and
pacified all these strifes, distributing the Benefices in this manner. To
Forman he left the Archbishopric of S. Andrews, and Abbacy of Dunfermlin,
which was given him by the Pope in Commendam. The Abbacy of Aberbrothock, Lesl.
l. 9.
which Forman likewise possessed, he gave to James Beaton Archbishop of
Glasgow, and Chancellor for the time. The Prior John Hepburn was contented
with a pension of three thousand Crows, which Forman was ordained to pay him
during life; and upon his brother Master James Hepburn was the Bishopric of
Murray bestowed. Alexander Gordon Cosen to the Earl of Huntley, was made
Bishop of Aberdene, James Ogilvy a brother of the house of Ogilvy, Abbot of
Drybrugh, and George Dundass of the house of Dundass, Commendator of the
preceptory of Torphichen. This partition did satisfy them all, and so they
were fully reconciled. Some few years after, Forman died at Dunfermlin, where
he was also buried; A plain and open man, but said to be profuse; besides the
Benefices he possessed in Scotland, he was Archbishop of Burges in France, by
the gift of King Lewis the twelfth; which did greatly increase his means.

39. Upon the death of Forman, James Beaton translated from Glasgow to S.
Andrews.
James Beaton Archbishop of Glasgow, and Chancellor of the Kingdom, was
translated to S. Andrews. Master Gawane Dumbar, to whose instruction the young
King was committed, was preferred to this place. The troubles of the time were
great because of the minority of the King, and therein this Bishop had not the
least part, being chased from the Court, and from his own dwellings, glad to
lurk, and shift himself a long time from place to place amongst friends, Lesl.
l. 9.
to eschew the violence of the Dowglasses, who had settled themselves about the
King, Buchan. l. 14.
and swayed all affairs at their pleasures. But it was not long ere he made
even with them; The Queen Mother (who had taken the Earl of Angus to her
husband) falling into dislike of him, and pursuing a divorce in the Bishops
Court, which she easily obtained: Thereupon the young King his escape from the
Dowglasses, and their exile in England, at which time the Bishop was reponed to
his office and place; seventeen years he lived Bishop of this See, and was
herein most unfortunate, that under the shadow of his authority many good men
were put to death for the cause of Religion, though he himself was neither
violently set, nor much solicitous (as it was thought) how matters went in the
Church.

The first that was called in question, Mr. Patrick Hamilton Abbot of Ferm
Martyr.
was Master Patrick Hamilton Abbot of Ferm, a man nobly descended (for he was
Nephew to the Earl of Arrane by his father, and to the Duke of Albany by the
Mother) and not much past twenty three years of age; This young gentleman had
traveled in Germany, and falling in familiarity with Martin Luther, Buchan. l.
14.
Philip Melanchthon, Francis Lamberd, and other learned men was by them
instructed in the knowledge of true Religion; in the profession whereof he was
so zealous, as he was resolved to come back into his country, and communicate
the light he had received unto others. At his return, wheresoever he came, he
spared not to lay open the corruptions of the Roman Church, and to show the
errors crept into Christian Religion: whereunto many gave ear, and a great
following he had both for his learning and courteous behavior to all sorts of
people. The Clergy grudging at this, under color of conference, enticed him to
the city of S. Andrews; and when he came thither, appointed Friar Alexander
Campbel to keep company with him, and to use the best persuasions he could to
divert him from his opinions. Sundry conferences they had, wherein the Friar
acknowledging, that many things in the Church did need to be reformed, and
applauding his judgment in most of the points, his mind was rather confirmed,
History of the Church. p. 21.
then in any sort weakened. Thus having stayed some few days in the city,
whilst he suspected no violence to be used, under night he was apprehended
being in bed, and carried prisoner to the Castle; the next day he was presented
before the Bishop, accused for maintaining the Articles following.

1. That the corruption of sin remains in children after their Baptism. An.
1527.
2. That no man by the power of his free will can do any good. 3. That no man
is without sin so long as he lives. Articles wherewith the Abbot was charged.
4. That every true Christian may know himself to be in the state of grace. 5.
That a man is not justified by works, but by faith only. 6. That good works
make not a good man, but that a good man does good works, and that an ill man
does ill works, yet the same ill works truly repented, make not an ill man. 7.
That Faith, Hope, and Charity are so linked together, that he who has one of
them has all, and he that lacks one, lacks all. 8. That God is the cause
of sin in this sense, that he withdraws his grace from man, and grace
withdrawn, he cannot but sin. 9. That it is a devilish Doctrine to teach, that
by any actual penance remission of sin is purchased. 10. That auricular
Confession is not necessary to salvation. 11. That there is no Purgatory. 12.
That the holy Patriarchs were in heaven before Christ's Passion. 13. That the
Pope is Antichrist, and that every Priest has as much power as the Pope.
Being desired to express his mind touching these Articles, he said, That he
held the first seven to be undoubtedly true, whereunto he offered to set his
hand: the rest (he said) were disputable points, but such as he could not
condemn, unless he saw better reasons then yet he had heard. Manuscript
process which is extant under the hands of the Theologues.
After some conference kept with him on each Article, the whole were remitted
to the judgment of the Theologues. There met to this effect Master Hugh
Spence, Provost of S. Salvators College, Master James Waddall Parson of Flisk,
and Rector of the University, Master James Simson Official of S. Andrews,
Master Thomas Ramsay, professor of the holy Scriptures, Master John Grison
Theologue, and Provincial of the Black Friars, John Tillidaff Warden of the
Gray Friars, Master Martine Balfoure, and Master John Spence Lawyers; Sir
Alexander Young, Batchelar of Divinity, Sir John Annand, Chanon of of S.
Andrews; Friar Alexander Campbell Prior of the Black Friars, and Master Robert
Bannerman Regent of the Pedagogy. These men within a day or two, presented
their Censure of the Articles, judging them all Heretical, and contrary to the
faith of the Church. This subscribed with all their hands, and delivered to the
Bishop in a solemn meeting, kept in the Cathedral Church the first of March
1527. sentence was pronounced against the young Gentleman, declaring him an
Heretic: and giving him over in the hands of the secular power to suffer
punishment due to Heresy.

There assisted the Bishop in that meeting, The subscrivers of the sentence.
Gawine Archbishop of Glasgow, George Bishop of Dunkeld, John Bishop of
Brichen, and William Bishop of Dumblane, Patrick Prior of S. Andrews, David
Abbot of Aberbrothock, George Abbot of Dumfermling, Alexander Abbot of
Cambuskenneth, Henry Abbot of Lundors, and John Prior of Pettenweem, the Dean,
Subdean, and Thesaurer of the Church of Glasgow, with the Rectors of Stobo,
Areskin, Carstares, Goven and Glasgow: All which set their hands to the
sentence, and to give it the greater authority, whosoever were of any
estimation in the University, were made to subscrive the same, amongst whom was
the Earl of Cassels, a child of thirteen years old.

The same day, The manner of his execution, and speech at his dying.
(for the execution was hastened, lest the King who was gone at that time in
Pilgrimage to S. Duthak in Rosse should impede the proceeding) he was condemned
by the secular Judge, and in the afternoon led to the place of his suffering,
which was appointed to be at the gate of S. Salvators College. Being come to
the place, he put off his Gown, and gave it with his Bonnet, Coat, and other
apparel to his servant, saying, This stuff will not help in the fire, yet
will do thee some good, I have no more to leave thee, but the ensample of my
death, which I pray thee keep in mind. For albeit the same be bitter, and
painful in man's judgment, yet is it the entrance to everlasting life, which
none can inherit, that denies Christ before this congregation. Then was he
tied to the stake, about it a great quantity of coal, wood, and other
combustible matter was heaped, whereof he seemed to have no fear, but seriously
commending his soul into the hands of God, held his eyes fixed toward the
heavens. The Executioner firing the powder that was laid to kindle the wood,
his lest hand and the side of his face was a little scorched therewith, yet the
fire did not kindle. History of the Church.
Whereupon some were sent to the Castle to bring more powder; whilst this was
bringing, he uttered diverse comfortable speeches to them that stood by: The
Friars all that time molesting him with their cries, bidding him convert, pray
to our Lady, and say, Salve Regina: amongst them none was more troublesome then
Friar Alexander Campbell, who, as we said, kept company with him at his first
coming to the City; often he besought him to depart, and not to vex him; His
appealing of Friar Campbell.
but when he would not cease his crying, he said, Wicked man, thou know I am
not an heretic, and that it is the truth of God, for which I now suffer; so
much thou did confess unto me in private, and thereupon I appeal thee to
answer before the Judgment seat of Christ.

The powder by this time was brought, and the fire kindled, after which with a
loud voice he was heard to say, How long, O Lord, shall darkness oppress this
Realm? how long will thou suffer this tyranny of men? and then closed his
speeches with these words, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. His body was quickly
consumed (for the fire was vehement) but the patience and constancy he showed
in his dying, stirred up such compassion in the beholders, Friar Campbell dies
of a Frenzy. History of the Church. p. 23.
as many of them doubted not to say, that he suffered an innocent, and was
indeed a true Martyr of Christ. This opinion was further confirmed by the death
of Friar Campbell, and the manner of it; for within a year and less, he fell
into a frenzy, and died as one desperate.

The rumor of this execution stirred up some in all the quarters of the
Kingdom to enquire of the reasons of his suffering, Numbers brought to the
knowledge of the truth by his suffering.
and what the articles were for which he was condemned; by the inquisition
whereof, many were brought to understand, and apprehend otherwise of the truth
of things, then formerly they did. In the University it self was left so deep
an impression of his Doctrine, Buchan. l. 14.
as could not afterward be extinguished; yea diverse of the Friars fell after
this time openly in their Sermons to condemn the errors, Friar Seaton
suspected of Heresy.
and abuses of the Clergy. Friar Alexander Seaton one of the Dominican Order, a
man reasonably learned, and for the time Confessor to King James the first,
preached ordinarily at S. Andrews all the Lent following, History of the Church.
where taking for his subject the Commandments of the Law, he did insist much
on these points: That the Law of God is the only rule of righteousness: That
if Gods Law be not violated, no sin is committed: That it is not in man's power
to satisfy for sin: and that the forgiveness of sin, is no otherwise
purchased, then by unfeigned repentance, and true faith, apprehending the mercy
of God in Christ. Of Purgatory, Pilgrimage, prayer to Saints, Merits and
Miracles, which was the usual matter of Fri^rs Sermons, not a word he spoke;
whereupon he grew to be suspected as one inclining to heresy. About the end of
Lent, upon some occasion he went to Dundy, and being there, was advertised,
that another of his Order was set up to resute the points of Doctrine he had
taught; which moved him to return to S. Andrews, and confirm the same points
which he had formerly delivered, adding somewhat besides of the virtues
requir^d by the Apostle in a good and faithful Bishop.

Thereupon he was called before the Bishop, Friar Seaton called before the
Bishop.
and charged to have affirmed in his Sermon, that a Bishop should be a
Preacher, and that the Bishop who preached not, was a dumb dog, and one that
fed not the flock, but his own belly. The Friar answering, That he had said
indeed, that S. Paul required a Bishop to be a Teacher, and that Esaias called
them dumb dogs who did not preach, but that he himself had affirmed nothing.
I declared, said he, what the Spirit of God said, with whom if men offend not,
they cannot justly offend with me; and those that have reported my speeches,
seem to be unlearned affes, who cannot put a difference betwixt that which
Esaias, and S. Paul speaks, and that which of my self I speak. I never said that
you my Lord and the other Bishops who preach not, are dumb dogs, I only told
what the Prophet and the Apostle said in that case.

This answer galled the Archbishop exceedingly, yet knowing the man to be one
of an audacious and bold spirit, he dissembled his anger, minding to bring him
in discredit with the King; which was easily wrought, because of the liberty
the Friar used in reproving the Kings licenciousnesse. So perceiving the Kings
countenance altered toward him, The Friar flies to Berwick, and from thence
writes to the King.
and fearing some danger, if he should stay any more at Court, he fled to
Berwick, and from thence wrote unto the King, showing the cause of his sudden
departing to be the fear he conceived of the authority of the Bishops, who had
behaved themselves as Kings, and would not admit any man, of what state or
degree soever he was, if once they did account him an heretic to speak in his
own defense; Notthelesse for himself, he offered to return, and justify his
cause, so as he might have audience. Withal, he advertised the King, that it
concerned him in duty to see that every one who is accused of his life, be
permitted to use his lawful defenses: for howsoever the Prelates held, that
such matters belong not to the cognition of the Prince, he would make the
contrary manifest by their own laws, if he should be once heard. Wherefore he
besought his Highness not to be led any more by their informations, but to use
the authority committed unto him by God, and not to suffer these Tyrants
proceed against him, till he was brought to his answer, which he would not
refuse to give, so as he might be assured to do it with the safety of his life.

This letter receiving no answer, He becomes Chaplain to the Duke of Suffolk.
after he had stayed a while at Berwick he went to London, and became Chaplain
to Charles Duke of Suffolk, in whose service he died. In the book of Martyrs I
read, that Gardener Bishop of Winchester, by his crafty and subtle persuasions,
induced him to make a recantation of sundry points at Paul's Cross; Acts of
Martyrs.
but what his belief was of most of the Articles of Christian faith, it
appears by the Treatises he left behind him; his examination by Gardener and
Bonner (which he likewise published, discovering the policies they used to
circumvene him) does testify his constancy in the truth, and that he never
denied any point which formerly he had taught.

Soon after his flight, Henry Forest Martyr.
one Henry Forest was delated for saying that Master Patrick Hamilton died a
Martyr, and thereupon was brought to S. Andrews: but because the probation was
not clear enough, Friar Walter Lainge was appointed to confess him. The simple
man that feared no harm, being asked by the Friar what was his judgment of
Master Patrick, answered, That he esteemed him to be a good man, and that the
Articles for which he was condemned, might well be defended. This confession
revealed by the Friar, was taken for a sufficient evidence, and the poor man
condemned to be burnt as an heretic. As he was leading out to be degraded, he
complained grievously of the Friar who had betrayed him, crying out, Fie on
falsehood, fie on false Friars, revealers of confession. Never let any man trust
them after me. They are despisers of God, and deceivers of men. And when they
were taking from him his Orders, (for he was of the Order of the Bennet and
Collet (as they used then to speak) he cried aloud, Take not only from me your
Orders, but your Baptism also. So being carried to the place of execution,
(which was appointed to be at the North style of the Abbey, to the end the
heretics of Angus might see the fire) he suffered death most constantly.
Whilst they were consulting upon the manner of his execution, one John Lindsay
a plain and simple man who attended the Bishop, gave advice to burn him in some
hollow cellar: for, the smoke, says he, of Master Patrick Hamilton has
infected all those on whom it blew.

Yet the persecution still proceeding, Diverse cited to appear at Halirudhouse.
diverse were cited to appear at Halirudhouse, by James Hay Bishop of Ross, who
sat as Commissioner for the Archbishop of S. Andrews, amongst others James
Hamilton of Levingston, brother-germane to Master Patrick, with Katharine
Hamilton his sister. The Gentleman was advised by the King secretly, (for he
loved the man) not to appear, and was for his contumacie condemned. His sister
appearing, and questioned upon the point of justification by works, answered
simply, that she believed no person could be saved by their works. Master John
Spence the Lawyer, (whom we named before) held a long discourse with her about
that purpose, telling her that there were diverse sorts of works, works of
congruity, and works of condignity; in the application whereof he consumed a
long time. An. 1534.
The woman growing thereupon into a chafe, cried out, Work here, work there,
what kind of working is all this? I know perfectly that no works can save me,
but the works of Christ my Savior. The King was present all the time, and
laughed heartily at the answer, yet taking the Gentlewoman aside, he moved her
to recant her opinions, and by her ensample diverse others at the same time
abjured their profession: of which number were, Sir William Kirk Priest, Adam
Daes, Henry Cairnes, Master William Iohnston Advocate, Master Henry Henryson
Schoolmaster in Edinburgh, and John Stewart In-dweller in Leith.

These persons scarce dismissed, Normand Gourlay and David Straiton Martyrs.
Master Normand Gourlay, and David Straiton were brought to trial. Master
Normand was charged for denying Purgatory, and saying that the Pope had no
jurisdiction within Scotland; David Straiton was charged with the same points,
and further was accused, for maintaining that Tithes were not due to Churchmen:
Acts of Martyrs.
which point he denied, confessing that the tithes of some fishes which his
servants had taken at sea, being too rigorously exacted, he said, that if they
would have the tithes of the fishes they should go and receive them where the
stock was taken; and that he gave order to his servants to cast every tenth
fish they took into the Sea, because he saw nothing but rigor would content
the Church.

This Gentleman had been in former times very quarellous and turbulent, History
of the Church.
but was then become another man, through frequenting the company of John
Areskyn of Dun, by whom it pleased God to enlighten his mind with the knowledge
of his truth, and to kindle in his heart such a love to the same, as usually he
was heard to pray for strength and spiritual courage, that if he should be
brought to suffer for Christ, no fear of death nor corporal pain might cause
him shrink. And it clearly appeared, when he was brought to his answer, that
his prayers were heard. For notwithstanding of the offers made him to recant
and burn his bill, (as they spoke at that time) he stood most constantly to the
defense of the truth, and gave great encouragement to Master Normand Gourlay,
who suffered with him. These two were burnt at one stake the 27. of August,
1534.

At the same time was sentence pronounced against Alexander Alesse, Master John
Fife, Alexander Alesse and others, fly to England.
John Mackbee, and one Macdongal, who were summoned to the said Diet, and
compeered not. These persons fled afterward into England, where they remained
a while well entertained. Alexander Alesse by the commendation of the Lord
Cromwell came in favor with King Henry the eighth, and was called commonly the
Kings Scholar; as he was indeed a man of good learning, and gave thereof a
notable proof in his dispute with Stockeslie, Bishop of London, before the
Convocation in the year 1537. After Cromwels death, taking with him Master John
Fife, Bal. cent. 14.
he went into Saxony, where they lived Professors together a long time in the
University of Lipsia. Macdongal went also in their company, and came to good
credit, being elected Burgomaster of one of their Towns. John Macbee, commonly
ealled Doctor Machabeus, during his abode in England, was liberally entertained
by Nicol Saxton, Bishop of Salisbury, who made much account of him, but
afterward going to Denmark became Chaplain to King Christian, in whose service
he died in the year 1550. Thus it pleased God to provide for these men after
their exile.

Some four years after, Diverse accused of heresy in a meeting at Edinburgh.
the Bishops kept a meeting at Edinburgh in the month of February, 1538. where
diverse were accused of heresy, and condemned to die. Friar Killore, Friar
Beverage, Sir Duncane Simpson Priest, Robert Forrester a Gentleman, and Dean
Thomas Forest a Chanon of S. Colinsinch, called commonly The Vicar of Dolor.
An. 1538.
This poor man not long before had been called before the Bishop of Dunkeld his
Ordinary, The Vicar of Dolor his conference with the Bishop of Dunkeld.
for preaching every Sunday to his Parishioners upon the Epistles and Gospels
of the day, and desired to forbear, seeing his diligence that way brought him
in suspicion of heresy. If he could find a good Gospel, or a good Epistle that
made for the liberty of the holy Church, the Bishop willed him to preach that
to his people, and let the rest be. The honest man replying, That he had read
both the new Testament and the old, and that he had never found an ill Epistle
or an ill Gospel in any of them. The Bishop said, I thank God I have lived well
these many years, and never knew either the old or new. I content me with my
Portuise, and Pontifical, and if you Dean Thomas leave not these fantasies,
you will repent, when you cannot mend it. Dean Thomas answered, History of the
Church.
that he believed it was his duty to do what he did, and that he had laid his
account with any danger that might follow. So at this time being brought in
question with the persons above named, Vetimo Febr. 1538.
they were all together condemned, and burnt in the fire upon the Castle hill
of Edinburgh.

This year in Glasgow, Friar Russel and one Kennedy martyred at Glasgow.
Hieronymus Russel of the Order of the Gray Friars, and one Kennedy a young man
of Air, not past 18. years of age, were accused likewise of heresy; but
because the Archbishop Mr. Gawine Dumbar, was esteemed somewhat cold in those
businesses, Master John Lawder, Master Andrew Oliphant, and Friar Maltman were
sent from Edinburgh to assist at their trial; Kennedy at his first appearing in
judgment discovered some weakness, and would gladly have saved his life by
denying the points laid to his charge; History of the Church.
but encouraged by Hieronymus, and by the answers he made to the Judges, he
gathered his spirits, and falling down upon his knees, brake forth in these
words; Wonderful O God is thy love and mercy toward me a miserable wretch, for
even now when I would have denied thee, and thy Son the Lord Jesus Christ, my
only Savior, and so have thrown my self into everlasting condemnation; thou
by thine own hand have pulled me back from the bottom of hell, and given me to
feel most heavenly comfort, which has removed the ungodly fear, that before
oppressed my mind. Now I defy death, do what you please, I praise God, I am
ready.

The Friar reasoned long, and learnedly against his accusers, and being
answered only with railings, and bitter speeches, said, This is your hour, and
power of darkness; Now you sit as Judges, and we stand wrongfully condemned,
but the day comes which will show our innocence, and you shall see your own
blindness, to your everlasting confusion; Go on, The Archbishop disswadeth the
execution.
and fulfill the measure of your iniquity. At which words the Archbishop was
greatly moved, affirming that these rigorous executions did hurt the cause of
the Church more then could well be thought of, and therefore declared, that in
his opinion it should be best to save the lives of the men, and take some other
course with them; but these others who were sent to assist, told him expressly,
that if he followed any milder course, then that which had been kept at
Edinburgh, they could not esteem him the Churches friend: whereupon he was
compelled to give way to their cruelty, and thus these Innocents were condemned
to be burnt alive.

All the time they were preparing the fire, The courage of Russel at his dying.
Hieronymus comforted mightily the young man, using these speeches unto him,
Fear not brother, for he is more mighty that is in us, then he who is in the
world. The pain which we shall suffer is short, and light, but our joy and
consolation shall never have an end; death cannot destroy us, for it is
destroyed already by him, for whose sake we suffer: Therefore let us strive to
enter in by the same straight way, which our Savior has taken before us. Many
other comfortable speeches he uttered, which moved the hearers wonderfully.
When they were brought to the place of their suffering, they used not many
words, but commending their souls to God, after they were tied to the stake,
endured the fire constantly, without expressing any token of fear or amazement.

It was about the same time, Master George Buchannan eseapeth out of prison.
that Master George Buchannan (who for his rare erudition was afterward in
great fame) for some biting verses against the Franciscans was committed to
prison, but he escaping by a window of the chamber, wherein he was detained
prisoner, whilst the Keepers were fast asleep, fled into France. Thus there
passed few days, Buchan. l. 14.
wherein some one or other was not called in question for Religion. The History
of the Church.
But the more hot the persecution was, the favorers of the truth did every day
the more increase. And now had the Archbishop James Beaton committed the charge
of all Church Affairs to his Nephew the Cardinal (who succeeded in his place)
for he was aged and sickly himself, The Archbishop commits the charge of all
affairs to his Nephew the Cardinal.
and not seen often abroad. In his last days he began to erect the new
College in S. Andrews, and set men awork to build the same; but neither lived
he to finish the work, nor were the moneys he left in store to that use rightly
bestowed. Some contestings a few years before he and the Clergy had with the
King, because of the impositions laid upon the Prelates, An. 1539.
for the entertainment of the Senators of the College of Justice. So as the
matter was drawn by an appeal to Rome, and Gawine Dumbar Bishop of Aberdene
appointed to prosecute the same, A contest for the imposition laid upon the
Clergy for the Lords of Session.
But this ceased upon an accord made, which was, that the Senate should consist
of fourteen Ordinaries with a President, seven of the Spiritualty, and as many
of the Temporalty; the President always being of the spiritual estate, and a
Prelate constitute in dignity. According to this appointment, a ratification
passed in Parliament anno 1537. and the Abbot of Cambuskennoth was elected
President of the new Senate in the year 1539. Buchar. l. 14.
The Bishop a little after he had assisted as witness at the Christening of
the Kings first son, Lesl. l. 9.
who was born at S. Andrews, departed this life, having designed his
successors in all the Benefices he enjoyed, which were not a few; for besides
the Archbishopric of S. Andrews, Bishop Beaton dies.
he possessed the Abbacies of Aberbrothock, Dunfermlin, and Kilwining. To his
Nephew the Cardinal, he left S. Andrews and Aberbrothock. To George Dury his
kinsman the Abbacie of Dunfermlin, and to... Hamilton of the house of Roplock,
the Abbacie of Kilwining. All which, the King for the esteem wherein he held
this Bishop whilst he lived, confirmed to them according to his Will: he was
buried in the Abbey Church before the high Altar.

In his time lived Master John Mayor, The learned men that lived in this time,
M. John Mayor.
Hector Boeth, Gilbert Crab, and William Gregory, men of good learning, and
worthy to be remembered. Master John Mayor was born at Hadington, within the
Province of Lothian, and trained up from his youth in the study of letters. A
while at Cambridge he heard Philosophy taught, but finding the place not so
convenient, he went to Paris, and past his course in the College of Montacute.
After that he gave himself to Theology, commencing Doctor amongst the
Sorbonists, Bal cent. 14.
and in scholastic Divinity was not much behind any of his time, which his
Decisiones sententiarum, Sophisticalia Parisiensia, and that other work
entitled Placita Theologica, do sufficiently witness. Returning afterward
unto his country, he professed Theology in S. Salvators College at S. Lest.
l. 9.
Andrews, whereof he was made Provost, and died there being of a good age: a
man well inclined, ingenious, and according to these times not unlearned. He
wrote the story of his country, howbeit in a Sorbonick and barbarous style,
yet very truly, and with a great liberty ofspirit, not sparing the usurpation
of Rome, and taxing in diverse places the laziness and superfluity of the
Clergy: which could hardly be done in those times without danger.

Hector Boethius was Principal of the College of Aberdene, Hector Boeth.
a great Philosopher, and much commended by Erasmus for his eloquence, and
felicity of ingenie. Buchannan, Bal. Cent. 14.
who could well discern of learned men, speaking in a certain place of him
says, Quod non solum artium liberalium cognitione supra quam illa ferebant
tempora insignis crat, sed etiam humanitate and comitate singulari praeditus;
That he was not only notably learned in the liberal Sciences above the
condition of those times, but also of an exceeding courteous and humane
inclination. Yet is he traduced by some of the English Writers for a fabulous
and partial Historian. But they who like to peruse his History, will perceive
that this is spoken out of passion and malice, and not upon any just cause.

Gilbert Crabbe lived in the country of France, Gilbert Crab.
much esteemed for his dexterity and diligence in the education of youth; he
was sent to Paris by his friends being yet very young, and having studied his
course there, was preferred to be Sub. dean of a Church near unto Bordeaux,
Bal. cent. 15.
yet ceased not to advance the knowledge of letters at his uttermost; and was
so respected, as the children of all the Noblemen in those parts were committed
to his instruction. He died young at Bordeaux, not having attained to the
fortieth year of his age, much lamented of those that knew him.

William Gregory lived in Toulouse, William Gregory.
and was made General of the Carmelites in the Diocese of Meaulx and Toulouse,
which Order he is said to have greatly reformed. Baleus writes that he
received much kindness of this Gregory at Toulouse in the year 1527. Bal.
ibidem.
and says, that he died in that City, having left diverse monuments of his
ingenie to the posterity, the Catalogue whereof you may see in the place.

With this I shall join another, not for any commendation of his learning, for
he had none, nor for his good qualities, which were as few; but for strange and
extraordinary things seen in him, John Scot his memorable fasting.
which in the time ministered occasion of great talk and wondering to many. This
man named John Scot having succumbed in a plea at law, and knowing himself
unable to pay that wherein he was adjudged, took sanctuary in the Abbey of
Halirudhouse, where out of a deep displeasure he abstained from all meat and
drink the space of 30, or 40, days together. Public rumor bringing this
abroad, Buchan. l. 14.
the King would have it put to trial, and to that effect shut him up in a
private room within the Castle of Edinburgh, whereunto no man had access; he
caused a little bread and water to be set by him, Lesl. l. 9.
which he was found not to have tasted in the space of 32. days. This proof
given of his abstinence, he was dimitted, and coming forth into the street
half naked, made a speech to the people that flocked about him, wherein he
professed to do all this by the help of the Blessed Virgin, and that he could
fast as long as he pleased. Many did take it for a miracle, esteeming him a
person of wonderful holiness; others thought him to be phrentick and mad; so
as in a short time he came to be neglected, and thereupon leaving the country
went to Rome, where he gave the like proof of his fasting to Pope Clement the
seventh.

From Rome he came to Venice apparelled with holy vestures, He takes his
journey to the holy Sepulcher.
such as the Priests use when they say Mass, and carrying in his hand a
Testimonial of his abstinence under the Popes Seal, he gave there the like
proof, and was allowed some five Ducats to make his expense toward the holy
Sepulcher, which he pretended to visit. This voyage he performed, and then
returned home ^ bringing with him some palm tree leaves, and a scripful of
stones, which he said were a part of the pillar to which our Savior was tied
when he was scourged; He is imprisoned in London.
and coming by London, went up into the Pulpit in Panls Churchyard, where he
cast forth many speeches against the divorce of King Henry from Katherine his
Queen, inveying bitterly against him for his defection from the Roman See, and
thereupon was thrust in prison, where he continued 50. days fasting.

After that being dimitted (for they held him to be a mad man) he came directly
into Scotland, Thomas Doughty suffered to abuse the people.
and remained in company with one Thomas Doughty, who a little before was
returned from Italy, and had built a little Chapel to the holy Virgin, with
the money he had begged in his travel. This man by his counterfeit miracles
made great advantage amongst the simple people; and albeit he was known to be a
cousening fellow, and in life extremely vicious, yet was he suffered by the
Clergy to abuse the ignorant multitude, for that the opinion of Purgatory,
Pardons and prayers to Saints, which began then every where to be despised, was
by this mean nourished amongst the people.

Scot grudging that Doughty did appropriate all the gain he made to himself,
Scots emula^ion of Doughty, and his cousenage.
did not admit him a partner in the same, retired to a house in the suburbs of
Edinburgh, at the Western part of the Town, and therein erected a religious
Altar, which he adorned in the best manner he could, setting up his daughter a
young maid of reasonable beauty upon the Altar, and placing lights and torches
round about her: the simple sort for a long time believed her to be the Virgin
M^ry, and frequented the place in great numbers to do her worship: but the
knavery coming to be detected, he forsook his Altar, and forgetting all his
devotion, returned to his first trade and manner of life. Lesley in his story
says, that he prophesied many things concerning the decay of the Romish
Religion, and the restitution of it in a short time; of the decay he might
speak having seen it begun, but for other things he was a dreamer rather then a
Propher.

40. The first act of the Cardinal after his promotion, did show what an enemy
he would be to those who in that time were called heretics; The history of
Cardinal Beaton.
for he was not well warmed in his seat, when to make his greatness seen, he
brought to S. Andrews, the Earls of Huntley, Arran, Marshall, and Montrosse;
the Lords Fleming, Lindsay, (...), and (...), with diverse other Barons and men
of quality. There came thither also, Gawine Archbishop of Glasgow Chancellor,
William Bishop of Aberdene, Henry Bishop of Galloway, John Bishop of Bri^^en,
and William Bishop of Dumblane; The Abbots of Melross, An. 1540.
Dunfermlin, Lindors, and Kinlosse, with a number of Priors, Deans and Doctors
of Theology. And they all having convened in the Cathedral Church, he sitting
in a Chair somewhat erected above the rest, (for that he was a Cardinal) began
to expone the dangers wherein the Catholic faith stood by the increase of
heretics, and the boldness they took to profess their opinions openly even
in the Kings Court, Sir John Borthwick cited for heresy.
where he said they found too great countenance. In special he named Sir John
Borthwick, commonly called Captain Borthwick, whom he had caused cite to that
Diet for dispersing heretical books, and for maintaining diverse Articles
contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church, desiring their assistance in the
procedure of Justice against him. The heads of the accusation were read.

1. The heads of his accusation.
That he held the Pope to have no greater authority over Christians, then any
other Bishop or Prelat had. 2. That Indulgences and Pardons granted by the Pope
were of no force nor effect, but devised to abuse people, and deceive poor
ignorant souls. 3. That Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy men, may lawfully
marry. 4. That the heresies, commonly called the heresies of England, and their
new Liturgy was commendable, and to be embraced of all Christians. 5. That the
people of Scotland are blinded by their Clergy, and professed not the true
faith. 6. That Churchmen ought not to enjoy any temporalties. 7. That the King
ought to convert the rents of the Church into other pious uses. 8. That the
Church of Scotland ought to be governed after the manner of the English. 9.
That the Canons and Decrees of the Church were of no force, as being contrary
to the law of God. 10. That the Orders of Friars and Monks should be abolished,
as had been done in England. 11. That he did openly call the Pope Simoniack,
for that he sold spritual things. 12. That he did read heretical books, and the
New Testament in English, and some other Treatises written by Melanchthon,
Oecolampadius, and Erasmus, which he gave likewise unto others. 13. The last
and greatest point was, that he refused to acknowledge the authority of the
Roman See, or be subject thereunto.
These accusations (he not appearing, Sir John Borthwick denounced heretic.
nor any in his behalf) were taken as confessed, and he denounced an heretic,
yea an heresiarch, (for so the sentence bears) his goods ordained to be
confiscat, himself burnt in effigy, if he could not otherwise be apprehended,
and all manner of persons inhibited to relieve or entertain him, under the pain
of cursing or forfeiture.

This sentence was given against him the 28 of May, Anno 1540. and the same day
was his picture burnt in the open Market place of S. Andrews, as likewise in
Edinburgh some two days after. Acts of Mart.
Sir John Borthwick hearing how they had proceeded against him, fled into
England, where he was kindly received by Henry the eighth then reigning, and by
him employed in a Commission to the Protestant Princes in Germany, for a
confederation betwixt him and them in defense of their common profession.

King Henry had some years before sent into Scotland the Bishop of S. David's to
present the King his Nephew with some English books, The King invited to meet
his Uncle King Henry at York.
containing an Exposition of the principal heads of Christian Religion,
thinking to induce him to make the like reformation which he had made in
England. And at that time came Lord William Howard, Buchan. l. 14. Lesl. l. 9.
Holinshed history of Scotland.
to desire the King to meet his Uncle King Henry at York, upon some occasions
tending to the common good of both Kingdoms. The King consenting a Diet was
appointed, and all things prepared for the journey. But the Cardinal and Clergy
fearing the effects of that conference, The Cardinal and Clergy seek to impede
the meeting.
labored with the Courtiers to divert him, and before the King himself they
laid diverse terrors; as, That he would be detained prisoner in England, as
King James the first had been^ That he should make himself suspected to the
Emperor, An. 1541.
and to his old confederate the French King: And, which he was most to regard,
incur the Popes displeasure by treating too familiarly with him, that was
lying under the highest censure of the Church. Yet stood the King resolute for
the journey, foreseeing (as also it happened) that if he should break the Diet,
the same might breed the English Kings dislike, and be an occasion of war, on
which he would not hazard, unless he knew of means to entertain the same. The
Clergy hereupon besides the representation of some moneys in hand, made offer
of an annuity of fifty thousand Crowns, if war should fall out; declaring
withal, that by confiscating the goods of heretics, he might gain an hundred
thousand more. The King excuses himself to King Henry.
And with such vain hopes they brought him to send a fair excuse to King Henry
by Sir James Learmouth his domestic. After this the King being ruled wholly by
the Cardinal, followed in all things the appetite of the Clergy, giving
commission to Sir James Hamilton his Theasurer, to call and convene all persons
suspected of heresy, and inflict the punishments, which after trial they
should be found to merit. The King was also heard say, That none of that sort
should expect any favor at his hands, nay not his own sons, if they should
prove guilty; which put many in fear.

But this continued not long, Sir James Hamilton executed.
for Sir James Hamilton becoming suspected, and accused of a practice against
the King his life, was shortly after executed; and war breaking out with
England, he found the Nobility averse from the incursions he intended to make,
which did greatly discontent him. These thoughts, with some fearful visions he
had by night that much terrified him, withdrew his mind wholly from the
extremities on which the Clergy had set him: The King troubled with visions.
for at Linlithgow on a night as he slept, it seemed to him that Thomas Scot
Justice Clerk came unto him with a company of devils; crying, Woe worth the day
that ever I knew thee or thy service, serving thee against God and against his
servants, I am adjudged to hell torments. Hereupon awaking, he called for
lights, and causing his servants to arise, told what he had heard and seen.
History of the Church.
The next morrow by the light of day, advertisement was brought him of the
Justice Clerk his death, which fell out just at the time that the King found
himself so troubled, and in the same manner almost; for he died in great
unquietness, The Justice Clerk his fearful death.
iterating often these words; Iusto Dei judicio condemnatus sum, by the
righteous judgment of God I am condemned. The form of his death answering the
dream so justly, made it the more terrible.

Another vision he had in the same place not many nights after, which did more
affright him; whilst he lay a sleeping, he imagined that Sir James Hamilton,
whom he caused to be executed, came unto him with a sword drawn in his hand,
and therewith cut off both his Arms, threatening within a short time to return
and deprive him of his life. With this he awaked, and as he lay musing what the
dream could import, news were brought him of the death of his two sons, James
and Arthur, who died at S. Andrews and Striveling, at one and the very same
hour. The next year, which was the year of our Lord 1542. being overwhelmed
with grief and passion, The King died at Falkland, An. 1542, the eighth of
December.
for the loss of his Army received at Solway; he departed this life at
Falkland in the 32. year of his age. Some few days before he died, he had
advertisement that his Queen was delivered of a daughter at Linlithgow, at
which time it is said he burst forth in passion, saying, It came with a less,
(meaning the Crown) and will go with a less, fie upon it; after which he was
not heard to utter many words.

The Cardinal hearing that the King was deceased, The Cardinal forgeth the
Kings Testament.
did suborn a Priest called Henry Balfour, to form his last Will, whereby it
was declared, that he had committed to the Cardinal, the Earls of Huntley,
Argyle, and Murray, the government of the Realm, during his daughters minority.
This Will he caused publish in Edinburgh on the Monday after the Kings death,
Buchan. l. 15.
but the Nobles giving it no credit, and esteeming it a mere forgery, The Earl
of Arran elected Governor.
did choose the Earl of Arran Regent and Governor of the Realm. Never was
any Governor received with greater love and opinion of all sorts; for besides
the favor carried to himself, every one was glad to be freed of the Cardinals
Government; and by his first beginnings a strong hope was conceived, that all
things should be reformed which were amiss both in Church and Kingdom. An.
1542.
But this hope soon vanished, in the manner that ye shall hear.

King Henry of England hearing that his Nephew the King of Scots was dead, and
that he had left one only daughter of seven days old, The King of England
seeks to unite the Kingdoms by marriage.
began to think of uniting the two Kingdoms, and reducing the whole Isle under
one Government, by the marriage of Edward his son, a Prince of five years old,
to the young Queen of Scots. Hereupon he sent for the Earls of Cassils and
Glancarne, the Lords of Fleming, Maxwell, and Gray, (who were taken prisoners
at Solway, and detained in England) to Hampton Court, Buchan. l. 15.
where he then lay; and at their coming proponed the business unto them, with
an offer to dimit them freely, so as they would promise to use their best means
with the Governor, and others of the Nobility of Scotland, for obtaining their
consents to the Match. The Noblemen liking the motion, and esteeming it a ready
means to establish a lasting Peace, gave their promise to deal faithfully in
it, and so were sent home with many liberal promises, if the marriage should
take effect. In their company returned the Earl of Angus, and his brother Sir
George, (who had been exiled a long time in England) with letters to the
Governor from the King for their restitution.

The matter being moved to the Governor, A Parliament at Edinburgh.
and Council, it was liked by all, the Queen Mother and the Cardinal only
excepted: and for this a Parliament was called at Edinburgh the 13. of March
following, whither came Sir Ralph Sadler as Ambassador from King Henry, Lesl.
l. 10.
to attend the success. In the beginning a great stir was made by the
Cardinal and Clergy that adhered to him, The Cardinal committed. Ambassadors
sent into England for concluding the match. Buchan. l. 15.
so as the Estates could come to no conclusion, whereupon the Cardinal was
committed in the Castle of Dalkeith. The day following by an uniform consent,
the Match was agreed, and the Earl of Glancarne, Sir George Douglas, brother to
the Earl of Angus, Sir William Hamilton of Forne, and Sir James Learmouth of
Dersay, employed by the Estates to transact with King Henry upon all
particulars.

In this Parliament upon a petition presented to the Estates for restraining
the power of the Prelates in pursuing those they called heretics, The history
of the Church.
and for liberty to read the Scripture in the English language, Commission was
granted to some selected persons for considering the petition, and prescribing
what was fit to be done therein. The Commissioners meeting after the Parliament
was broke up, declared, That it should be lawful for every one that could read,
to use the English Translation of the Bible, The Governors Preachers suspected
by the Clergy.
until the Prelates should publish one more correct. Intimation of this
liberty being sent through all the Kingdom by the Governors direction, the
Clergy did declaim against him as a favourer of heretics, taking exception at
two Preachers he entertained in his house, the one called Friar William, the
other John Rough, who did openly in their Sermons inveigh against the Popes
authority, the adoration of Images, invocation of Saints, and other
superstitious inventions of Rome.

In the end of July the Ambassadors directed toward England, The Ambassadors
return from England.
returned with satisfaction in all particulars concerning the marriage, and so
the contract betwixt the two Kingdoms was signed by the Governor, and those
whom the States had deputed for the part of Scotland, and by Sir Ralph Sadler
Ambassador for the part of England, History of the Church.
and the Seals of the Kingdom interchanged, as use is. The Governor and
English Ambassador for the greater assurance, did solemnly swear to observe
the Contract in all Articles thereof, dividing the holy Sacrament amongst them,
as the custom then was.

And now all matters looked fair, The estate of the Governors Court.
no man wishing them to go better; for in the Governors Court was nothing
seen, that the severest eye could censure, or reprove. In the public
Government such a moderation was kept, as no man was heard to complain. The
Governor was reverently obeyed, and held in as great respect, The Bishop of
Ross, and Abbot of Paisley, seek to divert the Governor from the Contract with
England.
as any Kings of preceding times. To be short, every man did promise himself a
blessed and happy time; which on sudden all was overturned, and the Realm cast
in greater troubles then before.

John Hamilton Abbot of Paisley base brother to the Governor, and David Panter
(afterward removed to the Bishopric of Ross) who had lived a long time in
France, returning about this time into the country, and being devoted to the
French, dealt privately with the Governor, who was of an easy nature, and apt
to be taken by those he trusted to break the contract with England. But having
small hope to prevail, so long as the Preachers and Gentlemen, whose counsel
he followed, remained with him, they used all means to be rid of them; Friar
Guilielm fearing to be called in question for his doctrine, The Governors
Preachers and servants part from him.
(at which the Abbot was ever excepting) withdrew himself and went into
England; John Rough upon some color was dimitted to preach in the parts of
Kile and Carrick; The Lord of Grainge, Master Henry Balnaves, Master Thomas
Ballenden, and Sir David Lindsay of the Mont, who had attended the Governor
ever since the time of his promoving to the Regency, had such discontents given
them, as they were made too weary of their attendance; History of the Church.
and the meaner sort, such as Mr. Michael Durham, Mr. David Borthwick, David
Forres, and David Bothwel, men that had served him faithfully and of a long
time, were openly menaced, and forced to quit their services.

Neither was the Cardinal in this time idle, The Cardinal set at liberty.
for being by the Queens intercession removed from Dalkeith to the place of
Seaton, he went from thence without warrant to S. Andrews, none calling him
therefore in question; for the Governors brother, who was then preferred to be
Theasurer, and ruled all things at Court, made up a secret friendship with him.
A Convention of the Clergy at S. Andrews.
Shortly after in a frequent meeting of the Clergy at S. Andrews, the Cardinal
laying before them the dangers wherewith the Clergy was threatened by the Match
with England, did earnestly incite them to oppose, it, Buchan. l. 15.
and contribute moneys, and employ all their friendship to the contrary, seeing
it concerned them no less then their lives or estates were worth. They making
no difficulty, and offering to contribute all their means to that effect,
appointed a present collection to be made, which was trusted to his disposing.
The Friars were directed to inveigh in their Sermons against their alliance,
and the Priests set on to stir up the popular against the Ambassador, who
had many indignities offered him, which he patiently digested, lest he should
be thought to minister any occasion of breach.

How soon the day appointed for delivering the pledges was come (for that was a
condition in the contract) the Ambassador went unto the Governor, The
Ambassador of England complains of the indignity offered to him.
and put him in mind of the pledges, that by the contract he was obliged to
enter: complaining withal of the disgraces that he and his Master the King of
England received. The Governor answering first his complaint of the
insolences committed, said, He should take trial, and punish the committers in
such sort, as all might see what affection he bore to the King and Country of
England. The Governors excuse. Buchan. l. 15.
But for the pledges, he said, I can neither move them to enter willingly, nor
force them if they be unwilling. For you see what a mutiny is raised in the
country by the Cardinal, and how uncertain I am of mine own estate; Till this
be quieted, I know not in that point what to answer. The Ambassador who
understood that to be truth which he spoke, War denounced by England.
forbear to urge the delivery of the pledges any more saying he would advertise
his Master how the case stood, and attend his directions. Soon after the
Ambassador was recalled, the Scots ships and Merchants that were in England,
arrested, and open war denounced.

The country hereupon drew into factions. The country goes into factions.
The Governor and some few Noblemen that abode with him at Halirudhouse,
professing a willingness to keep the contract with England, and Queen mother
with the Cardinal and his followers, directly opposing. They having the young
Queen in their hands, whom they kept still at Linlithgow, to strengthen their
party, The Earl of Lenox recalled from France.
sent to recall the Earl of Lenox (who lived then in France) for the old
emulation between the two houses of lenox and Hamilton, as also the slaughter
of his Father in the field of Linlithgow, which he could not have forgotten,
would easily (as they thought) move him to join with them. Buchan. l. 15.
Besides, they considered that his presence and friendship, which was great in
the country, would aid and countenance their course not a little. Hereupon
were messengers dispatched in haste, with letters to the French King, and to
the Earl himself. The letters written to himself were full of affection, and
therein hopes given of his Match with the Queen mother, and of the Regencie of
the Realm, during her daughters minority. And (as flatterers are never wanting
to great men) there were some about him, when they understood that he was
called home, put him in hope of the Crown it self, if the young Queen should
happen to depart this life. For the late King was known to have intended the
same, and the Governors title, they said, would try naught, himself being
illegitimate, and procreated in an unlawful marriage, upon a divorce led
between his Father and Dame Elizabeth Home his wife, which made him incapable
not of the Crown only, but even of his private inheritance. With such conceits
they filled the young Noblemans head, and (as men are made easily to believe
what they earnestly desire) encouraged by these hopes, and the French Kings
promises, he returned home.

At his coming having saluted the Governor, with whom he dissembled in the
best sort he could, The Earl of Lenox welcomed by the Queen Mother and the
Cardinal.
and visiting the Queen Mother and Cardinal at Linlithgow, who did very kindly
receive him, he went to see his friends, and imparted to them the causes of his
return, with the hopes that were given him, and the promise he had of aid and
supply from the King of France. They approving the course he had taken, advised
him to follow his fortune, and promised their assistance to the uttermost. A
few days after being advertised, that the Governor was gathering forces to
take the young Queen from her Mother, he came to the Queen Mother with four
thousand men, The young Queen removed to Striveling.
and abode with her, till by a common consent her daughter was sent to
Striveling, and committed to the custody of the Lords, Grahame, Areskin,
Levingston, and Lindsay.

Mean while the Governors brother did earnestly ply him to relinquish the
English alliance, The Governor forsakes his party, and receives absolution
from the Cardinal.
laying before him the danger wherein he thrust himself, in suffering the Popes
authority to be weakened, on which he said, the security of his title and
succession to the Crown did stand; and giving him hopes of benefit, and
advancement from the French King: and so far in end prevailed, as the
Governor without imparting his mind to the Noblemen, who kept Court with him
at Halirudhouse, Buchan. l. 15.
went privately to Striveling, and submitted himself to the Cardidal, receiving
absolution at his hands, and renouncing the profession he made of the truth,
with the alliance contracted with England. A deed that lost him the favor of
the country, and brought him in great contempt; for after this fact was he
never in regard, the Cardinal from thenceforth carrying all the sway, and
leaving him only the shadow of authority.

This done, The Cardinals care to be rid of the Earl of Lenox.
the Cardinals next care was, to rid the Court and the Council of the Earl of
Lenox, which was brought about in this sort. Queen Mother by her letters to the
French King did advertise what an alteration was made, how the Governor was
brought by the Cardinals means to break with England, and that for assuring the
peace of the country, there was nothing more required, then the calling the
Earl of Lenox back under some fair color, Buchan. l. 15.
for that his stay at home might prove dangerous, and a suspicion there was
already of his inclining to England, which might breed greater troubles then
yet had been seen, therefore entreated the King to recall him with speed.

The Nobleman suspecting no such dealing (for all that time he was used with
great demonstrations of love and kindness by the Queen Mother) began to urge
the performance of promises, and had his hopes cunningly entertained, till the
answer returned from France; at which time he was advertised by some friends in
that Court, that the French King was hardly informed of him, and some courses
he had taken, and howbeit he was invited to return, he should not find the
welcome he expected. This made him more instant with Queen Mother then before,
but it was not long ere he felt himself deluded; The Earl of Lenox finding
himself abused, goes to England.
whereupon he retired home discontent, and laid many ways to repair himself,
but all sorted to no effect; so as he resolved in end, having lost the French,
to offer his service to the King of England, by whom he was kindly received,
and afterward honored with the alliance of King Henry his Niece, Lady
Margaret Douglas.

How soon the Cardinal was freed of the Earl of Lenox, The persecution of the
professors in Perth.
he set himself to pursue those that were called heretics, and leading the
Governor along with him, went first to the Town of Perth, where by delation of
one Friar Spence, Robert Lamb, William Anderson, James Rannald, James Hunter,
James Finlason, and Hellene Stirk his wife, were apprehended.

Robert Lamb being accused for interrupting the said Friar in a Sermon he made
a Perth, whilst he was teaching, that a man could not be saved without praying
to the Saints, confessed that he had done it, saying, It was the duty of every
man that knows the truth, to bear testimony unto it, The indictment of the
persons delated.
and not to suffer people to be abused with false doctrine, such as that was.

William Anderson, James Rannald, and James Finlason, were indicted for nailing
two Rams horns on S. Francis head, the putting of a Cowes rump to his tail, and
for the eating of a Goose upon All-hallow evening.

James Hunter a Fletcher by occupation, and a simple man without any learning,
was charged to have kept company with the said persons.

The woman Helene Stirke, was accused for her refusing to pray unto the Virgin
Mary, when she was in labor of her birth, and saying, she would only pray to
God in the name of Jesus Christ.

These were the inditements whereupon they were put to trial, They are found
guilty, and their behavior at their suffering.
and being found guilty by a Jury, were condemned to die, great intercession
was made for their lives to the Governor, but he was so subject to the
Cardinal, as without his consent he would give no pardon. Thus the poor
innocents were taken to the common place of execution, and hanged; Robert Lamb
at the foot of the Ladder made a pithy exhortation to the people, beseeching
them to fear God, and forsake the Leaven of Papistical abominations. The woman
desired earnestly to die with her husband, but could not be permitted, sentence
being given against her that she should be drowned; yet she followed him to the
place of execution, exhorting him by the way to patience and constancy for the
cause of Christ. And as she parted from him said, Husband be glad, we have
lived together many joyful days, and this day which we must die, we ought to
esteem the most joyful of all, because now we shall have joy for ever;
Therefore I will not bid you good night, for we shall shortly meet in the
Kingdom of heaven. How soon the men were executed, the woman was taken to a
pool of water not far of, where having commended her children to the charity
of her neighbors, and giving a little babe who was sucking upon her breast
unto a nurse, she died with great courage and comfort.

Sir Henry Elder, Burgesses exiled, and the Lord Ruthven put from his Provostry.
John Elder, Walter Piper, and Laurence Puller, with some other Burgesses were
banished, and the Lord Ruthven Provost of the Town discharged of his office,
because he was suspected to favor the heretics; his place was given to John
Charterhouse of Kilfawnes, and the Citizens commanded to accept him for their
Provost; but they excused themselves, saying, they could make no election
before the ordinary time; yet the Governor out of his authority charged them
to accept of Kinfawnes, threatening to punish those that refused. And for that
it was thought after the Governor and Cardinal was gone, that the Townsmen
should withstand their Provost, the Lord Gray, and Normand Lesley, son to the
Earl of Rothese, were desired to give their assistance.

In falling out as was expected, Kinfawn elected Provest, seeks to force the
town to obedience.
Kinfawnes convened his friends, to advise how the Townsmen might be forced to
obey. The Lord Gray undertaking to enter the Town by the Bridge, Normand Lesley
and his followers were appointed to enter at the South-gate, and S. Magdalens
day appointed for their meeting. The Lord Gray came early in the morning, but
Normand who brought his company by water, Buchan. l. 15.
was hindered by the tide; yet all being quiet in the Town, and no appearance of
stir, the Lord Gray resolved to enter, esteeming his own forces sufficient;
but he was not far advanced, when in the street called Fishstreet, the Master
of Ruthven, with his company that lay close in some houses near by, The Lord
Gray invading Perth is repulsed.
issued forth upon him, and compelled him to turn back. The disorder in the
fight was great, every one hindering another, so as many were trod to death,
and some threescore persons killed.

The Cardinal wished rather the loss had fallen on the Lord Ruthvens side, The
Cardinals proceeding against the Professors in Angus and Me^nis.
yet he was not ill pleased with the affront that Gray had received; for he
loved none of them; and so making no great account of the matter, he went on
with his work, and in the country of Angus called many in question for reading
the New Testament in English, which as then was accounted an heinous crime. And
it is said, The ignorance of these times was so great, Buchan. l. 15.
as even the Priests did think the New Testament to have been composed by
Martin Luther, An. 1544.
and the old to be the only Scripture that men ought to read.

John Roger a black Friar, with certain others, Roger a black Friar, imprisoned
at Saint Andrews.
was brought to the Castle of Saint Andrews, and within some few days found
dead at the foot of the back wall: whether he fell seeking to escape, or that
he was murdered (as the report went) in prison, it is uncertain. From Angus
the Cardinal leading the Governor with him, went to Mernis, using the like
inquisition, and stayed there till near Christmas; at which time they returned
to S. Andrews, and having past the holy time in feasting, took journey to
Edinburgh, where a Convention of the Clergy was kept for censuring the lives of
scandalous Priests.

Whilst they were thus busied, The history of Mr. George Wishart.
advertisement was made to the Cardinal, that Master George Wishart, for whom
he had searched a long time, was in the house of Ormeston in Lothian. This man
being of all the witnesses that God raised in that time to advance his truth,
the most worthy; the Reader will not mislike that I set down the story at
large. He was a brother of the house of Pittarrow in Mernis, a man of great
knowledge, and pleasant utterance, endued also with many rare virtues; humble,
modest, charitable, and patient even to admiration; some time he had spent in
the University of Cambridge, and out of a desire to promove the truth in his
own country, came home in the year 1544. making his chief resorts in the Towns
of Dundy, and Montross, where he taught publicly with great profit and
applause.

The Cardinal incensed with the following he had among the people, Wishart
discharged from preaching at Dundy.
discharged them of Dundy to receive him. Whereupon Robert Mill, a man of great
authority in the Town, either corrupted by the Cardinals gifts, or because he
feared some trouble might fall upon the Town for his occasion, did one day as
he had ended his Sermon, History of the Church.
openly prohibit him to come any more amongst them, and not to trouble the Town
with his Sermons. He after a little silence turning himself to the speaker,
said, God is my witness, that I mind ever your comfort, and not your trouble,
which to me is more grievous then to your selves. But sure I am, to reject the
word of God, and drive away his messengers, is not the way to save you from
trouble. When I am gone, God will send you messengers, who will not be afraid
either for burning or banishment. I have with the hazard of my life remained
amongst you preaching the word of salvation; and now since your selves refuse
me, I must leave my innocence to be declared by God. If it be long well with
you, I am not led with the spirit of truth; and if trouble unexpected fall upon
you, remember this is the cause, and turn to God by repentance; for he is
merciful. The Earl Marshal and some other Noblemen, who were present at the
Sermon, dealt earnestly with him to go with them into the North, but he
excusing himself, took journey into the West parts.

He had not been long there, He goes to the West, where the Archbishop of
Glasgow seeks to apprehend him.
when the Archbishop of Glasgow advertised of the great concourse of people
unto his Sermons, took purpose to apprehend him, and for that effect made a
journey unto the Town of Air. Alexander Earl of Glaincarne, hearing what the
Bishop intended, hasted to the Town, offering to place Master George Wishart in
the Church where the Bishop was preparing to preach; but he would not consent,
saying, that the Bishops Sermon would not do much hurt, and that he would
teach, if they pleased, at the Market Cross; which he did, diverse of the
hearers which were enemies to the truth, being converted at the same time. The
Sunday following, being desired to preach at the Church of Machlin, he went
thither, but the Sheriff of Air had in the night time put in a Garrison of
soldiers in the Church to exclude him; Hugh Campbell of Kingzeacleugh with
others of the Parish offending thereat, would have entered the Church by force,
but he would not suffer it, saying, It is the word of peace that I preach unto
you, the blood of no man shall be shed for it this day; Christ is as mighty in
the fields as in the Church, and he himself when he lived in the slesh,
preached oftener in the Desert and upon the Seaside, then in the Temple of
Jerusalem. So walking along to the edge of the Mort on the South Side of
Machlin he preached to the multitude that flocked about him three hours and
above: and all the while he abode in those parts, taught daily with good
success.

After a months stay in these quarters, he was advertised of a great
desolation in the town of Dundy by reason of the pestilence, which brake up in
it the fourth day after he left the Town. Wishart returns to Dundy, the
pestil^nce the^e raging.
This moved him to return, and on the next morrow after his coming, he gave
signification that he would preach; but because the sickness which had
consumed a great many people, was still raging in the Town, he choosed to
preach upon the head of the Eastgate, the infected persons standing without
the gate, and those that were free within. His Theme was the 20. verse of the
107. Psalm; He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destruction. Thereupon taking occasion to speak of the dignity and excellency
of the word of God, and the punishments that follow the contempt of the same,
as also of the mercies of God, and his readiness to pardon those that truly
turn unto him, with the happy estate of such as God takes to himself out of
this misery; so he comforted the people, as they were instant to have him stay
with them, judging themselves happy if they should die affisted with such a
Preacher. Neither did he forsake them all the time the plague continued, and
not suffering the poor who were destitute of means, to lack any necessary helps
more then the rich.

It happened whilst he stayed there, A Priest apprehended that intended to
kill him.
that a Priest called Sir John Weighton, having a purpose to kill him, as he
descended from the place where he used to preach, was apprehended with a weapon
in his hand; a Tumult thereupon raised, the sick without the Gate rushed in,
crying to have the murderer delivered to them. But he taking the Priest in his
Arms, History of the Church.
besought them to be quiet, saying, He has done no harm, only he has showed
us what we have to fear in time coming: and so saved the wicked man by his
intercession.

The plague decreasing he prepared to go to Edinburgh, He visits Montrosse.
where he had promised to meet the Gentlemen of the West, that resolved at his
parting from them to keep the Convocation, and offer dispute to the Clergy, yet
because he had not seen the people of Montrosse of a long time, and was
doubtful if ever he should return, he determined first to go thither. Whilst
he remained there, a letter was directed to him from the Lord of Kinneir in
Fife, advertising him that he had taken a sudden sickness, A plot of the
Cardinals for his intercepting, and his wonderful escape.
and requesting him to come unto him with diligence. He presently made to the
journey, accompanied with some honest Citizens, that would needs convey him
part of the way, and was not past a quarter of a mile, when on the sudden he
made a stay, saying to the company, I am forbidden of God to go this journey:
will some of you be pleased to ride to yonder place (pointing with his finger
to a little hill) and see what you find? for I apprehend there is a plot
against my life. So turning back to the Town, they who went forward to the
place, found some threescore horsemen laid to intercept them; whereby he
understood the letter to be counterfeited. They declaring at their return what
they had seen, he said, I know I shall end my life in the hands of that man,
(meaning the Cardinal) but it will not be after this manner.

Some two or three days after he made to his journey, His journey to
Edinburgh, and what befell him in the way.
and would not be dissuaded by the Lord of Dun, and others who labored to
have him stay. The first night he lodged at Inner-gowry, two miles from Dundy,
with an honest man called Fames Watson; where being laid in bed, he was
observed to rise a little after midnight, and go forth into a garden: There,
after he had walked a turn or two, he fell upon his knees, sending forth many
sighs and groans; then prostrating himself upon the ground, he lay in that
sort almost an hour, weeping and praying, and then returned to his rest.
William Spaldin and John Watson, who lay in the same chamber, and had followed
to see whither he went, began to ask him, as if they had known nothing, where
he had been; whereunto he made no answer: in the morning inquiring of new
wherefore he rose in the night, and what was the cause of such mourning (for
they told him all they had seen him do) he with a dejected countenance,
answered, I wish you had been in your beds, which had been more four your ease,
for I was scarce well occupied. But they praying him to satisfy their minds
further, and to communicate some comfort unto them, he said, I will tell you,
that I assuredly know my travel is nigh at an end, therefore pray to God for
me, that I shrink not when the battle waxes most hot. Hearing these words,
they burst forth in tears, and said it was to them a small comfort: An. 1545.
whereunto he replied, God will send you comfort after me, this Realm shall be
illuminated with the light of Christ's Gospel, as clearly as ever was any Realm
since the days of the Apostles. The house of God shall be built in it; yea it
shall not lack (whatsoever the enemies shall devise to the contrary) the very
Capestone: neither shall this be long in doing, for there shall not many suffer
after me. The glory of God shall appear, and truth shall once triumph in
despite of the Devil. But alas, if the people become unthankful, the plagues
and punishments which shall follow, will be fearful and terrible.

This said, Wishart preaches at Leith.
he addressed himself to the way, and went that night to Perth, the next day
he came to Leith, where he kept himself close, expecting some advertisement
from the Gentlemen of the West; no advertisement coming, he waxed heavy and
sorrowful, and being asked, what made him so heavy? he said, I have labored to
bring people out of darkness, but now I lurk as a man ashamed to show himself
before men. They perceiving his desire was to preach, answered, that they would
gladly hear him, but considering the danger he might fall into, they could not
advise him to do it; he replied, If you and others will hear me the next
Sunday, I shall preach in Leith; (let God provide for me as best pleases him)
Which he did, taking for his text the Parable of the Sower, out of the 13.
Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel.

Having ended his Sermon, He goes to East Lothian, and preaches at Haddington.
he was by the Gentlemen his auditors counseled to leave the Town (for they
held his abode in that place dangerous:) which advice he followed, remaining
some time with the Lord of Brunston, and sometime with the Lord of Languedry
and Ormeston; yet every Sunday in one Church or other he taught openly, unto
the time of his apprehension. The last Sermon he made was at Haddington, where
he received from the Gentlemen of the West a letter, declaring they could not
keep the Diet appointed at Edinburgh: which grieved him so much, as calling
John Knox (who then attended him) he said, I am weary of the world, since I
perceive men too weary of God; yet he went to the Pulpit, and rebuking the
people of that Town for the contempt of the Gospel, told them, that strangers
should possess their houses, and chase them from their habitations; which came
shortly to pass. In that Sermon as he had always done since his last coming
into Lothian, he spoke of the short time he had to live, and told that his
death was more nigh, then they did believe. He goes to Ormeston, and dimitteth
John Knox.
All that night he stayed in Haddington, and the next morning bidding those of
his acquaintance farewell, as it were for ever, he went on foot to Ormeston,
(for the frost was vehement) accompanied with the Lord of the place, John
Sandelands of Caulder, and Chretchton of Brunston. John Knox was desirous to
have gone with him, but he willed him to go back, saying, One is enough at this
time for a sacrifice.

When they had supped, There he is apprehended and delivered to the Earl
Bothwell upon promise.
he fell in a long discourse of the happy estate of Gods children, and having
ended that purpose, said he had a desire to sleep, but first appointed the 51.
Psalm to be sung; which done, he went to bed. About midnight the house was
belayed with horsemen, that the Governor sent to take him prisoner. The Lord
refusing to deliver him, and thinking to get him shifted, the Earl Bothwell
Sheriff of the County came, History of the Church.
and he required he should be put in his hand, upon promise that his life
should be safe, and that it should not be in the Cardinals power to do him any
hurt. The Lord reporting this to Mr. George, he requested him to open the
gate, saying, The blessed will of God be done. So the Earl entered the house, to
whom Mr. George said, My Lord, I praise God that so honorable a man as you are
does receive me this night, in the presence of these Noble men; For I am
assured your Honor will not permit anything to be done unto me against the
Order of the law; I am not ignorant that all the law which they who seek my
life use, is nothing but a corruption, and a Cloak to shed the blood of Gods
Saints: yet I less fear to die openly, then to be murdered in secret. The Earl
answered, I shall not only preserve your body from violence, if any be intended
against you, but I will promise you on my honor in the presence of these
Gentlemen, That neither the Governor nor Cardinal shall be able to harm you,
and that I shall keep you in my own power till either I make you free, or bring
you back to the place where now I receive you.

Upon this promise was he delivered and put in the Earls hands, who departed
with him to Elphinston, where the Cardinal was attending the success; it being
told him that young Calder and Brunston were with the Lord of Ormeston, The
Lairds of Calder and Ormeston committed.
he sent to apprehend them, but Brunston escaped to the wood, the other two
were committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, and thither was Mr. George first
carried, and afterward brought back to the house of Hales, (the Earls
principal house in Lothian) but Queen Mother at the Cardinals desire, being
earnest with the Earl to have sent him again to the Castle of Edinburgh,
albeit in regard of his promise he refused a long time, yet overcome in end by
her entreaty, he yielded; So was Mr. George of new taken to the Castle, Wishart
carried to S. Andrews.
and after a short stay there, conveyed to S. Andrews, where he remained
prisoner unto the day of his suffering.

The Cardinal not thinking it expedient to delay his trial, The Cardinal sends
to the Governor for a Commission.
wrote to the Prelates to meet at S. Andrews the 27. of February. The
Archbishop of Glasgow, at his coming, gave advice to seek a Commission from the
Governor to some man of quality, that might execute Justice, left all the
burden should lie upon them; whereunto the Cardinal agreed, supposing the
Governor would make no scruple in the matter; nor had he made any, if David
Hamilton of Preston knowing what was sought, had not seriously dissuaded him,
advising him rather to use his power in the defense of Gods servants, then to
arm their adversaries with his authority. For it is marvelled, David Hamilton
of Presson disswadeth the Governor.
said he, that you should give such liberty to wicked and godless men, thus to
oppress poor innocents, unto whose charge no crime is laid; only they are
accused for preaching the Gospel of Christ, which your self not long since
openly professed, and exhorted others to profess, promising by your authority
to maintain the same. Buchan. l. 15.
The opinion which men had of your affection to the truth, was that which
chiefly procured your advancement to the place you now hold in the Realm; and
now consider what are men's thoughts and speeches of your proceedings, or rather
what a fearful unthankfulness it is on your part to Almighty God, who has
bestowed upon you so many blessings. You are rid of your neighbors at home
(who envied your honor) without blood and slaughter; you have lately reported
victory of the forain enemy that was stronger by much then your self, and now
will you persecute Gods servants for the pleasure of flagitious men, who
neither can hide their wickedness, nor have care to dissemble it? Remember how
suddenly the late King was taken away, when he followed these courses which now
you run. They who by their perverse counsels wrought his undoing, are leading
you on to the same destruction. At the first they were your open enemies, and
resisted your promotion to the government with all their might, but now I know
not how they have snared you by their malicious devices. Think upon King Saul,
who was exalted by God from a mean estate to be King of Israel; so long as he
obeyed the word of God, he prospered, but how soon he grew disobedient, he
became miserable. Compare the success you have had in your affairs with his
prosperity, and you will find it not unlike; and of this you may be assured,
that except you take another course, your end shall be no better then his,
perhaps worse: wherefore be wise, and suffer not your self to be led any more
by the counsels of wicked men, neither let poor innocents at their appetites be
thus cruelly murdered.

The Governor moved with these speeches, The Governor desires the Cardinal to
defer the trial.
did answer the Cardinal, That he should do well not to precipitate the man's
trial, but to delay it until his coming; for as to himself he would not
consent to his death before the cause were well examined; and if the Cardinal
should do otherwise, he would make protestation that the man's blood should be
required at his hands. This answer grieved the Cardinal not a little, for he
knew that the delay would work the prisoners escape, and to commit the cause to
examination, he saw it was more dangerous. Therefore in a great passion he
replied, That he wrote not unto the Governor, as though he depended in any
matter upon his authority, but out of a desire he had that the heretics
condemnation might proceed with a show of public consent, which since he could
not obtain, he would be doing himself that which he held most fitting.

Thus he made a citation to be given forth, A citation for his appearance.
and Master George to be charged to appear the next morrow, to answer for his
seditious and heretical doctrine. Master George receiving the summons, said,
The Cardinal has no need to summon me* for I am in his hands, and kept fast in
irons, so as he may compel me to answer at what time he pleases. But to
manifest, says he, what men you are, it is well done to keep your forms and
constitutions. History of the Church.
The next day the Cardinal and Prelates being met in the Abbey Church, the
prisoner was presented by the Captain of the Castle, and then the Sub-prior
called Master John Winrame, At his trial the Sub-prior preaches.
a man of good learining, and one who secretly favored the truth, went up into
the Pulpit as he had been enjoined; he took for his Theme the words of our
Savior in the thirteenth of Matthewes Gospel, concerning the good seed, which
he interpreted to be the word of God; heresy he said was the ill seed, and
that he defined to be, a false opinion fighting directly against the word, and
defended with pertinacie. Thereafter falling to speak of the causes of heresy,
he said the main cause was, the ignorance and negligence of those who had the
cure of souls, and neither understood the word of God, nor could use the same
to the convincing of false teachers, and the reducing of those who were gone
astray. In the latter part of his Sermon, speaking of the way how heresies
should be discerned, he said, That as the Goldsmith knows the fine gold from
the counterfeit by the touchstone, so is heresy discerned by the true,
sincere, and undefiled word of God. And in the end concluded, that heretics
ought to be punished, and might lawfully be put to death by the Magistrate.

Now albeit that was said made directly against themselves, He is accused by
Master John Lawder a Priest.
who were there met, not to confute heresy, but to bear down the truth, and
punish those that found fault with their pride and licentiousness; yet as all
had been spoken for them they proceeded, and after their wonted form, placed
Mr. George in a seat erected for that purpose, and over against him, Master
John Lawder a Priest in another, who having a scroll of a paper in his hand,
containing the Articles laid unto Mr. George his charge, did use many bitter
and reproachful words; all which he heard very patiently, not moving or
changing once his countenance. Buch. n. l. 15.
Being required to answer, before he would utter a word, he bowed his knees,
and made his prayer to God; then standing up, entreating them in most humble
manner, to suffer him repeat the sum of the doctrine which he had taught
since his coming into Scotland: His answer.
which he said, was nothing but what the ten Commandments of God, the 12.
Articles of Christian faith, and the Lords prayer contained. In Dundy he said,
that he had preached a part of the Epistle to the Romans. And as he was going
on, to show what form he kept in his preaching, he was interrupted by the
accuser, who with many opprobrious speeches calling him an heretic, a
runnegate, a traitor and thief, said that it was not lawful for him to preach,
and that he had usurped the power at his own hand, without any lawful calling
of the Church. The Prelates also prohibiting all discourses willed him to
answer simply, yea, or nay; fearing if liberty was given him to speak, he
should draw some of the hearers to his mind.

Mr. George perceiving that he could not have audience, appealed to an equal
and indifferent Judge. Mr. George Wishart his appellation.
Whereunto Lawder replied, that the Cardinal was a more then sufficient Judge
for him: and then he reckoned out all his styles, saying, that he was
Archbishop of S. Andrews, Bishop of Meropois, Chancellor of Scotland,
Commendatory of Aberbrothock; Legatus natus, legatus a latere, and the second
person within the Realm. Mr. George calmly answered, I do not condemn my Lord
Cardinal, but I desire the word of God to be my Judge, and some of the Temporal
estate, with certain of your Lordships here present, because I am my Lord
Governors prisoner. At which words some foolish people that stood by cried
out, Such man, such Judge; meaning that the Governor, and others of the
Temporal State, were heretics like unto himself.

Then would the Cardinal have pronounced sentence without any further process,
Sentence of death pronounced against him.
but being advertised to let the accusation be read, and hear what he would
say, lest people should think him wrongfully condemned; he commanded the Priest
to read the points distinctly, and receive his answer to every one of them
severally. The Articles laid to his charge were eighteen in number, which with
the answers he made, the Reader may at his leisure see in the book of Martyrs.
After they had spent some hours in this sort, sentence was pronounced against
him, and he condemned to be burnt as an heretic. Then was he led back to the
Castle, and lodged in the Captains chamber that night, the greatest part
whereof he spent in prayer.

Early in the morning the Prelates sent two Friars to advertise him that he
must die, Two Friars sent to confess him.
and asked if he would confess himself: he answered, That he had no business
with Friars, nor would he willingly confer with them, but if they were
disposed to gratify him in that sort, The conference with the Sub-prior.
he desired to speak with the learned man that preached the day before. This
being permitted, the Sub-prior came, and talked with him a good space: At last
he asked Mr. George if he would receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: he
answered, Most willingly, so I may have it ministered according to Christ's
institution, under both kinds of bread and wine. Hereupon the Sub-prior went
to the Bishops, and told that he had conferred with the prisoner, who did
solemnly affirm that he was free of all the crimes, and that he did utter this
not out of a desire he had of life, but to manifest his innocence (which was
known to God) before men. The Cardinal offended with these speeches of the
Sub-prior, said, It is a long time since we knew what a man thou art. The
Sub-prior answering nothing, asked if they would permit the Sacrament to be
given to the prisoner: the Cardinal conferring with the rest of the Bishops a
while, answered in all their names, That it was not reasonable to give any
spiritual benefit, to an obstinate heretic condemned by the Church.

When Master George heard that the Sacrament was denied him, He communicates
with the Captain of the Castle.
being asked by the Captain of the Castle, going then to breakfast, if he would
take a part with him, he answered, Very willingly, and so much the rather
because I perceive you to be a good Christian, and a man fearing God. Then
turning himself to the Captain, he said, I beseech you in the name of God,
Buchan. l. 15.
and for the love you bear to our Savior Jesus Christ, to be silent a little
while, till I have made a short exhortation, and blessed this bread which we
are to eat, so that I may bid you farewell. The table being covered, and bread
according to the custom set upon it, he spoke about the space of an half hour,
of the institution of the Supper, and of our Saviors death and passion,
exhorting those that were present to mutual love, and to the leading of an holy
life, such as becomes the members of Christ. Then giving thanks, he brake the
bread, distributing to every one that was present a portion; likewise having
tasted the wine, he delivered the cup unto them, exhorting them to remember
with thankfulness the death of our Lord Jesus, in this his communion with
them. As to my self, he said, there is a more bitter potion prepared for me,
only because I have preached the true doctrine of Christ, which brings
salvation, but pray you the Lord with me that I may take it patiently, as out
of his hand; and so concluding with a new thanksgiving, he withdrew himself to
his chamber.

Within a little space, Two executioners lead him to the place of his suffering.
two executioners came up unto him, one of whom apparelled him in a black coat
of linen, the other fastened some bags of powder upon all the parts of his
body; and thus arrayed, he was brought to an utter room, where he was commanded
to stay, till all things were prepared. A scaffold in the mean time erecting on
the East part of the Castle toward the Abbey, with a great tree in the midst
in manner of a gibbet, unto which the prisoner was to be tied; and right
against it was all the munition of the Castle planted, if perhaps any should
press by violence to take him away. The fore Tower was hanged with Tapestry and
rich Cushions laid for ease of the Cardinal and Prelates, who were to behold
that spectacle. And when all things were made ready, he was led forth with his
hands being tied behind his back, and a number of soldiers guarding him to
the place of execution. History of the Church.
As he was going forth of the Castle gate, some poor creatures, who were lying
there, did ask of him some alms for Gods sake, to whom he said, I have not the
use of any hands wherewith I should give you alms, but our merciful God, who
out of his abundance feeds all men, vouchsafe to give you the things which
are necessary both for your bodies, and for your souls. Afterward two Friars
met him, crying, Master George pray to our Lady, that she may be mediatrix for
you to her son: to whom he said, Cease, tempt me not my brethren.

Being come to the place of execution, His death and the manner of it, 2.
Martii 1545.
and gone up upon the scaffold, he turned himself toward the people, and
besought them not to offend with the good word of God because of the torments
they saw prepared for him, desiring them withal to show his brethren and
sisters who had often heard him, An. 1546.
that the doctrine he taught was no wives fables, but the true Gospel of Christ
given him by the grace of God, which he was sent to preach, and for which he
was then with a most glad heart and mind to give his life. Some have falsely
spoken, said he, that I should hold the opinion that the souls of men
departed, sleep after their death until the last day; but I know and believe
the contrary, and am assured that my soul shall this night be with my Savior
in the heavens. This said, he bowed his knees, and having conceived a short but
most pithy prayer, he was tied to the stake, and then cried aloud, O Savior of
the world, have mercy upon me; Father of heaven, I commend my spirit into thine
holy hands. The executioners having kindled the fire, the powder that was
fastened to his body, blew up. The Captain of the Castle who stood near unto
him, perceiving that he was yet alive, willed him to be of good courage, and
commend his soul unto God; This flame (said he) has scortched my body, yet
has it not daunted my spirit, but he who from yonder high place beholds us
with such pride, His prophecy of the Cardinals death.
shall within few days lie in the same as ignominiosly, as now he is seen
proudly to rest himself. After which words, one of the tormentors drawing the
cord that went about his neck, stopped his breath, so as he spoke no more.
Buchan. l. 15.
The fire increasing, his body was quickly consumed unto ashes.

But the Cardinals malice not yet satisfied, Prayers inhibited to be made for
him after his death.
caused the same night a Proclamation to be made through the City, that none
should pray for the heretic under pain of the heaviest censures that could be
inflicted. And then the Priests triumphing did in all meetings, extol the
Cardinal above the skies, saying, That he not regarding the Governors
authority, The Priests extol the Cardinal.
had by himself caused justice to be executed upon that heretic and kithed a
most worthy Patron of the Ecclesiastical estate. If the Church, said they, in
former times had found such a Protector, matters had not been reduced to the
doubtful terms wherein now they stand; but long or this time by her own power
and authority she had been able to maintain her self. Such insolent speeches
they were heard to utter in every place. The Cardinal himself also seemed to be
greatly pleased with that which he had done, presuming it should keep all his
enemies in fear; yet it proved the very rock on which he and all his fortunes
perished: for the common sort of people exclaimed mightily against his cruelty,
and some of good birth and quality did openly vow that the blood of Master
George Wishart should be revenged, though they should give life for life: of
which number, John Lesley brother to the Earl of Rothes, forbear not in all
companies openly to avouch, that his hand and dagger should be the Cardinals
Priests.

Nor was he ignorant of the general hatred carried unto him, He contracted his
base daughter to the heir of Craford.
and thereupon began to fortify himself with some strong alliance, which he
shortly after made, contracting one of his base daughters to the Earl of
Craford his son and heir. The Nuptials were performed with an exceeding pomp
and magnificence. But he did not long enjoy the content he took in his Match,
for Normand Lesley son to the Earl of of Rothes, Buchan. l. 15.
who had followed him a long time, and done him good services, having moved him
in the behalf of some friends that were interessed by the restitution of the
Lairds of Cleish, Easter Weimes, and certain others who been forfeited in the
late Kings time, was not answered as he expected; for which growing into a
choler, and alleging the Cardinals promise in the business, he said, that he
would not be deluded in that sort. The Cardinal, who had not been accustomed to
such speeches, and thought he was not used with that respect which became,
chafed mightily, so as after an unseemly altercation they parted in wrath.

This discord publicly rumoured, A conspiracy against the Cardinal.
diverse that hated the Cardinal (some for the cause of Religion, and some for
other private respects) did reparie to Normond, and working upon his passion,
incensed him with their words, wondering how he could look for any good from
him that was a man hated of God, and all good people. And as it falls out in
such conferences, whilst every man was recounting the injuries he had suffered
in private, and talking of his violent courses, one amongst the rest said, that
they should do God good service, and no small benefit to the country, to make
an end of that vicious and ungodly tyrant whom all good men did hate: and with
such words inflaming one another, at last they agreed to cut him off.

The principal undertakers were Normond Lesley, John Lesley his Uncle, William
Kirkaldy of Grange, Peter Carmicall of Fife, and James Melvile, one of the
house of Carneby; The proceeding of the conspirators.
the Plot was to meet at S. Andres in the most private manner they could, and
surprise the Castle some morning before the servants were stirring. And that
the enterprise should not fail, they gave hands to be in the City the 28. of
May, promising in the mean time so to carry themselves, as no suspicion might
be taken of their purpose. Thus at the day appointed, Normond accompanied with
five only, came to the City, and went to his accustomed lodging; William
Kircaldy was there a day before, John Lesley who did profess enmity to the
Cardinal, entered not till night was fallen. Upon Saturday morning the 29. of
May, rising about three of the clock, they met in the Abbey Churchyard, where
they condescended that William Kircaldy, and six with him (for they did not
exceed twelve in all) should attend the opening of the gate, Grange enters
into the Castle.
and assure it for the rest. All things succeeded to their wishes, Grange at
his first coming found the gate open; and entering with his company,
entertained the Keeper with some speeches, asking if the Cardinal was stirring,
and how soon he would rise. Normond came shortly after, and some two with him;
last of all, came John Lesley with other two; whom as soon as the Keeper saw,
suspecting some bad practice, he made to draw the bridge, but they laying hands
upon him, took the keys, and assured the gate.

Then appointing four of the company to watch the chamber where the Cardinal
lay that no advertisement should go unto him, The servants and workmen put to
the gate.
they went to the several chambers in which the servants lay asleep, and
calling them by their names (for they were all known unto them) they put fifty
of his ordinary servants, besides the workmen, Masons, and Wrights, who were
reckoned above a hundred, (for he was then fortifying the Castle) to the gate,
permitting none to stay within, but the Earl of Arran the Governors eldest
son, whom they thought best to detain upon all adventures. This was performed
with so little noise, as the Cardinal did not hear, till they knocked at his
chamber. Then he asked, who was there? John Lesley answered, My name is Lesley.
Which Lesley, said the Cardinal? is that Normond? It was answered, that he must
open to those that were there. The answer gave him notice that they were no
friends; therefore making the door fast, he refused to open. They calling to
bring fire, The Cardinal killed.
whilst it was in fetching, he began to commune with them; and after some
speeches, upon their promise to use no violence, he opened the door; but they
rushing in with their swords drawn did most inhumanely kill him, he not making
any resistance.

The tumult was great in the City, A tumult in the City.
upon the rumor that the Castle was taken. The people armed, and such as
favored the Cardinal, made haste intending to scale the walls; Buchon. l. 15.
but when it was told them, that he was dead whom they sought to help, their
hearts cooled. The people still crying for a sight of the Cardlnal, his corpse
was brought to the very same place, where he sat beholding Master George
Wisharts execution. Upon the sight whereof, they dissolved; many then calling
to mind the Martyr his last words, were thereby confirmed in the opinion they
had of his piety and holiness.

Such was the end of this unfortunate man, who in his life was ambitious beyond
measure, The Cardinal his description.
and in punishing of those he esteemed heretics, more then inhumane; a
barbarous part it was in him to sit and behold the Martyring of Master George
Wishart, taking pleasure in that which no man could look on without pity. But
the hatred he bare to the truth, and the care he had to maintain his own
greatness, was such, and so excessive, as he did both forget himself, and the
place he held in the Church, and now does remain a tragical ensample in story,
to admonish every man to keep within his bound, and hold that moderation which
is fitting.

The rumor of this fact being quickly dispersed through the country, How the
fact was interpreted in the Country.
every man commended or condemned it as his passion led him. They who stood in
awe of his power, did highly commend the enterprise and praise the doers, and
of that sort diverse came to congratulate the fact, offering to take one part
with them. Others who were more wise, and moderate, though they disliked not
the fact, (as hoping to enjoy their profession with greater liberty) did yet
abhor the form and manner, judging it to be foully done, especially on the
part of Normond, at whose hands he did not look for any harm. And indeed few
or none of those who had an hand in that work, escaped an extraordinary
judgment; God thereby declaring, that howsoever it pleases him in the
execution of his judgments, to use sometimes the ministry and service of men,
yet does he not allow of their wicked disposition, and for most part fails
not to reward them with the same, or the like that they do unto others.

But in the Church a fearful uproare was raised upon this accident, A great
stir in the Church by this occasion.
the Priests and Friars exclaiming every where against the murder, as the most
odious which in any memory had been committed. The Bishops running upon the
Governor (who was no less troubled with the fact then themselves) desired
some course might be taken for the speedy punishment of the murderers: but he
following the course of law, directed summons for their appearing to underlye
trial, which they contemned, and were therefore denounced Rebels. The
murderers accursed.
The Ecclesiastic Judges to be nothing behind for their parts, did solemnly
curse the actors, and all that should receive or minister unto them any
necessaries.

41. Mean while the Governor did nominate his base brother for the place; The
Governors base brother elected Bishop.
who was elected by the Chanons, and soon after confirmed by Pope Paul the
third. For he fearing the defection of the Realm from the obedience of the
Roman See, as England had given the ensample, was glad to gratify the
Governor, and with the Bulls which were freely exped, wrote both to the
Governor and to the Bishop, that they should make their zeal appear, in
vindicating the injury done to the Ecclesiastic estate.

Upon the receipt of these letters, The Castle besieged, and supplied from
England.
it was resolved to besiege the Castle, which beginning about the end of
August, continued until the month of January; howbeit to small effect: for
the passage by Sea being open, they were supplied with all necessaries from
England by King Henry, to whom they had obliged their faith by two several
messages for defending the Castle, and maintaining the contract with England:
which the Governor fearing he was induced to capitulate with the besieged, and
yield unto the conditions following.

1. That the Governor should procure unto them a sufficient absolution from
the Pope for the slaughter of the Cardinal, A c^pitulation with the besieged.
and till the same was returned, that they should retain the Castle, and not be
pursued by force.

2. That they, their friends, servants, and partakers, should simply be
remitted by the Governor, and never be called in question for the said
slaughter, but should enjoy all commodities spiritual and temporal, which they
possessed before the committing thereof.

3. That the besieged should give pledges for rendering the Castle, how soon
the absolution was returned from Rome; and for surety of the pledges, that the
Earl of Arran eldest son to the Governor, should remain in their custody
until the absolution was returned, and they secured to their content.

The conditions were to the besieged more advantageous then honorable to the
Governor, The Governor sends to France for a supply.
but neither the one nor the other intended performance; for the Governor at
the same time sent a messenger to France, with letters from the Queen Dowager,
and from himself, entreating a supply of Ships and Galleys, to batter the house
on that part which looked toward the Sea, and debar the Keepers of further
provision. They on the other side, were resolved not to forsake King Henry's
protection, of whose assistance they were confident. The proceedings of the
next summer, shall clear the intentions on either side; in the mean time, let
us hear how the affairs of Religion went the rest of this winter.

Diverse, as we touched before, Diverse joined with those within the Castle.
upon the news of the Cardlnals death, came and joined with those that had
killed him, especially Master Henry Balnaves, the Melvils of the house of
Raith, and some Gentlemen of Fife, to the number of sevenscore persons, who all
entered into the Castle the day after the slaughter, and abode there during the
time of the first siege. John Rough and John Knox preach to the besieged.
John Rough, he that had attended the Governor as Chaplain in the beginning of
his Regiment, came also thither, and became their Preacher.

After him came John Knox, but not till the siege was raised, and the
appointment made, whereof we have spoken. The adversaries of Religion taking
advantage of this, did cast in the teeth of both the Preachers and Professors
the murder committed, as though they did all approve the same; and Bishop
Lesley in his Chronicle speaking of John Knox, saying, that He did think to
attain to the top of Evangelical profession, by triumphing that way upon the
slaughter of a Priest and Cardinal. I deny not, but this his doing was scarce
allowable, and that it had been a wiser part in him not to have gone toward
them at all; yet since he did neither accompany them at the fact, nor came unto
them till the conditions of peace were granted; his guiltiness was not such as
they make it to be; neither will I say that he was grieved at the Cardinals
death, but rather glad that such an enemy was taken out of the way: but that he
did insult upon his death, or allow the manner of it, cannot be truly affirmed
as to that which is objected, forth of the narration made of this accident in
the book entitled, The History of the Church of Scotland, where the Author
seems indeed to commend the fact; though that history be ascribed to John
Knox, it is sure that he did not pen the same, as I shall make clear in
another place.

How soon the Governor was gone, John Rough preaching in the city, is oppugned
by the Clergy.
John Rough did openly preach in the Parish Church, and was much haunted by the
people; at which the Clergy offending, a great stir was raised: Dean John
Anand oppugning his doctrine both by word and writing, John Knox did take on
him to maintain the same: and the matter being brought to a dispute, after long
reasoning upon the authority of the Roman Church, John Knox did offer to
prove, That the present Church of Rome was more degenerate from the purity
which it had in the days of the Apostles, then was the Church of the Jews
from the Ordinances given by Moses, when they consented to the death of our
Savior.

Such as were present at the reasoning, John Knox maintained his doctrine in a
Sermon.
having requested John Knox to make good what he had spoken, he took occasion
the Sunday following to preach in the Parish Church, choosing for his Theme the
24, and 25. verses of the seventh Chapter of Daniel; In the Sermon after he had
spoken of the care that God had always of his Church, to forewarne her of the
dangers that were to happen, many years before the same fell out; and
illustrated that point by the predictions of Isreal's captivity, the prophecy
of the four Empires, namely the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman, The
substance of John Knox his Sermon.
and foretelling of the Beast that should afise out of the destruction of the
Roman Empire; he said that by that Beast, the Church of Rome was to be
understood, in regard all the marks assigned by Daniel, did pertain to that
Church, and to no other power which ever was in the world. Then falling to
speak of Antichrist, he showed that there was not any one person meant by that
title, but a body and multitude of people, having a wicked head, that should
not only be sinful himself, but the occasion also of sin to all that should be
subject unto him. And that he was called Antichrist, because he was contrary to
Christ, in life and doctrine, in laws. The contrariety of life he made clearly
by deciphering the corrupt and beastly conversation both of the Popes
themselves, and of their Clergy. The contraiety of doctrine he qualified by
comparing the doctrine of the justification by faith taught in the Scriptures,
with the doctrine of justification by works, maintained by the Church of Rome.
And the contrariety of laws he proved by the observation of days, abstaining
from mears, and forbidding of marriage, which Christ had made free. In end he
came to speak of the marks of the Beast, one he said was in the Text, where it
was said, He shall speak great words against the most high; but what greater
words said he can be uttered then to call the Pope the Vicar of Christ, the
successor of Peter, the head of the universal Church; most holy, most blessed,
one who cannot err, that may make right of wrong and wrong of right, that of
nothing may make somewhat; that has all verity enclosed in the shrine of his
breast, that has power over all men, no man having power over him, and through
he draw ten thousand millions of souls with himself to hell, that none may or
ought to say that he does wrong? which words he showed, were expressed in the
common law, and could not be denied. Another note more remarkable, he adduced
forth of S. John his Revelation, where it is said, that the Babylonian whore
shall make merchandise of the souls of men; which never any did of what
profession soever they were, the Pope and his followers excepted: for they
(said he) take upon them to mitigate the pains of souls in Purgatory, and to
release them by saying of Masses, selling of Pardons, and Indulgences, which
none besides them ever did: whereupon he inferred, that the Church of Rome was
quite degenerate from her first purity, and that very beast foreshewed in the
Scriptures, etc.

At this Sermon Master John Mayor the Sub-prior, The Archbishop offended with
the Subprior for permitting these preachings.
a number of Chanons and Friars of both Orders, with the whole University, were
present; whom he appealed to answer his allegations, if they found any one of
them not consonant to truth. The Archbishop being advertised of this, wrote to
the Sub-prior, saying, that he wondered how he could suffer such heretical and
schismatical doctrines to be taught, The two preachers convened before the
Sub-prior.
and not oppose himself thereto. Whereupon John Rough and John Knox were cited
to answer unto certain heads collected out of their Sermons, and set down as
follows.

1. That no mortal man can be the head of Christ's Church. 2. That the Pope is
Antichrist, and so not a member of Christ's mystical body. 3. That no man may
make or devise a Religion that is acceptable to God, but that he is bound to
observe and keep the Religion received from God, without chopping or changing
the same. 4. That the Sacraments of the New Testament ought to be ministered as
they were instituted by Christ Jesus, and practiced by his Apostles, nor ought
there any thing be added unto them, nor diminished from them. 5. That the Mass
is abominable idolatry, blasphemous to the death of Jesus Christ, and a
profanation to the Lords Suppers. 6. That there is no Purgatory, in the which
the souls of men can either be pined or purged after this life, Heaven being
appointed for the faithful, and Hell for the reprobate and unfaithful. 7. That
prayer for the dead is vain, and to the dead is idolatry. 8. That Bishops are
no Bishops, except they preach themselves wthout a Substitute. 9. That tithes
by Gods law do not appertain necessarily to Churchmen.
This last Article I would not omit, John Knox his judgment of tithes.
because it is alleged by those that penned the story; whether it was a point
of John Roughs preaching or not, I cannot say, but for John Knox it is clear by
his Sermons and writings still extant, that he held it a point of high
Sacrilege to rob and spoil the Church of tithes. It is true that many in
these times, offending with the extortion of Churchmen, did hold that tithes
belonged not to the Church by any divine right; and knowing that this opinion
would find easy passage among the people, as also serve to abridge the means
and power of Churchmen, they were the more ready to deliver such doctrines; but
this was done rather out of passion then judgment: for he that will not
wilfully shut his eyes against the truth, cannot but know that tithes are the
Lords, and the portion that he has served for the maintenance of his worship
and service: But to leave this.

The Sub-prior and others of the Clergy, John Knox his answer to the Sub-prior
and Clergy.
that convened with him, having laid these Articles to their charge, John Knox
answered, that for himself he was glad to declare his mind in those points,
before so modest and judicious an auditory; and turning to the Sub-prior, It is
a long time, said he, since I have heard that you are not ignorant of the
truth; Therefore I do appeal your conscience before the supreme Judge, that if
you think the Articles wherewith we are charged contrarious to the truth of
God, that you plainly open your self, and suffer not the people to be deceived;
but if in your conscience you know them to be true and sound, then I will crave
your patrocinie, that by your authority the people may be moved to embrace the
truth, whereof now many doubt, because of your indifferency. The Sub-prior
answered, That he came not there to judge, but to confer of these points, and
would, if he pleased, reason a little of the power of the Church, which in my
opinion (said he) may very lawfully devise rights and ceremonies for decoring
the Sacraments, An. 1547.
and other parts of divine service; John Knox replying, That no man in the
worship of God might appoint any ceremony, giving it a signification to his
pleasure. One Arbuthnet a gray Friar reasoned so hotly in the contrary, that
forgetting himself, he denied the Apostles to have received the Holy Ghost,
when they penned their Epistles. The Sub-prior checking the Friar, did after a
little space dimit the Preachers with a brotherly admonition, to take heed what
doctrine they delivered in public.

When they were gone, A consultation of the Clergy, how to stay the defection
of the people.
such of the Clergy as were present, entered in consultation, what was fittest
to be done for staying the defection of the people; and in end resolved, that
every learned man of the Abbey and University, should preach in the Parish
Churches on Sundays; the Sub-prior beginning, the Officials following, and the
rest according to their seniority; eschewing all of them to speak of any
controverted point, which might breed question, and minister unto people
occasion of talk. John Knox, who by this mean was excluded from the Pulpit on
the Sunday, preached on the week days sometimes, none daring to offer him any
wrong, because of the fear they stood in of them within the Castle.

But John Rough being grieved with the wicked and licencious living of the
soldiers and others in the Castle, John Rough for saking those in the Castle,
goes into England.
took his leave of them and departed into England; preaching some years in the
Towns of Carlisle, Berwick, and Newcastle, he was afterward provided to a
Benefice by the Archbishop of York, nor far from the Town of Hull, and
resided upon it until the death of King Edward the sixth. In the time of Queen
Mary's persecution, he fled with the wife that he had married unto Friesland,
and won his living with the knitting of Caps, hose and such like wares; and
in November 1557. coming to London for providing some necessaries to maintain
his trade, was apprehended by the Queens Vice-Chamberlain at the Saracens head
in Islington, where they who professed Religion, used quietly to meet.

Being brought before Bonner Bishop of London, He is brought in question, and
examined by Bonner Bishop of London.
and questioned, if at any time since his last coming into England, he had
preached; he answered; That he had not preached, but in some places where godly
people were assembled, he did read the prayers of the the Communion Book, set
forth in the Reign of King Edward the sixth. And being asked, what his
judgment was of the said book, he confessed, That he did approve the same, as
agreeing in all points with the word of God. The Bishop used many persuasions
to make him recant, and detained him some weeks in prison, to try what he would
do: but finding him resolute, and constant in his profession, he brought him
forth to be judged. Where (one Morgan a Bishop of S. David's assisting) he was
charged, first, That being a Priest, and in Orders, he had married a wife;
next, That he refused to use the Latin Service; and thirdly, That he would not
go to the Mass. To the first point he answered, That Orders were not an
impediment to marriage, and that he had done lawfully in taking a wife. To the
second and third he said, If he were to live Methuselahs days, he would
neither use the Latin Service, nor be present at Mass, which he counted
abominable. He suffered Martyrdom and is burnt in Smithfield.
Upon these answers he was condemned, degraded, and put in the hands of the
secular Magistrate, who the next morning being the 21. of November, caused him
to be burnt in Smithfield. Thus ended that worthy Minister and Martyz of
Christ, of whom I thought fit in this place to say so much, though his
sufferings fell out some years after.

The summer following about the beginning of June, the absolution promised to
those of the Castle, The absolution returned from Rome, does not satisfy them.
returned from Rome, whereupon the Keepers were required to render the house,
according to the capitulation made. But they alleging the absolution not to be
sufficient, because of some words contained in the Bull, wherein it was said,
remittimus crimen irremissibile, we remit a crime which cannot be remitted;
refused to accept the same. It was answered that such a clause was insert only
for aggravating the crime, and that the absolution was in it self valid enough.
But they would not be satisfied; The Castle of S. Andrews again besieged at the
coming of the French Galleys.
and so complaining that promise was not kept with them, resolved to stand to
their defense.

In the end of the same month there arrived twenty one Galleys sent from
France, under the command of Leon Strozius, within sight of the Castle. The
Governor was at that time in the borders, and upon advertisement of the
Galleys arriving, came with such diligence, as diverse who belonged to the
Castle, being in the City, had no leisure to re enter; and some who were gone
thither for private business, were forced to stay within. Shortly after his
coming, the siege was confirmed by sea and land, trenches cast, and the Canons
planted, some in the Abbey steeple, some in S. Salvators, and some in the
street that leads to the Castle.

Then began the battery both by sea and land, The Castle besieged and battered
by land and sea.
but that of the sea did not great harm. The siege continuing all the month of
July, upon the twenty nineth day in the South-quarter (on which the Canon had
played furiously that morning) a great breach was made; this terrifying the
defendants, who to that time showed great courage, expecting relief from
England, (and indeed a navall Army was prepared to come, but King Henry dying
about the same time, it was stayed) beside the danger they apprehended of the
breach, the plague within the house was hot, and thereof every day a number
died: So perceiving no help, and the sickness increasing, they came to a
capitulation, where it was agreed, that the lives of all within the Castle
should be saved, The Castle reduced upon capitulation.
the Principals transported unto France, and if they liked not to remain there,
be conveyed upon the French Kings charges to what country they pleased,
Scotland excepted. Immediately the Castle was rendered to the French Captain,
who sent his men to receive the prisoners, and make spoil of all that was in
the house. They found of victuals great store, wherewith they furnished the
Galleys. But the Cardinals treasure and household-stuffe, which was very
precious, pleased them better. All this with the wealth the defendants had (for
they had brought all their substance thither) fell into the hands of the
French; the fourth or fifth day after the Galleys put to Sea, and about the
midst of August arrived safe at Roan in Normandy, where some of the prisoners
were incarcerated; others detained all the winter in the Galleys, especially
John Knox, Mr. James Balsom, with his brothers David and Gilbert. The Castle
demolished.
The Castle after the French were gone, was by act of Council demolished, which
some said, was done to satisfy the Popes law, that ordaines the places where
Cardinals are slain to be ruinated: but the true cause was, the fear the
Governor had, that England should take the house and fortify it; as they did
some others a short while after.

This revenge taken of the Cardinals death, The Duke of Somerset invadeth
Scotland.
gave the Priests some satisfaction, who reckoned it a part of their happiness
to be rid in this sort of John Knox, and others that they knew to be their
enemies. But the Duke of Somerset entering with a strong Army into Scotland, in
September next, put all in a new fear. The Governor sent Proclamations
through the country, charging all that could bear Arms, to meet at Edinburgh
for the defense of the Realm; many of all sorts assembled, and with greater
diligence then was expected, which made the Duke of Somerset, who was a
Nobleman well inclined, His letter to the Governor and Nobility.
and hated the shedding of blood, to write unto the Governor and Nobility,
entreating them to consider, That both the Armies consisted of Christian men,
who above all things, (if they were not forgetful of their profession) ought to
wish peace and quietness, and have in detestation war, and unjust force; as
likewise to remember that the cause of the present invasion did not proceed
from covetousness or malice, but from the desire of a perpetual peace, which
could not be so firmly made up by any mean, as by marriage, which they knew was
promised, and by the public consent of the whole Estates ratified, upon
conditions more beneficial to the Scots then to the English, insomuch that they
were called not unto a servitude, but unto a common fellowship, and a liberal
communication of all their fortunes, which could not but be more commodious to
the Scots, then to the English; the hope of advantage, and the fear of injuries
being always greater from the party that is more strong, to that which is the
weaker: And for the business in hand, he desired them to consider this
especially, that seeing there was a necessity of giving their Queen in marriage
to some man, if they did either respect their profit or honor, they could not
make a better choice, then of a King their neighbor, born in the same Isle.
joined in propinquity of blood, instructed in the same laws, educated in the
same manners and language, superior in riches, and in all external commodities
and ornaments, and such a one as would bring with him a perpetual peace, An.
1548.
together with the oblivion of ancient grudges, and hatreds. For should they
take a stranger to be their King, differing from themselves in language,
manners, and laws; great evils and discommodities could not but arise, as they
might know by that which had fallen out in the like case to other nations, by
whose ensample he wished they should be made wise. As for the part of England,
he said if they did find the minds of the Scots not estranged from peace, they
would remit somewhat of their right, and be contented that the young Queen
should be kept amongst themselves, until she were fit for marriage, and might
choose a husband to her self by advice of the Nobility; during which time, all
hostility should cease betwixt the two Kingdoms, it being provided that the
Queen should not be sent to any forain country, nor contracted in marriage
with the French King, nor any other Prince: which if the Scots would faithfully
promise, he would presently retire with his Army, and recompense all injuries
done since his coming into Scotland, at the sight and estimation of honest men.

This letter the Governor communicated to his brother, The Duke of Somnsets
letters suppres^^d.
and to a few others on whose counsel he depended, such as George Dury Abbot of
Dunfermlin, Mr. Archebald Beaton, and Mr. Hugh Rig a Lawyer, who gave him
advice to suppress the letter: for they feared if the offers were published,
the greater part of the Nobility would embrace the same, and in stead thereof
they made a rumor to be dispersed through the Army, that the English were come
to take away the Queen by force, and bring the Kingdom into subjection. The
Nobles and whole Army believing this to be the effect of the letter, became
mightily incensed. Nor did any kithe so foolish as the Priests and Clergy men,
who dreaming of nothing but victory, cried out, that the English heretics had
no spirits, and durst not come to a battle: But they found themselves
deceived; for upon Saturday the tenth of September, 1547. The battle of Pinc^ie.
the Armies joining, the Scots were put to the worse, and many thousands slain,
few in the fight, (which lasted not long) but exceeding many in the chase. The
English pursuing the victory, came forwards to Leith, where they remained eight
days, dividing the spoil and prisoners; and in that time surprised the Isles
of Inchkeith and Inchcolme, in the river of Forth, with Broughtie Castle in the
mouth of Tay, which places they strongly fortified. In their return homewards
they took the Castle of Home, with the house of Fascastle, and placed Garrisons
in the Towns of Haddington, The young Queen conveyed to Dumbartom.
Lawder, and Roxborough. The Governor, the Bishop his brother, and such of the
Nobles as escaped in the flight, went to Striveling, and there taking counsel
what should be done with the young Queen, concluded to send her to the Castle
of Dumbarton, under the custody of the Lords Areskin and Levingston, and to
advertise the King of France, how matters went, entreating of him a supply both
of men and money.

Hereupon the next summer arrived at Leith three thousand Germans under the
charge of Count Rhingrave, with as many French commanded by Monsieur de
Andelot, The siege of Haddington.
Monsieur de Mallery, and Monsieur d' Ossel, Monsieur d' Esse being General of
the whole. This supply did so hearten the Governor, as gathering together an
Army, he beleaguered the Town of Haddington, which the English had at that time
made very strong. The Nobility being there convened, entered of new into a
consultation touching the young Queen, and the course that should be taken with
her. The French General desired she should be sent into France, and espoused
to the Daulphin; A counsel taken for sending the young Queen to France.
which the Queen her Mother longed to have done. The Noblemen were not of one
mind, for such as favored the reformation, were of opinion that the
conditions offered by England (which were then come to light) should be
embraced because that would bring with it ten years of peace at least; in which
time, if either King Edward of England, or the young Queen should depart this
life, all things would return to their first estate: and if no such things
happened, yet the Kingdom being at rest, and freed of the present troubles
would grow to some better ease within it self, and they might more maturely
advise what course was fittest to be taken: Delay, they said, in matters of
such consequence was safest, and that precipitation might bring with it a
sudden, but untimely repentance. The rest stood all for the French, most of
them being corrupted with gold, and others with large promises. An. 1550.
The Governor himself had an annuity promised of twelve thousand francks, and
a company of men at Arms, to the Earl of Arran his son. All these
pretending the safety of the young Queen, did reason that there was no other
way to be rid of the English wars, but that one: For as long as the English
have any hope, said they, to speed, they will still be troubling; but when they
shall see the Queen gone, and that there is no remedy, they will cease from
their pursuit. The greatest number inclining that way, it was concluded that
the young Queen should be conveyed to France. Shortly after, the French Navy
that lay at Leith, giving out that they were to return home, compassing the
North Isles, received her at Dunbrition, and after much tossing at sea, did
safely land her in France.

The wars with England in the mean time went on, and continued full two
years, Peace made with England.
till by the treaty of Bulloign, in the yare 1550. a peace was made, the Lord
Chastilion being Commissioner for the French, the Earl of Bedford for the
English, and David Panter Bishop of Ross for the Scots. The prisoners taken in
the Castle of Saint Andrews put at liberty.
At that time were Normond Lesley, Mr. Henry Balnaves, John Knox and others,
who had been kept partly in prison, and partly in the Galleys since the taking
of S. Andrews Castle, put to liberty; Mr. James Balfour had freed himself long
before by abjuring his profession, and was become Official to the Bishop of S.
Andrews; James Melvil died in the Tower of Breast in Britain; William Kircaldie,
Peter Carmichal, with Robert and William Leslies, who were imprisoned in Mont
S. Michael, found means to escape before the Treaty, and went into England.
Norman Lesley his fortune and death.
Norman after he was freed, returned into Scotland, but fearing the Governor
he went into Denmark, where not finding that kind reception he expected, he
betook himself to England, and had an honorable pension allowed him, which was
thankfully answered during the life of King Edward the sixth. Queen Mary
succeeding, he found not the like favor, and thereupon went to France, where
he had a company of men of Arms given him, with which he served the French
King in his wars against the Emperor Charles the fifth, and in pursuing the
enemy whom he had in chase, was wounded with the shot of a Pistol, whereof he
died the day after at Montreul. He was a man of noble qualities, and full of
courage, but falling unfortunately in the slaughter of the Cardinal, which he
is said at his dying to have sore repented, he lost himself and the expectation
which was generally held of his worth.

The country notwithstanding the peace made with England, The country vexed
with Justice Courts.
was not in much better case; for the Governor, who was altogether ruled by
the Bishop his brother, going through the country with Justice Courts, (as
they call them) vexed the people mightily; and whereas during the war men
enjoyed the liberty of their profession, a new persecution was raised, which
took the beginning at one Adam Wallace a simple man, but very zealous in his
Religion; he was taken at Winton in Lothian by the Bishops direction, and
brought to his trial in the Church of Black Friars in Edinburgh, where in
presence of the Governor, the Earl of Argyle, great Justice of the Realm,
Adam Wallace accused of heresy.
the Earls of Angus, Huntley, Glaincarne, and diverse others of the Nobility he
was accused, first, of usurping the office of a Preacher, having no lawful
calling thereto; next, of baptizing one of his own children; thirdly, for
denying Purgatory; fourthly, for maintaining that prayers made to the Saints,
and for the dead were merely superstitious; and fifthly, for calling the Mass
an idolatrous service, and affirming that the bread and wine in the Sacrament
of the Altar, after the words of consecration, remained bread and wine.

To the first he answered, His answer.
That he never judged himself worthy of so excellent a vocation as is the
calling of a Preacher, nor did he ever presume to preach; only he confessed,
that in some private places he did read a part of the Scripture at times, and
make a short exhortation thereupon to those that would hear him. It being
replied that he ought not to have meddled with the Scriptures; he said, That he
esteemed it the duty of every Christian to seek the knowledge of Gods word, and
the assurance of his own salvation, which was not to be found but in the
Scriptures. One that stood by saying, What then shall be left to the Bishops
and Churchmen to do, if every man should be a babbler upon the Bible? History of
the Church.
he answered, It becomes you to speak more reverently of God and of his blessed
word; and if the Judge did right, he would punish you for your blasphemy: But
to your question. I say, that albeit you and I and five thousand mo would read
the Bible, and confer together upon it, yet we leave more to the Bishops to
do, then either they will do or can; for we leave to them the preaching of the
Gospel of Christ, and the feeding of the flock, which he has redeemed by his
own blood, which is a burden heavy enough; neither do we them any wrong in
working out our own salvation so far as we may.

To the second he answered, That it was as lawful for him to baptize his own
child, since he could not have a true Minister, as it was to Abraham to
circumcise Ismael and his family.

To the third and fourth heads, more generally he said, That he never believed
nor maintained any thing, but that he found in the book hanging at his girdle:
which was the Bible in French, Dutch, and English. And being urged to be more
particular, he answered, That if he were disposed to speak of these matters, he
would require a more upright and indifferent Judge. The Earl of Huntley upon
that, saying he was a fool to desire another Judge then the Governor, and the
Bishops there present; he replied, That the Bishops could not be his Judges,
because they were open enemies to the doctrine he professed. And for the
Governor, he doubted if he had the knowledge to discern lies from truth, and
the inventions of men from the true worship of God. The Judge that he desired,
he said, was the book of God, by which if he should be convinced to have
taught, spoken, or done in matters of Religion, any thing that was repugnant to
the will of God, he would not refuse to die; but if he tried innocent, and was
found not to have spoken or done any thing contrary thereto, then he desired
the protection of the Governor and Nobility, against the Tyranny of malicious
men.

Being enquired what he did think of the Mass, Acts of Martyrs.
he said, That he had read the Bible in three languages, and had never found
the word Mass in them all, and that the thing which was in greatest estimation
with men, was nothing but abomination in the sight of God. Then did all the
company cry out, Heresy, heresy, let him be condemned. So the poor man was
sentenced to be an heretic, and put in the hands of Sir John Campbel of
Lundie, Justice deputy, who having adjudged him to die, sent him back to
prison, because the night was coming on; all that night he spent in singing of
Psalms, which he had learned by heart, and the next day was led forth to the
fire, which was prepared in the Castle hill, being inhibited to speak unto the
people; yet when he came to the place of execution, he entreated the beholders,
Not to offend with the truth because of his sufferings, saying, The disciple is
not above his Master: and as he was proceeding, the Provost of the Town who had
the oversight of the execution, did interrupt him, saying, that he would not be
permitted to speak to the people; whereupon having in some few words commended
his soul to God, he took his death most patiently.

The same year there arose a great contention amongst the Churchmen, A
contention among Churchmen for saying of Pater noster.
for saying the Pater noster, upon this occasion. One Richard Marshal, Prior of
the Black Friars at Newcastle in England, had been in S. Andrews, and in one of
his Sermons taught, that the Pater noster should be said unto God only, and not
unto the Saints. Some Doctors of the University taking exception against his
doctrine, stirred up a Gray Friar called Friar Tottis to confute him, and prove
that the Pater noster might be said unto the Saints. The Friar, an audacious
and ignorant fellow, took the matter in hand and reading his text out of the
fifth of S. Matthewes Gospel, The foolish preaching of a Friar in Saint Andrews
upon this subject.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for unto them belongs the kingdom of
heaven, gathered upon it, that the Pater noster might be said to Saints,
because all the Petitions in the prayer, said he, appertain to the Saints: for
if we meet an old man in the street, we will say, Good morrow Father, much more
in our prayers may we call the Saints our Fathers; and seeing we grant they are
in heaven, we may say to every one of them, Our Father which art in heaven.
Then we know, said he, God has made their names holy, so we may say to any of
the Saints, Hallowed be thy name. And as they are in the Kingdom of heaven, so
that Kingdom is theirs by possession; therefore when we pray for the Kingdom
of heaven, we may say to any of them, Thy kingdom come. In like manner, except
their will had been the will of God, they had never come to that Kingdom;
therefore seeing their will is Gods will, we may say to every one of them, Thy
will be done. But when he came to the fourth Petition, he was much troubled to
find a color for it, An. 1543.
confessing it was not in the Saints power to give us daily bread; yet they may
pray, said he, to God for us, that he will give us our daily bread. The like
gloss he made upon the rest of the Petitions, but with so little satisfaction
of the hearers, as they all fell a laughing, and the children meeting him in
the streets, did cry and call him, Friar Pater noster, whereof he grew so
ashamed, that he left the City.

Yet in the University, Acts of Martyrs. p. 1274.
the contention ceased not, whereupon the Doctors did assemble to dispute, and
decide the question. In that meeting, some held that the Pater noster was said
to God, Formaliter, and to Saints Materialiter; others not liking the
distinction, said that the Pater noster ought to be said to God Principaliter,
and to Saints minus Principaliter; others would have it Ultimate, and non
ultimate: others Primario, and secundario and some (wherewith the most voices
went) said that the Pater noster should be said to God, Capiendo stricte, and
to Saints, Capiendo large. Yet did they not setle upon the distinction; and
after diverse meetings, when they could not agree by common consent, the
decision was remitted to the Provincial Synod, which was to meet at Edinburgh
in January following. A simple fellow that served the Sub-prior in his chamber
for the time, thinking there was some great matter in hand, that made the
Doctors to convene so often, asked him one night as he went to bed, A pleasant
discourse and jest of the Subprliors servant.
what the matter was? The Sub-prior merrily answering, Tom (that was the
fellows name) we cannot agree whom to the Pater noster should be said; he
suddenly replied, Sir, whom to should it be said but unto God? then said the
Sub-prior, What shall we do with the Saints? he answered, Give them Ave's and
Creeds enough in the devils name, for that may suffice them. This answer going
abroad, many said, He has given a wiser decision then all the Doctors had done
with their distinctions.

When the Synod convened, The decision of the Provincial Synod.
the question was again agitated, and after much reasoning, the same being put
to voices, it was found that the Pater noster might be said unto the Saints.
But the Bishops and such as had any judgment would not suffer the conclusiou
to be enacted, ordaining the Sub-prior at his return to S. Andrews, for settling
the minds of people, to show that the Pater noster ought to be said to God, yet
so that the Saints ought also to be invocated. And thus ended that contention.
In this meeting, The Catechism called The two-peny faith.
order was taken for publishing an English Catethisme, containing a short
explanation of the Commandments, Belief, and Lords Prayer; and the Curates
enjoined to read a part thereof every Sunday and holy day to the people, when
there was no Sermon. This being imprinted, was sold for two pence, and
therefore called by the vulgar The two-peny faith.

The year following, A Provincial Synod kept at Linlithgow.
another Provincial Council was kept at Linlithgow, in which the maintainers of
any opinions contrary to the Church of Rome were accused, and the Decrees of
the Council of Tyent, made in the time of Pope Paul the third received. Some
Acts were made for reforming corrupt lives of the Clergy, but little or no
execution followed; they to whom the correction belonged, being themselves in
the highest measure faulty and culpable.

But the next year brought with it an alteration in both Kingdoms, An. 1553.
to the Clergies great content; King Edward the sixth of England, dies
for in England King Edward the sixth departed this life, a Prince of rare
piety, and the special comfort of those who professed the Reformed Religion; in
whose place Queen Mary succeeded, one wholly devoted to the Pope and his
faction: And at home the Governor was induced by Robert Carnegie (on whom he
relied much) and by Panter Bishop of Ross, Queen Regent admitted to rule by
dimission of the Governor.
to dimit the Regencie to Queen mother, of whom the Clergy held themselves more
assured. She following the directions of her brother the Duke of Guise, and the
Cardinal of Loraine, set her self to maintain Popish superstition at the
uttermost, using less cruelty then did Queen Mary, but more policy, and to
the same end. So as now the fear of change in Religion was gone, and the hopes
quite dashed of those that sought Reformation; yet the Lord by his providence
did otherwise dispose things, and made that a mean to advance Religion amongst
us which men thought should be utterly extinguished; for some of those that
fled from Queen Mary's persecution, taking their refuge unto this Kingdom, did
not only help to keep in the light which was begun to shine, An. 1554.
but made the Sun break up more clear then before.

William Harlow a man of simple and mean condition, came first into the
country; he had served some years in the English Church with good approbation,
William Harlow a Minister.
and was at this time very comfortable to the faithful.

After him came John Willock a Franciscan sometime in the Town of Air, John
Willock a Convert.
who for love of Religion had left the country, and lived in England; when the
persecution arose there, he fled into Embden in Friesland, where he professed
Medicine, and by that occasion was made known to Anna Countess of Friesland,
then a widow, who employed him in a Commission to the Queen Regent, in the year
1554. His Commission giving him some liberty, he kept most company with those
he saw well affected in Religion; and during the time of his abode, was a great
encourager of the professors. Returning the next year with commendatory letters
from the same Countess to Queen Regent, he made his stay in Edinburgh, where
notwithstanding he was visited with an heavy sickness for diverse months, he
ceased not daily to instruct and exhort such as came unto him, who were neither
few, nor of the meaner sort.

In the end of the year John Knox came into Scotland, John Knox returns into
Scotland.
to whom many of good note repaired; for he taught daily in the house of one
James Sim at Edinburgh, where he was secretly kept. In his teaching he labored
chiefly to inform his hearers, that in no case it was lawful to be present at
the Mass, or to partake of the Papistical Sacraments. John Knox his conference
with young Lethington, touching the presence at the Mass.
William Maitland younger of Lethington, a man of good learning and utterance,
resorting often to his Sermons, and perceiving his vehemence in that point,
took occasion one day in the presence of his auditors to say, That he did not
think his doctrine well grounded, and that wise men ought to serve the time,
and not expose their lives to unnecessary dangers, and so make themselves
unprofitable to the Church. For even the Apostle S. Paul, said he, to eschew
the tumult of the people at Jerusalem, went into the Temple, and purified
himself with four men, that had a vow upon them, which otherwise then for
eschewing the present danger, he would not have done. To this John Knox
answered, That men ought so to serve the time, as they neglect not their
obedience unto God, whose Commandment, how great soever the danger be, may not
be transgressed. For the ensample alleged, he said, the dissimilitude was
great, seeing to go into the Temple to purify and pay vows, was sometimes
commanded by God himself, whereas the Mass from the first invention of it was
abominable idolatry, and never allowed of God. Further he said, that it might
justly be doubted, if either S. Paul's fact, or the advice that S. James and the
Elders of Jerusalem gave him had any good warrant, seeing the event proved not
such as they did promise to themselves; for S. Paul was so far from
purchasing thereby the favor of the Jews, as to the contrary they rising in a
tumult, threw him forth of the Temple, and had almost killed him; so as it
seemed God did not allow his doing, for that it served to confirm the obstinate
Jews in their superstition. By these and the like answers to the rest of the
allegations propounded, the hearers were so satisfied, as they resolved to go
no more to Mass, but to make an open separation, whose ensample diverse others
both of the Town and Country followed.

This being observed by the Priests, The Priests offended at the dishant of the
Mass.
and others of the inferior Clergy they complained to the Bishops, and showed
how the Church Service was contemned, and people drawn away to private
conventicles. The Bishops meaning the case to the Queen Regent, she was much
commoved; yet advised them to use their own authority, and spare her for a
little time, lest the Articles of the marriage which was then treating betwixt
her daughter and the Daulphine of France, John Knox cited, and the Diet
deserted.
might receive some cross at the Convention of the Estates. Hereupon they took
counsel to call John Knox, and summoned him to appear in the Church of Black
friars at Edinburgh the fifteenth of May. But when the day came, they took a
new device and deserted the Diet, pretending some informality in the Summons;
howbeit the true cause was, that a number of Barons and Gentlemen were come to
the Town to assist him. After that time his preaching grew public, and was
more frequented then before. The Earls of Glencarn and Marshall, repaired daily
thereto, and were so taken with his Sermons, as they did counsel him to write
unto the Queen Regent, and entreat her to make a Reformation of the Church; An.
1556.
which he did; the letter was delivered by the Earl of Glencarne, but she
calling it a Pasquill, gave the same to the Archbishop of Glasgow, and made no
more account thereof. This is that letter which was afterward published in
Print, and entitled, A letter to Queen Dowager.

Letters about the same time were brought to John Knox from the English Church
at Geneva, He goes to Geneva.
declating that they had elected him to be their Preacher, and requesting him
to come and accept the Charge. This letter he communicated with those that were
his ordinary auditors; and when he saw them exceedingly grieved for his
departing, gave his promise to return, how soon they should find it fit to
recall him.

Soon after he took leave of them and went to his journey, He is condemned as
an heretic, and burnt in effigy.
but was not well gone, when upon a new citation directed by the Clergy
(because he appeared not) he was condemned for an heretic, and burnt in
effigy, at the Mercat-crosse of Edinburgh; This was done in the month of
July, 1556. the copy of the sentence being sent unto him, he published an
Apology, intituling it An appellation from the Clergy to the Nobility and
Commons of Scotland.

This year many prodigious signs were observed: A Comet of that kind, which
the Astronomers call (...), Diverse prodigious signs.
the vulgars a fiery Bissome, shined the whole months of November, December,
and January; great Rivers in the midst of winter dried up, and in the summer
swelled so high, as diverse Villages were therewith drowned, and numbers of
cattle feeding in the valley grounds carried to the sea; Whales of a huge
greatness were cast out into sundry parts of the River of Forth; hailstones of
the bigness of a Doves egg falling in many parts, destroyed abundance of
Corns; and, which was most terrible, a fiery Dragon was seen to fly low upon
the earth, vomiting forth fire both in the day and night season; which lasted a
long time, and put the people to a necessity of watching their houses and
Corn-yards. These direful signs (as every man is led by his fancy to presage)
were taken by some to be progonosticks of great troubles that should ensue upon
the Match with France; others said that thereby was signified some great change
in the estate of the Church.

And indeed after this the estimation of the Clergy daily diminished, The
esteem of the Clergy decays.
and diverse of that number relinquishing their order, made open profession of
the truth. Mr. John Douglas, a Carmelite Friar, forsaking his Order, became a
Chaplain to the Earl of Argyle, Mr. John Douglas a Carmelite forsakes his
Order.
who resided then at Court, and spoke openly in his Sermons against Popish
superstitions. In Dundy, Paul Methven did publicly exhort the people to
renounce the doctrine of Rome, and submit themselves to the doctrine of Christ.
And in all the parts of the country, some were daily breaking forth,
especially from the Cloisters; and declaiming against the corruptions of the
Church. The Bishops perceiving it would be to no purpose to convene the
Preachers before themselves for heresy, moved the Queen Regent to call them
before the Council for raising mutinies, and stirring up people to sedition,
hoping that way at least to restrain their public teaching: The Preachers
cited before the Council.
but at the day appointed for their appearance, such numbers of people did
accompany them, as it was held safest not to call them till the multitude was
dispersed; and for that effect a Proclamation was given out, charging all
persons that were come to the Town without license of the Authority, A
Proclamaon for the borders.
to repair immediately to the borders, and attend the Lieutenant in the
service against England, for the space of 15. days.

The Gentlemen of the West country, The Gentlemen of the West complain of
their oppression.
who were but lately returned from the same service esteeming this a sort of
oppression, went in a tumult to the Palace, and entering the Queens Privy
chamber, complained of the unreasonable Proclamation that was sent forth. The
Queen began to excuse the matter, and show the necessity of their attendance
for some short time, but they would not be satisfised; And one James Chalmers
of Gaitgirth, a froward and furious man, stepping forward, said, We know Madam
that this is the device of the Bishops who stand by you; we avow to God it
shall not go so, they oppress us and our poor tenants for feeding their idle
bellies, they trouble our Preachers, and seek to undo them and us all; we will
not suffer it any longer. An. 1558.
And with those words, every man made to his weapon. The Queen being extremely
feared, gave them many good words, praying them to use no violence, and saying,
that she meant no ill to their Preachers; that she would hear the controversy
betwixt the Bishops and them; and that the present Diet with the Proclamation
given out should be discharged: so the force ceased, and all was quiet for that
time.

Not long after, Commissioners chosen for the young Queens marriage with the
Daulphin.
there arrived a messenger from the French King with letters to the Nobility,
desiring that the marriage should be consummated betwixt the young Queen, and
the Daulphin his son, and that certain Commissioners should be sent to assist
the solemnity. A convention of Estates being called to this purpose in December
following, choice was made of eight persons to go in that journey; for the
spiritual Estate were named James Beaton Archbishop of Glasgow, and James
Stewart Prior of S. Andrews, base brother to the young Queen; For the Nobility,
Gilbert Kennedy Earl of Cassils, George Lesley Earl of Rothes, and James Lord
Fleming; For the Burrowes, George Lord Seaton Provost of Edinburgh, and John
Areskin of Dun Provost of Montrosse.

The great dysasters that happened both in their going and returning, The
misfortunes that happened in that voyage.
brought many to think the marriage would not prove happy, and prosperous. For
having shipped at Leith in the month of February, they were dispersed by a
mighty tempest, and one of their vessels that carried their horses, cast away
at S. Ebbes head, before they left the Scottish shore; another wherein the Earl
of Rothes, and Bishop of Orkney sailed, with all the furniture for the marriage
(which was very rich and costly) perished upon the coast of France, nigh unto
Bulloign, the Earl and Bishop hardly escaping by the shipboat, which carried
them to land. Neither had they any better fortune in their return homewards;
for at Deep, diverse of the chief persons fell sick and died. The Bishop of
Orkney, a man of singular wisdom and experience, (who in his time had
performed many honorable ambassages, to the credit and benefit of his
country) ended there his life the 14. of September, 1558. the Earl of Rothes
died two-dayes after him, and the Earl of Cassils Thesaurer of the Realm, a
virtuous Nobleman, went the same way. The Lord Fleming a brave young Nobleman
returned to Paris, suspecting some contagion, and deceased in December
following. These deaths falling out so suddenly together, bred a suspicion in
many that they were made away by poison: which was the rather believed, because
the French King was known to be displeased for their refuse of the matrimonial
Crown to his son; however it was, the apprehension taken therefore, begat a
great hatred of the French amongst the people of this Realm.

In the month of April, The history of Walter Mill Martyr.
Walter Mill an old decrepit Priest having ceased from saying of Mass, became
suspected, and was upon the same apprehended in Dysert by Sir George Strachen,
and Sir Hugh Torry, two of the Archbishops of S. Andews Priests; he was kept in
the Castle, and earnestly labored to recant and acknowledge his errors: but
continuing firm and constant in his opinions, his trial at last made, and he
accused in presence of the Bishops of S. Andrews, Murray, Brichen, Cathnes, and
Athens; the Abbots of Dunfermlin, Lundors, Balmerinoth, and Couper; Dean John
Winrame, Sub-prior, John Grison a black Friar, Mr. William Cranston Provost of
the old College, and diverse other Doctors of the University. When he came into
the Church, and was led to the place where they had appointed him to stand, he
looked so feeble partly by age and travel, partly by ill entertainment, as it
was feared none should hear what he answered. Yet how soon he began to speak,
he delivered his mind with such quickness and courage, as amazed his very
enemies.

Sir Andrew Oliphant, His examination.
one of the Archbishops Priests, commanded him to arise (for he was upon his
knees) and answer to the Articles, said, Sir Walter Mill get up and answer, for
you keep my Lord here too long; he notthelesse continued in his devotion, and
that done he arose, and said, he ought to obey God more then man; I serve a
mightier Lord then your Lord is. And where you call me Sir Walter, they call me
Walter, and not Sir Walter; I have been too long one of the Popes Knights: now
say what you have to say.

Oliphant then began with this question, What think thou of Priests
marriage? He answered, I esteem it a blessed bond, ordained by God, approved by
Christ, and made free to all sorts of men; but you abhor it, and in the mean
time take other men's wives and daughters, you vow chastity, and keep it not.

Oliphant proceeding said, Thou say that there is not seven Sacraments. He
answered, Give me the Lords Supper, and Baptism, and take you the rest and
part them amongst you.

Oliphant. Thou say that the Mass is idolatry. He answered, A Lord sends
and calls many to his dinner, and when it is ready ringeth the Bell, and they
come into the Hall, but he turning his back upon the guests, eats all
himself, giving them no part; and so do you.

Oliph. Thou deniest the Sacrament of the Altar to be the body of Christ really
in flesh and blood. He answered, The Scripture is not be taken carnally, but
spiritually; and your Mass is wrong: for Christ was once offered on the Cross
for man's sin, and will never be offered again, for then he put end to all
sacrifices.

Oliph. Thou deniest the office of the Bishop. He answered, I affirm they whom
you call Bishops, do not Bishops works, nor use the Offices of Bishops, but
live after their own sensual pleasures, taking no care for the flock, nor yet
regarding the word of God.

Oliph. Thou speak against pilgrimage, and call it a pilgrimage to
whoredom. He answered, I say that pilgrimage is not commanded in the
Scripture, and that there is no greater whoredom in any place then at your
pilgrimages, except it be in the common brothels.

Oliph. Thou preachest privately in houses, and sometimes in the fields. He
answered, Yea man, and upon the sea too, when I am sailing.

Oliph. If thou will not recant thy opinions, I will pronounce sentence against
thee. He answered, I know I must die once, therefore as Christ said to Judas,
Quod facis fac cito; you shall know that I will not recant the truth, for I am
corn, and no chafe; I will neither be blown away with the wind, nor burst
with the flaile, but will abide both. These answers he gave with a great
boldness, to the admiration of all that were present.

Then did Oliphant pronounce sentence, Sentence pronounced against Walter Mill.
ordaining him to be delivered to the temporal Judge, and burnt as an heretic;
but because no man could be found to supply the place of a Judge, (for Patrick
Lermond Bailiffe of the Regalty did absolutely refuse) nor in the whole City so
much as a cord to be had for money to tie him, The Bailiffe of the Regality
refuses to be Judge.
after he should be condemned, his life for one day was prolonged. The next
morning one of the Archbishops domestics called Alexander Somervaile, a wicked
and flagitious man, supplying the place of the temporal Judge, condemned him to
the fire; and because no cords could be had, the ropes of the Archbishops
Pavilion were taken to serve the purpose.

As the time of his suffering drew near, His constancy at his suffering.
his constancy and courage still increased; for being conveyed to the fire with
a number of armed men, when he was come to the place, and the Priest Oliphant
did command him to go to the stake, he said, No, I will not go, except thou put
me up with thy hand; for by the law of God I am forbidden to put hands in my
self, but will thou put to thy hand and take part of my death, thou shall see
me go up gladly. Then Oliphant putting him forward, he went up with a cheerful
countenance, saying, Introibo ad altar Dei; and desired he might be permitted
to speak to the people. Oliphant, and the executioners said, that he had spoken
too much, and that the Bishops were offended with the delay. Yet some youths
that stood by, willed him to speak what he pleased, giving the executioners and
Bishops both to the devil. So after he had made his prayer upon his knees he
arose, and standing upon the coals, spoke to the people a few words to this
effect. Dear friends, the cause why I suffer this day, is not for any crime
laid to my charge, though I acknowledge my self a miserable sinner before God,
but only for the defense of Jesus Christ, set forth in the old and new
Testaments: for which as many faithful Martyrs have offered their lives most
gladly, being assured after their death to enjoy endless felicity; so this day
I praise God, that he has called me of his mercy amongst the rest of his
servants, to seal up his truth with my life, which as I have received of him,
so willingly I offer it to his glory. Therefore as you would escape eternal
death, be no more seduced with the lies of the Priests, Monks, Friars, Priors,
Abbots, Bishops, and the rest' of the sect of Antichrist; but depend only upon
Jesus Christ and his mercy, that you may be delivered from condemnation.

The multitude that looked on made a great lamentation, The people exceedingly
moved at his speeches.
for they were exceedingly moved with his words. When the fire was kindled, and
began to flame, he cried, Lord have mercy on me, pray good people whilst there
is time; and thus departed, showing a wonderful courage and resolution of
spirit. The Citizens took his death so grievously, that lest it should be
forgotten, they made up a great heap of stones in the place where his body was
burnt; and when the Priests had caused the heap twice or thrice to be carried
away, denouncing such as should bring any stones thither accursed; still it was
renewed, until watches were appointed to see who they were, that brought any
stones to the place, and charge given to apprehend them. The Epitaph made upon
him is worthy the inserting.

Non nostra impietas, His Epitaph.
aut actae crimina vitae
Armarunt hosts in mea fata truces.
Sola fides Christi, sacris signata libellis,
Quae vitae causa est, and mihi causa necis.
This man was the last Martyr that died in Sco^land for Religion, His death,
the death of Popery in this kingdom.
and his death the very death of Popery in this Realm; for thereby the minds
of men were so greatly enraged, as resolving thereafter openly to profess the
truth, they did bind themselves by promise and subscription to oaths, if any
should be called in question for matters of Religion at any time after, they
should take up Arms, and join in defense of their brethren against the
tyrannous persecution of the Bishops.

The work of Reformation did hereupon take a beginning, The worthy men that
lived in this time.
the story whereof before I set down (after I have remembered some worthy
persons that lived in those times) I will add the Catalogue of our Bishops in
the rest of the Sees of this Kingdom, so far as I have been informed or
learned by diligent search.

Sir David Lindsay of Mont shall first be named, Sir David Lindesay of the Mont.
a man honorably descended, and greatly favored by King James the first.
Besides his knowledge and deep judgment in Heraldry (whereof he was the chief)
and in other public affairs, he was most religiously inclined, but much hated
by the Clergy, for the liberty he used in condemning the superstition of the
time, and rebuking their loose and dissolute lives. Notthelesse he went
unchallenged, and was not brought in question; which showed the good account
wherein he was held. Diverse poesies he wrote in his mother tongue, which gave
evidence of his quickness of wit, and the knowledge he had in histories. In
the beginning of the Governors Regencie, he did attend him till the Governor
misled by ill counsel, made his authority subject to the Cardinal. After that
time he lived for the most part private, and died in a good age, the Queen
Regent having the administration of affairs.

Next to him shall be remembered Mr. Patrick Cockburn, Mr. Patrick Cockburn.
a Gentleman of the house of Langton, in the Merss; this man having attained by
his studies to great learning, lived a long time in the University of Paris
well esteemed. What course he took afterward I know not, nor where he died;
but by the Treatises yet extant that he wrote, it appears that he was a man
of good learning, and a favourer of the truth.

The third shall be John Mackbrair a Gentleman of Galloway, John Mackbrair.
who forsaking the country for Religion, became a Preacher in the English
Church; in the time of Queen Mary's persecution he fled to Frankford, and
served the English congregation as Minister. Afterward called by some occasion
to the charge of a Church in the lower Germany, he continued there the rest of
his days. Some Homilies he left upon the Prophecy of Hosea, and an History of
the beginning and progress of the English Church.

To these I shall add our countreyman Robert Wachop, Robert Wachop Archbishop
of Armagh.
though he lived and died an adversary to the truth, An. 1130.
seeing by his virtue and learning he purchased both credit and dignity in
forain parts; and, which almost exceeds belief, being blind from his very
birth, only by learning the lessons and conferences of learned men, he grew to
such knowledge, as in the University of Paris none of the Doctors was held more
learned, nor had a more frequent auditory: being afterward promoved to the
Archbishopric of Armach in Ireland, he was employed in diverse legations to the
Emperor, and King of France by Pope Paul the third, which he discharged with
such prudence, as he came to be greatly esteemed with all the Princes to whom
he was known. At last in his return homewards from Rome, in the year 1551. he
died at Paris, much lamented of all that University.

Coming now to set down the Catalogue of Bishops in the rest of the Sees, I
shall keep the order of the Provinces, and begin with Dunkeld, the Bishop
whereof has hitherto been reckoned in the first place.

The Bishops of DUNKELD
In the City of Dunkeld, Dunkeld erected to be a Bishopric.
there was of old an Abbey founded by Constantine the third King of Picts,
about the year 729. to the memory of S Columbe, in which the Culdees were
placed; King David in the year 1130. did erect it to be a Bishops See; and
recommending one Gregorius to the place, obtained Pope Alexander the third his
confirmation thereof; The succeession of Bishops in that See.
he sat 42. years, and was much favored by that good King. The lands of
Anchtertaile, with diverse others appertaining to that See, were of King David
his gift. This Bishop diet at Dunkeld, in the year 1169.

2. Richard, Chaplain to King William, was elected in his place, and
consecrated in S. Andrews upon the vigils of S. Laurrence by Richard Bishop of
S. Andrews. This Bishop was commended for vindicating the Church of Abercorne
forth of the hands of a laick person named John Avonele, who claimed the
Patronage thereof; he sat four years, and dying at Crawmold, was buried in S.
Colmes Inche in the year 1173.

3. Cormacus succeeded in his place, to whom King William gave the lands of
Dalgathy; he died in the year 1177.

4. In his place was chosen Walter de Bidden, who was Chancellor to King
William, but he lived not many years.

5. John Scot an English man born, being Archdeacon of S. Andrews, had been
elected Bishop of that See, but that his election being withstood by the King
as we showed before, he was after Biddens death promoved by the Popes consent
to Dunkeld; a man that made conscience of his charge, and was painful in his
office. The country of Argyle was at that time of the Dioces of Dunkeld, the
people whereof did only speak Irish, and neither understood the Bishop, nor he
them. Upon this he traveled to have the Dioces divided, and Argyle erected
into an Episcopal See; and to that effect sent a letter to Pope Clement the
third, entreating that one Evaldus his Chaplain, who could speak Irish, a wise
and godly person, might have the charge of that part committed to him; for,
How, said he, can I make an account to the Judge of the world in the last day,
when I cannot be understood of them, whom I teach? The maintenance is
sufficient for two Bishops, if we be not prodigal of the patrimony of Christ,
and will live with that moderation, which becomes his servants; it shall
therefore be much better to diminish the charge, and increase the number of
able workmen in the Lords field. The Pope reading the letter, and considering
how earnest he was to be eased of his charge, though to his own temporal loss,
said, It is the study of others to enlarge their bounds and livings, not caring
how it goes with the people, and here is one that requesteth his Benefice may
be parted in two. O how few Bishops are now in the Christian world so disposed!
and so commending greatly the Bishops disposition granted his request, sending
back Evaldus (for he was the messenger) consecrated Bishop as was desired. The
Bishop glad to have obtained his desire, entered Evaldus to the charge, and
followed diligently his own in that part which remained. Some few days before
his death, he rendered himself a Monk in Newbotle, and there departed this life
in the year 1203. his body was interred in the Quire of that Church upon the
North side of the Altar. An. 1210.
William Bining, afterward Abbot of Cowper, did write his life, but the story
is perished.

6. After his death Richard Provand, King Williams Chaplain, was consecrated
Bishop, and lived a few years only in the Sea, for he departed this world in
the year 1210. and was buried in Inchcolme.

7. John Leicester, cosen to King William, and elected successor, and dying
at Crawmond, was buried in Inchcolme with his predecessor in the year 1214.

8. Hugo, called Hugo de sigillo, a Monk of Aberbrothock, succeeded unto
Leicester, a man of a sweet and amiable disposition, he was called the poor
man's Bishop, and lived not a year after his consecration.

9. Matthew Chancellor of Scotland was then elected, but he died the same year
before he was consecrated.

10. To him succeeded Gilbert Chaplain to Bishop Hugo; he sat 22. years, and
died in the year 1236.

11. Galfrid Liverance was elected in his stead. This Bishop was a zealous man,
he reformed the service of the Church ad usum Sarum; and ordained the Chanons
to make residence at Dunkeld, giving them the Commons of that Church for their
entertainment. He died at Tibbermoore in the year 1249. and was buried at
Dunkeld.

12. After Galfrids death Richard Chancellor to the King succeeded, and dying
the same year at Crawmond, was buried in Inchcolme.

13. After him Mr. Richard of Innerkething, Chancellor of Scotland, was
elected, who sat 22. years; he built the great Quire of the Abbey Church in
Inchcolme upon his own charges, and died very old in the year 1272. He is much
commended for his faithful service done to King Alexander. His body was
interred at Dunkeld, and his heart laid in the North wall of the Quire, which
he built in Inchcolme.

14. Robert Sutevile Dean of Dunkeld, debarred at first from the Bishopric of
S. Andrews, by the ambitious suite of Abill the Archdeacon, was at this time
preferred to be Bishop of Dunkeld; he died in the year 1300. and governed the Sea 28. years, Moribus, scientia, and vita praeclarus.

15. After him Matthew by recommendation of Edward the first of England, who
kept Scotland then under subjection, was advanced to the Bishopric, and sat
12. years.

16. William Sinclare a brother of the house of Roslin, and Uncle to William
Lord Bisset, succeeded. This is he that King Robert the Bruce used to call his
own Bishop; for the King being in Ireland with an Army for the supply of his
brother Edward, the English taking advantage of his absence, sent two Armies to
invade the kingdom; the one by land, the other by sea. The Sea Army landed in
Fife, near to Anchtertaile, (where the Bishop had his residence) which the
Sheriff of the country for hindering their depredations went to encounter,
but at the sight of their numbers he gave back and fled; the Bishop hearing of
their flight, brought forth his ordinary train, and casting himself in the
Sheriffs way, asked why he fled: and having checked him bitterly for his
cowardice, called for a lance, crying aloud, You that love the honor of
Scotland, follow me. By this forwardness he put such courage in the rest, as
they returning upon the English, did chase them all back to their ships, one of
the ship-boats overcharged with the company that leapt into it was sunk, and in
that conflict were drowned and slain 500. English and above. The honor of this
victory was wholly ascribed to the Bishops courage, for which he was greatly
favored by the King. He built in his time the Quire of Dunkeld from the
ground, which the Army of England had demolished; redeemed the lands of Green
oak from one Simon Cader, and gave to his Archdeacon the Church of Logia
Leguhy, with the Vicaridge pensionary of little Dunkeld; afterward dying the
27. day of June, Anno 1338. he was buried in the Quire of Dunkeld, in a marble
Tomb by himself erected.

17. The same year one Duncan an English man born was consecrated Bishop; he
set in few the lands of Fordel to Walter Fotheringham, at the desire of Edward
Baliol, and died in the year 1364. after he had sat 26. years.

18. To him succeeded Michael of Monimuske Chamberlain of Scotland; An. 1376.
he died the first of March, 1376. and was buried in the Quire of Dunkeld.

19. After him Mr. John Peblis Chancellor to King David Bruce, came to the
place, a man learned, and of great authority; he sat 20. years in the Sea.

20. In the year 1396. Robert Carden son to John Carden of that ilk, was
consecrated Bishop, and governed the Sea the space of 40. years. He did many
good things in his time to his Church, building and enlarging it at his own
charge, and acquired thereunto diverse lands, as the town of Crawmond, with the
lands adjoining, for which he gave in excambion, the lands of Cambo in the same
Parish, and the lands of Muchler besides Dunkeld. He died the 16. of January,
1436. and was buried hononrably in S. Ninians Chapel of Dunkeld, which himself
had built.

21. To him succeeded Donald Macknachtan Dean of Dunkeld, Doctor of the Common
law, and Nephew to Bishop Robert his predecessor; he was elected by the
Chapter, but King James the first misliking the choice, opposed his entry,
whereupon he took journey to Rome to obtain his election confirmed, and died by
the way as he was traveling thither.

22. James Kennedy Nephew to King James the first by his sister, was then
preferred to the Sea, two years he sat Bishop in Dunkeld, and was afterward
translated to S. Andrews, as before we have showed.

23. Upon his translation Mr. Alexander Lawder Parson of Rothow, and brother
germane to the Bishop of Glasgow, then Chancellor of the kingdom, was elected
Bishop, but he died the same year (which was the year 1440.) at Edinburgh, and
was buried with his Ancestors in the Church of Lawder.

24. Mr. James Bruce Parson of Killmeny, was after him consecrated Bishop of
Dunkeld at Dunfermlin the fourth of February in the year of Christ 1441. and
sat Bishop the space of 6. years. In the seventh year he was translated to the
Bishopric of Glasgow, and made Chancellor of the kingdom.

25. To him succeeded Mr. John Ralston; he was Secretary to King James the
second, and sat Bishop little above three years, dying in Dunkeld, in the year
1450. where he was buried.

26. Master Thomas Lawder, Preceptor or Master of Lowtrey, who had been Tutour
to Kings James the second in his youth, at the age of 60. years was elected
Bishop after Ralston by the Kings recommendation; he took great pains in
preaching, and by his continual exhortations and exemplary life, won that
unruly people to the obedience of God and the King. Having finished the
building of the Church, he dedicated the same in the year 1454. and adorned it
in most magnificent manner. He obtained of the King an erection of the Bishops
lands on the North side of Forth, into a Barony called the Barony of Dunkeld;
as likewise the lands in the South, into another which was called the Barony of
Aberlady: built a Bridge upon the River of Tay, nigh to his own Palace; founded
a number of Chaplanries, and Prebends, partly in Edinburgh, partly in Dunkeld;
made purchase of two lodgings, one in Edinburgh, and another at Perth, for the
receipt of his succescessours: and having done many good works, resigned his
Bishopric because of his great age, to Master James Levinston Dean of Dunkeld.

27. This resignation was crossed a while by Thomas Spence Bishop of Aberdene,
whose credit in the Court was great at that time, but upon transaction amongst
themselves, the Kings consent was obtained, and he consecrated at Dunkeld by
John Hepburn Bishop of Dumblaine, John Balfour Bishop of Brichen, and the said
Thomas Spence in the year 1476. He sat seven years two months and five days,
and dying at Edinburgh, was buried in the Isle of Inchcolme.

28. The Chapter after Levingstones decease made choice of Alexander Inglis
Dean of Dunkeld, and Keeper of the Rolls in the time of King James the third,
but Pope Sextus the fourth cassing his election, gave the Bishopric to George
Brown Chancellor of Aberdene (who was then at Rome) and consecrated him Bishop
in Saint James Church, Anno 1484. The King displeased with this promotion,
declared him rebel, and complained thereof to the Pope and Cardinals; but the
Pope maintaining his own gift, the King was afterward reconciled to him, and
he peaceably possessed in the Bishoprics. An. 1010.
This Bishop was a strict observer of discipline, and by his austere and
rigorous forms wrought a great reformation in all the parts of his Dioces,
which he distributed in four Deanries, placing one in the Borders of Atholl and
Drumalbane, another in Fife, Fothrick, and Strathern, the third in Angus, and
the fourth in the parts besouth Forth. The penalties of offenders he gave to
the use of the Church where they resided, saying commonly, Oleum peccatorum non
impinguet caput meum. He was a man given much to hospitality, and withal very
careful of the Church, for he recovered to the Sea the lands of Fordel and
Muckarsie, with the Forest of Birnan, that had been alienated before his time,
founded diverse Prebends and Chaplanries, and gave many ornaments to the
Cathedral Church. Before his death he was tormented with the Felt gravel, which
he bare most patiently, professing that he was glad to endure those pains as
serving to wean his heart and affection from the love of this world; and so
departed this life most happily the twelfth of January, 1514.

29. Andrew Stewart brother to John Earl of Athol, was upon his death
postulated Bishop, but it took no effect, Master Gawan Douglas brother to the
Earl of Angus, and Provost of Saint Giles in Edinburgh being preferred thereto
by Pope Leo the tenth. This gift was quarrelled by the Duke of Albany
Governor, and the Bishop called in question for his traficking with Rome
without license; whereupon he was committed and continued prisoner a whole
year. Afterward compounding with Andrew Stewart, to whom he gave the Churches
of Alight, and Cargill, he got peaceable possession of the Sea; yet the
troubles that followed in the country, made him forsake the same, and
undertake a journey to Rome. In his way thither he died of the plague at London
in Savoy house in the year 1522. A man learned, wise, and given to all virtue
and goodness; some monuments of his engenie he left in Scottish meeter which
are greatly esteemed, especially his translation of Virgil his books of AEneids.

30. George Creighton succeeded, a man nobly disposed, and a great
housekeeper, but in matters of his calling not very skilled. In the question
of Religion (which was in his time severely agitated) he loved to have things
calmly carried, but his counsel took little place. It was he that said to one
of his Vicars, whom he was persuading to leave his opinions, That he thanked
God that he knew neither the Old nor the New Testaments, and yet had prospered
well enough all his days.

31. Robert Creighton his Nephew was preferred upon his death to the Sea, in
whose time fell out the reformation of the Church.

The Bishops of ABERDENE.
1. Malcolme the second in memory of the defeat he gave the Danes at Murthlack,
The succession of Bishops in the Sea of Aberdene.
founded there a Bishops seat in the year 1010. and preferred one Beanus
thereto, a man of singular virtue and godliness, gifting to him and his
successors the lands of Murthlack, Cloveth, and Dummeth. This Bishop sat 32.
years, and dying in Murthlack, was buried at the Postern door of the Church,
which himself had built.

2. Donortius who succeeded him, lived Bishop 42. years, and was interred with
his predecessor.

3. Cormachus the third Bishop of this See governed the same 39. years, and was
buried likewise with his predecessors.

4. Nectanus succeeded; in his time King David did translate the Sea from
Murthlack to Aberdene, and gave to him and his successors the lands of old
Aberdene, Sclaty, Goull, Moorecroft, Kurmundy, Mowmenlach, Clat, Talynstine,
Rain, Dawyot, and their Churches, with diverse others lands, whereby the Sea
was greatly enriched: this Bishop died in the year 1154. having sat 14. years
at Murthlack, and 17. at Aberdene.

5. After the death of Nectanus, one Edward was promoved, who was greatly
favored by Malcolme the fourth, called the Maiden, and was thought to have
persuaded the King to continue in his single life: he was the first Bishop that
brought the Chanons to do ordinary service in the Church of Aberdene, and died
in the eleventh year after his consecration.

6. Matthew Kinninmouth Archdeacon of S. Andrews succeeded, a man famous for
learning, and other excellent virtues. In his time began the Cathedral Church
of Aberdene to be built unto the memory of S. Machar, to whom King Malcolme
gave the lands of Tuligreg, Fetternew, Invercrowden, Banchordeneif, Balhelvy,
and the Patronages of the Churches. He sat Bishop 34. years.

7. John Prior of Kelso was next elected Bishop; this man is greatly commended
for liberality to the poor, and magnificence in the buildings and ornaments of
the Church; he died the next year after his consecration.

8. One Adam was assumed in his place rather for satisfying King Williams
pleasure, then for any good affection born to the man by the rest of the
Clergy; at first he showed no great care in his charge, giving himself wholly
to temporal affairs; yet after King Williams death, he grew quite another
man, setting himself to amend his former negligences. He sat 21. years.

9. Upon his death the Clergy and people of Aberdene postulated Matthew
Chancellor of the kingdom, who was willing to accept the place, but Dunkeld
falling void in the mean season, King Alexander the second preferred him to
that See.

10. And Gilbert Striveling a man well born, and much esteemed for his
integrity of life, obtained the place, but he lived not many years, departing
this world in the eleventh year after his election.

11. Radolph Abbot of Aberbrothotk succeeded, being with an uniform consent of
the Clergy and people elected Bishop; he was brought with great difficulty to
accept the charge; a man of great prudence, and painful in his calling: for he
traveled through all his Dioces on foot, preaching and visiting the Churches,
that he might know their true estate; and is said never to have changed his
form of living that he used in the Cloister, and to have been more abstinent
and sparing both in diet and apparel, then he was before; he died some eight
years after his consecration, which was about the year of Christ, 1247.

12. Peter Ramsay, a man of good learning, was next chosen Bishop; he was a man
very kind to the Chanons, and parted many of his rents amongst them; he sat
Bishop ten years, and deceased about the seventh or eighth year of King
Alexander the third his reign.

13. Presently after his death Richard Pottock an English man was elected, who
sat Bishop 13. years.

14. Hugh Benham elected by the Monks went to Rome, and was there consecrated
by Pope Martin the fourth; after he had remained there the space of a year, he
returned to Scotland, at which time there was a great contention between the
Churchmen and the people of the country for certain tithes, that the Priests
did exact too rigorously. The difference being submitted to him, he composed
the same in a Convention of the Clergy at Perth, wherein the King and many of
the Nobles were present, and died of a Catarrhe, being very old, in the Isle of
Louchgoull, about the year 1280.

15. Henry Cheyn, Nephew to the Lord Cummyn, was preferred to the Sea; the
troubles which in his time brake forth in the Kingdom between Bruce and
Baliol, wrought him great vexation; for whilst he took part with his Uncle
against Bruce, he was banished into England, where he lived until the end of
these wars, and then licenced by King Robert to return* he gave himself to
repair the Church, and restore all things, which the licenciousnesse of war
had disordered: he died the same year in which King Robert the Bruce ended his
life, that is, in the year of Christ 1329. which was the 48. year after his
consecration.

16. Alexander Kinninmouth Doctor of Divinity succeeded in his place, a great
lover of learning and learned men, whom out of all parts he drew to make
residence with himself. In the winter season he dwelt at Murthlack, and when
the the spring opened, at Aberdene, because of the confluence of people all
that time of the year: all the summer and harvest time he remained at
Fetterneir and Rain, that he might the more commodiously discharge his office
in every part of his Dioces. The English in his time set on fire the Town of
Aberdene, which burnt six days together, and did much harm; his own Palace,
with the whole houses of the Chanons were thereby consumed, which was thought
to have hastened his death; he departed this life in the eleventh year of his
consecration.

17. William Deyn was made Bishop in his stead, the most of his time the Realm
was infested with wars, whereby he was impeded in many good purposes that he
intended, and had much ado to keep the Clergy in obedience, for every man
during the war, took liberty to do what they thought good; he sat Bishop the
space of ten years.

18. After him John Raith Doctor of Divinity was chosen Bishop by the Monks; he
lived only six years Bishop, and was buried in the Quire of Aberdene.

19. King David Bruce returning from France about this time had brought with
him in company one Nicolaus, a corrupt and ambitious man, who procured the
Kings recommendation to the Chapter of Aberdene for his election. The Chanons
excused themselves, saying, The Church of Aberdene was not so scant of men as
to admit an unworthy person into the place. And howsoever the King in his
Kingdom might do what he pleased, they were by their oaths astricted to admit
none but learned men, and such as were approved for integrity of life:
wherefore entreated the King in humble manner to suffer them, as they had been
accustomed, to elect some wise and grave person, that could discharge the place
with credit: which after some months they obtained, making choice of one
Alexander Kinninmouth, who was consecrated in the Town of Perth, the King
himself being present. This man answered fully the hopes conceived of him, and
took great pains in his calling; for on the ferial days he taught the Civil
and Canon law, and the holy days he spent in preaching and prayer. Thrice
every week he fasted, contenting himself in the holy Eves with bread and water.
He caused demolish the old Church of Aberdene, which he esteemed not so
beautiful as was fitting for a Cathedral Church, and laid the foundation of
another more magnificent. But ere the work was advanced six cubits high, he was
employed by King Robert the second in an Embassage to France, for renewing the
old league, which he worthily performed; shortly after his return he died,
having sat Bishop 24. years.

20. Adam Conningham, a man well descended, and of great authority, was after
him elected. This Bishop is said to have been in such account for the his
wisdom and sincerity, that in all matters of importance propounded in Council,
his opinion did ever prevail. His frequent employments with the French King, as
well before, as after his preferment to the Sea, and the happy success he had
therein, manifested his prudence and dexterity of wit: yet as it falls out
often in Courts, upon some envious delations the King became jealous of him, as
if he had practiced with some Noblemen against the Royal succession, and
pressed to reduce the old form of election of Kings. Finding that the King had
taken some impression of the report, albeit nothing was more false, he took
counsel to retire himself, and attend his charge at home: where he had not
long staid, but he fell in a new trouble, with a base son of the Kings, named
Alexander, a man extremely vicious, and for his oppressions hated of all good
men. To the Bishop he bare a special grudge, because of the liberty he had used
in reproving his wickedness; and hearing in what dislike the Bishop was with
the King, he violently possessed himself in the Bishops lands, thrust forth his
tenants, and behaved himself as Master, and Lord of all. The Bishop complained
to the King, but finding no redress, he pronounced him excommunicate;
wherewith the wicked man incensed, associating a number as wickedly disposed as
himself, did swear to take the Bishops life, and came to Aberdene of that
intention. Whereof the Bishop getting advertisement, he went forth to meet him
on the way, and how soon he saw him, discovering his head, which was all white,
(for he was a man of great age) said, If this be it that thou seek, I have
brought it unto thee, take thee head, life, and all. The company admiring the
old man's courage, and moved with some compassion of his white hairs, persuaded
Alexander not to meddle with his blood. The report of this insolency going to
the King, he sent for his son, and committing him to prison* caused
satisfaction to be given for all the injuries the Bishop had sustained, An.
1300.
and surety for his indemnity thereafter. After which he enjoyed reasenable
quietness until his death, which happened in the year of Christ, 1390. having
sat Bishop ten years.

21. Gilbert Grimlaw, a man learned, wise, and of great esteem with the Nobles
of the Kingdom, was consecrated Bishop of Aberdene the same year; he had been
Chancellor to King Robert the third a long time, which office he discharged
with great credit, and to the contentment of all the subjects: after the Kings
death (the Earl of Fife brother to the deceased King then governing the Realm)
he was employed in an Embassage to Charles the seventh of France, and went
thither in the company of the Earls of Buchan and Douglas, who with diverse
other Noblemen were afterward unfortunately killed at the battle of Vernoil.
The Bishop at his return found all things out of frame, the Governor dead, his
son Mordach placed in his room, and the whole estate miserable by the riots
and oppressions which were used every where without punishment. This made the
Bishop retire himself and live private at home, where soon after he died of a
consumption in the year 1424. his body was interred in the Quire of the
Cathedral Church.

22. After his death Henry Leighton Bishop of Murray was translated to
Aberdene, a man learned both in the Civil and Canon law, of great experience,
and in that regard postulated Bishop by the Chanons: he stood doubtful a while
whether he should condescend to the charge or not, yet was induced to consent
at last, and so came to Aberdene, where he applied himself carefully to do the
charge of a Bishop. But the Estates of the Realm meeting in a solemn
convention for putting some order to the present confusions, he was sent with
some others in Commission to England, to treat for redemption of King James the
first, who was there detained captive. This business happily performed, he
returned with the King, to whom he gave great content by his services and
forwardness in reforming public abuses; he advanced greatly the fabric of
the Church of Aberdene, and bestowed large sums for perfecting that work; he
built also the Chapel called Saint John's Chapel within the Cathedral, and was
therein buried himself in the year 1441. 17. years after his translation.

23. Ingram Lindesay Doctor of the Canon law, was upon his death with the great
applause of all good men received Bishop, he was at that time very old, and by
the policy of one Alexander who aimed at his place, moved to take journey to
Rome: the man imagining that he should die in the voyage, whereof yet he was
deceived. For the Bishop sailing to Marselles in France, went from thence by
sea to Rome, and after some months stay returned more healthful then before.
17 years he continued Bishop, and ruled the affairs of the Church very
wisely. A man constant in his promises of a spare diet, but very hospitable,
for he entertained great numbers both of learned men and others, especially the
eldest sons of Noblemen and Barons in the North parts; and notwithstanding of
his age, and public employments was ever at study when he could find any free
time from those cares. A little before his death he fell in the Kings
displeasure for denying admission to some whom the King had presented to
certain Benefices, for that they were either mere ignorants or for their years
incapable. But this did not much trouble his mind, as being no way conscious to
himself of any just offense offered. He died at Aberdene much lamented of the
Citizens who loved him dearly, and buried him in the Cathedral Church with
great solemnity.

24. Then was Thomas Spence Bishop of Galloway translated to the Sea, a man of
active spirit, and fitted for great business. Whilst he was yet very young, he
went to France, trusted with a Commission by King James the second, and by his
wise behavior won such favor with Charles the seventh then reigning, as
after diverse great services performed to that King, he returned honored with
the place of a Chancellor, and a yearly pension of 3000. French Crowns, about
which time the Bishopric of Galloway falling void, he was held most worthy to
be preferred thereto, and from thence by the occasion of Bishop Lindesay his
death, at the earnest entreaty of the Chanons, was translated hither; most of
his time after he was translated, he spent in Legations from the King and
Estate, sometimes to the Duke of Burgundy, An. 1480.
and sometimes to Edward the fourth of England. Not thelesse mindeful of his
Church he adorned the same in a most rich and sumptuous manner, and built of
new the Bishops palace, which since the burning by the English had been wast
and ruinous. Amongst other charitable works, he erected an hospital at
Edinburgh, acquiring thereto diverse lands, and ended his life by sickness the
fifteenth of April 1480. his body was interred in the Trinity College of
Edinburgh.

25. Robert Blaicater being for the time at Rome, was by the provision of Pope
Xistus the fourth made Bishop, at whose hands also he received consecration; a
Gentleman well descended, and of good knowledge both in divine and humane
learning: soon after he was translated to Glasgow, where he died.

26. William Elphinston succeeded to Blaicater, a famous and memorable person;
he was born in the City of Glasgow, and trained up in the Pedagogie of that
City; where he made such profit in his studies, that all who knew him conceived
even in his younger years great hopes of his advancement. By the advice of his
Uncle Laurence Elphinston he went to France, being 29. years of age, and there
abode some nine years, having purchased good reputation in the University of
Paris for his skill in the laws, which six years together he professed,
reading daily the Lectures thereof in a most frequent auditory. Then returning
into his country, was preferred first to be Official of Glasgow, afterward
made Official of S. Andrews, and promoved to be of the Kings Council. Some
jarres falling out at that time betwixt King James the third, and Lewis the
eleventh of France, which was like to have dissolved the ancient friendship
betwixt the two nations, he was joined in Commission with the Bishop of
Dunkeld, and Earl of ^uchan for pacifying the same, and by a wise and most
eloquent oration brought matters so about, that the old league and amity was
renewed, and all occcasions of discord quite removed: whereupon the Bishopric
of Rosse was at his return cast upon him, which he accepted with great
difficulty. The Sea of Aberdene afterward falling void, he was translated
thither, and at that time was made Chancellor of the Kingdom; in which charge
he carried himself with that moderation and equity, as he was both loved and
reverenced of all persons. But the unhappy troubles that fell out betwixt the
King and some of his Nobility, which by no means (though he did use his
uttermost diligence that way) could be pacified, made him retire to his charge
at Aberdene, where he gave himself to reform such things as he found disordered
in the Church, and had doubtless effected the same if he had not been called
back to Court, and employed much against his will in public affairs.

King James the fourth then entering his reign, he was by the consent of the
whole estate sent Ambassador to Maximilian the Emperor, to suite his daughter
Margaret in marriage for the King: But she before his coming being promised to
the Prince of Spain, the business took no effect, yet that his travel should
not be altogether unprofitable, in his return from the Emperors Court, he
reconciled the variance, which long had continued betwixt this nation and the
people of Holland, and thereby grew in such favor with the King, that
whatsoever business he had, either within or without the Kingdom, the same
was wholly committed to his trust.

Neither did he in the mean while neglect to use his best means for the
advancement of learning, having built a stately College in Aberdene, which for
the beauty of the edifice and rich foundation was one of the rarest monuments
this Kingdom had seen. The expense he bestowed partly on that work, partly for
providing materials for building of the Bridge upon Dey, with the large alms
he gave daily to the poor and religious of all sorts (not to speak of the help
and relief he made to others of his kindred) exceeded almost all credit and
belief: for he was ever observed to keep a good table, and had no Benefices in
Commendam, (which was then grown into a custom amongst Churchmen) yet upon the
rents of his own Bishopric, he did both maintain his estate, do all those
great and magnificent works; and dying, left in treasure ten thousand pounds in
gold and silver, which he bequeathed to the College, and the finishing of the
bridge at Dey: that in him we may truly see how it is not the abundance of
worldly goods, but the blessing of God that makes rich.

What time he could spare from the public service he spent in writing the
history of his nation, An. 1514.
and gathered in one volume all the Antiquities that could be found thereof.
The memories also of those holy men who lived in former times, in this
kingdom, he studied to preserve, committing to writing their worthy and
memorable acts, and giving order that on solemn days the religious should read
some part thereof in their common meetings; neither was he seen to be idle, but
always in labor and striving how to benefit the public. Nor was there any
man known to have been of more integrity of life and manners, sweet and
pleasant conversation, of a cheerful countenance, and exceeding delightful. The
constitution of his body was healthful and strong, old age which to others is
of it self a disease, wrought in him no alteration either of mind or body; for
being 83. years old, his judgment in the weightiest matters of State was
observed to be as quick, and his memory as ripe, as when he was in the middle
of his youth.

That which is supposed to have hastened his death, was the unfortunate death
of the King at Flowden; for after the report of that loss he was never
perceived to laugh, nor willingly did he hear any thing that sounded unto mirth
or gladness, and thereupon had resolved to live the rest of his time obscure
and retired: yet being called by the Council to assist some great business,
which for the time was in hand, he sickned in his journey toward Edinburgh,
and the sixth day after his coming thither, died most christianly: his body
embalmed, was carried afterward to Aberdene, and entombed in his own College
before the high Altar. They write that the day his Corpse was brought forth to
the burial, the pastoral staff, which was all of silver, and carried by
Alexander Lawder a Jurist, broak in two pieces, one part thereof falling in the
grave where his body was to be laid, and that a voice was heard to cry, Tecum
Gulielme mitra sepelienda, with thee the mitre and glory thereof is buried: 30.
years he sat Bishop, and ended his course being very old in the year 1514.

27. The Chanons assembling according to their custom to elect a Bishop in his
place, the Earl of Huntley, a man of great power in the North, came upon them
unexpected, desiring that Alexander Gordon his Cosen, then Chanter of Murray,
might be chosen. The Chanons not daring refuse, did all give their consents. In
the mean time was one James Ogilvy presented thereto by the Duke of Albany, and
at Rome Robert Forman Dean of Glasgow took a provision thereof from Pope Leo
the tenth; yet both these did resign their titles afterward at the Duke of
Albany his persuasion, Ogilvy having received in recompense the Abbacy of
Driburgh, and Forman yielding at the desire of Andrew Forman his brother, then
Archbishop of S. Andrews, upon promise of the next place that should fall void.
Thus after some months delay, Gordon was received, and consecrated Bishop: but
he enjoyed the place a short time, and was buried in the Cathedral Church of
Aberdene.

28. Gawan Dumbar, Archdeacon of S. Andrews, and Master of the Rolls, a man of
many excellent parts, was after him elected Bishop; he set himself to perfect
all those works which Bishop Elphinston had begun, and were not as yet
finished; especially the building of the Bridge upon Dey, with the houses that
he had appointed for the several professions of Sciences in the College. The
Executors of Bishop Elphinston he called to an account, and made them render
the moneys left by him in legacy, adding thereto his own liberality, wherewith
he accomplished all these works. He founded likewise an hospital for twelve
poor men, and a Preceptor to attend them; and all the time he lived Bishop,
which was 13. years, whatsoever profit or commodity he made by the Church, he
bestowed wholly upon the poor, and such public works, without applying a
farthing either to his own use, or the enriching of any of his kinsmen. He
departed this life at S. Andrews the ninth of March, 1531.

29. To him succeeded William Stewart son to the Lord of Minto, a man given to
virtue, charitable to the poor, and ready to every good work; he built the
Consistory house in old Aberdene, enlarged the territory of the College, and
bestowed upon it a part of the rent it now possesses; he built likewise the
Library, with two schools, and founded therein four Chaplains; the office of
the Chancellary in the State, conferred upon him by the King, An. 1160.
he discharged with good credit, and dying at Aberdene in the month of April,
in the year 1545. was buried in the Cathedral Church.

30. William Gordon, son to the Earl of Huntley, succeeded in the place. This
man brought up in letters at Aberdene, followed his studies a long time in
Paris, and returning thence, was first Parson of Clat, and afterward promoved
to the Sea; some hopes he gave at first of a virtuous man, but afterward
turned a very Epicure, spending all his time in drinking and whoring; he
dilapidated the whole rents by fewing the lands, and converting the victual
duties in money, a great part whereof he wasted upon his base children, and the
whores their mothers; a man not worthy to be placed in this Catalogue; he died
in the year 1577.

The Bishops of MURRAY.
This Bishopric was founded by King Malcolme the third, a worthy and religious
King, The succession of Bishops in the Dioces of Murray.
but who were the first Bishops in this See, I find not. The first that is
named, is one William, who did consecrate Arnold Bishop of S. Andrews about the
year, 1160.

2. To him succeeded Simon a Monk of the Abbey of Melrose, elected Bishop in
the time of William King of Scots, who governed the Sea 13. years, he died in
the year of our Lord 1184. and was buried at Birnay.

3. Richard, a Chaplain of King William, sat Bishop 19. years, and was buried
in Spinie where he died.

4. Bricius Prior of Lesmahagow succeeded him, he continued Bishop 24. years,
and was the first that founded the College of Chanons; he died in the year of
our Lord 1227. and was buried with his predecessor.

5. After him Andrew Dean of Murray, was consecrated Bishop; he founded the
Cathedral Church of Elgin, and added ten Chanons more to the College; he died
in the year 1274 and was buried in the Quire of the Church, which he had
founded toward the South.

6. Simon, Dean of the same Church, was preferred next unto this See, and lived
Bishop 9. years only; he was buried in the Quire of Elgin.

7. Archebald, Dean of Murray, was after his death made Bishop, and sat 47.
years; he built the Palace of Kinneddore, and departed this life in the year
1303. at Elgin, where his corpse was also interred.

8. David Murray after his death elected, was consecrated at Avignion, by Pope
Boniface the eighth; he lived Bishop 27. years, and died in January 1330.

9. John Pilmore, who then stood elected to the Bishopric of Rosse, was by the
provision of Pope John the 22. consecrated Bishop of Murray; he continued
Bishop 27. years, and departed this life in the Castle of Spinie.

10 Alexander Bar Licenciator in the laws succeeded; he was consecrated by
Pope Urban the fifth, and died in the Castle of Spinie the fifteenth of May,
1397.

11. William Spinie Chanter of Murray, and Doctor of the Canon law, was after
his death consecrated Bishop by Pope Benedict the thirteenth, and lived Bishop
nine years only; he died in the Chanory of Elgin the second of August, 1406.
and was buried in the Quire of the Cathedral Church.

12. John Innes Parson of Duffus and Bachelor both in the Canon and Civil law,
sat after him seven years, and died in the Chanory the fifteenth of April,
1414.

13. Henry Lichton Parson of Duffus, a Doctor in both Laws, after he had sat
Bishop in this See 10. years, was translated to Aberdene.

14. Columba Dumbar succeeding, lived Bishop ten years, and departing this
life in the Castle of Spinie, was buried in the Isle of S. Thomas the Martyr.

15. After him John Winchester Chaplain to King James the second, was preferred
to the Sea, a man of good parts; he continued Bishop 13. years, and was buried
in S. Mary Isle, within the Cathedral Church.

16. James Stewart Dean of Murray sat two years Bishop.

17. To him succeeded David Stewart, his brother, Parson of Spinie, who
governed the Sea 14. years, and was buried in S. Peter and S. Paul's Isle upon
the South of the Cathedral Church.

18. After his death William Tulloch Bishop of Orkney, An. 1140.
was translated to Murray, and lived five years only after his consecration.

19. Andrew Stewart Dean of Murray succeeded; he sat Bishop 19. years, and was
buried in the Quire of the Cathedral Church.

20. Andrew Forman sat after him Bishop 15. years, and was then translated to
S. Andrews.

21. Next after him James Hepburn governed the Sea 9. years, and was buried in
our Lady Isle, nigh unto the Tomb of Alexander the first, Earl of Huntley.

22. Robert Shaw Abbot of Paisley, a man of great virtue, and exceedingly
beloved, was next made Bishop; but he lived not above two years in the place.

23. Alexander Stewart, Brother german to the Duke of Albany, sat after him
seven years, and was buried in the Monastery of Scone.

24. To him succeeded Patrick Hepburn, who was commendatory of Scone, in his
time the reformation of Religion was made; he lived Bishop 36. years, and died
in the Castle of Spinie the 20. of June, 1573.

The Bishops of BRICHEN.
In this See since it was founded by King David, Since the writing of this
Catalogue, I have found four Bishops succeeding Edwardus one after another;
Turpimis, Rodolphus, Hugo and Gregonus. But how long they sat Bishops, I
cannot say.
which was about the year 1140. there have been many worthy Bishops, yet most
of them are buried in oblivion, these few that follow, I have gathered out of
old Records.

1. Urwardus or Edwardus lived about the year 1260. a Monk at first at Couper
in Angus, a man very zealous in his calling, for it is testified of him that he
went on foot through the whole kingdom (with one Eustathius Abbot of
Aberbrothock) preaching the Gospel wheresoever he came.

2. Albinus after him was Bishop some few years.

3. William Dean of Brichen elected successor, died at Rome in the year 1275.
whilst he was attending, to have his election confirmed.

4. The fourth Bishop I find mentioned, is one John who governed the Sea in the
year of God 1318. and got a new confirmation from King David Bruce, of all the
lands possessions, and privileges enjoyed by his predecessors in former times,
because of their rights lost in the time of the last war. This confirmation
is dated in the year 1359.

5. To him succeeded Adam Chancellor of the Kingdom, but it seemed he sat few
years.

6. Then Patrick who was his successor both in the Bishopric, and in the
office of Chancellary in the year 1372.

7. Steven in the year 1384.

8. Walter, surnamed Forrester in the year 1413.

9. John, who was likewise Chancellor, Anno 1434. In his time was the Church of
Cortoguhy annexed to the Bishopric by Walter Pallatine of Strathern Earl of
Atholl, Lord Brichen and Cortoguhy.

10. George Shoreswood succeeded him in both charges, anno 1483. In his time
was the Church of Funeven made one of the Chapter.

11. Another called John, was made Bishop in the year 1483.

12. William Meldrum succeeded in the year 1500.

13. And after his death John Hepburn, Anno 1552.

14. To him succeeded... Sinclare Dean of Restalrig, a little before the
Reformation.

The Bishops of DUMBLANE.
The Sea of Dumblane was founded likewise by King David. The succession of the
Bishops of Dumblane.


1. Ionathus was the first Bishop, he died in the year 1200. or thereabout, and
was buried at Inchaffray.

2. Simon, An. 1210.
who succeeded him, lived not a year.

3. Abraham Chaplain to Gilbert Earl of Stratherne, was consecrated in the year
1210. This was the Earl who gave a third part of his lands to the Sea of
Dumblane, and another third part to the Abbey of Inchaffray.

4. William called Gulielmus de Bosco was next preferred to the Sea, and
shortly after created Chancellor.

5. Osbert, Abbot of Cambuskenneth succeeded, he died in the year 1231.

6. The sixth Bishop was Clemens, a Friar of the Dominican Order, consecrated
in the Stewe Church of Weddal, in the year 1233. This man was an excellent
Preacher, learned above many of that time, and of singular integrity of
conversation; he gave diverse lands and rents to the Church of Culross, and
restored the Cathedral Church of Dumblane, which was decayed. Leander
Bononiensis, in his third book De viris illustribus Praedicatorum, remembers
him with a special commendation. The like does Philippus Wolphius in his third
book De vitis peritorum virorum. He died in the year 1256.

7 Robert was after him elected. This is he who was sent with Richard Bishop of
Dunkeld, by the rest of the Prelates in the year 1268. to protest against the
proceedings of Ottobon the Popes Legate for the contribution imposed by him
upon the Scottish Clergy, toward the charge of the holy war.

8. Alpin after him governed the Sea some few years.

9. Then one Nicolaus was made Bishop, he gave the half of the Church of
Strowan to the Abbey of Inchaffray.

10. After him succeeded Maurice Abbot of Inchaffray, a Prelate of great
spirit, who gave great encouragement to his countrymen in that famous battle
of Bonnockburn, and was therefore chosen by King Robert Bruce to be his
Confessor after that battle: the Sea falling void, he was preferred to the same.

11. One William succeeded to him.

12. Then Walter Cambuslang in the year 1363.

13. And after him was Finlaw, commonly called Dermoch, who built the bridge of
Dumblane, and died in the year 1419.

14. William Stephen, one of the first Professors in the University of S.
Andrews, was after him preferred.

15. Upon his death Michael Ochiltrie succeeded, a wealthy Prelate, and well
esteemed; he purchased to his See a great part of the forfeited lands of
Stratherne, adorned the Cathedral Church with many rich ornaments, built the
bridge of Knaig at Machant, with the Church of Muthill, and did in his time
diverse other good works.

16. After him succeeded Robert Lawder, who founded diverse Prebendaries, and
Chanonries in the Church of Dumblane.

17. John Hepburn succeeded in the year 1471. This Bishop had a long contention
with the Abbot of Inchaffray for certain Churches claimed by the Abbot, but the
matter was afterward pacified. He died in the year 1508. and was buried in the
Quire of the Cathedral Church.

18. James Chisholme obtained the Bishopric after his death by the Popes
provision, and carried himself in his charge very commendably; a severe censour
he was of the corrupt manners of the Clergy, and recovered many lands and
possessions, which were sacrilegiously taken from the Church before his time.
He died in the year 1534.

19. To whom succeeded William Chisholme his brother, a wicked and vicious man,
who for hatred he bare to true religion made away all the lands of the
Bishopric, and utterly spoiled the benefice.

The Bishops of Ross.
1. This See was also one of King David's foundations, The succession of the
Bishops of Rosse.
the first Bishop I find was one Gregorins.

2. Reynaldus a member of Melross, An. 1066.
who died in the year 1213.

3. Andrew Murray was chosen in his place, but he shortly after resigned the
same to

4. Robert, Chaplain to Alexander the second.

5. After him one Matthew was elected and consecrated by Pope Gregory the tenth
at Viterbium, in the year 1274.

Then succeed these in order.

6. Thomas Dundie. 7. Roger. 8. Alexander. 9. Thomas Urwhart. 10. Alexander
Kilbuines. 11. William Bullock. 12. Thomas Tullich. 13. Henry Cokborne. 14.
James Woodman. 15. Thomas Hay. 16. John Guthrye. 17. John Fraser. 18. Robert
Cokburn.
19. William Elphinstone, who was afterward Bishop of Aberdene.

20. James Hay.

21. Robert Carncrosse Abbot of Halirudhouse, a man of great wealth, and
preferred by King James the fifth to this See about the 1534. year, and lived
ten years Bishop.

22. David Panter, Secretary to the Governor, was after his death elected in
the year 1544. and immediately after employed in a legation to France, where he
remained seven years. At his return he was solemnly consecrated, the Governor
and many of the Nobility being present. He was a man learned, and of great
experience in public affairs, and died about the year 1550.

23. To him succeeded Henry Sinclar, Dean of Glasgow, and Vice President in the
College of Justice, a man of singular wisdom and learning, especially in the
laws; which place he discharged with good credit. By his advice many things
were bettered in the form of Justice, and diverse abuses in the forms of
process amended; his death fell out shortly after the Reformation, and in his
place Mr. John Lesley, (of whom we shall have often occasion to speak) was
preferred.

The Bishops of CATHNES.
1. This Bishopric was founded by Malcolme the third, The succession of the
Bishops of Cathnes.
about the year 1066. who preferred thereto one Darrus, whom he favored
greatly. This man lived long, and in a good reputation, and after his death was
honored for a Saint.

2. There succeeded to him one Andrew, of whom Roger Hoveden makes mention,
saying, that he came into England with William King of Scots in the year 1176.
and shortly after his return home departed this life.

3. To him succeeded John, the Bishop that Harold the Earl of Orkney and
Cathnes used most cruelly, cutting forth his tongue, and pulling out his eyes;
which King William (in whose reign it happened) punished exemplarly, for he
caused the Earl his eyes first to be pulled out, then made him to be executed
by the hands of the hangman, and all his male children to be gelded, to
extinguish their succession.

4. Adam another Bishop, whether his immediate successor or not, I cannot say,
was no less barbarously used; for in the year 1222. or much thereabout, some
wicked people suborned by the Earl of Cathnes assailed him being private at
home, and killing his chamber boy, with a Monk of Melross, that did ordinarily
attend him (for he had been Abbot of that Monastery) drew him by force into his
kitchen, and when they had scourged him with rods, set the kitchen on fire, and
burnt him, therein. King Alexander the second was at that time upon his journey
toward England, and upon notice of this cruel fact, turned back and went in
haste to Cathnes, where he put the offenders and their partakers to trial: 400.
by public sentence were executed, An. 1245.
and all their male children gelded, that no succession should spring from so
wicked a seed. The place where their stones were cast in a heap together, is to
this day known by the name of the Stony hill. The Earl for withholding his
help, and because he did not rescue the Bishop, was forfeited. And howbeit
after some little time he found means to be restored, yet did he not escape the
judgment of God, being murdered by some of his own servants who conspired to
kill him; and to conceal the fact, set the house on fire, and burnt his body
therein: so was he paid home in the same measure he had used the Bishop.

5. To this Adam succeeded Gilbert the Chanon surnamed Murray, and son to the
Lord of Duffus, who was in great esteem for the bold and courageous answer he
made to the Popes Legate at Northampton; he built the Cathedral Church of
Cathnes upon his own charges, and lived to see the same finished, and shortly
after the dedication died at Scravister in the year 1245. the posteri gave him
the reputation of a Saint.

6. William, who succeeded, followed his steps, and did much good in his time,
he died in the year 1261.

7. Then Walter Doctor in the Canon law, who lived ten years, and ended his
days in the year 1271.

8. Archibald, a man much commended for his meek and tractable disposition,
succeeding, died in the year 1288.

9. Andrew a man skilled in the laws, was preferred after his death, and lived
Bishop 13. years.

10. Ferquhard succeeded to him; this Bishop was a strong defender of the
liberties of the Church, and died in the year 1328.

11. David that followed lived 20. years Bishop and departed this life, an.
1348.

12. Thomas Fingask was next Bishop, he died in the Chanonry of Elgin, anno
1360. and lies buried in S. Mary's Isle in a Tomb erected by William Earl of
Sutherland, whom he left his Executor.

13. To him succeeded Bishop Alexander, who lived many years in that See, and
died in the year 1409.

Then these in order.

14. Malcolm, a zealous and devout man, who died anno 1421.

15. Robert Strackbock died anno 1440.

16. John Innes Dean of Rosse, in the year 1448.

17. William Mudie died anno 1460.

18. After whom one Prosper was elected, but he resigned the place in favors
of John Sinclar, son to the Earl of Cathnes, who was never consecrated, and
so the Sea remained void the space of 24. years; during which time Mr. Adam
Gordon governed the affairs of that See.

After Sinclars death succeeded Andrew Stewart Commendatory of Kelso and Fern,
he died in the year 1517. and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Cathnes.

Andrew Stewart son to the Earl of Athol was preferred after him, and died in
the year 1542.

Then Robert Stewart brother to Matthew Earl of Lenox was made Bishop, he was
afterward made Prior of S. Andrews, and created Earl of March, upon his
resignation of the Earldome of Lenox to Duke Esme: a man of noble disposition,
but much addicted to his servants, whom he rewarded with dilapidation of the
Church rents, whereto he was provided; he died at S. Andrews very old in the
year 1586.

The Bishops of ORKNEY.
The Islands of Orkney lying over against Cathnes, The Bishops of Orkney.
have always since they were made Christians, been governed by Bishops, but
being possessed by the... whilst that Kingdom stood, and for a long time in
the hands of the Norvegians, from whom Alexander the third King of Scots
recovered the same by composition. The first Bishops and their successors are
utterly unknown, An. 1137.
of the latter I have no intelligence, nor in the records that remain is there
any mention of them, only I read of four or five that sat in this See before
the Reformation.

1. One William that lived in the time of King Robert the third.

2. William Tullock, who was translated to Murray in the reign of King James
the third.

3. To whom succeeded one Andrew.

4. After Andrew, Edward.

5. And after Edward Robert Reid, a man of excellent wit and great experience,
employed in diverse legations, and selected amongst others by the Estates to
assist the marriage of Queen Mary with the Daulphin of France; he died in his
return at Deep much regretted, for he was a man of great integrity, and careful
in the administration of Justice.

The Bishops of GLASGOW.
This City at first was made famous by Kentigern, The succession of the Bishops
of Glasgow.
commonly called Saint Mungho, who is esteemed the first Bishop thereof. I
spoke of him before, and showed how he was begotten by Eugenius the third upon
Thametis daughter to the King of Picts; his mother finding her self with
child, out of shame and fear of her fathers wrath, stole privately away, and
entering into a little vessel that she found at the nearest coast, was by the
wind and waves cast on land, where the town of Culross is now situated; there
was delivered of her birth, and leaving the child with a nurse, returned home:
his Parents being unknown, he was brought to Servanus, and baptized and bred up
by him; yet it ^^ems by the hymn, they did ordinarily sing in the Festivals,
that his Father came afterward to be known, for thus it begins....

They report of him, that a Lady of good place in the country having lost a
ring, which her husband gave her, as she crossed the river of Cluyd, and her
husband waxing jealous, as if she had bestowed the same upon one of her lovers,
she did mean her self unto him, entreating his help for the safety of her
honor; and that he going to the river after he had used his devotion willed
one who was making to fish, to bring him the first that he caught; which was
done; in the mouth of that fish he found the ring, and sending it to the Lady,
she was thereby freed of her husbands suspicion. The credit of this I believe
upon the reporters; but howsoever it be, the Sea and City do both of them wear
in their Arms a fish with a ring in the mouth even to this day. He was
certainly a man of rare piety, and to the poor exceeding bountiful, lived to a
great age, beyond the ordinary course of men, as in the conclusion of the hymn
is said.

Cum octogenos centum quoque quinque vir annos
Complerat, sanctus est Glasgow funere functus.
After his death for many ages the Sea was in a manner desolate unto the reign
of Malcolm the third, who restored the same to some integrity. The first Bishop
I find named after the restitution was

1. John Achaian, who took great pains in building the Cathedral, and having
brought it to a reasonable perfection, did dedicate the same in the year 1137.
King David being there in person, and bestowing upon the Sea the lands of
Patrick, which the Bishops do yet enjoy. It was in his time that Thurstan
Archbishop of York, encroaching upon his jurisdiction, (which at that time
comprehended the country of Cumberland) placed a new Bishop at Carlisle, by
the instigation of Henry King of England; This the Bishop took so heavily, as
when he perceived his complaints not much regarded, he forsook his charge, and
went into France, enclosing himself in the Monastery of Tours, where he abode
until the Pope at the request of King Malcolm the fourth, compelled him to
return: after which time he lived not long, for he died at Glasgow in the year
1146. the twenty eighth of May.

2. To him succeeded another called John, An. 1207.
who was greatly favored by King Alexander the first, and did counsel
Eadmerus, because of the Kings dislike, to leave S. Andrews, and return unto
England.

3. Herbert was his successor, and in his time the controversy with York was
great, for the superiority claimed by one Roger Archbishop of York over the
Bishops of Scotland. This contention drew Angelramus Archdeacon of Glasgow, and
Chancellor of the Kingdom for the time, to travel unto Rome, as was touched
before; and Herbert dying whilst he was there,

4. Angelramus by an uniform consent of the Clergy and Laity was elected in his
place, and upon notice given of the election, consecrated by Pope Alexander at
Rome, from whom he obtained an exemption to the Church of Scotland from the
jurisdiction of the English and all others, the Apostolic See only excepted;
Shortly after his return he died.

5. Iocelin Abbot of Melrosse was his successor; in his time the City of
Glasgow was erected into a Burgh Royal; he died at Melrosse, and was interred
in that Monastery.

6. Eugenius was chosen after his death, but how long he lived, I read not.

7. Hugo Chancellor of the Kingdom succeeded, and lived but a few years.

8. After him William Malvoisin a French man was elected, and consecrated in
France by the Popes direction; he was afterward translated to S. Andrews, and
preferred to the office of Chancellary.

9. Florentius, son to the Count of Holland, was assumed in his place, and
shortly after upon license obtained of the Pope, he resigned the office, and
died at Rome in the year 1207.

10. And then Walter Chaplain to King William, was consecrated Bishop; he
lived in the place 27. years.

11. William Babington Chancellor of the Kingdom, was after his death elected
Bishop. In his time, as Boeth writes, the fabric of the Church of Glasgow was
fully accomplished; his words are, Absolutum est ea tempestate templum
Cathedrale Glasguense, seeds profecto magnifica, cujus haud exiguam partem
Gulielmus ibidem Episcopus liberalitate sua extruxerat, nec diu operi perfecto
superfuit. He died the 25. of January 1261.

12. The Chanons meeting to choose a successor, condescended upon Nicole Moffet
Archdeacon of Teviot-dale, yet shortly after forthinking their election, they
procured the same to be cassed at Rome, whither he was gone to obtain
Confirmation. Thereupon John de Chyan an English man was by the Pope provided
to the Sea, whom King Alexander the third admitted with great difficulty. This
man is said to have been learned, but very troublesome to the Chanons, upon
whom he laid grievous impositions. The discord betwixt him and them waxing hot,
he left the country, and going to France, died there in the year 1268.

13. Nicole Moffet Archdeacon of Teviot-dale was upon his death provided to the Sea, notwithstanding the opposition of the Chanons, but he lived a short time,
and died at Tannigham of the Apoplexy. He was no less hated of his Clergy,
whom he is said to vex with many injuries.

14. William Wishart Archdeacon of S. Andrews, and Chancellor of the Kingdom,
was chosen of the Chanons in the year 1270. but S. Andrews falling void by the
death of Gamelinus, before his consecration he was postulated thereto, and so
returned to S. Andrews.

15. Robert Wishart Archdeacon of Lothian, and Cosen to the said William, was
upon his change by the Kings recommendation admitted to the place. This is he
who made that reply to King Edward, in the consultation held at Norham for the
right of the Crown, whereof we spoke in the life of William Fraser Bishop of
S. Andrews; a worthy man, and a great lover of his country, for which he
suffered much trouble, being made prisoner and sent unto London, where he was
kept some years; afterward obtaining liberty, he returned to his See, and
therein performed many good works: he died the 26. of November, 1316. and was
buried in the Church of Glasgow betwixt the altars of S. Peter and S. Andrew.

16. John Lindesay succeeded, An. 1325.
a man given much to the adorning of his Church; he died the ninth of April
1325. and was buried in the Cathedral, nigh to the Altar of the Blessed Virgin.

17. Mr. Stephen Dundy was the same year elected Bishop, and going to Rome to
be confirmed, died by the way, not without suspicion of poison given him at a
feast made by the Friars predicant of Glasgow.

18. In his place was chosen John Wishart, who in his return from Rome was
taken prisoner by the English, and died some few days after.

19. William Rae, a good and zealous man, was after him chosen by the consent
of the whole Chapter; he redeemed the possessions of the Church which his
predecessors had alienated, built the stone bridge at Glasgow, and having done
many good works, died in the year 1367.

20. After his death Walter Wardlaw succeeded; Pope Urban the sixth did
prefer him to be Cardinal in the year 1384. and in the third year after he
died.

21. Then was Mr. Matthew Glendouning provided to the place. In his time the
steeple which was all built of timber, was burnt by lightning, in place whereof
he intended to build one of stone, and made therefore great preparation, but
was prevented by death in the year 1408.

22. His successor William Lawder finished the work; he was Chancellor of
Scotland, and without the Chapters election provided by the Pope of mere
authority, which was never done in that See before.

23. After him John Cameron was Bishop, a man given to violence and oppression,
who committing many deeds full of cruelty and covetousness, especially upon
his own Tenants and Vassals, made (as the fame goes) a fearful and unhappy
end; for in the year 1446. the night before Christmas day, as he lay asleep in
his house of Lockwood some seven miles from the City of Glasgow, he seemed to
hear a voice summoning him to appear before the tribunal of Christ, and give an
account of his doings. Thereupon he awak't; and being greatly terrified, did
call his servants to bring lights and sit by him, he himself took a book in his
hand, and began to read; but the voice being again heard, struck all the
servants with amazement. The same voice calling the third time far louder,
and more fearfully, the Bishop after a heavy groan, was found dead in the bed,
his tongue hanging out of his mouth. This reported by Buchannan almost in the
same words, I thought good to remember as a notable example of Gods judgment
against the crying sin of oppression.

24. To Cameron succeeded James Bruce, who was translated from Dunkeld to this
See in the year 1446. and preferred to be Chancellor of the Kingdom.

25. After him Mr. William Turnbull (others called him David) was chosen
Bishop, he founded the College of Glasgow.

26. Upon his death Andrew Moorehead was elected. The hospital near the Castle
was his foundation.

27. To Moorehead succeeded John Lang, who was Chancellor of Scotland.

28. He dying, Mr. George Carmighal was promoved, but not consecrated; for he
died going to Rome for Confirmation.

29. Robert Blacader Bishop of Aberdene, was after his death translated to this
See. In his time was the Sea of Glasgow erected into an Archbishopric, for
which arose a great contention betwixt Shevez Archbishop of S. Andrews, and
him; which was after some treaty pacified, and Galloway, Argyle, and Isles
appointed Suffragans to Glasgow. He lived until the year 1500. at what time
taking his journey toward Jerusalem, he departed this life in the way thither

30. Mr. James Beaton upon his death was preferred, and sat Bishop twenty two
years, thereafter he was translated to S. Andrews, of whom you may there read.

31. Mr. Gawan Dumbar tutour to the King upon his translation was promoved, a
good and learned man; An. 631.
he was afterward made Chancellor of the Kingdom, and administered the office
with good commendation.

32. Mr. James Beaton succeeded after his death, in whose time the Reformation
fell forth, and of him we shall have occasion afterward to speak.

The Bishops of GALLOWAY.
1. S^. Ninnian had his chief abode in the country of Galloway, The Bishops
of Galloway.
and built there a Church all of white stone, which was therefore called
Candida casa, and to this day in the country language Whitherne, as you would
say, a white house; he is accounted the first Bishop of this See.

2. In the year 631. one Plechelmus (Beda calls him Pectelmus) was here
Bishop.

3. Frithwoldus succeeded to him, and died in the year 768.

4. After him Pethumus, who deceased anno 778.

5. Then Ethelbert.

6. And after him Baldulphus. Further mention I find not of any Bishop in this
See in those first times; and it seems it has been quite decayed, before
Malcolm the third restored the same.

In the latter times, I read only of these following.

7. John Bishop of Galloway, who resigned his charge, and became a Monk in the
Abbey of Halirudhouse.

8. Thomas Spence translated from Galloway to Aberdene in the year 1458.

9. David, who was also Dean of the Kings Chapel.

10. Alexander.

11. Henry.

12. George.

13. And Bishop... Gordon, who lived at the Reformation, and embraced the truth.

The Bishops of ARGYLE.
This Bishopric was part of the Dioces of Dunkeld, The Bishops of Argyle.
until John Scot Bishop thereof obtained of Pope Clement the third a division
of the Bishopric, as you may read in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Dunkeld.

1. Then was Evaldus or Harold his Chaplain consecrated Bishop, and the seat
appointed to be at Lismore within the country of Argyle, whence the Bishop of
this See is styled Lismorensis Episcopus; this erection was made in the year
1200.

2. To Harold succeeded William, who perished by a tempest at Sea, in the year
1240.

3. And to him another of the same name.

4. Then David who was Bishop in the year 1330.

5. In the year 1425. one Finlaw Bishop of Argyle, Vir ordinis Dominicani, as
Buchannan says, upon the apprehension of Duke Murdach, joined with the Dukes
youngest son against King James the first, and fled with him into Ireland.
The King complaining of him to Pope Martin the fifth, he gave Commission to the
Bishops of S. Andrews and Dumblane to call him before them, and finding him
guilty, to depose him from the place; but he in the mean time died in Ireland.

6. So by the provision George Lord of Balcomie in Fife, was preferred to the Sea; how long he lived Bishop, and who succeeded since his time, I have not
learned.

The Bishops of the ISLES. An. 1289.

Of the Bishops of the Isles I have less to say, The Bishops of the Isles.
only that the Isle of Man was at first the Cathedral seat, as by occasion we
touched before; and that by the invasions of the Norvegians and English, the
same was translated unto Ilcolmkill.

In Man, Amphibalus was the first Bishop. I read of one Machilla likewise that
was there Bishop, and confirmed the holy Brigida in her purpose of single life.

After the translation of the seat to Ilcolmkill, I find only one Onacus
mentioned about the year 1289. who is reported to have been a good and godly
man; with another called Mauricius, whom King Edward the first of England sent
prisoner to London. And thus far of the succession of Bishops unto the time
of the Reformation.

THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Contents.
The History of the Reformation of the Church; and how it was wrought.

THE Petitions put up to Queen Regent for reformation of the Church taking no
effect, The Nobles and Barons resolve upon a Reformation.
some Noblemen and Barons joining in Council, did bind themselves by o^thes and
subscriptions to assist one another; and hazard their lives and substance in
advancing the cause of Religion. The principals were Archibald Earl of Argyle,
Alexander Earl of Glencarne, James Earl of Morton, Archibald Lord of Lorne, An.
1558.
Sir James Sandelands of Calder, John Erskin of Dun, and William Maitland of
Lethington younger. They meeting together after deliberation what should be
fittest first to do, concluded, That in all Parishes the Curates should be
caused read the Prayers and Lessons of the Old and New Testament on Sundays
and other Festival days, An act for public service.
according to the form set forth in the Book of Common Prayers; and if they
should refuse, that the most qualified in every Parish should do the same. But
for preaching and interpretation of Scripture, History of the Church.
the same should be used only in private houses after a quiet manner, till God
should move the Queen to grant further liberty.

This accordingly was performed in the parts where they had Commandment, The
Clergy complaining to Queen Regent.
and by their example in diverse Towns and Parishes of the country the like
was done, to the great offense of the Clergy, who complaining of that boldness
to the Queen Regent were answered, that it was no fit time to enter into those
matters, and that she should find occasion ere it were long to put order unto
them. But the Clergy fearing delays did forthwith call a Provincial Council at
Edinburgh; where professing to make reformation of abuses, they renewed some
old Popish constitutions, which they made to be imprinted and affixed upon the
doors of all the Parish Churches.

The Bishop of S. Andrews advertised of the Reformation begun in Argyle sent
to the Earl, The Bishop of S. Andrews letter to the Earl of Argyle.
Sir David Hamilton his Cosen, with a letter, wherein after he had showed the
peril in which he did cast both himself and his house by that open defection
from the Church, he desired him in some honest fashion to rid himself of that
defamed and perjured Apostate, who had seduced him: (This was one Mr. John
Douglas, whom the Earl had taken to be his Minister) offering to provide him of
a learned and wise Preacher, for whom he would lay his soul in pawn, that he
should teach no other but true doctrine, and agreeable to the Catholic faith.
The Earl of Argyle his answer.
The Earl answered, That for peril he feared none either to himself or to his
house, having resolved to live in obedience to his Prince, and to serve God as
well as he could according to his written word: and for the defection alleged;
seeing it had pleased God to open his eyes and give him the knowledge of his
truth, which he took for a great argument of his favor, he would not
relinquish or forsake it for fear of any inconveniences. As to the man he wrote
of, he said that he heard him teach the doctrine of Christ, condemn idolatry,
adultery, fornication, and such like wickedness, and that he should make him
give an account thereof whenever he should be cited. But to call him defamed
and perjured there was no reason, seeing he was not declared to be such by any
sentence; and if he had in former times made any unlawful oath, he had done
much better in violating the same, then if he had observed it. Further, whereas
he made offer to provide him of some learned man, he gave him thanks,
considering the necessity there was of laborers in the Lords harvest; but he
understood what his meaning in that was, and minded not to be led with any such
teachers. In end he wished him not to begin the battle with him, whereof the
event would be doubtful; for as to himself he knew God was God, and should be
God still, whatsoever man's crast could work or devise.

The Bishop receiving this answer did communicate the same with the chief of
the Clergy, The feast of S. Giles.
who thereby conceiving that there was some business in hand, began to think
of other defenses; And the feast day of S. Giles, or Sanctus Egidius, falling
out about that time to be kept at Edinburgh, they entreated Queen Regent to
honor the solemnity with her presence. The custom was in that time of the
year to carry the image of the Saint in procession through the town, (for they
had S. Giles to their Patron) with Drums, Trumpets, and all sort of musical
instruments; neither was there any day kept more superstitiously then this. The
Queen agreed the rather to accompany the procession, for that some cumult was
feared, which she thought her presence would repress. But when the time of the
solemnity was come the Saint was missing, for some had stolen the image out of
the place where it was kept. The procession disturbed by a tumul^^
This made a stay, till another little image was borrowed from the Gray Friars;
which the vulgar in mockery called young Saint Giles. Herewith they set
forward, the Regent accompanying the people, till the procession was nigh
ended; then withdrawing her self to the lodging where she was to dine, she was
no sooner gone, then some youths provided for the purpose, drawing near unto
the Fertor, and making a show to carry it upon their shoulders, after they had
walked some few paces, and perceived by the motion they made, the image was
fixed to the Fertor, they threw all to the ground; and taking the image by the
heels, dashed the same against the stones, so as head and hands were beaten
off, and the idol wholly defaced. The people hereupon fell a crying, the
Priests and Churchmen betook them to flight, and a great stir was in the
streets. Some hours the Fray continued, and being in end settled by the
authority of the Magistrates, the whole Clergy that were in town assembled
themselves; and making the best countenance they could, indicted a solemn
meeting in the beginning of November next.

To this diet Paul Methven was summoned, (...).
and not appearing, was decerned for his contumacie to be banished the Realm;
a prohibition likewise was given to all the subjects, that none of them should
entertain or receive them in their houses. Notthelesse the town of Dundy where
he abode, forbear not to hear his Sermons, and minister unto him all
necessities. Mean while they who had combined for working a Reformation, did
send into all parts of the Realm to solicit persons to join in that cause, and
purchase the subscriptions of those that were willing, unto a bond which was
framed to that effect. Some moved with a zeal to Religion, others out of a
desire to change, and the greatest part longing to be relieved of the
oppressions of the Churchmen, were easily moved to consent. So when they
understood by the return of the subscriptions, that the country for the most
part was inclined that way, and that in force and power they were nothing
inferior to their adversaries, they resolved to begin and make an end of the
work; yet lest they should seem to contemn authority, they concluded to present
a supplication to the Queen Regent and Council, Supplication to Queen Regent
for (...)
to whom the redress of all enormities both Ecclesiastical and Civil did
orderly belong; (these were the words of the Supplication:) and to this effect
made choice of Sir James Sandelands of Calder, an honorable Baron, and of
great account, to present the Petitions following.

1. That their Ministers might be permitted in conceiving of public prayers,
and the administration of the Sacraments to use the vulgar language understood
by the people.

2. Petitions for reformation.
That the Sacrament of the Supper might be ministered in both kinds according to
our Saviors institution.

3. That the election of Ministers should be according to the manner used in
the primitive Church, that those who had the charge of election should enquire
diligently of the life and doctrine of such as were admitted.

4. That seeing by corruption of time, ignorant and scandalous persons had been
promoved to Ecclesiastical offices, they should after trial be discharged, and
other more sufficient put in their places.

These Petitions were no way pleasing to the Queen Regent, The Queens answer.
yet because the Parliament was approaching, wherein the matrimonial Crown and
naturalization of the French were to be passed, she thought best to keep them
in hope, saying, That all they could lawfully desire, should be granted unto
them; mean while they were licenciated to use their prayers and service in the
vulgar language, providing they did keep no public assemblies in Edinburgh, or
Leth, for eschewing of tumults.

The Prelates having notice of this were highly incensed, and when their
consent was required (for the same Petitions were presented to them) carrying
themselves more imperiously then before, answered, that they would not depart a
jot from the decrees of Trent. A dispute offered by the Clergy, and accepted by
the Congregation.
Afterward being a little calmed, they made offer to commit the cause to
dispute, which by those of the Congregation, (this was the title given commonly
to the Reformers) was accepted, upon two conditions; one, that the
controversies in Religion might be decided by the Scripture; the other
condition was, that such of their brethren as were exiled or condemned, might
assist the dispute, and have safe conduct given them to that effect. But both
the conditions were denied; for neither would they admit any other Judge but
the Canon Law and Council; nor would they dispense with any sentence by them
pronounced. Some of them that affected quietness propounded other conditions
of reconcilement; Ridiculous conditions offered to the Petitioners.
That if the Congregation would suffer the Mass to be held in the wonted
reverence, if they would acknowledge Purgatory, confess the invocation of
Saints, and admit prayers for the dead, they should be allowed to pray and
administrate the Sacraments in a known language. But those conditions were held
so ridiculous and absurd, as they were not vouchsafed any answer.

Soon after this the Parliament being assembled, Articles presented by the
Congregation to the Parliament.
the Articles following were prepresented to Queen Regent.

1. That in regard the controversies in Religion, which had a long time
continued betwixt the Protestants in Germany, and the Roman Church, were not
as yet decided by a lawful general Council, and that they themselves upon the
same grounds could not any longer communicate with Papists in their idolatrous
religion; The humble desire of the Congregation was, that all such acts of
Parliament, as warranted Churchmen to proceed against heretics, might be
abrogated, or at least suspended, till in a lawful general Council the
controversies depending were determined.

2. And lest it should hereby seem that they desired a liberty to profess what
they pleased, they humbly required that all such might be led before the
temporal Judge, the Prelates and their officers being only permitted to accuse;
with this proviso, that an authentic Copy of the accusation should be
delivered to the person accused, and a competent term assigned him to answer.

3. That all lawful defenses should be received from persons accused of
heresy, and they allowed to accept against the witnesses according to law.

4. That the party accused should have liberty to expone his own mind, and that
his Declaration might carry more faith then the deposition of whatsoever
witnesses, forasmuch as no person ought to suffer for Religion, who is not
known to be obstinate in his wicked opinions.

5. That none of their profession should be condemned for heresy, unless they
were first convinced by the word of God, to have erred from the faith which the
holy Spirit witnesses to be necessary to salvation.

The Queen receiving the Articles answered in effect as before, That it was not
safe for her to utter her mind at that time; Queen Regent stays the
presenting of the Articles.
which if she should do, the spiritual Estate would not fail to oppose her in
all business. But how soon the public matters were passed, they should know
what a good mind she bare unto them. Howbeit this answer did no way content the
wiser sort, yet knowing that the Articles would not pass in an Act, if she
should disassent, they resolved to surcease from presenting them to the
Estates, only desired they might be permitted to make a Protestation, which
they did in this sort.

It is not unknown to this honorable Parliament, The Protestation made by
those that desired Reformation.
what controversy is of late arisen betwixt those that will be called Prelates
and Rulers of the Church, and a great number of us the Nobility and Commonalty
of this Realm, for the true worshipping of God, the duty of Ministers, and the
right administration of the holy Sacraments. And how we have complained to the
Queen Regent, that our consciences are burdened with unprofitable ceremonies,
and we compelled to endure many idolatrous abuses; that such as take upon them
offices Ecclesiastical, do perform no part of the duty which is required of
true Ministers, and that we and our brethren are most injustly oppressed by
their usurped authority. As also we suppose it to be sufficiently known to your
Honors, that we were of mind this present Parliament to seek redress of
these enormities, but considering the troubles of the time do not suffer such a
reformation, as we by the warrant of Gods word do require, we are enforced to
delay that which of all things most earnestly we desire; and yet lest our
silence should give our adversaries occasion to think that we repent us of our
former intentions, we cannot cease to protest for remedy against that injust
Tyranny, which heretofore patiently we have sustained.

Therefore first we protest, that seeing we cannot obtain just reformation
according to Gods word, that it may be lawful to us to use our selves in
matters of religion and conscience, as we must answer unto God, until such
time as our adversaries be able to prove themselves the true Ministers of
Christ's Church, and purge themselves of such crimes as we have already laid to
their charge, offering our selves to prove the same, whenever the sacred
Authority shall please to give us audience.

Secondly, we protest, that neither we, nor any other of the godly that please
to join with us in the true faith, which is grounded upon the word of God,
shall incur any danger of life or lands, or other political pains, for not
observing such acts as have passed heretofore in favor of our adversaries, or
for violating such rites as have been invented by man without the Commandment
of God.

We thirdly protest, that if any tumult or uprore shall arise amongst the
members of the Realm for the diversity of religion, and if it shall chance
that abuses be violently reformed, the crime be not imputed to us, who now do
most humbly seek that all things may be reformed by order. But that whatsoever
inconvenience shall happen to ensue for lack of timely redress, the same may
be imputed to those that will not as now hearken to our petitions for
reformation.

And last we protest, that these our requests proceeding from conscience do
tend to no other end, but only to the reformation of abuses in religion; most
humbly beseeching the sacred Authority to think of us as faithful and obedient
subjects, and take us in their protection, keeping that indifferency which
becomes Gods Lieutenants to use toward those that in his name do call for
defense against cruel oppressors and blood-thirsty tyrants.

These protestations made in face of Parliament, The Protestation refused to be
inserted in the records.
were desired to be insert in the books of public records; but Queen Regent
answering that she should remember what was protested, and put a good end to
all things, the desire was rejected.

Yet how soon the Parliament brake up, The Queens countenance changed toward
the Congregation.
and all matters in it went to her contentment, it was observed that her
countenance was quite altered upon those that favored the Reformation, and
often she was heard say, That being now freed of the vexations which most
troubled her mind, she would labor to restore the authority by some notable
example to that reverend esteem, which in the late times it had lost: whereby
diverse did apprehend that a tempest was breeding, albeit the same did not break
forth until the next spring; At which time taking up the names of all the
Ministers in the country, she caused summon them to appear at Striveling the
tenth of May. Hereupon the Earl of Glencarn, An. 1559.
and Sir Hugh Cambel Sheriff of Air, were sent to enquire the reason of that
citation, and to entreat her not to molest the Ministers, unless they could be
charged with preaching false doctrine, Ministers cited to appear at Striveling.
or behaving themselves disorderly. The Queen in passion replied, That maugre
their hearts, and all that would take part with them, these Ministers should be
banished Scotland, though they preached as soundly as ever. S. Paul did.

The Noblemen marvelling what should move her to such passion, Commissions
directed to the Queen.
besought her in humble manner to think of the promises she had made to them
from time to time. Hereat growing into a greater choler she said, That the
promises of Princes should be no further strained, then it seemed to them
convenient to perform. Then said they, if this be the conclusion which you have
taken, that you will keep no promises to the Subjects, we cannot any longer
acknowledge your authority, and will henceforth renounce all obedience to you;
what inconveniences may arise of this, you may bethink your self. This
unexpected answer calming the Queen a little, after a few more words, she said,
that she would think how to remedy these evils in the best and most quiet sort.

The same day at night advertisement was brought to the Queen of the
reformation begun in the town of Perth, Reformation begun at Perth.
wherewith she was much disturbed, and calling the Lord Ruthven, commanded him
to go and suppress these novations: he answering, That he should make their
bodies and goods subject, but had no power over their minds and consciences,
she was so commoved, that she avowed to make both him and them repent what they
had done.

The Diet appointed for the appearing of the Ministers at Striveling drawing
nigh, the Professors in all parts of the country prepared to accompany them.
In the parts of Angus and Mernis such was the zeal of people, as none would
stay at home, all professing to go and yield confession of their faith with
their Ministers.

The Queen advertised of this concourse of people from all parts, The Queen
Regent deals with the Lord of Dun to stay the contentions of people.
employed John Areskin of Dun to cause them return home, promising that the
Diet should desert, and nothing to be done to the prejudice of the Ministers.
This he signified by letters to the principals of the Congregation, advising
them to dismiss the multitude. But they suspecting (as it also came to pass)
that some advantage should be taken of the Ministers not appearing at the day,
resolved to make the Commons return to their houses. The Barons and Gentlemen
staying at Perth in the mean while with the Preachers, when the day appointed
came, notwithstanding of the promises made, the Preachers not appearing, were
denounced Rebels. The Lord of Dun offending herewith, departed from Court, and
coming to Perth excused himself of the advice he had given, declaring that they
were not to expect any favor, and that they should do wisely to provide
against the worst.

Whilst these things passed, John Knox joyneth with the Congregation at Perth.
John Knox returned from Geneva unto Scotland, and joining with the
Congregation, did preach to them at Perth. In his Sermon he took occasion to
speak against the adoration of Images, showed that the same tended to God his
dishonor, and that such Idols and monuments of superstition, as were erected
in Churches, ought to be pulled down, as being offensive to good and godly
people. The Sermon ended and the better sort gone to dinner, a Priest rather to
try men's affections, then out of any devotion, prepared to say Mass, opening a
great case, wherein was the history of diverse Saints exquisitly carved. A young
boy that stood by saying, that such boldness was unsufferable, the Priest gave
him a blow. The boy in anger casting a stone at the Priest, happened to break
one of the pictures: whereupon stir was presently raised, some of the common
sort falling upon the Priest, others running to the Altar and breaking the
images, so as in a moment all was pulled down in the Church that carried any
mark of idolatry. The Monasteries demolished at Perth.
The people upon the noise there of assembled in great numbers, and invading
the Cloisters, made spoil of all they found therein. The Franciscans had store
of provision both of victuals and household stuff: amongst the Dominicans the
like wealth was not found, yet so much there was, as might show the profession
they made of poverty to be feigned and counterfeit. The Carthusians, who passed
both these in wealth, were used in like manner, yet was the Prior permitted to
take with him what he might carry of gold and silver plate. All the spoil was
given to the poor, the rich sort forbearing to meddle with any part thereof.
But that which was most admited, was the speed they made in demolishing these
edifices. For the Charterhouse (a building of exceeding cost and largeness)
was not only ruined, but the stones and timber so quickly taken away, as in
less then two days space a vestige thereof was scarce remaining to be seen.
The Images pulled down at Couper in Fise.
They of Cowper in Fife hearing what was done at Perth, went in like manner to
their Church, and defaced all the Images, Altars and other instruments of
idolatry; which the Curate took so heavily, as the night following he put
violent hands in himself.

The report of these things being brought to Queen Regent, she was greatly
incensed, Queen Regent intends to surprise Perth.
especially against those of Perth, and presently dispatched letters to the
Duke of Chattellerault (the Lord Hamilton was so styled) and to the Earls of
Argile and Athol, desiring them to come to her with diligence. The French
garrison were likewise called, her purpose being to surprise the town at
unawares. But they within the Town receiving advertisement of her preparation,
sent messengers to all the parts of the kingdom for aid and assistance. Many
came to their succors from Angus, The Earl of Glencarne comes to assist the
town.
Mernis, Fife, and the adjacent Shires: some also from Lothian. But the
celerity which Alexander Earl of Glencarn used, was most admired; for he upon
warning given him of the danger wherein the town stood, taking his way through
the mountains, traveled night and day till he came to Perth, bringing with him
two thousand and five hundredth men, a good and opportune support; The Lord
Ruthven having a little before fallen from them, and gone to the Queen; which
bred a great discouragement to the rest. The principalls that came in Glencarns
company were the Lords of Boyde and Ochiltrie, the Sheriff of Air, the Lairds
of Cragie, Sesnok, Carnal, Bar, and Garthgirth.

The Queen getting intelligence that the Earl of Glencarn was come to assist
them, and that in the town there was seven thousand Gentlemen, besides the
Burgers, An accord mediated by the Earl of Argile and Lord James.
resolute men all; sent the Earl of Argile and the Prior of Saint Andrews,
called then Lord James, to enquire the reason of their Convocation, and mediate
an accord. The Earl of Glencarn and Lord of Dun selected to treat with them,
answered to the first point, that they were come thither to defend their
friends, and save the town from destruction. As to the accord they professed to
mediate, they said, that ^f Queen Regent would cease from troubling the
professors of true Religion, and suffer the reformation begun in the town to
proceed, they should in all other things be obedient to her commandments.

The Noblemen employed in this treaty were known to be well affected to the
cause, which made them within the town hearken to the conditions proponed; and
so much the rather, that the Noblemen did promise, if the Queen did either
refuse to accept reasonable conditions, or the same being accepted did violate
the least jot thereof, The conditions of the accord.
they should in that case join themselves openly with the Congregation, and
undergo the like hazard that they did. Thus at their persuasion the Articles
following were drawn up and agreed unto by both parties.

1. That both the Armies dissolving, the Town should be left patent to the
Queen.

2. That none of the Inhabitants should be molested or called in question for
the alteration they had made in Religion.

3. That no French men should enter into the Town, nor approach to it by the
space of three miles, and that when the Queen retired, there should no French
garrison be left in the Town.

4. That all other controversies should be delayed unto the next Parliament, or
meeting of the Estates.

This appointment was made the 29 of May, anno 1559. after which public thanks
being given by John Knox for the good issue of the present trouble, the
Congregation departed forth of the town, having first obliged themselves one
to another, that they should all concur in maintaining the true Religion, and
be ready at all occasions to defend the Professors thereof; for still they
feared that promises should not be kept with them: And that the Queen would
find occasions to violate the Articles, whenever she pleased, as the
success also declared.

For immediately upon their departing, she entered into the town with some
French soldiers in her company, contrary to the Articles; Queen Regent enters
into Perth.
one of whom marching by the house of Patrick Murray a Citizen, who was known
to be most forward in the cause of Religion, whether casually or of purpose, it
is uncertain, killed with a shot his son, a boy of 13. years old, that was
beholding the Queens entry. The child being brought and laid before the
Queens lodging, she asked whose son he was; answer made that he was the son of
one Patrick Murray, she said that the case was to be pitied; and the more, that
it had fallen on the son, and not on the father; but she could not help
misfortune. The Articles of peace violated.
Before three days passed, all the heads of the Capitulation were broken, some
of the Citizens exiled, others fined in great sums, the present Magistrates
thrust out of Office, new Rulers intruded, and four Companies of soldiers
left in the town for a Garrison, who were charged to permit no other Service
but that of the Roman Church, which against promise she had of new
established. Some that desired matters should be more peaceably carried, told
her that the placing of a Garrison would be interpreted a breach of the
Articles; she answered, that the promise was to leave no French soldiers in
the town, which she had done, for they were all Scottish men that were there:
and it being replied, that all who took wages of the French King, would be
counted French soldiers: she said, that promise was not to be kept to
Heretics, and if she could make as honest an excuse after the fact committed,
she would take upon her conscience to kill and undo all that Sect. But Princes,
says she, ought not to have their promises so strictly urged.

These speeches being divulged did procure to her much ill will. Some reason
indeed she had to assure the town, it being the town of all the Kingdom most
commodious for the assembling of forces out of all quarters, and the people by
nature bellicose, and at that time greatly inclined to those of the
Congregation: but the advantage she made of this was little or nothing to the
malice she incurred by the breach of promises. Neither did ^he after this time
ever see a good day, but was of all sorts of people despised and misregarded.

The Earl of Argile and Lord James thinking their honors touched by the
breach of the peace, The Earl of Argile, and Lord James forsake the Regent.
which they had mediated, did forsake her and went to the Congregation:
whereupon they were charged to appear before the Council; but they answered,
That seeing the Queen had broken Conditions, which by warrant from her self
they had made with the Lords of the Congregation, they would have no more
meddling in such dishonest courses, and do the best to repair things.

The Noble men remained at that time in Saint Andrews; and because they
foresaw this their answer would not be well accepted, and feared some sudden
attempt, (for the Queen with her French men lay then at Falkland) they sent to
the Lords of Dun and Pittarrow, and others that favored Religion in the
Countries of Angus and Mernis, and requested them to meet at Saint Andrews the
4. day of June. Mean while they themselves went to the town of Craile, whither
all that had warning came, John Knox in a sermon preached at Craill persuades
the expulsion of the French.
showing great forwardness and resolutions; and were not a little encouraged by
John Knox, who in a Sermon made unto them at the same time put them in mind of
that he foretold at Perth, how there was no sincerity in Queen Regents dealing,
and that conditions would not be kept, as they had found. Therefore did he
exhort them not to be any longer deluded with fair promises, seeing there was
no peace to be hoped for at their hands, who took no regard of Contracts and
Covenants solemnly sworn. And because there would be no quietness till one of
the parties were masters and strangers expulsed out of the Kingdom, he wished
them to prepare themselves, either to die as men, or to live victorious.

By this exhortation the hearers were so moved, Images pulled down at Crail and
Austruther.
as they fell immediately to the pulling down of Altars and Images, and
destroyed all the Monuments which were abused to idolatry in the town. The like
they did the next day in Austruther, and from thence came directly to Saint
Andrews. The Bishop hearing what they had done in the Coast-towns, and
suspecting they would attempt the same reformation in the City, came to it well
accompanied, of purpose to withstand them: but after he had tried the
affections of the townsmen, and found them all inclining to the Congregation,
he went away early the next morning toward Falkland to the Queen.

That day being Sunday, The Monasteries of S. Andrews demolished.
John Knox preached in the Parish Church, taking for his theme the History of
the Gospel touching our Saviors purging of the Temple: and applying the
corruption which was at that time in Jerusalem to the present estate in the
Church, and declaring what was the duty of those to whom God had given
authority and power; he did so incite the Auditors, as the Sermon being ended,
they went all and made spoil of the Churches, rasing the Monasteries of the
Black and Gray Friars to the ground. Proclamation to meet the Queen at Couper.
The report of this carried to Queen Regent, she was sore incensed, and
presently gave order for the marching of the French companies toward Saint
Andrews, directing Proclamations to all the parts about for meeting her in
arms the next morning at Couper.

The Lords taking purpose to prevent her coming, The Lords of the Congregation
prevent her.
went the same night thither accompanied with 100. horse only, and as many
foot; but such was the readiness of men in that quarrel, as before 10. of the
clock on the next day their number grew to 3000. The Earl of Rothes and Lord
Ruthven brought with them many Gentlemen from Lothian; the Lairds of Calder,
Ormston, Halton, Restarig and Coalston brought only a few; for the warning they
got was late, yet their presence did greatly encourage the rest. The towns of
Dundy, Saint Andrews and Couper showed great resolution and courage.

In the morning early the Noble men had drawn forth their Companies to the
Moore on the West side of the town, The meeting at Couper moore.
and committed the direction of all things to Mr. James Halleburton, Provost of
Dundy, a man of good experience, and much esteemed both for valor and
counsel, who made choice of a plot of ground most convenient for defense; for
it lay so, as the Munition might play on all sides upon the enemy without
receiving any annoyance from them, till it should come to handy blows. A little
river ran also between the Armies, which the enemies behoved pass before they
gave the onset. The Lord Ruthven with the horsemen was placed in the vantguard,
the other Lords with the Gentlemen of Angus, Mernis, Fise and Lothian, made the
battle. The townsmen of Dundy, Saint Andrews and Couper were set in the
rear, and a certain space from them were the serving men and followers of the
Camp appointed to stand, which made show of an auxiliary force provided against
all accidents.

In Queen Regents Army the French were commanded by Monsieur de Offell, The
estate of the Queens Army.
and the Scots by the Duke of Chatterault: the morning was dark, and the fields
covered with a foggy mist, which hindered the Armies that they could not see
one another. About noontide when the air began to clear, the French sent some
of their company to view the numbers and order kept by the Congregation: who
beholding them from a far, as they stood ranged in three battles, and
perceiving behind them the multitude of serving people, which they took to be a
supply of French men, affirmed at their return the numbers to be greater then
in truth they were. Upon this a Post was directed to the Queen (who was not as
yet come from Falkland) to enform her how matters went, and to show that the
Lords were much stronger then was supposed, and very forward to fight; as
likewise that they perceived a secret muting in their own Army, some openly
professing, that they would not fight against their friends and Countrymen for
the pleasure of strangers. A treaty for peace.
She hearing this was content they should treat for peace; so the Lord Lindsey
and Wa^ghton were employed by the Duke to confer with the Lords, who at first
were not suffered to approach nigh to the Army, and had answer that they knew
the Queen had sent those forces to pursue them, and if they would invade they
should find them prepared to defend. But they professing all their desires to
be for peace, and that they were sent to that effect, were afterward permitted
to go to the Lords: who told them, that they had been so often abused with the
Queen Regents promises, as they could not trust her words any more; but if she
would send back the French men that troubled the Country and give surely that
no violence should be used to those that profess the true Religion, The French
required to be ^mitted.
they should not be found unreasonable. It was ansvvered, that for dimitting
the French men, she could say nothing till the French King was advertised; and
for the security craved, she could give no other but her own word, nor stood it
with her honor to do otherwise. Thus because a present peace could not be
concluded, a truce for eight days was made, upon condition that the French
soldiers should be transported unto Lothian, and promise given, that before
the expiring of that time some indifferent men should be sent to Saint
Andrews, authorized with sufficient power for making a firm and solid peace.
The truce accorded.
This truce made at Garlibank the 13. of June, 1559. was signed by the Duke and
Monsieur de O^sell in name of the Queen.

This done the Lords of the Congregation departed leaving the fields first at
the Dukes request, The town of Perth complains of their oppressions.
and returning to Corvper gave public thanks for that the enemies had failed
of their purpose. The next day dismissing the multitude, they went to Saint
Andrews, where attending some days, (but in vain) the coming of these
indifferent persons who were promised to be sent thither, for concluding a
final peace, complaints were daily brought unto them of the oppressions used
by the Lord of Kinfawns, whom Queen Regent had placed Provost in the town of
Perth. The Earl of Argile and Lord James did hereupon write to the Queen,
showing how at her special desire they had traveled with the Congregation
then being at Perth, and brought them to accept of the conditions propounded by
her self: the breach whereof chiefly in one point, that is, the placing of a
Garrison of soldiers in the town of Perth, was no less dishonorable to them
who had given their promises to the contrary, then it was grievous to the
people: Therefore they desired the Garrison might be removed, and the town
restored to the former liberty.

No answer returning, The Lords be siege Perth.
the Lords resolved to expulse the Garrison by force, and coming to Perth the
24. of June, they summoned the Provost, Captains and Soldiers to render,
assuring them, if they held out, and that it happened any one to be killed in
the assault, all their lives should pay for it. The Provost and Captains
answered, That they had promised to keep the town for Queen Regent, and would
to the last drop of their blood defend the same. As these things were in doing,
the Earl of Huntley, the Lord Areskin, and Mr. James Bormatyne, Justice Clerk,
came by direction of the Queen to persuade the Lords to delay the siege, at
least for some days: but they refused to defer it the space of one hour,
praying them, if they loved the safety of the besieged, to advise them to
render; for if any harm should be done in the assault, their lives should
answer it. (...) offending that his intercession availed not, left them without
a farewell.

Then were the Provost and Captains again summoned, but they exspecting no
sudden assault, and being confident that the Queen would send relief, answered
as before; whereupon the Lord Ruthven that lay on the West quarter began to
batter the walls with his munition. The men of Dundy who lay upon the East
side, played upon the town in like manner with their pieces, which put the
besieged in fear; so as considering their own weakness, and doubting the
succourse should come too late, they demanded a Parlee, Perth yielded upon
Composition.
wherein it was agreed, that if the Queen did not send relief within the space
of 12. hours, they should depart and go forth of the town with their weapons
and ensigns displayed. Thus was the town yielded, Kinfawns expulsed, and the
Lord Ruthven repossessed in his charge, and the inhabitants restored to their
Liberties.

The next day the Abbey of Scone, The Abbey of Scone demolished.
situate a mile above Perth, was burnt to ashes by the townsmen of Dundy: The
Noble men were earnest to have the Church and house saved from fire, but the
people were in such fury because one of their company was killed by a shot from
the house, as by no means could they be pacified.

Intelligence in the mean time coming to the Lords, that the Queen was of mind
to place a Garrison of French soldiers in Striveling to stop that passage and
seclude the Professors beyond the river of Forth from those of the South, they
made haste to prevent her, and rising at midnight came early in the morning to
the town, and immediately after their coming pulled all the Monasteries to the
ground. The Altars and Images in all the Churches within and about the town
were broken and defaced, The Abbey of Cambuskehneth ruined.
and the Abbey of Cambuskenneth ruined and cast down. Three days they abode at
Striveling, and on the fourth marched toward Edinburgh, doing the like at
Linlithgow, which is in the way. The rumor of their approach, though they were
but few in number (for they passed not three hundred men in ally did so
terrify the Queen and the companies that were with her, as with all the haste
they could make, they fled to Dumbar. The Lord Seaton, who for the time was
Provost of Edinburgh, Images and Altars pulled down at Linlithgow and Edinburgh.
and took upon him the protection of the Black and Gray Friars, abandoned the
charge, and left all to the spoil of the multitude, who before the arriving of
the Lords had demolished all the monasteries within the Town, and carried away
whatsoever they found in the same. It is strange to think how by so weak means
in such a disorderly way those things should have been wrought, seeing upon the
least show of resistance the enterprisers would in all probability have lest
their attempt. But God put such a fear in the adversaries hearts, as they did
flee, none pursuing.

Queen Regent not knowing how to redress these things, A Proclamation by Queen
Regent.
gave forth a Proclamation, wherein she declared, That having perceived a
seditious tumult to be raised by a part of the Lieges, who named themselves the
Congregation, and under pretense of Religion had taken Arms, she by the advice
of the Lords of the Privy Council, for satisfying every man's conscience, and
pacifying the present troubles, had made offer to call a Parliament in January
next, or sooner if they were pleased, for establishing an universal order in
matters of Religion by the advice of the Estates, and in the mean time to
suffer every man live at Liberty, serving their conscience without any trouble,
until further order were taken. And because much appeared to consist upon the
state of the Town of Edinburgh, she in like manner had offered to permit the
inhabitants to use what manner of Religion they would during that time, to the
end none might have just cause to say, that they were forced to any thing
against their minds. But that they of the congregation rejecting all
reasonable offers, had by their actions clearly showed, that it is not
Religion, nor any thing pertaining thereto that they seek but only the
subversion of authority, and the usurpation of the Crown. In testimony whereof
they daily brought English men into their houses that come with messages unto
them, and returned answers back to England, and of late had violently possessed
the Palace of Halirudhouse, and intromitted with the Irons of the Minthouse,
one of the chief things that concerned the Crown. Wherefore she commanded all
persons belonging to the said congregation, (the inhabitants of the Burgh
excepted) to depart forth of the town of Edinburgh within six hours after the
charge, as likewise all that were of their society to forsake them, and live
obedient to the authority, except they would be reputed and holden traitors to
the Crown, etc.

Together with this Proclamation rumors were dispersed, Rumors dispersed to
the prejudice of the Congregation.
that the Lords of the Congregation had conspired to deprive the Queen Regent
of her authority, and to disinherit the Duke of Chattelerault, and his heirs of
their succession and title to the Crown. These rumors were believed of diverse,
and prevailed so far, as many that assisted the Congregation began to shrink
and fall away: in regard whereof it was thought needful they should clear
themselves. both by their letters to the Queen, and open Proclamation to the
people; which they did in manner following.

First in the letters directed to the Queen they said, The Lords purge
themselve to the Queen.
That they had notice given them of a Proclamation lately made, wherein they
were traduced as usurpers of their Sovereigns authority and invaders of her
person, who in absence of their Sovereigns governed the Realm, which they
esteemed to proceed of a sinistrous information made by their enemies, and was
an imputation most false and odious; their intentions being no other, but to
abolish idolatry and superstitious abuses, that did not agree with the word of
God, and maintain the true Preachers thereof from the violence of wicked men.
They did therefore beseech her, to use her authority to that effect, and for
other matters she should find them as obedient as any subjects within the
Realm, whereof they promised to give testimony and assurance, so as they might
have safe access to her Highness. This was the substance of the letter which
was sent by the Lords Ruthven and Ochil^rie unto her.

In the Proclamation they did call God to witness, The Proclamation of the
Lords.
That such crimes as they were charged with, never entered into their hearts,
and that their only intention was to banish idolatry, and advance true
Religion, and defend the Pre achers thereof, promising to continue in all duty
toward their Sovereign and her mother their Regent, provided they might enjoy
the liberty of their consciences. As to the intromission with the Irons of the
Minthouse, they said, That they being born Counselors of the Realm, and sworn
to procure the prosit thereof; when they understood the subjects to be greatly
hurt by the baseness of the money which increased the dearth of all necessary
wares, they could do no less of their duties, then stay the coining of more
lay money, until the Nobility and Council had taken surther deliberation
therein; And where it was given out, that they had spoiled the Minthouse of
great sums, in that point they did remit themselves to the Declaration of Mr.
Robert Richardson Master of the Mint, in whose hands they delivered all the
gold and silver both coined and uncoined, which there was found, etc. For the
Intelligence with England nothing was replied: whereby it seemed there was some
dealing that way for expelling the French men, which they did not deny, and
thought not convenient as then openly to profess.

The Queen taking hold of the last words of the letter sent unto her self, The
Lairds of Pittarrow and Cunninghamhead, sent to the Queen.
and desiring to know what they would say, as likewise trusting to gain
somewhat by conference with them, did offer a safe conduct to any they pleased:
whereupon the Lairds of Pittarrow and Cunningham-head were sent in name of the
Congregation, to declare that their intent and purpose was no other, but that
they might enjoy the liberty of their consciences; and unable Ministers by
removed from all Ecclesiastical administration; Christ Jesus might be truly
preached, and his holy Sacraments rightly administered; and that their Preachers
might be licenced to do their offices without molestation, until such time as
by a general Council lawfully convened, or by a Parliament within the Realm,
the controversies of Religion should be decided. which things being granted,
they did faithfully promise in all other things dutiful obedience. Only to be
assured of sincere dealing, they desired that the French companies which were
to the country a burden, and fearful to them, might be sent home to their
native country.

These Propositions were not pleasing, The Queens desire to speak with the Earl
of Argyle, and the Lord James.
yet made she no show of any dislike, but using gracious words, said, That if
she could be assured of their honest and dutiful meaning to her daughter, and
her self, their demands seemed not unreasonable. But she longed to speak with
some of their number who were of greater authority, meaning as afterward she
uttered that her desire was, the Earl of Argyle and Lord James should come unto
her; for when she saw the Lord Ruthven and Ochil^rie returned not unto her,
with the Lord of Pittarrow; she fell a complaining, that she was not sought in
a courteous manner, and that they in whom she put her most confidence, had left
her in her greatest need. In end she said, That she could not be satisfied till
she spoke with the Earl of Argyle, and Lord James, for still she suspected
there was some higher purpose amongst them then religion.

This reported to the Lords, The Lords suspecting some practice, refuse to send
the Noblemen.
they would not by any means condescend that these Noblemen should go unto her,
doubting some practice against them; for she was heard say, That if the means
could be found out to divide these two from the rest, she was sure to prevail:
one likewise of her chief attendants was said to have bragged, that before
Michaelmas next both these Noblemen should lose their heads. This not
succeeding, it was agreed that the Duke, the Earl of Huntly, the Lords Erskin
and Summervaile, with the Abbot of Kilwining, and Justice Clerk should meet for
the Queen, with such as the Congregation did appoint, for treating of the best
means to settle a constant and solid peace, and for the part of the
Congregation were named the Earls of Argyle and Glencarne, the Lord Ruthven,
Boyd, and Ochiltrie, the Lord James, the Lairds of Dun and Pittarrow.

These meeting at Preston, A meeting at Preston.
to the number of an hundred on each side, (as was appointed) conferred
together a whole day, but without any conclusion; for the Queen seeming to
yield unto the free exercise of Religion would have it provided, that in what
place she happened to come, the Ministers should cease from preaching, and the
Mass only be used. The Lords answered, That this were to leave them no Church,
for when the Queen pleased, she might change the place of her residence, and so
there could not be any certain exercise of Religion, which were all alike, as
to overthrow it: In these terms they parted that night, yet the Lords named
for the Congregation unwilling to break off the conference, said, they would
think more of the business, and advertise what would be yielded unto.

After some deliberation, The answer of the Lords to the condition proponed.
the Lord Ruthven and Pittarrow were remitted with this answer, That as they
could not impede her to use what exercise of Religion she pleased, so could
they not agree that the Ministers of Christ should be silenced upon any
occasion, much less that the true service of God should give place to
superstition and idolatry. Wherefore they humbly requested (as often they had
done) liberty to serve God according to their consciences, and did beseech her
to remove the French soulders, otherwise there could be no firm and solid
peace. The Queen hearing all, replied only that she wished there might be
peace; but to none of the points proponed made she any direct answer. Whereupon
the Noblemen resolved to bide together at Edinburgh, and not depart till
matters were fully composed.

News in this time were brought of the French King Henry the second his death,
News of the French Kings death.
which put the Lords in some better hopes, but withal made them more
careless; for diverse, as though nothing was now to be feared, did slide away
to attend their private affairs, and they who remained expecting no invasion,
lived secure, keeping neither watch nor ward, as if there had been no enemy to
fear. The Queen on the other side became more watchful, observing all occasions
whereby she might weaken the faction, and assure her self: So getting notice of
the solitude which was at Edinburgh, she hasted thither with the companies she
had. The Lords advertised of her coming, grew doubtful what to do, for
howsoever they might save themselves by flight, they saw the town by their
retiring should be lost, and the Church, which in some good fashion was then
established, be utterly cast down; therefore with the small number they had,
they issued forth of the town; and putting themselves in order, stood on the
East side of Craigingate, to impede the approach of the French. The Duke and
Earl of Morton, who were gone that morning to meet the Queen, and give her the
convoy, labored to compose things, but prevailed not; only that day they kept
the parties from falling into an open conflict. The Queen prepares to enter
into Edinburgh.
The next day when the Queen, which lay all that night at Leith, prepared to
enter into the town by the West port, and that the Lords were advancing to stop
her in the way; the Lord Areskin, who until that time had carried himself a
neuter, threatened to play upon them with the Canon, unless they suffered the
Queen to enter peaceably, and without trouble. This it was supposed he did, to
make them accept the conditions of truce offered the day before, which they
seeing no better way, were content to yield unto The Articles were as follows.

1. The Articles of the Truce.
That the Congregation, and their adherents, (the inhabitants of Edinburgh only
excepted) should depart forth of the town, within the space of twenty four
hours, to the end the Queen Regent and her companies may enter peaceably in
the same.

2. That the Congregation should render the Palace of Halirudhouse, with all
the furnishing they found therein, redeliver the Minthouse and Printing Irons
the next morning before ten of the clock: and for observing this and the former
Article, the Lord Ruthven, and Lord of Pittarrow should enter as pledges to
the Queen.

3. That the Lords of the Congregation, and all the members thereof should
remain obedient subjects to the King and Queens authority, and to the Queen
Regent, as governing in their place, observing the laws and customs of the
Realm, as they were used before the raising of this tumult in all things, (the
cause of Religion excepted) wherein the order after specified, should be
followed.

4. That the Congregation should not trouble nor molest any Churchman by way of
deed, nor make them any impediment in the peaceable enjoying and uplifting
their rents, and that it should be lawful for them to dispone, and use their
benefices and rents, according to the laws and customs of the Realm, until
the tenth of January next.

5. That the Congregation should use no force nor violence in casting down of
Churches, religious places, or defacing the ornaments thereof, but the same
should be harmless at their hands, until the tenth of January next.

6. That the town of Edinburgh should use what Religion they pleased, until
the said day, and none of the Subjects in other parts of the country be
constrained against their minds in matters of that kind.

7. That the Queen should not interpone her authority, to molest the Preachers
of the Congregation, nor any other their members in their bodies, lands;
possessions, pensions, or whatsoever other kind of goods they enjoyed; nor yet
should any spiritual or temporal Judges trouble them for the cause of religion,
or other action depending thereupon, until the said tenth of January, but that
every man should live in the mean time according to conscience.

8. That no man of War, French or Scottish, should be put in Garrison within
the town of Edinburgh, only it should be lawful to the soldiers to repair
thither for doing their lawful affairs; which done, they should retire
themselves to their proper Garrisons.

This truce, and the heads thereof published, The Lords depart to Striveling.
the Lords departed toward Striveling. leaving John Willock Minister to serve
in the Church of Edinburgh, As they departed, the Duke and Earl of Huntley met
with them at the Quarry holes, promising if any part of the appointment should
be violated, to join all their forces for expulsing the French out of the
Realm: and indeed the Queen was then more careful nor in former times she had
been, to see that no breach should be made; howbeit many ways she went about
to reestablish the Mass, and bring the favorers of Religion in contempt. The
Queen desires the Church of S. Giles for the exercise of Mass.
In Edinburgh she employed the Duke, the Earl of Huntley, and Lord Seaton, to
deal with the Magistrates and Council of the Town, that they would appoint some
other Church then S. Giles where their Minister might preach, reserving that
Church to her use, and for the exercise of the Mass. The Magistrates answered,
That S. Giles Church had been the ordinary place of their meeting to Sermon and
other Religious Exercises, and could not be taken from them without a manifest
breach of the truce; seeing by one of the Articles it was provided, that the
Preachers of the Congregation should not be molested in any thing they
possessed at the making of the appointment. Huntley replying, That the Queen
meant to keep all conditions, and desired this only of their favor; or if
they would not change the place of their preaching, The Magistrates answer.
that at least they would permit Mass to be said either before or after Sermon
in the Church of S. Giles: They answered, That they were in possession of that
Church, and would never consent that Idolatry should be there again erected; or
if men would do it violently, they behoved to suffer, and would use the next
remedy.

This being refused another device was invented, The French Captains and
soldiers trouble the people in hearing the Sermon.
that the French Captains, with their soldiers, should in time of Sermon and
prayers keep their walks in the Church, and trouble the exercise so much as
they could. This they thought would enforce them to make choice of a more
retired place for their Sermons, or then irritate the people, and breed an
occasion of some disorder, so as the breach of the peace should proceed from
them. The insolence was great they committed in this kind, for they did laugh
and talk so loud all the time, as the Preacher could not be heard, yet was it
patiently digested, knowing that an occasion of trouble was only sought. In
other places their behavior was no better, for at Leth they did cut in pieces
the Pulpit erected for the Preachers, and set up the Mass, which had been
suppressed before in that town. The like did they in the Abbey Church, forcibly
abolishing the service of Common Prayers, which there was ordinarily used. And
in what place soever they came, some one disturbance or other they wrought to
the professors of the turth. Herewith a rumor was dispersed amongst the
vulgar, That it was not Religion as the Congregation pretended, but an open
rebellion they went about; and that their purpose was to disinherit their
lawful Queen, and set up Lord James her base brother in her place: which by
diverse was apprehended as truth, and wrought a great alienation of minds from
the cause.

About the same time came Monsieur Crook a French Gentleman with letters from
the Queen and King Francis her husband to Lord James, full of exprobrations and
menacings, as appears by the Copies here insert.

Francis King of France to James Prior of S. Andrews.
COusin, A letter to Lord James from King Francis.
when I understood as well by letters as common report the tumults raised at
this time in Scotland, I was much commoved, especially when it was said that
you, to whom my dear wife, my father deceased, and my self have given so many
benefices, should be the head and principal fosterer of the same. That you
should be so forgetful of our love, and of the duty you have at all times
professed unto the Queen, I would not believe; or if it was so as the same
commonly reports, I did think that you were induced by the promises and
flattering persuasions of others to take the fault upon you whereof they were
the cause, supposing the offense would be esteemed either none, or very small
in your person. This my conceit of you, if it be true, shall be as joyful to
me as that which should be most joyful, for I should with by this mean some
part of my displeasure mitigated into which you are worthily fallen, having
deceived the hope which I had of your piety toward God, and your faithful
service toward my self. Therefore since nothing can be more acceptable to me,
then to hear that controversies are composed, and all things compacted without
tumult, according to law and good order; and since I am persuaded this may be
easily done by your credit, I thought meet to advertise you by these letters,
and for the good will I bear you, I do earnestly request that you will return
to the obedience from which you have foully fallen, that so I may see you carry
another mind, then that which your foolish actions have manifested. This will
appear to be so, if that you apply your diligence to bring those things which
now are out of order in those parts, back again to the ancient and sound form
of obedience, which you know is due to God and me. Otherwise I would have you,
and all those that adhere unto you, persuaded that ere it be long I shall take
such punishment of you and them, as your wickedness deserves, which I have
given the bearer charge to make known unto you at more length, whom I will you
to credit as my self, praying God, my Cousin, to have you in his protection.

Paris the 17. day of July 1559.
The Letter sent by the Queen, was of the tenor following;
MARY, Queen of Scotland and France,
to James Prior of the Monastery of S. Andrews.
I Cannot my Cousin wonder enough, how you that are nighest us in blood,
Another letter from the Queen of Scots to Lord James.
and greatly benefitted by our liberality, as your self knows, should be so
presumptuous and wickedly disposed, as by one and the same fact to violate the
Majesty of God, and the authority belonging to me, and my husband; for to me it
is a wonder that you, who being with me did complain of the Duke of
Chattellerault, and diverse others for dismissing my authority, should now be
the leader of a faction in matters of greatest weight, wherein not onley the
honor of God is touched, but my authority all utterly taken away: which I
would have more easily believed of any other of my subjects then of you, for I
had a special hope of your sidelity, and am not a little grieved that you
should have deceived me; Though yet I can scarce be persuaded, that you are
gone so far from truth and reason, as to be carried away with such blind
errors which I wish were not, as any in the world else, beseeching God to
illuminate you with his light, that returning into the right way you may show
your self (by doing things contrary to that you have already performed) a good
man, and obedient to our laws; whereof by these letters I thought good to
admonish you, and withal earnestly to entreat you to amend your by gone
faults, with better deeds in time coming; that the anger which I and my husband
have conceived against you, may by that means be mitigated. Otherwise I would
have you understand, that we will take such punishment of you, that you shall
ever remember us, which shall be to me a most grievous thing. God I beseech to
keep you from all danger.

Paris the 24. of July. 1559.
Lord James having perused the Letters, and conferred a space with the
Gentleman, who was commanded to say unto him, The answer given by Lord James.
That the King would rather spend the Crown of France, then not be revenged of
the seditious tumults raised in Scotland, made answer in writing as follows.
That he was no way conscious to himself of any und^tisulness either in word or
deed a against his Sovereigns laws. That it was true he had joined himself
with these of the Nobility who went about the reforming of Religion, and would
not deny it, but this he did not esteem a fault against the King or Queen. For
thereby nothing is sought, but the advancement of Gods honor and the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, from which if he should desist it were in effect to renounce his
Lord and Savior. Then this cause only excepted, he and the rest who were
charged with the crime of Rebellion, should in all other things be most
obsequent. This writing he delivered to Monsieur Crook, who gave it Queen
Regent, she opening the same and reading it, said, that such a proud and
rebellious answer was never given to a King and Queen.

Some few days after this, A French Captain called Octavian, arriveth with a
regiment of soldiers.
arrived a French Captain called Octavian with a Regiment of soldiers, who
brought with him great sums of money, and other necessary provisions for
war: But the Queen did incontinent send him back to entreat the French King
for other four companies to make up the number of twenty Ensigns with an
hundred horsemen, and four ships well appointed to keep the Haven of Leth:
trusting therewith, as she said, The Queen makes to fortify Leth.
and with the assistance she promised her self in the Country, to daunt all
the rebels and bring them to obedience. Mean while, she began to fortify the
town of Leth, as being a Port fit to receive fresh supplies, and a place that
might serve the French companies for a refuge, if they should happen to be
redacted to any necessity.

The Lords of the Congregation kept at that time a Convention in Striveling,
The Earl of Arrane joins with the Lords at Striveling.
and thither came the Earl of Arrane (the Duke his eldest son) having left
France upon this occasion. Being one day in conference with the Duke of Guise
(who then ruled all things in the French Court) and falling in speech of those
that professed the reformed Religion, he did utter his mind too freely in
their favors: which was so ill taken, as it was resolved to call him in
question. Of this, and other speeches that had escaped the Cardinal of
Lorraine in the Court of Parliament, he was advertised, and thereupon retired
quickly from Court, and went to Geneva; there he became acquainted with Mr.
Randolph an English man (who was afterward employed in many honorable
Legations to Scotland) and came with him into England, where he was much graced
by Queen Elizabeth, and by her persuasions induced to promise, that at his
return he should join himself with those that sought to expel the French forth
of Scotland, and move his father so far as in him lay, to take part in that
cause. Both which he truly performed; for immediately upon his return he came
to the Noblemen at Sriveling and made offer of his assistance in the common
quarrel both of Religion and the liberty of the Country. Then going to visit
his Father at Hamilton he won him to their side, and reconciling some old
grudges betwixt his father and certain Noblemen, brought them all to meet
together at Hamilton, and to write a common Letter to Queen Regent, A letter
directed to the Queen from the Lords.
which was to this effect: That it was to them a marvel, ho she not provoked
by any injury, could go so soon from the late appointment, as to expulse the
ancient inhabitants of the town of Leth, place therein a Colonie of strangers,
as minding to keep the Country under a Tyrannical subjection; This they said
was against her promise, against the public weal, and against the laws and
liberties of the Kingdom; wherefore they entreated her to desist from that
course, and not to drive them into a necessity of seeking the concurrence of
the Subjects for resisting the mischief intended against the whole. This letter
dated at Hamilton the 29. of September, was subserived by the Duke of
Chattellerault, the Earls of Arrane, Argile, Glencarn, and Mentieth; the Lords
Ruthven, Boyd, and Ochiltrie, and diverse other Barons and Gentlemen.

They wrote also to the Lord Ereskin keeper of the Castles of Edinburgh and
Striveling; Desiring him as a Nobleman and a Member with them of the same
Commonwealth to look circumspectly to his own person, A letter sent by them to
the Lord Ereskin.
and to the strengths committed to his trust, and not to suffer himself to be
abused with the promises and policies which they knew would be used. Hereof
they did think it needful, as they said, to give him warning, not that they
stood in doubt of his sidelity, but that they esteemed it their duty to
advertise him of the common danger, and to assure him, if by violence any
should go about to bereave him of those sorts, their assistance should not be
lacking.

Queen Regent not liking to make an answer to the Lords in writing, Sr. Robert
Carnagie and Mr. David Borthuick directed to the Duke.
sent Sir Robert Carnagie, and Mr. David Borthuick with a letter of credit to
the Duke. That which they had in credit to say was, that she wondered much at
his joining with the Lords, or that he should have permitted the Earl of
Arrane his son take that course; and to advise him to come and stay with her at
Court; or if they could not obtain that point, that they should dissuade him
from taking part with them. The Duke asking what the Queen meant to do
concerning the fortification at Leth and dispatch of the French men; they said,
If all things were put in the Queen will, she would be gracious enough.
Whereunto he replayed, That both he and the rest of the Lords would most
willingly serve her, so as she would be ruled by the counsel of natural
Scottish men; but so long as she kept about her strangers, who were a trouble
and great to the Country, he believed no wise man would give either him, or
them advise to put themselves in her hands.

This answer reported to the Queen, A Proclamation given forth by the Queen.
because she perceived the arriving of the French soldiers to be generally ill
taken, she gave forth a Proclamation; Wherein complaining of the calumnies
dispersed against her by wicked people, especially that she had broken the
appointment made with the Congregation at Leth, (which she said was only to
entertain division in the Realm) by receiving of French forces which they
aggredged so far against all reason, it not being an Article of the
appointment; that albeit for every Frenchman that was in Scotland, there were a
hundredth at her command, there should not a jot that was promised be broken,
nor the least alteration be made in any thing, if the Congregation did in like
manner faithfully keep their part. Therefore willed all good subjects not to
give ear to such informations, nor suffer themselves to be led thereby from
their due obedience, assuring them that they should ever find with her truth
in promise, and a motherly love toward all loyal subjects.

Besides the Proclamation, The Queen seeks to disunite the Lords
she employed in the Country some whom she especially trusted, to inform the
Subjects of her good meaning; the principalls were, Mr. James Balfoure
Official of Lothian, Mr. Thomas and Mr. William Scots sons to the Lord of
Balwery, Sir Robert Carnagy and some others. Neither did she omit to deal with
the specials of the Congregation, sending Sir John Bannatyne Justice Clerk to
the Lord Ruthven, The persuasions used.
with many liberal promises, if he would leave the faction, and Mr. John
Spence of Condy to Lord James with a letter bearing this effect; That having
understood the cause of his departing from her, to be the love he bare to
Religion: Albeit she did mislike the same, yet knowing his mind, and the
minds of other Noble men to be so far bent that way, as there was no
possiblity to reclaim them, she had now resolved to tolerate their profession,
and at their own sights, to grant such liberty as might stand with the common
policy of the Realm and their Sovereigns honor. As for the men of War, and
fortification at Leth so much complained of, she said, that some had given her
to understand, that it was not the advancement of Religion which was sought,
but that the same was made a pretext to overthrow the authority of his sister,
(whereof she believed he would never be participant) and this was the true
cause of inbringing the said forces, whereas if suspicions and jealousy could
be removed, she would be well pleased to dimit them; for it grieved her much to
see the troubles that were in the Country, neither desired she any thing more,
then a perfect peace and reconciliation, wherein she requested his assistance,
praying him to keep faith and kindness to his sister (who trusted more in him
then in any man living) and to show her what he desired for his own particular,
and she would faithfully the same should be performed to his contenment.

By such policies as these she labored to disunite the Lords; Lord James his
Answer.
but the love of the cause, and their own safeties, which they apprehended to
consist in their fastness and fidelity to others, kept them together. The many
breaches they had also found, begat in them such a distrust, as nothing, though
never so truly meant, could be believed; his answer therefore was, That in the
matter proponed to him he could say nothing by himself, for they had all taken
oath to have no private dealing with her, or to make any several address for
themselves, which for his own part he would keep unviolate, and how soon the
Noblemen were convened, he would show what was written unto him, and leave
nothing undone, that served to establish peace in the Realm; provided the glory
of God was not interessed: neither doubted he if she were found as tractable as
by her letter she professed, but she would obtain of the rest that which might
in reason content her. Further he said, that he had communicated to her servant
some things that misliked him in her proceedings with a true heart, which he
wished of God she, and all men knew.

When as Queen Regent perceived these means could not divide them, A
Proclamation by the Queen, declaring her purpose in the fortifying of Leth.
she gave forth a new Proclamation of this tenor. That whereas the Duke of
Chattellerault had directed his missives unto all the parts of the Realm,
informing that the French men lately arrived, were begun to plant in Leth for
the ruin of the Commonwealth, and that the fortification made there was a
purpose devised in France to bring the subjects under servitude, which he and
his partakers could not patiently endure, she esteems it needful for the
manifestation of her proceeding since the last appointment, to make the
Declaration following: First, that diverse of the Congregation, and those not of
the meanest sort, had violated the said appointment in sundry heads, yet she,
in hope that they would have returned to their duties, did connive at many
things, and took no notice of their doings, till of late (having perceived by
their frequent messages to, and from England, and by the defection of many
great personages from her obedience, that there was some other purpose in hand,
then the establishing of Religion) she was forced to have her recourse to the
law of nature, and as a bird that is pursued will provide a nest for it self,
and for her followers: for which cause she had made choice of the town of Leth,
as a place most convenient, being her daughters property, whereunto no person
could lay claim; a place fortified of old, and such as made best for her
safety. Further she said, that it was not religion that they sought, but a mere
rebellion they were entered into against their Sovereigns, as appeared by many
evidences. First, by the taking of Broughtie Castle, and expulsing the Keepers
thereof by some of the Congregation: Next, by the contempt of the offer made by
her self unto the Lord Duke, when he complained of the fortification of Leth,
that if they would cause amend the wrongs committed against the Laws of the
Realm, she would do what in reason they could require. Thirdly, by the charges
he had sent to the free Burghs to choose such Magistrates as they thought would
assist them in their purpose. And fourthly, by the witholding of provision,
against all humanity, from her and from her family. All which things to those
that had any eyes made more then manifest, that it was no other but a plain
usurpation of authority they went about; the particulars whereof she had
certainly understood, it being detected unto her, that the Earl of Arrane had
joined with the Congregation for no other end, and that the Crown was promised
by them unto him: yet she no way doubting of the subjects good affection, and
that they would when need should be, stand in defense of their Sovereigns right
against all pretenders, thought meet to give them warning of these practices,
and prohibit the Lieges to put themselves in Arms, or take part with the Duke,
and his assisters, etc. The Bishop of Amiens, and some Doctors of Sorbon active
at Leth.


Monsieur Pellence Bishop of Amiens, (he was afterward Archbishop of Sent, and
created Cardinal arrived about this time at Leth, accompanied with three
Doctors of Sorbon, Doctor Furmer, Doctor Brochet, and Doctor Ferretier.
Monsieur le Broche a French Knight, gave them the convoy with two thousand
foot. The Doctors gave out, that they were come to dispute with the Preachers
of the Congregation. The other two pretended a Legation, and sent to some of
the Nobility resident at the time in Edinburgh, to desire a hearing. It was
answered, That they came not as Ambassadors, but as enemies, to brag and
threaten them with Arms, otherwise they needed not have brought so many armed
soldiers in their company. If they meant to treat with weapons in their hands,
they would likewise fortify themselves, and make it seen that they were not
moved to any thing by compulsion, but guided by reason: nor would they have
them think they were sorude and ignorant, as to fall in reasoning with
adversaries, that might force them to conditions at their pleasure. Wherefore
if they desired peace and quietness, as was pretended, it should be fittest to
dimit these for ain soldiers, and seek to have matters composed according to
reason and Justice. This answer given, there was no more heard of the Legation,
nor of the Doctors disputes.

The Lords in the mean time published a Declaration answering the other lately
made by Queen Regent, A declaration published by the Lords.
wherein first they declared, That as they had often complained of the
inbringing of French soldiers, and the manifold oppressions done by them, so
they could not but seek redress thereof by all means, in regard the same
tended to an open conquest of the country, and the laying upon their necks an
intolerable servitude; for whereas the Queen did pretend the defection of
diverse great Personages from her obedience, and the frequent messages to, and
from England, to be the cuase of their inbringing; it is well known that before
the arrival of these strangers, there was no such defection, but all lived
peaceable and obedient, according to the appointment made by her self. And for
the Messages to England, time will make manifest that the support craved was to
no other end but to maintain Religion, and suppress idolatry; wherein they
think they have done nothing against their duties, it being lawful for them
where their own power fails, to seek help and assistance, wheresoever they
may have it. Next touching the convenience of Leth for a place of
fortification; they grant it is a port very fit to receive strangers; but had
the Queen intended no more then her own security, Dumbar, Blackness, and other
forts already built, would have better served to that use. And where she called
Leth her daughters property, they answered that it was notoure, the sums
paid to the Lord of Restalrig Superior of Leth were disbursed by the
inhabitants, and a large taxation given to her self upon promise, that their
town should be erected into a Burgh royal; in place of which, some of the
indwellers were expulsed from their own houses, others robbed of their
substance, and all that chused to remain there, kept in such fear and terror,
as in effect they esteemed nothing their own. Neither was this only done to
those that professed themselves reformed, but to all the inhabitants
indifferently; which show clearly, that the French did mind nothing less, then
to subdue the whole nation, if it lay in their power. And where it was said,
that the town of Leth was fortified of old, the same was never done without the
consent of the Nobility and Estates of the Realm, whereas the present
fortification was made expressly against their wills signifying to her in
writing. Concerning the Earl of Arrane, and their purpose to place him in
authority, they took God to record, that the same never entered into their
hearts; and that neither the said Earl, nor any pertaining unto him, did ever
move them in such a matter; which if they had done, they were not so foolish as
to promise that, which afterward they must needs have repented. Then for the
particulars adduced to qualify their intended rebellion, they answered, that
the taking of Broughty was to prevent the danger that might have ensued, if the
French should have planted tin that place as they had done at Leth, whereof the
conjectures were not obscure. As to the Dukes misregard of her offer, they did
remit the truth of that, to the report of the persons employed by her self.
Further it was said, that they had directed charges to the free Burghs to elect
Magistrates at their appetites; and truth was, that some towns asked their
advice in this business, and that the answer given them was, that if they
elected such as feared God, and loved equity, and justice, they could not err
in their choice. But that she should object this, seemed strange, seeing it was
known, that she her self did force the town of Edinburgh to take Magistrates of
her appointment, and against their own liking. Lastly, for the impeding of
necessary provisions to her and her family, they utterly denied the same; only
they had taken order to stay the furnishing of strangers (that oppressed the
country) with victuals, and did forthink the same was not sooner and more
strictly done: concluding, that seeing nature did oblige them to love their
country, and the oath they had given to be true to the Commonwealth, forced
them to hazard whatsoever God had given them in defense thereof; they being
Counselors of the Realm by birth, could not forbear to seek that by force of
Arms, which hitherto had been denied them. Therefore required all natural
Scottish men to judge between the Queen and them, and not to abstract their
just and dutiful support from their native country in so needful a time,
assuring them who did otherwise, that they should be esteemed betrayers of the
Kingdom into the hands of strangers.

This Declaration made, the Lords assembling their forces, The Lords come to
Edinburgh and write unto the Queen.
came to Edinburgh the eighteenth of October, and on the same day Queen Regent
by the counsel of the French men entered into Leth, with the Bishops of S.
Andrews, Glasgow, Dunkeld, the Lord Seaton and some others. The day following
they sent a letter to the Queen declaring, how they were convened to see a
redress made of the great disorders that were in the Realm, especially to have
the town of Leth made patent for the free traffic of the subjects, and
desiring her to command all the strangers and mercenary soldiers to depart
forth of the same, and to cause the forts to be demolished which were newly
erected; otherwise they would take it for an argument, that her meaning was to
bring the Kingdom into servitude; against which mischief they would provide by
the best means they could. The messenger who carried this letter, after he had
been detained a whole day, was dismissed without answer.

Mean while the rumor increasing of the Duke his usurpation of the authority,
The Duke purges himself and his son of any aspiring.
he thought it necessary to make a public purgation, as he did at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, by sound of Trumpet, protesting both for himself and for
his son the Earl of Arrane, that none of them did seek any pre-eminence, nor
meant to usurp the authority Royal, but that they were convened with the rest
of the Nobility to maintain the cause of Religion, and liberty of their native
country invaded by strangers; which he desired all men to believe, and not to
be carried with the false and malicious reports of enemies, devised only to
withdraw the hearts of natural Scottish men, from the succor they owed to
their oppressed country.

Two days after Robert Forman, The Herald directed to the Lords.
Lion Herald, was directed by Queen Regent to the Lords with this writing.
After commendations we received your let of the date at Edinburgh the 19. of
this instant, which to us appears rather to have come from a Prince to his
subjects, then from subjects to those that bear the authority; for answer
whereof we have sent unto you this bearer the Lion Herald King of Arms
sufficiently instructed with our mind, to whom you shall give credit. At Leth
the 21. October. 1559.

The credit, The credit given to the Herald by the Queen.
as the Herald related the same, was this; First, he showed the Queen did think
it strange, there should be any other to command within the Realm besides her
daughter and her husband: in fomer times had been given just causes of
suspicion, so now she perceived clearly by the contents of the last letters,
they did not acknowledge any authority superior to themselves in the Kingdom.
Next he was desired to ask the Duke of Chatteller ault how his doings did agree
with his words and writing, whereby he promised not only to obey the King
himself, but also to keept his son of the Earl of Arrane from meddling with
the present broils and tumults of the country. Thirdly, in answer to their
letters, he was willed to say, that it never came in her mind to overthrow the
liberty and laws of the Realm, much less to make a conquest of it; for to
whom should she seek the same, it being her daughter by right, and she already
possessed thereof? nor could they think her so unnatural, as to bereave her own
child of the Crown, and acquire it to another. As to the fortification of
Leth, and entertaining of strangers, he was bidden ask if any thing in that
kind was by her attempted before they did show themselves manifest contemners
of the Authority, by surprising Towns, and making bonds both amongst
themselves, and with the ancient enemies of the Kingdom; and to omit other
things, Could they think it lawful to them to keep an Army at Edinburgh, for
pursuing her who was their Regent, and her Council, and that it should not be
lawful to her to entertain a few companies at Leth for her own safety? Belike
they would have her to flee from place to place, as hitherto she has done,
declining their fury. In their whole letters was there a word sounding to
obedience, any overture of peace, or so much as an intimation of willingness
in them to have debates composed, and all things reduced to their former
estate? They might cover it as they pleased with the pretexts of the
Commonwealth, and their care of the good and quiet thereof, but nothing less
was meaned by them. For if they desired peace, she has often showed the way
unto it. Neither could they be ignorant, that the French soldiers would long
before that time have been recalled by the command of their King, if they
themselves had not been a let and hinderance thereto. Further he was required
to say, that if as yet they would live obedient to their Sovereigns, she for
her own part would refuse no means of concord, nor should she omit any thing
that made for the good of the Commonwealth. Neither was this her mind alone,
but the mind likewise of their Sovereigns, who had sent two chief men, one of
the Church estate, and the other an honorable Knight, to signify so much unto
them, whom they so far despised, as they would not vouchsafe them either
answer, or audience, Lastly, the said Herald, as he was enjoined, did charge
the Duke, the Noblemen and others their assisters and partakers, to depart
forth of the Town of Edinburgh, and dissolve their forces under the pain of
lose Majesty.

The Herald having in this sort delivered his credit, The Lords deliberate upon
discharging the Queen of her Regency.
the Lords convened in Council with a number of Barons and Burgesses, whom
they called to assist. In this meeting the Lord Ruthven presiding, declared how
the Queen had refused their Petitions, and that there was no expectation of the
yielding up the Town of Leth, or dimitting the French companies by a peaceable
treaty, so as now they were to think of the next course. The reverence of
authority, (which as yet was in the person of Queen Regent) deterred many at
first from uttering their minds, yet after some short silence, they began to
speak of discharging the Queen of her Regencie. The motion seemed dangerous to
some, as wanting example, at least for a long time: The like, they said, had
been sometimes done, but it was always carried under the show of authority;
they in whose hands the King was at that time, taking upon them in his name to
suspend the present Government. But that the Nobility and Estates without, and
against the Princes consent, should assume that power to themselves, was never
heard, and would be thought strange. Others held, that she being a Regent only,
might very well be prohibited to use the name of the King and Queen for
authorizing of her proceedings, especially when they were known to be hurtful
and pernicious to the whole Kingdoms. The opinion of the Preachers required.
In this variation of judgments it was thought meet to take the opinion of the
Preachers, and to that effect Mr. John Willock, and John Knox being called,
they delivered their minds one after another in this sort. Mr. John Willock
first speaking, said,

That albeit Magistracy be Gods Ordinance, Master Willock his opinion.
and that they who bear rule have their authority from him, yet their power is
not so largely extended, but that the same is bounded, and limited by God in
his word. And albeit God had appointed Magistrates his Lieutenants on earth,
honoring them with his own title, and calling them Gods, yet did he never so
establish any, but for just causes they might be deprived; for even as
subjects, said he, are commanded to obey their Magistrates, so Magistrates have
direction given them for their behavior toward those they rule; and God in
his word has defined the duties both of the one, and the other. In deposing
Princes, and those that have borne authority, God did not always use his
immediate power, but sometimes he used other means, such as in his wisdom he
thought good. As by Asa he removed Maacha his own Mother from the honor and
authority which before she did exerce: By Jehu he destroyed Joram and the whole
posterity of Achab, and by diverse others he deposed from the Government, those
whom he established before by his own word. Of these ensamples he inferred,
That since Queen Regent had denied her chief duty to the subjects of the
Realm, which was to minister Justice indifferently, to preserve them from the
invasion of strangers, and to suffer the word of God to be freely preached:
seeing also she was a maintainer of superstition, and despised the counsel of
the Nobility, he did think they might justly deprive her from all regiment and
authority over them.

John Knox being next desired to speak, after he had approved all which his
brother had said, did add this more, That the iniquity of the Queen Regent
ought not to withdraw their hearts from the obedience due to their Sovereigns;
John Knox his sentence.
nor did he wish any such sentence to be pronounced against her, but that when
she should change her course, and submit her self to good counsel, there should
be place left unto her of regresse to the same honors, from which for just
causes she ought now to be deprived.

It had been a better, The Preachers ought not to have meddled in that business.
and wiser part in these Preachers, to have excused themselves from giving any
opinion in these matters, for they might be sure to have it cast in their
teeth, to the scandal of their profession. Neither was the opinion they gave
sound in it self, not had it any warrant in the word of God; for howbeit the
power of the Magistrates be limited, and their office prescribed by God, and
that they may likewise fall into great offenses, yet it is no where permitted
to subjects to call their Princes in question, or to make insurrections against
them, God having reserved the punishment of Princes to himself.

And for the ensamples they alleged, The examples they brought, did not
warrant their opinion.
they are nothing to the purpose; for Asa was King of Judah, and in possession
of the Crown, and Maacha, though in nature his Mother, was by condition his
subject, and might lawfully be discharged from the authority (which by his
favor she enjoyed) after she fell to the erecting and worshipping of Idols. As
to the ensample of Iehu, it is nothing better, seeing what he did was by Gods
express Commandment, who gives and takes away Kingdoms as he pleases; but
no man has this power, and they that presume otherwise, go expressly against
the Commandment of God, and the duty of Christian profession.

Always the Lords and others then assembled, Act depriving Queen Regent of her
government.
as having now their determination sufficiently warranted, fell to gather the
voices of such as were present, who all uniformly consented to her deprivation.
So by an Act, and Decree of Council, (wherein were reckoned out all the
enormities alleged to have been committed by Queen Regent; namely, the
pursuing of the Barons and Burgesses of the Realm with open hostility, no
process nor order of law being first used; nor they called and convict of any
crime in lawful judgment; The thrusting in of Magistrates upon people within
Burghes against their liking, and without any order of election; The inbringing
of forainers into the Realm, without the advice and counsel of the Nobility;
The laying of Garrisons in some Towns to the oppression of peaceable subjects;
The coining of base money to the impoverishing of the country; The placing of a
stranger in one of the greatest offices within the Realm, as the office of
Chancellary, which she had conferred to Monsieur Rubie a French man; The
sending of the great Seal forth of the Realm, against the advice of the
Council; The altering of the Laws and Customs of the Realm, especially in
graces and pardons granted to the Lieges, and the obstinate refusing of the
Nobility and Barons their request, when they sought redress of these evils)
they in name and by the authority of their Sovereigns did suspend the
Commission granted to Queen Regent, discharging her of all authority until the
next Parliament that should be called by their advice, and consent. Prohibiting
likewise the officers and others serving her, under color of the said
authority, to exerce their offices from henceforth, and to coin either gold or
silver without express consent of the Council and Nobility, conform to the
laws of the Realm. This Act ordained to be published in all the head Burghes
of the Kingdom, was subscribed in this manner; By us the Nobility and Commons
of the Protestants of the Church of Scotland.

As Soon as this Act was by found of Trumpet proclaimed, The Herald dimitted,
and the Act intimated to the Queen by letters from the Lords.
the Herald whom they had detained two days, was dismissed with an answer
conceived in this form: By the letters and instructions you have sent by the
Herald unto us, we take up how ill you are set against God his truth, the
liberty of this our native country, and the common good of all. To defend
these, as in duty we are bound, we in the name of our Sovereign Lord and Lady
suspend your Commission, and all administration public which you thereby may
pretend, as being assured that your proceedings are direct contrary to their
minds, which we know are inclined to the weal and common good of the country.
And seeing you refuse us who are natural born subjects of the Realm to be your
Counselors, we will no longer acknowledge you for our Regent, and lawful
Magistrate, considering the authority (if any you have committed unto you by
our Sovereigns) is for most just and weighty reasons suspended by us in their
name, whose Counselors we are by birth, in these matters chiefly, that concern
the safety of the Commonwealth.

And howbeit we have determined, with the hazard of our lives to set that Town
at liberty, wherein you have most injustly planted your mercenary soldiers and
strangers, yet for the reverence we bear unto you, as being the mother of our
Queen, we earnestly beseech you to depart thence at this time, when we
constrained by public necessity are by force of Arms to recover it. We
further request you to bring forth of the Town with your self, all that carry
themselves as Ambassadors, and are come unto the country, either for taking
up of controversies, or assisting the government of public affairs, within
the space of twenty four hours, and to cause the Captains, Lieutenants, and
soldiers (whose blood we would gladly spare because of the old amity and
friendship betwixt us and the Realm of France, which the marriage of our
Sovereign Lady to that King, ought rather to increase then diminish) to remove
themselves within the same space. This letter was subscribed, By all the
Nobility and Barons present, the twenty third of October, 1559.

The 25. The town of Leth summoned.
day of the same month was the Town summoned, and all the Scots and French
men, of whatsoever state and degree, commanded to leave the same within the
space of 12. hours. This denied, and defiance given on both sides, there
followed some light skirmishings, without any great slaughter. The Lords had
resolved to enter the Town by scalade, and were preparing ladders for that use,
which being dressed in S. Giles Church, did impede the ordinary meetings to
Sermon and Prayer, to the great offense to the Preachers, who in their Sermons
did sharply reprove that intermission of religious exercises, foretelling that
the enterprise could have no good success, which brought with it in the
beginning such a neglect of God his service. And so indeed it proved, for upon
the sudden they became so terrified, as not only was that purpose of the
scalade broken, but very nigh they were to have utterly forsaken the cause. The
Duke grew fearful by the falling away of some to the Queen, the soldiers
mutinied in default of their pay; they found their most secret counsels also
disclosed, and had lately intercepted letters with a servant of James Balfour,
as he was going to Leh, giving intelligence of all their purposes. These things
with some others more, did cast them in a great diffidence one of another.

But such as were of better courage, Moneys failing, they sent to borrow from
England.
taking counsel how to remedy those evils, made it their first care to content
the soldiers. And because there was no way to do this, but by present money,
it was devised that a collection should be made amongst the Lords and Barons;
by whom some being unprovided, others nigardly disposed, the sum could not be
made up which was required. Thereupon it was agreed that every Nobleman should
give his silver plate to be coined for supply of the present necessity. But
when that came to be done, the irons and instruments of the Minthouse could not
be found. This failing, their only hope of relief was from England, and that
they considered could not come in due time; whereupon they resolved to use
their private credit with Sir Ralph Sadler, and Sir James Crofts (who had the
charge of the Town of Barwick) and borrow of them some moneys.

In this business Sir John Cockburn of Ormston was employed, whose journey was
not so closely carried, but the Queen had notice both of it and his errand.
Thereupon she deals with the Earl of Bothwell to lie in Ormston his way, The
Lord of Ormston surprised by Bothwel, and spoiled of his money.
and surprise him with the money at his return. The Earl had but a few days
before sworn solemnly to be no enemy to the Lords, and had given hopes to join
with them, so as no danger was suspected from him: yet not regarding his oath,
he came upon the Gentleman at unawares, and after some wounds given him took
him prisoner, and robbed him of four thousand Crowns, which he had received in
loan. The rumor hereof coming to the Lords, the Earl of Arrane, and Lord James
taking some companies of horse with them, made toward Creichton, whither
Bothwel (as they were advertised) was gone, But finding that he was escaped
they seized upon the house, The house of Creichion on taken.
and gave it in keeping to Captain Forbes.

The same day that this happened, The Provost of Dundy put to flight by the
soldiers at Leth.
the Provost of Dundy with his Townsmen, and a few mercenary soldiers, went
down toward Leth carrying with them some pieces of Artillery, which he planted
on a hill near unto the Town. The French had warning, that most of the horsemen
were gone about other business, and knowing the footmen to be few, made a
salley upon them with some companies. The Townsmen of Dundy sustained the
fight for a while, trusting to be seconded by the soldiers, but they turned
backs in the very beginning of the conflict, the townsmen were forced to
retire, keeping still their ranks, till a cry was raised that the French were
entering by Leth Wind, to cut them off from the Town. This caused such a
perturbation, as every man took the way he held best for his safety; and in the
flight (as commonly it falls) one hindering another, many were overthrown,
some ten soldiers were killed, Captain Mowak taken prisoner, and Mr. Charles
Geddes servant to the Master of Maxwell. The flight held to the midst of the
Canon gate, where the Earl of Argyle, and Lord Robert Abbot of Halirudhouse
turned the Chase, and pursuing the French, made them fly as fast as they
followed. This little advantage of the French made Bothwel so insolent, as he
simply refused to restore the moneys he had taken. And thus all hopes of money
failing, and the soldiers refusing to serve, some not of the meanest sort,
stole away secretly, the few that remained were distracted in opinions among
themselves, and grew doubtful what to do.

The fifth of November upon advertisement that the French were issued forth of
Leth, A conflict betwixt the Scots and French
to intercept the provision that was carrying to Edinburgh, the Earl of
Arrane, and Lord James, with their domestics, went out to defend the Careers,
and were followed with diverse of the Citizens, these giving the onset upon the
French with more courage then foresight, advanced so far, as they were almost
encompas^ed by the enemy, and cut off from the Town. For the French had divided
their companies in two: one part took the way directly from Leth to
Halirudhouse, the other marched somewhat more Eastward, and nearer the Sea. The
Lords who were gone as far as Restalrig, beholding the French to march
toward Edinburgh, returned with expedition, fearing the case of the Citizens,
and that they themselves should be cut off; which in all appearance had been
done, if the Lord of Grange and Alexander Whitlaw with a few horsemen had not
kept them in skirmish for a little time. The other French companies that came
by Restalrig beholding the Lords retire, made after them, and pursued so hotly,
as the Earl of Arrane, and Lord James, were forced to quit their horses for
safety of the foot, who were in great disorder. Captain Alexander Halliberton,
a man of good spirit, and forward in the cause of Religion, staying behind to
hold off the French, received diverse wounds, whereof the same night he died. In
this conflict there fell some 25. or 30. men. The Master of Buchan, with the
Lairds of Pitmilly, Fairnay, and some others of smaller note were taken
prisoners.

A little before this time William Maitland of Lethington Secretary to the
Queen, Secretary Lethington forsakes the Queen Regent.
perceiving that he was hated of the French for the freedom he used in his
counsel, did secretly withdraw himself, and joined with the Lords. He was
earnest to have them abide together, laying before them the dangers, that might
ensue upon their dissolving, but few or none consenting, conclusion was taken
to leave the Town, and after midnight to depart toward Striveling.

The day after the Lords departing, the French went up to Edinburgh, The Lords
leave Edinburgh, and the French possess the Town.
and took possession of the Town. All that professed the Religion, were
compelled to fly, and seek their refuge in other places. Mr. Willock the
Minister went unto England, and immediately was the Roman service restored.
The Church of S. Giles (as if infected with some contagion by the Sermons
preached therein) was of new hallowed by the Bishop of Amiens, with a number of
Ceremonies; and such triumphing was amongst the Popish sort, as they thought
the game to be theirs. The Queen sent advertisement to France, requiring new
forces with expedition, to make the victory absolute. Whereupon the Marquess
D'Elbeuf, and Count Martiques a young Nobleman were directed with some
companies both of foot and horse; The Queen sends for new forces from France.
but they imbarking at Deep were dispersed by tempest, 18. Ensigns cast away
upon the coast of Holland, and the rest driven back into France. A while after
the Marquess putting to Sea arrived at Leth about the beginning of the spring,
with a thousand foot, and some few horsemen.

The Lords at their coming to Striveling were in great heaviness, The Lords
send to England for a supply.
and doubtful what course to take, till encouraged by a Sermon that John Knox
made unto them they gathered new spirits, resolving to send unto England for
supply, and till answer should come to divide their companies. The Duke and
Earl of Glencarne, with the Lords Boyde, Ochiltry, and their friends were
appointed to remain at Glasgow; the Earls of Arrane and Rothes, Lord James,
the Master of Lindesay, and their friendship to stay together in Fife; and for
making intelligence one to the other, Mr. Henry Balnaves was ordained to attend
the Noblemen at Glasgow, and John Knox these of Fife.

The Duke at his coming to Glasgow caused all the Images and Altars to be
pulled down, Altars and Images demolished at Glasgow.
and took the Castle pertaining to the Bishop. Upon the report of this, the
Bishop taking with him a number of French men, and assisted by the Lords
Semple, Seaton, and Rosse, marched hastily thither, recovered the Castle, (for
the Lords advertised of their coming, The Bishop recovereth the Castle.
had left the Town) and staying there one only night, returned to Edinburgh.
In Fife there was more quietness, all things continuing peaceable, till a
little before Christmas, at which time answer was returned from England, and
hopes given of support from thence.

William Maitland younger of Lethington, and Robert Melvil brother of the Lord
of Raith, Commissions sent unto England.
had been entrusted with that business. They at their coming to the Court of
England, did inform the Queen of the troubles of the country, the difficulties
whereunto it was reduced, and the danger that England should fall into, if
Scotland were once subdued by the French, entreating her aid and assistance for
their expulsion. She remitting the matter to the Council, it was long debated,
whether or no any supply should be granted: some maintaining that it was a
thing of ill example to assist the subjects of another Prince in their
Rebellion, and that the same might draw upon themselves a dangerous war.
Others holding that they were obliged in conscience to defend their neighbors
from the oppression of strangers; and that to suffer the French, who were
naturally enemies to the English, A supply granted, and the Duke of Norfolk
sent to treat of the conditions.
fortify themselves in Scotland, would prove a hurtful and preposterous
course. In end the Queen enclining that way, it was concluded that a supply
should be granted, and the Duke of Norfolk sent to Berwick to treat of the
conditions with the Commissioners of the Scottish Nobility.

The French advertised of this conclusion taken, The French resolve to make an
end of the war before the English be prepared.
resolved to make an end of the war before the English support could be in
readiness, and to begin with the Lords residing at Fife, Thereupon taking
their journey to Striveling, they spoiled Linlithgow in the way, with the lands
of Kinneil, and all that they understood belonged to the Duke in those parts.
The like pillage they made in Striveling, and passing the Bridge they kept the
side of the River, robbing all the villages, and Coast Towns which were in
their way. It was their purpose to have kept the coast still, till they came to
S. Andrews, and then to have fortified the Castle, and City: but the Earl of
Arrane and Lord James hearing that they were past Striveling, sent some forces
under the charge of the Lord Ruthven, a Nobleman of good experience and
courage, to withstand their attempts. In his company was the Earl of
Sutherland, who was come to the Lords some days before, directed as he gave
out by the Earl of Huntley to make offer of his assistance; howbeit his
principal Commission was unto the Queen Regent, as afterward was known.

The first encounter with the French was at Pitticurre, An encounter with the
French at Pitticurre.
(so they call the Haven on the West of Kingorne) by occasion of some small
vessels that were espied to come from Leth, which as the Lord Ruthven did stop
from landing, the French that were further advanced then he supposed, did
charge him on the back, and forced him to fly, six or seven soldiers were
killed in this conflict, and a Dutchman called Paul Lambird, with a French boy
taken and hanged upon the Steeple of Kingarne. The Earl of Sutherland wounded a
little in the Arm with the shot of an Harquebuse, returned the same day to
Couper.

The Lords, The Lords came to Dysert to stay the progr^sse of the French.
to stay the further progress of the French, drew all the forces they could
make in these parts to the Town of Dysert, where they remained 20. days
together, keeping the French soldiers (that were numbered to be 4000.) in such
work that the country was generally saved from spoil, and the hurt and damage
that was done, falling for the greatest part upon their friends and
confederates; For of all that were professed enemies to the French, the Lord
of Grange only had his house blown up with Gunpowder; whereas the Lord of
Weimes, Seafield, Balmaito, Balwery, Balgony, Dury and others of the French,
faction, were forced to furnish them with corns, cattle, and what else they
stood in need of; or if the soldiers lacked any thing, the readiest goods upon
their ground were taken to provide them. Hereof diverse complaints being made to
the French Captains, the poor owners were scornfully answered, that their goods
were of the Congregation; and if they made faith that the same were their own
proper goods, they were railed upon, and called cowards and unworthy niggards,
that made more account of their goods then of their friends. Such as professed
Religion, and expected the worst, putting their goods out of the way, or
standing to their defense, were in a much better condition; and Grange who had
his house cast down as I have said, avenged himself sufficiently a few days
after.

For knowing that the French used to send forth some soldiers into the
country every day to bring in provision, The Lord of Grange defeats a company
of the French.
he laid an Ambush near to Kingorne, and as Captain le Batu with an hundred
soldiers came forth, after they were passed a mile from the town, he brake
upon them with a number that he had selected to that purpose; the Captain with
his soldiers retiring to a little country house, defended themselves a while
with their shot, and dangerously wounded David Kircaldy brother to the Lord of
Grange, and a Gentleman called Robert Hamilton, who were both at first supposed
to be slain. The French had the advantage, for they were within ditches, and Le
Batu having taken a little house, kept the gate with some Harquebuses. Grange
and his company carried spears only, yet in that heat of valor, which
ordinarily at such occasions he showed, he rushed in upon the French and was
followed by the Master of Lindesay, and others whom his example did animate.
The Captain refusing to render himself with fifty of his company was slain, the
rest were all taken, and sent prisoners to Dundy.

By this time the Lords that remained in the West parts, Commissioners sent to
treat with Norfolk.
being advertised of the answer returned from England, and how the Duke of
Norfolk was coming to Berwick to attend the Scottish Commissioners, that
should be chosen to treat of the conditions of the supply, they sent of their
number some to assist the Noblemen of Fife in making that choice. The meeting
was at Couper, where by common consent choice was made of Lord James, the Lord
Ruthven, the Masters of Maxwel and Lindesay, the Lord Lethington younger, and
Lord of Pittarrow, and Mr. Henry Balnaves; and power given them by the Duke
and remnant Lords to contract and agree with the Queen of England and her
Lieutenant, upon all such things as might serve for the good and conjunction of
the two Kingdoms, and particularly for expelling the French soldiers out of
the Realm of Scotland. These taking journey by Sea came about the midst of
February to Berwick, and after some short treaty a contract was formed betwixt
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England, and Lieutenant to the Queens
Majesty in the North, in name and behalf of her Highness on the one part, and
Lord James Stewart, Patrick Lord Ruthven, Sir John Maxwel of Tareglife Knight,
William Maitland of Lethington younger, John Wishart of Pittarrow, and Mr.
Henry Balnaves of Halhil, in name and behalf of the noble and mighty Prince
James Duke of Chattellerault, second person of the Realm of Scotland, and the
remnant Lords joined with him for maintenance and defense of the ancient Rights
and liberties of the country on the other part, to the effect following.

1. That the Queens Majesty having sufficiently understood as well by
information from the Nobility of Scotland, as by the proceedings of the French,
that they did intend to conquer the Realm of Scotland, The contract with
England.
suppress the Nobility thereof, and unite the same to the Crown of France,
perpetually contrary to the Laws of the same Realm, and the pactions, oaths,
and promises of France; and being most humbly and earnestly requested by the
said Nobility, for and in the name of the whole Realm, to receive the Kingdom
of Scotland, the Duke of Chattellerault declared heir to the Crown thereof,
with the Nobility and other subjects into her protection and maintenance, only
for preservation of the Scots in their own freedoms and liberties, during the
time that the marriage did continue betwixt the Queen of Scots and the French
King, and a year after, should employ her best means for and in their defense.

2. That her Majesty should send with all convenient diligence into Scotland a
sufficient aid of men of war, horse and foot, with artillery, munition, and
other instruments of war, as well by sea as by land, to join with the forces
of Scotland, for the expelling the French forces presently within that Realm,
and stopping so far as may be all others to enter therein in time coming.

3. That her Majesty should continue her aid to the Nobility and subjects of
Scotland, until such time as the French (enemies to the said Realm) should be
utterly expelled thence, and should transact, agree, nor conclude any league
with the French, except the Scots and French should be also agreed, and the
Realm of Scotland left in freedom; neither should she leave the maintenance of
the said Nobility and other subjects, whereby they might fall as a prey into
their enemies hands, so long as they did acknowledge their Sovereign Lady and
Queen, and should endeavor themselves to maintain their own liberty, and the
estate of the Crown of Scotland.

4. If in case any Forts or Strengths within the Realm shall be recovered out
of the hands of the French by her Majesty's aid, the same shoudl be immediately
demolished, or delivered to the Duke of Chattellerault, and his partakers at
their election; neither should the power of England fortify within the ground
of Scotland, but by the advice of the said Duke, Nobility, and Estates of
Scotland.

5. That the said Duke and Nobility, as well such as be already joined, as such
as hereafter shall join with him for defense of the liberty of the Realm,
should to the uttermost of their power aid and support her Majesty's Army
against the French and their assisters with horse and foot, and all manner of
other aid they possibly can make, and shall provide victuals to the Army by
land and sea, and continue so doing, during the time her Majesty's Army shall
remain in Scotland.

6. That they should be enemies to all such Scottish men and French, as shall
in any ways show themselves enemies to the Realm of England for the aiding and
supporting of the said Duke and Nobility, and should never assent nor permit
the Realm of Scotland to be conquered or otherwise united to the Crown of
France, then it is at the present, only by the marriage of the Queen their
Soveraing to the French King, and as the Laws and liberties of the Realm do
allow.

7. That if it should happen the French men at any time thereafter to invade or
cause the Realm of England to be invaded, they should furnish the number of
1000, horsemen and 2000. footmen at the least, or such part of either of them
as should be required, at the charge of the Queen of England* and should
conduct the same to any part of the Realm of England, that should be appointed,
upon the charges always of the Queen of England And in case the invasion
should be made on the North part of England, either upon the North of the water
of Tyne toward Scotland, or against Berwick, on the North side of the water of
Twede, they should convene and gather their whole forces upon their own
charges, and should join with the English power, and continue in an earnest
pursuit of the quarrel of England, during the space of 30. days, or so much
longer, as they are accustomed to abide in the fields for defense of Scotland.

8. That the Earl of Argyle, Lord Justice of Scotland, being presently joined
with the said Duke, should employ his force, and good will, when he should be
required by the Queen of England for reducing the North parts of Ireland to her
obedience* conform to a mutual contract, which should be made betwixt her
Majesty's Deputy of Ireland for the time and the said Earl, wherein should be
expressed what each of them should do for support of others, in case either of
them had business with Macc-o-neale, or any other of the Isles of Scotland, or
Realm of Ireland.

9. That the Scots for performance and sure keeping of their part of this
contract, should deliver such pledges to the Duke of Norfolk before the entry
of her Majesty's Army in Scottish ground, as the said Duke did presently name,
who should remain in England for the space of six months, and be exchanged by
deliverance of new hostages, for six months to six months, or four months to
four months, at the pleasure of Scotland; the pledges always being of the
like or as good condition as the former, and the lawful sons, brethren, or
heirs of some of the Earls or Barons of the Parliament: and the time of the
continuance of the said hostages should be during the marriage of the Queen of
Scots to the French King, and a year after the dissolution of the same, till
further order may be had betwixt both the Realms for peace and concord.

10. That the Duke and Nobility joined with him being Earls and Barons of
Parliament, should subscrive and ^eale these Articles within the space of
twenty or thirty days at the furthest, after the delivering of the said
hostages; and should procure, and persuade all others of the Nobility that
should join themselves thereafter with the said Duke for the cause above
specified, to subscrive and seal the same Articles within the space of twenty
days after their conjunction, upon requisition made by them of England.

11. That the said Duke and Nobility joined with him, certainly understanding
that the Queens Majesty of England was moved to grant the present support only
upon respect of Princely honor and neighborhood, for defense of the freedom
of Scotland from conquest, and not of any sinister intent; did by these
presents testify and declare* that neither they nor any of them do mean by
this contract to withdraw their due obedience from their Sovereign Lady the
Queen, or yet to withstand the French King her husband, in any lawful thing
which tends not to the subversion of the just and ancient liberties of
Scotland, for the preservation whereof they acknowledge themselves bound to
spend their goods, lands, and lives.

This contract of the date at Berwick the 27. of February 1559. was confirmed
by the Queen of England, and a Patent thereof delivered under the great Seal of
England to the Duke and Nobility: the Lords of Scotland did in like manner
ratify the same by their subscriptions, at the Camp before Leth the tenth of
May following.

How soon the French heard that the Lords were removed from Dysert, The French
soldiers upon sight of the Navy return to Leth.
they marched forward according to their first purpose toward S. Andrews, and
kept the Coast, partly because of the ships which carried their victuals,
partly by reason of a great snow which then was fallen, and made the nearest
ways unpassable. After that they had crossed the water of Leven, and were come
unto Kincraige, they espied a fleet of ships bearing up the Firth* which they
did apprehend to be a supply sent unto them; but when they saw them fall upon
the ships that carried their victuals they became doubtful, and shortly after,
were assured by a boat which had spoken them* that it was an English Navy sent
to the support of the Congregation, and that a land Army was also prepared to
come into Scotland. These news troubled them not a little, and made them
doubtful what course to take; for to return by Striveling was a long way, and
to transport the soldiers to the other coast, there were no vessels, so as
they feared to be kept from joining with their fellows at Leth. Their
resolution therefore was to make the longer journeys, as they did; and setting
to the way the same night, they came on the third day to Leth, having lost
diverse of their company by the way.

Fife thus delivered from their oppressions, Diverse houses in Fi^e taken by the
Lord.
public thanks were given to God in the Church of S. Andrews. This done, the
Lords took purpose to besiege the houses of Weimes, An. 1560.
Seafield, Bagome and Dury, which were taken without resistance, and the Lords
thereof made prisoners; but shortly after they were dimitted, and the houses
restored upon condition, not to assist the French any more. The Earl of Huntley
at the same time being advertised that the Barons of Mernis were come to
Aberdene to make reformation in that City, The Cathedral of Aberdene saved by
the Earl of Huntl^y.
hastened thither to withstand their proceedings, and by his coming saved the
Cathedral Church; the houses of the Dominicans, Carmelites, and other Religions
being already demolished, and cast down. Yet when he heard that the English
forces were advancing, he sent to the Lords, and made offer to join with them.
A meeting to this effect was appointed at Perth, whither he came, and staying
some three days, departed homewards upon promise to return unto the Army in
the beginning of April; for Proclamatinos were gone through the country*
charging all the subjects to meet in Arms at Linlithgow the last of March, and
from thence to pass forwards in pursuit of the French that had fortified at
Leth.

For fulfilling the Article whereby the Lords were tied to send pledges unto
England, Pledges s^nt to the Admiral of England.
Colin Campbel Cosen to the Earl of Argyle, Robert Douglas brother to the
Lord of Lochleven, and... Ruthven son to the Lord Ruthven, were delivered to
the English Admiral, and by sea conveyed to the Town of Newcastle.

After which, The English forces enter into Scotland.
the English forces consisting of 2000. horse, and six thousand foot, entered
into Scotland, conducted by the Lord Gray, under whom commanded the Lord
Scroop, Sir James Crofts, Sir Henry Percie, and Sir Francis Lake. The Scottish
Army joined with them at Preston the fourth of April, whereof the principal
leaders were, the Duke of Chattellerault, the Earls of Argyle, Glencarn, and
Menteith, Lord James. the Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Ochiltrie, who were assisted
by all the Barons and Gentlemen professing Religion in Lothian, Fife, Angus,
Mernis, and the West countries. Queen Regent enters into the Castle of
Edinburgh.
The same day the Queen Regent removed her family to the Castle of Edinburgh,
and was received by the Lord Aresken, a Nobleman of approved honesty and
wisdom; he was not ignorant of the Queens intentions, and the desire she had to
have the French Masters of that strength; yet he would not at that time deny
her entry, but used such circumspection, as she and the house both were still
in his power.

The Noblemen resolving to fall presently to work, A letter from the Lords to
the Queen Regent.
did yet think to move the Queen of new for dismissing the French companies,
and to that effect they directed a letter of this tenor. Madame, We have often
before this time by letters and messages been instant with you to remove the
French soldiers out of the Realm, who now the space of a year and more have
oppressed the poor people with evils intolerable, and threaten to bring this
Kingdom under a miserable servitude. But seeing we could not prevail by our
lawful requests, we were forced to mean our estate to the Queen of England our
nearest neighbor, and entreat her support for expulsing these strangers by
Arms (if otherwise we cannot obtain it.) And now albeit she pitying our
distresses has taken us and our cause in her protection, yet for the duty we
owe unto you as the Mother of our Queen, and the desire we have to eschew the
shedding of Christian blood, we have advised once again to entreat the
dismission of these French men with their Captains and Commanders, for whose
commodious transport the Queen of England will be pleased to lend her Navy, and
give to others of them a safe passage by land. If this condition shall be
rejected, we take God and men to record, that it is not malice nor hatred which
moves us to take Arms, but that we are driven by necessity to use extreme
remedies for preserving the commonwealth, and saving our selves, our estates,
and posterities from utter ruin: neither shall we for any peril that can
happen (howsoever we suffer many wrongs and indignities, and are daily in
expectation of worse) forsake that dutiful obedience which we owe to our Queen,
or yet resist the King her husband, in any thing that shall not tend to the
subversion of the ancient liberties of this Kingdom. Therefore most gracious
Queen, we beseech you again and again, to weigh the equity of our Petition, the
inconveniences of war, and to consider how needful it is that thus your
daughters afflicted Kingdom should be put to some rest and quietness. If so
you do, you shall give to all nations a testimony of your moderation, and
procure the peace of the greatest part of Christendom.

This letter dated at Dalkeith the fifth of April, was subscrived by all the
Noblemen that were present. The English General did in like manner direct Sir
George Howard, and Sir James Crof^s, to make offer that if the French would
peacably depart forth of Scotland, The English General entreats the Queen to
dimit the French
they likewise should return into their country without molesting any person.
Her answer was, that she would think of what was propounded, and give answer
the next day. But the Army not liking to admit these delays, advanced the next
day, which was Saturday, toward Leth, keeping along the sea coast, till they
came to Restalrig. The French issuing forth of Leth to the number of 1300. or
thereby, and planting themselves upon a little hill called the Hawkhill, The
first conflict of the siege of Leth.
(where they knew the English Army would encamp) for the space of five hours
continued in fight, the one striving to make good the place, the other to carry
it. At last the Scottish horsemen did charge the French with suh a fury, that
they not able to maintain it any longer, took the flight and retired to the
Town, from which they had been quite cut off, if the English horse had seconded
the Scots, as was appointed. In this conflict three hundred of the French were
killed, and some few of the English.

Then begun the Army of England to place their Pavilions betwixt the Town of
Leth and Restalrig. The situation of the Scottish and English Camp.
The Lord Gray lodging in the Deans house in Restalrig, and the most part of
his horsemen in the same village, the foot lay all in the tents, upon the South
and South-east side of Leth, and near unto them were the Scots Noblemen
encamped, trenches cast, and a little mount erected, which was called Mount
Pellain, from the name of the Captain, whereupon eight Canons were placed to
play upon S. Antonies Steeple, on which the French had planted some Ordinance.
These thundering night and day battered the steeple, and forced the French to
dismount their artillery. The English after this growing negligent, and
supposing the French would make no more fallies, The French entered into the
English trenches where diverse were killed.
followed their sports, some of the Captains going to Edinburgh, and the
soldiers falling to play at Dice and Cards, as though there had been no
enemies to fear: wherefore the French getting intelligence, they issued forth,
and entering the English trenches before they were perceived, put many to the
sword. The slaughter was great, and esteemed to exceed the loss of the French
in the first encounter.

This accident taught them to be more watchful all the time that the siege
continued, A fire in the town of Leth,
and because their numbers were so few for besieging the Town in all parts,
they devised to raise certain mounts in every quarter, and to remove the Canon
to the West side of the water of Leth. more near the walls then before. The
last of April a sudden fire kindling within the Town, burned all that night,
which destroyed many houses, and consumed a great part of the soldiers
provision. During this burning, the English playing continually with the Canon
upon the places where they saw the flames rising to stop the quenching of the
fire; and entering the ditches did in the mean time measure the height of the
walls to provide ladders for the scaling which they intended.

The seventh of May having resolved to give an assault, The English thinking to
scale the walls are repulsed.
they brought the ladders a little before day toward the walls, but they
proved too short, and so that purpose failed. The English lost 160. at this
enterprise: such as were affected to the French, did hereupon take courage
trusting the siege would rise, and the English Army depart but the accident did
no way dismay either the English or Scots, every man animating another to
constancy and continuance; and about the time came letters from the Duke of
Norfolk, which greatly confirmed their minds. Thereby he charged them not to
break up the siege by any means, assuring they should not lack men, so long as
any could be had between Twede and Trent, (for in those bounds he commanded as
Lieutenant) and giving hopes to come in person to the Camp, he caused his
Pavilion to be set up, and sent thither his officers, and provision. Shortly
after, a fresh supply came from England of 2000. men, which made all former
losses to be forgotten. The French for some days made diverse fallies, but were
ever put to the worst; for all the hurt which fell either to Scottish or
English, from that time until the rendering of the Town, was only the loss of
two men, Robert Colvil of Cleish Master household to Lord James, a Gentleman
much commended both for wisdom and valor, (he was wounded in the thigh by the
shot of a great piece from the town, and died of it within two hours) and
Alexander Lochart brother to the Lord of Bar, who lying too open in the
trenches was discovered by the enemy, and shot in the head.

The French King hearing in what distress the companies at Leth were, The
offer of the French King to the Queen of England.
and by reason of other affairs, not able to supply them in time, sent Count
Randon and Monsieur Monlu^k Bishop of Valence Ambassadors to the Queen of
England, desiring her to retire her Army out of Scotland, with offers to
restore the town of Callais, if she would call them back; her answer was, The
Queens answer.
that she did not value that fisher Town so much, as to hazard for it the state
of Britain. The French perceiving that peace could not otherwise be made, but
by calling back the French soldiers, and thinking it dishonorable for the King
and Queen of France to treat with their own subjects they entreated the Queen
of England to send her Ambassadors to mediate an agreement: Sir William Cecill
and Doctor (...) sent to mediate an agreement.
which was easily assented unto, and Mr. William Cecill principal Secretary of
England, with Doctor wotton Dean of Canterbury and York, appointed to go with
the French Ambassadors into Scotland, and use their best means for pacifying
the present troubles.

Whilst they were in their journey, Queen Regent sickneth and dies.
Queen Regent partly out of sickness, and partly of displeasure, died in the
Castle of Edinburgh the tenth of June, 1560. Before her death she desired to
speak with the Duke of Chattellerault, the Earls of Argyle, Glencarn, She
conferreth with the Lords before her death.
Marshall, and Lord James; to whom she expressed her grief for the troubles of
the Realm, commending earnestly the study of peace unto them, advising them to
send both French and English forth of the country, and beseeching them to
continue in the obedience of the Queen their Sovereign, and to entertain the
old amity with the King and Realm of France. After some speeches to this
purpose bursting forth in tears, she asked pardon of then all whom any way she
had offended, professing that she did forgive those who had injured her in any
sort, and embracing all the Nobles one by one, kissing them, she took her
farewell. To others of meaner sort that stood by, she gave her hand, and so
they departed. Afterward, disposing her self for another world, she sent for
John Willock the Preacher, who was then returned from England, and conferring
with him a reasonable space, openy professed, that she did trust to be saved
only by the death and merits of Jesus Christ: and thus ended her life most
Christianly.

She was a Lady of honest and honorable conditions, Queen Regent her just
commen lations.
of singular judgment, and full of humanity, a great lover of justice, helpful
to the poor, especially to those that she knew to be indigent, but for shame
could not beg. Compassionate of women in travel, whom she did often visit in
her own person, and help both with her skill and counsel. In her Court she kept
a wonderful gravity, tolerating no licenciousnesse; her maids were always
busied in some virtuous exercise, and to them she was an ensample every way of
modesty, chastity, and the best virtues. A great dexterity she had in
government, which appeared in the composing the tumults in the North, and in
pacifying the Isles which by her wisdom were reduced to perfect obedience. ^s
to those wars which afficted the Kingdom in her last days, it is not to be
doubted, but the same happened much against her will, neither had they fallen
out at all, if affairs had been carried according to her mind. But she was to
govern by direction, and in all matters of weight must needs attend responses
from the French Court, which were the Oracles whereby all affairs at those
times were framed. This made her in matters of Religion more severe then of her
own nature she was, and led her into many errors of State, neglecting the
Natives, and born Noblemen of the country, and following the counsels of the
French that attended her, who making no conscience of their promises, and
minding nothing but the bringing of Scotland in subjection to France, as they
conceived things to serve unto their ends, moved her to follow courses unsure
and dishonorable. Otherwise she was of a most mild disposition* and was heard
often to say, The malice ^ of the author of the story called John Knox his
history.
That if her own counsel might take place, she doubted nothing to compose all
the dissensions within the Realm, and settle the same upon good conditions in a
perfect tranquillity The Author of the story ascrived to John Knox in his whole
discourse shows a bitter and hateful spite against her, forging dishonest
things, which was never so much as suspected by any, setting down his own
conjectures as certain truths, and misinterpreting all her words and actions;
yea the least syllable that did escape her in passion, he makes in an argument
of her cruel and inhumane disposition; but when he comes to speak of her end
he will have all her sickness, and death (though in none of the two there was
any thing extraordinary) to be the judgment of God inflicted upon her, as if
death and the ordinary visitations which bring death, were not common to
Princes as well as others. Then for her burial, because by direction of her
friends, and (as some say) at her own desire order was taken to carry her corpse
to the Abbey of Rhemes in Campaigne, where her sister was Abbess, which of all
necessity required a protraction of time, he construed the delay to be the
punishment of her inhumanity, and the want of sepulcher in this Kingdom, a
prognostic of the short continuance of her race, and the Guisian blood (as he
speaks) in this Realm. Pardon me good Reader for this digression. To detract
from the same of Princes, and miscensure their words and actions, favors of
malice, and no way becomes a Christian, much less a Minister of Christ.

Shortly after the death of Queen Regent truce was taken for hearing the
Ambassadors sent from France and England, A truce taken upon the death of the
Queen Regent.
who coming to Edinburgh, entered into consultation first amongst themselves,
upon the best and easiest means to compose the present quarrels. Then calling
to them certain of the Scottish Nobility, began to treat of the sending of the
French soldiers forth of the Realm. Wherein two difficulties occurred. One
was, that the Commissioners of France did urge the retaining of a number of men
of war in some sorts of the country for the King and Queen, after peace was
concluded. The other, that the companies that should be broken, might depart
unchallenged with all their baggage. The Scottish Noblemen did oppose these
desires, esteeming it unreasonable that they should be suffered to depart
before they gave satisfaction to those they had wronged; And to place strangers
in forts, they thought it could not but breed trouble, and occasion a new war
more dangerous then the present. This contention held some days, at last both
parties wearying, they were brought to agree upon the conditions following.

1. Conditions of the peace.
That the French men of war in the town of Leth, should be sent home within
the space of twenty days with bag and baggage; and for their better transport,
should be furnished with ships of England, they giving pledges for the safe
return of the same.

2. That Leth being rendered to the Lords of Scotland, the walls thereof should
be demolished, as likewise the fortifications at Dumbar, if so it should seem
good to the Lords after they had viewed the same; and that the King and Queen
should make no new forts within the Realm, nor augment these that were already
made, nor yet repair these that were demolished, without counsel and consent of
the Estates.

3. That a Garrison of threescore French men should be permitted to remain in
the Castle of Dumbar, and as many in the Isle of Inchkeeth, until the Estates
should find means to maintain the said forts upon their own charges from all
peril of forain invasion; the said soldiers in the mean time living obedient
to the laws of the Realm, and taking nothing from the subjects without payment
of ready money.

4. That an Act of oblivion should be made for abolishing the memory of all
injuries and wrongs attempted or committed against the laws of the Realm,
since the sixth day of March, 1558. until the first of August 1560. which Act
should be ratified in the next Parliament, and confirmed by the Queen with
consent of her husband.

5. That a general peace and reconciliation should be made amongst the Lords
and subjects of the Realm, so as they who were called of the Congregation, and
they who were not of the same, should bear no quarrel to others for any thing
done since the sixth of March, 1558.

6. That the King and Queen should not pursue, revenge, or suffer to be
revenged, any violence or injury that had been done since the said time, nor
should deprive or seek any color to dispossess the subjects, or any of them,
of the benefices, houses and estates which they have enjoyed before, they
always continuing in the due obedience of their Sovereigns. And that it might
be known that the King and Queen were not willing to keep any remembrance of
the troubles past, it was accorded the Duke of Chattellerault, and all other
Noblemen of Scotland should be repossessed in their livings and benefices
within France, after the manner that they did enjoy the same, before the said
sixth day of March; and that all capitulations agreed upon in time past, should
be observed as well for the part of their Majesty's, as the part of the
Nobility and people of Scotland.

7. That where any Bishops, Abbots, or other Churchmen, should allege
themselves to have received any injuries either in their persons or goods, the
same should be considered by the Estates of Parliament, and redress made
according to reason; and in the mean time, that no man should stop them to
enjoy their rents, nor do any hurt or violence to their persons; and if any
should do contrary to this Article, he should be pursued by the Lords as a
perturber of the Commonwealth.

8. That in time coming the King and Queen should depute no strangers in the
administration of Civil and Common Justice, nor bestow the offices of
Chancellary, Thesaurer, Comptrollary, and the like upon others, then born
subjects of the Realm: as likewise that it should not be lawful to give the
office of Thesaurary, or Comptrollary to any Churchman or other person that is
not able to administrate the same. Further, that the Thesaurer and Comptroller
appointed by them, and instructed with sufficient commission, should do nothing
in disposing of casualties without the consent of the Council, to the effect
all things may be done for the profit of the King and Queen: yet should it not
be thought that this Article did either bind the King or Queen, but that they
may give where and when they should think expedient.

9. That the Estates of the Realm should convene and hold a Parliament in the
month of August next, for which a Commission should be sent from the French
King, and the Queen of Scotland, and that the said convention should be as
lawful in all respects, as if the same had been ordained by the express
Commandment of their Majesty's: providing all tumults of war be discharged,
and they who ought by their places to be present, may come without fear.

10. That for the better government of this Realm choice should be made of a
Council which should consist of twelve worthy men of the Kingdom, of which
number the Queen should choose seven, and the Estates five; which twelve in
their Majesty's absence should take order with the affairs of Government, and
without their authority and consent nothing should be done in the
administration of public business. And that the said Council should convene
as often as they might conveniently, but no fewer then six together; or if any
matter of importance occurred, they should all be called, or the most part of
them: providing it should not be prejudicial to the King and Queen, and to the
Rights of the Crown.

11. That the King and Queen should neither make peace nor war in these
parts, but by the counsel and advise of the Estates, according to the custom
of the country, as it was observed by their predecessors.

12. That none of the Lords of the Nobility of Scotland should make convocation
of men of war, except in ordinary cases approved by the laws and custom of
the Realm, nor should any of them cause men of war strangers to come into
these parts, much less attempt to do any thing against the King and Queen, or
against the authority of the Council, and other Magistrates of the Realm; and
in case any of them had occasion to take Arms, the same being first
communicated to the Council, their Majesty's likewise should be made acquainted
therewith, and nothing to be done by them, that ought not to be done by good
and faithful subjects, that love the quietness of the Realm, and will abide in
the obedience of their Sovereigns.

13. That Lord David son to the Duke of Chattellerault, detained prisoner at
Bois de Vincennes, should be put to liberty, and suffered to return into
Scotland at his pleasure.

14. That with the French men no Artillery should be transported forth of the
Realm, but those which were sent, and brought in since the decease of Francis
the first, and that all other Artillery and Munition, especially that which
has the Arms of Scotland, should be put into the places out of which they
were taken.

15. That the Army of England should return home immediately after the
embarking of the French, and that all the Scottish men of war should be
broken, and licenced to depart.

16. That for the Articles concerning Religion presented for the part of the
Nobility and people of Scotland (which the Commissioners would not touch, but
referred to their Majesty's) it was promised that a certain number of Noblemen
should be chosen in the next Convention and Parliament to be sent to their
Majesty's, to expone unto them the things that should be thought needful for
the estate thereof; and for the Articles presently decided, they should carry
with them the ratification of the same by the Estates, and return a
confirmation thereof from their Majesty's.

Lastly, that the Queen of Scotland, and King of France should not hereafter
usurp the titles of England, and Ireland, and should delete the Arms of England
and Ireland out of their scutchions and whole housholdstuffe.

This accord made, The French embark, and the Army of England departs.
the French prepared to depart, and for returning the ships of England that
were lent to transport them, the Bishop of Amiens and Monsieur le Broche
remained hostages. On the sixteenth day of July the French embarked, and the
same day did the English Army depart toward Berwick; the third day after their
parting, a solemn thanksgiving was kept in the Church of S. Giles by the Lords,
and others professing true Religion, The Ministers distributed amongst the
Burghs.
and then were the Ministers by common advice distributed among the Burghs.
John Knox was appointed to serve at Edinburgh, Christopher Goodman at S.
Andrews, Adam Heriote at Aberdene, John Row at Perth, William Christeson at
Dundy, David Ferguson at Dunfermlin, Paul Methven at Iedburgh, and Mr. David
Lindesay at Leth; besides these they did nominate for the direction of Church
affairs, some to be Superintendents, as Mr. John Spotswood for Lothian and
Mers, Mr. John Winram for Fife, and John Areskin of Dun for Angus and Mernis,
Mr. John Willock for Glasgow, and Mr. John Kerswel for Argyle and Isles; with
this small number was the plantation of the Church at first undertaken.

The time appointed for the Parliament approaching, A Parliament, and the
lawfulness thereof questioned.
warning was made to all such as by law or ancient custom had any voice
therein to be present, and at the day the meeting was frequent; In the
beginning there was great altercation, diverse holding that no Parliament could
be kept, seeing their Sovereigns had sent no Commission, nor authorized any to
represent their persons. Others (alleging that Article of the peace whereby it
was agreed, That a Parliament should be kept in the month of August, and that
the same should be as lawful in all respects, as if it were ordained by the
express commandments of their Majesty's) maintained that the said Article was
a warrant sufficient for their present meeting: and this opinion by voices
prevailed. So after some eight days spent in these contentions, they began to
treat of affairs, but as they had no commission, so the solemnities accustomed
of Crown, Scepter, and Sword, which are in use to be carried at these times,
were neglected. There were present of the spiritual Estate, the Archbishop of
S. Andrews, the Bishops of Dunkeld, Dumblane, Galloway, Argyle, and Isles; The
Prior of S. Andrews, the Abbots of Couper, Landors, Culross, S. Colmes Inch,
Newbottle, Halirudhouse, Kinlose, Deire, and New-Abbey, with the Priors of
Coningham, and S. Mary Isle; Of the Nobility, the Lord Duke, the Earls of
Arrane, Argyle, Marshal, Cassils, Cathnes, Athol, Glencarne, Merton, and
Rothes: The Lords Ruthven, Glammis, Areskin, Boyd, Ochiltrie, Carlisle,
Levingston, Ogilvy, and Somervil, with many of the inferior Barons; The Clergy
offended with the election of the Lords of the Articles.
and of the Commissioners of Burghs none were absent. In electing the Lords of
the Articles, the Noblemen that had the nomination of the Clergy passing by
such amongst them as they knew to be Popishly affected, made choice of the
Bishops of Galloway, and Argyle, the Prior of S. Andrews, the Abbots of
Abberbrothock, Kilwining, Lundors, Newbottle, and Culross; at which the
Prelates stormed mightily, alleging that some of them were mere Laics, and
all of them Apostates (for they had openly renounced popery, and joined
themselves with the Professors of the truth) but there was no remedy, the
course was changed; and now it behoved them to take law, who formerly had given
it to others.

The first thing they moved in the Articles, Petitions proponed in favor of
the Reformers.
was a supplication of the Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other subjects
concerning religion, wherein three things were petitioned. First, that the
Doctrine of the Roman Church professed and tyrannously maintained by the
Clergy should be condemned, and by Act of Parliament abolished. Some
particulars they named, such as the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the
adoration of Christ's body under the form of bread, the merit of works,
Papisticall Indulgences, Purgatory, Pilgrimage, and praying to Saints departed.
These they reckoned to be pestilent errors, such as could not but bring
damnation to the souls of those who were therewith infected: therefore desired
a punishment to be appointed for the teachers and maintainers of such
Doctrines. Next, that a remedy should be found against the profaning of the
holy Sacraments by men of that profession, and the true Discipline of the
ancient Church revived and restored. Thirdly, that the Pope of Rome his usurped
authority should be discharged, and the patrimony of the Church employed to the
sustentation of the Ministry, the provision of Schools, and intertainment of
the poor, of a long time neglected.

This last clause was not very pleasing to diverse of the Nobility, who though
they liked well to have the Pope his authority and doctrine condemned, had no
will to quit the Church Patrimony, wherewith in that stirring time they had
possessed themselves. So making no answer to the last point; the Ministers were
desired to draw into several heads the sum of the Doctrine they craved to be
established, that the same might be seen and considered by the Parliament. This
accordingly was done, and the fourth day after (which was the 17. of August)
exhibited to the Estates under this title, The Confession of Faith put in form
and presented.
[The confession of the Faith and Doctrine, believed and professed by the
Protestants of Scotland;] It is the same confession word by word that you have
registered in the first Parliament of King James the sixth, which (that the
story may on with an uninterrupted delivery) I thought not needful here to
insert.

The Confession read in open Parliament and put to voices, the Earl of Atholl,
the Lords Sommervill and Bothwick only of all the temporal Estate
disassented, The Confession approved.
saying, They would believe as their fathers before them had believed. The
Popish Prelates were silent, and answered nothing; whereupon the Earl Marshall
brake forth into these speeches; It is long since I carried some favor unto
the truth, and was somewhat jealous of the Roman religion, but this day has
fully resolved me of the truth of the one, and falsehood of the other: for
seeing my Lords the Bishops (who by their learning can, and for the zeal they
should have to the truth, would as I suppose gainsay any thing repugnant unto
it) say nothing against the confession we have heard, I cannot think but it is
the very truth of God, and the contrary of it false and deceiveable doctrine.
Thus was the confession of Faith approved, and by public voices of the Estates
authorized. At the same time there passed three other Acts in favor of the
Professors; one for abolishing the Popes Jurisdiction and authority within the
Realm; The Popes authority abolished.
a second annulling all Statutes made in preceding times for maintenance of
idolatry; and a third for punishment of the sayers and hearers of Mass.

With these Acts Sr. James Sandelands Knight of the Rhodes, The Lord Torpichen
directed to France.
a Gentleman of good account (who had carried himself as neuter in all these
broiles) was directed to France for obtaining a ratification of the same from
the Queen and the King her husband; and therewith was desired to clear the
Noblemen and other Subjects from imputations of disloyalty cast upon them, and
to pacify the minds of their Sovereigns, (whom they understood to be much
exasperated) by all the good ways he could use. But he found his Embassage and
himself both contemned; the Guisians (who were the only men then in account
with the King) checking him bitterly at his first audience, for that he being a
Knight of the holy Order, should have taken a Commission from Rebels to
solicit a ratification of execrable Heresies: The Gentleman did what he could
to mitigate their wrath, but nothing could avail. So was he dismissed without
answer, whereof the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Abbat of Dunfermlin, and the
Lord Seaton, (...) from Leth with the company of French, were generally blamed.

The cold entertainment he found in that Court was soon advertised; The Earls
Morton and Glencarn sent into England.
which troubled greatly the (...) of the Professors, for they were sensible of
their own weakness, and (...) from England, if France should again invade,
because of the loss the (...) received in the late expedition; neither had the
Earl of Morton and Glencarn (who upon the breaking up of the Parliament were
sent into England to render thanks to the Queen, and to entreat the continuance
of her favor) given any advertisement of their acceptance. But whilst they
stood thus fearful, The French King dies.
news was brought of the French Kings death, which raised their hearts not a
little, neither were they more glad, then the French faction were sorrowful.

These meeting in the most secret manner they could, Mr John Lesly sent from
the French faction to persuade the Queens return.
took counsel to send Mr. John Lesley (afterward Bishop of Rosse) with
letters to the Queen, entreating her to return into Scotland; withal to show
her that the best course she could take, was to land at Aberdene, where she
should be honorably received, and find such assistance of the Noblemen in
these quarters, as at her first coming she might re-establish the Catholic
Religion: he was also desired to warn the Queen not to give ear to the counsels
of her brother, who (as they said) was of an aspiring mind, and aimed at no
less then the Government of the Realm; whom she should do wisely to cause be
detained in France, till matters at home were fully settled. The letter he
carried was subscribed by the Archbishop of Saint. Andrews, the Bishops of
Aberdene, Murray and Rosse; the Earls of Huntly, Craford, Athol, Sutherland,
and Cathnesse.

On the other side the Noblemen that had assisted the expulsion of the French,
Lord James by the Noblemen of the Reformation to the same end.
how soon they heard of the death of King Francis convened at Edinburgh, and
after counsel taken directed Lord James to the Queen to persuade her in like
manner to return: But Lesly using greater diligence came to her some days
before him, and finding her at Vitrie in Champaigne, (wthier she was gone to
seek a secret place for her sorrow) delivered the letters and credit he was
trusted with. The Queen hearing all, answered, that the Prelates and Noblemen by
whom he was employed, should rest assured of her favor, willing him to
advertise so much, and to attend till she could resolve upon her return.
Incontinent after Leslies coming the Queens uncles did enter in deliberation
what course was best for her to take, and whether or not she should return to
Scotland; for they conceived the passage by Sea would be dangerous, (she not
being assured of the Queen of Englands friendship) And in her own Kingdom the
late troubles not being fully appeased, they considered her peril would be
great, The Queen resolves to return.
and that she should be cast in many difficulties: yet finding her own mind to
incline that way, and hoping to have her more subject to their counsels whilst
she lived at home, then if she remained in France; they resolved to give way to
her return, and to provide a fleet for her safe transport. Lord James at his
coming, though he was advertised of the conclusion taken, yet dissembling his
knowledge thereof, did signify the great desire that the subjects had to enjoy
her presence, and their longing for her return, using the best reasons he could
to persuade her unto it. Hereby she was much confirmed in her purpose, and
after a day or two imparting to him her resolution, willed him to return with
diligence, and making advertisement of her journey, take care that nothing
should be attempted against the pacification made at Leth before her coming.

In March following there arrived at Leth one Noalius a Senator of Bordeaux, An
embassage from France.
bringing a Commission from the King that had now succeeded his brother,
whereby three things were craved; First, that the old league betwixt France and
Scotland should be renewed. Secondly, that the late confederacy with England
should be dissolved. Thirdly, that the Churchmen should be restored to their
places, from which they had been thrust. The Council not willing to meddle with
matters of that importance, delayed his answer to the Convention appointed in
May, at which time Lord James returned; he had audience and answer given him to
this effect: That the Scots were no way conscious to themselves of any breach
of the ancient league, but contrariwise the French had broken to them, seeking
of late (...) deprive them of their ancient liberties, and under the profession
of friendship to bring them into a miserable servitude. That they could not
violate the contract made with England, except they would (...) accounted of
all men living the most ingrate; for having received the greatest (...) and
benefit at the hands of the English, which one neighbor Nation could possibly
(...) another, if they should requite them with such ingratitude, they would
bring upon themselves a perpetual and everlasting shame. And for repairing the
Churchmen in their places, they said that they did not acknowledge those whom
they so styled to be Office-bearers in the Church, and that Scotland having
renounced the Pope, would maintain no longer his Priests and vassals.

Noalius dismissed with this answer, Morton and Glencam return from England.
the Earls of Morton and Glencarn, who a little before this time were returned
from England, did relate the good acceptance they received from the Queen, and
the promises she made to assist them in the defense of the liberties of the
Kingdom, if they should stand in need at any time of her help; which was heard
with great content. They had been trusted with a more private business; this
was to try if the Queen might be pleased to take the Earl of Arrane to her
husband, and that way to unite the Kingdoms in a more firm amity. But to this
she did in fair terms answer, That she was not as yet wearied of the single
life, and professing her self adepted to the Noblemans good affection, said
that if she should try her kindness in any other matter, he should find his
love not ill bestowed. The Earl took the repulse more patiently, because of the
French Kings death, and trusting he should gain the favor of his own Queen,
whom he greatly affected: but of this he was likewise disappointed as we will
hear.

IN the Convention kept at Edinburgh in January preceding a form of
Church-policy was presented, A form of Church policy.
and desired to be ratified. Because this will fall to be often mentioned, and
serves to the clearing of many questions which were afterward agitated in the
Church; I thought meet word by word here to insert the same, that the Reader
may see what were the grounds laid down at first for the Government of the
Church, so we shall the better decerne of the changes that followed.

The first Head of Doctrine.
SEeing that Christ Jesus is he whom God the Father has commended only to be
heard and followed of his sheep, we judge it necessary, that his Gospel be
truly and openly preached in every Church and Assembly of this Realm, and that
all Doctrine repugning to the same be utterly suppressed as damnable to man's
salvation.

The Explication of the first Head.
Lest that upon this our generality ungodly men take occasion to cavil, this
we add for explication; By preaching of the Gospel, we understand not only the
Scriptures of the New Testament, but also the Old; to wit, the Law, the
Prophets, and Histories, in which Christ Jesus is no less contained in figure,
then we have him now expressed in virtue; And therefore with the Apostle we
affirm, that all Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to instruct, to
reprove, and to exhort. In which books of Old and New Testaments we affirm that
all things necessary for the instruction of the Church, and to make the man of
God perfect, are contained and sufficiently expressed.

By the contrary Doctrine we understand, whatsoever men by Laws, Councels, or
Constitutions have imposed upon the consciences of men without the express
Commandment of Gods word; such as are the vows of chastity, forswearing of
marriage, binding of men and women to a several and disguised apparel, to the
superstitious observing of Fasting-dayes, difference of meats for conscience
sake, prayer for the dead, and keeping of Holy days of certain Saints,
commanded by man, such as be all these the Papists have invented, as the Feasts
(so as they term them) of the Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins; of Christmas,
Circumcision, Epiphany, Purification, and other said Feasts of our Lady: which
things because in the Scriptures of God they neither have commandment, nor
assurance, we judge them utterly to be abolished from this Realm. Affirming
further, that the obstinate maintainers and teachers of such abominations ought
not to escape the punishment of the Civil Magistrate.

The second head of Sacraments.
TO Christ Jesus his holy Gospel truly preached, of necessity it is that his
holy Sacraments be annexed and truly ministered as seals, and visible
confirmations of the spiritual promises contained in the words. These
Sacraments are two; to wit, Baptism, and the holy Supper of the Lord Jesus;
which are then rightly ministered, when by a lawful Minister the people before
the administration of the same, are plainly instructed and put in mind of Gods
free grace and mercy offered unto the penitent in Christ Jesus, when Gods
promises are rehearsed, the end and use of the Sacraments preached and declared
in such a language, as the people do understand; when also to them nothing is
added, and from them nothing diminished, and in their administration all things
done according to the institution of the Lord Jesus, and practice of his holy
Apostles. And albeit the order of Geneva, which now is used in some of our
Churches, is sufficient to instruct the diligent Reader how that both these
Sacraments may be rightly ministered, yet for an uniformity to be kept, we
thought good to add this as superabundant.

In Baptism we acknowledge nothing to be used except the element of water
only, and that the word and declaration of the promises (as we said before)
ought to precede: therefore whosoever presumes in Baptism to use oil, salt,
wax, spittle, conjuration and crossing, as they accuse the institution of
Christ of imperfection, (for it was void of all these inventions) so for
altering Christ's perfect Ordinance they ought to be severely punished.

The table of the Lord is then most rightly ministered, when it approaches most
nigh to Christ's own action. But plain it is that at the Supper Christ Jesus
sat with his Disciples, and therefore do we judge, that sitting at table is
most convenient to that holy action; that Bread and Wine ought to be given,
distribution of the same made, that the Bread should be taken and eaten, and
likewise that all should drink of the Cup, with declaration what both the one
and the other is. For touching the damnable error of the Papists, who defraud
the people of the Cup of the Lords blood, their error is so manifest, as it
needs no confutation.

That the Minister break the bread, and distribute the same to those that be
next unto him, commanding the rest every one with reverence and sobriety to
break with other, we think it nearest to Christ's action and to the perfect
practice of the Apostles, as we read in Saint Paul. During which action we
think it necessary, that some comfortable places of Scripture be read, which
may bring in mind the death of the Lord Jesus, and the benefit of the same:
for seeing in that Action we ought chiefly to remember the Lords death, we
judge the Scriptures making mention of the same, most apt to stir up our dull
minds then, and at all times. The Ministers at their discretion may appoint the
places to be read as they think good; but what times we think most convenient
for ministration of the one and other Sacrament, shall be declared when we come
to the policy of the Church.

The third head touching the abolishing of Idolatry.
AS we require Christ Jesus to be truly preached, and his holy Sacraments
rightly ministered; so we can not cease to require Idolatry with all monuments
and places of the same, as Abbeys, Chapels, Monkeries, Friars, Nunneries,
Chantries, Cathedral Churches, Chanonries, Colleges, other then presently are
Parish Churches or Schools, to be utterly suppressed in all places of this
Realm; Palaces, Mansions and dwelling houses, with their Orchards and Gardens,
only excepted. As also we desire that no persons, of what estate or condition
soever they be, be permitted to use idolatrous service; for that wheresoever
idolatry is maintained, if so it may be suppressed, the wrath of God shall
reign both upon the blind and obstinate idolaters, and those that negligently
suffer the same.

By Idolatry we understand, the Mass, invocation of Saints, adoration of
Images, and the keeping and retaining of the same; finally, all honoring of
God, not contained in his holy word.

The fourth head concerning Ministers and their lawful Election.
IN a Church reformed or tending to reformation none ought to presume, either
to preach, or yet minister the Sacraments, until they be called orderly to the
same. Ordinary vocation consists in Election, Examination and Admission; and
because the election of Ministers in Papistry has been altogether abused, we
think expedient to entreat of it more largely.

It appertains to the people and to every several congregation to elect
their Minister, and in case they be found negligent therein the space of forty
days, the best reformed Church, to wit, the Church of the Superintendent with
his council, may present unto them a man that they judge apt to feed the flock
of Christ Jesus, who must be examined as well in life and manners, as in
doctrine and knowledge.

That this may be done with more exact diligence, the persons who are to be
examined, must be commanded to appear before men of soundest judgment,
remaining in some principal town, next adjacent unto them. As they that be in
Fife, Angus, Mernis or Stratherne to present themselves in St. Andrews; those
that be in Lothian, Mers, or Tivio^dale, in Edinburgh; and likewise those that
be in other countries, must resort to the best reformed Cities and Towns, that
is, to the Town of the Superintendent, where first in the Schools, or failing
thereof in open assembly, and before the congregation they must give
declaration of their gifts, utterance and knowledge by interpreting some place
of Scripture to be appointed by the Ministry; which being ended, the person
that is presented, or that offers himself to the service of the Church, must
be examined by the Ministers and Elders of the Church openly before all that
list to hear, in all the chief points that be now in controversy betwixt us
and the Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians, and other such enemies to the Christian
Religion; In which if he be sound and able to persuade by wholesome Doctrine,
and to convince the gainsayers, then must he be directed to the Church and
Congregation where he would serve; that there in open audience of the flock he
may preach and deliver his knowledge in the Article of Justification, the
Offices of Christ Jesus, the number, effect and use of the Sacraments, and
finally, the whole Religion which hereto fore has been corrupted by Papists.

If his Doctrine be found wholesome and able to instruct the simple, and if the
Church can justly reprehend nothing in his life, doctrine or utterance; then we
judge the Church, which before was destitute, unreasonable, if they refuse him
whom the Church does offer, and that they should be compelled by the censure of
the Council and Church to receive the person appointed and approved by the
judgment of the Godly and Learned; unless that the same Church has presented
a man better or as well qualified to examination, before that the foresaid
trial was taken of the person presented by the Council of the whole Church.
As for example; the Council of the Church presents a man unto a Church to be
their Minister, not knowing that they are otherwise provided; in the mean time
the Church has another sufficient in their judgment for that charge, whom they
present to the learned Ministers, and next reformed Church to be examined. In
this case the presentation of the people to whom he should be appointed Pastor,
must be pre^erred to the presentation of the Council or greater Church, unless
the person presented by the inferior Church, be judged unable for the regiment
by the learned. For this is always to be avoided, that no man be intruded or
thrust in upon any congregation. But this liberty with all care must be
reserved for every several Church, to have their voices and suffrages in
election of their Ministers: Yet we do not call that violent intrusion, when
the Council of the Church in the fear of God, regarding only the salvation of
the people, offers unto them a man sufficient to instruct them, whom they
shall not be forced to admit before just examination, as is aforesaid.

What may unable any Person that he may not be admitted to the Ministry of
the Church.
It is to be observed that no person noted with public infamy, or being
unable to edify the Church by wholesome doctrine, or being known of corrupt
judgment, be either promoted to the regiment of the Church, or yet retained in
Ecclesiastical, administration.

Explication.
By public infamy we understand not common sins and offenses which any has
committed in time of blindness by frailty, if he have declared himself truly
penitent thereof by a more sober and better conversation; but such capital
crimes as the Civil sword ought and may punish with death by the Word of God;
for besides that the Apostle requires the life of Ministers to be
irreprehensible, that they may have a good testimony from those who be without,
we esteem it a thing unseemly and dangerous, that he shall have public
authority to preach to others everlasting life, from whom the Civil Magistrate
may take the life temporal for a crime publicly committed. And if any will
object, that the Prince has pardoned his offense, and that he has publicly
repented the same: we say, that neither does repentance take away the temporal
punishment of the Law, nor the pardon of the Prince remove the infamy before.

That the life and conversation of the person presented or to be elected may be
more clearly known, public Edicts may be directed to all parts, at least to
those parts where he has bin most conversant, as where he was educated in
letters, or continued since the years of his Infancy and childhood were passed.
Strict commandment would also be given, that if any capital crime has bin
committed by him, the same should be notified; and if he has committed wilful
murder, and adultery, if he has bin a common fornicator, thief, drunkard,
fighter, a brawler or contentious person; these Edicts ought to be published in
the chief Cities, with Declaration that such as conceal his known sins, do so
far as in him lies deceive and betray the Church of God, and communicate with
the sins of the wicked person.

Admission.
The admission of Ministers to their Offices must consist in the consent of the
people and Church whereunto they shall be appointed, and in the approbation of
the learned Ministers appointed for their examination.

We judge it expedient that the admission of Ministers be in open audience,
where some special Minister shall make a Sermon touching the duty and office
of Ministers, their manners, conversation and life, as also touching the
obedience which the Church owes to their Ministers; and warning made to the
Minister that he attend carefully upon the flock over which he is placed, and
walk in the presence of God so sincerely, as the graces of the holy Spirit may
be multiplied upon him; and in the presence of men, so soberly and uprightly,
that by his exemplary life the word which he teaches may be confirmed. The
people likewise ought to be exhorted to reverence and honor the Minister as
the Servant and Ambassador of the Lord Jesus, obeying the Doctrine delivered
by him out of the Word, even as they would obey God himself. For whosoever
hears the Minister of Christ, hears himself, and whosoever receives him
and despises his Ministry, rejects and despises Christ Jesus.

Other ceremonies then the public approbation of the people, and the
Declaration of the chief Minister, that the person there presented is appointed
to serve that Church, we cannot approve; for albeit the Apostles used the
Imposition of hands, yet seeing the miracle is ceased, the using of the
ceremony we judge not to be necessary.

The Minister once publicly admitted may not leave the flock at his pleasure,
to which he has promised his fidelity and labors: not yet may the flock
reject and change him at their appetite, unless they be able to convict him of
such crimes, as deserves deposition. We mean not but that the whole Church or
most part thereof for just considerations may translate a Minister from one
Church to another, neither yet mean we that men who serve now as it were of
benevolence, may not be appointed to other places, but they being once solemnly
admitted, we think they should not change at their own pleasure.

We are not ignorant, that the rarity of learned and godly men will seem a just
reason to some, why that so strict and sharp examination should not be taken
universally; for so it would appear that the most part of Churches shall have
no Minister at all. But let these men understand that the lack of able men will
not excuse us before God, if by our consent unable men be placed over the flock
of Christ. As also that amongst the Gentiles godly and learned men were as
rare, as they be now amongst us, when the Apostles gave the same rule of
examining Ministers, which we now follow.

Lastly, let them understand, that is like to have no Minister at all, and to
have an idol in the place of a true Minister, yea in some sort it is a worse;
for they that be utterly destitute of Ministers, will make diligent search for
them, but such as have a vain shadow content themselves commonly with the same,
without any further care, and they remain deceived, thinking that they have a
Minister, when in very deed they have none: for he is not to be thought a
Minister, that cannot break the Bread of life to fainting and hungry souls;
neither can the Sacraments be rightly ministered by him, in whose mouth God has
not put the word of exhortation.

The chiefest remedy in this rarity of true Ministers, is fervent prayer unto
God, that it may please him to thrust forth faithful labors into this his
harvest. Next, the Council of their authority, compel such men as have gifts
and graces able to edify the Church of God, to bestow them where greatest
necessity is known. For no man may be permitted to live idle, nor as themselves
lift, but must be appointed to travel, where the Church and Council shall
think it most expedient. We cannot prescribe certain rules how the Ministers
should be distributed, and such learned men as God has already sent unto us:
But of this we are assured, that it greatly hinders the progress of Christ's
Gospel within this poor Realm, that some altogether abstract their labors
from the Church, and others remain altogether in one place, the most part of
them being idle. And therefore think that the Council should compel all men
to whom God has given any Talent to persuade by wholesome Doctrine, to bestow
the same, if they be called by the Church, to the advancement of Christ's glory,
and to the comfort to his troubled flock; and that with consent of the Church
not only Towns may be assigned for the chiefest workmen to remain in, but
also Provinces; that by their faithful labors Churches may be erected, and
order established where none is at the present.

For Readers.
To the Church that cannot presently be furnished with Ministers, men must be
appointed that can distinctly read the Common Prayers and Scriptures for the
exercise both of themselves and of the Church, until they grow until a
greater perfection. Because he who is now a Reader, may in process of time
attain to a further degree, and be admitted to the holy Ministry. Some we know
that of long time have professed Christ Jesus, whose honest conversation
deserves praise of all good men, and whose knowledge might greatly help the
simple and ignorant people, notthelesse the same persons content themselves
with reading; These must be animated and encouraged to take upon them the
function of the Ministry. But if in no measure they be qualified for
preaching, they must abstain from administration of the Sacraments, till they
attain unto further knowledge, and such as take upon then the office of
Preachers, who shall not be found qualified therefore by the Superintendent,
are by him to be placed Readers.

The fifth head concerning the provision of Ministers, and distribution of the
rents and Possessions justly pertaining to the Church.
SCripture and Reason do both teach, that the labourer is worthy of his hire;
and that the mouth of the Ox that treads forth the corn, ought not to be
musled. Therefore of necessity it is, that honest provision be made for
Ministers, which we require to be such, that they neither have occasion of
solicitude, nor yet of insolency and wantonness. And this provision must be
made not only for their own sustentation during their lives, but also for their
wives and children after them: for it is against godliness, reason, and equity,
that the widow and children of him who did faithfully serve the Church of God
in his life, and for that cause was not careful in providing for his family,
should after his death be left comfortless.

It is difficil to appoint the several stipends of every Minister, because the
charges of necessity of all will not be alike; for some will be resident in one
place, some will be compelled to travel and change their dwelling, especially
if they have charge of diverse Churches; Some will be burdened with wife and
children, and one with more then another; some perchance will live a single
life; and if equal stipends should be appointed to all these, who are in charge
so unequal, one would suffer penury, and another have superfluity. Therefore we
judge that every Minister should have sufficient wherewith to keep an house,
and be sustained honestly in all things necessary, forth of the rents of the
Church which he serves, conform to his quality, and the necessity of time:
wherein it is thought that every Minister shall have forty bols meal, and
twenty bolls malt, with money to buy other provision to his house, and serve
his other necessities, the modification whereof is to be referred to the
judgment of the Church, which shall be made every year at the choosing of the
Elders and Deacons; providing always that there be advanced to every Minister,
provision for a quarter of a year beforehand of all things.

To the Superintendents who travel from place to place for establishing of the
Church, a further consideration must be given; therefore we think that to each
of them should be appointed six Chalders beer, nine Chalders meal, and three
Chalders oats for provand to his horse, with 500. Marks of money, which may be
augmented and diminished at the discretion of the Prince and Council of the
Realm.

The children of the Ministers must be freemen of the Cities next adjacent,
where their Fathers labored faithfully; they must also have the privileges of
Schools and Bursaries in Colleges freely granted unto them, if they be found
apt for learning; or failing thereof, they must be put to some handicraft, and
virtuous industry, whereby they may be profitable instruments in the
commonwealth. Their daughters likewise would be virtuously brought up, and
honestly educated, when they come to maturity of years, at the discretion of
the Church. And this we require not so much for our selves or any that
pertains to us, as for the increase of virtue and learning, and for the
profit of the posterity to come. For it is not to be supposed, that a man will
dedicate his children to serve in a calling, where no wordly commodity is
expected; and naturally men are provoked to follow virtue, where they see
honor and profit attending the same; as by the contrary, many despise virtue
when they see virtuous and godly men live unrespected; and we should be sorty
to know any to be discouraged from following the studies of learning, whereby
they may be made able to profit the Church of Christ.

Of the stipend of the Readers we have spoken nothing, because if they can do
nothing but read, they cannot be esteemed true Ministers, and regard must be
had of their labors, but so as they may be spurred forward to virtue;
therefore to a Reader that is lately entered, we think forty Marks, more or
less as the Parishioners can agree, sufficient: providing that he teach the
children of the Parish, which he must do besides the reading of the Common
Prayer, and the books of Old and New Testament. If from reading he proceed to
exhort and explain the Scriptures, then ought his stipend to be augmented,
till he come to the degree of a Minister. But if after two years service he be
found unable to edify the Church by preaching, he must be removed from that
office and discharged of all stipend, that another may be put in place, who to
the Church may be more profitable.

No child nor person within the age of one and twenty years may be admitted to
the office of a Reader, but such must be chosen and admitted by the
Superintendent, as for their gravity and discretion may grace the function that
they are called unto. These Readers who have some gift of exhortation, and have
long continued in the course of godliness, we think may have 100. Marks or
more, at the discretion of the Church appointed for them; yet a difference must
always be kept betwixt them and the Ministers that labor in word and
ministration of the Sacraments.

Rests two sorts of people who must be provided for of that which is called the
Patrimony of the Church; to wit, the poor, and the Teachers of the youth. The
poor must be provided for in every Parish, for it is a shameful thing that they
should be so universally contemned, and despised. Not that we are Patrons to
stubborn and idle beggars, who running from place to place make a craft of
begging; for those we think must be compelled to work, or then punished by the
Civil Magistrate. But the poor widows, the fatherless, the impotent maimed
persons, the aged, and every one that may not work, or such persons as are
fallen by occasion into decay, ought to be provided, and have their necessities
supplied by the Parish where they were borne, or have remained for any long
space.

Of Superintendents.
Because it is found expedient for the erecting and planting of Churches, and
appointing of Ministers, that at this time there be selected ten or twelve
Superintendents, we have thought good to design their bounds, set down their
office, the manner of their election, and causes which may deserve deposition
from their charge.

The Dioces of the Superintendents, and places of their residence.
The Country of Orkney shall have a Superintendent, and for his Dioces the
Isles of Orkney, with the countries of Cathnes and Strathnaver; his residence
to be in the Town of Kirkwall.

The Superintendent of Ross, his Dioces shall comprehend Ross, Southerland,
Murray, with the North Isles of Sky, and Lergis* and their adjacents; his
residence should be in the Chanonry of Ross.

The Superintendent of Argyle shall have for his Dioces Argyle, Cantyre, Lorne,
the South Isles of Arrane, and Boole, with the Isle adjacent, and the country
of Loghquaber; his residence to be in Argyle.

The Superintendent of Aberdene, his Dioces shall comprehend all betwixt Dye
and Spey, that is, the Sherifdom of Aberdene and Bamff; his residence to be in
old Aberdene.

The Superintendent of Brichen shall have for his Dioces the Sherifdomes of
Mernis, Angus, and the Bray of Mar unto Dey, and keep his residence at
Brichen.

The Superintendent of Fife shall have for his Dioces the Sherifdomes of Fife,
Fotheringham, and Perth unto Striveling; his residence shall be in S. Andrews.

The Superintendent of Lothian his Dioces shall comprehend the Sherifdomes of
Lothian, Striveling, Mers, Lawtherdale; and Stow of Twaddale; his residence to
be in Edinburgh.

The Superintendent of Iedburgh shall have for his Dioces Teviotdale, Tweddale,
and the Forest of Attrick; his residence to be in Iedburgh.

The Superintendent of Glasgow his Dioces shall comprehend Clyddisdale,
Ranfrew, Monteith, Kile, and Cunningham; his residence to be at Glasgow.

The Superintendent of Dunfreis shall have for his Dioces Galloway, Carrick,
Niddisdale, and Annandale, with the rest of the Dales in the West; his
residence to be at Dunfreis.

These men must not be suffered to live idle as the Bishops have done
heretofore, neither must they remain where gladly they would, but they must be
Preachers themselves, and remain in one place above three or four months:
after which they must enter in visitation of their whole bounds, preach thrice
a week at least, and not to rest till the Churches be wholly planted, and
provided of Ministers, or at the least Readers.

In their visitation they must try the life, diligence, and behavior of the
Ministers, the order of their Churches, and the manners of their people, how
the poor are provided, and how the youth is instructed; They must admonish
where admonition needs, and dress all things that by good counsel they are
able to compose; finally they must take note of all heinous crimes, that the
same may be corrected by the censures of the Church.

Of the election of Superintendents.
Such is the present necessity, that the Examination and Admission of the
Superintendents cannot be so strict as afterward it must; for the present
therefore we think it sufficient, that the Council nominate so many as may
serve the Provinces above written, or then give Commission to men of best
knowledge, who have the fear of God to do the same. The Gentlemen and Burgesses
of Towns within the Dioces, being always made privy at this time to the
election; as well to bring the Church in practice of her liberty, as to make
the Pastor better favored of the flock, whom themselves have chosen.

If so many able men cannot be found at the present, as necessity requires, it
is better that those Provinces wait till God provide, then that men unable to
edify and govern the Church, be suddenly placed in the charge: experience
having taught, what ills have bin engendered in the Church by men unable to
discharge their offices.

If any Superintendent shall depart this life, or happen to be deposed, the
Minister of the chief Town within that Province, with the Magistrate and
Council, the Elders and Deacons of the said Town, shall nominate the
Superintendents of two or three Provinces next adjacent, within the space of
twenty days, two or three of the most godly and learned Ministers within the
Realm, that from among them with public consent one may be elected to the
office then vacant. The twenty days expired, and no man presented, three of
the next adjacent Provinces, with consent of their Superintendents, Ministers,
and Elders, shall enter into the right and privilege of the chief Town, and
shall present one or two, if they list, to be examined according to the order,
and it shall be lawful for all the Churches within the Dioces, within the same
time to nominate such persons as they esteem worthy election.

After the nomination made, public edicts must be sent forth, warning all men
that have any objections against the persons nominated, or against any one of
them, to appear in the chief Town at the day affixed, which we think should be
thirty days after the nomination, and declare what they have to say against
the election of any one of them.

The day appointed for the election being come, the Ministers of the Province,
with the Superintendents next adjacent, shall examine the learning, manners,
prudence, and ability to govern the Church, of the whole persons nominated, and
cause them publicly to preach, to the end he that is most worthy, may be
burdened with the charge; And then they shall give their voices according to
conscience, and not out of affection: It must be considered, whether the
objection be made of malice or out of a zeal to Gods glory, and the weal of the
Church. Other ceremonies then this examination, the approbation of Ministers
and Superintendents, with the public consent of Elders and people, we do not
admit.

The Superintendent so elected, must be subject to the censure and correction
of the Ministers, and Elders of his chief Town, and whole Province, over which
he is appointed: and if he be found negligent in any of the chief points of his
office, especially if he be found negligent in preaching* the word, or in
visitation of his Churches, and if he be convict of any of these crimes, which
in a common Minister are condemned, he must be deposed, without respect of his
person or office.

If his offense be public, and the Ministers and Elders of the Province
negligent in correcting him; then the next one or two Superintendents, with
their Ministers and Elders, may convene him, providing the same be within his
own Province or chief Town, and inflict the censure that his offense deserves.

No Superintendent may be translated at the pleasure or request of any one
Province, without the Council of the whole Church, and that for grave causes,
and considerations.

After the Church shall be established, and three years are past, no man shall
be called to the office of a Superintendent, who has not two years at least
given a proof of his faithful labors in the ministry of some Church.

Of Schools, and the necessity of them.
Seeing men now adays are not miraculously gifted, as in the time of the
Apostles, for the continuance of knowledge and learning to the generations
following, especially for the profit and comfort of Christ's Church; it is
necessary that care be had of the virtuous and godly education of youth:
wherefore we judge that in every Parish there should be a Schoolmaster, such a
one as is able at least to teach the Grammar, and Latin tongue, where the Town
is of any reputation. But in Landwart, where people convene to Doctrine only
once in the week, then must either the Reader or the Minister take care of the
youth of the Parish, to instruct them in their rudiments, especially in the
Catechism of Geneva.

In every notable Town, chiefly in the Town of the Superintendent, we think
that a College should be erected, wherein at least the arts of Logic and
Rhetoric, with the Tongues, should be taught by sufficient Masters, for whom
honest stipends must be appointed. And that provision should be made for such
youths as are poor, and cannot be brought up in letters by their friends: the
commodity whereof will be great, when the children are brought up in the
presence of their friends, by whose good attendants their necessities may be
supplied, and many inconveniences avoided, that youth commonly runs into,
when they are sent to strange and unknown places. The exercise likewise of
children in the Church, cannot but serve greatly to the instruction of the aged
and unlearned.

The great Schools called Universities, should be replenished with those that
be apt for learning: for no father of what condition or estate soever he be,
ought to use his children after his own fantasy, especially in their youth;
but all must be compelled to bring them up in knowledge and virtue. The rich
must be exhorted, and by the censure of the Church compelled, to dedicate their
sons to the profit of the Church and Commonwealth, training them up in godly
exercises upon their own expenses, and the children of the poor must be
sustained upon the charge of the Church, till it be tried whether they be apt
for letters and learning or not.

If they be found to be docile, and have good ingenies, they may not be
permitted to reject learning, but charged to follow their studies, that the
Commonwealth may reap some comfort by them: and for this purpose the Minister
and Elders, with the best learned in every Town, must be appointed to examine
at the end of every quarter, the youths, and see how they do profit.

A certain time must be appointed to reading of the Catechism; a certain time
to the Grammar, and Latin tongue; a certain time to Arts and Philosophy; and a
certain time to the other tongues and studies which they intend to learn. That
time expired, some craft and profitable exercise; Providing always they have
learned first the Commandments, the Articles of the Belief, the right form to
pray unto God; the number, use and effect of the Sacraments; and that they may
be instructed touching the natures and Offices of Jesus Christ, and other such
points as without the knowledge of them they neither deserve to be called
Christians, nor ought to be admitted to the participation of the Lords Table.

The time appointed to every course.
Two years we hold more then sufficient for learning to read perfectly, to
answer to the Catechism, and get some entrance in the rudiments of Grammar.
Three or four years more we allow for attaining to the perfection of Grammar.
To the Arts, that is, Logic, Rhetoric, and the Greek tongue, we allow other
four years, and the rest of 24. years to be spent in that study wherein they
intend to serve the Church or Commonwealth, be it in the Laws, Physic, or
Divinity. After which time of 24 years being spent in the Schools, they must be
removed to serve the Church or Commonwealth, unless they be found necessary
Professors for the College or University.

The erection of Universities.
We think it necessary that there be three Universities in the Realm; one in
St. Andrews, another in Glasgow, and the third at Aberdene. In the first and
principal Universitie, which is St. Andrews, that there be three Colleges;
and in the first College there be four Classes; The first for new Supposts, to
whom Dialectick only shall be taught; the next Class shall have the
Metaphysics only read; the third Physic, and the fourth Medicine. In the
second College shall be two Classes, whereof the first shall be for moral
Philosophy, and the second for the Laws. In the third College likewise two
Classes, the first for the Greek and Hebrew tongues, and the second for
Divinity.

Of Professors, and of the Degrees of time and Studies.
In the first College and first Class there shall be a Reader of Dialectick,
who shall complete his course thereof in one year. In the second Class a
Professor of Mathematics, who shall read to the Students Arithmetic,
Geometry, Cosmography and Astrology* the space of another year. In the third
Class a Professor of natural Philosophy, who shall accomplish his course
likewise in one year. After which three years, those that shall be found by
trial sufficiently grounded in the foresaid Sciences, shall be Laureat and
Graduate in Philosophy. In the fourth Class there shall be a Reader of
Medicine, who shall complete his course in five years; After the study whereof
such as are found sufficient upon examination, shall be Graduate in Medicine.

In the second College and first Class thereof a Reader of Ethics, O
Economicks and Politics, whose course shall end in one year; In the second
Class shall be two Readers of the Municipall and Roman Laws, who shall finish
their course in four years; after which time those that are found sufficient,
shall be Graduate in the Laws.

In the third College and first Class a Reader of the Hebrew and another of
the Greek tongue, who shall complete the Grammars thereof in half a year; the
rest of the year the Reader of the Hebrew shall interpret some Books of Moses,
of the Prophets, or Psalms, so that his course shall continue one year: the
Reader of the Greek shall interpret some Book of Plato, together with some Book
of the New Testament, and shall finish his course the same year. In the second
Class there shall be two Readers of Divinity, one of the New Testament, and
another of the Old, who shall finish their course in five years. After which
time those that are found sufficient shall be Graduate in Divinity.

None shall be admitted into the first College, and be made Suppost of the
Universitie, unless he have from the Master of the School, and Minister of the
Town, where he was instructed in the Latin tongue, a testimony of his
learning, docilitie, age, and parentage.

Those that have bin taught the Dialectick shall be examined by the Rector and
Principalls, and being found to have profited therein, shall be promoved to the
Class of the Mathematics.

None shall be admitted to the Class of Medicine, but he that shall be known
to have spent his time well in Dialectick, Mathematick and Physic, and shall
have a testimonial of his docilitie in the last.

None admitted to the Class of Laws, but he that shall have a testimonial of
his time well spent in Dialectick, Mathematick, Ethick, O Economicks,
Politics, and of his docilitie in the last.

And to the Class of Divines they only shall be admitted that bring a
sufficient Testimonial of their time well spent in Dialectick, Mathematick,
Physic, Ethick, O Economick and Politic Philosophy, the knowledge of the
Hebrew tongue, and of his docility in Divinity.

Such as will apply themselves to hear the Laws shall not be compelled to hear
Medicine, neither shall such as apply themselves to hear Divinity be compelled
either to hear Medicine or the Laws.

The second University at Glasgow, shall have two Colleges. In the first
whereof shall be three Classes; one for Dialectick, another for Mathematick,
and a third for Physic; And in the second College shall be four Classes, one
for moral Philosophy, Ethics, O Economicks, and Politics; another for the
Municipall and Roman Laws* the third for the Hebrew tongue, and the last for
Divinity to be ordered according to the University of St. Andrews.

The third Universitie at Aberdene shall be conform to the University of
Glasgow in all points.

Unto every College there must be elected forth of the body of the University,
a Principal, who must be a man of learning, discretion and diligence; he shall
receive the whole rents of the College, and distribute the same according to
the erection of the College, adjoining to himself weekly one of the
Professors; he shall hearken daily the Diet compts, and oversee the policy and
buildings of the house, attend that the Professors be diligent in their
several readings to the youth, and shall weekly keep a meeting with the whole
Members of the College for punishment of faults that shall happen to be
committed, and shall yearly be countable to the superintendent Rector and rest
of the Principalls, who shall convene to that effect the first of November.

The election of the Principal shall be in this sort, within eight days after
the place falls void, the members of the College being sworn to follow their
conscience shall nominate three of the most sufficient men of the University,
not being Principalls already, who shall be publicly propounded through the
whole University; This done, the Superintendent by himself, or his special
Procurators, with the Rector and the rest of the Principalls, shall convene
within eight days after, and choose one of the three whom they think most
sufficient, being sworn before to do the same without favor or partial
affection.

There shall be in every College a Steward, Cook, Gardener and Porter, who
shall be subject to the Principal as are the rest.

Every University shall have a Beddale, who shall be subject to serve at all
times the University at the direction of the Rector and Principal.

There shall likewise a Rector be chosen in every University from year to year
on this manner. The Principalls of the Colleges with the whole Regents
chapterly convened shall be sworn to nominate every man speaking in his own
room, such a one as in his conscience he thinks to be most sufficient for
that charge and dignity; and of those who shall be most often nominated there
shall be put in lite 15. days before Michaelmas, and upon the eve of
Michaelmas the whole Principals, Regents and Supposts graduated, or who have
studied the Ethics, O Economicks and Politics, and no others, every nation
having protested to follow the Dictate of their own Conscience, shall nominate
one of the said three, and he unto whom most voices are given, shall be
confirmed by the Superintendent and Principals, who shall take his oath for
lawful administration, and the oath of the rest of the University, for their
submission and obedience; after which he shall put on a new garment, and be
presented to the University. Insignia Magistratus being born before him,
monthly he shall visit every College, and try how the exercises of Reading
be kept; his assessours shall be a Lawyer and Theologue, by whose advice he
shall decide all Civil questions betwixt the Members of the Universitie. If
any without the Universitie pursue a Member thereof, or be pursued by any
Member of the same, he shall assist the Provost and Bailies and other Judges
competent to see justice ministered, and that as well in civil as criminal
causes.

We think it expedient that in every College of the whole Universities there
be 24. Bursars divided equally in the Classes above specified; that is, in St.
Andrews 72. Bursars, in Glasgow 48. in Aberdene as many; these shall be
sustained only in meat upon the charges of the College, and not be admitted
but upon trial taken by the Ministry of the Town, and Principalls of the
Universitie, as well touching their own docility, as if their parents be able
to entertain them or not.

Of Stipends, and the expenses n^cessary.
The sums needful for the ordinary charges, we judge may be as follows.

Imprimis, for the stipend of the Professors of Dialectick, Mathematick,
Physic and Moral Philosophy, for each of those 100l. Item, for the Professor
of Medicine, and Laws 200. marks. Item, to the Reader of the Hebrew and Greek
tongues, and Divinity, 200l. Item, to every Principal 200l. Item, to every
Steward for his fee 16l. Item, to every Gardener, Cook and Porter 10. marks.
Item, to the sustentation of every Bursar, that is not in the Class of
Theology or Medicine, 20l. Item, to the Bursars in these Classes 24l. Summa of
the yearly and ordinary expenses in the Universitie of St. Andrews, extends
to 3796l. summa of the yearly and ordinary expenses of Glasgow, extends to
2922l. Summa of Aberdene 2922l. Summa of the whole ordinary charges is 9640l.

For the payment of these sums we think the Temporalties of Bishoprics and
Churches Collegiat ought to be destinated so far at least, as the same
charges do require.

The Beddale shall have for his stipend 2s. of every Intrant and Suppost of the
Universitie, of every Graduate in Philosophy 3s. of the Graduate in Medicine
4s. and 5s. of the Graduate in Theology, Bursars in these studies only excepted.

For upholding the fabric this order would be taken, that every Earls son at
his entry shall give 40s. with so much at his graduation; Every Lords son 30s.
The son of a Baron 20s. the son of a Burgess or substantious Gentleman 10s. and
the sons of all others, Bursars excepted, 5s. These moneys being collected
shall be put in a common box, and committed to the keeping of the Principal,
and upon the 15. day of November yearly in the presence of the Superintendent,
Rector and whole Principals the same shall be opened, the moneys counted, and by
their consents reserved or employed upon building or repairing, as the
necessity of the fabric shall require.

Of the Privilege of the University.
Seeing innocence should rather defend us then privilege, we think that every
person should answer before the Provost and Bailies of the Town, where the
University is, upon all actions they are called for, so as the Rector be
assessor to the Magistrates therein; If the question be betwixt members of the
University, the party called is not held to answer but before the Rector, and
his assessors; in all other causes of civil pursuit the general rule of law is
to be observed, Actor sequatur forum rei.

The Rector and all inferior members of the University must be exempted from
all taxes, imposts, charges of war, or any other burdens that may abstract
them from attending the youth, such as Tutory, Curatory, Executory, and the
like.

As for other things that may concern the Students and Masters such as the
choice of books to be read in every Class, and such other particulars, they
are to be left to the discretion of the Principal and Regents, and their
Council.

The sixth head of the Rents and Patrimony of the Church.
TWo sorts of men, that is, the Preachers of the word, and the poor, besides
the Schools, must be sustained upon the rents of the Church; wherefore it would
be considered how, and of what the same is to raised. For to our grief we hear
that some Gentlemen are now more rigorous in exacting the tithes, and other
duties paid before to the Church, then ever the Papists were, and so the
tyranny of Priests is turned into the tyranny of Lords or Lairds; for this we
require, that the Gentlemen, Barons, Lords, Earls, and others, be content to
live upon their own rents, and suffer the Church to be restored to her right
and liberty, that by her restitution the poor that heretofore have been
oppressed, may now receive some comfort and relaxation.

It is a thing most reasonable that every man have the use of his own tithes,
providing that he answer the Deacons and Treasurer of the Church, of that which
shall be reasonably appointed unto him, and that the uppermost cloth, the
Corpresent, the Clerkmail, the Pasche-offerings, Tith-ale, and other the like
exactions be discharged for ever. And because not only the Ministers, but also
the poor and Schools must be sustained upon the Tithes, we think it more
expedient, that Deacons and common Treasurers of the Church be appointed to
receive the whole rents appertaining thereto, then the Ministers themselves:
And that commandment may be given that no man either receive, or intromet with
any thing belonging to the sustentation of the foresaid persons, but such as
shall be appointed thereto by the Church.

If any shall think this prejudicial to those that possess the tithes by
virtue of leases, we would have them know, that unjust possession is no
possession before God; and that those of whom they acquired their right, were
thieves and murderers, and had no power to alienate the Patrimony and common
good of the Church: yet do we wish recompense to be made to such as have
debursed sums of money to these unjust possessors, so that the same had not
been given of late, in prejudice of the Church, or no collusion used. For which
purpose we think it expedient that whosoever have the titles of any Church in
part or whole, be warned to produce his right, that cognition being taken
thereof, a reasonable recompense may be given them, before the years that are
to run; the profits of years past deduced, and considered, so that the Church
in end may receive her liberty and freedom.

The tithes that we think must be lifted for the use of the Church, are the
tithes of hay, hemp, lint, cheese, fish, calf, veal, lamb, wool, and all sorts
of corn. But because these will not suffice to discharge the necessaries of the
Church, we think that all things dotate to hospitality in times past, with all
annual rents both to Burgh and Land, pertaining to Priests, Chanteries,
Colleges, Chaplaineries, and Friars of all orders, to the sisters of the
Seynes, and all other of that sort, be retained to the use of the Church or
Churches within the Towns or Parishes where they were founded: likewise the
whole revenues of the temporalities of Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons; with
all rents of lands pertaining to Cathedral Churches, which must be applied to
the entertainment of Superintendents, and Universities. And further, we think
that Merchants and Craftsmen in free Burghs, who have nothing to do with
manuring the ground, ought to make some provision in their Cities and Towns,
and dwelling places for the support of the Church, and necessities thereof.

The Ministers, and failing of them, the Readers must be restored to their
Manses and Gleibs, without which they cannot serve nor attend their flocks, and
where any Gleib exceeds six acres of land, that which is more shall remain
with the possessor, till further order be taken.

The Deacons or Treasurers appointed to collect these rents, must be chosen
yearly in every Parish by the common consent of the Church, they may not
distribute any part of that which is collected, but by the command of the
Ministers and Elders, who must command any thing to be delivered but as the
Church has before determined. That is, the Ministers to be first paid either
quarterly, or from half year to half year, of the sums allowed to them, the
Schoolmasters, Readers, and Hospitals, if any be.

If any extraordinary sums must be disbursed, then the Ministers, Elders, and
Deacons are to consult whether the same stands with the profit of the Church or
not; and if they do agree, they may do as best seems unto them. But if there
be controversy amongst themselves, the whole Church must be made privy, and
the reasons heard; their judgment with the Ministers consent shall prevail.

The Deacons shall make their Accounts to the Minister and Elders of that which
they have received, and the Elders when they are changed (which must be every
year) shall clear their accounts before such Auditors as the Church shall
appoint. And both the Deacons and Elders being changed, shall deliver to them
that are newly elected, all sums of money, corns, or other profits resting in
their hands; the tickets whereof must be delivered to the Superintendents in
their visitations, and by them to the great Council of the Church, that as well
the indigence, as abundance of every Church may be known, and so a reasonable
equality may be kept through the whole Realm.

The seventh head concerning the Censuring of offenders.
AS no Commonwealth can flourish, or long endure without good laws and sharp
execution of the same: so cannot the Church of God be purged, or yet retained
in purity without the order of Ecclesiastical discipline; This stands in
reproving and correcting those faults, which the Civil sword does either
neglect, or may not panish.

Blasphemy, Adultery, Murder, Perjury, and such capital crimes fall not
properly under the censure of the Church, because such open transgressors of
Gods law, should be taken away by the Civil sword. But Drunkenness, Excess,
whether in apparel or in meat and drink, Fornication, oppression of the poor by
exactions deceit in buying and selling, by wrong mete and measure, wanton words
and licentious living tending to slander, do properly appertain to the censure
of the Church, which in the order and cases following we judge shall be
observed.

If the offense be secret and known by few, and be rather surmised then that it
be manifestly proved, the offender ought to be privately admonished, and if he
promise to amend, the censure shall not proceed any further.

If he contemn the admonition that is given him, or after promise walk als
uncircumspectly as before, the Minister ought to call and rebuke him, and if he
be disobedient, proceed according to the rule of Christ.

In faults public and heinous, such as Fornication, Drunkenness, Fighting,
common Swearing, and Execration, the offender must be called before the
Minister, Elders, and Deacons, and have his sin laid out before him; whereof if
he show himself penitent, and require to be admitted to public satisfaction, a
day should be appointed for his appearance before the whole Church, to testify
the repentance which before he professed; which if he accept, and with
reverence perform, he ought to be received again in the society of the Church:
for the Church of God must not be more rigorous, then God declares himself to
be: who witnesses, that Whenever a sinner does unfainedly repent and turn
from his wickedness, that he will not remember his iniquity any more.

If the offender be obstinate and show no signs of repentance, he must be
dismissed with an exhortation, to consider his dangerous estate, and assured
that if he do not show no tokens of amendment, a more severe course will be
taken. If within a certain space he manifest his repentance to the Minister, he
may be presented before the Congregation, and received in manner aforesaid. But
if he shall continue in his impiety, then it must be signified to the
congregation, that such offenses are fallen out amongst them, the committer
thereof rebuked and desired to repent, whereof as yet no tokens are given, and
they requested to call unto God for touching the heart of the offender (whose
fault ought to be expressed, but not his name) with remorse that he may truly
and earnestly be converted.

If he notwithstanding continue in his contempt, his name must the next day of
the public meeting be notified to the congregation, and the most discreet and
nearest of his friends or acquaintance entreated to deal with him earnestly,
that he may be brought to the knowledge of the fault, and solemn prayers made
for his conversion to God.

The third Sunday the Minister shall require, if the impenitent has declared
any signs of his repentance; and it being found that he has done the same, a
day shall be affixed to him for appearing before the Consistory, where if he
show himself penitent, as well of the crime, as of his long contempt, he shall
be received upon public satisfaction in manner before prescribed.

But if no man signify his repentance, then the Minister by consent of the
Elders and Deacons, and at commandment of the Church, shall pronounce the
offender excommunicated from God and from the society of his Church. After
which sentence no person may have any kind of conversation with him, (his wife
and family only excepted) in eating, drinking, buying, selling, saluting, or
conforming with him, unless the same be licensed by the Ministry; that he
finding himself abhorred of the faithful and godly, may take occasion to
repent, and so be saved.

This sentence as being the most heavy censure which can be inflicted by the
Church, ought not to be rashly used, but for great causes, and due process of
time kept; but being pronounced, ought with all severity to be maintained, and
intimation thereof made through the whole Realm, lest any should pretend
ignorance of the same.

His children begotten or born after the sentence and before his repentance,
may not be admitted to Baptism, till either they be of age to require it, or
else the mother, or some of his special friends members of the Church, present
and offer the child, abhorring and damning the iniquity of his parent. If any
do think it rigorous thus to punish the child for the fathers offense, let
them understand that the Sacraments appertain only to the faithful and their
seed; and that such as contemn the admonitions of the Church, and obstinately
continue in their iniquity, cannot be reckoned amongst the faithful.

Murderers, manslayers, adulterers, and committers of the like horrible
crimes, whom the Civil sword ought to punish with death, if they shall be
permitted to live, shall be holden excommunicate and accursed in their fact.
The offenders being first called, and the order of the Church used against them
in the same manner, as the persons who for their obstinacy are publicly
excommunicated, so the obstinate impenitent after the sentence of
excommunication, and the murderer or adulterer shall stand in one case as
concerning the judgment of the Church, and neither of both admitted to prayers
or Sacraments (howbeit they may be present at the preaching of the Word) till
first they offer themselves to the Minister and Elders, requesting humbly their
prayers, and desiring them to intercede with the Church for their admission to
public repentance.

Upon this humble request signification shall be given to the Church of the
same, the first day of public preaching, and the congregation exhorted to pray
unto God, that he will perform the work which he appears to have begun in the
heart of the offender, by granting him unfaigned repentance of his sin, with a
sense and feeling of his mercy. Thereafter a day shall be publicly assigned
unto him him to make open confession of his crime and contempt. At which time
he must appear in presence of the congregation, and confessing the same desire
mercy of God, and entreat them to accept him in their society.

The Minister shall try diligently if he find in him an hatred and displeasure
of his impiety committed, and as he finds, so to comfort him in the hope of
Gods mercies; but especially is to see that he be instructed in the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, in the article of Justification, and offices of Christ; for it
were a mocking of God to receive him to repentance, who knows not wherein his
remedy stands, when he is grieved for sin.

If he shall perceive him to be reasonably instructed, and humbly disposed,
then shall he demand of the congregation, if they be willing to receive that
creature of God, (whom Satan had before drawn in his snare) into their society,
which they yielding unto, (as justly they may not deny the same) then ought the
Minister to crave the assistance of the Churches prayers in behalf of the
penitent* and prayer ended, exhort them to receive him again in their favors,
in token whereof the Elders, and one or two of the Congregation shall take him
by the hand, and embrace him in the name of the whole Church.

This done, the Minister shall exhort him who is received to walk circumspectly
in time coming, lest Satan catch him again in his snares, advertising him how
that enemy will not cease to try all means possible for bringing him from the
obedience that he has given to God, and his Ordinance. And after the
exhortation shall give again public thanks to God for the conversion of that
their brother, and pray for increase and continuance of his grace to him, and
the whole congregation.

Unto this discipline the whole estates of the Realm, as well the Rulers, as
they that are ruled, and the Preachers themselves, as well as the poorest
within the Church, must be subject: the Ministers especially, because they as
the eye and mouth of the Church should be most irreprehensible.

The eighth head concerning Elders and Deacons.
MEn of best knowledge, of purest life, and most honest conversation that can
be found in every Church, must be nominated for these offices, and their names
publicly read unto the congregation, that from amongst those some may be
chosen to serve as Elders and Deacons. If any be nominated, who is noted with
public infamy, he must be repelled; for it is not seemly that the servant of
corruption should have authority to judge in the Church of God: or if any man
know others that are of better qualities within the Church, then those who are
nominated, the same shall be joined to the others, that the Church may have the
choice. If the Churches be few in number, so as Elders and Deacons cannot
conveniently be had, the same Church may be joined to the next adjacent; for
the plurality of Churches without Ministers and order does rather hurt, then
edify.

The election of Elders and Deacons ought to be made every year once, which we
judge most convenient to be done the first of August yearly, lest men by long
continuance in those Offices presume upon the liberty of the Church. And yet it
hurts not, if a man be retained in office more years then one, so as he be
appointed yearly thereto by common and free election: Providing always that
the Deacons, and Thesaurers of the Church be not compelled to receive again the
same Office for the space of ^. years. How the suffrages shall be given and
received, every several Church may take the order that seems best to them.

The Elders being elected must be admonished of their Office, which is to
assist the Minister in all public affairs of the Church; to wit, in judging
and discerning of causes, in giving admonition to licentious livers, and having
an eye upon the manners and conversation of all men within their charge: for by
the gravity of the Elders the loose and dissolute manners of other men ought to
be restrained and corrected. The Elders ought also to take heed to the life,
manners, diligence and study of their Ministers; And if he be worthy of
admonition, they must admonish him; if of correction, they must correct him;
and if he be worthy of deposition, they with the consent of the Church and
Superintendent may depose him.

The Office of Deacons is to receive the rents, and gather the Alms of the
Church, to keep and distribute the same as they shall be appointed by the
Ministry and the Church; yet they may also assist in judgment the Minister
and Elders, and be admitted to read in public Assemblies, if they be called,
required and found able thereto.

The Elders and Deacons, with their wives and families, must be subject to the
same censure, that Ministers are subject unto; for they are Judges to the
manners of others, and therefore they must be sober, humble, entertainers of
concord and peace amongst neighbors; and finally, an ensample of godlyness to
the rest of the flock: whereof if the contrary appear, they must be admonished
by the Minister or some of their brethren, if the fault be secret; but if it be
open and known, they must be openly rebuked, and the same order kept with them
that is prescribed against Ministers offending. We think it not necessary that
any public stipend be appointed either to the Elders or Deacons, because their
travel continues but for a year; as also because they are not so occupied
with the affairs of the Church, but that they may have leisure to attend their
private business.

Of the Censure and Deposition of Ministers.
If a Minister be of a loose conversation, negligent in his study, and one that
waits not on his charge and flock, or one that proponeth not fruitful
doctrine to his people, he ought to be admonished by the Elders, and if he
amend not, the Elder may complain to the Ministry, till his repentance appear;
but if any Minister be deprehended of any notable crime, as whoredom,
adultery, murder, manslaughter, perjurie, heresy, or any such as deserves
death, or any infer the note of infamy, he ought to be deposed for ever. By
heresy we understand pernicious doctrine plainly taught, and obstinately
defended against the foundation and principal grounds of Christian faith. Such
a crime we judge to deserve perpetual deposition from the Ministry, knowing
it to be a thing most dangerous to commit a flock unto a man infected with
heresy.

Some faults deserve deposition for a time; as if a Minister be deprehended
drunken, if he be a brawler, or fighter, an open slanderer, a defamer of his
neighbors, factious and a sower of discord; till he declare himself penitent,
and give some assurance of better conversation, upon which the congregation
shall attend the space of twenty days or longer, as they shall think
expedient, before they proceed to a new election.

Every inferior Church should notify by one of their Elders, and one of their
Deacons to the Superintendent, the life, manners, study and diligence of their
Ministers, that the discretion of some may correct the levitie of others.
Neither must the life and manners only of their Ministers come under censure,
but also of their wives, children and family.

It must likewise be adverted, that the Minister neither live riotously nor
avaritiously, and a respect had how he spends his stipend: for if a
reasonable stipend be appointed him, he must live accordingly, because
avaritiousness and solicitude of money is no less to be damned in Christ's
servants, especially those who are fed at the charge of the Church, then is
excess and superfluity.

We judge it unseemly for Ministers to live in common Alehouses or Taverns;
neither must a Minister be permitted to frequent the Court, unless it be for a
time when he is either employed by the Church, or called by the Authority to
give his counsel and judgment in any matter: Neither yet must he be one of
the council in Civil affairs, be he never judged so apt for the purpose; but
either must he cease from the Ministry (which at his own pleasure he may not
do,) or else in bearing charge in Civil affairs, except it be to assist the
Parliament when the same is called.

The ninth head concerning the Policy of the Church.
WE call the Policy of the Church the exercise of Religion in such things as
may help to bring the ignorant to knowledge, or else promove in them that are
more learned, a further growth of grace, or otherwise such things as are
appointed for keeping things in good order within the Church, whereof there be
two sorts* the one utterly necessary, as that the Word may be truly preached,
the Sacraments rightly administrtd, common Prayers publicly made, children and
simple persons instructed in the chief points of Religion, and offenses
corrected and punished. These things we say are so necessary, that without the
same there cannot be any face of a visible Church.

The other sort is profitable, but not merely necessary, as that Psalms be
sung, and certain places of Scripture read, when there is no Sermon; or that
the Church should convene this or that day in the week to hear Sermons. Of
these and the like, we see not how a certain Order can be established: For in
some Churches the Psalms may be conveniently sung, in other perhaps they
cannot; some Churches may convene every day, some twice or thrice in the week,
and some it may be but once: In these and the like every particular Church may
appoint their own policy themselves. Yet in great towns we think expedient,
that every day there be either Sermon or Common Prayer, with some exercise of
reading the Scriptures. The day of public Sermon, we do not think the
Common Prayers needful to be used, lest we should foster the people in
superstition who come to the Prayers, as they come to the Mass, or give them
occasion to think that those are no Prayers which are conceived before and
after Sermon.

In every famous town we require that one day besides the Sunday be appointed
for Sermon, during the time whereof men must abstain from all exercise of trade
and labor the servant as well as the master. In smaller towns such order must
be kept as the Churches within the same shall appoint, but the Sunday in all
towns must precisely be observed, before and after noon. Before noon the Word
must be preached, Sacraments administered, and marriage solemnized when occasion
does offer. After noon the Catechism must be taught, and the young children
examimined thereupon, in audience of all the people: In doing whereof the
Minister must have care to cause the people understand the questions
propounded, with the answers and doctrine, that may be collected thereof.

What order shall be kept in teaching the Catechism, and how much thereof
every Sunday shall be handled; the distinctions of the Catechism it self,
which is the most perfect that ever was yet used in any Church, do show. Where
there is neither Preaching, nor Catechism upon Sundays at afternoon, the
Common Prayers ought to be used.

It appertains to every Church, to appoint the times when the Sacraments
should be ministered: Baptism may be ministered whenever the Word is preached,
but we think it more expedient that the same be ministered upon Sunday; and when
occasion is offered of great travel before noon, the same may be ministered in
the afternoon; upon the week days only after the Sermon, partly to remove
that gross error, which may hold that children dying without Baptism are
damned, partly that the people may assist the ministration of the Sacrament
with greater reverence then commonly they do.

Four times in the year we think sufficient for Administration of the Lords
Table, which we desire to be so distinguished that the superstitious
observation of times may be avoided so far as may be: for it is known how
superstitiously people run unto that action upon Easter, as if time gave virtue
to the Sacraments, when as the rest of the whole year they are careless and
negligent, as though it belonged not unto them, but at that time only.
Therefore we think it expedient that the first Sunday of March yearly be kept
for one day to that service: The first Sunday of June for another: The first
Sunday of September for the third: and the first Sunday of December for the
fourth.

Albeit we deny not, but every Church for reasonable causes may change the
time, and minister the same oftener; yet we think the Sacrament of the supper
ought never to be ministered without examination preceding, chiefly of those who
are known, or suspect to be ignorant; and that none ought to be admitted to
that holy mystery, who cannot formally say the Lords Prayer* the Articles of
the Belief, declare the sum of the Law, and understands the use and virtue
of that holy Sacrament.

We also think necessary, that every Church have a Bible in English, and that
the people convene to hear the Scriptures read and interpreted, that by
frequent reading and hearing the gross ignorance of the people may be removed.
And we judge it most expedient, that the Scriptures be read in order: That is,
that some one Book of the New and Old Testament be begun, and followed forth to
the end. The like we esteem of preaching, if the Minister remain for the most
part at one place. For the divagation from one place of Scripture to another,
whether it be in reading or preaching, we account not so profitable for the
Church as the continual following of one Text.

The Masters of Families must be commanded to instruct, or cause to be
instructed, their children and servants in the Principles of Christian
Religion, without the knowledge whereof, they may not be admitted to the Table
of the Lord; wherefore we think it needful that every year at least the
Ministers take trial by public examination of the knowledge of every person
within the Church; and that every master and mistress present themselves, and
so many of their family as are come to mature age, before the Minister and
Elders to give confession of their Faith, rehearse the Commandments of the
Law, with the Lords Prayer, and declare what is their understanding in those
things. If any shall suffer their children or servants to remain in wilful
ignorance, the censures of the Church must be used against them unto
excommunication, and then the person referred to the Civil Magistrate. For
seeing the just man lives by his own faith, and that Christ Jesus justifies
by knowledge of himself, it is intolerable that any should be permitted to live
as Members of the Church of God, and yet to continue in ignorance.

Moreover, all persons would be exhorted to exercise themselves in the Psalms,
that when the Church conveneth, and the Psalms be sung, they may be the more
able with common heart and voice to praise God. In private houses it were
expedient that the most grave and discreet person of the family should use
Common Prayers at morning and night.

Of the exercise of Prophesying or Interpretation of the Scriptures.
It was a custom in the Church of Corinth at some times when they did assemble
and meet together to read a place of Scripture, whereupon one first gave his
judgment for the instruction and consolation of the Auditors; after whom
another did either confirm what the former had said, or add that which he had
omitted, or correct and explain more properly the place, or text. Liberty was
also given to a third man to speak, if the whole truth had not been revealed by
the former; and above the number of three, it seems, none were allowed to
speak, as we read in the 1 Cor. 14. 29. where we have these words; Let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. And if any thing be
revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace: for ye may
all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may have comfort. And the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. This exercise we think to
be most necessary for the Church this day in Scotland, because thereby the
Church may have trial of the knowledge, gifts and utterance of every man
within their own body. The simple and those who have somewhat profited, shall
be encouraged to proceed in their studies, and the whole Church shall be
edified, every man that list to hear and learn, being permitted to declare his
mind and knowledge for the comfort of the rest.

But lest this exercise that is so profitable might turn into debate or strife,
these rules must be observed.

1. All curious and unprofitable questions must be avoided.

2. All interpretations that are against the Analogy of faith and against
charity, or that seem to contain an open contradiction to other manifest places
of Scripture, are to be rejected.

3. The interpreter may not take to himself the liberty of a Preacher (although
he be appointed and received a Minister) but he must keep him to his text, and
not break out by digression into Common places.

4. He may use no invectives in the exercise, unless it be in confuting of
heresies.

5. He must be short in his admonitions and exhortations, and spend the time
allowed him in opening the mind of the holy Ghost in that place, showing the
dependence of the Text, and observing such notes as may edify the auditor.

6. Neither he that interprets, or any of the Assembly ought to move any
question in open audience, which he does not presently resolve without
disputing with another; but every man must show his own judgment, and utter it
to the edification of the Church.

7. If any be noted of curiosity, or bringing in of strange doctrines, he must
be admonished by the Ministers and Elders, after the interpretation is ended.

8. The whole Ministers, with those that are of the assembly, ought to convene
and judge how the persons have interpreted the text, and how they have handled
and entreated the matter; during which time the person should be removed, till
every man has given his censure. After which the persons being called in, they
should be gently admonished of their escapes, if any they have made; and then
should all questions and doubts be resolved amongst them, without any
contention.

The exercise would be kept in every town, where Schools, and repair of
learned men are, upon a certain day of the week, which, together with the books
of Scripture that they shall think most profitable to be entreated, we refer
to the judgment of the Ministers and Elders of the particular Church where
they convene. The Ministers to Landwart, and Readers, so as they have gift of
interpretation, lying within six miles of the Town, must assist and be present
at the exercise, that either they may learn themselves, or others may learn by
them.

Moreover, whosoever are esteemed to have any gifts that may edify the Church,
must be charged by the Ministers and Elders to join themselves with that
company of interpreters, to the end the Church may know whether they be able to
serve in the vocation of the Ministry, or not. And if any be found
disobedient, and unwilling to communicate their gifts with their brethren, the
censures of the Church should be used against such, providing that the consent
and authority of the civil Magistrate be interrponed thereto: for no man should
be permitted to live as it pleases him within the Church, but constrained to
bestow their labors where it is thought they may serve to the edification of
others.

Of Marriage.
Marriage ought not to be contracted amongst persons that lack judgment to
choose. Therefore we think that children and infants cannot be lawfully married
in their less age, that is, if the man be within 13. years of age, and the
woman within 12. at least.

If any have been married within those years, and kept their bodies pure and
unconjoyned with others, we think not that such can be compelled to adhere as
man and wife by reason of any former promise; but if after the years of
judgment they have embraced one another by virtue of the last consent, having
ratified the promise made by others for them in their youth, the same should be
held as married persons.

Public inhibitions should be made, that no persons under the power and
obedience of Fathers, Tutors, and Curators, either men or women, contract
marriage privately, and without the knowledge of those, to whom they live
subject under the power of the Church censure; for if any son or daughter be
moved toward a match, they are obliged to ask the counsel and assistance of
their parents for performing the same. And though the Father notwithstanding
their desires, have no other cause then the common sort of men have; to wit,
lack of money, or because they are not perhaps of such a lineage and birth, as
they require; yet must not the parties make any Covenant, till the Ministry or
civil Magistrate be acquainted therewith, and interpone their request for the
Parents consent; which if they cannot obtain, finding no just cause why their
marriage ought not to proceed, in that case they sustaining the place of the
Parent may consent to the parties, and admit them to marry; for the work of God
ought not to be hindered by the corrupt affections of worldly men. We call that
the work of God, when two hearts, (without filthiness before committed) are so
joined, that they are content to live together in the holy band of matrimony.

If any commit fornication with the woman whom he requires in marriage, then
both of them do lose the foresaid benefit, as well of the Church, as of the
Magistrate; for neither of them ought to be intercessors for filthy fornicators.

The Father, or nearest friend, whose daughter being a virgin is deflowred, may
by the law of God compel the man who has done the injury, to marry his
daughter; yet if the Father by reason of the offense will not consent to the
marriage, he may in that case require the dowry of his daughter, which if the
offender be not able to pay, he ought to be punished in his body by the
Magistrate, with some other punishment.

In a reformed Church marriage ought not to be privately used, but in open face
and presence of the Church: Also for avoiding dangers, we think it expedient
that the banes be proclaimed three Sundays, unless the persons be well known,
and that no suspicion of peril can arise, and then may the Proclamation be
shortened at the discretion of the Minister. But in no ways can we admit
marriage to be secretly used, how honorable soever the persons be, and
therefore esteem Sunday before Sermon, the most convenient time for celebration
of marriage, and that it ought not to be used upon any day else, without the
consent of the Ministry.

Marriage once lawfully contracted, may not be dissolved at man's pleasure, (as
our Savior does witness) unless adultery be committed; which being
sufficiently proved in the presence of the civil Magistrate, the innocent party
(if they require it) ought to be declared free, and the offender put to death,
as God has commanded. But if the life of the offender be spared, yet may not
the Church be negligent in their duty, which is to excommunicate the wicked,
and pronounce the innocent party free. And not the less, if the offender show
any fruits of penitency, and earnestly desire to be reconciled to the Church,
he may be received to the participation of the Sacraments, and other benefits
of the same.

If any shall demand, whether the offender after reconciliation may again marry
or not; we answer, that if they cannot live continent, and if the necessity be
such, as that they fear to fall of new into the offense of God, we cannot deny
them the remedy appointed. If the party offended may be reconciled to the
offender, then in no case we judge it lawful to the offender to marry another,
and the solemnization of their marriage must be of new in the fac^ of the
Church, but without the Proclamation of the banes. This we offer as the best
counsel that God gives us in so doubtful a case; howbeit we judge the best
reformation were to prefer Gods Commandment, and punish those crimes, as he
requires, with death.

Of Burial.
Burial has been had in estimation in all ages, to signify that the body which
is committed to the earth shall not utterly perish, but rise again in the last
day; but this we would have done without vain and superstitious rites, devised
for making gain, and advantage; such as singing of Masses, Diriges, and all
other prayers for the dead; which custom is plainly repugnant to the Scriptures
of God, for it is manifest, that they who depart in the faith of Christ Jesus,
rest from their labors, and so go from death to life; as on the other side,
they who depart in unbelief, shall never see life, but the wrath of God abides
upon them. For avoiding all inconvenients, we judge it best, that neither
singing nor reading be at the burial; for albeit these things may admonish the
living to prepare themselves for death, yet superstitious and ignorant persons
may think that some profit thereby comes to the dead. Herefore we think it
most expedient, that the dead be accompanied to the place of burial with some
honest neighbors, without either singing or reading, and without all kind of
ceremonies formerly used: so that the bodies be committed to the grave in such
decent and seemly manner, as they who are present may be warned to fear the
judgments of God, and to hate sin which is the cause of death: yet we are not
so precise in this, but that we are content that particular Churches with
consent of the Minister, do that which they shall find most fitting, as they
will answer to God, and the Assembly of the universal Church within the Realm.

We are not ignorant that some require a Sermon at the burial, or else some
places of Scripture to be read for putting the living in mind that they are
mortal, and that they likewise must die; but let these men understand, that the
Sermons which are daily made, serve for that use, which if men despise, funeral
Sermons shall rather nourish superstition, then bring such persons to a right
consideration of their own estate. Further, the Ministers shall this way be for
the most part occupied in preaching funeral Sermons, or else they shall have
respect of persons, preaching at the funeral of the rich and honorable, and
keeping silence, when the poor and despised die; which the Minister with a good
conscience cannot do, seeing there is no respect of persons with God: And
whatsoever they do to the rich, in respect of their Ministry, the same they
are bound to do to the poorest under their charge.

Churches appointed for preaching and ministration of the Sacraments, ought not
to be made places of Burial. But for that use some other convenient ground is
to be appointed, lying in the most free air, and kept to that use only; which
we think should be well walled and fenced about.

For Reparation of Churches.
Lest the word of God, and ministration of the Sacraments should come in
contempt through the unseemlinesse of the place, where these exercises are
used; we think it needful that the Churches where the people publicly convene,
be repaired with expedition, and repaired in such fashion as may agree with the
Majesty of the word of God, and serve to the ease and commodity of the people.
The preparation would be according to the possibility and number of Churches;
every Church having close doors, windows of glass, thatch or slate to defend
the people from rain, a bell to convocate them, a pulpit, a basin for
baptizing, and a table for ministration of the Lords Supper. Where the
congregation is great, reparation must be made within the Church for the
commodious receiving of the people; and the expenses raised partly of the
people, and partly of the tithes, at the consideration of the Ministry. But
because we know the sloth of men in these businesses, and in all other affairs
which redound not to their private commodity, strict charge would be given for
the reparation aforesaid within a certain day, and penalties inflicted upon the
contemners.

For punishment of those that profane the Sacraments.
It has been the policy of Satan to draw mankind into one of two extremities;
either to hold men gazing upon the visible elements, so as forgetting the end
for which they were appointed, they do ascribe unto them a saving virtue and
power, which they have not; or then to cause them despise the Ordinance of God,
as though there was no profit in the right use thereof, nor any danger in the
profanation. In time of blindness the holy Sacrament was gazed upon, kneeled
unto, carried in procession, and worshipped as Christ himself: and then men
stood in such admiration of the idol in the Mass, that none durst have
presumed to have said Mass, nor have min^stred the Sacraments but Priests, and
those of the shaven sort. Now men are so bold, as without all vocation to
minister the Sacraments in open Assemblies; and some presume to do it in houses
without all reverence, where there is neither Minister nor Word preached. Our
desire is that some strict punishment be inflicted upon such abusers; which
albeit we will not take upon us to prescribe, yet we fear not to say, that both
of them deserve death. For if he who falsifyeth the seal and subscription of a
King, be adjudged worthy of death, much more he that falsifieth the seal of
Christ Jesus, who is the Prince of all the Kings of the earth. King Darius gave
out an edict, that he who did let the reedifying of the material Temple in
Jerusalem, should have some wood taken out of his house, and be himself hanged
thereupon; And what shall we think those do merit, who manifestly do hinder the
building of the spiritual temple, and the edifying of the souls of Gods people,
by the true preaching of the Word, and right administration of the Sacraments?

The Papistical Priests have neither power nor authority to minister the
Sacraments of Christ, because in their mouths God has not put the word of
exhortation: And it is not shaving of their crowns, the crossing of their
fingers, the blowing of the dumb dogs, called the Bishops, nor the laying on
of their hands, that makes them true Ministers; but the Spirit of God first
moving the heart to enter in the holy calling, then the nomination of the
people, the examination taken by the learned, and public admission in manner
aforesaid, are the things that make men lawful Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments. We speak of the ordinary vocation in Churches reformed, and not of
the extraordinary, whereby God is pleased sometimes to raise up men by himself
for doing his work. Therefore notwithstanding the usurpation they have made in
time of ignorance, inhibition would be given them in the strictest manner, not
to presume upon the like he^eafter; as likewise to all others who are not
lawfully called to the holy Ministry.

This was the policy desired to be ratified; It had been framed by John Knox,
partly in imitation of the reformed Churches of Germany, partly of that which
he had seen in Geneva; whence he took that device of annual Deacons for
collecting and dispensing the Church rents, whereof in the sixth head he
speaks; I cannot say, A Noble man being asked his judgment thereof; answered,
that it was a devout imagination, wherewith John Knox did greatly offend; yet
was it no better then a dream, for it could never have taken effect. The Church
men that went before had been provident enough in these matters, and good it
had been for these that succeeded to have kept fast that, which they found
established to their hand, as the Archbishop of St. Andrews did at the same
time advise them. For he employing John Brand, The advertisement of the
Archbishop of St. Andrews sent to John Knox.
a Munk of Halyrudhouse, (who served many years after Minister at the
Ca^ongate) to go unto John Knox, willed him to say from him, That albeit he had
innovated many things, and made reformation of the Doctrine of the Church,
whereof he could not deny but there was some reason; yet he should do wisely to
retain the old policy which had been the work of many ages, or then put a
better in place thereof, before he did shake the other. Our Highlandmen, he
said, have a custom, when they will break young Colts, to fasten them by the
head with strong tethers, one of which they keep ever fast, till the beast be
thoroughly made. The multitude, that beast with many beads, would just be so
dealt with. Master Knox, I know, esteems me an enemy, but tell him from me he
shall find it true that I speak.

The Estates always, A direction for demolishing Cloisters and Abbey Churches.
not thinking it meet to enter at that time in examination of the policy,
deferred the same to a more convenient season, only an Act was passed for
demolishing Cloisters, and Abbey Churches, such as were not as yet pulled down;
the execution whereof was for the West parts committed to the Earls of Arrane,
Argile, and Glencarn, for the North to Lord James, and for the in-countries to
some Barons that were held most zealous.

Thereupon insued a pitiful vastation of Churches, and Church buildings
throughout all the parts of the Realm; for every one made bold to put to their
hands; All the Churches under this pretext spoiled and defaced.
the meaner sort imitating the ensample of the greater, and those who were in
authority. No difference was made, but all the Churches either defaced, or
pulled to the ground. The holy vessels, and whatsoever else men could make gain
of, as timber, lead and bells, were put to sale. The very Sepulchers of the
dead were not spared. The Registers of the Church, and Bibliotheques cast into
the fire. In a word; all was ruined, and what had escaped in the time of the
first tumult, did now undergo the common calamity; which was so much the worse,
that the violences committed at this time, were colored with the warrant of
public authority. Some ill advised Preachers did likewise animate people in
these their barbarous proceedings, crying out, That the places where idols had
been worshipped, ought by the Law of God to be destroyed, and that the sparing
of them, was the reserving of things execrable; as if the commandment given to
Israel for destroying the places where the Canaanites did worship their false
gods, had been a warrant for them to do the like. The report also went, that
John Knox (whose sayings were by many esteemed as Oracles) should in one of his
Sermons say, That the sure way to banish the Rookes, was to pull down their
nests: which words (if any such did escape him) were to be understood of the
Cloisters of Monks and Friars only, according to the Act passed in the
Council. But popular fury once armed can keep no measure, nor do any thing
with advice and judgment.

After the convention dissolved notwithstanding of the answer given concerning
the Book of Policy, diverse Noblemen and Barons moved by John Knox did convene,
and set their hands to the same. The subscribers were, the Duke of
Chattellerault, the Earl of Arrane, Argile, Glencarn, Marshall, Menteith,
Moreton, and Rothes, Lord James, the Lord Yester, Bo^d, Ochiltrie, Sanquhar,
and Lindesay, the Bishop of Galloway, the Dean of Murray; the Lairds of
Drumlanrigge, Lonchinvar, Garlees, Barguency, and diverse Burgesses; with this
provision adjected, That the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other beneficed men,
who had joined themselves to the Religion, should enjoy the rents of their
benefices during their lives, they sustaining the Ministers for their parts, as
was prescribed in the said book. But all this turned to no effect, for the
Churchmen that were Popish took presently a course, to make away all the
Manses, Gleibs, Tithes, and all other rents possessed by them, to their friends
and kinsmen; and most of these that subscribed, getting into their hands the
possessions of the Church, could never be induced to part therewith, and turned
greater enemies in that point of Church Patrimony, then were the Papists, or
any other whatsoever.

THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. An. 1561.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
The Contents.
The things that fell out after Queen Mary her coming from France into this
Kingdom, unto her resignation of the Crown to King James her son.

THe Queen preparing to return home was taken with the Fever tertian, The
Queen prepares to return from France.
and forced to stay at Ianville some months. In the end of June she came to
Paris, where Francis Earl of Bedford, (who was sent from England to condole
King Francis his death) did in the name of his Mistress salute her, and after
some gratulatory speeches for her recovery, propone the ratification of the
contract made at Leth, Her conference with the Earl of Bedford
entreating the performance of it. The Queen thanking her sister for her
kindness, answered, That she was not as yet in perfect health, but hoped
shortly to be well. Touching the ratification, she said, that she remembered the
business, but could give no resolute answer, till she had the advice of the
Nobles, and estates of her own Realm. For though the matter concerned her
principally, yet the same did touch them also: and they having showed
themselves displeased in former times, because she did not take their advice in
affairs, would now be much more offended, if she should proceed in that matter,
not having first acquainted them therewith. But as she trusted, the same should
not be long a doing, seeing she intended to make her voyage shortly home. The
Ambassador replying; that there was no cause to doubt of their consents in
that particular, the accord being made by themselves. It was made, said the
Queen, by some of them, not by all; and when I come amongst them, Monsic^r d'
Oyfell sent into England.
it will appear what mind they are of. But I will send Monsieur d' Oysell to
my sister, who shall give her I trust good satisfaction, and by him I will
signify that I am to go into Scotland, and will require those favors of her
that Princes do one to another in the like cases.

Soon after this she sent Monsieur d'Oysell into England with a direction, that
after he had done this message unto the Queen, he should go into Scotland, and
take order that the Garrisons kept in the Castle of Dunbar, and the Isle of
Inchkeith should keep those Forts until she were safely arrived. The Queen of
England^ answer.
But the Queen of England taking ill the delay of the ratification, answered
him in the hearing of all the attendants; That except the Queen of Scots did
confirm the conditions agreed upon at Leth, wherein she found her self still
frustrated, there could be no perfect amity amongst them; and if she would do
that, the kindness which became a Queen her cosen and neighbor, should not be
wanting on her part. This she desired him to report, and leave his journey unto
Scotland, for that she would not permit the same through her Country.

The Queen of Scots highly offended with this answer, did call Nicholas
Throgmorton, the Ambassador Legier of England, and kept a long conference with
him about these matters, The Queen of Scots offended with it.
which out of the Ambassadors own letters sent to the Queen his Mistress I
shall relate. Commanding her attendants to go aside, she brake forth in these
speeches: How great soever my weakness be, I like not to have so many witnesses
of it, Her conference with Nicoolas Throgmor^on.
as your Queen of late had, when she talked with Monsieur d'Oysell. And now I
must tell you, that nothing grieves me more, then that I should have desired a
thing of her that I stood in no great need of: having Gods favor, I can return
to my Country without her leave, as I came hither, against the will of King
Edward her brother: Neither do I lack friends, that both will and may convey me
safefy thither; yet I desire rather to try her friendship then any others.
Oftentimes you have said, that it were good both for our selves, and for our
Kingdoms, that we should live friends and keep kindness one to another, but it
seems not that she is so minded, otherwise she would never have returned me
such an answer. It is like she favors my rebellious subjects more then me;
yet she should with reason think that my subjects who have rebelled against me,
will never be so trusty and loving to her, as I my self. My friends do marvel
what her purpose could be in assisting my Subjects against me; and now to
hinder my return unto my own Country being a widow. I know not what it should
mean; I work her no trouble, I have no meddling with the affairs of England; and
yet I know there be numbers in that Country who are not well contented with
the present times; I require nothing of her but amity, and friendship, and this
I cannot have. She objects to me, that I have small experience of the world; It
is true, that years bring experience, yet I am of that age that I know how to
carry my self toward my friends, and well-willers; I will not use many
speeches unworthy of her, but let me with her good leave say, that I am a Queen
as she is, that I have as good friends, and as good a stomach as her self. But
comparisons they say are odious, therefore I will contain my self.

For that treaty at Leth, The Queen of Scots reasons for delaying the
ratification.
wherewith she so troubles her self, it was made whilst the King my husband
was alive, to whom according to my duty I was in all things obsequent. That he
delayed to ratify the accord, it was his fault, not mine. After his decease
the Council of France left me to my own Counselors, neither would my uncle
meddle in Scottish aff^irs, lest they should offend. The Scots that are here
with me, are not Counselors, neither can I deliberate with them in weighty
matters: as soon as I have consulted with the Estates of my Kingdom, I shall
give her a reasonable answer; and that she may have it the sooner, I shall
haste my journey homewards. But she perhaps will belay my way, and so impede
her own satisfaction; and it may be she desires no satisfaction of her
demands, that there may be always some occasion of jarring and discord amongst
us. She casts often in my teeth, that I am young and unadvised; and so she
might justly think me, if I should treat of matters of such importance, but as
now I will not reason that point. This I may truly say, that I never did any
thing to my sister, which I would not have done to my self. I have always
performed the duty of a kinswoman unto her, but she does either not believe it,
or then despises my friendship. Would to God I were as dear to her, as I am
near of blood, for this were a precious sort of kindred; but God forgive them,
if there be any that stirs up these contentions amongst us. You are her
Ambassador, let me know what is it offends her, or in what word or action I
have wronged her.

Hereunto Throgmorton answered. Madam, Throgmorton his answer.
I have no Commission to your Majesty, but for the ratification of the treaty
at Leth; yet if you will have me to show what I think be the cause of my
Mistress offense, I will tell it in few words, but not as an Ambassador. How
soon the Queen my Mistress was crowned, you usurped the Title and Arms of
England, which during Queen Mary's reign you never attempted; and a greater
injury could not be offered to a Prince then that was. But says she, My father
in law and husband, who lived both at that time, commanded me so to do: after
they were deceased, and since I have been at mine own liberty, I have neither
used her Arms, nor Titles. And yet I see not what wrong it can be to me, who
am a Queen, and had to my grandmother the eldest sister of King Henry the
eight, to use the Arms of England, seeing others more remote in blood have
done the like. The Marquess of Exeter, and Duchess of Suffolk Niece unto Henry
the eight by his youngest sister, did bear the Arms of England, with borders
for a difference, and should it be imputed as an injury to me so to do? But
well I see, (so she concluded) that nothing I do is taken in good part.

The Quen of England in the mean time falling in some jealousy of the Lords of
Scotland, The Queen of Englands letter to the No^ility.
because of that which the Queen had said, that the treaty at Leth was not made
by all their consents, and that when she should be amongst them, it would
appear whether they continued in the same mind, sent a letter full sharpnes of
to the Nobility and Council; wherein after an ample declaration of the
friendship done to them, in the late aid they received against the French, she
complained of the delays made in the ratification of the accord past at Leth,
which as it seemed by their Queens words, was in their default, seeing she had
said, that before she gave a resolute answer in that matter it behoved her to
know their minds, whereof she could not be ignorant, so many of themselves
being with her of late, and messengers going daily betwixt them; therefore she
desired to know, if they did mind to keep the peace contracted, and if they
continued in that mind, that they should procure the Queen to ratify it, at
least to advertise her, what she might look for at their own hands.

This letter was speedily answered by the Council, The Councels answer.
with great attestations that it came never in their minds to break the peace
contracted; for in so doing they should make themselves infamous in the world,
and sin highly against their consciences. Of the delay which their Queen made,
and the reasons thereof, they professed to be ignorant. Therefore entreated her
Majesty to be persuaded of them, that next to the glory of God they would study
to keep the peace inviolate, and that there should be no blame in them, if the
ratification was not made to her contentment.

Whilst these things passed at home, the Queen of Scots set forward to
Callais, attended by the Cardinals of Loraine and Guise, the Dukes of Guise and
d'Aumarll, the grand Prior, and the Marquess d' Elbeuf her Uncles, the Duke of
Nemours, Monsieur d' Anvile the Constables son, and diverse others her friends
and kinsmen. At Abbavile which is in the way to Callais, she sent for the
English Ambassador, and asked him, by what means she might satisfy Queen
Elizabeth. He answered, by ratifying the Treaty of Leth. He^ (...) with the
English Ambassador at (...).
To whom she replied, I have very just reasons to refuse it, which ought not to
be interpreted as delays. For first, that treaty should have been confirmed by
my husband and me, and cannot now be ratified, unless it be concluded in my
own name alone, seeing the King then my husband, is expressly named in the
accord. Next, the most of the Articles are performed, for all preparations of
war are ceased, and the French called back from Scotland. But the Queen
offends, said she, that I use the title and arms of England. This I have not
done since my husbands death: And if it be alleged, that the same is used in
Letters Patents given me through France; it is known I cannot hinder that, for
they who pass those letters are not my subjects; And for the Articles
conc^rning Religion, I trust my own subjects shall have no cause to complain of
my severity. Thus what I may do, I will, to give my sister satisfaction. And I
pray you Monsieur l' Embassadeur, do the part of an Ambassador, and rather
pacify the Queen, then exasperate her in any sort. So earnest she was to have
all matters of quarrel laid aside, fearing that the Queen of England should
seek to intercept her by the way: and indeed a Navy was put to Sea, under
color of suppressing Pirates, but the taking of one of the ships wherein were
the Earl of Eglinton, and other passengers, made it suspected that a worse
thing was meant. Always it fell out so, that the Queen of Scots, having a
prosperous wind, The Queen (...) at Le^h.
passed by the English ships, (the weather being foggy) unperceived, and after
the sixth day, after her embarking, which was the 20. of August, 1561. did
safely arrive at Leth.

The fame of the Queens coming noised abroad, The Nobility assembles to
congratu^ate her return.
the Nobility from all the parts of the Realm assembled to congratulate her
return, and besides them numbers of all sorts of people convened, as unto a
joyful spectacle: for they had not seen the face of their Sovereign for many
years, and after her marriage with the French King, had scarce any hope of a
King to reside amongst them: which would most certainly have happened, if any
succession had followed of that marriage. For Scotland in that case would have
been but an accession to France the mightier Kingdom; as Henry the seventh
foretold of England (and we have seen it verified in our days) drawing unto it
the weaker and lesser Crown. That the Queen therefore was now returned, and
they delivered of the fears of redacting the Kingdom into a Province, they did
justly esteem it one of the greatest benefits that could happen unto them.
Then, when they called to mind the variableness of fortune, how she left a
pupil of six days old only by the death of the Father, was exposed as a prey
to those that were most mighty, and partly by civil seditions at home, partly
by the invasions of external enemies from abroad, even before she could have
any sense oftrouble, was forced to forsake her country, and relegated as it
were into exile, having hardly escaped the hands of enemies that lay in wait to
intercept her, and the violence of tempestuous and raging seas. And again when
fortune began to smile a little upon her, and she was honored with a royal
Marriage, how these joys on the sudden came to be changed into extreme
sorrows; being first deprived of her mother, then of her husband; a new
Kingdom lost, and her ancient crown which belonged to her by inheritance,
standing in a state very uncertain: whilst I say they called to mind these
variable fortunes, and the^ewith considered the excellencies that nature had
bestowed upon her, as the beauty and comeliness of her person, her mild
inclination, and gracious demeanor toward all sorts of people, it cannot be
told what a joy and love this begat in the hearts of all the subjects.

The beginning of her government was likewise very gracious, No change to be
made in religion, and a private Mass p^rmitted to the Queen.
for some few days after her arriving in a Council kept with the Nobility to
remove the occasions of trouble she condescended, that no change nor alteration
should be made in the present state of Religion; only she would use her own
service, as she said, apart with her family, and have a Mass in private. This
was thought by many a thing not intolerable, considering she was the Sovereign
Princess of the Realm, and educated from her youth in the Roman faith, from
which there was hope, by better instruction, and humble and courteous
behavior, she might be reclaimed; yet the Preachers in their Sermons did
publicly condemn that toleration as unlawful. And amongst the Nobility, The
Earl of Arran opposes
the Earl of Arrane did oppose it, taking protestation that he did neither
agree to private nor public Mass: which highly displeased the Queen, and was
thought to have alienated her affection, that before seemed much inclining
toward him.

There fell out upon this an Accident, A tumult in the Abbey.
which was like to have caused great trouble. The Queen purposing to hear Mass
the next day in her Chapel of Halirudhouse, whilst the tapers and other
things required to that service were carried through the Court, one of the
common sort invading him, that bore the wax lights, brake them all in pieces,
and if by the intervention of some more moderate spirits the tumult had not
been repressed, the rest of the furniture had been wholly spoiled, and that day
Mass disappointed. It was held a proud and insolent fact, and condemned by
many; others said that the patience of men was too far tempted; and some
maintained that if right were done, the Priest according to Gods law made
against idolaters, ought to suffer death. But this stir was quickly appeased
by Lord James, much against the Earl of Huntley* his mind, who by this occasion
thought to win credit with the Queen, and in conference with her Uncles
bragged, that if the Queen pleased to use his service, he would reduce all the
North countries to the Roman profession. But his courses being suspected, and
the Quen misliking all counsels that tended unto trouble, no heed was given to
his offers.

The month following was spent in the entertainment of the French that had
accompanied the Queen homewards, The Nobles that came from France with the
Queen, return home.
they made but short stay in the country; For about the midst of September,
Duke d' Aumarll returned unto France by Sea, the grand Prior, and Monsieur d'
Anvile took their journey through England, the Marquess d' Elbeuf of all that
company only remained, and abode all the Winter with the Queen.

In this mean time was William Maitland of Lethington directed to the Queen of
England with letters both from the Queen, William Maitland directed to England.
and from the Nobility. The Queens letters were full of kindness, tending all
to express the love and affection she bare unto her, as to her dearest sister
and kinswoman and the desire she had to continue in true and sincere friendship
with her. The letters sent by the Nobility were to the same effect; but
containing this more, That the surest way to preserve friendship (...) true
amtty amongst them two, was to declare the Queen of Scots her nearest and
lawful heir to the Crown of England in case she should have no issue.
Lethington urging this last point strongly as he was commanded, after he had
used his best persuasions to that effect, was answered by the Queen of England,
as follows. I did expect another message from your Queen, The Queen of
Englands answer.
then this is which you have brought me, and do marvel that she should forget
the promise made before her coming out of France, touching the ratification of
the treaty of Leth; which was, that how soon she returned to her own country,
she should give me a full and resolute answer. I have long enough, said she.
suffered my self to be abused with fair speeches, and now it had been time, if
she had regarded her own honor, to have made good her promises. Lethington
replied, that within a few days after the Queen took land, he was employed in
this legation, and that she had no leisure to deal in any public matters,
being taken up with admitting the Noblemen that came to welcome her into the
Realm, and with the fetling of the estate of Religion, which her Majesty
understood to be a work of no small weight, neither were all the Noblemen whose
advice she must take in matters of that importance come into the Court, before
his parting from it. Here the Queen interrupting his speech, said, What need is
there of advice or counsel, to do that which by her subscription and seal she
is bound to perform? He answered, that no commission was given him in that
matter, nor did his Mistress think that any account thereof would have been
required of him* but that she might justly excuse her self by the occasions he
ha^ mentioned. Then after a few more speeches of that purpose, the Queen
returning to the chief point of his legation, said, I have observed that you
have often in your discourse said, that your Queen is descended of the blood
Royal of England, and that I am obliged to love her, as being nearest to me in
blood of any other, which I neither will or can deny. Neither have I in any of
my actions (as the world knows) attempted ought against the safety and
tranquillity of her, and her kingdom; yea they that ^e most inward with me, can
witness that even when I had just cause of offense given me, by her usurpation
of the Titles and Arms of England, I could never be induced to think other,
then that the was the politic device of some enemies, to breed dissension
amongst us. But howsoever that be, I hope so long as I live, she shall not
bereave me of my Kingdom, nor yet be able, if God shall bless me with children,
to impede their succession. And if it shall happen otherwise that I be taken
away, she shall never find that I have prejudged the Right which she claims
to the Kingdom of England, What a right it is I have never been curious to
know, nor do I purpose to search and examine it, but will leave the same to the
cognition of those whom it concerns. This your Queen may assuredly expect at
my hands, that I shall never wrong her, nor her cause, if it be just, in the
least point. And God I take to witness, who hears this our conference, that
next my self, I know not any whom I would prefer to her, or who (if the t^tle
should fall to be controverted) might exclude her. You know, says she, who the
compe^itors be: but alas, what power or force have these weak creatures to
attempt so great an enterprise? always the matter it self is weighty, and of
great importance, which I will take time to think upon.

After some few days, A second conference with Lethington.
calling Lethington unto her, she said, That it seemed strange to her, how the
Nobility at the Queens first coming should put up such a request to her, seeing
they knew there was no reparation made of former wrongs, and to desire, says
she, that I should gratify their Queen, having received so great an injury,
without any amends made, is it not in effect as much as to boast and threaten
men if they will take such a course? I would have them think that I am strong
enough for them at home, and lack not friends abroad that will maintain and
defend my right. Hereto he replied, That in his first speech he had clearly
discovered the intention of the Noblemen, how partly out of that duty, which
they owed to their Sovereign, and the defense of her honor, partly out of a
desire to confirm and assure the peace begun betwixt the two Realms, they had
made this motion; and that the reason why they dealt so plainly with her, was
not only the experience they had of her favor in times past, but also the
respect of their own safety. For if any should oppose the Queens right, and
thereupon wars should arise betwixt the two Kingdoms, they must needs be
driven to hazard their lives and estates. Wherefore they thought that their
motion was not to be ill taken, seeing it tended to the cutting off the
occasions of disagreement, and composing differences by a firm and certain
peace.

True, says she, The Queen of Englands reply.
If I had attempted any thing to the hurt of your Queens right, they might with
reason have required me to amend it. But when I am yet in health and life to
desire me to prepare mine own winding sheet, is a thing without example, nor
has the like ever been required at the hand of any Prince: yet I take in good
part the meaning of your Lords, and am glad of the good affection they bear to
their Queen, and the care they have to advance her honor. I think it likewise
wisdom in them to foresee the dangers they may run into, and like well that
they do abhor the shedding of Christian blood, which I confess could not be
avoided, if any faction should arise, and lay claim to the Crown. But where, or
what is that faction, or what force can they have? Always leaving these
things, suppose I had an inclination to satisfy their desire, think you that I
would rather gratify your Lords herein then the Queen her self? No, I will
tell you, I have many other reasons that stay me from taking such a resolution.
First, I know what a dangerous thing it is to touch this string, and I have
ever upon great respects abstained from bringing in question the right of the
Crown; for so often has the controversy of marriage lawful and unlawful, of
legitimate and base-born children, been agitated according as men's affections
and humors led them, that even in regard of those disceptations I have
hitherto forborne to match with any husband. Once at my Coronation I was
married to this Kingdom, whereof always I carry this ring for a pledge, (
pointing to a ring she more on her finger) And howsoever things go, I shall be
Queen of England so long as I live; when I am dead, let them succeed who have
the best right. If your Queen has it, I shall not wrong her in the least
point, and if it belong to another, it were not reasonable to desire me to do
them an open and manifest wrong. If there be any law, which may bar her
title, it is unknown to me, for I do not willingly think of these matters; but
if there be any such, when I received the Crown, I swear to my people that I
should not change their laws.

Now where you say, The Queen of Englands ^easons for her refuse.
that by declaring your Queen my successor, our affection should become more
firm; I rather fear, that it should be the seed of a most bitter hatred. For
think you, that I will behold willingly the preparation of mine own funerals?
It is natural to Princes to be jealous even of the children that by Birthright
are to succeed them. How did Charles the seventh of France carry himself
toward Lewis the eleventh, and he again toward Charles the eighth, or King
Francis of late toward Henry who succeeded him? and is it probable, that I
should be otherwise disposed toward my Cosen, if once she shall be declared
heir unto my Crown? No, be sure I shall have the very same mind which Charles
the seventh showed to Lewis the eleventh.

There is another thing which I esteem of an exceeding great weight; I know the
unconstancy of the people, how they loath always the present government, and
have their eyes continually set upon the next successor: and naturally they are
more that look, as it is said, to the Sun rising then to the setting of the
Sun. To omit other examples, this I know by mine own experience; when my sister
Queen Mary reigned, how earnestly did a number wish to see me placed in her
Throne? what a desire had they of my advancement? if I had but given my
countenance to their practices, they would have refused no peril in bringing
the same to effect. Now it may be the same persons are not of the same mind
toward me, as children that dream that apples are given them are greatly
joyed, but in the morning when they are awaked, and find themselves deceived,
they fall a weeping; so they who loved me exceedingly when I was but called
Elizabeth, and if I perhaps gave them any good countenance, thought with their
selves, that how soon I was made Queen, they should be rewarded rather
according to their own conceit, then any service done unto me, now when they
find that the issue answers not their expectation, some of them, it may be in
hope of a better fortune, would not dislike a change of the government. For the
greatest wealth that ever any Prince had, or can have, is not able to satisfy
the unsatiable covetousness of men. And if this be our case, that the
affection of our people is so easily changed, when we keep a greater moderation
in our largesses, then they think we ought, or perhaps for some other light
cause they grow discontented, what may we think shall come to pass, when
seditious people have a certain successor designed, to whom they may open their
griefs, and betake themselves, if they be in any sort displeased? In what a
peril think you I should live, having so mighty neighbor Princes to succeed
me? to whose grandor look how much I shall add by confirming her succession, so
much I shall detract from mine own security. This peril no caution can assure,
nor the bonds of any laws avert. Princes also who live in expectation of
Kingdoms, do hardly contain themselves within the limits of right and reason:
surely I my self would never think my estate assured, if once my successor were
known to the world. This is the sum of that which passed at this second
audience.

Not many days after getting access, Lethingtons third audience.
he asked the Queen, what answer she would give to the Nobility? she said, At
this time, I have no answer to give, but that I approve the affection and
sedulous care they have of their Sovereigns good estate, but the matter is of
such weight, as I cannot on a sudden, or directly answer it. When your Queen
shall perform her promise concerning the treaty of Leth, it will be time to
require a proof of my affection toward her; till then I cannot with safety of
mine honor gratify her in any thing.

Lethington replied, as before, that he had no Commission in that business,
and that in the matter of succession he had showed more his own judgment, then
the mind of the Queen his Mistress; for he could never think the confirmation
of the treaty of Leth, to be a thing of that importance, as for the delay or
refusal of that, the Queen of Scots and her posterity should be excluded from
the succession of the Crown of England. Neither will I now, says he, enquire
by whom that treaty was concluded; at what time, in what manner, by what
authority, and for what cause it was done; for I have no warrant to speak of
these things: but this I dare affirm, that albeit the Queen following her
husbands direction, had ratified the treaty, she should have found her self
thereby so far interessed, as she would doubtless used all means to free her
self of the same. And this I say not in the Queens name, but only to make it
seem, that our Noblemen have reason to travel, that all debates and
controversies may cease, and a firm and perpetual peace may be established.

This and some other speeches interchanged amongst them touching the treaty,
The conclusion taken by the Queen of England.
moved the Queen of England to agree that the same should be revised by some
Commissioners, and corrected after this form. That the Queen of Scots should
thenceforth abstain from using the English Arms, and from the titles of the
Crown of England, and Ireland, during the life of Queen Elizabeth, and her
posteriy. That on the other part the Queen of England should oblige her self
and the children begotten of her, to do nothing in prejudice of the Queen of
Scots her succession. These were the things acted in this legation.

Now at home the Queen keeping a progress in the country, The Queen of Scots
her progress in the country.
went from Edinburgh to Striveling, from thence to Perth, Dundy, and S.
Andrews, and other special Burghs, where she was received with much honor and
triumph; returning to Edinburgh a little before the feast of Michaelmas, at
which time the Burgesses are wont to elect their annual Magistrates, and to set
down statutes for the good of the town; amongst other acts, one was published,
inhibiting that any adulterer, fornicator, drunkard, Mass Priest, or obstinate
Papist, should be received in the town, under such pains as the law did
prescribe. A^chibald Douglas Provost of Edinburgh committed.
The Queen interpreting that to be an usurpation of royal power, did commit
Archibald Douglas Provost to the Castle of Edinburgh, charging the Council of
the Town to make a new election: which they obeyed, choosing Mr. Thomas... in
his place. A Proclamation was likewise made, granting liberty to all good and
faithful subjects, to repair and remain within the Burgh at their pleasure,
for doing their lawful and ordinary business.

These things ministered great offense, The Preachers are displeased.
who seeing the Queen take more liberty then she did in the beginning, keeping
her Masses more public, and causing them to be celebrated with a greater pomp,
did mightily complain thereof in their Sermons, but profited little; for some
of the Noblemen, who had in former times showed themselves most jealous against
the toleration of idolatry, were grown a little more cold by the flatteries of
Court, and all of them emulous of others greatness, were striving who should be
in most favor with the Queen.

She had some while before this taken to be of her privy Council, The Queen
makes choice of a Council.
the Duke of Chattellerault, the Earls of Huntly, Argile, Atholl, Morton,
Marshall, Glencarn, Montrosse and Arroll, Lord James her brother, the Lord
Ereskin, and Mr. John Lesly, Bishop of Rosse; Huntly was created Chancellor,
one that in matters of religion had behaved himself very unconstantly, and to
win the Queens favor was now become altogether Popish. This animated the
Priests and others of that faction, which before were quiet, and put them in
some heart.

One Ninian Winyet Schoolmaster at Linlithgow, a man of reasonable learning,
set forth a Book of questions, Ninian Winyet a Priest exiled*
against the confession of Faith; which went current in the Court, and was much
esteemed by them of his Profession. Being cited, and diverse conferences kept
with him, to make him acknowledge his errors, he continued obstinate, and was
therefore sentenced by the Church; wherefore he forsook the Country, and
flying to Germany was preferred to be Abbot of the Scottish Monastery at
Ratisbone, where he lived many years. The Abbot of Corsragnell in the West,
published about the same time another Faith. Whereunto John Knox having made a
reply, and the Author in regard of his age and quality of birth, (for he was of
the house of Cassils) was thought fit to be overseen.

Mean while the Court was busied in a consultation how to supply the charge of
the Queens house, The thirds of Benefices granted to the Queen.
which the ordinary revenues of the Crown could not so honorably maintain as
was required. Diverse being thought upon, the readiest seemed to fall upon the
Church rents, and draw somewhat from the Prelates and beneficed Persons. To
this purpose they were convened before the Council, and after a long Treaty,
and many persuasions used, considering with themselves, how they subsisted
merely by the Queens favor, and that by refusing a part, they might endanger
the whole, they were induced to yield the third part of their benefices, to be
disposed of at the Queens pleasure, and assumed forth of what places her
Collectors should choose, her Majesty securing them of the two parts during
their lives, and liberating them of the Ministers, with whose maintenance they
were continually boasted. It carried some show of commodity this at first, but
turned to little or nothing; the Prelates and beneficed men undervaluing their
rents, and making up a third, which did afterward when the number of Ministers
increased, scarce suffice to their provisions.

Much about this time a rumor was raised in the Court, A guard of horse and
foot levied to attend the Queen.
and went a while uncontrolled, that the Earl of Arran intended to ravish the
Queen, whom he was known to love most passionately. She whether counterfeiting
a fear, or that there was any cause given that way, it is not known, did leavy
a guard of horse and foot to attend her person: which put diverse in fear, Lord
James sent to the borders is at his return made Earl of Marr^ He is preferred
to the Earldome of Murray, and the Lord Ereski^ made Earl of Mar.
and opened the mouths of discontented people, as if some grounds of tyranny
had been thereby laid. But she not regarding these surmises, and careful only
of the Countries quiet, labored ear^estly to have justice take place, and the
borders then being unquiet, sent her brother Lord James thither with a
Commission of Lieutenandry; which he faithfully discharged, using exemplary
punishment upon a number of broken men, and taking pledges of others for
living obedient to the Laws. For this service at his return he was preferred
first to the Earldome of Mar, and a little after to the Earldome of Murray:
for the Lord Ereskin, having claimed title to the Country of Mar, was by the
Queen made Earl of the same.

Huntly Huntly offends with these prefermen^s.
offending that these honors should have been conferred without his consent,
and he thereby put from the possession first of Mar, then of Murray, which he
had enjoyed since the death of King James the fifth; and because of that long
possession reckoned to be part of his own patrimony; resolved, since he saw his
own credit and authority waning, before that of Murrayes was fully settled, to
underm inehim by one mean or other: whereupon by scandalous detractions and
other the like courses familiar in the Courts of Princes, He charge Murray
with the affectation of the Crown.
he labored to disgrace him; and finding that these prevailed not, presented
to the Queen a libell written with his own hand, wherein he charged the Earl of
Murray with ambitious affectation of the royal authority. Yet the proofs he
brought being weak, the Queen made no account thereof. This also failing, he
incited James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, Bothwell stirs up the Earl of
Murray against the Hamiltons.
(one that had debauched his patrimony, and had all his hopes depending upon
the public disturbance) to set the Earl of Murray and the Hamiltons by the
ears: which he assayed to do, first by persuading the Earl of Murray to ruin
Duke Hamilton; who, as he said, lay waiting on the Queens death, and aimed at
no less then the Crown, and besides bare a particular enmity against himself.
This he said could not but be acceptable to the Queen, seeing that besides the
natural hatred that all Princes have to their successors, she did bear a
special grudge to the Earl of Arran for his love to the reformed religion, and
because of some hard speeches that fell out in a conference betwixt him and her
uncle the Marquess d' Elbeuf.

The Earl of Murray abhorring such unhonest practices, Practice against the
Earl of Murray.
and refusing to hearken thereto, his next address was to the Hamiltons,
offering to take part with them in cutting off the Earl of Murray (whose credit
with the Queen he knew they disliked) and showing how easy it might be done;
By this means, he said, they should have the Queen in their own hands, and be
rid of him who chiefly stood in their way. The time and place of the murder
being considered upon, Bothwell and Gawin Hamilton Abbot of Kilwining, are said
to have taken the matter in hand. The device was to kill the Earl whilst the
Queen was at hunting in the Park of Falkland, and that performed, to carry the
Queen along with them for their greater surety, and the countenancing of the
fact.

The Earl of Arrane, The practice discovered by the Earl of Arrane.
who had withstood the conspiracy, perceiving them resolute in that they had
undertaken, and fearing it might take effect, advertiseth the Earl of Murray of
the plot laid against his life; Murray rendering him many thanks, the letter was
intercepted by some that disliked the intelligence they kept with others, and
finding by the answer what advertisement he had made, persuaded the Duke his
father to send him with some Keepersto the house of Kinneill. But he making an
escape in the night came to the house of Grange in Fife, and sending to the
Earl of Murray to show what had happened, was the next morning conveyed by him
to the Queen in Falkland. And at his coming he discovered the whole practice
unto her; whereupon Bothwell and Kilwining were both apprehended, for they were
come to Falkland of intent to clear themselves. Arrane becomes distracted.
Arran being brought before the Council to be examined, was observed to be in
some perturbation of mind, and being dimitted for that time, was at his next
appearing clearly perceived by his words and countenance to be taken with a
frenzy, yet when he came to himself, as he did sometimes in the beginning of
the disease, he wrote to the Queen and others so judiciously, as many thought
he did only fain himself mad, to free his father of the conspiracy. The rest he
accused so constantly and with such eagerness, that in presence of the Council
he made offer, since the accusation could not be made out by witnesses, to try
in single combat with Bothwell. But the Queen misliking that form of trial
made Bothwell to be sent to the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Abbot of Kilwining
to the Castle of Striveling, committing Arrane to the custody of some persons
at Court.

And now Huntly imagining that he had a fair occasion to put Murray out of the
way, New devices for cutting often Murray.
and that he might do the same more safely, having two of the greatest Families
in the Kingdom partners with him in the quarrel, fell into other devices; and
first stirring up a trouble in St. Andrews where the Queen then remained, and
thinking that M^rray would come forth upon the noise to pacify the tumult, he
resolved by some whom he had suborned to cut him off in the fray. This not
succeeding, An. 1562.
some armed men were laid to intercept him as he came from the Court at night;
for the Queen detaining him late, he was wont to go accompanied with one or two
only in most quiet manner to his lodging. But this being likewise frustrated by
advertisement given to Murray, and he having tried it to be so (for upon the
notice given him, he went and found them standing armed in the Porch of the
Abbey, which was the place designed to him) delated the matter to the Queen.
Huntly excusing his men, said that they were some only of his company, who
being to go home that day, had put on their arms, and being stayed by some
occasion till the next morning, were there attending his coming.

This excuse, albeit naught and frivolous, Letters sent from beyond sea in
favor of Huntly.
was accepted for the time, which gave many to think, that the Queens affection
to her brother was not so great as it was commonly taken to be. And it is true,
that about the same time the Queen had received letters from the Pope, the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and her uncles in France, advising her to entertain
Huntly as the man most powerful, and best inclined toward the advancing of
the Romish religion, and to give him some hopes of her marriage with John Gordon
his second son, whereby he should be made more forward in the purpose. Great
promises were made besides of money and other necessary supplies for war, but
so always, as these were made away that were enemies to the Catholic faith;
of whose names a roll was sent unto her, and the Earl of Murray placed in the
first rank. But what impression these letters made in the Queens mind, she
showed the same to her brother, and used him with no less respect then before.

In the beginning of the next summer there was a great speech of the interview
of the Queens of England and Scotland, An interview of the two Queens moved.
and messengers to and fro sent to agree upon the place, the time and manner of
the meeting. The motion came from the Queen of Scots, who, as it was thought,
greatly affected the same out of a desire she had to live in a firm peace with
the Queen of England, and make her self known to the subjects of that Country.
Neither was the meeting disliked of the better sort, as thinking it would
serve, besides the preservation of the common peace, to bring her unto a liking
of the reformed religion. But they who were popishly set, fearing greatly the
conference, spoke openly against it, saying, That of such interviewes there was
never seen any good fruit, and that it would not be safe for the Queen of Scots
to put her self in the power of her, whose Kingdom she had claimed. Not the
less, the treaty went on, and was concluded, York condescended to be the place
of meeting, the numbers on either side agreed unto, and the time designed about
the end of June. But whilst all things were in readiness for the journey, the
Queen of England excused her self by letters, The interview stayed.
desiring the interview should be put off till the next year, which the Queen
of Scots was not ill pleased to hear: for she feared if the same had held, that
the French King and her uncles should have been much offended.

This journey being stayed, the Queen took her progress unto the North. Being
at Striveling, Petitions of the Church to the Queen.
she was petitioned by certain Commissioners of the Church for abolishing the
Mass, and other superstitious rites of the Roman religion, and for inflicting
some punishment against blasphemy, against the contempt of the Word, the
profanation of the Sacraments, the violation of the Sabbaths, adultery,
fornication, and other the like vices condemned by the word of God, whereof the
laws of the Country did not take any hold. For actions of divorce, it was
likewise desired that they should be remitted to the judgment of the Church,
or at least trusted to men of good knowledge and conversation, and that Popish
Churchmen might be excluded from places in Session and Council. To these
Petitions exhibited in writing, the Queen after she had perused the same, made
answer, That she would do nothing in prejudice of the religion she professed,
and hoped before a year was expired to have the Mass and Cattholick profession
restored through the whole Kingdom: and thus parted from them in a choler.

About the midst of August she entered into Aberdene, The Queen go^th to
Aberd^ne.
and was met by the Lady Huntly, a woman of an haughty disposition, wise and
crafty withal in sifting the minds of others: she knowing the mutability of
Princes favors, labored to insinuate her self in the Queens affection, using
all servile flattery, extolling the power of her husband, and repeating the
offer he had made for reestablishing the Roman profession in these North
parts. The Lady Huntley intercedes for her son.
Then falling to intercede for her son John Gordon (who had offended the Queen
by his escape forth of ward, in which he was put for wounding the Lord Ogilvie
upon the high street of Edinburgh) she entreated her Majesty's favor for that
oversight, and that he might be licensed to attend her Majesty, during her
abode in those quarters. The Queen understanding what they went about, and how
they flattered themselves with a conceit of her marriage, answered that it
stood not with her honor to admit him in her presence, unless he should
reenter himself in the place from which he had escaped. The Lady thanking her
Majesty, and promising obedience in her sons behalf, did only entreat that the
place of his Ward might be changed to the Castle of Striveling: whereunto the
Queen having yielded, the Lord Glames was appointed to convey him thither; and
he indeed went so far on the way, as to the Nobleman his house of Glames; but
whether called back by his Father and friends, or of his own private motion it
is uncertain) there he changed his mind, and returned to the North, where
gathering some forces, a thousand horse or thereabout, with them he drew near
to Aberdene.

The Queen highly commoved with his contempt, The Queen takes journey to
Innernesse.
yet dissembling her anger, did after a day or two keep on her journey toward
Innerness, whither she intended. The eighth of September the night before her
setting forth, were seen in the firmament great inflammations and lightnings
extraordinary, which continued the space of two hours and above. It feared the
common sort, who do always interpret such accidents to be prognostics of some
trouble: But the Queen contemning these things as casual, would not hear of
altering her journey; so the first day she went to Buquhaine, the next to
Rothemay, and the third day being invited by Huntley to his house of
Stra^thbogie, where great preparations were made for her receipt, she denied to
go with him, or grace him in any sort, till his son gave obedience; and so kept
on her way.

The day following she came to Innerness, The Castle of Inn^^n^sse denied to
the Queen.
and thinking to lodge in the Castle, the Keeper Alexander Gordon refused to
give her entry. Thereupon she began to suspect some treachery. In the Townsmen
she could repose no assurance, as being all vassals and dependers of Huntley;
The town it self was unfenced with walls, and the country all in Arms, (as she
was advertised) to attend his coming. Yet disposing of things in the best sort
she could, order was given to keep a strong watch, to fortify the passages into
the town, and have ships prepared in the Road, whereunto if need were, she
might take her refuge. About midnight some spies sent from Huntley unto the
town were apprehended, who discovering his numbers and enterprise, were made
fast. And the next morning, upon a rumor that went of her danget the Queen
stood in, there flocked out of all quarters unto her number of Highlandmen, the
Frasers, and Munroes chiefly, with their followers and friendship. The Castle
beiseged and rendered.
The Clanchattan in Huntleys company, how soon they knew that the enterprise
was against the Queen, forsook him, and slipped aside, came and yielded
themselves unto her. She finding her forces increased, commanded to lay siege
to the Castle which rendered upon the first assault. The Captain and principal
Keepers were executed, but the lives of the common soldiers spared. After some
four days abode in the Castle, the Queen returned to Aberdene, accompanied with
all the Noblemen and clans of the country, and thither came the Lady Huntley
with offers of submission for her husband, but was denied access.

Huntley perceiving the world thus altered, Huntley resolves to invade the
Queen.
and himself fallen in the Queens displeasure, so as there was no hope of
regaining her favor, betook himself to desperate courses, and assembling his
friends and others that would run hazard with him, he approached to Aberdene,
presuming much of the affection of the inhabitants: At Court he had the Earl of
Sutherland, and John Lesley of Bughaine, men of no mean power, who made him
daily advertised of things that passed there, and the small numbers that were
with the Queen, willing him to take the opportunity. Whereupon resolving to
follow his enterprise before the forces of the Queen were further increased
(for charge was gone to all that could bear Arms in Lothian, Fife, Angus,
Stratherne, and Mernis, to come and attend her at Aberdene) he advanced with
some 800. in company, looking to find no resistance. And like enough the
enterprise had succeeded to his mind, but that the same morning letters were
intercepted, sent by Sutherland and Buquhaine to Huntley, which detected all
their counsel. Sutherland upon discovery escaped: Buquhaine was pardoned upon
his confession, and from thenceforth served the Queen faithfully. Huntley
advertised of these things, was advised by his friends to turn back; yet
hearing the Earl of Murray was coming against him, he made a stay resolving to
fight.

The place of standing he chused, The battle of Corrichie.
was naturally fenced with moss and quagmire, and so of difficult access;
300* they were in all, for many of his followers the night preceding were slipped
from him. Neither had the Earl of Murray any great number, and few whom he
might trust: for howbeit of the country about, diverse gathered unto him, most
of them were corrupted by Huntley, as appeared when the companies came in sight
one of another, all of them in sign of treason, and that they might be
discerned by the enemy, putting a bush of heath or header in their helmets, and
how soon they came to join, giving back, and retiring in great disorder. The
Earl of Murray, who stood a little off with an hundred in a troop, discovering
the treason called aloud to his men, that they should bend their Spears, and
not suffer those that fled to enter amongst them. So forced to take another
course, they went aside leaving him and his troop, when they had taken their
standing. Huntley imagining upon that flight and disorder the day to be his,
commanded his men to throw away their lances, and with drawn swords to run upon
them, as to a slaughter. But when they were come to the place where Murray with
his company stood, they were born back and compelled to fly as fast, as before
they followed. They who had played the Traitors seeing this, to clear
themselves, turned upon Huntley, and made all the slaughter which was committed
that day.

There fell in the conflict on Huntleys side, The Earl of Huntl^y taken
prisoner, and dies.
120. near as many were taken prisoners, on the other party not a man died.
Amongst the prisoners was the Earl of Huntley himself, with two sons, John
and Adam Gordon: The Earl was aged and corpulent, and by reason of the throng
that pressed him, expired in the hands of his takers, the rest were carried to
Aberdene late in the night. The Earls of Murray, Morton, and Lord Lindesay (for
these last two had been in the field with Murray) went first into the Church,
Thanksgiving for the victory.
where Mr. John Crage Minister of that City gave solemn thanks to God for the
victory, and their safety. This ended, they went unto the Queen, who received
them graciously, yet expressed no motion of a mind either troubled, or much
joyed. The next day was spent in taking counsel concerning the prisoners; the
conclusion whereof was, that punishment should be taken according to the laws
of John Gordon; That Adam his brother should be spared, because of his tender
age; the other captives fined according to their wealth, and those of meaner
estate banished the country. John Gordon beheaded at Ab^rdene.
The day following, John Gordon upon a scaffold erected in the street of
Aberdene was publicly executed. His death was much lamented, not by his
friends only, but even by strangers and persons unknown; for he was a youth of
most brave and manlike countenance, of a valorous spirit, and one who by his
noble behavior had raised great expectation of himself. Abused he was by the
hopes of a royal match, and which grieved all the beholders, pitifully mangled
by an unskilful Executioner.

This defeat of Huntley brought the North parts in a great obedience, The Lord
Gordon forfeited and commit^ed.
and mightily discouraged those of the Popish faction throughout the whole
Realm, for all that sort had placed their hopes on him and his greatness, both
in the Court and country. The eldest of his sons named George, after the
loss of that field fled to the Duke his Father in law, and was delivered by
him to the Queen, who sent him prisoner to Dumbar. In the end of January he was
accused and convicted of treason, his lands declared to be forfeited, The
Archbishop of Saint Andrews committed.
and himself committed to prison. Shortly after, John Hamilton Archbishop of S.
Andrews was committed in the Castle of Edinburgh for saying and hearing of
Mass. The Abbot of Corsragnal, and Prior of Whithern were used in the like
sort, An. 1563.
and diverse Priests and Monks for the same cause censured. The severe
proceeding against Papists put many in hope that the Queen should be brought to
embrace the Religion: which was further assured by the countenance she gave
unto the Church in the Parliament kept at Edinburgh the May following, A
Parliament at Edinburgh.
wherein diverse statutes passed upon their Petitions, as in the Acts of that
time may be seen. In this Parliament was the Act of oblivion (agreed unto at
the treaty of Leth) first ratified; but without any respect to that treaty,
which the Queen would never acknowledge. Wherefore it was advised that the
Lords in the house of Parliament should upon their knees entreat the passing of
such an Act, which accordingly was done. The rest of this summer the Queen
spent in hunting in the countries of Athol and Argyle.

But in August the same year there happened a thing that was like to have
caused much trouble: A trouble at Halirudhouse.
certain of the Queens family that remained in the Palace of Halirudhouse had a
Priest attending them, who did his ordinary service in the Chapel; diverse of
the town of Edinburgh resorting unto it, great offense was taken, and the
disorder complained of by the Preachers. The Citizens being informed that many
of their people were gone thither, one day went down, and being denied entry,
forces the gates, Some were taken and carried to prison, many escaped the back
way with the Priest himself. The uproare was great, and advertisement gone to
the Queen thereof, she was mightily incensed, avowing not to come to the Town,
till some exemplary punishment were inflicted upon the doers; yet by the
mediation of the Earls of Murray and Glencarne she was pacified. John Knox
called before the Council.
John Knox only was called before the Council, and charged to have been the
author of the sedition, as likewise for convocating the subjects by his missive
letters, whenever he thought meet. He answered, That he was never a Preacher
of rebellion, nor loved to stir up tumults: contrariwise, he taught all
people to obey their Magistrates and Princes in God. As to the convocation of
the subjects, he had received from the Church a command to advertise his
Brethren, when he saw a necessity of their meeting; especially, if he saw
Religion to be in peril: and had often craved to be exonerated of that burden,
but still was refused. Then directing his speech to the Queen with a wonderful
boldness, He charged her in the name of the Almighty God, and as she desired to
escape his heavy wrath and indignation, to forsake that Idolatrous religion
which she professed, and by her power maintained against the statutes of the
Realm. And as he was proceeding, was required by the Earl of Morton then
Chancellor (fearing the Queens irritation) to hold his peace, and go away.
After which time matters were carried more peaceably betwixt the Queen and the
Church, the Earl of Murray always interposing himself, and propounding the
Petitions of the Church unto her, as likewise returning her answers to their
satisfaction.

In the end of this year Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox, by the permission of
the Queen, The Earl of Lenox restored.
returned into Scotland, and in a Parliament called to that effect in January
next had the process of forfeiture laid against him, whilst the Duke was
Governor, reduced, and so restored to his lands and possessions after 22.
years exile. Henry his son followed him some months after, Henry Lord Darnely
son to Lenox, comes into Scotland.
and came to Edinburgh in the beginning of February. A young man not past 21.
years, of comely personage, and of a mild and sweet behavior. He had presence
of the Queen in the place of Weymis, and was received with great demonstrations
of favor. Nor was it long, that she was perceived to bear some affection unto
him. Whereupon a speech went, that she would take him unto her husband. The
Queen intends to take him to husband.
And indeed, besides the love she carried to the young Nobleman, there was
great respects that led her that way. He was descended of the Royal blood of
England. And next unto her self, the apparent heir of that Crown. If it should
fall him to marry with one of the greatest families of England, it was to be
feared, that some impediment might be made to her in the Right of succession,
which she thought was a wise part in her to prevent. Again, the Queen of
England had advised her by Thomas Randolph her Ambassador, to choose unto her
self a husband in England for the better conservation of the peace contracted
betwixt the kingdoms, and had of late recommended the Earl of Leicester as a
worthy match to her. She therefore as well to satisfy the Queen of Englands
desire, An. 1564.
in not matching with a stranger, but with some Englishman born, as likewise to
cut off all debates of succession, resolved to take the Nobleman to her husband.

But no sooner was her intention discovered, Enemies raised up against the
Queen.
then on all sides enemies rose up against her. Of the Nobility at home, some
opposed the Marriage under pretext of Religion (for the Earl of Lenox and his
son were both esteemed to be Popish.) The Queen of England by Nicholas
Throgmorton her Ambassador, advised her not to use have in a business of that
importance; and (to interpose some impediment) charged the Earl of Lenox and
his son to return into England, the time being not yet expired, contained in
their licenses. And universally amongst the subject, the question was agitated,
Whether the Queen might choose to her self an husband; or it were more fitting,
that the Estates of the land should appoint one unto her. Some maintaining,
that the liberty could not be denied unto her, which was granted to the meanest
subject; others excepting, that in the heirs of the Kingdom the case was
different, because they in assuring an husband to themselves, did withal
appoint a King over the people; and that it was more reason the whole people
should choose an husband to one woman, then that one woman should elect a King
to rule over the whole people. It was objected also by some, that the marriage
was unlawful, and contrary to the Canon law, Lady Margaret Douglas his mother,
being sister uterine to King James the fifth her father. But for this the Queen
had provided a remedy, having sent William Chisholin Bishop of Dumblane to
bring a dispensation from Rome. And to strengthen her self at home, she
restored George Gordon son to the Earl of Huntley, unto his lands and honors,
recalled the Earl of Sutherland who lived an exile in Flanders, The Lord Gordon
restored.
and Bothwel that was banished in France. This wicked man was not well returned
into the country, when he devised a new plot against the Earl of Murray his
life, for which being called in question, he forsook the country, and fled
again unto France.

The only man that seemed to stand for the marriage, Signeur Davie an at^endant
on the Queen favors the marriage.
and used his best means to promove it, was an Italian called David Risio, who
had great credit that time with the Queen. This man had followed the Savo^an
Ambassador into Scotland, and in hope of bettering his fortune gave himself to
attend the Queen at first in the quality of a Musician; afterward growing in
more favor he was admitted to write her French letters, and in the end
preferred to be principal Secretary to the Estate. It grieved many to see a
stranger thus advanced; Lethington chiefly was displeased for that he found his
credit this way impaired, yet being one that could put on any disguise on his
nature, of all others he most fawned on this Italian, and showing him, as it
was truth, that he was the object of diverse Noblemens envy, did persuade him by
all means to work the match, and procute (if it could be) the consent of the
Queen of England thereto: wherein offering his own service (for he longed after
some employment abroad) he procured to himself a message toward the Queen of
England. Secretary L^thington sent into England.
By him the Earl of Lenox and his son did excuse their not returning into
England, as they were charged; beseeching Queen Elizabeth's favor unto the
match intended, and that which might prove more profitable to her and her
Realm, then any other course the Scottish Queen should take.

Signieur Davie (for so he was commonly called) did after this labor with all
his power to have the marriage perfected; and as he was of a politic wit, the
more to bind the young Nobleman and his friendship unto him, studied to have
the same finished before the return of the Queen of Englands answer, either
fearing, that her disassent might work some delay in the match, or that the
Noblemans obligation to himself should be the less in case she consented. For
this purpose a Convocation of the Estates was kept at Striveling in the month
of May, A Convoc^tion of the Estates at Striveling.
where the matter being propounded, and the advice of the Estates craved, many
did yield their consents, with a provision that no change should be made in the
present estate of Religion. The greater part to gratify the Queen, without
making any exception, agreed that the marriage should proceed. Of the whole
number Andrew Lord Ochiltrie did only oppose, plainly professing, that he
would never consent to admit a King of the Popish Religion. Shortly after, was
Henry Lord Darnly created Lord of Ar^manoch, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of
Rothesay, that honored with these Titles he might be thought more worthy of
the royal match. This determination of the Estates published, The Lord of
Darnely created Duke of Roth^say.
the Earls of Murray, Argile, Glencarn and Rothes, assisted by the Duke of
Chattellerault, whom they had drawn to be of their faction, meeting at
Striveling after that the Queen was parted, did join in a confederacy for
resisting the marriage, pretending the danger, and other inconveniences that
might arise to the Estate. A mutiny at Edinburgh.
In the town of Edinburgh the people began to mutiny, and assembling themselves
in companies on St. Leonards Crags took counsel to put their Burgesses in
arms, to assign them Captains, and to disarm such of the townsmen as they knew
to be affected to the marriage.

The Queen highly incensed at this mutiny did haste to the town, The Queen
comes to Edinburgh, and the mutiners fly.
at whose coming the heads of the faction, Andrew Slater, Alexander Clerk,
Gilbert Lauder, William Harlaw, Michaell Rind, James Inglish, James Young, and
Alexander Gouthrie, fled forth of the town, and were denounced rebels. Their
houses possessed by the Thesaurer, and their goods put under Inventary, were
after some few days at the intercession of the Magistrates (so great was the
Queens clemency) restored, and themselves pardoned.

The Assembly of the Church meeting at the same time in Edinburgh presented to
the Queen by their Commissioners the Petitions following; An Assembly at
Edinburgh.


1. That the Papisticall and blasphemous Mass with all Popish idolatry,
Petittions of the Church.
and the Popes jurisdiction should be universally suppressed and abolished
through the whole Realm, not only amongst the subjects, but in the Queens
Majesty's own person and family, and such as were tried to transgress the same
punished according to the Laws.

2. That the true Religion formerly received, should be professed by the Queen,
as well as by the subjects; and people of all sorts bound to resort upon the
Sundays at least, to the prayers and preaching of Gods Word, as in former
times they were holden to hear Mass.

3. That sure provision should be made for sustentation of the Ministry, as
well for the time present as for the time to come, and their livings assigned
them in the places where they served, or at least in the parts next adjacent;
and that they should not be put to crave the same at the hands of any others.
That the benefices now vacant, or that have fallen void since the month of
March, 1558. and such as should happen thereafter to be void, should be
disponed to persons qualified for the Ministry upon trial and admission by
the Superintendents.

4. That no Bishopric, Abbacie, Priory, Deanery, Provostry, or other benefice
having more Churches then one annexed thereto, should be disponed in time
coming to any one man, but that the Churches thereof being dissolved, the same
should be provided to several persons, so as every man having charge, may
serve at his own Church, according to his vocation. That Gleabs and Manses
might be designed for the residence of Ministers, as likewise the Churches
repair; and an Act made in the next Parliament to that effect.

5. That none should be permitted to have charge of Schools, Colleges, and
Universities, or to instruct the youth either privately or publicly, till they
were tried by the Superintendents in the visitation of the Churches, and after
trial admitted to their charge.

6. That all Lands founded of old to Hospitality should be restored, and
applied to the sustentation of the poor; and that Lands, annual rents, or
other emoluments belonging sometime to the Friars of whatsoever Order, as
likewise the Annuities, Aultrages, Obits and other duties pertaining to
Priests, be employed to the same use, and to the upholding of Schools in the
places where they lie.

7. That horrible crimes abounding in the Realm, such as idolatry, blasphemy of
Gods Name, manifest violation of the Sabbath or Lords day, witchcraft, sorcery,
and enchantment, adultery, incest, open whoredom, maintaining of brothels,
murder, slaughter, theft, reife and oppression, with all other detestable
crimes, be severely punished, and Judges appointed in every Province for
executing the same.

8. That some order should be devised for the relief of the poor laborers of
the ground, who are oppressed in their Tithes by Leases set over their heads,
and they thereby forced to take unreasonable conditions.

To these petitions the Queen made Answer by writing in this sort: First she
said, The Queens answer to the Petitions.
That where it was desired that the Mass should be suppressed and abolished
as well in her Majesty's own Person and Family, as amongst the Subjects, her
Highness did answer for her self, that she was no ways persuaded, that there
was any impiety in the Mass; and trusted her Subjects would not press her to
do against her Conscience. For not to dissemble, but to deal plainly with them,
she said, she neither might nor would forsake the Religion wherein she had been
educated, and brought up, believing the same to be the true Religion, and
grounded upon the Word of God. Besides she knew, that if she should change her
Religion, it would lose her the frienship of the King of France, and other
great Princes her friends and confederates, upon whose displeasure she would be
loath to hazard, knowing no friendship that might countervail theirs. Therefore
desired all her loving Subjects, who have had experience of her goodness, how
she had neither in times past, nor yet in time coming did intend to force the
conscience of any person, but to permit every one to serve God in such manner,
as they are persuaded to be the best. That they likewise would not urge her to
any thing that stood not with the quietness of her mind.

As for the establishing the Religion in the body of the Realm, she said, That
they knew the same could not be done but by the consent of the three Estates in
Parliament. And how soon the same should be convened, whatsoever the Estates
did condescend unto, her Majesty should thereto agree, assuring them in the
mean while, that none should be troubled for using themselves in Religion,
according to their consciences, and so should have no cause to fear any peril
to their lives or heritages.

To the third and fourth Articles it was answered, That her Majesty did not
think it reasonable, that she should defraud her self of so great a part of the
Patrimony of the Crown, as to put the Patronages of benefices forth of her own
hands, seeing the public necessities of the Crown did require a great part of
the Rents to be still retained. Notwithstanding, her Majesty was pleased, that
her own necessity being supplied, after it should be considered, what might be
a reasonable sustentation to the Ministers, a special assignation should be
made to them forth of the nearest and most commodious places, wherewith her
Majesty should not intermeddle, but suffer the same to come to their use.

Touching the sustentation of the poor, her Majesty said, That her liberality
toward them should be as far extended, as with reason can be required.

And for the rest of the Articles, Her Highness promised to do therein, as the
Estates convened in Parliament should appoint,

About the midst of July (the dispensation of the marriage being brought from
Rome) the Queen was espoused to the Lord Darnelie, The Queen married to the
Lord Darnly.
after the Popish manner in the Chapel of Halirudhruse by the Dean of
Restalrig, and the next day was he by the sound of the Trumpet proclaimed King,
and declared to be associated with her in the Government.

The discontented Lords sent forth their complaints upon this, The complaints
of the discontented Lords.
alleging, That the Kingdom was openly wronged, the liberties thereof
oppressed, and a King imposed upon the people without advise and consent of the
Estates (a thing not practiced before at any time, and contrary to the Laws and
received custom of the Country) Desiring therefore all good subjects to take
the matter to heart, and join with them in resisting these beginnings of
Tyranny. But few or none were thereby won to show themselves openly of their
party, so as when the Queen with her husband went against them, they left the
town of Striveling where the first convened, and fled into Paislay.

The King to make himself more popular, The king hears a Sermon at St. Giles.
and take from the Lords the pretext of Religion wherewith they colored their
designs, took purpose to go unto St. Giles Church in Edinburgh and hear
Sermon. John Knox (either doubting his sincerity, or favoring the faction of
the Noblemen) fell upon him with a bitter reproof; for which being cited before
the Queen and Council, John Knox cited before the Council.
he not only stood to that he had spoken but added, That as the King for her
pleasure had gone to Mass, and dishonored the Lord God, so should he in his
Justice make her the instrument of his ruin. The Queen incensed with this
answer, burst forth in tears: whereupon he was inhibited preaching by the
Council, and silenced for some months. Mr. John Craig (who a little before
was brought to Edinburgh) because of the prohibition given to his Colleague,
refused to do any service there, which put the people in a stur, yet upon
better advice, he was moved to continue in his charge.

In the end of August the King and Queen accompanied with five thousand or
thereabouts, The Lords pursued by the King and Queen.
went to Glasgow to pursue the Lords. They removing from Paisley to Hamilton,
an Herald was sent thither to summon the Castle, which they denied to render,
giving out, that they would try the matter in battle the next day. But the
manifold distractions amongst themselves did let this resolution, and diverse
falling away from their side, they went to Edinburgh, where supposing to find
assistance, the Captain of the Castle forced them by his continual playing on
the town, to quit it. After which they took their course to Dumfreis, allured
by the fair promises of John Maxwell Lord Hereis.

A new expedition upon this was concluded, and the Lieges warned to meet at
Bigger, the 9. of October: in the mid time the King and Queen leaving the Earl
of Lenox Lieutenant in the West parts, made a Progress through Fife, to punish
those that had assisted the Lords. The Lairds of Grainge, Balcomie, Pitmillie,
and Ramormie, were fugitive, some others of meaner sort taken prisoners, and
the towns of Perth, Dundie, and St. Andrews fined in great sums. This done,
they returned to Edinburgh, and from thence went into Dumfr^is, where the Lords
had stayed all that while: The Lord Hereis pretending to make their peace,
concluded his own, The Lords fly into England.
advising them to fly into England, as they did. Thither went the Duke of
Chattellerault, the Earl of Murray, Glencarne, and Rothes, the Lord Ochiltrie,
the Commendatory of Kilwinning, and diverse others of good note. A few days
they abode in Carlisle with the Earl of Bedford, Lieutenant at that time in the
North. Then going to Newcastle, The Queen of England intercedeth for the Lords.
they sent the Earl of Murray to the English Court, to entreat the Queens
intercession for them; she incontinent dispatched a Gentleman of her Privy
Chamber, named Tamerorth with Letters to the Queen of Scots, requesting, that
Murray and the rest might be received in favor. The Gentleman not vouchsafing
to give her husband the title of a King, nor bringing any Commission to him,
was denied presence, and had his answer delivered him in writing, to this
effect: That Queen Elizabeth should do well to have no meddling with the
subjects of Scotland, but leave them to their Princes discretion, seeing
neither she, nor her husband did trouble themselves with the causes of her
subjects.

The Duke perceiving that by these means their peace would not be hastily made;
The Duke received in favor
and knowing his reconcilement to be more easy, resolved to sever his cause
from the rest, and sent the Abbot of Kilwinning to entreat favor to himself
and his friends: which he easily obtained, for he was known to be nothing so
guilty as the others, and to have been craftily drawn upon that faction; so he
returned into Scotland, in December following.

In this month a general Assembly of the Church convened again at Edinburgh,
A general Assembly of the Church.
where the answer made by the Queen to their last petitions was presented; and
replied unto by the same Assembly in this manner: A reply to the answer of
their last Petitions.
First they said, That it was no small grief to the hearts of good and
Christian subjects to hear, that notwithstanding the Evangel of Christ had been
so long preached in the Realm, and his mercy so plainly offered, her Majesty
should yet continue unperswaded of the truth of that Religion, which they
preached and professed, it being the same which Christ Jesus had revealed to
the world, which he commanded his Apostles to preach, and ordained to be
received of all the faithful, and firmly retained by them until his second
coming; A religion that had God the Father, his only Son Christ Jesus, and the
Holy Spirit for the Authors thereof; and was most clearly grounded upon the
Doctrine and practice as well of the Prophets, as Apostles, which no other
religion upon the face of the earth could justify, allege or prove. For
whatsoever assurance the Papist had or could allege for his profession; the
same the Turk had for his Alcoran; And the Jews more probably might allege for
their rites and traditions, whether it be antiquity of time, or consent of
people, or authority of Princes, or multitudes and number of Professors, or any
the like cloakes they do pretend. Wherefore in the Name of the eternal God
(with the reverence that became them) they required her highness to use the
means whereby she might be persuaded of the truth, An. 1565.
such as the preaching of the Word of God, the ordinary mean that he has
appointed for working knowledge and begetting faith in the hearts of his chosen
ones, conference with learned men, and disputation with the adversaries, which
they were ready to offer, when and where her Grace should think expedient.

Next, where she could not believe any impiety to be in the Mass they made
offer to prove the whole Mass from the beginning to the ending, to be nothing
else but a mass of impiety, and that the Priest his actions, the opinion which
the hearers, or rather the gazers upon it had of the same, were blasphemous,
and grossly idolatrous. And where her Majesty said, she would not hazard the
displeasure of the King of France and other Princes, with whom she was
confederated; they to the contrary did assure her, That true Religion is the
only bond that joyneth men with God, who is the King of Kings, and has the
hearts of all Princes in his hands, whose favor ought to be unto her more
precious, then the favor of all the Princes on earth, and without which no
friendship or confederacy could possibly endure.

Thirdly, touching her answer to the Article for sustentation of the Ministry,
they show, It was never their meaning, that her Majesty, or any other Patron
should be defrauded of their just rights. Only they desired when any Benefice
was void, that a qualified person should be presented to the Superintendent of
the bounds, to be tried, and examined by him. For as the Presentation belongs
to the Patron, so does the Collation belong to the Church. Otherwise, were it
in the Patrons power simply to present whom they pleased, without trial or
examination, there should be no order in the Church, and all be filled with
ignorance and confusion.

Fourthly, to that which her Majesty spoke of retaining a great part of the
Benefices in her own hands, they answered, That such doing was against the Law
both of God and Man, and could not stand with a good conscience, seeing it
tends to the destruction of many poor souls that by this means should be
defrauded of instruction. And for the offer she made to provide the Ministry
by assignations in places most commodious, her own necessities being first
supplied, they said, That good order did require Ministers first to be
provided, Schools for instructing the youth maintained, the fabric of Churches
repaired and upheld, and the poor and indigent members of Christ sustained;
all which ought to be furnished out of the Tithes, which are the proper
Patrimony of the Church. These things done, if any thing were remaining, that
her Majesty and Council might use it as they should think expedient. In end,
giving thanks to her Majesty for the offer of assignations, they humbly desired
the general offer to be made more particular, and that it might please her to
reform the answer given to the Articles of the Church in all the aforesaid
points.

After this sort did the Church insist with the Queen, but with small success;
for the provision of Ministers some small supply was obtained. But in the point
of Religion, they found no contentment. During the rest of this winter, matters
were quiet: but the next year had a foul beginning, Seigneur Davie who governed
all affairs at Court, had only the Queens ear, being slain upon the occasion,
and after the manner you shall hear. The slaughter of Signeur Davie conspired.
There had fallen out a little before some private discontents betwixt the King
and Queen, whereupon first she caused change the order which was kept in the
Proclamations and public Records, placing the name of her husband after her
own name, that the Royal authority might be known to belong unto her self
wholly. And after a little time upon a color that the dispatch of business was
much hindered through the Kings absence; she had appointed in stead of his hand,
a cachet to be used in the signing of Letters, which was committed to the
custody of Seigneur Davie. This being noted, (as they are never wanting some in
Court to stir the coals) diverse tales were brought to the King of the neglect
and contempt that he was held in, and of the great respect carried to the
stranger. The vanity and arrogance of the man himself was likewise so great, as
not content to exceed the chief of the Court, he would outbrave the King in his
apparel, in his domestic furniture, in the number and sorts of his horses,
and in every thing else: So as no speech was for the time more common and
current in the Country, then that of Davies greatness, of the credit and
honor whereunto he was risen, and of the small account that was taken of the
King. This the King taking in heart, he did open his grief unto his father, who
advised him to assure the Nobility at home, and to recall those that were
banished into England; which done, he might easily correct the insolency and
aspiring pride of that base fellow.

A parliament being then called to meet at Edinburgh the 12. A Parliament at
Edinburgh deserted.
of March, for pronouncing sentence of forfeiture against the Earls of Murray,
Glencarn, Argile, Rothes, and other Noblemen that were fled into England, as
the time of meeting drew nigh, the Queen labored earnestly to have the process
laid against them found good; and that matters might go to her mind, she
designed Davie to exercise the office of Chancellor in that meeting. The Earl
of Morton who after Huntlies death had supplied the place unto that time,
interpreted this as a disgrace offered unto him, dealt with the King (with whom
he was grown familiar) to make him sensible of his own contempt and misregard;
and finding him apprehensive enough that way, drew him to a meeting in the Lord
Ruthvens lodging, upon pretext of visiting the Nobleman, who lay then diseased,
where breaking forth in a speech of the present misgovernment, the blame of all
was cast upon the King, as having for the pleasure of a wicked villain chased
his cousins and best friends out of the Realm, and helped to raise a base
fellow to such a height of credit, as now himself was become by him despised.
The King that could not deny it to be his fault in a great part, professed his
readiness to join with them for remedying those evils, and from thence forth
promised to do nothing but by the consent of the Nobility. Yet they not
esteeming it safe to trust his promises, whom they knew to be facile and
somewhat uxorious, lest afterward he should go from that agreement, did
exhibit to him a Bond in writing, wherein they were all sworn to join for
maintaining Religion, reducing the Noblemen lately exiled, and making Davie out
of the way. Unto this the King did wittingly set his hand, and with him
subscribed the Earl of Morton, the Lords Ruthven and Lindesay, for he also was
present and upon the plot.

The night following, because matters could not be long kept close, and
needful it was to go presently thorough with the design by reason of the
Parliament approaching, The slaughter of Davie.
they prepared to execute the same. Morton, whose forces were greatest was
appointed to guard the utter Court of the Palace, if perhaps any stir should be
made. For there lodged within the Earls of Huntly, Atholl, Bothwell, Sutherland
and Cathnesse, with the Lords Flemyn and Levingston, a force to have resisted
any sudden attempt. The King taking the Lord Ruthven with him, who was but
lately recovered of a Fever, and followed by four or five men at most, entered
into the room where the Queen sat at supper. Ruthven seeing Davie at the
table, (for the Queen was accustomed when she supped private to admit others to
sit by her, and that night the Countess of Argile, and beneath her Davie was
placed) commanded him to arise and come forth, for the place where he sat did
not beseem him.

The Queen starting up hastily, went between Davie and Ruthven to defend him,
and Davie clasping his hands about her middle, the King labored to loose them,
willing her not to be afraid, for that they were come only to take order with
that villain. Then was he dragged down the stairs to the gallery where Morton
with his company was walking. There they fell upon him, and striving who should
give the first stroke, killed him with many wounds.

It was constantly reported that he had warning given him oftener then once by
John Damiott a French Priest, Damiott a French Priest willed him to be gone.
who was thought to have some skill in Magic, to do his business and be gone,
for that he could not make good his part; And that he answered disdainfully,
The Scots are given more to brag then to fight. Some few days again before his
death being warned by the same Priest to take heed of the bastard, he replied,
That whilst he lived, he should not have credit in Scotland to do him any
hurt. For he took the Earl of Murray to be the man, of whom he was advertised
to take heed. But that prediction either fulfilled, or eluded, the first stroke
was given him by George Douglas, base son to the Earl of Angus, after whom,
such others as were in place, either serving their private malice, or desiring
to be esteemed associates in that conspiracy, inflicted every man his wound
till he was dispatched; yet had they no commandment from the contrivers, so to
kill him: It being their purpose to have brought him to public execution,
which they knew would have been to all the people a most grateful spectacle.
And good it had been for them so to have done, or then to have taken him in
another place, and at another time, then in the Queens presence. For besides
the great peril of abortion, which her fear might have caused; the false
aspersions cast upon her fame and honor by that occasion, were such as she
could never digest, and drew on all the pitiful accidents that afterward
ensued. The Queens behavior after Davies murder.
The Queen bursting forth in many tears, after a great chiding she kept with
the Lord Ruthven, sent one of her maids to enquire what was become of Davie,
who quickly returning, told that he was killed; having asked her how she knew
it, the maid answered, that she had seen him dead. Then the Queen wiping her
eyes with her handkerchief, said, No more tears; I will think upon a Revenge.
Neither was she seen after that, any more to lament.

The rumor of this deed ran soon through the Town, whereupon the people did
arm, and go to the Palace. But they were pacified by the King, who calling to
them from a window, showed that the Queen and he were well, and that they
needed not to fear, because that which was done, was done by his own
commandment. The Noblemen that lodged within the Palace, were charged to keep
within their chambers; yet the Lords Huntley and Bothwel escaped the same night
by a window at the back of the Palace. Athol and the rest had license to depart
the next morning. Upon Tuesday thereafter (for the slaughter was committed upon
Saturday the ninth of March) the Earls of Murray and Rothes, The exiled Lords
return.
with these that were exiled in England, returned to Edinburgh; and going first
to the Parliament house, took documents, that they were ready to answer the
summons of forfeiture directed against them, and that none did insist to pursue.

In this doubtful estate of things the Queen not knowing whom to trast, sent
for her brother the Earl of Murray, and having conferred familiarly a while
with him, by his means had her servants and guards restored; for after the
slaughter they were all put from her. The King protests his innocence.
The night following she went from the Palace to Seaton, and from thence to
Dumbar, taking the King with her in company; who repenting the fact, and
forsaking the other Conspirators, did openly by sound of Trumpet at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh protest his innocence, denying, that ever he gave his
consent to any thing, but to the returning of the Lords that were banished in
England. Yet was the contrary known to all men, so as this served only to the
undoing of his reputation, and made him find few or no friends thereafter to
aid him in his necessity.

Upon the Queens departing the Conspirators, The Conspirators fly into England.
and whosoever were thought privy thereto, fled some to England, others to the
borders, and Highlands, and such a change you should have seen as they who the
night preceding did vant of the fact as a goodly and memorable Act, affirming
some truly, some falsely, that they were present thereat, did on the morrow
forswear all that before they had affirmed. The Earl of Morton with the Lords
Ruthven, Lindesay, and young Lethington, remained at Newcastle in England,
where the Lord Ruthven falling again in the fever departed this life. Mr.
James Macgill, Clerk of Register, with diverse Citizens of Edinburgh that were
esteemed favorers of the fact, left the Town, and lurked privately amongst
their friends. Inquisition of the murderers.
After some four days stay at Dumbar the Queen returned to Edinburgh,
accompanied with many of the Nobility, and then began Inquisition to be made
for the Murderers. Thomas Scot Sheriff depute of Perth, and servant to the
Lord Ruthven, with Sir Henry Yair sometimes a Priest, being apprehended, were
after trial hanged, and quartered. William Harlaw and John Mowbray Burgesses of
Edinburgh, convicted, and brought to the place of execution, had their lives
spared by the intercession of Bothwel. The Lairds of Calder, Ormeston, Halton,
Elphingston, Brunston, Whittingham, Shirre^hall, and many others being cited,
as conscious of the murder, for not appearing were denounced Rebels. The
office of the Clerk Register was conferred upon Sir James Balfour, and a
conclusion taken in council, that they who should be tried to have either
devised, or to have been actual committers of the said murder, should be
pursued by order of Justice, and the same executed with all severity: An. 1566.
but that the Commons and others that came to the Palace accidentally, should
upon their supplication be used with more clemency. In all this proceeding
there was none more earnest or forward then the King, notwithstanding whereof
the hatred of the fact lay heavy upon him, nor could he ever after this time
recover his former favor with the Queen. The rest after a little time were
reconciled, Lethington by the means of Athol was first called home, albeit
Bothwel did strongly oppose it. The Barons addressed for themselves, by means
of their friends that were in credit. Morton and Lindesay in the winter
following were pardoned at the request of the Earls of Huntley and Argyle.

Now the time of the Queens lying in drew nigh, The Castle of Edinburgh made
choice of for the Queen her lying in.
whereupon the Council meeting to advise upon the place where her Majesty
should stay, made choice of the Castle of Edinburgh, as the part most
commodious: and ordained the Earl of Arrane, who was there kept prisoner, to be
removed to the Castle of Hamilton with a liberty to travel by the space of two
miles about, providing he should do nothing to the prejudice of his house, and
enter himself unto 20. days warning in the Castles of Edinburgh, Dumbar, and
Dumbarton, or any of them; for observance whereof the Earls of Murray and
Glencarn became sureties.

The Queen at her first entry into the Castle did feast the Nobility, and made
them all friends: The Queen feasts the Noblemen.
Argyle, Murray, and Athol had lodgings assigned them within the Castle.
Huntley, Bothwel, and others of the Nobility remained in the Town. The 19. of
June, betwixt nine and ten of the clock in the evening she was brought to bed
of a son, The Queen delivered of a son.
to the exceeding joy of the subjects, for which the Nobles and whole people
assembled the next day in the Church of S. Giles, gave solemn thanks to God.
Presently was Sir James Melvil sent to carry the news to the Queen of England,
who to congratulate her safe and happy delivery, Sir Henry Killigrew sent from
England.
sent Sir Henry Killigrew to Scotland by Post. The Assembly of the Church
convened the same time in Edinburgh, sent the Superintendent of Lothian to
testify their gladness for the Princes birth, The desire of the Church for the
Baptism of the Prince.
and to desire that he should be baptized according to the form used in the
reformed Church. To this last she gave no answer, otherwise the Superintendent
and his Commission were very graciously accepted. The Queen calling to bring
the Infant that the Superintendent might see him, he took him in his Arms, and
falling upon his knees conceived a short and pithy prayer, which was very
attentively heard by her; having closed his prayer, he took the babe, and
willed him to say Amen for himself; which she took in so good part, as
continually afterward she called the Superintendent her Amen. This story told
to the Prince when he came to years of understanding, he always called him his
Amen; and whilst he lived, did respect and reverence him as his Spiritual
Father.

The Queen waxing strong went by water to Alloway, The Queen goes to Alloway.
a house pertaining to the Earl of Mar, and kept private a few days. In that
place brake out first her displeasure against the King her husband; for the
following her thither, was not suffered to stay, but commanded to be gone, and
when at any time after he came to Court, his company was so loathsome unto her,
as all men perceived she had no pleasure nor content in it; such a deep
indignation had possessed her mind, because of the disgrace offered to her in
the slaughter of her servant Davie, the envy whereof was all laid upon the
King, as she could never digest it.

Secretary Lethington (who by his subtle flatteries was crept again into
favor) did wickedly foster this passion, Secretary Lethington soffereth her
Majesty's anger against the King.
by putting in her head a possibility to divorce from the King, which he said
was an easy work, and a thing that might be done, only by abstracting the
Popes dispensation of their marriage. And the Earl Bothwel (a man sold to all
wickedness) did likewise by himself and by his instruments (of whom Sir James
Balfour was the chief) take all occasions to incense her, and by exaggerating
the Kings ingratitude toward her, wrought her mind to an hatred implacable.

In the beginning of October the Queen went to Iedburgh, The Queen goes to
Iedburgh.
to keep some Justice Courts, where she fell dangerously sick; the King coming
there to visit her, had no countenance given him, and was forced to depart. At
her return from the Borders being in Craigmillar, Lethington renueth the
purpose of diverse.
Lethington renewing the purpose of divorce in the hearing of the Earls of
Argyle and Huntley, did persuade her to take some course for her separation
from the King, seeing they could not live together in Scotland with security.
The Queen asking him how that could be done without some blemish to her honor:
he replied, that none would think ill of her part therein, she being so
ungratefully used by him; but that all might know the murder of Davie to have
been his fact, her Majesty should do well to pardon the Lords, that were fled
to England, and call them home. Nay said the Queen, I will rather have matters
to continue as they are, till God remedy them. Yet within few days Morton and
Lindesay were recalled at the entreaty of the Earls of Argyle and Huntley, as
was touched before.

Preparation was then making for the Baptism of the Prince, Preparation for
the Princes Baptism.
who about the end of August had been transported to Striveling. To honor this
solemnity, the Count de Briance, was sent Ambassador from the French King,
Monsieur de Croke, from the Duke of Savey, and the Earl of Bedford from the
Queen of England, who brought with him a Font of gold weighing two stone
weight, with a Basin and Ewer for the Baptism. At the day appointed for the
solemnity, (which was the fifteenth of December) they all convened in the
Castle of Striveling. The Prince was carried by the French Ambassador, walking
betwixt two ranks of Barons and Gentlemen that stood in the way from the
Chamber to the Chapel, holding every one a proket of wax in their hands. The
Earl of Athol went next to the French Ambassador, bearing the grear fierge of
wax. The Earl of Eglington carried the Salt, the Lord Semple the Cude, and the
Lord Ross the Basin and Ewer: all these were of the Roman profession. In the
entry of the Chapel the Prince was received by the Archbishop of S. Andrews,
whose Collaterals were, the Bishops of Dunkeld, Dumblane, and Ross; there
followed them, the Prior of Whithern, sundry Deans and Archdeans, with the
Gentlemen of the Chapel in their several habits, and Copes. The Countess of
Argyle by Commission from the Queen of England, did hold up the Prince at the
Font, where the Archbishop did administer the Baptism with all ceremonies
accustomed in the Roman Church, the spittle excepted, which the Queen did
inhibit. The Earl of Bedford entered not in the Chapel, during the service;
and without the doors stood all the Noblemen, professors of the reformed
Religion. The rites performed, the Prince was proclaimed by his name and
Titles. James, Prince and Stewart of Scotland, Duke of Rothesay, Earl of
Carrick, Lord of the Isles, and Baron of Renfrew: then did the Music begin,
which having continued a good space, the Prince was again conveyed to his
chamber.

It was night before the solemnity took end, The King withheld from the
solemnity.
for it was done in the afternoon. The feasting and triumphal sports that
followed, were kept some days with exceeding cost and magnificence, yet the
content the people received thereby was nothing so great, as their offense for
the Kings neglect; for neither was he admitted to be present at the Baptism,
nor suffered to come unto the feast. To some his ill disposition was given for
an excuse, others more scornfully were told that his fashioners had not used
the diligence they ought in preparing his apparel. Mean while the Ambassadors
had a watchword given them, not to see nor salute him. And such of the Nobility
as were known to bear him any favor, or out of their compassion did vouchsafe
him a visit, were frowned upon by the Court. His Father advertised of these
things, sent for him to come unto Glasgow, where he then remained; but scarce
was he past a mile from Striveling, The King falls sick in the way to Glasgow.
when a vehement pain seized on all the parts of his body, which at his coming
to Glasgow was manifestly perceived to proceed of poison, that treacherously
had been ministered unto him: for through all his body brake out blisters of a
bluish color, with such a dolor and vexation in all his parts, as nothing
but death was a long time expected. Yet his youth and natural strength
vanquishing the force of the poison, he began a little to convalesce, and put
his enemies to other shifts, wherein shortly after (but to their own undoing)
they prevailed.

The report of what passed at Striveling coming to Edinburgh, The Archbishop of
S. Andrews restored to his privileges.
where the Assembly of the Church was then gathered, did greatly offend the
better sort; yet nothing grieved them so much, as a Commission granted to the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, whereby he was reponed to his ancient jurisdiction in
confirming Testaments, giving collation to Benefices, and other such things as
were judged in the spiritual Courts. The Assembly taking this greatly to heart,
ordained a supplication to be made to the Nobility, and Lords of secret
Council, professing Christ with them, and who had renounced the Roman
Antichrist, (I use the words of the superscription) for impeding the said
Commission, and letting it to take effect. In this supplication they said, That
the causes judged in these Courts did for the most part pertain to the true
Church, The Churches complaint for the same.
and that howsoever in hope of some good effect to have followed, the Church
had overseen the Commission granted by the Queen in these matters to men who
for the greater number were of their own profession, they would never be
content that he whom they knew to be an enemy to Christ and his truth, should
exerce that jurisdiction, seeing under the color thereof, he might usurp again
his own authority, and take upon him the judgment of heresy, in which case
none could be ignorant what his sentence could be; wherefore their desire was,
the Queen should be informed that this was a violation of the laws of the
Realm, and the setting up again of the Roman Antichrist, whose authority and
usurped power in an open and free Parliament had been condemned, which her
Majesty also at her first arriving into this Realm, and since that time by
diverse Proclamations had expressly forbidden to be acknowledged; here of they
said if their honors should plainly and boldly admonish the Queen, using that
reverence which was due from Subjects, and doing nothing in a tumult, they did
persuade themselves, she would do nothing against Justice, and that such
Tyrants should not dare once to appear in Judgment. But howsoever matters
went, they humbly craved to understand their minds, and what they would do, if
it should happen such wolfes to invade the flock of Christ. This the sum of
the supplication. I find not what answer it received, nor that the Bishop made
any use of his Commission; but the change it seems which shortly after happened
in the State, did quite frustrate the same.

Master Knox being licenced at this time to visit his sons, Master Knox goes
into England.
who were following their studies at Cambridge, did move the Assembly to write
unto the Bishops of England in favor of some Preachers, who were troubled for
not conforming themselves to the Orders of that Church. Because it will appear
by the letter, in what esteem our reformers did hold the Church of England, and
how far they were from accounting the government thereof Antichristian, I
thought meet to insert the same word by word.

The Superintendents, Ministers, and Commissioners of the Church within the
Realm of Scotland, A letter from the Assembly of the Church to the Bishops of
England.
to their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors of England, who have renounced the
Roman Antichrist, and do profess with them the Lord Jesus in sincerity, wish
the increase of the holy Spirit.
BY word and writing it is come to our knowledge, Reverend Pastors, that diverse
of our brethren (amongst whom some be of the best learned within that Realm)
are deprived from all Ecclesiastical function, and forbidden to preach, and so
by you are stayed to promove the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, because their
conscience will not suffer them to take upon them at the commandment of the
authority, such garments as Idolaters in time of blindness have used in their
idolatrous service; which rumor cannot but be most dolorous to our hearts,
considering the sentence of the Apostle, If ye bite and devour one another,
take heed ye be not consumed one of another. We purpose not at the present to
enter into the Question which we hear is agitated with greater vehemency by
either party then well likes us, to wit, whether such apparel is to be
accounted amongst things indifferent, or not? But in the bowels of Jesus Christ
we crave, that Christian charity may so far prevail with you, that are the
Pastors and guides of Christ's flock in that Realm, as ye do not to others, that
which ye would not others did unto you.

Ye cannot be ignorant how tender a thing Conscience is, and all that have
knowledge are not alike persuaded: your conscience stirs not with the wearing
of such things, but many thousands both godly and learned, are otherwise
persuaded, whose consciences are continually stricken with these sentences:
What has Christ to do with Belial? what fellowship is there betwixt light and
darkness? If Surplice, Corner-cap, and Tippet, have been the badges of
Idolaters, in the very act of their Idolatry, what have the Preachers of
Christian liberty, and the rebukers of superstition to do with the dregs of
that Roman beast? yea, what is he that ought not to fear, either to take in
his hand, or forehead, the print and mark of that odious beast?

Our brethren that refuse such unprofitable apparel, do neither damn nor
molest you, who use such vain trifles: if ye shall do the like to them, we
doubt not therein you shall please God, and comfort the hearts of many, which
are wounded with the extremity used against those godly brethren. Color of
Rhetoric or humane persuasion we use none, but charitably we desire you to
call to mind the sentence of S. Peter. Feed the flock of God which is committed
to your charge, caring for it, not by constraint but willingly, not as being
Lords of Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock. We further desire you
to meditate upon that sentence of the Apostle, Give not offense, either to the
Jews, or to the Grecians, or to the Church of God. In what condition ye and we
both travel for the promoving of Christ's Kingdom, ye are not ignorant,
therefore we are the more bold to exhort you, to deal more wisely then to
trouble the godly with such vanities. For all things which seem lawful, edify
not. If the commandment of the Authority urge the consciences of you and our
brethren, further then they can bear, we pray you remember that ye are called
the light of the world, and the salt of the earth. All civil authority has not
ever the light of God shining before their eyes in their statutes and
commandments, but their affections favor too much sometimes of the earth, and
of worldly wisdom. Therefore we think that ye ought boldly oppone your selves,
not only to all power that dare extol it self against God, but also against
all such as dare burden the consciences of the faithful, further then God has
burdened them in his own word.

But we must confess our offense, in that we have entered in reasoning further
then we purposed and promised in the beginning, now therefore we return to our
former humble supplication, which is, that our brethren who amongst you refuse
these Romish rags, may find of you who are Prelates such favor, as our head
and Master commands every one of his members to show to another: which we
look to receive from your humanity, not only because ye will not offend Gods
Majesty in troubling of your brethren for such vain trifles, but also because
ye will not refuse the humble request of us your brethren and fellowpreachers;
in whom albeit there appear no worldly Pomp, yet we suppose ye will not so
far despise us, but that ye will esteem us in the number of those that fight
against the Roman Antichrist, and travel that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ may
be every where advanced. The days are evil, iniquity abounds, and charity
(alas) is waxed cold; Therefore ought we to watch the more diligently, for the
hour is uncertain, when the Lord Jesus shall appear; before whom ^e, your
brethren and we must give an account of our administration. And thus in
conclusion we once again crave favor to our brethren; which granted, ye shall
command us in the Lord things of double more importance. The Lord Jesus rule
your hearts in his true fear unto the end, and give unto you and us victory
over that conjured enemy of all true religion, the Roman Antichrist, whose
wounded head Satan by all means labors to cure again; but to destruction
shall he and all his maintainers go by the power of our Lord Jesus, to whose
mighty protection we heartily commit you. From our General Assembly at
Edinburgh the twenty seventh of December, 1566.

To quiet the Ministers, Assignation of Ministers stipends.
who were daily complaining of their lack of provision, the Court made offer to
the same Assembly of certain Assignations for their present relief, which were
accepted under protestation, that the same should not prejudge their right to
the tithes, nor be accounted as a satisfaction for the same. For these they
held to be the proper Patrimony of the Church, and so justly belonging thereto,
as that they ought not to be paid to any others, under whatsoever color, or
pretext. But this protestation availed not, only it shows what was the
judgment of the Church in that time concerning tithes.

The Queen in January following went to visit the King who lay sick at Glasgow.
The Queen visits the King at Glasgow.
After some complainings he made of her unkindnesse, and a little chiding they
kept for discontents passed, they did so lovingly reconcile, as the King,
though he was not as yet fully recovered, was content to be transported to
Edinburgh, and had a lodging prepared in a remote place of the Town, He comes
to Edinburgh, and there is murdered by Bothwel.
for his greater quiet, as was pretended. But he had not stayed there a
fortnight, when Bothwel having conspired his murder, did come upon him in the
night, as he lay asleep, and strangled him with one of his cubiculars, that lay
in the chamber by him. The murder committed, the two corpses were carried
forth at a gate in the Town wall, and laid in an Orchard near by, and
thereafter the house blown up with powder; the noise whereof did awake those
that were sleeping in the furthest parts of the Town. The Queen not gone as yet
unto her rest, convened the Noblemen that lodged within the Palace, and by
their advice sent Bothwell with some others to enquire what the matter was,
(for he was returned to his Chamber before the blowing up of the house, having
left some to fire the train, when he was past and gone away) many of all sorts
did accompany him to the place, where finding the body of the King naked only,
the upper part covered with his shirt, the rest of his apparel, and even his
pantofles near by him, each one making a several conjecture, Bothwel would have
it believed, that the violence of the powder had carried his body forth at the
roof of the house unto that place; but this was against all sense, for not a
bone of his whole body was either broken or bruised, which must needs have been
after such a violent fall. Nor could it be perceived, that either the corpse or
garments were once touched with the powder. So it was manifest that his body
and all were laid there by the hands of men. Bothwel returning, showed the
Queen what a strange thing had happened, admired how it could be, and who they
were committed the murder: she hearing it, retired to a private room, and went
presently to bed.

Now he had provided some to carry the news unto the borders, A rumor
dispersed by Bothwel that Murray and Morton had murdered the King.
and to give out that the Earls of Murray and Morton were the chief contrivers
of the murder: which rumor went current in England for a while. Yet ere a
long time passed, all was laid open, and he known to have been the principal
actor himself. Proclamations were made promising large sums of money to those
that would detect the murderers: whereunto the next night by a placard affixed
on the Market Cross, answer was made, That if the money should be consigned in
the hands of an indifferent person, the murderers should be revealed, and the
delator set to his name, and justify his accusation. No notice being taken of
this offer, voices were heard in the dark of the night, crying, that Bothwel
had murdered the King, some drawing his portraict to the life, set above it
this superscription, Here is the murderer of the King, and threw the same into
the streets. And there were some, that in all the public places of the Town,
affixed the names of the murderers, the principal as well as the accessaries.
For the principal they named Bothwel; The names of the murderers cast forth in
the street.
as accessaries, Sir James Balfour, and Gilbert Balfour, his brother, Mr. David
Chalmers Black, Mr. John Spence, Seigneur Francis Sebastian, John de Bordeaux,
and Joseph the brother of Davie, which last four were of the Queens household.
These things did so offend the Court, as neglecting the trial of the murder,
they fell to the drawers of these portraicts and the authors of the libels. All
the Painters and Writers were called for dignoscing the letters, and draughts;
when nothing could be tried, to provide for afterward against the like by a
new edict, it was made capital to disperse libels for defaming any person in
that sort, and to have, keep, or read any such that should happen to be
affixed, or cast into the streets.

The Earl of Lenox, The Earl of Lenox soliciteth the Queen to take trial of the
murder.
whilst these things were a doing, ceased not to solicit the Queen by his
letters for taking trial of the murder, without delaying the same unto the
time of Parliament, as she had purposed. Particularly he desired the Earl of
Bothwell, An. 1567.
and others named in the libells and placard affixed on the door of the
Senate House, to be apprehended, and the Nobility assembled for their
examination. Bothwell perceiving that he was now openly attached, did offer
himself to trial, The Castle of Edinburgh delivered to Bothwell, and the
Prince delivered to the Earl of Mar.
for which the 12. of April was assigned, and the Earl of Lenox cited by the
Justice to pursue according to the delation he had made. In the mean time to
fortify himself, he got the Castle of Edinburgh in his custody, upon the Earl
of Mar his resignation, placing therein Sir James Balfour, whom he especially
trusted. The Earl of Mar for his satisfaction had the Prince delivered in his
keeping, and carried unto Striveling, where the Earl then lay heavily sick.

The Diet appointed for the trial being come, Bothwell put to a trial. Robert
Cuningham protests against the proceedings in the name of the Earl of Lenox.
and the Court fenced as use is, Bothwell was empannelled. The Earl of Lenox
being called compeired Robert Cuningham, one of his domestics, who presented
in writing the Protestation following. My Lords, I am come hither sent by my
master, my Lord of Lenox, to declare the cause of his absence this day, and
with his power as my Commission bears. The cause of his absence is the
shortness of time, and that he could not have his friends and servants to
accompany him to his honor, and for the security of life, as was needful in
respect of the greatness of his party. Therefore his Lordship has commanded
me to desire a competent day, such as he may keep, and the weight of the cause
requires; otherwise, if your Lordships will proceed at this present, I
protest, that I may use the charge committed to me by my Lord my master,
without the offense of any man. This is, that if the persons who pass upon the
Assise and enquest of these that are entered on pannell this day, shall cleanse
the said persons of the murder of the King, that it shall be wilful error,
and not ignorance, by reason it is notoriously known that these persons did
commit that odious murder, as my Lord my master alleges. And upon this my
protestation, I require an instrument.

The Justice by the advice of the Noblemen and Barons appointed to assist in
that judgment, The persons chused upon the Jury.
did notwithstanding the said protestation grant process, whereupon the
Noblemen chosen for the Jury were called. These were Andrew Earl of Rothes,
George Earl of Cathnes, Gilbert Earl of Cassils, Lord John Hamilton Commendator
of Aberbrothock, James Lord Ross, Robert Lord Semple, Robert Lord Boyd, John
Lord Hereis, Laurence Lord Oliphant, John Master of Forbes, with the Lairds of
Lochinvar, Langton, Cambusnetham, Barnbowgall, and Boyne: the Earl of Cassills
excused himself, offering the penalty, which by the Law they pay that refuse to
pass upon Assise, but could not obtain himself freed, the Queen threatening to
commit him in prison, and when he seemed nothing terrified therewith,
commanding him under pain of treason to enter and give his judgment with the
rest. Thus were they all sworn and admitted, as the manner is; After which
Bothwell being charged with the indictment, and the same denied by him, they
removed forth of the Court to consult together, and after a little time
returning, by the mouth of the Earl of Cathnes their Chancellor, Bothwell
acquitted with a protestation of the Jury.
declared him acquit of the murder of the King, and of all the points
contained in the indictment, with a protestation, That seeing neither her
Majesty's advocate had insisted in the pursuit, nor did Robert Cuningham,
Commissioner for the Earl of Lenox, bring any evidence of Bothwells guiltiness,
neither yet was the indictment sworn by any person, and that they had
pronounced according to their knowledge, it should not be imputed to them as
wilful error which they had delivered. Mr. David Borthwi^^, and Mr. Edmund
Hay, who in the entry of the Court were admitted as his prolocutours, asked
instruments upon the Juries declaration; so he went from that Court absolved,
yet the suspicions of the people were nothing diminished. And some indeed were
of opinion, that the Judges could give no other deliverance, nor find him
guilty of the indictment as they had formed it; seeing he was accused of a
murder, committed on the 9. day of February, whereas the King was slain upon
the 10. of that month. But he for a further clearing of himself set up a paper
in the most conspicuous place of the market, Bothwell offers to try his
innocence by combat.
bearing. That albeit he had been acquitted in a lawful Justice court of that
odious crime laid unto his charge, yet to make his innocence the more manifest,
he was ready to give trial of the same in single combat with any man of
honorable birth and quality that would accuse him of the murder of the King.
The next day in the same place, by another writing, answer was made, that the
combat should be accepted, so as a place were designed wherein without danger
the undertaker might profess his name. The offer accepted upon security of the
place.


The 13. of April a Parliament was kept for restoring the Earl of Huntley, and
others to their estates and honors, which was not as yet done with the
solemnity requisite. A Parliament at Edinburgh.
In this Parliament the Commissioners of the Church made great instance for
ratifying the Acts concluded in favor of the true Religion, yet nothing was
obtained: The Queen answering, that the Parliament was called for that only
business, and that they should have satisfaction given them at some other time.
The Parliament being broke up, Bothwell inviting the Noblemen to supper did
liberally feast them; Bothwell seeks the consent of the Lords to the Queens
marriage.
and after many thanks for their kindness, fell in some speeches for the Queens
marriage, showing the hopes he had to compass it, so as he might obtain their
consents. Some few to whom he had imparted the business beforehand, made offer
of their furtherance, the rest fearing to refuse, and suspecting one another,
set all their hands to a bond, which he had ready formed to that purpose.

A few days after, He ravisheth the Queen in her return from Striveling.
faigning an expedition into Liddisdale he gathered some forces, and meeting
the Queen on the way as he returned from Striveling, whither she had gone to
visit her son, he took her by way of rape and led her to the Castle of Dumbar.
No men doubted but this was done by her own liking and consent, yet a number of
Noblemen convening at Striveling, lest they should seem deficient in any sort
of their duties, sent to ask whether or not she was there willingly detained?
for if she was kept against her will, they would come with an Army and set her
at liberty; She answered, That it was against her will that she was brought
thither, but that since her coming she had been used so courteously, as she
would not remember any more that injury.

Now this rape (as afterward came to be known) was devised to secure the
murderers of the King. His design in committing this rape.
For it being held sufficient by a custom commonly received, that in
remissions granted for crimes committed, the most heinous fact being
particularly expressed, others of less moment might be comprehended in general
words, they were advised to pass a remission for violence offered to the Queen,
and the laying of hands upon her person, then to subjoyn, [ And for all other
crimes and nefarious acts whatsoever:] under which clause, they esteemed the
murder of the King might be comprised, which otherwise was neither safe for
them to express, nor could the Queen with her honor pardon. Thus did they
think both that Bothwell himself should be secured and safety to all his
partakers in the Murder.

Whilst the Queen was detained at Dumbar, Bothwell his divorce from his wife.
a divorce was sued for Bothwell from Lady Ieane Gordon his wife, in two
several Courts. In the one sat by Commission from the Archbishop of St.
Andrews, Robert Bishop of Dunkeld, William Bishop of Dumblane, Mr. Archibald
Crawford Parson of Egilsham, Mr. John Manderstor Chanon of the College Church
of Dumbar, Mr. Alexander Chrichton, and Mr. George Cook, Chanons of the Church
of Dunkeld. In the other Court Mr. Robert Martland, Mr. Edward Henryson, Mr.
Alexander Sim, and Mr. Clement Little, Judges constitute by the Queens
authority, in all causes consistoriall: and in both Courts was the sentence of
divorce pronounced, but upon diverse grounds. In the Archbishops Court sentence
was pronounced upon the consanguinity standing betwixt Bothwell and his wife,
at the time of her marriage, they mutually attinging others in the fourth
degree, and no dispensation granted by the Pope for consummating the same; In
the other Court the sentence was grounded upon adultery committed by him, which
these Judges held to be the only lawful cause of divorce: both the processes
were posted, and such festination made in them, as in the space of ten days
they were begun and concluded.

The divorce passed, The Queen comes to the Castle of Edinburgh.
the Queen came to the Castle of Edinburgh, and the next morning Bothwell sent
to ask his banes with the Queen. The Reader John Cairnes, whose office it was,
did simply refuse; thereupon Mr. Thomas Hepburn was directed to the Minister
Mr. John Craig, to desire him to publish the same. The Minister likewise
refusing, as having no warrant from the Queen, and for that the rumor went,
that she was ravished, and kept captive by Bothwell, upon wednesday thereafter,
the Justice Clerk came unto him with a letter signed by the Queen, wherein she
declared that she was neither ravished, nor detained captive, and therefore
willed him to publish the banes; The banes of Bothwell with the Queen asked.
his answer was, that he could ask no banes, especially such as these were,
without the knowledge and consent of the Church. The matter being motioned in
the Session of the Church, after much reasoning kept with the Justice Clerk, it
was concluded that the three next preaching days, the Queens mind should be
intimated to the people.

The Minister protested, Mr. John Craig protested.
that in obeying their desire it should be lawful to him to declare his own
mind touching the marriage, and that he should not be tied by that asking of
their banes to solemnize the same. The first preaching day falling to be
friday, in the hearing of diverse Noblemen, and Counselors, he showed what he
was enjoined to do; That he held the marriage betwixt the Queen and Bothwell
unlawful, whereof he would give the reasons to the parties themselves, if he
might have hearing; and if this was denied, he said, that he would either cease
from proclaiming their banes, or declare the cause of his disallowance in the
hearing of all the people.

The same day at afternoon being called before the Council, and required by
Bothwell, Mr. Craig called before the Council with the reasons of his
opposition.
to show what reason he had to oppose his marriage; he answered, First, that
the Church had in the last Assembly inhibited the marriage of persons divorced
for adultery. Next he alleged the divorce from his wife to have proceeded upon
collusion betwixt them, which appeared, as he said, by the precipitation of
that sentence, and the contract made so suddenly after his divorce with the
Queen. Thirdly, he laid to his charge, the rape of the Queen, and the suspicion
of the Kings murhter; which that marriage would confirm. For these reasons he
most gravely admonished him to surcease and leve that course, as he would
eschiew the wrath and indgnation of Almighty God. He desired also the Lords
present, to advertise the Queen of the infamy and dishonor that would fall
upon her by that match, and to use their best means to divert her from it.

The Sunday following, His publication thereof to the people.
publicly he declared what he had spoken in Council, and that it seemed to
him they would proceed in the marriage, what mischief soever should ensue. For
himself, he said, that he had already liberated his conscience, and yet again
would take heaven and earth to record, that he abhorred and detested that
marriage as scandalous and hateful in the sight of the world. But seeing the
great ones as he perceived did approve it, either by their flattery, or by
their silence, he would beseech the faithful to pray fervently unto God, that
he might be pleased to turn that which they intended against Law, reason, and
good conscience, to the comfort and benefit of the Church and Realm. These
speeches offended the Court extremely; therefore they fummoned him to answer
before the Council, for passing the bounds of his Commission; For the bounds,
said he, of my Commission, are the Word of God, good Laws, and natural
reason; and by all three I will make good, that this marriage, if it proceed,
will be hateful and scandalous to all that shall hear of it. As he was
proceeding in his discourse, Bothwell commanded him silence, and thus was he
dimitted.

Nottheless of this opposition the marriage went on, The marriage of the Queen
with Bothwell celebrated.
and was celebrated the 15. of May by Adam Bishop of Orkney, in the Palace of
Halirudhouse, after the manner of the reformed Church. Few of the Nobility were
present, (for the greater part did retire themselves to their houses in the
Country) and such as remained, were noted to carry heavy countenances;
Monsieur le Crock the Ambassador being defired to the feast, excused himself,
thinking it did not sort with the dignity of his Legation to approve the
marriage by his presence, which he heard was so universally hated. His Master
the French King, as likewise the Queen of England, had seriously dissuaded the
Queen from the same by their Letters; but she led by the violence of passion,
and abused by the treacherous counsel of some about her, who sought only their
own ends, would hearken to no advice given her to the contrary. Yet was it no
sooner finished, then the ill fruits thereof began to break out: for the wonted
acclamations and good wishes of the people were no more heard, when she came in
public; and diverse that had set their hands and seals to the marriage, fell
now openly to condemn it, as that which ministered too just a suspicion, that
she was consenting to the death of the King her husband.

The Earl of Athol immediately after the murder of the King had forsaken the
Court, and lived at home, waiting some occasion to be revenged of the doers,
and now esteeming it fit to show himself, The Noblemens bond for preservation
of the young Prince.
he came to Striveling, where in a meeting of Noblemen that were desired to
come thither, upon his motion a bond was made for the preservation of the young
Prince, lest Bothwell getting him in custody, should make him away, as no man
doubted he would, as well to advance his own succession, as to cut off the
innocent child, who in all probability would one day revenge his fathers death.

The principals of this combination, were the Earls of Argile, Atholl, Morton,
Mar and Glencarne, with the Lords Lindesay and Boyd. But Argile out of a
facility (which was natural unto him) detected all their counsels to the
Queen; and the Lord Boyd with great promises was won to the adverse party.
Bothwell suspecting some insurrection, advised the Queen for saving her
reputation in forain parts, to acquaint the French King and her kinsmen of the
house of Guise, with her marriage, and the reasons thereof, desiring them, since
that which was done, could not be again undone, The Bishop of Dumblane sent to
France.
to favor her husband no less then they did her self. And to this effect the
Bishop of Dumblane was sent into France, with letters to all her friends.

Neither did he admit to do at home, Noblemen solicited to enter in bond with
the Queen and Bothwell.
what he thought might serve to fortify himself; for diverse Noblemen and
Barons were invited to Court, and at their coming solicited to enter into bond
for the defense of the Queen and Bothwell, who should on the other part be
obliged to protect them in all their affairs. Some of these being wrought to
the purpose, did set their hands willingly to the bond: the rest, though they
would gladly have shunned it; yet because they held it dangerous to refuse, The
Earl of Murray refused and is licensed to go into France.
subscribed in like sort. Only the Earl of Murray of all that were called,
denied to enter in any bond with the Queen; it being neither lawful for him,
as he said, nor honorable for her, whom in all things it was his duty to obey.
Concerning Bothwell, he said, that he was reconciled unto him by the Queens
mediation, and would faithfully keep all that he had promised: but to enter in
bond with him or any other, he did not think it the part of a good subject.
Shortly after this he obtained leave, howbeit not without some difficulty, to
go into France; for he saw troubles breeding, in which he loved not to have an
hand.

How soon he was gone choice was made of a new Council, The Queen makes
choice of a Council.
and the Archbishop of St. Andrews, with the Lords Oliphant and Beyd, received
into the number: for their better and more easy attendance, they had their
times of waiting particularly assigned.

The Earls of Crawford, The order of their attendance.
Arroll and Cassils, with the Bishop of Ross, and the Lord Oliphant were
appointed to begin, and attend from the 1. of June to the 16. of July. The
Earls of Morton and Rothes, with the Bishop of Calloway, and the Lord Fleming,
were to succeed and remain from the 16. of July to the penult of August; After
them the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Earls of Argile, and Cathnes, with the
Lord Hereis, to the 15. of October. And from that day to the 1. of December,
the Earl of Huntley, (who was then created Chancellor) the Earls of Atholl,
Marshall, and Lord Boyd were appointed to wait: at which time Crawford and
Arroll were again to begin, and the rest to follow in their order for the same
space. So as during the whole year, the Counselors should be tied to the
attendance of 3 months only. It was always provided that so many of the
forenamed persons as happened to be at Court, should during their abode,
notwithstanding of their several assignments, be present with the others; And
that it should be lawful for the Queen to adjoyn at any time such as she
thought worthy of that honor. The same day a Proclamation was given out,
Declaring all writings purchased from the Queen for permitting Papists to use
the exercise of their Religion, to make no faith, her Majesty being no way
minded to violate the Act made at her first arrival, and often since that
time, renewed in favors of the true Religion. But this did not repress the
murmurs of the people, A Proclamation to accompany the Queen to the borders.
for which it was specially intended.

Wherefore some few days after the Queen by Bothwels persuasion taking purpose
to visit the borders, and having charged the subjects to accompany her thither
with a provision for 15. days according to the custom, it was publicly
rumored, that these forces were gathering for some other business, and that the
intention was, to have the Prince her son in her own custody, and taken out of
the Earl of Mar his hands. So as a new Declaration came forth, To certify the
people of her good affection, and that she never meaned to make any novations
in the Kingdom, by altering the laws thereof, nor do any thing in the public
affairs, but by the advice of the Noblemen of her Council. And for her son,
as she had trusted him to such a Governor as other Princes in former times
were custom to have, so her motherly care for his safety and good education
should be made apparent to all. But no regard was had to these Declarations,
and the Noblemen who had combined themselves at Striveling, The Castle of
Borthwick environed.
taking Arms, and being assisted by the Lord Home, environed on the sudden
the Castle of Borthwick, wherein the Queen and Bothwel were then remaining: The
Queen and Bothwell escape.
yet their companies not sufficing to enclose the house (for Athol did not keep
the Diet) Bothwel first escaped, and after him the Queen disguised in man's
apparel fled to Dumbar.

The Lords upon their escape retired to Edinburgh, The Lords retire to
Edinburgh.
where they expected the rest of their forces would meet. There lay in the Town
at that by the Queens direction, the Earl of Huntley, the Archbishop of S.
Andrews, the Bishop of Ross, the Abbot of Kilwining, and the Lord Boyd: How
soon they heard of the Lords coming, they went to the street offering
themselves to conduct the people, and to assist them in the defense of the
Town; but they found few or none willing to join with them, and the peoples
affections wholly inclining to the Lords. The Magistrates gave order to shut
the gates, but no further resistance was made; so as the Lords entering by the
gate called S. Maryport, which was easily brokeup, they made themselves Master
of the Town. Huntley and the rest taking their refuge to the Castle, were
received by the Keeper, (Sir James Balfour, a man much trusted by Bothwel)
though at the same time he was treating with the Lords for delivering the
Castle into their hands.

The next day being the 12. of June, A Proclamation given out by the Lords.
the Lords gave out a Proclamation, wherein they declared, That the Earl of
Bothwel having put violent hands in the Queens person, warded her highness in
the Castle of Dumbar, and retaining her in his power, had seduced her, being
destitute of all counsel, to an unhonest and unlawful marriage with himself,
who was known to have been the principal author, deviser, and actor in the
cruel murder committed upon the late Kings person; and that he was daily
gathering forces, and strengthening himself by all means, of purpose, as
appeared, to get in his hands the young Prince, that he might murder him in
the like sort, as he had done his Father: which the Nobility of the Realm had
resolved to withstand, and to deliver the Queen out of his bondage. Therefore
did they charge all and sundry the Lieges within the Kingdom to be in readiness
upon three hours warning, to assist the said Noblemen for delivering the Queen
from captivity, and bringing the said Earl and his Accomplices, to underlie the
trial and punishment of Law for the foresaid murder. Commanding all such as
will not join with the said Noblemen, to depart forth of the Town of Edinburgh
within four hours after the publication made, under the pain to be reputed as
enemies, etc.

But the Queen having escaped, The Queen gathers forces.
as we show, there resorted to her from all quarters numbers of people, so as
within few hours she had an Army about her of 4000. men and above, a force
sufficient to oppose the enterprisers. The Lords on the other side, were cast
into many difficulties; Difficulties amongst the Lords.
for the heat of the common sort of people being quickly cooled, as ordinarily
it happens, and the greater part of the Nobility being either enemies, or
behaving themselves as Neuters; few of them came to offer their assistance: yea
had they been never so many, lacking munition and other necessary provisions
for the besieging of forts, they saw no way to attain to their purpose;
whereupon they began to think upon dissolving their forces, and quitting the
enterprise, at least for that time. But the resolution which the Queen took,
altered their counsels, and gave them the opportunity they wished for. She
partly considing in her power and numbers, and partly animated by a sort of
flatterers, who made her believe, that the Lords would flee upon the first
bruit of her coming, resolved to march with her Army to Leth: whereas nothing
had been so much to her advantage as a little protracting of time; The Queen
gives them the opportuniy they wished for.
for had she remained three days longer at Dumbar, the Lords without all
peradventure had retired every one to his home. But where mutations are
destined, the worst counsels seem ever the best, and are most readily embraced.

Being advanced so far as Glaidsmoore (where she caused master her forces) a
Proclamation was made, The Proclamation of Glaidsmore.
bearing, That a number of Conspirators having discovered their latent malice,
borne to her and the Duke of Orkney her husband, after they had failed in
apprehending their persons at Borthwick, had made a seditious Proclamation, to
make people believe that they did seek the revenge of the murder of the King
her late husband, and the relieving of her self out of bondage and captivity
pretending that the Duke her husband was minded to invade the Prince her son;
all which were false, and forged inventions, none having better cause to
revenge the Kings death then her self, if she could know the authors thereof.
And for the Duke her present husband, he had used all means to clear his
innocence, the ordinary Justice had absolved him, and the Estates of Parliament
approved their proceedings, which they themselves that made the present
i^surrection, had likewise allowed. As also he had offered to maintain that
quarrel against any Gentleman on earth undefamed, then which nothing more
could be required. And as to her alleged captivity, the contrary was known to
the whole subjects, her marriage with him being publicly contracted, and
solemnised with their own consents, as their hand writs could testify. Albeit
to give their treason a fair show, they made now a buckler of the Prince her
son being an infant, and in their hands; whereas their intention only was to
overthrow her and her posterity, that they might rule all things at their
pleasure, and without controlment. Seeing therefore no wilfulness, nor
particularily, but very necessity had forced her to take Arms for defense of
her life, as her hope was to have the assistance of all her faithful subjects
against those unnatural rebels, so she doubted not but such as were already
assembled, would with good hearts stand to her defense, considering especially
the goodness of her cause, promising them in recompense of their valorous
service the lands and possessions of the Rebels, which should be distributed
according to the merit of every man.

This proclaimed, The Lords cast themselves in the Queens way.
the Army did set forward, the Queen lodging that night in Seaton a little
before midnight; word was brought to Edinburgh of the Queens approach; who
without long suspense made to their Armor. And at Sun rising, putting
themselves in order, they marched directly to Mussilburgh, a Village two miles
distant from Preston; there they refreshed themselves with food, and a little
rest; for the Queens Camp was not as yet stirring. About the midst of the day
the horsemen who were sent to observe when the Queens Army did advance, brought
word that they were marching. The order of the Lords A^my.
The Lords thereupon made haste, and drawing their companies forth of the
Village, ranged them in two battles. The first was conducted by the Earl of
Morton, and the Lord Home, the second by the Earls of Athel, Mar, and
Glencarn, the Lords Lindsay, Ruthven, Semple, and Sanq^uar, with the Lairds of
Drumlanrig, Tulibardin, Selfourd, Grange, and diverse others of good sort were
assisting, in number not much inferior to the Queens Army, and in this
superior, that the most part of them were Gentlemen practiced, and of good
experience in war. The meeting at Carberry hill.
The Queen stood with her Army on the top of the hill called Carberry hill,
which the Lords because of the ascent wherewith it rises, could not come at in
a direct course, but to their disadvantage; wherefore they inclined a little to
the right hand, both to find a more plain way, and to get the Sun in their
backs, when they should come unto the fight. This deceived the Queen, who
supposing they were flying toward Dalkeith, a little Village pertaining to the
Earl of Morton, but when they were past the strait of the hill, and that she
saw them making directly to the place where she with her Army stood, she
perceived her error.

The French Ambassador seeing them ready to join, The French Ambassador
labors to compose matters.
interposed himself, and coming to the Lords, desired that matters might be
composed without bloodshed, for the good of both parties; saying, that he found
the Queen peaceably inclined, and disposed, both to forgive the insurrection
they had now made, and to forget all by past oflences. The Earl of M^rten
replied; That they had taken Arms, not against the Queen, but against the
murderer of the King, whom if she would deliver to be punished, or then put
him from her company, she should find nothing more desired of them, and all
other subjects, then to continue in their dutiful obedience toward her;
otherwise no peace could be made: Neither are we come, said he, to ask pardon
for any offense that we have done, but rather to give pardon to those that have
offended. The Ambassador perceiving this to be their resolution, and judging
it reasonable which they required, but not like to be obtained, took his leave
and departed to Edinburgh.

During the Treaty of the French Ambassador, Bothwel offers to try the cause
in combat.
the Queens Army keeping within the trenches, that the English of old had made,
Bothwel advanced himself upon a strong and lusty horse, appealing any one of
the adverse party to single combat. James Murray brother to Tulibardie (he that
before had offered himself to fight, but suppressed his name, It is accepted,
and the Queen inhibiteth the fight.
as we showed) made answer, that he would accept the challenge. Bothwel
refusing to hazard with him, as not being his equal in honor and estate,
Willam Murray his eldest brother made offer to take his place, saying, that in
wealth he was not inferior to Bothwel, and for antiquity of his house, and
honesty of reputation, he esteemed himself more then his equal; yet he likewise
was refused, as being a Knight only, and of a lower degree. Diverse Noblemen did
thereupon offer themselves; the Lord Lindesay especially showed a great
forwardness, desiring he might be permitted to try himself with Bothwel, which
he would take as a singular honor, and esteem it as a recompense of all his
service done to the State. Here when as Bothwel could not honestly shift the
combat, the Queen interposing her authority, did prohibit him to fight.
Thereafter taking a view of the Army on horseback, and encouraging them to
battle, she found Bothwels friends and followers very desirous to fight; but in
the rest there appeared no such willingness, The Queens Army unwilling to fight.
some saying that the battle would prove dangerous to the Queen, because
howsoever Gentlemen were ready to hazard themselves, the Commons who were the
greatest number, seemed not to be so disposed, nor well affected to the cause.
Others more plainly declaring their minds, said that it were much better that
Bothwel should defend his own quarrel by combat, then to expose the Queen and
so many Gentlemen to peril. And there were some that counseled to delay the
battle to the next day, for that the Hamiltons were said to be coming, who
would greatly increase her forces.

All these things the Queen heard impatiently, and bursting forth in many
tears, Bothwel flies, and the Queen rendereth herself to the Lords.
said, they were but cowards and traitors. After which, perceiving diverse of
the Army to steal away, she advised Bothwel to look to his own safety, for she
could render her self to the Noblemen. Then sending for William Kircaldy of
Grange, she talked with him a good space, and when she thought Bothwel was past
all danger, went with him to the Lords unto whom she spoke on this manner. My
Lords, I am come unto you not out of any fear I had of my life, or yet doubting
of the victory if matters had gone to the worst, but I abhor the shedding of
Christian blood, especially of those that are my own subjects; and will
therefore yield unto you, and be ruled hereafter by your counsels, trusting you
will respect me as your born Princess and Queen. They receiving her with the
wonted reverence, answered dutifully at first, but when she could not be
permitted to go unto the Hamilions (whom she had a desire to see) although she
gave her promise to return, and so found her liberty restrained, she waxed
angry and fell a complaining of their ingratitude. They replied nothing, but
taking their way toward Edinburgh, led her along with them, and kept her that
night in Craigmillar his lodging, who was then Provost of the Town. It was
night before they came thither, albeit the day was then at the full length,
because of the stays she made by the way, either looking for some relief by
the Hamiltons, as many supposed; or not liking to be gazed on by the multitude,
and seen in the estate of a prisoner. The next day toward the evening, she was
by the direction of the Noblemen sent to be kept in the house of Lochlevin, The
Queen sent prisoner to Lochlevin.
and conveyed thither by the Lords Ruthven and Lindesay, because Balfour had
not as yet transacted with the Lords upon the delivery of the Castle of
Edinburgh, though even then he betrayed the trust which Bothwel had in him. For
how soon it was known that the Queen was made prisoner, Bothwel having sent one
of his servants to the Castle to bring a little silver Cabinet which the Queen
had given him, and wherein he reserved all the letters she had written unto him
at any time, Sir James Balfour betrayeth his trust to Bothwel.
Balfour delivered the Cabinet to Bothwels servant, but withal advertised the
Lords what he carried, and made him to be apprehended. These Letters were
afterward divulged in Print, and adjected to a libel entitled, The detections
of the doings of Queen Mary, penned with great bitterness by Mr. George
Buchannan.

Some two days after the Queen was committed, The Earl of Glencarn demolisheth
the Altar.
the Earl of Glencarne taking with him his domestics only, went to the Chapel
of Halyrudhouse, and demolished the Altar, breaking the pictures and defacing
all the ornaments within the same. The Preachers did commend it as a work of
great piety and zeal, but the other Noblemen were not a little displeased, for
that he had done it without direction, and before they had resolved how to deal
with the Queen; neither did matters frame with them according to their
expectation, diverse of the Nobility, of whose assistance they held themselves
assured, lying back, and giving no concurrence: And those that favored the
Queen (of which number were the Earls of Argile, Huntley, and many others who
were at the same time at Hamilton,) professing open enmity, and condemning the
action as a crime of the highest treason that could be committed. The common
people also, who a little before seemed most incensed, pitying the Queens
estate, did heavily lament the calamity wherein she was fallen. In this
uncertainty of things, they resolved to write unto the Lords convened at
Hamilton, and entreat their concurrence for reordering of the estate, The Lords
write to the Noblemen of the Queens party.
and establishing of matters by a common consent; But neither would they admit
the messenger, nor receive their letters so highly did they offend with their
proceedings, and so confident they were to repair things by their own power.

The Noblemen hereupon made a motion to the Assembly of the Church, The
Noblemen made a motion to the Assembly, and the Assemblies Commission to the
Lords.
which was then convened at Edinburgh, to deal with those of the other faction,
and persuade them to a general meeting for matters of the Church, wherein they
hoped some good might be done, and all occasions of civil discord removed. The
Assembly liking well the motion, condescended to prorogue their meeting unto
the 20. of July next, and in the mean season, to direct letters to the Earls of
Argile, Huntley, Cathnes, Rothes, Crafourd, and Menteith; The Lords Boyd,
Drummond, Hervis, Catheart, Yester, Fleming, Levingston, Seaton, Glammis,
Ochiltrie, Gray, Oliphant, Methven, Innermaith and Sommervaile, and to the
Commendators of Aberbrothock, Kilwining, Dunfermling, St. Cobuke, Newbottle,
and Halyrudhouse. who did either assist the advese party, or then behaved
themselves as Newters. To procure the greater respect to these Letters, John
Knox, Mr. John Douglas, Mr. John Row, and Mr. John Craig, were chosen
Commissioners, and had instructions given them to this purpose. Instructions
given to those that were sent from the Assembly.
That Satan by his instruments, had of long time and by many subtle ways,
labored to hinder the progress of true Religion within this Realm, and that
now the same was in hazard to be utterly subverted, chiefly through the poverty
of the Ministers, that ought to preach the word of life unto the people, some
being compelled to leave their vocation, and betake them to civil callings,
others so distracted through worldly cares, as they could not wait upon the
preaching of the word so diligently as they wished; In consideration whereof
the Assembly of the Church being convened at Edinburgh, had thought it
necessary to prorogue their meeting to the 20. of July, and to entreat and
admonish all persons truly professing the Lord Jesus within the Realm, as well
Noblemen as Barons, and those of the other estates, to meet and give their
personal appearance at Edinburgh the said day, for giving their advice, council
and concurrence in matters then to be proponed; especially for purging the
Realm of Popery, the establishing of the policy of the Church, and restoring
the Patrimony thereof to the just possessors. Assuring those that should absent
themselves at the time, due and lawful advertisement being made, that they
should be reputed hinderers of the good work intended, and as dissimulate
professors be esteemed unworthy of the fellowship of Christ's flock: considering
chiefly that God in his mercy had offered a better occasion for effecting these
things, then in times past, and that he had begun to tread down Satan under
foot. This they were willed to speak, and by all fair persuasions, to move
them to keep the day and place appointed.

The missive letters were for the most part to the same effect, but in these,
besides the provision of the Ministers, I find the poor and indigent members of
Christ also mentioned, and somewhat said concerning an union to be made amongst
the professors, and such a conjunction as might make them able to withstand the
craft and violence of their enemies. But neither did the letters nor the credit
given to the Commissioners prevail with those to whom they went, all almost
excusing themselves (some by word, others by letter) and saying, That in regard
of the present division caused by the Queens imprisonment; and that the Town of
Edinburgh, where they were required to meet, was straightly kept by a part of the
Nobility, and some hired soldiers, they could not come to the place appointed
without trouble and danger of their lives. Notthelesse they did assure the
Church of their willingness to every thing, that might serve to advance the
Gospel, and further the provision of the Ministers, for the better and more
diligent attendance on their callings. The Earl of Argile did answer more
particularly, The Earl of Argile his answer.
and touching the policy desired, that no novations, nor alterations should be
made before a general meeting of the Estates. In like sort the Lord Boyd did
by his answer promise to bold hand to the forthsetting of the Policy, The Lord
Boyd his answer.
but with an exception, so far as it might stand with law. Yet had both the
one and other ratified the book of Policy by their subscriptions long before,
and made no scruple either of law or custom at that time. The Noblemen that
remained at Edinburgh, perceiving they could not be drawn to a meeting,
resolved to prosecute their purpose at all hazards, and joining with the
Assembly, condescended to all the Artticles proponed for the good of the
Church, and made great promises of performance; howbeit having once attained
their ends, they did forget all, and turned adversaries to the Church in the
same things whereunto they had consented. Always the Articles agreed unto, were
as follows.

1. Articles agreed in the Assembly of the Church.
That the Acts made in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh the twenty fourth of
August, 1560. touching Religion and the abolishing of the Popes authority,
should be extracted forth of the Registers, and have the force of a public
law; and that the said Parliament in so far as concerning Religion, should be
maintained and defended by them, as a Parliament lawful, and holden by
sufficient commission from the Queen, then being in France, and be ratified in
the first Parliament, which should happen to be kept within the Realm.

2. That until perfect order might be taken for restoring the Patrimony of the
Church, the Act of assignation of the thirds of Benefices for the sustentation
of the Ministry, should be put in due execution.

3. That an Act of Council made with consent of her Majesty touching the
conferring of small Benefices within the value of 300. marks to Ministers,
should be put in practice; as likewise the Act for annualls, obits, and
aulterages, especially within Burghes.

4. That in the first lawful Parliament which should be kept, or sooner if
occasion might serve, the Church of Christ within this Kingdom should be fully
restored unto the Patrimony belonging to the same, and nothing be past in
Parliament before that and other matters of the Church were first considered
and approved; In the mean while the Noblemen, Barons and other Professors then
present, did willingly offer, and consent to reform themselves in the matter of
the Church patrimony according to the Book of God, and to put the same in
practice for their own parts, ordaining the refusers and contraveners of the
same to be secluded from all benefits of the Church. It was further agreed,
That in the next Parliament, or otherwise at the first occasion order should be
taken for the ease of the laborers of the ground, in the payment of their
Tithes, and that the same should not be disponed to any others without their
advice and consent.

5. That none should be permitted to bear charge in Schools, Colleges, and
Universities, nor allowed publicly or privately to instruct the youth, except
such as should first be tried by the Superintendents, and Visitours of the
Church, who being found meet should be admitted by them to their charges.

6. That all crimes and offenses committed against the Law of God should be
severely punished, according to the Word of God, and Judges deputed for
execution thereof; or if there be no laws as yet made, nor Judges appointed
for the punishment of such crimes, that the same should be done in the first
Parliament.

7. That seeing the horrible murder of the King her Majesty's husband is a
crime most odious before God, and tending to the perpetual shame and infamy of
the whole Realm, if the same should not be exemplary punished; the Noblemen,
Barons and other Professors should employ their whole forces, strength and
power for the just punishment of all, and whatsoever persons that should be
tried and found guilty of the same.

8. Since it has pleased God to give a native Prince unto the Country, who in
all appearance shall become their King and Sovereign, lest he should be
murdered and wickedly taken away as his father was; the Nobility, Barons, and
others under subscriving should assist, maintain and defend the Prince against
all that should attempt to do him injury.

9. That all Kings and Princes, that in any time hereafter shall happen to
reign and have the rule of the Realm, should in their first entry, and before
they be either crowned or inaugurated, give their oath, and faithfully promise
unto the true Church of God, for maintaining and defending by all means the
true Religion of Christ, presently professed within the Kingdom.

10. That the Prince should be committed to the education of some wise, godly
and grave man, to be trained up in virtue and the fear of God, that when he
comes to years, he may discharge himself sufficiently of that place and honor
whereunto he is called.

11. That the Nobility, Barons and others underscribing, should faithfully
promise to convene themselves in arms for the rooting out of idolatry,
especially the blasphemous Mass, without exception of place or person. And
likewise should remove all idolaters, and others not admitted to the preaching
of the Word, from the bearing of any function in the Church, which may be a
hinderance to the Ministry in any sort; and in their places appoint
Superintendents, Ministers, and other needful members of the Church. And
further, should faithfully bind themselves to reform all Schools, Colleges
and Universities throughout the Realm; by removing all such as be of contrary
profession, and bear any charge therein, and planting faithful teachers in
their rooms, lest the youth should be corrupted with poysonable doctrine in
their lesser years, which afterward would not easily be removed.

These were the Articles agreed unto by a common consent, The Articles
subscribed.
ard subscribed in the presence of the Assembly, by the Earls of Morton,
Glencarne, and Mar; the Lords Home, Ruthven, Sanqhuar, Lindesay, Grahame,
Innermaith, and Ochiltrie, and many Barons, besides the Commissioners of
Burgesses.

Upon the dissolving of this Assembly, The Queen moved to make resignation of
the Crown.
the Lords Ruthven and Lindesay were directed to Lochlevin to deal with the
Queen for resignation of the Government in favors of the Prince her son, and
the appointing of some to be Regent who should have the administration of
affairs during his minority. At first she took the proposition grievously;
answering in passion, that she could sooner renounce her life, then her Crown:
yet after some rude speeches used by the Lord Lindesay, she was induced to put
her hand to the renunciation they presented, by the persuasion chiefly of
Robert Melvil, who was sent from the Earl of Atholl and Lethington, to advise
her as she loved her life not to refuse any thing they did require. He likewise
brought a letter from Sir Nicholas Throgmorton the Ambassador of England, (who
was come a few days before to visit her, but was denied access) to the same
effect, declaring that no resignation made in the time of her captivity, would
be of force, and in Law was null, because done out of a just fear; which having
considered with her self a while, without reading any one of the Writs
presented, she set her hand to the same, the tears running down in abundance
from her eyes. One of the Writs contained a renunciation of the Crown and
Royal dignity, with a Commission to invest the Prince into the Kingdom, by
the solemnities accustomed. And to that purpose a procuration was given to the
Lords Ruthven and Lindesay for dimitting and resigning in presence of the three
Estates the Rule and Government: And to the Earls of Morton, Atholl, Mar,
Glencarne and Menteith, and to the Lords Grahame and Home, with the Bishop of
Orkney, and the Provosts of Dundie and Montross, for inaugurating the Prince
her son. The other Writ did appoint the Earl of Murray Regent during the Prince
his Minority, if at his return he should accept of the Charge. And in case of
his refuse, the Duke of Chattellerault, the Earls of Lenox, Argile, Atholl,
Morton, Glencarne, and Mar, who should jointly govern, and administrate the
public affairs.

Both the renunciation, The King crowned at Striveling.
and Commission for government of the Realm, were the next day published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the third day after the Publication (which was
the 29. of July) was the Prince crowned, and anointed King in the Church of
Striveling by the Bishop of Orkney, assisted by two of the Superintendents. The
Sermon was made by John Knox; the Earl of Morton and the Lord Home took the
Oath for the King, that he should maintain the Religion received, and minister
justice equally to all the subjects. The English Ambassador though he was in
town, refused his presence to that solemnity, lest he should seem to approve
the abdication of the Queens Government. Now how soon the news came to France
(and they came in great haste) the Earl of Murray prepared to return, whereof
the Archbishop of Glasgow getting intelligence (who lay there Ambassador for
the Queen) he labored earnestly to have him detained, informing that he was
the head of the faction raised against the Queen, and that he was called home
to be their leader. The Earl of Murray returns from France.
But he had taken his leave some hours before of the Court, and used such
diligence, as they who were sent to stay him, found that he was loosed from
Diepe before their coming.

Returning by England, he came the 11. of August to Edinburgh, where he was
received with a wonderful joy. Great instance was used to have him accept the
Regency; at which they said no man would grudge, he being named by the Queen,
and having given all good men experiments of his worth. Some few days he
desired to advise, He visits the Queen at Lochlevin.
in which time he visited the Queen at Lochlevin, and sent Letters to the
Noblemen; of the other faction, especially to the Earl of Argile, with whom he
had kept an entire friendship of a long time, showing in what sort he was
pressed by the Lords that maintained the Kings authority, and entreating him by
the bonds of kindred, the familiarity they had long kept, and by the love he
bare to his native Country, to appoint a place where he might confer with him,
and have his counsel in that business.

To the rest he wrote according to the acquaintance he had with them, and as
their place and dignity required. Of them all in common he desired that they
would be pleased to design a place of meeting, where they might by common
advice provide for the safety of the Kingdom, which in that troubled time
could not long subsist, without some one to rule and govern.

But finding them all to decline the meeting, and being importuned on the other
side by those of the Kings faction to undertake the charge, he resolved to
accept the same, and in a convention of Noblemen, and others of the Estates
kept at Edinburgh the 20. The Earl of Murray elected Regent.
of August, was elected Regent with a great applause of all that were present.
The same day was his Election published, and charge given to all the subjects
for acknowledging, and obeying him as Regent, and Governor of the Realm unto
the Kings majority.

THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
The Contents.
How matters passed in the State and Church, during the Government of the four
Regents, his Majesty being yet minor.

BOthwell after his flight at Carberry, Bothwell takes the Sea, and is pursued
by Grange.
having stayed a few days in the Fort of Dumbar; for that he feared to be
enclosed, made to the Sea, with two or three ships, which he had prepared, and
went into Orkney; his purpose was to have remained in the Castle of Kirkwall,
and if any did pursue him to take himself to the ships: but the keeper Gilbert
Balfour would not receive him, so as he was forced to return to Sea, and there
playing the Pirate made spoil of all that came in his way. The Regent
advertised of this, sent William Kirkealdy of Grange with five ships well maned
to pursue him, who coming upon him unlooked for, as he lay in one of the creeks
of Orkney, gave him the chase, and had certainly taken him, if they had not
been hindered by rocks and shallow waters. The Unicorn one of Granges best
ships was cast away upon a rock, Bothwell with his that were not of such a
burden escaping. Shortly after he was taken upon the Coast of Norway, and
conveyed to Denmark, where being detected by some Scottish Merchants, he was
put in a vile and loathsome prison, and falling in a frenzy which kept him
some ten years, made an ignominious and desperate end, such as his wicked and
flagitious life had deserved.

Grange at his return had the Castle of Edinburgh committed to his keeping, The
custody of Edinburgh Castle committed to Grange.
which a little before was sold by Sir James Balfour to the Regent for the
sum of 5000. pounds, and the gift of the Priory of Pittinweeme. At the same
time Patrick Whitlaw keeper of Dumbar Castle, being charged to render the same
did at the persuasion of his friends yield up the fort, which otherwise was
held impregnable.

The Lords who were convened at Hamilton, perceiving how matters went, The
Lords convened at Hamilton write to the Regent.
and that all things grew strong on the Regents side, upon a new deliberation
did write unto him, and the rest that stood for the Kings authority, desiring a
conference; and offering to send the Earl of Argile with some others, to any
place they would for meeting. But because in the superscription they gave not
the Regent his due title, stiling him only Earl of Murray, the letter was
rejected by the Council, and the messenger dimitted without answer* Argile
knowing what had given the offense, resolved to go unto the Regent, and taking
with him the Lord Boyde, and the Abbot of Killwining came to Edinburgh. There
it being declared, that the election of the Regent was not made upon any
contempt, or misregard of the Noblemen who were absent, but upon necessity to
keep the Realm in order, it was agreed that a Parliament should be called for
settling all affairs by advice and consent of the Estates, An. 1566.
and that the same should be kept at Edinburgh the 15. day of December next.

When the Diet appointed for Parliament came, The first Parliament of King
James the 6.
it was kept with such a frequency, as the like was not remembered to have been
seen a long time. The honors accustomed of Crown, Scepter, and Sword, were
carried by the Earls of Angus, Huntley and Argile, and every thing done with
the greatest show of solemnity that could be used. Beginning was made at the
affairs of the Church, and diverse Acts concluded in their favors: The Acts
concluded in Parliament.
as an Act abolishing the Pope his jurisdiction and usurped authority within
the Realm; another for repealing the Statutes made in former times for
maintenance of idolatry, and superstition, with the ratifying of the confession
of faith, and some others, which may be seen in the first Parliament of King
James the sixth. The matter of policy, and jurisdiction of the Church was
referred to the consideration of certain Lords delegated by the Estates; but
for the restitution of the patrimony, which was promised to be the first work
of the Parliament, though the Regent did what he could to have the Church
possessed with the same, it could not be obtained. Only the thirds of Benefices
were granted to the Church, for provision of the Ministers; the superplus, or
what should be found remaining after the Ministers were provided, being applied
to the support of the public affairs of the Estate. Touching the Queen, a long
consultation was held what course should be taken with her: some urged that she
should be arraigned, and punished according to the law. Others reasoned, that
whatsoever authority was in the Kingdom, was derived from her, and was
revocable at her pleasure, so as she could not be arraigned or brought to trial
before any inferior Judge; and when it was replied, that the Scots from the
very beginning of the Kingdom, had been in use to censure and punish their
Kings, The Queen ordained to be kept in prison.
in case of grievous crimes, the greater number disliking that course, it was
concluded, that she should be detained, and kept in perpetual prison.

Some ten days after in an Assembly of the Church, The Bishop of Orkney deposed
for marrying the Queen.
the Bishop of Orkney was convened for joining the Queen and Bothwel in
marriage, and deposed from his function and office. The Countess of Argile
being cited to appear before the same Assembly for assisting the Baptism of
the King, and giving her presence at the Papistical rites then used, did submit
her self to censure, and was ordained to make public satisfaction in the
Chapel of Striveling, where the offense was committed, upon a Sunday after
Sermon in such manner, and at such time as the Superintendent of Lothian should
appoint.

In the month of January John Hepburn called Bolton, The confession of these
that were executed for the Kings murder
John Hay younger of Tallow, and two Chamberboyes of Bothwels powrie and
Dalgleish were brought to trial for the Kings murder, and found guilty by
their own confessions. The sum whereof was, that they were enticed unto that
wicked fact by Bothwel, who did assure them that most of the Noblemen within
the Realm had consented thereto, and that a contract was showed them subscribed
by the Earls of Argile, Huntley, young Lethington and others; but whether these
subscriptions were the Noblemens own or counterfeit, they could not tell. They
further said that Bothwel made them believe that the Lords who had subscrived,
would each of them have one or two of their servants present at the murder,
yet were they but eight persons in all, besides Bothwel himself, that came unto
the place: Namely, Sir James Balfour, the Lord of Ormeston in Teviotdale,
Robert Ormeston his Cosen, one Wilson a man of Hadington, and the four who
were then to suffer. The sentence upon their conviction was, that they should
be hanged, their heads cut off, their bodies quartered, and cast into the fire.
A manifold execution, which the treacherous Parricide they had committed, did
well deserve.

At the opening of the spring, An. 1568.
the Regent purposing to hold justice Courts through the whole Kingdom, made
his beginning in the West parts, because of some broken people in the Lenox,
The Queen escapes from Lochlevin.
and Highlands adjoining: whilst he remained at Glasgow, (for the first Court
was there affixed) the Queen made an escape from Lochlevin, to the great
contentment of many who stood in fear of the Regents severity or, as (the
vulgar called it) cruelty. And even some that were the principal workers of her
imprisonment. having changed their minds, did earnestly wish her liberty.
Lethington who hating Bothwel to the death, was enemy to the Queen for his
respect, as soon as he understood of his arresting in Denmark, and saw that he
was no more to be feared, desired greatly to have her restored, as thinking his
credit and safety should that way be most assured. Sir James Balfour followed
always his course; William Murray of Tulibardin, though he had showed great
forwardness at the hill of Carberry, where the Queen was taken, yet being
Popishly set, upon some private discontents forsook the Regent, and carried
with him diverse of his friendship. The Hamiltons were known to desire nothing
more then her freedom. The Earls of Argile and Huntley, howbeit they had been
present at the late Parliament, and given their assistance for establishing the
Kings authority, turned their Coats, and joined with the rest for repossessing
the Queen; and besides these many others, some led with hopes of advancement,
and some trusting to have their distressed estates bettered by a change, longed
much to have her relieved, which by this means came to pass.

George Douglas the Regents youngest brother a Gentleman of good spirit, The
manner of the Queens escape.
who remained with her in the Castle of Lochlevin, allured by her courtesies,
and fair promises, having corrupted the Keepers, although he himself upon
suspicion, was some days before sent forth of the Isle, got her transported,
(whilst the rest were at dinner) in a little vessel to the side of the lake,
where he with the Lord Seaton and some horsemen were attending. The first night
she lodged at Nudrie in West Lothian, and the next day was conveyed to
Hamilton, whither repaired unto her the Earls of Argile, Cassils, Eglington,
and Rothes, the Lords Sommervil, Yester, Borthwick, Levingston, Hereis,
Maxwell, Sanqhuar, and Ross, with many other Barons, and Gentlemen. The Lords
meeting in Council, the Queen declared that the resignation she had made of the
Crown, was extorted by fear; as likewise the Commission granted for
inaugurating the Prince her son, qualifying the same by the testimony of Robert
Melvile there present, The Queens resignation decerned null.
and others. Thereupon was the resignation decerned void and null, and
Proclamations made in her Majesty's name, commanding all the Lieges to meet in
Arms at Hamilton for pursuing the rebels, that had usurped the Royal authority.

The news hereof brought unto Glasgow (which is only eight miles distant) where
the Regent then abode, The Regent advertised of the Queens escape.
were scarce at first believed, but within two hours or less, being assured, a
strong alteration might have been observed in the minds of most that were
there attending. The report of the Queens forces made diverse to slide away;
others sent quietly to beg pardon for what they had done, resolving not to
enter in the cause any further, but to govern themselves as the event should
lead and direct them. And there were that made open defection, not a few, nor
of the meaner sort. The Lord Boyd falls to the Queen.
Amongst whom the Lord Boyd was especially noted, and in the mouths of all
men; for that being very inward with the Regent, and admitted to his most
secret counsels, when he saw matters like to turn, he withdrew himself and went
to the Queen.

Yet the Regent nothing discouraged, The Regent resolves to stay at Glasgow
and assemble forces.
and esteeming his life could not be more honorably bestowed then in the
defense of the King, albeit many did advise him to retire unto Striveling,
would not condescend to stir, saying, That his retreat would be interpreted a
flight, and the adversaries thereby animated, and his friends disheartened. In
the mean season he sent advertisement to his friends in Mers, Lothian, and
Strivelingshire. The Earl of Glencarn and Lord Semple with the men of Lenox,
and others well affected to the cause, that lay near to the City, made haste
unto his succourse, so as in a day or two, his company increased to 4000. and
above. There was with the Queen a French Ambassador, who had arrived a few
days before, and moved the Regent for access to the Queen before the escape
she made; he was still posting between Hamilton and Glasgow, rather to epsy
and observe things, then to make the peace he pretended; for when he saw the
Regents forces to be few, as at first they were, and that the Queens power was
much greater, he did persuade her to take the fields, and put it to the trial
of a day: which she resolved to do. Thereupon warning given to make ready
against the next morning, the Earl of Argile was proclaimed Lieutenant, and
conclusion taken to march with the Army by Glasgow, toward the Castle of
Dumbarton, where they pruposed to place the Queen, and either to give battle,
or draw the war at length as they pleased: or if the Regent (which they did
not expect) should meet them in the way, to fight him, accounting the victory
certain, because of their numbers.

The Regent advertised of the Queens intentions, The battle of Landside, 13,
May, 1568.
took the fields the next day early, and stood with his companies some hours
in battle, array, upon the Moore of Glasgow, where it was believed the Queens
Army should pass, but when he saw them keep the other side of the River, he
directed the horsemen to pass the Foords, the water being then ebbed, and
leading the foot along the bridge, went toward Landside, which lay in the way
to Dumbarton. This is a little Village upon the water of Carthe, The order of
the Regents Army.
situated at the foot of a hill toward the West; on the East and North the
ascent unto it is somewhat steep, the other parts of the hill are more even and
plain; both Armies contending who should first possess it, that of the Regents
prevented the other by occasion of Argiles sickness, who was on the sudden
taken with a fit of the Epilepsie, and so retarded the march of the Queens
Army. When they approached near and saw themselves prevented, they went to a
little opposite hill, and there ranged themselves in two battles, placing in
the first their whole strength almost; for if they should at the first
encounter repulse their enemies, the rest they made account would soon disband
and take the chase. The Regent had likewise put his troops in two battles; on
the right hand were placed the Earl of Morton, the Lords Home, Semple, and
Lindesay, with their clients and vassals; on the left, the Earls of Mar,
Glencarn, and Menteith, with the Citizens of Glasgow: the Harquebusiers were
planted in the Village beneath, and within the hedges upon the highway. Before
the joining both sides played with their Ordinance upon others, but the
advantage was on the Regents part, the Queens Canoniers being forced to quit
their munition. His Cavalrie on the other side being much inferior to the
Queens, was compelled to give ground: but when they entered upon the foot,
thinking to put them in disorder, the Archers from the Regents side rained such
a shower of arrows upon them, as they could not hold up their faces, and were
forced to turn back. The left wing of the Queens Army advancing it self in the
mean while, howbeit greatly annoyed by the Harquebusiers, that beat them in the
strait on both sides, got into the plain and displayed it self. Then did the
Armies join and enter into a hot fight, striving in thick ranks to maintain
their places, and by force of spears to break and bear down one another; for
the space of half an hour and more, the fight continued doubtful, and so
eagerly they strove, that they whose spears were broke, stood throwing their
poynards, stones, and what came readiest to their hands, in the faces of their
adversaries. The Regents second battle perceiving that none came against them,
and fearing the other should be overlaid, (for they saw some in the last ranks
recoiling) went unto their aid, whereupon the Queens Army gave back, and so
were put to rout. The Regent and those on his side showed great manhood, all
their hopes consisting in the victory: nor were his enemies any less
courageous, but the advantage of the ground were to those of his part no small
help. There were not many slain on the place, most of the slaughter being made
in the chase, and unless the Regent had with his presence wheresoever he came,
and by sending horse into all parts, stayed the fury of those that pursued, the
victory had been much more bloody. The Queen who stood a mile off from the
battle on a little height, perceiving the field lost, made toward the borders.
The number of the slain.
The rest that escaped, fled the readiest way they could find, every man to his
own home. The number of the slain was about 300. many were taken prisoners, The
ptisoners that were taken.
amongst whom the most eminent the Lords of Seaton, and Ross, the Masters of
Cassils and Eglington, Sir James Hamilton of Avendale, and the Sheriffs of
Air and Linlithgow. Of the Regents side one only was slain, the Lords Home and
Ochiltrie wounded. All the rest, a few excepted that followed the chase too
far, returned with him to Glasgow, where they went first to Church, and gave
thanks to God for the victory they had obtained, almost without any effusion of
blood. This conflict happened upon the 13th, of May. the eleventh day after her
escape from Lochlevin. The French Ambassador who had conceived an assured hope
of her prevailing, perceiving things fall out otherwise, took horse, and made
away to England, not once saluting the Regent, to whom, as he pretended, he was
sent. By the way he fell in the hands of some robbers, that rifled all his
baggage, which the Lord of Drumlanrig, for the respects he carried to the
title of an Ambassador, caused to be restored.

The rest of that day the Regent bestowed in taking order with the prisoners:
The Castles of Hamilton and Darffan rendered to the Regent.
some he freely dimitted, others upon surety, but the Principals were detained
(they especially of the Surname of Hamilton) and committed to several prisons.
The next day taking with him 500. horse, he rode unto Hamilton, and had the
Castle thereof, with the house of Draffan another strong hold, belonging to the
Duke, rendered in his hands. Such a terror this defeat wrought, that the whole
inhabitants of Cluid did relinquish and forsake their houses: upon the like
fear, did the Queen against the counsel of her best friends take Sea at
Kirkcadbright, and sail into England, landing at Wirkinton in Cumberland, near
to the mouth of the river Derwent, from which place she sent a letter to Queen
Elizabeth, The Queen flies to England and writes to Queen Elizabeth.
declaring that she was come into her Kingdom, upon hope of aid and assistance
from her, requesting she might be conducted to her with all speed because of
her present distress. John Beaton one of her domestics, was some days before
sent with the Diamond she had received from the Queen of England for a token of
kindness, to signify her purpose of coming into England, if she should be
further pursued by her subjects: who did shortly return with large promises of
love, and kindness, if she should happen to come; But as soon as her coming
was known, the directions sent by Sir Francis Knowles, were not so loving; for
by him she was desired to go unto Carlisle as a place of more safety, whither
the Lieutenant of the country should conduct her, and stay there till the
Queen was informed of the equity of her cause.

This direction did much displease her, and then began she to see her error,
The Queen of Scots begins to see her error.
but seeming to take all in good part, she sent the Lord Hereis to entreat the
Queen for an hearing in her own presence, where she might both clear her self,
and show how injuriously she had been dealt with by those, whom at her
intercession she had recalled from exile; or if that could not be obtained, to
crave that she might be permitted to depart forth of England and not detained
as a prisoner, seeing she came willingly thither, in confidence of her
kindness often promised, and confirmed as well by letters as messages. Queen
Elizabeth moved with these speeches, said, that she would send to the Regent,
and desire him to stay all proceeding against the subjects that stood in her
defense, till matters were brought to an hearing. A Parliament called by the
Regent.
For the Regent at the same time had called a Parliament to the 25. of June,
for proceeding against those that had accompanied the Queen in the fields by
course of law. They of the Queens faction were in the mean time preparing to
hinder the meeting, and when as the Diet drew near, the Earl of Argile with his
forces met Lord Claude Hamilton at Glasgow, the Earl of Huntley brought from
the North 1000. foot, with as many horsemen almost, and came as far as Perth,
but was not permitted to cross the river of ^ay, the channels and passages
being all guarded by the Lord Ruthven and such in those quarters as maintained
the Kings authority. So being forced to return home, the Earl of Argile, and
other Lords not seeing how they could hinder the meeting of the Parliament,
dissolved their companies, and returned to their own country.

At this time came the letters promised by the Queen of England, The Queen of
England desires the Parliament to be delayed. The R^gent refuses.
whereby the Regent was desired to delay the Parliament, and not to precipitate
the giving of sentence in these matters, till she was rightly informed of the
whole cause.

But the Regent considering that the delay of the Parliament would be
constructed to proceed of fear, resolved to keep the Diet. At the meeting it
was long disputed, whether all they that had taken Arms against the King, and
not sued for pardon, should be forfeited, or if sentence should be given
against a few only to terrify the rest, and hope of favor left unto others
upon their obedience? Secretary Lethington who did secretly favor the other
faction, maintained the calmest course to be the best, and by the persuasions
he used, wrought so as the process against the better sort was continued, and
some of meaner note only proscribed; which was interpreted, even as the Regent
conceived, to proceed of fear, and not of a mind to reclaim them. The Earl of
Rothes only of all the Noblemen of that side reconciled himself, accepting
three years exile for his punishment. Some others of meaner sort the Regent
received into favor, and such as stood out he pursued by force of Arms,
making an expedition into the countries of Nidisdale, Annandale, and the lower
parts of Galloway, where he put Garrisons in the Castles and strong Forts that
were judged necessary to be kept others he demolished and threw to the ground;
and had in a short space (as it was thought) reduced the whole country to his
obedience, if he had not been stayed by other letters by the Queen of England;
for the offending that he should have gone on in that manner, The Queen of
England writes to the Regent.
whereas she had willed him to defer all things till she was informed of the
whole cause, sent by one of her servants called Middlemore, a sharp letter unto
him declaring that she would not endure the sacred authority of Kings to be in
that sort abused at the appetite of factious subjects, and howsoever they had
forgot their duties to their Sovereign, she would not neglect her sister and
neighbor Queen. Therefore willed him to direct certain Commissioners to enform
her how matters had passed, men that could answer the complaints made by the
Queen of Scotland against him and his accomplices, which if he failed to do, she
would restore her to her Kingdom with all the power she could make.

The Regent took it grievously, that matters determined in Parliament, should
be brought again in question, and to plead before forain Judges he held it
dishonorable; yet considering the adversaries he had (the Cardinal of Lorain
abroad who swayed all things in the French Court, and at home many of the
Nobility) and that if he did offend the Queen of England, his difficulties
should be every way great, he was glad to yield to the conditions required,
though against his will. Thus it being condescended the Commissioners should be
sent, Commissiooners choosed to go into England.
when as they could not agree upon the persons (the principal Noblemen refusing
the employment) the Regent himself offered to undertake the journey; and to
accompany him, choice was made of the Bishop of Orkney, and Abbot of Dunfermlin
for the spiritual estate; of the Earl of Morton and Lord Lindesay for the
temporal; and of Mr. James Macgill and Mr. Henry Balnaves Senators of the
College of Justice: besides these there went with him Secretary Lethington,
and Mr. George Buchannan. The Secretary had long withstood the sending of any
Commissioners thither, and simply refused to go in that journey, yet the Regent
not holding it safe to leave him at home, whom he knew to be a busy man, and a
practiser underhand with the other party, did insist so with him, as in end he
consented.

The Commission was given in the Kings name under the Great Seal, to the
Regent, The tenor of the Commission.
the Earl of Morton, the Bishop of Orkney, the Abbot of Dunfermlin, and Lord
Lindesay, or to any three of them, for convening with the deputies of the Queen
of England at York, or any other place or places they should think expedient,
there to make plain and ample declarations to them ( I keep the very words of
the Commission) for informing his good sister of the true causes, whereupon
diverse of the Nobility, and good subjects, during the time that the Queen his
Mother was yet possessor of the Crown, took occasion to put on Arms; to take,
detain, and sequestrate her person for a time, with all causes, actions,
circumstances, and other their proceedings whatsoever toward her, or any other
subjects of the Realm since that time, unto the day and date of the said
Commission, or that should fall out, until the return of the said
Commissioners, whereby the Justice of their cause, and honorable dealing might
be manifested to the world: As likewise to commune, treat, determine, and
conclude with his said sister, or her Commissioners, having sufficient
authority, upon all differences, causes, or matters, depending betwixt the
subjects of either Realm, or for further confirmation, or augmentation of any
treaty of peace heretofore made and concluded betwixt the Realms, or for
contracting and perfecting any other treaty, or confederation, as well
maintenance of the true Religion publicly professed by the inhabitants of both
the Realms, as for resisting any forain, or intestine power, that might be
stirred up within the same, to disturb the present quietness, that it has
pleased the Almighty God to grant unto both the Kingdoms, in the unity of the
said Religion, and for increase of amity, peace and concord betwixt him and his
said sister, their Realms, dominions, people and subjects. And generally to do
and conclude all things which by them, or any three of them should seem
convenient, and necessary for the premises, or any part thereof, promising to
hold firm and stable, etc. This Commission is of the date a^ Edinburgh the
18th, of September, 1568.

In July preceding there was an Assembly of the Church kept at Edinburgh, An
Assembly of the Church.
wherein Mr. John Willock Superintendent of the west, being elected to moderate
the meeting, made difficulty to accept the place, unless some better order was
observed, then had been in former times; for even then the multitudes that
convened and indiscreet behavior of some, who loved to seem more zealous then
others, did cause a great confusion. Obedience being promised by the whole
number, he assumed the Charge. And there it was enacted, Who should have voice
in Assemblies.
That none should be admitted to have voice in these Assemblies, but
Superintendents, Visiters of Churches, Commissioners of Shires, and
Universities, and such Ministers as the Superintendents should choose in their
Diocesan Synods, and bring with them, being men of knowledge, and able to
reas^n, and judge of matters that should happen to be proponed. And that the
Assembly should not be troubled with unnecessary business, it was ordained,
That no matters should be moved, which the Superintendents might, and ought to
determine in their Synods. Some Acts of discipline were also concluded, as that
Papists continuing obstinate after lawful admonitions, Acts of discipline.
should be excommunicated; and that the committers of murder, incest,
adultery, and other such heinous crimes should not be admitted to make
satisfaction by any particular Church, till they did first appear in the habit
of penitents before the general assembly, and there receive their injunctions.
A supplication also was put up to the Regent and Council, wherein amongst other
particulars it was desired, That the persons nominated in Parliament for the
matter of policy, or juridiction of the Church, should be ordained to meet at a
certain day, and place for concluding the same. This was promised and the
eighth of August appointed to that effect; but the Diet did not hold, and so
these matters continued unresolved as before. In the end of the Assembly the
Bishop of Orkney, who had been deposed from all function in the Church for the
marriage of Bothwel with the Queen, was upon his submission reponed to his
place, The Bishop of Orkney reponed.
and for removing the scandal he was enjoined in his first Sermon to make
public acknowledgement of his fault, and crave forgiveness of God, the
Church, and Estate which he had offended.

About the end of September the Regent, A meeting of the English and Scots
Commissioners at York
and those that were joined with him in commission took their journey into
England, and came to York the fifth of October: the same day and almost the
same hour came Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Suffex, and Sir
Ralph Sadler Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, having Commission from the
Queen of England, to hear and determine all questions, controversies, debates,
and contentions, betwixt her sister the Queen of Scots and the subjects
adhering unto her on the one part, and the Earl of Murray and others refusing
to acknowledge her authority and adhering to the Prince her son on the other:
as likewise to decide all matters depending betwixt them two, to confirm the
peace before that time contracted, or establish a new confederation betwixt
them, their people and subjects, as they should think most convenient. Some two
days after John Lesley Bishop of Ross, William Lord Levingston, Robert Lord
Boyd, Gawan Commendator of Kilwining, and James Cockburn of Skirling,
Commissioners for the Scottish Queen.
Commissioners for the Scottish Queen, came to the City; where being all
convened, and the Commissions exhibited, an oath was presented to both parties
by the Commissioners of England, by which they were required to swear, That
they should proceed sincerely in that conference and treaty, and neither for
affection, malice, or any other worldly respect propone any thing before the
Commissioners, which in their consciences they did not hold to be true, just
and godly, and reasonable; as also not to withdraw, hide or conceal any matter
fit to be opened, and declared for the better knowledge of the truth in the
controversies standing amongst them.

The Commissioners of the Queen of Scotland before they took the oath
protested, Protestation for the Queen of Scotland.
That although the Queen their Mistress was pleased to have the differences
betwixt her and her disobedient subjects considered and dressed by her dearest
sister and cosen the Queen of England, or by the Commissioners authorized by
her, yet she did not acknowledge her self subject to any Judge on earth, she
being a free Princess, and holding her imperial Crown of God alone. This their
protestation they desired to be put in record, left the Queen or her posterity
should be prejudiced in their Sovereignty by the present proceedings.

The Commissioners of England did contrariwise protest, Commissioners of
E^gland protest in the contrary.
that they did neither admit nor allow that protestation in any sort, to the
hurt or prejudice of that right which the Kings of England have claimed, had
and enjoyed as superiors over the Realm of Scotland, which Superiority they
protested should belong and appertain to the Queen their Mistress, in the
right of the Crown of England. These protestations made, both parties took the
oath in manner as was required, and this was the Act of the first meeting.

The next day the Commissioners of the Queen of Scotland, A declaration in
behalf of the Queen of Scotland.
presented a Declaration in writing, bearing that James Earl of Morton, John
Earl of Mar, Alexander Earl of Glenc^rne, the Lords Homes, Lindesay, Ruthven,
Simple, Cathcart, Ochiltrie, and other their assistants, had levied an Army in
the Queens name against the Queen, taking her most noble peron, used her in
vile manner, and thrust into prison in Lochlevin, and forcibly broken her
Minthouse, taken away the printing Irons, with all the silver and gold coined
and uncoyned, which was in the house for the time: And going to the Castle of
Striveling, and made a fashion to crown her son the Prince being then but
thirteen months old. That James Earl of Murray taking upon him the name of
Regent, had usurped the Royal authority, and possessed himself with the whole
forts, Castles, Munition, Jewels, and Revenues of the Kingdom. And when it had
pleased God to relieve her out of that prison, (wherein she was so straightly
detained by the space of eleven months, as none of her friends and true
subjects could once be permitted to see, or speak with her) and that she had
publicly declared by a solemn oath, in the presence of diverse of the Nobility
at Hamilton, that whatsoever was done by her in prison, was extorted by force,
threats, and fear of death, she out of that natural affection which she carried
to her realm and subjects, did appoint the Earls of Argile, Eglington, Cassils,
and Rothes, to agree and make a pacification with the said Regent, and his
partakers; but they were so far from admitting any peaceable Treaty, as they
did invade her, in her passing to Dumbritton, with the men of War whom she
had hired with her own moneys, killed diverse of her faithful subjects, led
others away prisoners, and banished some of good note for no other cause, but
for serving faithfully their lawful Princess; and so after a great many
injuries had forced her to fly into England, to request the help of Queen
Elizabeth her dearest sister, and in blood the nearest Cosen she had in the
world, for restoring her in her former estate, and compelling her rebellious
subjects to acknowledge their due obedience unto her Majesty, which they in her
Highness name did most instantly entreat.

The day following which was the ninth of October, The Regents ^etire to the
^ommissioners o^ England.
the Regent and rest of the Commissioners for the young King appearing before
they would give any answer to the preceding writ, craved first to be resolved,
Whether the Duke and those that were appointed with him for hearing their
controversies, bad power to pronounce in the cause of the Kings Mother, guilty
or not guilty; and if according to the same, they meant to give sentence
without delay: As likewise, if it should appear by the Declaration they were to
make, that the Queen of Scots was guilty whether she should be delivered in
their hands, or detained in England? and if the Queen of England would from
thenceforth maintain the authority of the King and the Regency established in
the person of the Earl of Murray. Which points they desired to have cleared,
The Duke of Norfolks answer. Lethington disswadeth the Regent from accusing the
Queen.
before they could enter into the accusation intended. The Duke of Norfolk
replied, that they would proceed according to the Commission given unto them,
and render an account to her who had trusted them therewith. Lethington upon
this turning himself to the Regent, said, That it seemed the English ha^ no
other purpose, but to defame and disgrace the reputation of the Queen their
Kings mother; Therefore willed him and his associates to consider what hurt and
danger they should draw upon themselves, by accusing her in such a public
form, not only with those of her own Nation, that loved the Queen, but also
with other Christian Princes, especially with her cousins in France; and what
could they answer unto the King, when he being of ripe years should esteem that
manner of doing dishonorable to himself, his mother and whole Kingdom?

They notwithstanding went on, The information presented against the Queen of
Scots.
and presented their answer, conceived in the terms following. The King Henry
father to their sovereign Lord the King now reigning being horribly murdered
in his bed, James sometimes Earl of Bothwell, who was known to be the chief
Author thereof entered in such credit with the Queen, then their Sovereign, as
within two months after the murder committed, he openly attempted a rape of
her person and carried her to Dumbar Castle, where he did keep her as captive a
certain space, causing a divorce to be led betwixt him and his lawful wife,
and upon the conclusion thereof did suddenly accomplish a pretended marriage
with the Queea: which insolent proceedings, together with the shameful report
that passed in all Nations of the Kings murder, as if the whole Nobility had
been alike culpable thereof, so moved the hearts of a good number of them, as
they thought nothing could be performed more honorable to themselves in the
sight of all the world, then by punishing the said Earl who had committed the
murder, to free themselves of the vile reports spread every where; to set the
Queen at liberty from the bondage of that traitor, who had so presumptuously
interprised the rape and marriage of her, whose lawful husband he could not
be; and to preserve the innocent person of the King, from the hands of him that
had murdered his father. For which purpose they taking arms, when the said
Earl came against them with forces, leading in his company the Queen to defend
his wickedness; they offered for sparing the blood of innocent men, to decide
the quarrel in a single combat, whereof himself by Cartell, and Proclamation
and sundry times made offer. But after many shifts he in end directly refused
the same, and the Queen prefering his impunity to her own honor, that he might
have leisure to escape, came willingly to the Noblemen that were in Arms, and
conferred with them a certain space, after which they conveyed her to
Edinburgh, informing her of the true causes, that moved them to that form of
dealing, did humbly entreat her Majesty to suffer the said Earl and others, the
King her husbands murderers, to be punished according to the laws; and the
ptetended marriage, wherein she was rashly entered to be dissolved, as well for
her own honor, as for the safety of her son, and quietness of the Realm and
Subjects. But having received no other answer but rigerous threats against the
Noblemen, and she avouching to be revenged upon all those that had shown
themselves in that cause; they were driven by necessity to sequestrate her
person for a season from the company of Bothwell, and the keeping of any
intelligence with him, until punishment might be taken of him as murderer of
the King her husband. In the mean time, she finding her self wearied with the
troubles of government, and perceiving by things that had passed before that
time betwixt her and the people, that neither could she well allow of their
doings, nor they like of her forms, upon these and other consirations she
voluntarily resigned her Kingdom, and transferred the same unto her son,
appointing the Earl of Murray (who was at that time absent forth of the Realm)
to be Regent during her sons minority; and in case of the said Earls
decease, or not acceptance of the said Office, diverse other Noblemen, whose
names are expressed in the Commissions signed by her self, and sealed with the
seals of the Kingdom. The King hereupon, being duly, rightly and orderly
crowned and anointed, and the Earl of Murray after his return lawfully placed
and admitted Regent, all those things were ratified and confirmed by the three
Estates of Parliament, most of these that had withdrawn themselves from his
authority being present and giving their consent to the same: Notthelesfe, when
as matters were thus established, and the Kings authority univer^ally obeyed
without contradiction, certain persons envying the public quietness, had by
their subtle practices first brought the Queen out of Lochlevin, and
afterward by open force against their promised fidelity gone about to subvert
the government received, wherein as they were proceeding, it pleased God to
disappoint their interprise, and give unto the King and those who stood for his
authority, a notable victory unpon the 13. day of May last. Wherefore their
desire was, that the King and the Regent might peaceably rule and govern the
subjects according to the authority they had received of God, and that the same
might be conserved and established against the factions of turbulent subjects.

The Commissioners of the Queen of Scots having seen this answer made a long
and particular reply to all the points thereof, wherein adhering to their
former protestation, The Commissioners of the Queen of Scots reply.
first they said, That the pretext of taking arms against the Queen, because
Bothwell (the author of her husbands murder) was in such favor with her,
could not warrant their rebellion, fith it never was made known to the Queen
that he was the murderer. But to the contrary, Bothwell being indicted, and
orderly summoned to underly the trial of Law, he was by the judgment of his
Peers absolved, and the same absolution ratified by the authority of
Parliament, where the principalls that now accuse him and had withdrawn
themselves from her Majesty's obedience, were present, and not only consented
to his purgation, but solicited the Queen to take him to her husband, as the
man most worthy to bear rule of any other in all the Realm, giving their bonds
to defend him against all that should pursue him for the said crime, as their
subscriptions would testify. And so neither before the marriage with Bothwell,
nor after did they or any of them (which had been the duty of true subjects)
so much as in words utter their dislike of it, or advertise her Majesty of the
suspicions that were taken of him, until they had drawn the keeper of the
Castle of Edinburgh, and the Provost of the town to their faction. Then
secretly putting themselves in arms, they suddenly under silence of night
environed the Castle of Borthwick where her Majesty remained, and after she had
escaped to Dumbar, levied an army under pretense to defend the Queen, wherewith
invading her person in the way berwixt Dumbar and Edinburgh, they did take her
Majesty captive.

And where they allege that her Majesty preferring the impunity of Bothwell to
her own honor, made him to be conveyed safely away, The same was most
untrue, for they themselves sent the Lord of Grange to her Majesty, desiring
her to cause Bothwell pass out of the fields, as suspected of the Kings
murder, till the same might be tried, and that she would go with them and
follow the counsel of the Nobility, which if she would do, they would honor,
serve and obey her as their Princess and Sovereign: whereunto her Majesty for
the love she bare unto her subjects, and to avoid the effusion of Christian
blood, did willingly assent. In verification whereof, the said Lord of Grange
took the Earl of Bothwell at the same time by the hand, and willed him to
depart, giving his word that no man should pursue him. So as nothing is more
clear, then that he passed away by their own consents; for if they had been
minded against him only, would they not have pursued him so long as he was in
the Country, for he remained a great space after that in his own house, and
might more easily have been taken there, then upon the Seas, where they in a
colored manner did pursue him? Hereby, said they, may all men of found
judgment perceive that they cared not what became of him, if so they might
advance their own ambitious purposes and designs.

Thirdly, where she is charged to have used them with threats and menacings,
that, they said, was not to be thought strange, considering their undutiful
behavior, and the rude and vile usage her Majesty suffered by them. For when
the Earl of Morton, at her highness first coming to them, had reverently, as
it became him, said, Madame, here is the place where your grace should be, and
we will honor and serve you as truly, as ever the Nobility of the Realm did
any of your progenitors in former times, ratifying thereby the promise made by
the Lord Grange in their names to her Majesty, and that she trusting their
speeches had gone with him to Edinburgh; they first lodging her in a simple
Burgess house, and contrary to their promises did most rudely entreat her:
whereupon she sent Lethington her Secretary, and made offer unto them that for
any thing, wherewith they or any of the subjects were offended, she was content
the same should be reformed by the Nobility, and the Estates of the Realm, her
Highness being present, and permitted to answer for her self: yet would they
not hearken once to the motion, but in the night secretly and against her will
carried her to Lochivin, and put her in prison.

As to that they say, that she wearied with the molestations of government did
make a voluntary resignation of the Kingdom in favors of the Prince her son,
appointing the Earl of Murray his Regent during his minority, The falsehood
thereof did, as they said, many ways appear. For first, her Majesty is neither
decayed by age, nor weakened by sickness, but (praised be God) both in mind and
body able to discharge the most weighty affairs. As also the truth is, that the
Earl of Athol, the Lairds of Tullibardin and Lethington (who were of their
Council) sent Robert Melvil with a ring and some other tokens to her Majesty,
advising her to subscrive the letters of resignation, and what else should be
presented unto her to save her own life, and avoid the death which was
assuredly prepared for her, if she should happen to refuse the same, and at the
same time the said Gentleman did bring unto her Majesty a letter written by Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton, Ambassador of England, requesting her Highness to set
her hand to whatsoever they should desire of her. To whom her Majesty answered,
that she would follow his counsel, praying him to declare to her dearest sister
the Queen of England, how she was used by her subjects, and that the
resignation of the Crown made by her was extorted by fear, which her Highness
doubted not, but the said Nicholas performed.

Further it is notorious, that the Lord Lindesay at the presenting of the
letters of resignation unto her Majesty, did menace to put her in close prison,
if she refused to put her hand to the same, adding, that in that case, worse
would shortly follow; and that her Highness never looked what was in the
writings presented, but signed the same with many tears, protesting that if
ever she should recover her liberty, she would disavow that, which he compelled
her at that time to do. And to testify that the said resignation was made
against her will, the Lord of Lochlevin who was then her Keeper, refused to
subscrive it as witness, and did obtain a Testificat under her Majesty's own
hand, declaring that he refused to be present at the said resignation.

Neither can that renuciation be sustained by any reason, considering that no
portion of Revenue was reserved for her to live upon, neither was her liberty
granted, or any security given her of her life. All which weighed in the
balance of reason, will to men of indifferent judgment make manifest that the
alleged dimission so unlawfully procured, can never prejudge her Majesty in
her Royal estate: especially considering that at her first escape out of prison
she did revoke the same, and in the presence of a great part of the Nobility at
Hamilton, by a solemn oath declared, that what she had done was by compulsion,
and upon just cause of her life.

For the Coronation of her Highness son, they said, that the same was most
unorderly done, because there being in the Realm above an hundred Earls,
Bishops and Lords having voice in Parliament, (of whom the greatest part at
least ought to have consented thereto, it being an Action of such consequence)
four Earls and six Lords (the same that were present at her apprehension) with
one Bishop, and two or three Abbots and Priors, were only assisting; and of the
same number, some did put in a protestation, that nothing then done should
prejudge the Queen or her successor, by reason she was at that time a captive.
Nor can any man think that if the dimission had been willingly made her
Highness, she would ever have nominated the Earl of Murray Regent, there being
many others more lawful, and that have better right thereto then he; of whom
some have been governors of the Realm in former times, and during her
Majesty's minority had worthily exerced that place.

It is to as little purpose that they object of the Parliament, and the
ratification made therein; Seeing the principalls of the Nobility disassented,
and put in their protestations both to the Lords of the Articles, and in the
open Parliament against their proceedings, affirming that they would never
agree to any thing that might hurt the Queens Majesty's person, her Crown and
Royal estate further then her Highness self being at liberty would freely
approve. Lastly, where they would have it seen that the authority established
by them was universally obeyed in the Realm, and all things well and justly
administered; both these are alike untrue: for a great part of the Nobility have
never acknowledged another authority then that of the Queen, keeping and
holding their Courts in her Majesty's name. And for the administration of
affairs, it is apparent that wickedness did never reign more, and with less
controlment in the Realm, murder, bloodshed, with theft and robbery every
where abounding; policy destroyed, Churches thrown down, honorable families
ruinated, and true men bereft of their goods, for satisfying the soldiers
hired by them, to maintain the Regents usurped government, the like whereof
has not been seen, nor heard for many ages before. In regard whereof, they in
behalf of the Queen of Scotland their Mistress did earnestly request the
support and assistance of the Queen of England her cousin, for restoring her to
her Crown, and suppressing the rebels that had attempted against her.

The English Commmissioners having perused the writings of both sides, The
Commissioners of England, desire the Regent to give better reasons.
declared that as yet they were not satisfied with any thing the Regent had
showed, requiring him to produce some better, and more sound reasons, for the
severity they had used against their Sovereign, otherwise they could not but
think she had been too hardly dealt with, and report so much to the Queen their
Mistress. The Regent, (who disliked nothing more then to be drawn into the
accusation of the Queen his sister) answered that he could not be more
particular till he should be assured, that the Queen of England would undertake
the protection of the young King, and relinquish the cause of his Mother. The
Commissioners replying, that they had no warrant to promise any such thing, he
besought them to try the Queens mind, that her pleasure being known he might
sooner resolve what to do. Letters hereupon was sent to the Queen, who willed
the Regent to direct some one, or more of his side to Court, for her better
information. To this effect Secretary Lethington, and Mr. James Macgill Clerk
of the Rolls were sent thither, with whom the Queen having conferred a little
time, she gave order to recall her Commissioners, and advertise the Regent
himself to come unto her. At his coming the Queen laid to his charge the
proceeding against his sister the Queen of Scots, saying, that she did not see,
how he and the rest of his faction could well be excused, and that unless
matters were better cleard on their parts, she could not deny the help and
assistance that was required at her hands. The Regent according to the
condition proposed at York, answered, That if she would take upon her the
defense of the King, they should be more particular in their reasons for
rejecting the Queens authority, and clear every thing they should speak
sufficiently; otherwise to accuse his sister, and Queen, would be held odious
in the judgment of all men.

Whilst these things were a doing in England, (...) disperied of the R^gents
imprisonment.
the Queens faction at home sought all occasions to make trouble, abusing the
popular sort with rumors they dispersed. Sometimes giving out that the Regent
was made prisoner in the Tower. At other times that he had promised to subject
the Kingdom of Scotland to the English, to deliver the young King to be brought
up in England, and put all the forts and strong holds in the Realm in their
hands. Nor was any man more busied in dispersing such lies, and using all means
else for stirring up tumult, then Sir James Balfour, instigated thereto by
advertisement from the Secretary, as was commonly thought. For by his advise it
was that the Scottish Queen at the same time sent Commissions of Lieutenandrie
to diverse Noblemen for erecting again her authority, like as all the while he
remained in England, he did ever keep intelligence with the Bishop of Rosse and
others the Queens agents, and was one of the chief plotters of the match
intended betwixt her and the Duke of Norfolk, which came shortly after to be
detected. The Regent, who was not ignorant of these secret workings, did find
there was a necessity of his returning home, to prevent the commotions that
were breeding before they grew into a greater ripeness: and fearing to offend
the Queen of England, if he should depart without giving her satisfaction in
the particulars she desired to be informed of, touching the Queen of Scots,
resolved to do it, but with a protestation which he presented in writing to the
Council at Westminster the 28. of November in this form.

Albeit our whole proceedings from the beginning of our interprise directed
only for the punishment of the King murder, A Declaration presented in
writing by the R^gent.
and the purging of our Nation from the scandal of that abominable fact, may
let the world see how unwilling we have been to touch the Queen our Sovereign
Lords Mother in honor, or to publish unto strangers matters tending to her
infamy, yet shall it not be amiss upon the present occasion, to show briefly
what has been, and still is our meaning therein: Such and so great was our
devotion toward her, as well for private affection, whereby every one of us was
led to wish her well, as for public respects, that rather then we would
blemish her honor with the foreknowledge of that detestable murder, we
choosed to wink at the shrewd reports of the world, and let our selves to be
blasoned as rebels and traitors to our native Prince; which had been easy for
us to have wiped away with the uttering of a few words, if the desire we had to
save her reputation bad not made us content that the world should still live in
doubt of the justice of our quarrel, and speak every one as their affections
were inclined. So when we were urged by the Queens Majesty of England, and the
French Kings Ambassadors to give a reason why we detained our Queen at
Lochleven, we gave no other answer, but that her affection was so excessively
toward Bothwell the committer of that odious murder, that she being at
liberty it would not be possible to punish him, and that it behooved us for a
season to sequestrate her person, till he might be apprehend^d and punished. In
what danger this dealing brought us, we have no need to show. From France we
had nothing to expect but open Hostility, and by keeping up the chief causes of
her rejection, we had reason to fear, that the Queen of England should call our
proceeding in doubt, and so leave us destitute of her Majesty's aid, at whose
hands we look principally to receive comfort in time of danger. This course
nottheless we should still have kept, if the importunity of our adversaries had
not forced us to take another way: For remembering what a person she is whom we
are brought to accuse, the Mother of our King and sovereign Lord, a Lady to
whom in particular the greatest part of us are so far obliged for benefits
received, that if with the perpetual exile of any one, or of a number of us,
forth of our Native Country, we could redeem her honor without the danger of
the King and whole Estate, we would willingly banish our selves to that end.
And therefore ere we dip further in the matter which to this boure we have
shunned, we solemnly protest, that it is not any delight we take in accusing
her, but a necessity that is laid upon us to purge our selves, that draws us
unto it. For if our adversaries would rested content with our former answer,
which they know to be true, no further would we needed. But against our hearts
in defense of our just cause they compelled us to utter the things, which we
wish were buried in perpetual oblivion. So if our doing seem hateful to any,
let these bear the blame, who force us to answer, which they know we may, and
in the end must give. One thing only we desire, that they who have brought us
to this necessity may be present and hear what is said, that if we speak any
untruth, they may refute the same, for even in point of greatest moment we will
use their own testimony. This being communicated with the Agents of the
Scottish Queen they answered, That they did not force them to any accusations,
and if they did utter untruths, or calumniate the Queen in any sort, The answer
of the Commissioners for the Queen of Scots.
they would not patiently hear it. That all their desires were to have their
Queen restored to her Kingdom from which by force of arms she was expulsed,
or if it should please the Queen of England to hear any more of that matter,
they requested that the Queen of Scots might be sent for, and permitted to
speak for her self.

Mean while by a new Patent there were joined to the other Commissioners, Bacon
keeper of the great Seal, the Earls of Arundell and Leicester, with the Lord
Admiral and Sir William Cecill, and a time assigned to the Regent for
producing the reasons for the Queens rejecting. When the day was come, he
presented the confessions of some that were executed for the Kings murder; the
Statutes of Parliament ratifying her resignation of the Crown, and her sons
Coronation subscribed by diverse of her own party; certain amatory verses, and
epistles written to Bothwell (as they said) with her own hand; three several
contracts of marriage betwixt her and Bothwell, with a number of presumptuous
likelyhoods and conjectures, to make it appear that she was privy to the
murder Bothwell had committed.

The Queen of England having seen and perused all these stood doubtful what to
do, The Queen of England doubts how to carry her self in the business.
for albeit she was content to have some blot rubbed upon the Queen of Stots,
as many supposed; yet the pity of her misfortune made her sometimes to think of
composing matters betwixt her and her subjects. The terms besides wherein she
stood with the French King, who was daily by his Ambassadors soliciting the
Queen of Scots liberty, made her uncertain what course to take; for if she
should simply deny his request, it would be esteemed a breach of friendship,
and to yield to his desire she thought it scarce safe for her own estate.
Therefore keeping a middle course she resolved to suspend her Declaration unto
another time, and willed the Regent seeing he could make no longer stay, to
leave some of his company to answer the criminations, which possibly his
adversaries would charge him with after he was gone. But he replying said, That
he was not so desirous to return home, but he would willingly stay to hear what
they could allege against him. Nor was he ignorant of the rumors they had
dispresed, and what they had spoken to some of the Council and to the French
Ambassador, which were more convenient to be told, whilst he was himself in
place and might make answer, then to belly and calumniate him in his absence:
wherefore he did humbly entreat her to cause them utter the things plainly that
they muttered in secret. Hereupon were the Queen of Scots Commissioners called,
and it being inquired, Whether they had any thing to object against the Regent,
which might argue his guiltiness of the Kings murder; they answered, That when
the Queen their Mistress should bid them accuse, The Queens Commissioners purge
the Regent of the Kings murder.
they would do it, but for the present they had nothing to say. The Regent
replied, That if the Queen or any other would accuse him, he should ever be
ready to give an account of his actions, and neither decline place nor time,
but in the mean while till she should intend her accusation, it was reason they
should declare if they themselves had any thing to lay unto his charge. After
diverse subterfuges, in end they professed that they knew nothing which might
make him or any of his associates suspected of the murder.

The Regent now at the point to depart, The Duke of Chattellerault claims the
Regency.
a new let was made by the Duke of Chattellerault, who coming from France by
England, drew himself into a contestation for the government, pleading that the
same did belong to him, as being the nearest of blood and lawful heir of the
Crown next after the Queen of Scots and her succession.

This he said, was the Law and practice of all Nations, and a custom
perpetually observed in Scotland, for proof whereof he alleged the Regency of
Robert Ste^art uncle to King James the first, with that of his son Duke Murdack
after the fathers death; the government of John Duke of Albany in the minority
of King James the fifth, and his own Regency in the nonage of the present
Queen. Contrary to which custom, a few Rebels (as he complained) had most
injuriously to his disgrace, and (which was most unsufferable) to the contempt
of the lawful blood, preferred one base born, unto the supreme dignity; which
honor if it should be restored to him, the Civil troubles he said would
cease, and the Queen without any tumult be ressored to her content: Whereupon
he requested the Queen of Englands favor, and that by her authority the Earl
of Murray might be caused cease from his usurped Government.

To this in behalf of the Regent it was replied, A reply to the Dukes petition.
That the Dukes Petition was most injust, and contrary to the custom, and
Laws of the Country, which provided that at such times as the Crown should
fall in the hands of Minors, one or more of the most sage and powerful in the
Estates should be elected for the administration of affairs unto the Kings ripe
age. This course, they said, the Scots had constantly kept the last six
hundredth years, and thereby secured the Kingdom, and transmitted the same free
and safe to their posterity; As for instance, after the death of King Robert
Bruce, Thomas Randolph Earl of Murray was elected Governor; upon his death,
Duncan Earl of Mar: after him Andrew Murray, and then Robert Stewart; who
were all chosen Regents one after another. In the minority of King James the
second, Sir Alexander Levingston was elected, a man neither of blood of the
King, nor a Nobleman of degree, but for his worth, and wisdom preferred. In
like sort King James the Third, had four Tutours appointed to him by the
Estates, none of them for any respect of propinquity.

And for the examples adduced of Duke Murdack, and John Duke of Albany, they
made nothing to the purpose. The last of the two in the minority of King James
the fifth, being called to the government by the Nobility, and confirmed
therein by the Estates. And to show that in his election no respect was had to
neerness of blood, his elder brother Alexander was then alive, who would not
have been passed, if propinquity or kindred had carried the sway. How Duke
Murdack and his father before him came to govern, it was well known: King
Robert the third waxing infirm and unable to rule by himself, did substitute
his brother (called Robert likewise) his Lieutenant in the Kingdom, commending
his tow sons David and James to his care. But the kindness he showed to them
was, that the elder of the two was starved to death in the Palace of Falkland,
and the younger forced fly for his life, he being detained prisoner in England:
After the fathers death, the uncle usurped still the place wherewith he was
possessed, and at his dying left the same to Murdack his son. As to that he
speaks of his own Regiment, they said, he had done more wisely not to have
mentioned it, considering his preferment proceeded rather of hatred born to the
Cardinal, who had supposed a false testament, then of any favor carried to
himself: And that being possessed in the place, he sold both it and the young
Queen to the French, which had bred a great deal of trouble. And granting the
custom had been such as he pratends, will any man in reason judge it safe to
commit the tuition of an innocent child to him, whose family has entertained
so long enmity with that of which the King is descended, and will ever be
waiting and wishing the death of his Pupil? none will think it. This was the
substance of the reply which when the Queen of England heard, she directed
certain of the Council to show the Duke that he was not to look for any help
from her in that business, and to prohibit his journey into Scotland, till
the Regent was parted and gone home.

About the same time there were letters of the Queen of Scots intercepted, The
Queen of Scots letters intercepted.
sent to the Noblemen of her party in Scotland, wherein she complained, That
the Queen of England had not kept promise unto her, yet desired them to be of
good heart, because she was assured of aid by some other means, and hoped to be
with them in a short time. These letters sent from Scotland to the Regent, he
delivered to the Queen of England, who from thenceforth was much estranged from
the Queen of Scots, as well for that she charged her with breach of promise, as
because it appeared she leaned to some others besides her self.

The Regent presently after took his journey homewards, The Regent returns to
Scotland.
and being attended by the Sheriffs and Gentlemen of the Country at the Queen
of Englands direction, came safely to Berwick the first of February, and the
day following to Edinburgh, within a few days he went to Striveling, and in a
convention of the Estates, having related the proceedings in England, had all
ratified and approved.

The twentieth of the same month, the Duke of Chattellerault returned, The
Duke made Deputy by the Queen of Scots.
and being made deputy by the Queen of Scots, caused publish his letters,
prohibitting the subjects to acknowledge any other Sovereign then the Queen,
Hereupon the Regent gave forth Proclamations, charging the lieges in the Kings
name to meet him in Arms at Glasgow the tenth of March, The Duke in the mean
time sent to the Assembly of the Church convened at that time in Edinburgh, a
prolixe letter, He writes to the Assembly of the Church.
wherein he signified, That being in France, and hearing what troubles were
moved at home, the love he carried to his native country made him return with
intent to pacify these stirs at his utmost power; And howbeit in his absence
he had suffered wrong, yet he assured them that his own particular did not
grieve him so much, as the danger wherein the Kingdom was brought, by the
diversity that had happened betwixt the Queen their native Sovereign, and a
part of her subjects, which he wished to be removed in some quiet and peaceable
manner: and that the Estates convening might (after they had considered the
ground and beginning of these troubles, which he conceived to be the murder of
the Queens late husband) with one consent agree upon soem reasonable course to
be followed for redress thereof, and of the evils which thence had proceeded,
whereunto he and all the Nobility continuing in the obedience of the Queen
their Sovereign, should be found pliable; which he did not write, as he said,
because of the Proclamations made by the Earl of Murray to convene people in
Glasgow the tenth of March: for since these troubles began he was not in the
country, and if all Scotland were gathered, he would trust for his own and his
predecessors good deserving to find such favor, as if the Earl of Murray would
invade him and his friends, he should not be assisted by any of them to do him
wrong. Therefore desired them in Gods behalf ( so the letter bears) to make
his mind and intention known to the people, or if they did not think his
desires and offers reasonable, that they would come and reason with himself,
whom they should find easy to be ruled in all matters according to Gods word
and equity.

To this letter dated at Hamilton the 27. The Assemblies answer.
of February, 1568. the Assembly answered, That they would communicate the
Letter with the Regent, and know his pleasure, Commissioners from the Churches
the Regent.
whether or not they should send any of their number to the Duke in Commission
to treat with his Grace. Which accordingly they did, appointing the
Superintendents of Lothian and Fise, with Mr. John Row, to go unto the Regent,
and having obtained his license to pass to the Duke and Noblemen that were in
his company, and use all means possible for reconciling them to the obedience
of the King and his Regent.

They had also certain Petitions given them to be presented to the Regent in
name of the Church, Petitions in behalf of the Church.
as to desire, That benesiced persons not bearing function in the Church, and
subject only in payment of thirds, should be compelled to contribute for
sustentation of the poor. That remedy might be provided against the chopping
and changing of Benefices, diminution of rentals, and setting of Tithes in long
leases to the defrauding of Ministers and their successors, that they who
possessed plurality of Benesices, might be caused dimit all saving one. That
the jurisdiction of the Church might be separated from the Civil, and that they
might without his Graces offense and the Councels, use their censures against
the Earl of Huntley for deposing the Collectors of the Church, and placing
others in their rooms, by his own authority. Such a respect was carried in
that time to Civil power, as the Church could not proceed in censures against
men in prime places without their knowledge; the neglect whereof in after times
brought with it great troubles both to the Church and State. I find in the same
Assembly, the University of S. Andrews ordained to meet, and form such orders
as they should think fit, Orders for giving degrees in Divinity.
for giving degrees in divinity: whereby it appears, that our first reformers
were not enemies to degrees, either in Schools or in Church.

But to return to the State; The Regent and Duke agreed.
by the travels of the Superintendents matters for that time were transacted
betwixt the Regent and the Duke in this manner. That the Duke should come to
Glasgow, An. 1569.
and submit himself to the Kings authority. That he and his friends should be
restored to their honors and possessions. That he should give surety for his
and their continuing in the Kings obedience, and that the rest who were joined
with him in that cause, should be all accepted upon the same conditions. This
transaction not contenting the Earls of Argile and Huntley, they refused to be
comprised under it, either thinking to obtain better, or more easy conditions
of the Regent, or animated by the Queen of Scots letters, who had then
conceived some hopes of liberty.

The Duke hearing that they would not accept the conditions, He forthinketh his
yielding.
did forthink what he had done, and at the day appointed for giving in his
surety, though he came himself to Edinburgh, made diverse shifts, desiring that
all matters might be continued to the tenth of May, when the two Earls were
expected, and the Queens mind would be better known. It was told him, That the
Earls were treating severally for themselves, so as he needed not to wait on
their coming. And for the Queens approba^ion, being asked, if she would deny it,
what in that case he would do? more ingenuously then profitably for himself,
The Duke and Lord Hereis commit^ed to the Castle of Edinburgh.
he answered, that he was drawn against his will to make the promise he had
made, and that if he were freed of it, he would never consent to the like.
Thereupon was he and the Lord Hereis (who accompanied him, and was thought had
diverted him from his former resolution) committed in the Castle of Edinburgh.

The Earls of Argile and Huntley, A treaty with Argile and Huntley.
who were at the same time making their own appointment, had a day assigned
them at S. Andrews, whither Argile came first, and with him the difficulty was
not great, because in the last tumults he had carried himself more moderately
then others; wherefore of him no more was craved but that he should swear
obedience to the King and Authority in time coming, as he did. The business with
Huntley was greater, for he during the Regents absence had usurped the Royal
power, placing Lieutenants in the countries of Angus, Mernis, and Strathern,
and committed great spoils upon the subjects in those parts. Therefore when as
diverse of the Council did advise to put all things past in oblivion, it was by
others opposed, That the example of such impunity would prove hurtful: for when
they that had continued in the Kings obedience, and sustained loss in their
goods, should perceive the Rebels after a manner rewarded, and no regard taken
of their losses, they would undoubtedly grudge; and if troubles should
afterward arise, be more slack to do service; yea granting there were no such
inconvenience to be feared, yet neither the Regent, nor yet the King himself,
could by law remit the robbing of another man's goods, unless restitution was
made of that which was spoiled. And whereas some did object his greatness, and
that his lying out, might cause great unquietnes; It was an idle fear; for was
not his Father a man of greater wealth and wisdom easily brought under foot,
when he set himself against the Authority? And shall he who has not as yet
repaired the calamities of his house, be able to withstand the forces of a
whole Kingdom? It is more foolish, they say, that he will seek to some for ain
Prince, and so endanger the country; for (...) shall be find? Princes are not
wont to make account of stranger, further then may serve to their own
commodity. To accept him in favor, they said, was susficient, albeit he gave
satisfaction to the subjects whom he had wronged. This opinion prevailing, it
was concluded, that after trial of the complaints, he should satisfy those that
he had wronged, at sight of the Council.

But then arose another question, Huntky remitted upon some conditions.
Whether all that had assisted him in these last troubles, should be comprised
in his remission; and power given him to compone with them, for satisfying such
as complained; or that they should be severally called, and every man fined as
be should be tried to have offended? They who thought the Earl too rigorously
used in the point of satisfaction, held that to be the smallest favor which
could be done to him, to remit his followers to himself. But to the contrary it
was answered, That in civil wars nothing was so much to be looked unto, as
the weakening and dissolving of factions, which is the most easily wrought,
when the Prince reserves to himself the power of pardon and punishment. It was
further said, that a several examination was necessary, because all had not
offended alike, and that no man was so unfit to take that trial, as the Earl
himself, because in all probablity they should have most favor at his hand,
who had been most forward in his service, and so the least guilty should bear
the heaviest punishment. Upon these considerations it was thought meet to
convene his followers severally, remitting his domestics only to be used by
him at his pleasure. And thus was he received into grace; which done, the
Regent made an expedition into the North, The Regents expedition into the North.
where having kept Justice Courts at Aberden, Elgin, and Innerness, he settled
all those parts in peace, and for observing the same, The Lord Boyd briageth
lette^s from both Queens to the Regent.
took pledges of Huntley, and the principal claim of the country.

In his return the Lord Boyd, who was lately come from England, did meet him at
Elgin, with letters from both the Queens, and some others written by his
private friends in the English Court; The Queen of England in her letters made
offer of three conditions in behalf of the Queen of Scots, requiring one of the
three to be accepted. These were, That she should either be absolutely restored
to her Royal dignity; or be associated in the government with her son, and in
all letters and public acts honored with the title of a Queen, the
administration of affairs continuing in the Regents hands, till the King
should be 17. years of age; or if none of these could be granted, that she
might be permitted to return unto her country, and live a private life, having
honorable means appointed for her entertainment. The Queen of Scots desired,
that Judges should be appointed for cognoscing the lawfulnes of her marriage
with Bothwel, and if the same was found contracted against the laws, it might
be declared null, and she made free to marry where she pleased. A letter from
Sir Nicholas Throgmorion to the Regent.
From private friends, especially by a letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, the
Regent was advertised, that the marriage of the Duke of Norfolk with the Queen
of Scots was concluded, and that they did wait only the opportunity of
performance. Wherefore he wished him to concur with his best friends in that
matter, and to do it with such expedition and good affection, as it might not
appear either to the Queen his sister, or others who had interest in the
business, that his consent was extorted, and not willingly given. To this
effect he advised him to send the Lord of Lethington to England with speed, as
the wisest and most sufficient man he could choose, who would provide for him
and the rest that had assisted him, substantially and assuredly. His
conscience, he said, and some over precise objections might perhaps trouble
him, but if he could have espied any other thing then his overthrow in
resisting, he would not have written so peremptorily unto him. Then concluded
with these words, No man's friendship will be more embraced then yours, no man's
estimation be greater if you shall conform your self, and concurwith your
friends in this^ contrariwise, if you withstand, or become an adverse party,
you will be so encumbered both from hence, from thence, and all other places, as
no man can advise you what to do. Therefore God send you to direct your course
for the best.

This letter was accompanied with another from Sir Nicholas to Lethington, A
letter from, Sir Nicholas to Lethington.
wherein he showed, that according to his advice he had written to the Regent
with a great zeal, and care of his well doing (these were the words he used)
and requested he should hasten his coming to Court for that business, the same
being as yet concealed from the Queen, till he as the fittest Minister might
propone the same in behalf of the Regent, and Nobility of Scotland; whereunto
he held it assured the Queen would assent, as preferring her own surety, the
tranquillity of her Kingdom, and conservation of her people, before any device,
that might proceed from the inconsiderate passions of whomsoever. And that he
might be the more encouraged, he did inform him particularly of the Duke of
Norfolks consent, and the approbation of the Earls of Arundel, Pembrook,
Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the rest of the wisest, noblest, ablest and
mightiest of that Realm. And it was truth that he wrote of their consenting,
howbeit with a condition, so that the Queen of England was not against it: yea,
beside these diverse well affected both to Religion and State, did wish the
purpose a good success; for perceiving no inclination in the Queen of England
her self to take a husband, they feared the Queen of Scots, who was her
undoubted heir, by matching with some forain Prince, might endanger both
Religion and State; and therefore desired the marriage with the Duke might take
effect, he being a Nobleman of England, beloved of the people, and educated in
the Protestant Religion: for by this match, as they made account, if it should
happen the young King to die, the two Kingdoms might be united in a Prince of
the English Nation; or if he lived unto a ripe age, he might be married with
the Dukes youngest daughter, who was near of the same age, and that way the two
Crowns be made one. But these devices proved idle and vain, as we shall hear.
The Regent for answering these letters, did appoint a meeting of the Estates at
Perth in July thereafter. At which time an Assembly of the Church was also kept
in Edinburgh, A Convention of Estates at Perth.
and from it Commissioners directed to the Convention, to renew the Petitions
made the year preceding, that as yet had received no answer. And further, to
desire, that a portion of the tithes might be allotted for sustentation of the
poor; the laborers of the ground permitted to gather the tithes of their
proper corns, paying for the same a reasonable duty; and that the thirds of
Benefices being really separated from the two other parts, the Collectors of
the Church might peaceably intromet therewith, for the more ready payment of
Ministers according to their assignations. But these Petitions, in regard of
the more weighty business, were deferred to another time.

And the Convention falling to consider the letters sent from England, Their
judgment of the Letters sent, from the two Queens.
did hardly accord upon an answer, Beginning with that of the Queen of England,
they judged the first condition so derogatory to the Kings authority, as they
did simply reject it. The second of Association, was held dangerous, and third
only thought reasonable and meet to be accepted. But when they came to speak
of the Queen of Scots desires, the contention was great; they that stood for
the Kings authority, taking exception first, of her imperious form of writing,
and that she did command them, as though she were their absolute Queen; then at
the desire it self they excepted, not holding it safe to condescend unto the
same before the Queen of England should be acquainted therewith: for they
conceived some other thing to be lurking under that purpose of divorce then was
openly pretended. Such as affected the Queen, and were privy to the marriage
intended with Northfolk, excusing the form of writing, and laying the blame
upon her Secretaries, made offer to procure new letters in what terms they
pleased, so as judges were named to proceed in the divorce; and when they saw
this not to be regarded, in a chasing mood they said, That it was strange to
think, how that they not many months passed seemed to desire nothing more then
the Queens separation from Bothwell, should now when it was offered decline
the same. It was answered again in heat, That if the Queen was so earnest in
the Divorce, she might write to the King of Denmark, and desire him to do
justice upon Bothwell, for the murder of the King her husband. That done, the
divorce would not be needful, and she freed to marry where and when she
pleased.

The Convent^ on breaking up and neither the Queens faction obtaining what they
desired, A message sent into England
nor Lethington the employment which he affected, new suspicions began to rise
on all sides, and as in the most secret practices, somewhat always is bursting
forth, a rumor went ri^e amongst the common sort, that some great interprise
was in hand, which would bring with it a wonderful change in both Kingdoms.
Mr. John Wood one of the Regents domestics being sent with the answer of the
convention, did signify to the Queen of England the business made about the
divorce and what was done concerning it; but she not seeming to regard the
matter, professed that she was not satisfied with the answer of the convention,
and desired they should think better of the conditions proposed. The truth was
that she held not the Gentleman of sufficient quality to deal in such business;
for otherwise she was not ignorant of the cause, wherefore the divorce was
sought, and had warned Northfolk to take heed on what pillow he laid his head;
yea, she took so ill the Queen of Scots carriage in that matter; as shortly
after she caused her to be removed to Coventry more within the Country, and
gave her in custody to George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury and Edward Hastings
Earl of Huntingdon.

The Regent upon his servants return convened the Nobility again at Striveling,
The Abbot of Dunsermling sent into England
where in effect the same answer that of before, was given to the Propositions
made by the Queen of England; and here with Robert Pitcarne Abbot of
Dunfermline, a man of good sufficiency was directed, who was willed to say, for
the point of assotiation, That the same could not be granted, as tending to the
utter overthrow of the Kings authority, and the indangering of his person. For
besides that the participation of a Crown was obnoxious to many perils, there
could be no equality of Government betwixt an infant King, and a woman of
mature age, who would find a thousand ways being once possessed with a part
of the rule, to draw the whole unto her self. And if it should fall that she
matched with some foreign Prince, or other great Personage who must needs be
partner with her in the Government, the danger would be so much the greater.
These and the like reasons he was willed to use for the Queen of Englands
satisfaction. But before his coming to Court, the face of things was quite
changed. The Duke of Northfolk committed to the Tower, and the Bishop of Ross
put in the keeping of the Bishop of London. After which brake shortly forth
that rebellion in the North part of England, whereof Thomas Piercie Earl of
Northumberland, and Charles Nevill Earl of Westmerland were the heads. A
rebellion, that in the beginning caused great stir, and put the Queen of
England in such fears, as once she resolved to send the Queen of Scots by Sea
to the Regent, but the sudden dispersing of the rebels, altered that
resolution.

The two Earls fleeing into Scotland, The Earl of Northumberland imprisoned in
Lochlevin.
Northumberland was not long after put out by some borderers to the Regent, and
sent to be kept in Lochlevin; Westmerland found the means to escape into
Flanders, where he lived long in a poor and contemptible estate.

Lethington perceiving all his devices frustrated, Lethington charged with the
Kings murder.
and being conscious to himself of diversill practices remained for the most
part with the Earl of Atholl at Perth, who being sent for to come to the
Regent, made diverse excuses, and when he could not shift his coming any longer,
entreated Atholl to accompany him, that if need was he might use his
intercession. Being at Striveling in Council, Captain Thomas Crawfourd,
servant to the Earl of Lenox, did openly charge him with the Kings murder:
whereupon he was committed in a chamber within the Castle of Striveling, and at
the same time were certain directed to apprehend Sr. James Balfour, who was
guilty of the same crime; but he made an escape. Lethington was sent prisoner
to Edinburgh (where he was to have his trial) under the charge of Alexander
Home of North Berwick, a trusty Gentleman.

Having stayed some days in lodging not far from the Castle, The Lord of
Grange counter^^en the Regents hand, and takes Lethington to the Castle.
the Lord of Grange counterfeiting the Regents hand, came about ten of the
clock at night, and presented a warrant for receiving the prisoner in his
keeping: the Gentleman taking no suspicion, obeyed, for he knew no man to be
more inward with the Regent then was Grange. And he indeed unto that time did
carry the reputation of an honest man; nor was any one thought more sure and
fast then he was. But from thenceforth he became hated of all good men and was
in no esteem, as having abused his credit, and deceived the Regent, to whom he
was many ways obliged. For besides other benefits, he had preferred him before
all his own friends, to be keeper of the Castle of Edinburgh. The next day
being sent for to come to the Regent, he refused. Nottheless, the next day
following (so careful the Regent was to reclaim the man) he went himself to
the Castle, and conferred a good space with him, accepting the excuse he made,
and contenting himself with a promise to exhibit Lethington, when he should be
called to his trial.

After which keeping his journey to the borders, The Regent makes an expedition
to the borders.
which he had intended he went by the Mers, and as he was accustomed took up
his lodging in the Castle of Home. But there he was coldly received, the Lord
of the place having changed his party, and taken himself to the contrary
faction. From thence he went to Teviotdale, and though he was advised by his
friends, because of his small company, to return, and defer his journey to
another time, he would needs go on, and had great obedience showed in all the
parts to whom he came.

All the time of this expedition he had warning given him daily of some
practices against his life, He is informed of practices against his life
wherein Grange was ever named as one of the principalls. But he not trusting
these informations, sent the copies of all his advertisements to Grange, whose
purgations were so slender, as he was ever after that time held suspected. Soon
after the Regents return from the borders, the Abbot of Dunfermline came home
from England, showing that the Queen had taken in good part the answer of the
Council, and was specially pleased with the taking of Northumberland, which
she promised to remember with all kindness.

And now the Diet approaching of Lethingtons trial, because of the numbers
that were preparing to keep the day, the Regent disliking such convocations,
and for that he would not have Justice outbragged, did prorogate the same for
four months. Lethingtons trial deferred.


The adverse faction finding his authority daily to increase, and despairing of
any success in their attempts, James Hamilton of Bothwell-haugh, takes in hand
the Regents murder.
so long as he lived, resolved by some violent means to cut him off; and to
bring the matter to pass, one James Hamilton of Bothwell-haugh did offer his
service: This man had been imprisoned some time, and being in danger of his
life, redeemed the same by making over a parcel of land in Lothian called
Woodhously that came to him by his wife, to Sir James Ballenden Justice Clerk:
How soon he was let at liberty, he sought to be repossessed to his own, and not
seeing a way to recover it (for the Justice Clerk would not part therewith) he
made his quarrel to the Regent, who was most innocent, and had restored him
both to life and liberty. The great promises made him by the faction, with his
private discontent, did so confirm his mind, as he ceased not till he put to
execution the mischief he had conceived against him; and having failed the
occasion which he attended at Glasgow and Striveling, he followed the Regent to
Linlithgo, where lurking privately in the Archbishop of St. Andrews his
lodging, the next day, as the Regent did pass that way, he killed him with the
shot of a bullet, that entering a little beneath the navell, and piercing the
bowels, did strike dead the horse of a Gentleman who was riding on his other
side. The Regent killed by the shot of a bulbullet.
The Regent had warning given him the same morning, that one did ly in wait for
his life, and had the house designed where the man did lurk, but giving small
ear unto it, answered, that his life was in the hands of God, which he was
ready to yield at his good pleasure. Only he resolved to pass out of the Town
by the same gate at which he entered, and to turn on the back of the Town, unto
the way that led to Edinburgh, whither he was purposed. But when he had taken
horse, either that he would not seem fearful, or then hindered by the throng
of horsemen that attended, and thinking to ride quickly by the house that was
suspected, he changed his resolution: but the throng there working him the like
impediment, the murderer had the occasion to execute his treachery.

How soon the Regent perceived himself stricken, he lighted from his horse, and
returned on foot to his lodging: The Surgeon at the first inspection of his
wound did affirm it not to be deadly, yet after a few hours his pain
increasing he began to think on death. They who stood by, saying, that he had
lost himself by his clemency, having spared that miscreant whose life he might
justly have taken: he answered, that they should never make him forthink any
good he had done in his life. Thereafter giving order for his private affairs,
he seriously commended the care of the young King to such of the Nobility as
were present, and died a little before midnight. This fell out the 23. of
January, 1569. being Saturday.

The murderer escaping by the Postern-gate of the garden came the same night
to the town of Hamilton, The murderer escapes.
where at first he was welcomed with many gratulations, and made much of; yet
shortly after to decline the envy of the fact which they heard was universally
detested, they gave him a little money and sent him away unto France. Thuanus
writes in his story, that not long after he came thither, Thuanus. 46.
he was solicited to undertake the like interprise against Gasper Colignie that
worthy Admiral of France, and that he did answer, that he had no warrant from
Scotland to commit murders in France; and howbeit he had taken revenge of the
wrong done to himself, he was not either for price or prayer, to undertake
other men's quarrels: Whether this was so or not, I leave it upon the credit of
the Writer.

The death of the Regent was by all good men greatly lamented, The death of the
Regent greatly lamented.
especially by the Commons, who loved him as their father whilst he lived, and
now mourned grievously at his death. The great things he had wrought in his
life, (having in the space of one year and a little more, quieted the State,
which he found broken, and disordered) made his very enemies speak of him
after his death with praise and commendation. Above all his virtues, which were
not a few, he shined in Piety toward God, ordering himself and his Family in
such sort, as it did more resemble a Church, then a Court. For therein besides
the exercise of devotion, which he never omitted, there was no wickedness to be
seen, nay, not an unseemly or wanton word to be heard. A man truly good and
worthy to be ranked amongst the best Governors that this Kingdom has
enjoyed, and therefore to this day honored with the Title of The good Regent.

There fell out the next day after his death a thing which I thought was not to
be passed; A prediction of John Knox.
He was killed on the Saturday, and died (as I have said) a little before
midnight. The word of his death coming to Edinburgh, Thomas Maitland a younger
brother of Lethinton (this is he whom Buchannan makes his Collocutor in the
Dialogue De jure Regni) knowing what esteem John Knox made of the Regent, and
loving none of the two, caused a writing to be laid in the Pulpit where John
Knox was that day to preach to this sense, and almost in the same words. Take
up the man whom you accounted another God, and consider the end whereto his
ambition has brought him. John Knox finding the paper, and taking it to be a
memorial for recommending some sick persons in his Prayers, after he had read
the same, laid it by, nothing as it seemed commoved therewith, yet in the end
of the Sermon, falling to regrate the loss that the Church and Commonwealth
had received by the death of the Regent, and showing how God did often for the
sins of the people take away good Rulers and Governors; I perceive, said he,
albeit this be an accident, we should all take to heart; There be some that
rejoice in this wicked fact, making it the subject of their mirth, amongst whom
there is one, that has caused a writing to be cast in this place, insulting
upon that which is all good men's sorrow. This wicked man whosoever he be, shall
not go unpunished, and shall die where none shall be to lament him. The
Gentleman was himself present at Sermon, and being come to the lodging, asked
his sister who was also there, if she did not think John Knox was raving to
speak so of the man he knew not? But she weeping, said, that she was sorry he
had not followed her counsel, for she had dissuaded him from that doing. None
of this man's denunciations, said she, are wont to prove idle, but have their
own effect. Shortly after, the troubles of the Country increasing, the
Gentleman betook himself to travel, and passing into Italy, died there, having
no known person to attend him. This I thought not unworthy of record being
informed thereof by the Gentleman's sister to whom these speeches were uttered,
and who was privy to the whole purpose, for an advertisement to all persons,
not to make a light account of the threatenings of Gods servants: The Gentleman
was otherwise a youth of great hopes, learned and courteous, but miscarried
with affection, and not to be excused in this that he took pleasure in the fall
of him, whom he judged an enemy; a thing inhumane and abhorred of the very
heathen.

The word of the Regents death carried in haste to England, the Queen sent
Thomas Randolph, An Ambassador sent from England.
Master of her Posts, Ambassador into Scotland, partly to confer with the
Council, upon the surest means to keep affairs in the state they were, and
partly to complain of the incursion lately made in England. For the very night
after the Regents murder, Walter Scot of Baclugh, and Thomas K^r of
Pharnherst, had invaded the country bordering upon them, and practiced greater
hostility then was accustomed; of purpose to embroyle the two Kingdoms in a
public war, which they of the Scottish Queens faction most earnestly
desired. The Ambassador was no sooner come, The Ambassadors speech in
Council.
but he had hearing given him by the Council, to whom after he had spoken a few
words concerning her Majesty's good affection to the Realm in general, and in
her name commending to their care the preservation of Religion, the safety of
the young King, and the punishment of the late murder; he did much aggravate
the insolence of the borderers, and the spoil they had made in England, saying,
That his Mistress knew sufficiently that these things were not done by public
allowance, and therefore meant not to make quarrel to the country, but take
her self to the actors, whom if they by themselves could not suppress, her
Majesty would either join her power to theirs, or if they thought meet, send an
Army into Scotland, which without doing harm to any good subject, should only
punish the committers of that insolence.

The Council returning many thanks to the Queen for her kind Embassage, excused
themselves by the present troubles, An. 1570.
that no determinate answer could as then be given to his propositions, and
therefore besought him to have patience unto the first of May, at which time
the Estates of the Realm were to meet, by whom her Majesty should receive all
satisfaction. The Estates convening at the day, William Douglas of Lochlevin,
The Lord of Lochlevin urges a revenge of the Regents murder.
brother uterine to the late Regent, preferred a Petition to the Council for
some course to be taken in the revenge of his brothers murder, considering he
was taken away in the defense of the common cause of the Realm, and not upon
any private quarrel. The Petition was held reasonable by all that were present,
every one consenting to the pursuit, and punishment of the murderer, and his
accomplices. But in the manner they agreed not, some advising that not the
murderer only, but all who were suspected to have had a hand in the treachery,
should be called to underlie the ordinary trial of law, at a certain day.
Others esteeming such a form of process unnecessary with them, who had already
taken Arms to maintain the fact, and that the best course were, to pursue with
all hostility, both these that were delated of the recent crime, and such as
had been forfeited in the Parliament preceding. Many inclined to the last
course, yet because it was opposed by diverse of special note, The delay ill
taken of the people.
there was nothing concluded in the business; which was generally ill taken of
the people, who construed the delay to proceed of some private favor carried
to the enemies, and to be done of purpose, that either with time the hatred of
the murder might be lessened, or the adversaries might have leisure to make
themselves more strong.

The Assembly of the Church, in the mean while (which was then convened at
Edinburgh) to declare in what detestation they had the murder committed, did
ordain the murderer to be excommunicated in all the chief Burghs of the Realm,
and whosoever afterward happened to be convicted thereof, to be used in the
same manner. In this Assembly, diverse constitutions were made for discipline,
and amongst others an Act for the public inauguration of Ministers, at their
entry, whereunto the revolt of some Preachers gave occasion, that forsaking the
Pulpit, took them to the pleading of causes before the Lords of Session. It was
then also condescended, that forth of the thirds, five thousand merks should be
yearly paid for the furnishing of the Kings house, and the Church burdened
with no further duty.

Some few days after, The principals of the Queens faction writ to the Earl of
Morton.
the principals of the Queens faction being convened at Glasgow, the Earl of
Argile, and Lord Boyd, did write to the Earl of Morton, and offer to join with
the rest of the Nobility, in the trial and punishment of the Regents murder,
so as the meeting were appointed at Striveling, Falkirk, or Linlithgow, for to
Edinburgh they would not come. This letter (as he was desired) he communicated
with the Secretary, who was after the Regents death come forth of the Castle,
and by the Earl of Atholl brought again unto the Council, having first purged
himself of the accusation laid against him, and promised to submit himself unto
the most severe trial that could be taken; Lethington offers himself to a
trial.
his advice to the Earl Morton was, that the Noblemen should all be brought to
Edinburgh, which for those of the Queens party, he undertook to do, and to that
effect he sent letters unto the principalls of that faction, showing that they
had no cause to fear, being in forces superior to the others, and having the
Lord of Grange on their side, (for he had then plainly declared himself for the
Queen) who was both Provost of the Town, and commanded the Castle. A meeting at
Edinburgh of the Noblemen of both parties in March.
Thus about the midst of March the Earls of Huntley, Atholl, and Crawford, with
the Lords Ogilvy, Home and Sea^on did meet at Edinburgh. The Earl of Argile,
the Hamiltons, and the Lord Boyde, came as far as unto Linlithgow, but by
occasioned of a tumult raised amongst some soldiers, they were forced to
disperse their companies, and return home to their dwellings. Within a few
days the Earls of Mar and Glencarne came likewise to Edinburgh, after whose
coming, the Lords of both factions meeting to confer, did think fit to continue
all things till the Earl of Argile was advertised, whose authority was great in
those times. And when it was known that he was gone back from Linlithgow* the
Earl of Huntley followed to persuade his return; but he would not consent. They
write the Secretary should have privily dissuaded him, as one who loved to keep
all things loose; but I do not see what advantage he could expect that way, and
think rather that as his estate then stood, he did earnestly desire to have
matters accorded. The true cause of Argiles declining that conference seems to
have been the averseness of his brother and others of his friendship, who
refused to follow him in that quarrel, and carried a constant affection to the
maintaining of the Kings authority.

When as the other Noblemen perceived that Argile would not come, They
deliberate upon the choice of a Regent.
they began to treat of the choice of a Regent, in place of him who was taken
away. Here first they fell to question their own power and authority, which
some maintained to be sufficient because of the Patent the Queen had given at
first, for the administration of affairs in her sons minority; in which seven
Noblemen were named, besides the late Regent, and that of this number, they
might choose as they said any one. Others reasoned that no respect ought to be
had to that Patent, the same being expired by the creation of the last Regent,
for which only at the time it was granted. The more moderate gave their opinon,
that all proceeding in that business should be delayed till the convention of
the Estates in May next. This was likewise opposed by a number, that esteemed
the protracting of time dangerous; and thought that it concerned the Noblemen
who had first assisted the Coronation of the King, and continued firm in his
obedience, to nominate a Regent, that would be careful of the young King his
preservation, and of the quiet and tranquillity of the Realm. But this opinion,
as tending to the fostering of discord, was rejected, So that meeting
dissolved, without any certain conclusion.

At the same time one Monsieur Verack Cubiculare to the French King landed at
Dumbarton, An Ambassador from France.
bringing letters to the Noblemen of the Queens faction, full of thanks for the
constant affection they had showed in maintaining the cause, and promises of
present succors. This did so animate them, as in a frequent meeting kept the
first of April at Linlithgow, A meeting at Linlithgow of the Noblemen that
stood for the Queen.
they began to discover the intention which before they had concealed, of
making war upon England; for this, as they judged, would serve to oblierate the
late Regents murder. And to give the more authority to their proceedings, they
took purpose to remove to Edinburgh, using all means to draw the Town to be of
their party, which they thought would be easily obtained by reason of Grange
his Commandment, and if they should once compass this, they put no doubt to
draw the rest of the country their way in a short time. But first they
resolved to advertise the Town of their coming, and to entreat their favor.
The Magistrates answered, That their gates should be patent to all that
professed themselves subjects to the King, but they would neither receive the
English Rebels (meaning the Earl of Westmerland, and Lord Dacres, who were in
company with the Lords) nor the Hamiltons, and others suspected of the Regents
murder, nor yet to permit any Proclamations to be made, derogatory to the
Kings authority.

These conditions seemed to them hard, yet hoping by conversation to win the
people to their side, they came forward. The next day after their coming to the
Town, They give out a Proclamation.
they gave out a Proclamation, Declaring their good affection toward the
maintenance of true Religion, their Sovereign, the liberty of the country, and
the settling of the present divisions, which must, as they said, unless timous
remedy were provided, bring the Realm to utter destruction. They desired
therefore all men to know, that they had esteemed the enterprise taken by some
Noblemen against the Earl of Bothwel, for revenging the murder of the King,
and setting of the Queen at liberty, both good and honorable, whereunto they
would have given their assistance, if the same had been duly required. And for
the things that had intervened, which they did forbear to mention, lest they
should irritate the minds of any, their desire was the same might be in a
familiar and friendly conference calmly debated, and a peaceable course taken
for removing the differences. Mean while because they understood, that some
unquiet spirits gave out, that their present convening was for the subversion
of the religion presently professed, as they could not but give notice to all
the subjects, that they who were now assembled, were for the most part the
first and chiefest instruments in advancing Religion, and had still continued
in professing the same, with a resolution to spend their lands and lives in
maintenance thereof: So they desired to have it know, that their meeting at
that time did only proceed from a desire they had to see a perfect union, and
agreement established in the Realm, for which they were ready to meet with
those of the Nobility, that differed from them in judgment, and condescend
(after the ground of the differences was ripped up) upon such overtures as should
be found agreeable to the setting forth of God his honor, the strengthening of
the Royal succession, the preservation of the young Prince, the entertaining of
peace with forain Nations, and the settling of accord amongst the Noblemen, and
other subjects. This they declared to be their sole intention, and rather then
the same should not take the wished effect, they were content to yield unto any
conditions that should be thought reasonable; under protestation, that if this
their godly and honest purpose for the reunion of the State was neglected, and
despised, the inconvenients that ensued might be imputed to the refusers, and
the Noblemen presently convened, be discharged thereof before God, and man.
This was the substance of the Proclamation, in the end whereof the lieges were
charged to concur with them in forthsetting that godly purpose, and a
prohibition made under great pains, to join with any others that should attempt
under the cloak of whatsoever authority, to hinder the same.

But neither did this declaration, They deal wi^h the Earl of Morton, but he
will not hearken to them.
nor the great travel taken by the Earl of Athol at the same time, prevail with
the other Noblemen to bring them to this meeting, for still they excused
themselves by the Convention appointed in May, which they said there was no
necessity to prevent; or if any extraordinary occasion did require it, the same
being signified to the Earl of Morton, who lay at Dalkeith, upon his
advertisement they should be ready to meet. So finding their hopes this way
disappointed, by advice of the Secretary (whose directions only they followed)
they took purpose to deal with the Earl of Morton apart. To this effect the
Earl of Athol, the Prior of Coldinghame brother to the Secretary, and the Lord
Boyd were selected to confer with the Earl of Morton, and Abbot of Dunfermlin,
but they could come to no agreement. For the Earl of Morton (of whom they had
conceived some hope) would not hearken to any conditions, except they did
acknowledge the King for their Sovereign. Hereupon they ^ell to other counsels,
and first to have the Town of Edinburgh at their direction, they craved the
keys of the gates to be delivered; which being refused, they resolved to
contribute moneys for hiring of soldiers, and to draw so many of their friends
and followers thither, as with help of the Castle might command the Town. An
Army comes to Berwick under conduct of the Earl of Sussex.
But as they were about these devices, advertisement was brought of an Army
come to Berwick, under the command of the Earl of Sussex, which troubled all
these projects. To remain in Edinburgh they held it not safe, yet lest it
should be thought that they left the Town for fear, the Magistrates were
privately desired to entreat them to depart, The Lords forsake Edinburgh upon
the report.
lest the English should fall upon the Town, and make a spoil of it. So making
a show to please the Town, by whom they had been very courteously used, they
went to Linlithgow, and abode there the rest of that month. Before their
parting, they gave a warrant to the Lord of Grange for fortifying the Castle,
and dimitting the Lords Home and Hereis, They give warrant for fortifying the
Castle.
who had been committed by the late Regent. The Duke of Chattellerault was some
days before put to liberty. The Lord Home had a part of the moneys which were
contributed for levying of soldiers, given him to defend his bounds against
the English; but when the Lairds of Bacleugh and Farnherst desired the like,
they were refused, and went away in a great discontent.

About the end of April the Army of England entering into Teviotdale, The Army
of England enters in Scotland.
burnt the Towns of Lynwick and Crawling, with the Castles of Farnherst, and
Brauxholm, and diverse houses belonging to the Kers and Scots. And in their
return to Berwick besieged the Castle of Home, which was rendered by the Keepers
to Sir William Drury, at the Lord Home his direction, for he reposed much in
his friendship. The Lord Scroop at the same time invading the West borders,
made a great spoil upon the Iohnstons and others who had accompanied Bacleugh
in his incursion. The Lords that kept together at Linlithgow, having
advertisement of these proceedings of the English, and suspecting they had some
other intentions then the spoiling of the borders, sent a Gentleman to the Earl
of Sussex to request a truce, till they might inform the Queen of England of
the estate of things, and receive her Majesty's answer. The Lords desire a
Truce from the Earl of Sussex which he refused.
The Earl opening the letters that were directed to the Queen (for he had
warrant so to do) and seeing them full of vain and idle brags (for to show the
strength of the faction, they had set down a Roll of all the Noblemen of their
party, inserting there in both some of their opposites, and some that had
carried themselves newters in all these broyls) returned answer by the
messenger, that he would do as he was directed, and not grant any truce, nor
keep the Army at their pleasure without employment.

The time of the Convention approaching, A Convention of the Estates at
Edinburgh.
they who favored the King his authority came in great numbers to Edinburgh.
At their first meeting it was thought convenient, seeing the adverse party
professed a desire of peace, to make trial of their disposition, and thereupon
a Gentleman was sent with this message, that if they would join for revenge of
the murder of the Kings Father, An offer of peace to those of the Queens party.
and Regent, and would acknowledge the King for their Sovereign, whatsoever
else in reason they could crave should be granted unto them. The answer was
short and peremptory on their part; That they acknowledge none for their
Sovereign but the Queen, and that she having committed the Government of
affairs to the Earls of Arrane, Argile, and Huntley, they would follow and obey
them in her service. The Queens authority proclaimed.
Then they caused proclaim the Queens authority, with the several Commissions
of their Lieutenandries, and in the Queens name indicted a Parliament to be
kept at Linlithgow in August ensuing.

The Estates perceiving there would be no agreement, A Proclamation made by the
Estates.
gave forth a Proclamation to this effect; First, they said, that it was not
unknown to all the subjects in what a happy state the Realm stood under the
government of the late Regent, and what calamities it was fallen into by his
death, diverse Lords and other subjects conspiring with them, having presumed to
erect another authority under the name of the Queen his Majesty's mother. But
as such treasonable attempts had been often taken in hand, and as often through
Gods favor disappointed, to the shame and ignominy of the enterprisers, so
they wished all men should understand, what sort of people they were that had
massed themselves together in the present conspiracy.

The Conspirators they ranked in three orders, the principles, they said, were
the authors of the cruel murders of the King his father, The Conspirators
ranked in their Orders.
and Regent; Others were manifestly purjured, as having bound themselves by
their oaths and subscriptions to defend the King his authority which now they
impugned: A third sort were such as had servile minos, and without regard to
conscience, or honor did follow those to whom they had addicted themselves:
All which did pretend the maintenance of true Religion, the liberty of the
Country, and the preservation of peace both abroad and at home. But with what
probability, any man of judgment might consider; for neither could he, who was
known to have been a persecutor of the truth, and now carried the chief sway
amongst them (meaning the Archbishop of St. Andrews) be thought a maintainer of
Religion; nor could they be esteemed favorers of their Country, and the
quietness thereof, who without any just provocation had invaded the neighbor
Realm of England, and publicly entertained the Queens Rebels, professing
enemies to God and Religion. As to the care they professed of the Kings
preservation, any man might conjecture how he should be preserved by them, who
exiled his Grandfather, murdered his father, did wickedly counsel his mother,
led her on courses, that had brought her to shame and dishonor, and now at
last had unworthily cut off his Uncle and Regent, by suborning a mischant to
kill him treacherously. It is like, said they, that they will be content to
live subjects to a King descended of that house, which they have so long a time
persecuted and will they not fear, if God shall bring him to perfection of
years, that he will be avenged of his fathers and uncles murder? Neither can
any be ignorant what the hope of a Kingdom will work in ambitious spirits,
especially when they find themselves in a possibility to succeed unto the
present possession. And these are the men, said they, who seek to rule and
command under the name of her whom they have undone by their wicked practices.
Of this they thought fit to advertise the subjects, and to inhibit them from
giving any assistance to the said conspirators under pain of death. Such as of
simplicity or ignorance had joined with them, they commanded to separate and
return to their houses within the space of 24. hours, promising in that case
impunity and pardon for their bypast defection, those only excepted, who were
suspect of the foresaid murders, and had resset the Queen of Englands Rebels,
and violated the public peace betwixt the two Realms.

This Proclamation was indicted with much passion, All prepare for War.
and matters now reduced to these terms, that each side prepared to maintain
their quarrel with the destruction of their adversaries. The Queens faction
dispatched Vera^ to France to inform how matters went, and to further the
supply promised.

The Lord Seaton was sent to Flanders to entreat the Duke of Alva (at that time
Governor of the Neatherlands for the King of Spain) for some aid of moneys and
men, The Lord Seaton sent to Flanders.
and to impede the traffic of the Scottish rebels (so they termed them that
acknowledged the Kings authority) in those parts. For the point of traffic,
the Duke excused himself, saying, That he could not inhibit the same, it being
against the liberty of the Low Countries, but in other things he would do his
best to further the Queen of Scots cause.

Like as shortly after he sent Mr. John Hamilton Parson of Dumbar (who lay
Agent with him for the Scottish Queen) to the Earl of Huntley with great store
of Armor and gunpowder, The Parson of Dumbar brings moneys and Armor to
Huntley.
and the sum of ten thousand. Crowns to levy Soldiers. The Lord Seaton in
the mean while, who could not be idle wheresoever he was, and had a great
desire to approve himself by some service to the King of Spain, dissembling his
habit, went into the United Provinces, and dealt with Scottish Captains and
Under officers to make them leave the service of the Estates, and follow the
King of Spain; which being detected, he was apprehended, and by sentence of the
Council of War condemned to ride the Canon, yet by some help he escaped and
fled to the Duke of Alva, who sent him home laden with promises, and rewarded
with some little present for himself, because of his good affection.

The Lords on the other side who stood for the Kings authority, The Lords who
stood for the King, send to Sussex for supply.
sent to the Earl of Sussex entreating the assistance of his forces, or some
part thereof, because of the common danger; and to move him the more, they
advertised that the Earl of Westmerland and other English Rebels were with the
Lords convened at Linlithgow in Arms, with intention, as it seemed, to work
some mischief, which had need for the good of both Realms to be prevented,
which they doubted not (so the letters bear) having his assistance to do, and
to put them off the fields; whereas if supply were not sent in time, and that
matters should happen to be put to a day amongst themselves, the issue might
prove dangerous. Answer was made, that the forces should be sent upon
sufficient hostages for their surety, during their remaining in Scotland:
Withal he craved, that the English Rebels whom the Lords had in their hands,
and such others as should happen to be apprehended, might be delivered to him,
as the Queens Lieutenant, and left to her Majesty's disposition. For the
hastages, it was condescended that the chief Noblemen should deliver some of
their friends to remain in England during the abode of the English forces, and
their safe return assured, the chance and fortune of War only excepted, which
should be common and alike both to the Scots and them. But touching the
delivery of the English Rebels, the Lords entreated that the same might be
continued unto the return of her Majesty's answer to the instructions sent by
the Abbot of Dunfermlin, who was upon his journey, and had warrant from them to
satisfy her Majesty in that point. To this the Earl consented, providing the
Noblemen would give their bonds for the safe custody of the Rebels, and the
performance of that which her Majesty, and the Ambassador should agree unto.
Grange and Lethington seek to stay the English forces upon offers.


The Lord of Grange, and Secretary Lethington, who as yet made a show to
desire peace, labored by their letters to keep back the English forces,
offering what satisfaction the Earl of Sussex in name of her Majesty would
require. That the Earl answered, that if the Lords of Linlithgow would
disannull the Proclamation of the Queen of Scots authority, and discharge all
capitulations for aid out of France, and all other parts beyond the Sea,
remitting the present dissension to the hearing and ordering of the Queen his
Mistress, and oblieging themselves by their subscriptions to stand at her
Majesty's determination, he should stay his forces and detain them with
himself, till he received new direction from her Majesty.

Though these answers did in no ways please them, Sir William (...) in
Scotland with an Army.
yet to gain some time, they gave hopes, that after conference with the Lords
at Linlithgow he should receive all satisfaction. But he smelling their
intentions, after he had received the bonds and pledges from the Noblemen of
the Kings party, sent Sir William Drury Governor of Berwick with a thousand
foot, and three hundredth horsemen into Scotland. How soon the Lords that were
convened at Linlithgow, heard of their coming, and that the Earl of Lennox was
in their company, they departed toward Glasgow and besieged the Castle,
purposing to raze it, lest it should be useful to the Earl of Lennox, who was
now returned from England. But the house was so well defended by a few young
men (they passed not 24. in all) that the siege, after it had continued the
space of five or six days, brake up upon the rumor of the Noblemen, and the
English forces their approaching: The Duke of Chattellerault went with the Earl
of Argile into his Country, the Earl of Huntley, and the rest into the North.

The Noblemen assisted with the English forces coming to Glasgow after a short
stay marched to Hamilton, and laid siege to the Castle, The Castle of Hamilton
rendered.
which at the sight of the Ordinance that was brought thither for the battery
was yielded to the English by Andrew Hamilton of Meryton Captain, upon promise
to have their lives spared. The Castle was set on fire and pitifully defaced,
as also the Dukes palace within the town of Hamilton, and diverse other houses
in Cliddisdale. In their return to Edinburgh they destroyed the houses and
lands pertaining to the Lords Flemyn and Levingston, with the Dukes lodging in
the town of Linlithgow, the houses of Kinneill Powdowy, Peill of Levingston,
and others that appertained to the Hamiltons in that shire. This done, the
English forces returned to Berwick, and were accompanied thither by the Earl of
Morton, who received again the hostages that were delivered in England.

Whilst these things were a doing at home, the Abbot of Dunfermlin was
following his legation in England. The Abbot of Dunfemlin Ambassador in
England.
His instructions from the Noblemen of the Kings party were, First, to show the
Queen that by the delay of her Majesty's Declaration in the cause of the Kings
Mother, His instructions.
all these commotions had been raised, and therefore to entreat her Majesty
plainly to declare her self, and take upon her the protection of the young
King. Secondly, to inform her of the difficulties they had in electing of a
Regent, and crave her opinion therein. Thirdly, to show what a necessity there
was of entreating some forces of foot and horse, till the present troubles were
pacified: and in regard of the public burdens to request her for moneys to
maintain 300 horse, and 700. foot, which was esteemed sufficient for repressing
the adversaries power. Lastly, concerning the Rebels of England who were in
hands, to give her Majesty assurance that they should be safely kept, and to
beseech her Highness if she would have them delivered, that some respect might
be had to their credit, and mercy showed so far as could stand with her
Majesty's safety, and the quiet of the Realm. For the other Rebels that were
as yet in the Country he was desired to promise in their name all diligence
for their apprehension; and if it should happen them to be taken, that they
should be committed in sure custody, till her Majesty's pleasure was known.

These things proponed to the Queen she answered, The Queens answer to the
instructions.
That having heard nothing from the Lords, since the late Regents death, and
being daily importuned by forain Ambassadors, she had yielded to a new hearing
of the controversies betwixt them and their Queen, and that she intended to
have a meeting of the Commissioners of both parties ere it was long; Therefore
desired them to cease from using further hostility, and not to precipitate the
Election of a Regent, the delay whereof would work them no prejudice.

This answer reported to the Lords did trouble them exceedingly; from the one
part they saw a necessity of accommodating themselves and their proceedings to
the Queen of Englands pleasure, The Earl of Lennox made Lieutenant of the
Country.
and on the other, they did find a great hurt by the want of a Regent: That
adverse faction having thereby taken occasion to erect another Authority, and
diverse of their own partakers falling back from their wonted forwardness, as
not knowing on whom they should depend. After long consultation, this expedient
was taken; That a Lieutenant should be appointed for certain time, with full
authority to administrate all affairs; and notice sent to the Queen of England
of the necessity they stood in of a Regent, and that there was no other way to
keep the subjects in obedience. Choice accordingly was made of the Earl of
Lennox grandfather to the King, and a Commission of Lieutenandry given him to
endure to the 11. of July next; at which time, the Estates were warned to meet
for the election of a Regent. Letters were also directed to the Queen of
England, requesting her advice in the choice, and an answer to the other
Petitions moved by the Abbot of Dunfermlin.

The Queen, The Queen of Englands answer to the Lords that stood for the King.
who was put in hope that Westmerland and the other Rebels of England
entertained by the Queen of Scots faction, should be delivered unto her, had
showed her self very favorable unto them, but hearing that they were escaped,
she made answer as follows: That she did kindly accept the good will of the
Noblemen, testified by their seeking her advice in the choice of a Regent,
being a matter of such importance, and so nearly touching the estate of their
King and Realm. That her mind once was, they should do best to continue the
election for a time* but now considering the disorders that were raised, and
possibly thereafter might arise, if some person was not placed in that charge,
she did allow their resolution. And seeing the abilities of men for that place
were best known to themselves, she should be satisfied with their choice
whatsoever it was. Howbeit out of the care she had of the young King she would
not dissemble her opinion, which was that the Earl of Lennox her cousin, whom
as she was informed, they had made Lieutenant of the Realm, would be more
careful of his safety then any other. But in any case desired them, not to
think that in so doing she did prescribe them any choice, but left it free to
themselves to do what was fittest. Further, she desired them to rest assured,
notwithstanding of the reports dispersed by their adversaries, that she had
neither yielded, nor would yield to the alteration of the state of their King
and Government, unless she did see a more just and clear reason then had yet
appeared. For howbeit she condescended to hear what the Queen of Scots would
say, and offer as well for her own assurance, as for the good of that Realm, (a
thing with in honor she could not refuse) yet not knowing what the same would
be, she meant not to break the order of Law and Justice, either to the
advancing or prejudging of her cause. Therefore finding the Realm governed by a
King, and him invested by Coronation and other solemnities requisite, as also
generally received by the three Estates* she minded not to do any act that
might breed alteration in the Estate, or make a confusion of governments. But
as she had found, so to suffer the same continue, and net permit any change
therein so far as she might impede the same, except by some eminent reason she
should be induced to alter her opinion. In end she desired them beware that
neither by misconceiving her good meaning toward them, nor by the insolent
brags of their adversaries, they should take any course that might hinder or
weaken their cause, and make her intentions for their good ineffectual.

This letter communicated to the Estates convened at Edinburgh the twelfth of
July, The Earl of Lennox created King.
and a long discourse made to the same effect by Mr. Thomas Randolph her
Ambassador, they were exceedingly joyed. So following the advice given them,
they made choice of Matthew Earl of Lennox, declaring him Regent and Governor
of the Realm, unto the Kings majority, or till he were able by himself to
administrate the public affairs. This was done with the great applause of all
that were present, and published the next day at the Cross of Edinburgh.

In an Assembly of the Church kept the same month, An Assembly of the Church
at Edinburgh.
there was some business moved by Mr. James Carmichal then Master of the
Grammar School of S. Andrews, against Mr. Robert Hamilton Minister of the City,
for some points of doctrine delivered by the said Mr. Robert in Pulpit. The
points are not particularly expressed, but in the sixth Session of that
Assembly, Mr. James Macgill Clerk of Register Mr. John Bellenden of Auchno^le
Justice Clerk, and Mr. Archibald Douglas, one of the Senators of the College
of Justice, were directed from the Chancellor and Council, to require them to
forbear all decision in that matter, seeing it concerned the Kings authority*
and contained some heads tending to treason, (so is it there said) which ought
to be tried by the Nobility and Council* willing them notthelesse to proceed in
such things as did appertain to their own jurisdiction; which was judged
reasonable, and agreed unto by the Church. So far were they in these times
from declining the King and Council in doctrines savouring of treason, and
sedition, as they did esteem them competent Judges thereof. Commissioners
directed from the Assembly of the Church to the Lords of the Queens party.
In the same Assembly Commission was given to Mr. David Lindesay, and Mr.
Andrew Hay to travel with the Duke of Chattellerault, the Earls of Argile,
Eglington and Cassils, the Lord Boyd, and other Barons and Gentlemen in the
West parts for reducing them to the obedience of the King, and his authority.
The like Commission was given to the Lord of Dun for the Earl of Crawford, the
Lord Ogilvy and their assisters in Angus, and certification ordained to be made
unto them, that if they did not return to the Kings obedience, the spiritual
sword of excommunication should be drawn against them: which I cannot think was
really intended, considering the quality and number of the persons.

The Regent immediately upon his creation, The Regent goes to impede the
Parliament indicted at Linlithgow.
and oath taken according to the custom for maintaining true Religion, and
observing the laws and liberties of the Realm, prepared to keep the Diet
appointed at Linlithgow by the Lords of the Queens party, who were said to be
gathering forces, for holding the Parliament they had indicted; And because
much depended upon the success of that business, he sent to the Earl of Sussex
for assistance of his forces. And to the Lord of Grange (with whom he kept
some correspondence) for some Fieldpieces, and other things belonging to their
furniture. Grange at first made fair promises, but shifting those who were sent
to receive the munition, said, This his service should not be wanting to the
making of a concord, but he would not be accessory to the shedding of the blood
of Scot^ish men. The Earl of Sussex deferred his answer likewise, till the
Queen should be advertised. Notthelesse the Regent observed the Diet,
accompanied with 5000, Gentlemen none of the adverse party appearing.

Thereafter a Parliament was indicted to hold at Edinburgh, the tenth of
October, A Parliament indicted at Edinburgh.
and the Regent understanding that the Earl of Huntley had sent some 160.
soldiers to Brichen, and given order for providing victuals to the companies,
who were there to meet him, made an hasty expedition thither and having sent
the Lords Lindesay and Ruthven, with Sir James Haliburton Provost of Dundy, a
little before himself, went nigh to have intercepted the Earl of Crawford, the
Lord Ogilvy, and Sir James Balfour, The Regents expedition to Brich^n.
who were there attending Huntley. But they escaping, the soldiers fled to the
Steeple of the Church and Castle, which they had fortified. The steeple at the
Regents first coming did yield, and so many as were therein, had their lives
saved; the Castle held out some days, till they heard the Canon was at hand,
and then rendered at discretion. Cap. Cowts with 30. of his soldiers were
executed, because they had once served, and made defection. The rest were
pardoned, upon surety not to carry arms against the present authority. This
expedition ended the Regent returned to Edinburgh.

In the the Month of August by letters from Denmark it was advertised, An
Ambassador to Denmark.
that Colonel John Clerk who had served the King there in his wars with
Sweden, was imprisoned by the suggestion of some countrymen that labored for
Bothwels liberty. Whereupon Mr. Thomas Buchannan brother to Mr. George
Buchannan the Kings Tutor, was sent in Embassage to Denmark, to require that
Bothwel might be delivered and sent into Scotland, to the effect justice might
be done upon him, or then that he might be judged there, for the detestable
murder committed upon the person of the Kings father, and receive his due
punishment. This had before that time been often desired, but was delayed by
diverse occasions; and now the report of Bothwels greater liberty and that he
had been permitted to accuse colonel Clerk, a Gentleman well esteemed, and of
good reputation for his service done both at home and in parts abroad; the
Regent and Council took occasion to put that King in remembrance of their
former requests; and if any doubt was made in those parts of Bothwels
guiltiness, they offered to clear the same by evident probation; and thereupon
entreated him by the communion of blood and nigh kindred betwixt him and the
King of Scotland, that he would not suffer such a nefarious person to escape.
In the same letters they requested, that the Colonel might be set at liberty,
and restored to the Kings wonted favor, or then be licenced to return into
Scotland, where there was present use for his service. This Embassage was not
without fruit, and put Bothwel out of all credit, so as desperate of liberty,
he turned mad, and ended his wicked life some years after, (as before was
touched) most miserably.

All things now went ill with the Queens saction, An Abstinence agreed unto.
neither saw they a way to subsist, but by laboring an Abstinence, which the
Secretary earnestly went about, and prevailed so far with the two Liegers of
France and Spain, as they brought the Queen of England to a new Treaty with the
Scots Queen, and to hearken unto some overtures, which she did make both for
the Queens assurance, and for the settling of a perfect peace betwixt her and
her son, and those that stood in his obedience. This moved the Regent, he did
greatly oppose it; yet the Queen of England would needs have him agree to the
Abstinence for the space of two months, in which it was thought the Treaty
should take an end. Great dispute there was about the tenor and form of the
Abstinence, which at last was accorded in these terms. That the Regent should
oblige himself and his partakers to cease from Arms, and not to molest any that
pretended obedience to the Kings mother, during the space of two months, which
should be understood to begin the third day of September, providing that no
innovation should be made in the government, and all things continue in the
same estate wherein they were at the death of the late Regent: As also that the
ordinary administration of the Law and Justice in Parliament, Session, and
other Courts, with the punishment of thieves and trespassers, might proceed in
the mean time by law or force in the Kings name, and under his authority,
without any opposition. This granted, by a second letter the Queen of England
signified, A Treaty with the Queen of Scots.
That she had appointed Sir William Cecill her principal Secretary, and Sir
Walter Mildmay Chancellor of the Exchequer, to repair to the Queen of Scots,
and learn what offers she would make for her Majesty's surety, and the not
disturbing the Realms, if she should be put to liberty. In which treaty she
minded not to neglect the surety of the young King, and the estate of the
Nobility adhering to him, whereof she would be no less careful, then of what
concerned her self most. But in regard that treaty could take no good effect,
if the Regent and the Nobility on his side should do any thing to the prejudice
of the Queen of Scots and her party, she desired that no Parliament should be
kept during the time of the treaty; or if it had taken beginning before the
receipt of the letter, that nothing should pass therein, which might give her
cause to complain. And for the Abstinence taken unto the third of November,
seeing there was no likelihood, the treaty should take an end in so short a
time, he was further desired to prorogue the same for other two months. The
letter dated at Windsor the seventh of October, was brought to the Regent the
thirteenth, some two days after the Parliament was begun.

This treaty did much perplex the Regent, for albeit he was advertised before,
T^is Regents letter to the Queen of England.
of the Queen of Englands condescending to hear what the Scottish Queen would
say in her own cause, yet he did not expect any such sudden dealing, or that
it should have begun without his knowledge. But making the best construction of
all things, he answered, That the Parliament had taken a beginning before her
Majesty's letters came to his hand, and for the reverence he did carry to her,
he had abstained from all proceeding in any matters, only his office of
Regiment was confirmed, and the Parliament adjourned unto the month of
January, before which time he hoped the fruit of that treaty would appear. For
the prorogation of the Abstinence, he had declared at the first how hurtful the
same was to the King his affairs, and that there was no true meaning in the
adverse party, ad did manifestly appear by the arresting of the ships, and
goods of the Scottish Merchants, professing the King his obedience, in the
Kingdom of France, and other diverse insolences practiced at home, since the
granting thereof. That howsoever he was persuaded, her Majesty had not a mind
under color of the Abstinence to ruin the young King, and those that stood in
defense of his authority, yet they had received more hurt thereby then they
could have done, if open hostility had been professed. Therefore he desired
that before he was urged with a further cessation, the ships and goods stayed
in France, might be set free, the injuries committed at home repaired, and all
things innovated in the Government since the late Regents death, disannulled by
Proclamation: which things performed, he should willingly obey her Majesty's
desire. Upon this last part of the letter, many debates arose amongst the
parties, and diverse particulars on either side were exhibited in writing to the
Earl of Sussex, for verifying a breach of the Abstinence against others. That
which I find most insisted upon, was the denouncing of Secretary Lethington
Rebel, Secretary Lethington denounced Rebel, and loses his office.
who being cited to appear at a certain day before the Regent and Council, was
for his contumacy sentenced to lose his office, and have his goods consiscated.
The Regent challenged of this point made answer, That the Secretary could claim
no benefit by the Abstinence, seeing he was the Kings subject, and stood to the
defense of the Kings cause, both in England and Scotland, professing himself as
much displeased with the Proclamation of the Queens authority, as any man else.
And howbeit of late he had accompanied the contrary faction, yet he never
declined his subjection to the King. That being required to attend his office
he had refused, whereupon the same was justly taken from him; and for the
confiscation complained, if he would yet declare on what side he was, he should
be reasonably used.

The Secretary who had often changed his party, The Secretaries Declaration
finding that now he must declare himself on the one side, or the other, sent
to the Earl of Sussex this answer, That he did think it strange the Regent
should enquire on which side he was, seeing his speeches, writings and actions
had declared the same. Always now he would plainly profess, that he was not of
the Lord Regents side, nor would he acknowledge him for Regent. That he was of
that side, which would perform their duties to the Queen of Scotland, and to
her son, so as neither of them should have cause to find fault with him that he
was of that side which wished to either of them the place, which in reason and
justice they ought to possess; and that he was of that side which requested
the Queen of England to enter into good conditions with the Queen, whereby
Scotland might be brought in an union, and she restored to her liberty and
Realm. He confessed, that he did not allow of the proclaiming of the Queens
authority, nor of the Parliament indicted by those of he part, because he
foresaw the same would impede the Treaty betwixt the two Queens, and might do
hurt many ways, and hinder the good he was about to do. But that would not
inser an allowance of their doings. And this, he said might give the Regent to
understand on what side he was.

This answer neither expressing a reason of his falling away from the Kings
obedience, nor discovering plainly, as was desired, of what side he should be
esteemed, being delivered to the Regent, received this reply; The Regents Reply.
That it was no marvel, he should not acknowledge him for Regent, having
deserved so ill at his hands, and being attainted of the soul and cruel murder
of his son, the Kings father. That his Declaration did not satisfy that which
was demanded: for where he made a show to observe a duty both to the Queen and
to her son, and would have it appear, that he was about the effecting of great
matters; the duties he had done to either of them were well enough known,
neither could any man look for any good to proceed from him. Therefore
howsoever he had against his promise and subscription declined from the Kings
party, he must still be subject to answer such particulars as should be laid
against him in the Kings name. And seeing it was neither her Majesty's meaning,
that any person guilty of the Kings murder should enjoy benefit by the
Abstinence, he that was challenged thereof in the late Regents time, and had in
Council offered himself to the severest trial that could be taken could not
complain of the breach of Abstinence, for any thing done, or intended against
him. But that neither this particular, nor any other should be an occasion to
dissolove that Treaty begun, he said, that he was content the notes of all
injuries alleged on either side should be delivered in writing to the Earl of
Sussex, and the trial or redress thereof continued, till it should appear,
what effect the Treaty brought forth. The prorogation of the Abstinence in the
mean time, as was desired by the Queen of England, was yielded unto, and
subscrived the fourth of November with this provision, That the goods and the
ships of the Scottish Merchants arrested at that time in France should be
released, and no stay made of such as should happen to repair thither, during
the time of the Abstinence.

Whilst these things were debating, Articles propounded to the Queen of
Scotland.
the copy of the Articles proponed by the Commissioners of England to the Queen
of Scots, for the surety of the Queen, were sent to the Lords of her faction to
be considered, which were as follows. 1. That the Treaty at Leth should be
confirmed, and that she should not claim any right, nor pretend title to the
Crown of England, during the life of Queen Elizabeth. 2. That she should not
renew nor keep any League with any Prince against England, nor yet receive
foreign forces into Scotland. 3. That she should neither practice nor keep
intelligence with Irish or English without the Queens knowledge, and in the
mean time cause the English fugitives and rebels to be rendered. 4. That she
should redress the wrongs and harms done by her faction in the borders of
England. 5. That she should not join in marriage with any English man without
the consent of the Queen of England, nor with any other against the liking of
the Estates of Scotland. 6. That she should not permit the Scots to pass into
Ireland, without license obtained from the Queen of England. 7. That for the
performance of these Articles, her son should be delivered to be brought up in
England, and six other hostages, such as the Queen of England should name,
should be sent thither. The Castles of Home, Fast^ Castle, kept by the English
for the space of three years, and some Fort in Galloway, or Cantire be put in
the English men's hands, for restraining the Irish Scots from going into
Ireland. 8. That she should do justice according to the law, upon the
murderers of her husband and the late Earl of Murray. 9. That she should set
her hand, and cause the Commissioners to be appointed by her party, set their
hands and seals to these Articles. 10. And lastly, that all these particulars
should be confirmed by the Estates of Scotland.


Now albeit diverse of these Articles were misliked by the Lords of her faction,
Sir William Cecil his letters to the Regent.
yet conceiving thereby some hope of her restitution, they dispersed certain
copies in the country, to encourage those that professed her obedience,
holding back such of the Articles as seemed most hard, trusting to obtain a
mitigation thereof in the conference; And she indeed, I mean the Scottish
Queen, showed her self pleased withal, only she remitted the full answer to
her Commissioners that should come from Scotland. The rumor of the Accord held
good a few days, and amused the Regent and other Noblemen not a little, till a
letter directed by Sir William Cecil from Chattesworth in Derbyshire, where the
Queen of Scots then lay, did otherwise inform, which was to this effect: That
he was put upon that employment much against his heart, and yet had not dealt
therein but with a great regard of the safety of the young King and whole
Estate: And that all he had done touching Scottish affairs, was under
protestation, that it should be in the power of those whom the Queen and Regent
should send in Commission, to change, diminish or augment the Articles at their
pleasures. Therefore did he advise the Regent, to send a Nobleman with some
other well learned and practiced in the affairs of the country, to deal in
these matters; taking care, that the persons he choosed were constant and firm,
and such as would not be won from him, nor from the cause. This Letter of the
date the thirteenth of October, 1570. written in so friendly and familiar a
manner (for therein he named some whom the Regent had lately employed, of whom
he willed him to beware) gave him to understand, that matters were not so far
gone, as his adversary did brag.

After a few days the Earl of Sussex advertised the Regent that the Lords of
the other faction had made choice of certain Commissioners to attend the treaty
begun betwixt their Queen and the Queen of England, The Earl of Sussex his
advertisement to the Regent.
desiring that no trouble nor molestation should be made to them and their
train in that journey; as also to send some special persons instructed with
Commission from the King, and the Nobility of his side, to give their best
advice for the surety of the King and his dependants, if matters should happen
to be accorded. And if it fell out otherwise, to consider what should be the
most sure course for continuance of amity betwixt the two Realms, the
preservation of the young King, the reducing of the subjects to his obedience,
and the defense of the Isle against forain invasions. These Commissioners he
desired to be sent with expedition, for that her Majesty longed to have an end
of the business, and could not grow to any resolution, till she had conferred
with them, and understood their minds.

This he did by direction from the Queen his Mistress as he wrote, His
particular advice.
howbeit he himself had thought of some particulars that he held convenient to
be thought upon, but for the Kings security, and theirs, if his mother should
be set at liberty, wherein he prayed him familiarly to show what was his
opinion. As first, if she should happen to be restored to her Crown, and the
King to be made to dimit the authority, it might be upon condition that in case
of her death, or the breach of the present agreement, he might reenter to the
kingdom without any Solemnities to be used. Next, that a Council of both
parties might be provided to her by the Queen of England for avoiding all sorts
of practices. Thirdly, that the young King should be educated in the Realm of
England under the custody of such persons, as the Nobility of his party should
appoint, which would be the greatest sure^y for those that depended on him, and
tie his mother to the performance of the Articles. Fourthly, that a new Act of
Parliament should be made for the establishing of true Religion, and oblivion
of all injuries committed on either side. Fifthly, that the Queen should give
some principal men of her side Hostages to remain in England for fulfilling
the heads of the agreement. Lastly, he advised the Regent to send with the
Commissioners that should be employed in that errand a writing signed and
scaled by all the Noblemen of the Kings party, to show who they were that stood
on that side. Because besides the credit it would bring to the cause, the same
would be to good purpose, howsoever matters went. For if the Treaty should
break off, it would be seen who would maintain and defend the King; Or if
otherwise an accord were made, it would be known for what persons the Queen of
England was to provide a surety.

Whether these Propositions were made (as he gave out) of his own head, The
Regents answer.
or which would rather appear, that he was set on by the Queen of England to
try the Regent and Nobilities mind, he answered very advisedly, and beginning
at the last, he said, That he held his opinion good touching the sealing of a
writing by the Nobility of the Kings party, whose number would not be found so
great as he wished, because there were diverse Neuters that adhered to no side,
and many that desired to keep things loose, some for impunity of crimes whereof
they were suspected, and others hoping to better their condition in an unquiet
time; yet he trusted to obtain the subscriptions of a sufficient number who had
sincerely continued in the profession of true Religion and his Majesty's
obedience, and from their hearts abhorred the murderers of the King his son,
and the late Regent. For the other points he said, that he could not give his
private opinion in matters so important, by reason of his oath made at the
acceptance of the government to have no dealing in matters of that kind
without the knowledge of the Nobility and Council. And touching the
Commissioners which the Queen required to be sent, there should be diligence
used therein, how soon they understood of what quality the others were, that
the Lords of the Queens party did choose. Neither should any molestation be
made to them in their journey, so as their names, the number of their train, and
the way they minded to take were notified; For otherwise as he said, the King
and Estate might receive hurt, and some that were culpable of those odious
murders steal away privately in their company. Mean while he showed, that till
Commissioners might be chosen by the advice of the Noblemen then absent, the
Council had appointed the Abbot of Dunfermlin Ambassador to the Queen of
England, and given him such instructions as they held needful for the time, by
whom she should be more fully advertised of their minds in all matters.

About the midst of November the Abbot of Dunfermlin (then made Secretary) went
into England. The Abbot of Dunfermlin made Secretary and sent into England.
He was desired to show the Queen How it was the expectation of all the good
subjects in Scotland, that she would never forget the motherly care she had
professed to have of the innocent person of their young King; nor yet be
unmindfull of the Noblemen and others professing his obedience, who had studied
to maintain peace betwixt the two Realms ever since her Majesty's entry to the
Crown; and that they being required as well by letters from her Lieutenant in
the North, as by her Ambassador resident amongst them, to direct some special
persons toward her for communicating such things as they thought requisite for
the surely of their King and themselves, although they had resolved upon a
number sufficient for that Legation, yet they deferred to send away till they
should understand who were nominated for the Lords of the other party, to the
end they might equal them in birth and quality; That in the mean time lest
they should be thought more negligent then became them in matter of such
importance, they had laid upon him the charge, to come and signify to her
Majesty the opinion that was held in Scotland of the Articles framed at
Chattesworth, which the adversaries gave out to have been craved by her
Majesty, and esteemed a sufficient security for the Queen of Scots. And if he
did find her Majesty inclining thereto, then to remember her with what a person
she had to do; a Princess by birth, in Religion Popish, one that professed her
self a captive, and as joined with an husband, (suppose in a most unlawful
conjunction) and that any one of these would serve for a color to undo
whatsoever thing she agreed unto at the present; for her Majesty could not be
ignorant, how after her escape out of Lochleven, she revoked the dimission of
the Crown, made in favors of her son, (though the same was done for good
respects) upon a pretext of fear^ and that she did the same being a Captive. As
likewise she knew the Papists Maxim of not keeping faith to Heretics, which
would serve her for a subterfuge to break all Covenants when she saw her time;
and that to dimit her upon any surety, would prove no less dangerous to her
Majesty's own estate then to Scotland, considering the claim she had made in
former times to the Crown of England, and the attempts of her Rebels at home,
not yet well extinct, upon the same grounds. In regard whereof there was
nothing could assure the quiet of both Realms in their opinions, but her
detention under safe custody, which could not be esteemed dishonorable, the
just causes and occasions being published and made manifest to the world. As to
the power of forain Princes whereof they boasted, the same was not much to be
feared, so long as her person was kept sure; And if war for that cause should
be denounced, the peril should be less, then if she were set at liberty, and
restored to the Crown; for so she should have her forces and friendship ready
to join with other Princes in all their quarrels, against which no Hostages
could serve for assurance.

This was the sum of his instructions. The Queen of Englands answer, ult.
November. 1570.
He had presence of the Queen the penult of November, and perceiving that none
of these Articles were concluded, he did communicate all his instructions unto
her, as he was desired; she having perused them, and reasoned thereupon with
her Council, returned this Answer, That she found in his instructions diverse
things worthy of consideration, which behoved to be further debated, and
gravely weighed, because of their importance. Therefore desired some men of
credit to be directed unto England, that an end might be put to that business;
for as to the restitution of the Queen, seeing it appeared they had reason to
oppose it, she would not have the Regent or those of his party to think that
she intended to wrong them in any sort; for if they should make it appear that
nothing was done by them but according to justice, she would side with them and
maintain their quarrel. And otherwise if they were not able to justify their
cause by such evident reasons as might satisfy her Majesty in conscience, and
make her answer the world in honor, she would nevertheless for that natural
love she bare to the King her near kinsman, and the good will she carried to
the Noblemen that stood for his authority, leave no means unprovided for their
safeties: But in regard a great part of the time appointed in the last
prorogation of the Abstinence was already spent, she desired the same to be
prorogated unto March next, and would desire them to agree thereto, in regard
they that stood for the Queen had condescended to the same, and as much more
time as she should think fitting. This answer of the date at Hampton Court the
^. of December came unto the Regent the 15. who thereupon advertised the
Noblemen to meet at Edinburgh with all diligence for taking deliberation of
things desired.

The Lord of Grange, whether to impede the meeting, The Lord of Grange
raises a trouble in Edinburgh and breaks out in open Rebellion.
or to divert the Council from trying a conspiracy which was then discovered,
and said to have been devised in the Castle against the Regents life, it is
uncertain, raised a great trouble in the town of Edinburgh about the same time.
One of his servants called James Fleming being imprisoned by the Magistrates
for a slaughter committed by his direction, he in the evening whilst all men
were at supper, made the Garrison of the Castle to issue forth, and break open
the prison doors, playing all the while upon the town with the Canon, to
tertifie the inhabitants from making resistance. This being complained of to
the Regent, he was called to answer for the riot, but refused to appear and
presently brake out in open rebellion, fortifying the Castle, and conducing a
number of soldiers, who did afterward greatly annoy the Citizens.

The Nobility notwithstanding did keep the meeting, and made choice of the Earl
of Morton, Commissioners sent into England.
the Abbot of Dunfermlin, and Mr. James, Mr. Gill, to go unto England; withal
they agreed to the Abstinence required, adjourning the Parliament to May
thereafter. How soon these Commissioners were come to London, The Earl of
Leicester and Sussex, the Lord Keeper, the Chamberlain, Sir William Cecill
Secretary (then made Lord Burleigh,) Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Francis Knolls
were appointed to confer with them; These meeting in the Secretaries chamber at
Court, after salutations and some general speeches, the Lord Burleigh said,
That they were desired to come into England upon occasion of a Treaty begun
betwixt the two Queens, and that her Majesty did now expect to receive from
them such evident reasons for their proceedings against their Queen as
wherewith she might both satisfy her self, and with honor answer to the world
for that which she did: Or if they could not be able so to do, that matters
might be composed in the best sort for their safeties, which her Majesty would
by all means procure. The Commissioners answered, that they had before that
time imparted the truth of all things to her Majesty, which they thought might
satisfy to clear them from the crimes objected; yet if she stood doubtful in
any point, the same should be cleared, and their doings justified by most
evident reasons. Nothing further was said at that time, but all continued to
the next day. And then having again met, the Earl of Morton made a long
discourse of the reasons and grounds of their proceedings, answering the
objections which he thought could be made against what he had spoken. His
discourse ended, they were desired to put their reasons in writing, which was
with some difficulty yielded unto, and under condition, that if the reasons
proponed by them did not content her Majesty, the writing should be
redelivered, and no Copy taken thereof; Otherwise, if her Majesty did like and
allow them, they were content the same should be put in Record, if so it
pleased her Higness.

The last of February (for albeit the 20. of that month they came to London)
they presented a number of Reasons for justifying the deposition of their
Queen, Reasons justifying the Queen of Scots deposition.
and cited many Laws both Civil, Canon, and Municipall, which they backed with
examples drawn forth of Scottish Histories, and with the opinions of diverse
famous Divines. The Queen of England having considered their reasons, was not a
little displeased both with the bitter speeches, and with the liberty they had
used in depressing the authority of Princes, and thereupon told them, That she
was in no sort satisfied with their reasons, willing them to go unto the second
head, and devise what they thought meetest for the safety of their King and
themselves. But said, they refusing, that they had no Commission to speak of
any thing that might derogate from the Kings authority; and if such a
Commission had been given them, they would not have accepted it.

In these terms matters continued some days till the Commissioners for the King
of Scots suting to be dimitted, were sent for to Greenwich, where the Queen had
a long speech tending all to declare what a good will she had carried to the
young King, and to those that professed his obedience, and wondering they
should be so wilful, and not to deliberate of such things as served to their
own safety. The Commissioners answering, that they believed the reasons
produced would have satisfied her Majesty touching their proceedings, which (as
they esteemed) were sufficient to prove, that they had done nothing but
according to justice: Yet I (says the Queen) am not satisfied neither with
your reasons, nor laws, nor examples; nor am I ignorant of the laws my self,
having spent diverse years in the study thereof. If ye your selves will not
(says she) propone any thing for your own sureties, yet I would have you hear
what my Council is able to say in that matter, and I hope it shall content you.

They answered, that their respect to her Majesty was greater, then to refuse
any good advice which she and her good Council should give them, but that they
had no power to consent to any thing that might infer an alteration of the
present state, or diminish the Kings authority.

The next day the Articles following were given them, Articles proponed to the
Commissioners of Scotland.
and they desired to consider of the same, and set down their Answer in writing.

1. That in regard her son had been crowned King by virtue of her dimission,
and his Coronation ratified by the three Estates of Parliament, and that since
that time a great number of the subjects had professed obedience to him, and
his Regents, which was to be interpreted in the best part, as done out of duty,
and not out of any ill mind toward their Queen, the obedience so yielded to
the King and his Regents, should be allowed from the time of the dimission of
the Crown made by her, unto the resumption of the same: And all manner of Acts
done since that time in the administration of justice, and for government of
the State, should be reputed good and lawful, or at least reviewed, and
confirmed in the next Parliament after consideration taken of the same by
twelve Lords, whereof six should be named by the Queen and her Commissioners,
and the other six by the Commissioners for the Kings part.

2. That all Statutes and Ordinances made concerning matters of Religion, and
the Ministers thereof, since the same time, should be observed by all the
subjects of Scotland, and no pardon nor dispensation granted in time coming to
any person not observing the same, without consent of the said twelve Lords.

3. That all Processes, Sentences, and Judgments given either in causes civil
or criminal since the said time, wherein the order of the laws of the Realm had
been observed, should remain in force, and only such sentences as had been
pronounced either in the name of the King or Queen against any person for not
obeying or acknowledging either of their Titles, be rescinded; the sentences
always pronounced against the Earl of Bothwel, or any others, for the murder
of the Queens husband, standing good and valid.

4. That all Ecclesiastical benefices and temporal offices, which have usually
continued in the person of any during term of life, should remain with the same
persons that held them at the time of the Queens dimission; such excepted, as
may be proved to have consented to the murder of her husband, or that have
left them upon recompense, and with their own consents: In which cases the
present possessors should enjoy the same, unless they were incapable, and
declared by the twelve Lords to be such.

5. That all strengths, Castles, and houses appertaining to the Crown should be
restored to the possession of those who held them at the time of the Queens
dimission, except they had parted therewith upon agreement. In which case the
Queen with consent of the said twelve Lords, or the most part of the Council
should dispose thereof.

6. That the Jewels, Plate, Movables, and implements of houses belonging to
the Queen at the time of her dimission, should be restored, provided the moneys
which any had laid out for the same, were repayed: And for such as had been put
away by the direction of the Regents, or Council, that recompense should be
made by the Queen to the party according to the just value.

7. That a law should be established in Parliament for oblivion and remission
of all things done since that time, after the same manner that was done in the
year 1563. providing not the less, that the Comptroller, Thesaurer, and other
receivers of the Crown revenues, should give an account to the Queen of all
sums of money or other profits which had not been expended bona fide, for the
affairs of the Realm, or by order and warrant from the Regent, and others
trusted with those affairs; Neither should the remission be extended to any
that had taken by force any houses, Castles, lands, or heritages belonging to
others, but restitution should be made thereof to the party dispossessed, or to
his heirs, till the same by order of law be justly determined. In like manner
concerning goods moveable taken away from the Owners against their wills, and
being yet in their own nature extant, that restitution should be made thereof.
And because many doubts might arise upon this Article, the same should be
determined by the foresaid twelve Lords, or otherwise as was devised for the
execution of the Act made Anno 1563.

8. That for the more quiet government of the Realm, there should be appointed
a Privy Council, which should consist of twelve Lords spiritual and temporal,
besides the other ordinary officers that do usually attend. And that the said
Council should be established with the like provisions that were made at the
return of the Queen out of France, Anno 1561. So many as were then Counselors,
and yet alive, being counted of that number; and that the Earl of Lennox,
because he was most bound by nature to take care of the King, should be one of
the Council, and have place therein according to his degree.

9. That for the greater safety of the Kings person, he should be brought into
the Realm of England, and there governed by such Noblemen of Scotland, as
depend of him, so as he may be ever ready to be restored to the Crown, if the
Queen his Mother break the Covenants agreed betwixt her and the Queen of
England.

10. That for his entertainment he should not only have the revenues which the
Princes of Scotland in former times possessed, but also the Rents and Offices
belonging sometime to the Earl of Bothwel.

11. And last, that a convenient number of Hostages, being all Noblemen, and of
those who have adhered to the Queen, and solicited her delivery, should enter
in England to remain there for assurance of observing the conditions made both
to the King of Scots and the subjects under his obedience, and to the Queen of
England for the peace and quiet of her dominions; And that the said Hostages
should be entered in England before the Queen of Scots shall be put to liberty.

These Articles delivered to them were answered the next day, as follows:
Answer to the foresaid Articles.
We have seen and considered the note of the Heads which we received from your
Lordships for pacifying the controversies between the Queen our Sovereigns
mother, and the King her Son, and his Subjects, touching the Title of the Crown
of Scotland, if it be found, that her dimission either was, or may be lawfully
revoked by her; And therewithal having diligently perused our Commission and
Instructions to know how far we might enter in Treaty upon the same Heads for
satisfaction of the Queens Majesty, and your Lordships to whom the hearing of
the cause is committed; We find our selves no ways able, nor sufficiently
authorized to enter into any treaty or conference touching the King our
Sovereign his Crown, the abdication or diminution of the same, or yet the
removing of his person from the place where he abides* For as we confess our
selves his Highness subjects, and have all our power and Commission from him,
to treat in his name, in matters tending to the maintenance of true Religion,
his honor and estate, and for the continuance of amity betwixt the two Realms:
So we cannot presume to abuse our Commission in any thing that may prejudge
him, wherein we trust your Lordships shall allow and approve us.

At the same time, Propositions made to the Queen of Scots Commissioners.
some others were appointed to confer with those of his Mothers party; And to
them it was proposed, that for the security of the Queen of England, and the
Noblemen that followed the King of Scots, the Duke of Chatteller ault, with the
Earls of Huntley, Argile, the Lord Home, and any other Nobleman they pleased to
name, should be delivered as pledges, and the Castles of Dumbar, and Home, be
put in the hands of English men, to be kept for three years. The answer they
gave, was, that she who of her own motive committed her self to the protection
of the Queen of England, The Answer.
would most willingly give her satisfaction in all things which conveniently
might be done; but to deliver those great men, and the Fortresses required, was
no other thing but to spoil and deprive the distressed Queen of the succor of
her most faithful friends, and the strength of those places; yet if in all
other points they did agree, they made offer, that two Earls (one whereof
should be of the number nominated) and two Lords should enter as Hostages, and
remain in England for the space of two years; but for the Holds and Castles,
they could not, because of the League with France, put them in the hands of
English men, unless others were put also in the hands of the French.

The Queen of England perceiving that there were on both sides great
impediments, sent for the Kings Commissioners, The Treaty continued to a more
convenient time.
and told them, how she had considered, that the Articles proponed, could not
be resolved but in a Parliament, and therefore leaving the Treaty for a time,
seeing she understood there was a meeting of the Estates appointed in May next,
she held it meetest they should return, and in that meeting condescend upon an
equal number of both parties, that should have power to compose matters; The
Abstinence in the mean time being renewed, in hope that all differences should
be taken away, and matters peaceably agreed. This she would cause signify to
the Agents of their Queen, and doubted not, but they would assent thereto; yet
when it was moved unto them, they refused to agree to any delay, till they
should know what was her own mind. Hereupon the Kings Commissioners were
commanded to stay till her Answer should be returned.

In this time the Bishop of Galloway and the Lord Levingston trusting to speed
better by conference with the Earl of Morton, The Bishop of Galloway and the
Lord Levingston, confer with the Earl of Morton*
and the rest. sent to desire a meeting of them, which was yielded unto,
provided the Bishop of Ross came not in their company; for him they would not
admit, as being the Kings Rebel. Having met, they talked kindly one to another.
But that the Queen should be restored to her authority, in no condition (though
diverse were proponed) could be admitted; which when she heard, and that the
Queen of England had taken a course to delay things, she grew into a great
choler, and inhibited her Commissioners to treat any more. This reported to the
Queen of England, she sent for the Earl of Morton and his Associates, and told
him, that their Queen took in evil part the motion she had made; And seeing it
is so, says she, I will not detain you longer, ye shall go home, and if
afterward she be brought to agree to this course, as I hope she shall, I have
no doubt but you will for your parts do that which is fitting. Thus were they
dimitted.

Whilst these things were doing in England, the factions at home,
notwithstanding of the Abstinence, were not idle, but taking their advantage of
others. Lord Claud Hamilton ejecting the Lord Semple his servant forth of the
house of Paslay, Paslay taken by Lord Claud Hamilton, and recovered by the
Regent.
placed therein a number of soldiers, and by them kept all these parts in in
fear; The Regent upon this gathering some forces, besieged the house, and had
it rendered to him within a few days. The Soldiers were conveyed to Edinburgh,
and hanged on the Gallows without the Town. The Castle of Dunbart^n surprised.
Not long after, upon intelligence that the Castle of Dunbarton was negligently
kept, and might easily be surprised, he sent three companies under the command
of Captain Crawford, Captain Home, and Captain Ramsey to give the attempt;
Ladders and other necessaries for scaling being prepared, they went thither in
the night, conducted by a fellow that had served in the house, and as then had
quit his service upon a private discontent. A little before day carrying the
ladders with the least noise they could make, they placed the same in the most
commodious part for ascent, and notwithstanding of sundry difficulties that
happened, got up in the end to the top of the Rock: There having a wall of
stone likewise to climb, Captain Alexander Ramsey by a ladder which they drew
up after them, was the first that entered, and for a short space defended
himself against three watchmen that assailed him. Crawford and Home following
quickly with their companies, the watchmen were killed, and the munition
se^sed. The Lord Fleming, who commanded the Castle, hearing the tumult, fled to
the nether Balze (so they call the part by which they descend to the river)
and escaped in a little Boat. The soldiers and other servants yielding, were
spared, and freely dimitted. Within the Castle were the Archbishop of S.
Andrews, Monsieur Veras the French man, the Lady Fleming, John Fleming of
Boghall, Alexander Levingston, son to the Lord Levingston, and John Hall an
English man, who were all made prisoners. The next morning the Regent came
thither, (for he was lying at Glasgow) and using the Lady honorably, suffered
her to depart with her plate, jewels, and all that appertained either to her or
to her husband. Veras was sent to be kept at S. Andrews, and permitted
afterward to depart. The English man Hall was delivered to the Marshal of
Berwick. Boghall and the Lord Levingstons son were detained. The Archbishop of
S. Andrews executed.
The Archbishop was sent to Striveling, and the first of April publicly hanged
on a gibbet, erected to that purpose.

This was the first Bishop that suffered by form of Justice in this Kingdom,
His Declaration at his death.
a man he was of great action, wise and not unlearned, but in life somewhat
dissolute. His death, especially for the manner of it, did greatly incense his
friends, and disliked of diverse, who wished a greater respect to have been
carried to his age and place. But the suspicion of his guiltiness in the
murders of the King and Regent, made him of the common sort less regrated. It
is said, that being questioned of the Regents murder, he answered, That he
might have stayed the same, and was sorry he did it not. But when he was
charged with the Kings death, he denied the same. Yet a Priest called Thomas
Robinson that was brought before him, affirmed that one John Hamilton (commonly
called Black John) had confessed to him on his deathbed, that he was present
by his direction at the murder. Whereunto he replied, That being a Priest, he
ought not to reveal Confessions; and that no man's Confession could make him
guilty. But for none of those points was he condemned, nor the ordinary form of
Trial used, though he did earnestly request the same; Only upon the forfeiture
laid against him in Parliament, he was put to death, and the execution
hastened, lest the Queen of England should have interceded for his life.

They who stood for the Queen, They who stood for the Queen, take Arms and come
to Edinbugh.
upon advertisement that the Treaty was dissolved, and that she had recalled
the Bishop of Galloway, and the Lord Levingston, did presently take Arms. The
Lord of Grange to keep the Town of Edinburgh under command, did plant in the
steeple of S. Giles some soldiers, and transport all the Armor and Munition
which was kept in the Townhouse to the Castle; After a few days the Duke of
Chattellerault, came thither, with the Earls of Argile and Huntley, the Lords
Hereis, Boyd and diverse others, to stay the holding of the Parliament, which
had been adjourned to the fourteenth of May. At their coming they compelled the
Clerks and Keepers of the Register to deliver the books of Council and
Parliament, and seized on every thing, which they thought might hinder the
States to convene. The Ministers were commanded in their public prayers to
make mention of the Queen their Sovereign Princess; which they resused. John
Knox withdrew himself, and retired to S. Andrews, Alexander Bishop of Galloway
preaching in his place.

The Regent on the other side with the Nobility that adhered to the King, The
Regent resolves to hold the Parliament.
came into Leth with a resolution to hold the Parliament, whatsoever should
follow; and because it would be a difficil work to recover the town, conclusion
was taken to keep the Parliament in that part of the Canon gate which is
subject to the towns jurisdiction: the Lawyers having resolved, that in what
part soever of the town the Estates should convene, their meeting would be
found lawful. Thus on Monday the fourteenth of May, which was the Diet
appointed, the Parliament according to the custom was fenced in a house
without the gates, yet within the liberties of the town. The Saturday preceding
the Regent had by advice of the Council sent some men of war to possess that
part of the town, who were assisted by certain Noblemen volunteers that joined
in the service. And notwithstanding the continual playing of the Ordinance upon
that part from the Castle, both that day and all the time the Parliament sat,
not a man (a thing most strange) of the Regents side was either hurt or killed,
An. 1571.
there were cited to the Parliament young Lethington, his brother Mr. John
Maitland, Prior of Coldingham, Gawan Hamilton, Abbot of Kilwining, with his
eldest son, and a base son of the late Archbishop of S. Andrews, Persons
forfeited in this Parliament.
who were all declared culpable of treason. Young Lethington because of his
foreknowledge and counsel given to King Henry his murder, the rest for their
rebellion against the King and his Regents. As in such a troubled time the
Parliament was very frequent, for of the Nobility were present, the Earls of
Morton, Mar, Glencarn, Crawford, (who some months before had forsaken the
Queens faction, and submitted himself to the King) Buchan and Menteith, the
Lord Keith and Graham, as proxies for their Fathers; the Earls of Marshal and
Montrosse, with the Lords Lindesay, Ruthven, Glamis, Zeister, Methven,
Ochiltrie, Cathcart, two Bishops, nine Abbots and Priors, with twenty
Commissioners of Burghs. The forfeiture pronounced, the Estates took counsel to
dissolve, because the danger was great, and prorogued the Parliament to the
third of August, appointing the same to meet at Striveling.

A new Civil war did then break up, The civil war renewed.
which kept the Realm in trouble the space of two years very nigh, and was
exherced with great enmity on all sides. You should have seen fathers against
their sons, sons against their fathers, brother fighting against brother, nigh
kinsmen and others allied together, as enemies seeking one the destruction of
another. Every man as his affection led him, joined to the one or other party,
one professing to be the Kings men, another the Queens. The very young ones
scarce taught to speak had these words in their mouths, and were sometimes
observed to divide and have their childish conflicts in that quarrel. But the
condition of Edinburgh was of all parts of the country the most distressed,
they that were of quiet disposition and greatest substance, being forced to
forsake their houses; which were partly by the soldiers, partly by other
necessitous people, (who made their profit of the present calamities) rifled
and abused. The nineteenth day of May the Regent and other Noblemen leaving the
Canon gate, went to Leth, and the next day in the afternoon took their journey
toward Striveling, where the ordinary Judges of Session were commanded to sit
for ministering justice to the Leiges. As they were taking horse, The Regent
goes to Striveling.
the forces within Edinburgh issued forth making show to sight, yet still they
kept themselves under guard of the Castle. The Earl of Morton parting from the
Regent at Corstorphin, had the foot soldiers left with him to withstand the
enemy, if he should make any sudden attempt. Nor did there many days pass
when the Earl of Huntley, and Lord Claud Hamilton with their forces enterprised
the burning of Dalkeith. Morton, who remained there, being forewarned of their
coming, A conflict betwixt Morton and the Lords at Edinburgh.
took the fields, and entertained a long fight with them, though in number he
was far inferior; diverse on either side were killed, 25. of the Earl of
Mortons men taken prisoners, and of the adverse party Captain Hackerston.
Neither had the conflict ended so soon, if they had not been separated by an
accident that happened in the time. The Earl of Huntley and Lord Claud had
carried with them a great quantity of powder, wherewith the soldiers striving
to furnish themselves, and one of the matches falling amongst the powder, it
took fire, and with a terrible noise overthrew all that stood by, Captain James
Melvil and number of his company were thereby killed in the place, many died a
few days after of the hurt they received at that time.

The Earl of Morton by this invasion being taught to look unto himself, did
hire a band of soldiers, The Ea^l of Morton hireth soldiers.
that was lately come from Denmark, under the command of Captain Michael
Weymes, or as others write, Captain David Weymes. The Lords that remained at
Edinburgh thinking to intercept him and his company, as he crossed the river of
Forth, employed Mr. James Kircaldy, brother to the Lord of Grange, (who a few
days before was come from France with a supply of money and Arms) and Capt.
Cullen a man well skilled in sea affairs, to lie in wait for their landing. But
the purpose being detected to the Earl of Morton, he came upon them at Leth as
they were taking Boat, so unexpected, as 16. of the number were taken
prisoners, which served to redeem certain of Captain Weymes company, that were
the next day taken at sea, for he himself with the greatest part arrived safely
at Leth.

The Regent having advertised the Queen of England of those troubles, and by
the common danger of both the Realms, The Queen of England sends to Sir
William Drury, to try the estate of things.
entreated that she should no longer remain a neuter, she sent Sir William
Drury Marshal of Berwick to try the estate of things, the power that the Regent
had, and the means whereby the Castle of Edinburgh might be recovered; and
perceiving by the information returned, that without her assistance neither
could that strength be regained, nor the waged soldiers be kept long together;
because as yet she held it not fit to declare her self for the King, she began
of new to treat with both parties for a surceasance of arms, and that the town
of Edinburgh might be freed of the soldiers, and left patent for the Court of
Justice, the Captain of the Castle having in the mean time a convenient revenue
(for guarding the house) allowed unto him. But this turned to no effect, for
the conditions for the surceasance required, could not be agreed unto by either
side, for the Regent would have the town of Edinburgh put in the estate,
wherein it was at the going of the Commissioners to the Court of England in
January preceding and Grange to content him self with such an ordinary garrison
as other Keepers of the Castle were accustomed to entertain. The other faction
was content to leave the town patent, but so, that neither the Regent, nor the
Earl of Morton should come unto it: And for the surety of the Castle, they
would have Grange to retain 150. soldiers, besides the ordinary guard, who
should lodge in that part of the town, which was nearest unto the same.

The conditions of either side rejected, The Lords on the Queens party hold a
Parliament at Edinburgh.
they of Edinburgh not to be wanting of the authority of a Parliament, kept a
public meeting in the townhouse the twelfth day of June (to which day they
had indicted a Parliament) where a supplication was presented in name of the
Queen bearing, That it was not unknown how certain of her rebellious subjects
having imprisoned her person in the Tower of Lochlevin, A supplication
presented in name of the Queen.
did hereafter constrain her to make a dimission of the Crown in favors of her
son, which by the advice of Mr. John Spence of Condy her Advocate she had
lawfully revoked; albeit otherwise the same could not subsist, being done
without the consent and advice of the Estates, and upon a narrative of her
inability and weakness, which any of mean judgment may consider to be a mere
forgery, seeing her weakness to govern cannot be esteemed so great, as is the
weakness of an insant lying in the cradle, neither can he who has the present
administration of affairs, compare with her in any for aptness and ability to
govern. Therefore was it desired that the Nobility and Estates there convened,
after they had examined the grounds of the said dimission, and found them in
reason naught, should discern the same to be null in all time coming.

The supplication once or twice read, The Queens resignation of the Crown
discerned null.
it was pronounced as follows, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the
Commissioners of Burghs presently assembled, being ripely advised with the
supplication presented, have by authority of Parliament ordained the said
pretended dimission, renunciation, and overgiving of the Crown by the Queen,
consequently the Coronation of her son, the usurped government of his Regents,
and all that has followed thereupon, to have been from the beginning null and
of no force nor effect, for the reasons contained in the said supplication, and
other considerations notour, to the whole Estates. And therefore commands all
the subjects to acknowledge the Queen for their only Sovereign, notwithstanding
the said dimission, and as it had never been in rerum natura. Herewith to
conciliate the favor of the Church and people, by another statute they
ordained, That none should innovate, alter or pervert the form of Religion, and
ministration of Sacraments, presently professed and established within the
Realm* but that the same should have free course, without any let or impediment
to be made thereto. And therewithal the Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters,
and Readers in Churches, were commanded in their public service to pray for
the Queen as their only Sovereign, the Prince her son, the Council, Nobility,
and whole body of the Commonwealth. These statutes they caused to be proclaimed
at the Market Cross the day following, which was the 13th. of June.

Sir William Drury finding his labors unprofitable, and preparing to depart,
the Lords of Edinburgh would needs of courtesy bring him on the way. The Earl
of Morton who lay then at Leth pained with a Cholick, hearing that they were in
the the fields, and taking it to be done for ostentation of their power: arose
from his bed, and putting his men in order, marched to Restalrig, which way
they were to pass. Sir William Drury perceiving the companies of Leth in the
way, and sorry that his Convoy should have given the occasion, traveled
between them, and by his persuasions made them both to retire. But then the
question fell, who should first retire, and for this Sir William proponed that
he should stand between the companies, and upon a sign to be given by him. both
should turn at one instant. The Earl of Morton accepted the condition, A
conflict betwixt the Earl of Morton and the Lords at Edinburgh.
lest he should offend the Gentleman who had taken such pains amongst them; the
others refused, giving forth great brags, that they should make them leave the
fields with shame, if they did it not willingly: How soon Morton was advertised
of the difficulty they made, he cried aloud, On, on, we shall see who keeps the
fields last, and therewith gave so hard a charge. upon them, as they disordered
both the horse and foot. The Chase held toward the Watergate, where by reason
of the skant and narrow passage many were killed and trod to death, The Lord
Home taken prisoner.
but the number of prisoner were greater, for there were 150. taken, amongst
whom were the Lord Home, and Capt. James Cullen; the Abbot of Kilwining was
killed, a Gentleman of good worth, and greatly lamented; for he was of all that
faction esteemed most moderate. There died some 50. in all, most of them common
soldiers, and of mean account. On Mortons side Captain Weymis with one only
soldier was slain, this conflict happened on Satturday the 28. of June, 1571.

Advertisement hereof sent to the Regent, The Regent returns to Leth.
he came the next day to Leth, where first, order was taken with the prisoners,
and the Lord Home sent to Tantallan. But he stayed not long there, for the Lord
of Drumlanrig being intercepted by Sir David Spence of Wormston, as he was
making homewards, an exchange was made of the Lord Home with him. Captain
Cullen, a man infamous, and who in the last wars had used great cruelty, was
hanged on a Gibbet. The rest upon promise not to serve against the King were
dimitted. Resolution then was taken for the Regents abode at Leth, and the
countries attendance upon him by quarters, to keep the adversaries busied, and
hinder the victualling of the town. During which time, no day passed without
one conflict or other, wherein sometimes the Regent, and sometimes the Queens
party had the better; at this time upon a report carried to the Lord of
Grange, that he was commonly called by those of Leth, the Traitor, The combat
offered by Grange is accepted, and thereafter by himself declined.
he sent a Trumpet to appeal any one of their side to combat, that should dare
to affirm so much. The Lord of Garleys offering to maintain it, time and place
were appointed for the sight, and when all were expecting the issue of it,
Grange excused himself by the public charge he bare, saying, that it was not
thought convenient he should hazard the cause in his own person.

Notwithstanding of this great heat amongst the parties, The Queen of England
insisteth for peace.
the Queen of England ceased not to mediate an accord, and by a letter to the
Marshal dated the 19th. of July, willed him to move them of new for an
abstinence, offering to send persons of authority and credit to the borders,
who should travel to agree them, and remove all differences as well concerning
the title of the Crown, as other private matters; and because it was given her
to understand, that both parties had indicted Parliaments to August next, she
desired that no proceeding should be made therein; either by making of laws,
or by denouncing any persons forfeited, and that only they should authorize
certain persons to meet with her Commissioners for consulting upon the best
means to conclude a solid peace. There was also a letter of safe conduct sent
for any one, that Grange would direct unto England (for this he had desired)
Lethington excepted, and those that were suspected of the late Kings murder.
But whether this exception gave the cause, or the daily encouragements sent by
the French, none was directed thither.

The Regent by his answer of the 27. excused the not yielding to the
abstinence, which he said, The Regent excuses his refuse of the Abstinence.
without evident prejudice to the Kings cause, could not be granted so long as
Edinburgh was detained. For other points he answered, That by himself, without
the consent of the Nobility and Estates he could say nothing, but at their
meeting in August, her Majesty should receive all reasonable satisfaction. The
adversary party in the mean time, nothing relenting of their course, did keep a
form of Parliament at Edinburgh the 22. August, and though they were but five
persons in all present, that had any voice in the State, A Parliament kept at
Edinburgh by the Lords.
to wit, two Bishops and three Noblemen, they pronounced above 200. persons
forfeited. The Regent advertising the Queen of England how they had proceeded,
and what disorder did show the necessity whereunto they that lived in the Kings
obedience were brought, The Regent kept a Parliament at Striveling.
and how it concerned him, and the rest to prosecute what they had justly
intended, in regard of their enemies precipitation. So in the Parliament kept
at Striveling the 28. of the same month, sentence of forfeiture was pronounced
against the Duke of Chatteller ault and his two sons, the Abbot of
Aberbrothock, and Lord Claud, the Earl of Huntley, the Lord of Grange, Persons
forfeited in the Parliament.
and some others. And for satisfying the Queen of Englands desire, the Earl of
Morton, Mar, and Glencarn, the Lords Semple, Ruthven, and Glamis, with the
Bishop of Orkney, the Abbots of Dunfermlin, and S. Colmes Inche, Sir John
Ballendine Justice Clerk, and Mr. James, Mr. Gill Clerk of Register were
nominated by the Estates, and Commission given, or to any four, three, or two
of that number to treat with such as the Queen of England should appoint upon
the differences arisen amongst the subjects by occasion of the late troubles,
and for contracting a League offensive and defensive betwixt the two Realms. Of
all that did the Regent give notice to the Queen, beseeching her not to press
them with any thing that might seem to call the Kings authority in question.
But before these letters came to her hands, he was killed as ye shall hear.

Lord Claud Hamilton having intelligence given him of the security wherein the
Regent and Nobility lived at Striveling, An enterprise of the Lord claud
Hamilton.
and how as in a time of settled peace, they did not so much as keep a watch by
night, took resolution to invade them, and was therein greatly encouraged by
Cap. George Bell (a man born in Striveling, and one that knew all the passages
and streets) who made offerto put him and the company he should bring with him
safely in the town. This he communicated to the Earl of Huntley, Walter Scot of
Bacleugh, and David Spence of Wormeston, who were all content to join in the
enterprise. The second of September, they went from Edinburgh a little before
Sunsetting, accompanied with 200. horse and 300. foot, and lest their journey
should be suspected they made the rumor go, that they went toward Iedburgh,
to compose a discord fallen out betwixt the town and the Lord of Fernherst. To
ease the footmen they had taken all the horses which came the day before to the
Market, and as many as they could otherwise purchase by the way; and so
marching with a wonderful confidence (for by the wayall their discourse was,
whom they would kill, and whom they would save) they came about the dawning of
the day to the town, and found all things so quiet, as not a dog was heard to
open his mouth and bark: whereupon having planted the soldiers in the most
commodious parts of the town, and enjoined them to suffer no person to come
unto the street, they went to the Noblemens lodgings, which were designed unto
them, and found there little or no resistance. The Earl of Morton defended the
lodging wherein he was some little time, but fire being put to the house he
rendered to the Lord of Bacleugh. The Regent was taken with less ado, his
servants making no defense. In like sort were the Earls of Glencarn and
Eglinton made prisoners with diverse others. The Earl of Mar hearing the
noise, issued forth of the Castle with 16. persons only, and entering the back
of his new lodging which was not then finished, played with Muskets upon the
street, so as he forced them to quit the same. The townsmen and others upon
this taking courage, gathered together, and put the enemy to flight, pursuing
them so hotly, as they were constrained to quit their prisoners, and some to
render themselves to those they were leading captive. The Regent who was
Wormestons prisoner (for to him he had rendered) being carried a little without
the Port, when they saw the rescue coming, was shot by Captain Calder, and with
the same bullet wormeston (who did what he could to save the Regent) was
stricken dead.

The death of this Gentleman was much regrated of both factions, The number of
the slain on both sides.
for that he was for manly courage, and other virtues as well of body as mind,
inferior to none of his time. There fell at this time on the Regents side some
24. amongst whom the most eminent were George Ruthven, brother to the Lord
Ruthven, and Alexander Stewart of Garleis. Of the other side, as many were
slain, and diverse taken prisoners; amongst whom were the two Captains Bell and
Cawder, who were executed as Traitors. The Lord Claud with the Earl of Huntley,
and the rest escaped, and had all been taken, if there had been horses to
pursue them; But the Borderers that followed Bacleugh, men accustomed with such
practices, had emptied the stables at the first entry into the town. It was
certainly a bold enterprise, whereof we will not find many the like in story.
So few men leaving their strength to take so long a journey, and enter upon a
town full of enemies (for there were in it 500. able and resolute men at least,
besides the inhabitants) was a great audaciousnesse; and then to get in their
hands the chief of their adversaries, whereby they were once in a possibility
to have returned absolute victors; yea when the course altered, to have saved
themselves with so little loss, which held strange, and made the enterprise to
be counted no less fortunate, then it was bold and venturous.

It was also observed, An ominous speech of the King, being yet a child.
and is worth the reporting, that the young King who was brought from the
Castle to the Parliament house at their first sitting, after a short speech which
they had put in his mouth, espying in the table-cloth, or as others have said,
in the top of the house, a little hole, cried out, that there was a hole in the
Parliament. An ominous speech, and so interpreted by some that were present,
which the event made the more remarkable; for before the Parliament was at an
end, a great hole was made in it, by the death of him that began the same. The
Regent though the wound was mortal, did not light from his horse till he came
to the Castle. By the way when his friends did encourage him, he still
answered, If the babe be well (meaning the King) all is well; and being laid in
bed and his wound dressed, after they had told him that his bowels were cut,
calling the Nobility he spoke unto them a few words to this effect.

I am now my Lords to leave you, The Reg^nts speech to the Nobility.
at God his good pleasure, and to go into a world where is rest and peace. Ye
know it was not my ambition, but your choice that brought me to the charge I
have this while sustained, which I undertook the more willingly, that I was
persuaded of your assistance in the defense of the infant King, whose
protection by nature and duty I could not refuse. And now being able to do no
more, I must commend him to the Almighty God, and to your care, entreating you
to continue in the defense of his cause, (wherein I do assure you in Gods name
of the victory) and make choice of some worthy person, fearing God and
affectionate to the King, to succeed unto my place. And I must likewise commend
unto your favor my servants, who never have received benefit at my hands, and
desire you to remember my love to my wife Meg, (so he was accustomed to call
her) whom I beseech God to comfort. This said, he took leave of them all one by
one, requesting them to assist him with their prayers, in which he himself
continued some hours, and so most devoutly ended his life. A man he was of
noble qualities, tried with both fortunes, and if he had enjoyed a longer and
more peaceable time, he had doubtless made the Kingdom happy by his government.

It is time that we return to the Church, An Assembly of the Church at
Striveling.
and consider what the estate thereof was amidst the civil dissensions. In the
countries where the Queens faction ruled the Ministers in their prayers did
always recommend the Queen as Sovereign, serving the affection of those that
commanded in the bounds, albeit the assembly of the Church had otherwise
appointed. John Knox, as we showed, had left the town of Edinburgh, and was
gone to S. Andrews, where he had strong opposition made him by Mr. Archibald,
and Mr. John Hamiltons professors of Philosophy in the new College, who stood
fast to the Queens cause and drew many of the Students after them. This,
together with the grief he conceived of the present troubles, did cast him in a
sickness, whereof he never perfectly recovered. And at this time hearing that
the Assembly of the Church was met at Striveling, John Knox his letter to the
Assembly.
he sent unto them a letter, which I thought worthy to be here insert; it was,
as follows. Because the daily decay of natural strength does threaten me with
a certain and sudden departing from the misery of this life, I exhort you
brethren, yea in the fear of God I charge you to take heed to your selves, and
the flock over which God has placed you Ministers. What your behavior should
be, I am not now, nor have I need, as I think, to express, but to charge you
to be faithful, I dare not forget. And unfaithful ye shall be counted before
the Lord Jesus, if with your consent, directly or indirectly, you suffer
unworthy men to be thrust into the ministry of the Church, under whatsoever
pretext. Remember the Judge before whom we must give account, and flee this as
ye would eschew hell fire. This will be a hard battle I grant, but there is a
second will be harder, that is, to withstand the merciless devourers of the
Church patrimony. If men will spoil, let them do it to their own peril and
condemnation, but communicate not ye with their sins, of what estate soever
they be, neither by consent nor silence, but with public protestation make
known to the world that ye are innocent of such robbery, and that ye will seek
redress thereof at the hands of God and man. God give you wisdom, strength and
courage in so good a cause, and me an happy end. From S. Andrews the thirteenth
of August, 1571.

In this meeting the Churchmen began to think somewhat more seriously of the
policy of the Church then before: A consultation for settling the policy of the
Church.
for the first draught being neither liked universally among themselves, nor
approved by the Council, they saw it needful to agree upon a certain form of
government, that might continue. Unto this time the Church had been governed by
Superintendents and Commissioners of countries, as they were then named. The
Commissioners were alterable, and were either changed, The power of the
Superintendents.
or had their Commissions renewed in every Assembly. The Superintendents held
their office during life, and their power was Episcopal, for they did elect and
ordain Ministers, they presided in Synods, and directed all Church censures,
neither was any excommunication pronounced without their warrant. They assigned
the stipends of Ministers, directing the Collectors (who were then chosen by
the General Assembly) to distribute the thirds of Benefices amongst them, as
they thought convenient. If any surplusage was found in the accounts, the same
was given by their appointment to the supply of the public state; and in such
respect were they with all men, as notwithstanding the dissensions that were in
the country, no exception was taken at their proceedings by any of the
parties, but all concurred to the maintenance of Religion, and in the treaties
of peace made, that was ever one of the Articles: Such a reverence was in those
times carried to the Church, the very form of government purchasing them
respect. But the Church considering that things could not long continue in that
estate, the Superintendents being grown in years, and most of them serving upon
their own charges, which burden it was not to be hoped, others when they were
gone would undergo, thought meet to intercede with the Regent and Estates, for
establishing a sure and constant order in providing men to those places, when
they should fall void, and settling a competent moyen for their entertainment.
To this effect Commission was given to the Superintendents of Lothian, Fife,
and Angus, and with them were joined Mr. David Lindesay, Commissioners named to
deal with he Regent and Estate.
Mr. Andrew Hay, Mr. John Row, and Mr. George Hay. These were appointed to
attend the Parliament, and deal with the Regent and Estates, that some course
might be taken in that business. But the Regents death and the troubles which
thereupon issued, made all to be continued for that time.

The Regents funerals performed with such solemnity as the time would suffer,
and his corpse interred in the Chapel of the Castle of Striveling, the next
care was for using a Governor in his place. Archibald Earl of Argile, (who was
then returned to the Kings obedience) James Earl of Morton, and John Earl of
Mar being put in lites, The Earl of Mar elected Regent.
the voices went with the Earl of Mar. The fifth of September the election
was made, after which the Parliament went on: wherein besides the confirmation
of the Regencie, certain other Acts passed in favors of those that should
happen to be slain in defense of the King his authority. And the Regent bending
all his thoughts to the besieging of Edinburgh brought an Army thither about
the midst of October, with nine pieces of Artillery taken forth of the Castle
of Striveling. Having battered the walls of the town on the South Side, but to
small purpose, because of the Rampires and ditches which the defendants had
cast up within; he retired himself and his Army to Leth. The rest of the winter
was spent in light skirmishes, wherein none of the parties did suffer any great
loss. They in Edinburgh had the advantage; for the Castle being situated in an
high place, and having a long prospect into all the parts about, gave them
warning by a certain sign when their enemies did issue forth, so as seldom they
came to handy strokes: once only it happened that in an Ambush laid by them of
Leth, two Captains, Hackerton and Michel, who served the Lords in Edinburgh,
with 60. of their companies were taken prisoners. This made them of Edinburgh
more circumspect in their outgoing ever after that time.

In the North parts Adam Gordon (who was Deputy for his brother the Earl of
Huntley) did keep a great stir, Adam Gordon deputy for Huntley in the North.
and under color of the Queens authority committed diverse oppressions,
especially upon the Forbesses. Arthur Forbes brother to the Lord Forbes
(commonly called Black Arthur) a man both of wisdom and courage, had from the
beginning of the civil wars, allways allowed the Kings party, and was at that
time laboring to pacify quarrels amongst those of his name, (for they were
striving one with another) that they might be the more able to withstand their
enemies. In end he prevailed so far, as he brought his friends to condescend
upon a time and place of meeting, for taking up their controversies, and
building them together in a sure friendship. A conflict betwixt Adam Gordon and
the Forbesses.
Adam Gordon smelling his purpose, and fearing the consequence of it, used many
policies to keep them still divided: but when he perceived the meeting would
keep, he resolved to come unto the place, and one way or other to impede the
agreement. At his coming he found them treating upon matters, and standing in
two companies a good space one from another, and as if he had been ignorant of
the purpose, sent to enquire wherefore they made such Convocations. They
answered, that they were doing some private affairs, wherein he had no
interess. And being commanded to separate and return to their houses, they
refused: whereupon he invaded them, and falling on that part where Arthur
Forbes stood, in the very joining killed him. The rest seeing him fall, took
the flight, and in the chase many were slain; they reckon 120. to have died at
that time. Not long after he sent to summon the house of Tavoy pertaining to
Alexander Forbes. The Lady refusing to yield without direction from her
husband, he put fire unto it, and burnt her therein, with children and
servants, being 27. persons in all. This inhumane and barbarous cruelty made
his name odious, and stained all his former doings; otherwise he was held both
active and fortunate in his enterprises.

The Lord Forbes having escaped in the conflict came to the Regent, A supply
granted by the Regent to the Lord Forbes.
and complained for a present supply: he had granted to him 200. footmen under
the conduct of two Captains, Chisholm and Wedderburn, with letters to the
Noblemen of the country that lay adjacent, to assist. Forbes, gathering his
friends, and thinking himself strong enough with the supply he had obtained,
made out to search and pursue his enemies. Adam Gordon lay then at Aberdene,
and being advertised that the Forbesses were drawing near to the City, Another
conflict betwixt the Gordons and Fo^besses.
he went forth to meet them. The encounter at the beginning was sharp and
furious; but the Forbesses were young men for the greatest part, of small
experience, and not under command; and the soldiers not being well seconded by
them, after they had fought a while, gave over and yielded. The slaughter was
not great, for the conflict happened in the evening, which helped many to
escape: Captain Chisholm with most of his company, and some 15. of the name of
Forbes were killed; the Master of Forbes and some others were taken prisoners.

This good success of the Queens party in the North, gave hearts to all the
faction, and now they began every where to take new courage. In the South the
Lairds of Fernherst and Bacleugh did affail Iedburgh, a little town, but very
constant in maintaining the Kings authority. Lord Claud Hamilton belyed Paslay.
The Castle of Braughtie on the river of Tay was surprised by... Seaton of
Perbroath, and in diverse other parts troubles were raised of purpose to divide
the Regents forces, and to withdraw him from Leth, that the town of Edinburgh
which was then in some scarcity of victuals, might be relieved.

In the month of January an assembly of the Church convened at Leth, An
Assembly of the Church at Leth.
where after great instance made with the Regent and Council, for settling the
policy of the Church, it was agreed that six of the Council, and as many of the
Assembly should be selected to treat, An. 1572.
reason, and conclude upon that business. For the Council James Earl of Morton
Chancellor, William Lord Ruthven Treasurer, Robert Abbot of Dunfermlin
Secretary, Commissioners named for the Council and Church.
Mr. James Macgill Keeper of the Rolls, Sir John Bellenden Justice Clerk, and
Colin Campbel of Glenorchy were named; and for the Church, John Ereskin of Dun
Superintendent of Angus, Mr. John Winraine Superintendent of Fife, Mr. Andrew
Hay Commissioner of Claddisdale, Mr. David Lindesay Commissioner of the West,
Mr. Robert Pont Commissioner of Orkney, and Mr. John Craig one of the Ministers
of Edinburgh. These twelve convening after diverse meetings, and long
deliberation, grew to the conclusions following. 1. That the Archbishopricks
and Bishoprics presently void, Articles agreed unto by the Council and Church.
should be disponed to the most qualified of the Ministry. 2. That the
spiritual jurisdiction should be exerced by the Bishops in their Dioces. 3.
That all Abbots, Priors, and other inferior Prelates, who should happen to be
presented to Benefices, should be tried by the Bishop or Superintendent of the
bounds concerning their qualification and aptness to give voice for the Church
in Parliament, and upon their collation be admitted to the Benefice, and not
otherwise. 4. That so the Bishoprics presently void, or that should happen
hereafter to fall, the King and the Regent should recommend fit and qualified
persons, and their elections to be made by the Chapters of the Cathedral
Churches. And forasmuch as diverse of the Chapters Churches were possessed by
men, provided before his Majesty's Coronation, who bare no office in the
Church, a particular nomination should be made of Ministers in every Dioces, to
supply their rooms until the Benefices should fall void. 5. That all Benefices
of Cure under Prelacies, should be disponed to actual Ministers, and to no
others. 6. That the Ministers should receive Ordination from the Bishop of the
Dioces, and where no Bishop was as yet placed, from the Superintendent of the
bounds. 7. That the Bishops and Superintendents at the Ordination of Ministers
should exact of them an oath for acknowledging his Majesty's authority, and for
obedience to their Ordinary in all things lawful, according to the form then
condescended.


Order also was taken for disposing of Provestries, College charges, and
Chaplanries, and diverse other particulars most profitable for the Church, as in
the records extant may be seen, which were all ordained to stand in force
until the Kings majority, or till the Estates of the Realm should otherwise
appoint.

In August thereafter, An Assembly of the Church at Perth.
the Assembly of the Church meeting again at Perth, report was made of these
conclusions, and exception taken by some at the titles of Archbishop, Dean,
Archdeacon, Chancellor, and Chapter, as being Popish and offensive to the ears
of good Christians; whereupon it was declared, that by using these titles they
meant not to allow of Popish superstition in any sort, wishing the same to be
changed in others not so scandalous. As the name of Bishop to be hereafter used
for Archbishop, the Chapter to be called The Bishops assembly, the Dean to be
called The Moderator of the said assembly; And for the titles of Archdeacon,
Chancellor, Abbot, and Prior, that some should be appointed to consider how
far these functions did extend, and give their opinion for the interchange
thereof with others more agreeable to the Word, and the policy of the best
reformed Churches, reporting their opinions at the next Assembly. But I do not
find that any such report was made; like it is the wiser sort esteemed there
was no cause to stumble at titles, where the office was thought necessary and
lawful. A protestation always was made, that they received these Articles for
an interim, till a more perfect order might be obtained at the King his Regent,
and the Nobilities hands. According to these conclusions Mr. John Douglas
Provost of the New College of S. Andrews, was provided to the Archbishopric
of that See, Mr. James Boyd to the Archbishopric of Glasgow, Mr. James Paton
to the Bishopric of Dunkeld, and Mr. Andrew Ghram: to the Bishopric of
Dumblane.

About the end of January, The Lord Ruthven sent to assist the town of Iedburgh.
the Regent advertised of the peril wherein the town of Iedburgh stood, and of
the great preparation, that Fernherst and Bacleugh made to surprise it, (for
they had besides their own forces drawn all the people of Esk, Ewis, and
Liddesdale, to join with them in hope of spoil, and from the English Borders,
diverse that were given to robbery to the number of 3000. and above) sent the
Lord Ruthven with some forces to defend them. Before his coming, Walter Ker of
Cesford a man of good worth, who had ever assisted the Kings party, was joined
with them. Their enemies notthelesse esteeming themselves strong enough by
reason of their numbers, went forwards with an assurance of victory. The Lord
Ruthven having notice given him by the way of their diet, and the time they had
appointed to invade the town, did use the more speed, and came in sight thereof
just as the enemies appeared. They fearing to be enclosed betwixt the town,
(who showed themselves in the fields ready to fight) and the forces the Lord
Ruthven brought with him, did presently retire and give back. Fernherst and
Bacleugh went to Hawick, and were followed the next day by the Lord Ruthven,
who came upon them so unlooked for, as they were cast into a great fear. The
principals that had horses fled away, the rest betook them to a little bush of
wood, where being environed on all sides, they yielded at discretion: the
prisoners were many, of whom some few were retained as pledges, and the rest
dimitted upon promise to enter themselves at a certain day. The rest of the
winter and all the next spring was spent in light skirmishes, with small loss
on either side, for they of the Queens faction did seldom come to the open
fields, or if they showed themselves at any time, upon the first onset, they
took the flight, and retired to the town.

Whilst matters did thus proceed in the Queen of Scots quarrel at home, The
Bishop of Ross called inquestion for the Queens marriage with Norfolk.
the Bishop of Ross in England renewed the purpose of marriage with the Duke of
Norfolk, and practiced with diverse for setting the Queen at liberty. This being
discovered, the Duke was committed to the Tower of London, and being arraigned
at Westminster Hall the 16. of January was convicted of Treason and condemned
to die, yet was the execution delayed to the June after. The Bishop of Ross
called also in question, defended himself by the privileges of his Embassage,
saying, That he had done nothing but what his place and duty tied him unto, for
procuring the liberty of his Princess; and that he came unto England with
sufficient authority, which he had showed, and was at the time accepted. When
it was replied, that the privileges of Ambassadors could not protect them,
who did offend against the Majesty of the Princes they were sent unto, and that
they were not to be reputed other then enemies, who practiced rebellion against
the State: He answered, that he had neither raised nor practis^d rebellion; but
perceiving the adversaries of his Princess countenanced, and her out of all
hope of liberty he could not abandon his Sovereign in her affliction, but do
his best to procure her freedom. And that it would never be found that the
privileges of Ambassadors were violated, via juris, by course of law, but
only via facti, by way of fact, which seldom had a good success. After long
altercation he was sent to the Isle of Ely, and from thence brought and
imprisoned in the Tower, The Bishop of Ross imprisoned at Ely.
where he remained nigh two years. Some ten days after Norfolks execution, the
Queen of England directed certain of her Council to the Queen of Scots, to
expostulate with her for making suit to the Pope and King of Spain, The Duke of
Norfolk executed.
and for receiving letters from the Pope, together with a sentence declaratory
published against her self, whereunto (after protestation that she was a free
Queen, Certain of the Council directed to the Queen of Scots.
and subject to none) she answered, that she had indeed by letters solicited
both the Pope and King of Spain, for restoring her unto her Kingdom, which was
no prejudice to the Q. of England, that she had received godly and consolatory
letters from the Pope. But for the sentence given by him, she never knew
thereof, till a printed copy was brought unto her, which after she had read,
she did cast into the fire. These answers did not satisfy the Q. of Engl. who
having understood that she had entered in a secret confederacy with the
Spaniard, kept her from that time in a more strict custody then before.

Yet at the request of the French King, she sent of new Sir William Drury unto
Scotland to treat for peace; and if that could not be wrought, to procure a
cessation of Arms for a certain space. But he prevailed nothing, the wars
being then very hot, The Queen of England^ reateth for peace among the parties.
and the parties mightily incensed against others. No quarters were given, nor
interchange of prisoners made, but all that were taken on either side,
presently executed. This device was held to proceed from the Earl of Morton,
who thought the troubles would not hastily cease, if a greater severity were
not used toward them who withstood the Kings authority. But whose device
soever it was, it proved exceeding hateful. The common sort taking it to have
come of Morton, called the wars of that time the Douglasses wars. This form
of doing continued from the 16. of April to the 8. of June, at which time both
parties wearied of execution daily made, were content to cease from such
rigor, and use fair wars, as in former times. In the North Adam Gordon after
the Forbesses were defeated found no resistance, and following his fortune,
reduced all beyond the river of Dee to the Queens obedience. To impede his
proceedings (for he had entered then into the country of Mernis, and was
besieging the house of William Douglass of Glenbervy) The Regent directed the
Earl of Crawford and Buchan, The Earls of ^tawford and Buchan directed against
Adam Gordan.
with the Lord Glamis, and Master of Marshell. These Noblemen meeting at
Brichen, and waiting there till forces should assemble. Adam Gordon came upon
them in the night, and killing the watches that were placed at the Bridge on
the North side of the town, had very nigh taken them all in bed, but they
wakened by the noise of the Trumpets, espcaped, many were taken prisoners, and
some 39. persons slain within the City. This done, he besieged the town of
Montross, and forced them to pay a great sum of money which put the town of
Dundy in such fear, as they were driven to seek aid of their Neighbors in Fife.

At the same time the Castle of Blacknes, The Castle of Blacknes betrayed by
the Keeper.
a Fort on the South Side of the river of Forth, was sold by the Keeper to the
Hamiltons, and thereby the Navigation, betwixt Leth and Striveling barred, at
Edinburgh were diverse skirmishes betwixt them, and the companies that lay at
Leth; and (which was greatly lamented of both parties) the Lord Methven killed
by a shot of Cannon from the Castle. The Duke in the mean time, having
proclaimed a Justice Court at Hamilton, and diverse persons within the
Sheriffdom of Ranfrew and Lennox, to answer to certain crimes, whereof they
were delated. The Regent prepared to keep the diet, and leaving the Earl of
Montross, and the Lord Lindesay, to follow the service at Leth, took journey to
Glasgow, and from thence to Hamilton. But neither the Duke nor any in his name
appearing to hold the Court, he appointed the Lord Semple Lieutenant in those
West parts for the King, and returned to Striveling.

He had intended an expedition in the North, Ambassadors from France and
England.
but upon advertisement that two Ambassadors were arrived at Leth, he turned
thither; The one was Monsieur de Crock employed by the French, the other Mr.
Randolph, by England, who professed both of them to be sent for negotiating a
peace amongst the parties; yet was it thought the French did not much affect
the peace. For even then the Lord Fleming came from France with moneys to pay
the soldiers that served the Lords at Edinburgh. The Lord Fleming unhapp^y
killed.
This Nobleman some ten days after walking in the street, was unhappily wounded
in the knee by the shot of an Harquesk, whereof he died the sixth of September.
As to the Queen of England, howbeit she desired peace to be made, yet she would
have it in such manner, as both factions might depend on her, and so she had
carried her self in all the late treaties, as however she favored the Kings
party most, the other party did never despair of her good will.

The two Ambassadors having tried the minds of both parties, A cess^tion from
war concluded.
they found them more tractable then they expected, and after some travel taken
amongst them, obtained a cessation of Arms, and for the space of two months,
(continuing from the first of August, to the first of October) upon the
conditions following. 1. That the Regent, The Anicles of Ab^^^ence.
and all other subjects of the Realm partakers with them in the present
troubles, should faithfully promise during the said space, to abstain from all
hostility. 2. That before expiring of the said Abstinence, the Nobility and
Estates should convene and advise upon the best means to establish a final
peace, and if any difficulty should arise in the said treaty, which amongst
themselves could not be composed, that the same should be remitted to the
determination of the most Christian King and Queen of England. 3. That the town
of Edinburgh should be set at liberty, and made patent to all the subjects, and
no place thereof be withholden, or fortified with Garrisons, the Castle only
excepted, which before these troubles arose, was accustomed to be kept and
guarded with soldiers. 4. That all the subjects of whatsoever quality and
condition they were, should freely converse together without trouble or
molestation, to be offered them by word or deed, excepting such as should be
found guilty of the murder of the King his Father and Regents. The thieves and
broken men of the Borders and Highlands with the disturbers of the public
peace, betwixt the Realms of Scotland and England, none of which should be
comprised in the present Abstinence, but remitted to the trial and censure of
the Common law, and wheresoever they might be apprehended, presented. 5. And
last, because there were diverse persons, who in the time of these troubles had
possessed themselves in other men's lands, and the tenth whereof in that season
were to be collected; To the effect no impediment should be made to the peace
intended, it was agreed that the corns and fruits growing upon the said lands,
should be gathered and put in Granges, or stalked upon the fields, and not
applied to any private use, before the expiring of the Abstinence.


These Articles were published the first day of August, both at Edinburgh and
Leth, and the same day the Duke with the Earl of Huntley and their followers
departed from Edinburgh, leaving the town free, and patent, as was agreed. This
beginning of peace joyed not a little the good subjects, for which public
thanks were given in all the churches, and solemn prayers made for the
continuance, and perfection thereof. At this time or much about the same, the
Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept a long time at Lochlevin, was
delivered by the Earl of Morton to the Lord Hunsden Governor of Berwick, and
shortly after beheaded at York. Hereat many did offend, esteeming the fact
dishonorable, and a discredit to the whole nation: others did excuse it by the
necessity of the time, and the inconvenience that the public affairs might
receive, if the Queen of England should be in any sort displeased. But so much
the worse it was taken, that as the rumor went, Morton received for his
delivery in England a great sum of money, and so the Nobleman thought rather
to be sold, then delivered.

The next day after the publication of the Abstinence, the Regent and Nobility
adhering to the King did enter into Edinburgh, where the Ambassadors after
thanks given them for their pains they had taken were courteously dimitted; It
was the 27 of September, some three days only before the expiring of the
Abstinence, that the Noblemen ^id meet (as was appointed) to consult upon the
means of a perfect peace. Whereupon it was first agreed that the Abstinence
should be prorogued unto January next, after that, falling to treat of the
business it self, they agreed in many points, and even then had made a final
accord, if the Lord of Grange had not marred the same with his petitions;
These were as follows. 1. He craved a discharge to himself, and all that were
in the Castle of all things, which they or any of them had committed since the
beginning of the troubles, and that all Acts, Decrees, and Sentences pronounced
against them, either in Parliament. secret Council, or before the Justice
general, and his Deputies might be declared null, and of no effect. 2. That
they should be repossessed in their rooms, heritages, and possessions, without
any challenge to be made thereafter of the same by whatsoever person or
persons. 3. That the heirs of the Lord Fleming, the Lord of Wormeston, and
others who were slain in the Queens cause, might enter to their heritage and
rooms, as though they had never been forfeited. 4. That the Castle of Edinburgh
should be consigned in the hands of the Earl of Rothes, with the whole
furnishing, munition and rent belonging there to the Captain, making an account
of the Jewels, and other goods which he received with the house. As also
restoring all the goods of the people of Edinburgh that were put in his
custody, which he was content to do, he being freely discharged of all, and
secured by Act of Parliament. 5. That the Castle of Blacknes should be put in
the keeping of some one of their side, and the rents appertaining thereto,
assigned for the entertainment of a Garrison within the same. 6. In respect of
the great debt he had contracted in these wars he craved the sum of twenty
thousand merks to be given him for satisfying his creditors. 7. That the Earl
of Morton should resign the superiority of the lands of Grange, and other lands
annexed thereto, to be holden of the Crown in all time coming. And lastly, that
the Lords within the Castle might be licenced to go into the Kingdom of France,
or any other country they pleased forth of Scotland; and that the Earl of
Rothes should be surety for the accomplishment the whole premises.


These Articles being presented to the Regent and Council, The Regent and
Council do answer to the Articles.
were for the first three judged reasonable; but to commit any places of
strength to others then those who had constantly adhered to the King, they
esteemed it not safe, and to give him any recompense, that was known to be the
author of the last troubles, they said it would be a matter of ill ensample.
For the license craved to those of the Castle to go out of the country, they
held the petition very suspicious, and could not think there was a sound
meaning in them that had moved the same: yet was it not thought meet to answer
him by a simple denial at that time, but rather to keep him in hope, and
appoint a new diet for pursuing the treaty begun. Thus by consent the
Abstinence was prorogued, and the last of October. assigned for a new meeting at
Perth.

The delay grieved the Regent exceedingly, The Regent dies at Striveling.
and (as it was supposed) partly for this, and partly for the crossings he
found in the public affairs he contracted a sickness, whereof he died at
Striveling the eighth of October. The adversary faction flattering themselves
in their own conceits made the like construction of his death, which they had
made of the other Regents that proceeded: saying, that it was an evident sign
of Gods displeasure with the present courses, and that none of those who joined
in the enterprise against the Queen could prosper better. But to measure Gods
love or hatred by these outward accidents, is folly; seeing they fall out alike
to all both good and wicked: and for this Nobleman howsoever he was taken away
to the country untimely, he died happily for himself, and well reported of
all. Before his dying, He commends the care of the Kings person to his Lady
and Brother.
he commended the care of the Kings person in most earnest manner to his Lady,
and to Alexander Ereskin his brother appointing him keeper of the Castle till
his son should be grown up, and be of a perfectage, and giving most wise
directions both for the one and the other, ended his days in great quietness
and in the assurance of that better life.

In the next month John Knox, The description of Io^n Knox his life and death.
who had returned a little before to Edinburgh, departed this life. The Reader
will pardon me, if here I make a little digression to show what a man this was
both in his life and death, the rather because some malicious and wicked
spirits have studied by many forged lies to deprave his fame, only out of
hatred of true Religion, whereof he was a zealous promover. He was born in
Gifford within Lothian, of a mean but honest parentage, and being put to
school, made such profit in his studies under that famous Doctor Mr. John
Major, as he was held worthy to enter into orders before the years allowed. By
reading the ancients, especially the works of S. Austen, he was brought to the
knowledge of the truth, and for the profession thereof endured many troubles,
as well in the Cardinals life, as after his death. Having happily escaped these
dangers, he went into England, and became a Preacher of the Gospel, making his
chief abode in the towns of Berwick and Newcastle. In the beginning of Queen
Mary's persecution, he fled in the company of some other Ministers to Geneva,
and served with them in an English Congregation, which was there gathered,
until the year 1559. at which time he was called home by the Noblemen that
enterprised the Reformation, and how soon the Church got liberty, placed
Minister at Edinburgh; in this charge he continued to his last, for the civil
troubles which forced him to leave the town, ceased no sooner then he returned
to the place. But his body grown infirm, and his voice so weak, as people could
not hear him, teaching in the ordinary place, he made choice of another more
commodious within the town, reading to his auditory the history of the Passion,
in which he said, It was his desire to finish and close his Ministry. Thus he
continued preaching, though with much weakness, two months and more after his
return, and knowing that he was not to remain a long time with them, he was
instant with the Council of the town to provide themselves of a worthy Parson
to succeed in his place. Mr. James Lawson admitted Minister at Edinburgh.
Mr. James Lawson, who at that time professed Philosophy in the College of
Aberdene, being commended for a good Preacher, Commissioners were directed from
the Superintendent of Lothian, the Church of Edinburgh, and Mr. John Knox
himself, to desire him to accept the charge. To the letter that the
Commissioners carried, after he had set his hand, he added this Postscript,
Accelcra, mifrater, alioqui sero venies, make haste brother, otherwise you come
too late: meaning that if he made any stay, he should find him dead, and gone.
These last words moved Mr. Lawson to take journey the more quickly; when he was
come to the town, and had preached once or twice to the good liking of the
people, order was taken by the Superintendent for his admission, and the Diet
appointed, at which John Knox himself would be present, and teach, though he
could scarcewalk on foot to the chair. At no time was he heard to speak with
greater power, and more content to the hearers, and in the end of his Sermon,
calling God to witness that he had walked in a good conscience amongst them,
not seeking to please men, nor serving either his own or other men's affections,
but in all sincerity and truth, preached the Gospel of Christ, with most grave
and pithy words he exhorted them to stand fast in the faith they had received:
and having conceived a zealous prayer for the continuance of Gods blessings
upon them, and the multiplying of his spirit upon the Preacher, who was then to
be admitted, he gave them his last farewell. The people did convey him to his
lodging, and could not be drawn from it, so loath they were to part with him,
and he the same day in the afternoon, by sickness was forced to take bed.

During the time he lay, John Knox his speech to the Earl of Morton.
(which was not long) he was much visited by all sorts of persons, to whom he
spoke most comfortably, amongst others to the Earl of Morton that came to see
him, he was heard say, My Lord, God has given you many blessings, he has
given you wisdom, riches, many good and great friends, and is now to prefer
you to the government of the Realm. In his name I charge you, that you use
these blessings aright, and better in time to come, nor ye have done in times
past. In all your actions seek first the glory of God, the furtherance of his
Gospel, the maintenance of his Church and Ministry, and next be careful of the
King, to procure his good and the welfare of the Realm. If ye shall do this,
God will be with you and honor you; if otherwise ye shall do it not, he shall
deprive you of all these benefits, and your end shall be shame and ignominy.
These speeches the Earl nine years after, at the time of his execution, called
to mind, saying, that he had found them to be true, and him therein a Prophet.

His last speech to the Ministers.

A day or two before his death, His last speech to the Ministers and Elders of
the Church.
he sent for Mr. David Lindesay, Mr. James Lawson, and the Elders and Deacons
of the Church, to whom he said, The time is approaching for which I have long
thirsted; wherein I shall be relieved of all cares, and be with my Savior
Christ for ever. And now God is my witness whom I have served with my spirit
in the Gospel of his Son that I have taught nothing but the true and solid
doctrine of the Gospel, and that the end I proponed in all my preaching was, to
instruct the ignorant, to confirm the weak, to comfort the consciences of those
who were humbled under the sense of their sins, and bear down with the
threatenings of Gods judgments such as were prou^ and rebellious. I am not
ignorant that many have blamed, and yet do blame my too great rigor and
severity, but God knows, that in my heart I never hated the persons of those
against whom I thundered Gods judgments. I did only hate their sins, and
labored at all my power to gain them to Christ. That I forbear none of
whatsoever condition, I did it out of the fear of my God, who had placed me in
the function of the Ministry, and I knew would bring me to an account. Now
brethren for your selves I have no more to say, but to warn you, that you take
heed to the flock, over whom God has placed you overseers, and whom he has
redeemed by the blood of his only begotten son. And you, Mr. Lawson, fight a
good fight, do the work of the Lord with courage, and with a willing mind, and
God from above bless you and the Church, whereof you have the charge. Against
it, so long as it continues in the doctrine of truth, the gates of hell shall
not prevail.

This spoken, The Ministers carry a Commission to the Lord of G^ange from John
Knox.
and the Elders and Deacons dimitted, he called the two Preachers unto him, and
said, There is one thing that grieveth me exceedingly, you have sometime seen
the courage and constancy of the Lord of Grange in Gods cause, and now unhappy
man he has cast himself away. I will pray you two, take the pains to go unto
him, and say from me, that unless he forsake that wicked course wherein he is
entered, neither shall that rock in which he confideth, defend him, nor the
carnal wisdom of that man whom he counts half a god (this was young
Lethington) make him help, but shamefully he shall be pulled out of that nest,
and his carcass hang before the Sun. The soul of that man is dear unto me, and
if it be possible, I would fain have him to be saved. They went as he had
desired, and conferred a long space with Grange, but with no persuasion could
he be diverted from his course; which being reported, he took most heavily.

The next day he gave order for making his Coffin, He gives order for making
his Coffin.
wherein his body should be laid, and was that day (as through all the time of
his sickness) much in prayer, ever crying, Come Lord Jesus, sweet Jesus in thy
hands I commend my spirit. Being asked by those that attended him, if his pains
were great, he answered, that he did not esteem that a pain, which would be to
him the end of all trouble, and beginning of eternal joys. Oftentimes after
some deep meditations, he burst forth in these words: O serve the Lord in fear,
and death shall not be terrible to you. Blessed is the death of those, that
have part in the death of Jesus. The evening which was to him the last of this
wretched life, having slept some hours together, but with great unquietness
(for he was heard to send forth many sighs and groans) Robert Campbell Knize
cleaugh, and John Iohnston (called of Elphinston) which two gave diligent
attendance upon him, asked after he awaked, how he did find himself, and what it
was that made him in his sleep mourn so heartily? to whom he answered, In my
life I have often been assaulted by Satan, and many times he has cast in my
teeth my sins to bring me into despair, yet God gave me to overcome all his
temptations; and now that subtle Serpent, who never cease to tempt, has
taken another course, and seeks to persuade me; that my labors in the
Ministry, and the fidclity I have showed in that service, has merited heaven
and immortality. But blessed be God who brought to my mind these Scriptures:
What have thou, that thou have not received? and, Not I, but the grace of God
in me. With which he is gone away ashamed, and shall no more return, and now I
am sure my battle is at an end, and that without pain of body or trouble of
spirit I shall shortly change this mortal and miserable life, with that happy
and immortal life, which shall never have end. The prayers which ordinarily
were read in the house being ended, it was inquired, if he heard them; he
answered, Would to God you had heard them with such an ear and heart, as I have
done: adding, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. After which words, without any
motion of hands or feet, as one falling asleep, rather then dying, he ended his
life. He was certainly a man endued with rare gifts, and a chief instrument
that God used for the work of those times. Many good men have disliked some of
his opinions, as touching the authority of Princes, and the form of government,
which he labored to have established in the Church: yet was he far from
those dotages wherein some that would have been thought his followers, did
afterward fall; for never was any man more observant of Church authority then
he, always urging the obedience of Ministers to their Superintendents, for
which he caused diverse acts to be made in the Assemblies of the Church, and
showed him self severe to the transgressors. In these things howsoever it may
be he was miscarried, we must remember that the best men have their errors,
The History given forth in his name was not of his inditing.
and never esteem of any man above that which is sitting. As to the history of
the Church, ascribed commonly to him, the same was not his work, but his name
supposed to gain it credit; for besides the scurril discourses we find in it
more fitting a Comedian on a stage, then a Divine or Minister, such as Mr. Knox
was, and the spiteful malice that Author expresses against the Queen Regent;
speaking of one of our Martyrs, he remitteth the Reader to a further
declaration of his sufferings to the Acts and monuments of Martyrs set sorth by
Mr. Fox an English man, which came not to light some ten or twelve years after
Mr. Knox his death. A greater injury could not be done to the fame of that
worthy man, then to father upon him the ridiculous toys and malicious
detractions contained in that book. But this shall serve for his clearing in
that particular. He died the 27. of November in the 67. year of his age, and
had his body interred in the Churc-yard of S. Giles.

In the end of this month the Estates convening to elect a Regent made choice
of the Earl of Morton, The Earl of Morton elected Regent.
as the man in that time of greatest courage and counsel. The oath accustomed
being ministered unto him, because through the last Regents death, the meeting
appointed at Perth had failed: First, a conclusion was taken for calling a
Parliament at Edinburgh the 26. of January, next the custody of the King and
Castle of Striveling, was confirmed to Alexander Areskin, the Earl of Mar,
being then under age, and he enjoined to receive none within the house that was
known to be Popishly affected, or of the Queens faction; for others it was
ordained, that an Earl accompanied with two servants only, a Baron with one,
and private persons them alone (but all unarmed) should have access permitted,
when their occasions required. Rules given to the Regent for his government.
To the Regent himself it was enjoined, That if any place or office should fall
void, he should prefer none thereto but such as was sound in Religion, and for
other qualities apt and worthy. That during his Regencie, he should grant no
respits, nor remissions for heinous crimes. That he should not transport the
King forth of the Castle of Striveling, without the advice of the Council. That
he should grant no favor to the murderers of the Kings Father and Regents.
That he should neither enter into league with forainers, nor denounce war
without the consent of the Estates. And that he should be careful to entertain
the amity contracted with the Queen of England. The Estates on the other part
did promise to assist him with all their power against the Kings enemies, and
to join with him in the reformation of whatsoever abuses crept in by occasion
of the late troubles, without offending at the execution of justice upon their
nearest and dearest friend. Order was also taken for the entertainment of his
house, the settling of a resident Council, and the advancing of the revenues of
the Crown to the best profit. And these were the things done in that meeting.

Soon after came Sir Henry Killigrew Ambassador from England, Sir Henry
Killigrew sent from England.
partly to declare the content which the Queen had received in the choice of
the Earl of Morton to be Regent, and partly to renew the Abstinence which was
then near the expiring. Herein he prevailed so far with the Duke and Huntley,
A treaty of peace.
as they were brought not only to prorogate the Abstinence, but also to name
certain Noblemen, who should meet for them at Perth, with such as the Regent by
advice of the Council should nominate, The Lord of Grange refuses to be
comprehended in the treaty.
for concluding a perfect peace. The Lord of Grange, and those that remained
with him in the Castle, refusing to be comprehended in that treaty, went on in
victualling and fortifying the house; for impeding whereof, the Regent did
levy some companies of soldiers to enclose the Castle, and because the time
of Parliament was approaching, he caused erect Bulwarks in diverse places of the
street, to secure the people at their meetings to Sermon, and the Judges that
convened to the ministration of Justice. Grange finding himself thus pent up,
did by a Proclamation from the Castle wall, command all the Queens subjects to
depart forth of the town within the space of 24. hours.

The time expired, he made the Cannon thunder upon the town to the great
terror of the Inhabitants, yet there was no great hurt done that way; which
when he perceived, he hired one of his soldiers to set fire in the night time
to some houses under the wall, He molesteth the town of Edinburgh, and fireth
the houses.
which destroyed a number of tenements: for a strong Western wind blowing in
the time, the fire did so rage, as from S. Magdalens Chapel Westward all was
consumed, none daring to put hand to quench the fire, because of the Canon that
played still on the part where they saw any concurse of people. This made him
extremely hated, and even they that otherwise wished him well, were greatly
offended with this doing.

The Parliament notthelesse kept, A Parliament kept at Edinburgh.
and three in diverse Acts were mode partly for maintaining the Kings authority,
partly for preservation of true Religion, which causes were held in those days
so conjoined, as the enemies of the one, were likewise esteemed enemies to the
other. Therefore was it then enacted, That none should be reputed loyal and
faithful subjects to the King, or his authority, but be punished as rebels, who
made not profession of true Religion. And that all such as made profession
thereof, and yet withstood the Kings authority, should be admonished by their
teachers, to acknowledge their offense, and return to his Majesty's obedience;
and if they refused, that they should be excommunicated, and cut of from the
society of the Church, as putrid and corrupted members.

The Parliament breaking up, the Regent by advice of the Council directed to
the meeting at Perth, the Earl of Argile then created Chancellor, the Earl of
Montrosse, the Abbot of Dunfermlin Secretary, the Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Sir
John Ballenden Justice Clerk. The pacification concluded at Perth.
There met with them the Earl of Huntley, and Lord John Hamilton, Commendatory
of Aberbrothock, authorized by the rest that maintained the Queens authority.
The English Ambassador assisting them, after some days conference, they were
brought to agree upon these Articles.

1. That all persons comprehended in the present pacification should
acknowledge and profess the true Religion established and professed within the
Realm, and maintain the Preachers and professors thereof, against all
opposers, specially against the confederates of the Council of Trent.

2. That the Earl of Huntley, and Lord John Hamilton, with their friends and
followers, should submit themselves to the King, and to the government of the
Earl of Morton his Regent and his successors in the same, acknowledging
themselves the Kings subjects by their oaths and subscriptions.

3. That they should confess all things done by them, under color of any
other authority, since the time of his Majesty's Coronation, to have been
unlawful, and of no force nor effect.

4. That an Act of Parliament should be made with all their consents, ordaining
that none of the subjects should assist, fortify, supply, or show any favor,
directly, nor indirectly, to those who should happen to practice against the
religion presently professed, the Kings person, his authority, or Regent. And
if they should be tried to do any thing to the contrary, the remissions granted
to them, with all other benefits of the pacification, should be null, and they
pursued for their offenses past, as if they had never obtained pardon for the
same.

5. That all persons professing his Highness obedience, who had been
dispossessed during the late troubles, should be reponed to their houses,
lands, livings, benefices, and whatsoever goods belonging to them, if so the
same were extant in the hands of the intrometters, horses and armor only
excepted.

6. That the Master of Forbes, James Glen of Bar, and all other persons
should be set at liberty, as likewise the bonds given by the Lord Semple and
others for entry of prisoners, or for payment of any ransomes, be discharged.

7. That the Earl or Huntley and Lord John Hamilton should dimit, and cause all
soldiers hired or maintained by them, or any of their party to be forthwith
dimitted.

8. That all processes of forfeiture which had been led, especially the
sentences given against the Earl of Huntley, Lord John Hamilton, and Lord Claud
his brother, William Bishop of Aberdene, Alexander Bishop of Galloway, Adam
Gordon of Awchindown, and the rest of their friendship, for any crimes or
offenses done in the common cause; against the King and his authority, since
the 15th of June 1567. or for any other cause, contained in the summons of
forfeiture raised against them, should be declared null, and of no force,
without any other special declaration. And that the foresaid persons should
have liberty given them, to reduce the said forfeitures as they should please.

9. That all persons then returning, or who should return to the Kings
obedience, and for any crime committed in the said common cause since the time
aforesaid, had been dispossessed of their lands, heritages, Benefices,
Pensions, heritable offices, and other profits whatsoever, whether the same had
proceeded upon sentences of forfeiture or barratry, or any other way, should be
effectually restored, and be rehabiliated to their bloods and honors; to the
end they might enjoy the same as freely as if the said troubles had never
happened.

10. That all actions, crimes, and transgressions committed by them and their
sollowers since the 15th of June 1567. (incest, witchcraft, and theft excepted)
should be freely remitted, so as the same did not extend to the murder of the
first and second Regents, which are matters of such importance, as the Regent
now in place would not meddle with. And yet in respect of the present
pacification, if the same be moved to the Queen of England by the Commitrees
thereof; whatsoever she should advise to be done therein, should be confirmed
in Parliament, and the remission under the hand of the Clerk of the Rolls, be
as sufficient, as if the same were passed the great Seal. And if any of them
should crave a pardon for other crimes committed before the said 15th day, the
same (upon notice given of the persons, and crimes) should be granted; the
murderer of the Kings father, fire raising, theft, and the resset of theft,
with incest, and witchcraft, being excepted.

11. That all civil decrees given since the said 15. of June, wherewith the
said persons or any of them do find themselves grieved, should be reviewed by
the ordinary Judges that pronounced the same, and the parties upon their
supplications be heard to propone any lawful defense, which they might have
used in the time of the deduction of the process: providing the supplications be
presented, and their petitions exhibited within six months after the date of
these Articles.

12. That all persons comprehended in the pacification, after publication
thereof, should indifferently be received in all parts of the Realm, as his
Majesty's good subjects; and that nothing done, or that has occurred during
the troubles, should be esteemed a cause of deadly feud and enmity, nor
admitted as an exception, either against Judge, party, or witnesses.

13. That the heirs and successors of persons forfeited, and now departed this
life, who are comprehended in this pacification, should be restored to their
lands and possessions: and that it should be lawful for them to enter thereto
by Breves, as if their fathers and predecessors had never been forfeited, and
had died at the Kings peace; specially the heirs of John sometime Archbishop of
S. Andrews, Gawan Commendator of Kilwining, Andrew Hamilton of Cocknow, and
Captain James Cullen.

Unto these Articles some other particulars were added which were all confirmed
by the oaths, A time given to those of the Castle to accept the pacification.
and subscriptions of the Commissioners and Noblemen, in presence of the
English Ambassador, and a time given to Grange and those of the Castle, to
accept or refuse the benefit of the peace. But that none excepted in the former
Abstinence, nor any at that time forth of the Realm should think themselves
comprehended therein; it was declared, that the benefit of the present
pacification, should not be extended to them. This was done to exclude the
Archbishop of Glasgow, and Bishop of Rosse, Ambassadors for the Scottish
Queen, the one in France, and the other in England, against whom the sentence
of Barratry had been pronounced.

About this time Sir James Kirkaldy brother to Grange, Sir James Kirkaldy
returns from France.
who had been directed to France for supply of those within the Castle,
returned, bringing with him a years rent of the Scottish Queens Dowry, but
finding the house enclosed, and that there was no safe access thereto, he went
to Blackness, which then professed to hold for the Queen. The Captain had
betrayed the same, as we showed before, to the Hamiltons, and now turning his
coat to make his peace with the Regent, He takes land (...) Captain to the
Regent.
he offered to put in his hand both the man and the money. The bargain made,
the money was given to the Regent, and Kirkaldy detained as prisoner. A few
days after, the Captain going abroad to do some business, Kirkaldy enticed the
soldiers by great promises to join with him, and lay hands upon the Captains
brother, and a few Gentlemen left to attend him: which they following their
Captains ensample, were easily induced to do. Thus the house was possessed in
Kirkaldies name, and he of a prisoner turned to be chief commander. But he did
not long enjoy this place, for his wife being come thither to visit him, when
she was the next morrow to depart, desired the convoy of some soldiers for a
mile or two, fearing as she pretended to be robbed by Captain Lambie, who lay
with a company at Linlithgow, not far from thence: and as he, to save her, went
forth himself to bring her on a part of the way, suspecting no treachery, he
was in his return intercepted by Lambie, and carried first to Linlithgow, then
to Dalkeith, where he was kept some days, and afterward dimitted. In this sort
did fortune sport her self with that Gentleman, changing his condition up and
down three several times, within the space of a few days.

Peace now made with the chief Noblemen of the Queens faction, The English
Ambassador travelleth to make Grange accept peace, which he refuses.
it was supposed that Grange and his partakers would likewise be moved to
embrace it. Whereupon the Ambassador taking with him the subscribed Articles,
went to the Castle, and showing how things had passed, used many persuasions to
make them content to be comprehended therein. But they would not, affirming the
conditions to be shameful, and so far to the prejudice of their Queen, as till
they were allowed by her self, and by the French King, they should never admit
them. After the Ambassador had ceased to treat with them, the Earl of Rothes,
and Lord Boyd traveled to the same effect, representing the danger and
inevitable ruin they should fall into, if they did not yield in time. But they
scorned these threats, thinking the strength they were in, impregnable, and
looking still for some succors from France and the Duke of Alva, or if that
should fail, they made no doubt to obtain their peace at easier conditions,
then the Noblemen had accepted.

The Regent offended with their obstinacy, The Regent in^reateth the Queen of
Englands help for ^pugnation of the Castle.
discharged all further dealing with them, and sent to the Queen of England for
a supply of men, and munition; which was granted, and Sir William Drury Marshal
of Berwick commanded to join with him in besieging the Castle. How soon the
Regent understood, that the direction was given to the Marshal, the Lord
Ruthven was sent to confer with him of the order that should be kept in the
service. They meeting at the Church of Lamberton in the Mers, for preventing
all debates that might arise, did agree as follows. 1. That neither the
Regent nor the General should without the advice and consent of the other,
Articles agreed betwixt the Regent and the English.
transact or make any composition with the besieged. 2. That if it happen the
house to be taken by assault, the munition, plate, jewels, and housholdstuffe
pertaining to the King, with the Registers, and public records of the Kingdom
there reserved, should be all delivered to the Regent, within three days after
the house was recovered, and the rest of the spoil distributed amongst the
soldiers. 3. That so far as might be, the persons within the Castle should be
reserved to the trial of law, wherein the Regent should proceed by the advice
of the Queen of England. 4. That the Regent should provide the English forces
with victuals, and all other things necessary during the siege, as likewise
assist them with a convenient power of horse and foot. 5. That recompense
should be given at the Generals sight to the wives and nearest friends of the
English soldiers, who should happen to be killed. 6. That if any of the
Ordinance should break, or be otherwise spoiled, the same should be changed
with other pieces of the like quantity within the Castle. 7. That the English
General should not fortify within the ground of Scotland, An. 1573.
without the Regents advice, and the service finished should immediately retire
his forces. 8. And lastly, that for the safe return of the soldiers and
munition (the loss which fortune of war should make being excepted) hostages
of Noblemens sons should be delivered to the English, and entertained in the
parts most adjacent to Scotland.


These conditions made, and the Masters of Ruthven and Semple, John Cunningham
son to the Earl of Glencarn, and Douglas of Kilspindie being entered in Berwick
as pledges; A Proclamation given out by the Regent.
Sir William Drary marched with his forces into Scotland, and came to Edinburgh
the 25. of April. The Regent giving out a Proclamation (Wherein was showed the
care that the Queen of England had taken for the peace of the Realm in times
past, and the liberal succors she had granted at the present for the
expugnation of the Castle, treasonably detained and fortified by the Lord of
Grange) Did require and charge all good subjects, to carry themselves as became
them toward the English General and his company, and not to injure them either
by word or deed, except they would be esteemed enemies to the peace, and
partakers to the Traitors in their rebellious attempts.

The next day the Castle was summoned, The Castle summoned.
and offer made of their lives if they should yield before the planting of the
Canon; but the Captain in stead of answer, set upon the highest Tower, The
Captain answers by a token of defiance.
his ensign for a token of defiance. Then the Pioneers were put to work, and
begun to cast trenches, and raise mounts for planting the Artillery. The
besieged made all the hinderance they could, playing with their Ordinance upon
the workmen, and killing diverse ere the mounts were brought to perfection. How
soon they were erected, (being five in all, and entitled by the names of their
several Commanders) the Artillery was planted, The Castle made assaultable.
31. pieces in number, more and less. All things prepared, and the Parliament
finished, which the Regent had called to the last of April, for ratifying the
Articles of pacification, the battery began the 17. of May, on the 27. the
Castle was made assaultable, the Canon having made great breaches in the fore
and back walls; and the Tower called David's Tower, being also demolished. The
26 early in the morning the assault was given in two places: at the West part
where the ascent was most difficult, the assailers were repulsed, after an
obstinate sight that continued 3. hours, and 24. persons killed; on the East
side the blockhouse called the Spur, was taken with less resistance, A truce
taken, and the Captain willing to yield upon conditions.
which put the defendants in fear, and made them demand a parle. This granted,
a truce was taken for the space of two days, in which time the English General
used many persuasions to the Captain to make him render the house; neither was
he then unwilling, so as the lives and honors of these within might be saved:
but the Regent would give no condition, and have him simply to yield. The
Captain seeing nothing but extremity, resolved to stand to his utmost defense:
yet when he came back to the house, he found them all within divided, and the
greater part so discouraged, as they refused to undergo the hazard of a second
assault; which forced him to other counsels, and so following Lethingtons
advice, upon the 29. The Castle rendered to the English General.
of May, being let down by a rope over the wall, he and Piltadrow his Constable
did yield themselves and the house to the English General in the name of his
Queen, whose discretion (misknowing the Regent) they were willing to abide. The
General made them to be attended to his lodging, whither all that were of any
note in the Castle were brought. Thereafter they were commitred to several
places, most of them transported to Leth, and some detained in Edinburgh till
the Queen of England should signify her will concerning them; the Ladies and
Gentlewomen were licenced to depart, as likewise the private soldiers, and
others of meaner sort.

It was thought that the Queen in regard of the render made to her Lieutenant,
would take a favorable course with them, and save their lives: but she gave
direction to put them all in the Regents hands to be used as he thought meet;
which when Lethington heard, either despairing of life, or not willing to enjoy
it by the mercy of an enemy, he died at Leth so suddenly, as he was thought to
have made himself away by poison. A man he was of deep wit, great experience,
and one whose counsels were held in that time for Oracles; Lethington dies at
Leth.
but variable, and unconstant, turning and changing from one faction to
another, as he thought it to make for his standing. This did greatly diminish
his reputation, and failed him at last: which should warn all Counselors to
direct their courses by the lines of piety, and true wisdom; without which, the
most politic prudence will prove nothing but folly in the end. His brother Mr.
John Maitelan, who came afterward to great honors, had his life spared, and
was imprisoned in Tentallon, George Creichton Bishop of Dunkeld was sent to
Blackness, and the Lord Home detained in the Castle, which the Regent gave to
his brother George Douglas in custody; Grange and his brother executed.
Grange himself, with his brother Sir James Kirkaldy, and two Goldsmiths, James
Mosman, and James Cockey, were publicly hanged in the Market street of
Edinburgh. Such was the end of Sir William Kirkaldy of Grange, a man full of
valor and courage, who had sometimes done good service to his country against
the French, and purchased by that means great honor. But seeking ambitiously
to raise his fortunes, and hearkening to perverse counsel, he did break his
faith to the Regent, who had put him in trust, and thereby lost all his former
esteem, and drew upon himself these troubles, wherein he perished. His part was
foul in the death of the Cardinal, and for it, when he was in his best estate,
many did foredeem, that he should not escape some misfortune. Yet herein he was
happy, that at his death he expressed a great sorrow for his sins, and departed
this life with a constant and comfortable assurance of mercy at the hands of
God.

By this defeat of the Castilians (so they were commonly named) the Queens
faction fell quite asunder, The Queens faction quite de^^ated.
nor did it ever after this time make head. The Bishop of Ross (who had
followed her business as Ambassador in England) being at the same time put to
liberty, and commanded to depart forth of the Kingdom, went privately to
France; for he feared the Earl of Southampton, and Lord Henry Howard, brother
to the Duke of Norfolk, whom he had touched in his examination. When he came to
France, to mitigate the anger they had conceived, he published an Apology for
the depositions he had made, and whilst he lived, ceased not to do the duty of
a faithful subject, and servant to the Queen; soliciting both the Emperor and
Pope, the French King, and other Catholic Princes in her behalf; who gave many
good words, but performed nothing. So little are the promises of strangers to
be trusted, and so uncertain their help to Princes, that are once fallen from
their Estates. The Regents expedition to the borders.
At home the Regent applying himself to reform the disorders caused by the late
war, begun with the borders, who had broken out into all sorts of riot, and
committed many insolences both on the Scottish and English side. Thither he
went himself in person, where meeting with the English Wardens, he took order
for redress of bypast wrongs. And to secure the peace of the country, caused
all the Clannes to deliver pledges for the keeping of good order, and made
choice of the fittest and most active persons to rule and oversee those parts:
Sir James Home of Cauldinknowes was made guardian of the East Marches; the Lord
Maxwel of the West, and Sir John Carnichal of the Middle, who by the diligence
and strict jastice they observed resetters and entertainers of thieves, reduced
the country to such quietness, as none was heard to complain either of theft
or robbery.

The next care he took was to order the revenues of the Crown, His care for the
Kings houses and rents.
and recover such lands as had been alienated from it, or in any sort usurped;
the jewels impignorated by the Queen, he relieved by payment of the moneys, for
which they were engaged. He caused repair all the Kings houses, especially the
Castle of Edinburgh, and furnished the same with munition, and other
necessaries: and by these doings did purchase to himself both love and
reverence, with the opinion of a most wise and prudent Governor.

Yet was it not long before he had lost all his good opinion, He falls out
with the Church.
by the courses he took to enrich himself. Breaking first upon the Church, he
subtly drew out of their hands the thirds of Benefices, offering more sure
and ready payment to the Ministers, then was made by their Collectors, and
promising to make the stipend of every Minister local, and payable in the
Parish where he served. To induce them the more willingly to this, promise was
made, that if they should find themselves in any sort hurt or prejudged, they
should be reponed to their right and possession, whenever they did require
the same.

But no sooner was he possessed of the thirds, Two, three or four Churches
appointed to one Minister.
then the course he took for providing Ministers, was to appoint two, three,
and four Churches in some places, to one Minister (who was tied to preach in
them by turns) and to place in every Parish a Reader, that in the Ministers
absence might read prayers, who had allowed him a poor stipend of 20. or 40.
pounds Scots. As to the Ministers, they were put in a much worse case for their
stipends then before; for when the Superintendents did assign the same, the
Ministers could come boldly unto them, and make their poor estate known, and
were sure to receive some comfort and relief at their hands; but now they are
forced to give attendance at Court, begging their assignation and precepts for
payment, or as their necessities grew, seeking augmentation, which seldom they
obtained; or if any petty thing was granted, the same was dearly bought with
the loss both of their time and means. The Superintendents denied payment of
their means.
The Superintendents were no better used, the means allowed to them for their
service being withholden, and when they complained, they were answered, that
their office was no more necessary, Bishops being placed in the Dioces, and the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction belonging to them.

These things lost him the Church, The Church desired to be restored to the
thirds, but is denied.
which then growing sensible of their oversight in denuding themselves of the
thirds, craved to be reponed according to promise. But herein diverse shifts
were made, and after sundry delays, it was directly told them, That seeing the
surplus of the thirds belonged to the King, it was fitter the Regent and
Council should modify the stipends of Ministers, then that the Church should
have the appointment or designation of a superplus. They not able to help
themselves, An. 1574.
did in the next Assembly take order that the Ministers, who were appointed to
serve more Churches then one, should take the charge of that only at which they
resided, helping the rest as they might, without neglect of their own charge.
And because the placing of Bishops was taken for a pretext to withhold the
Superintendents means, the Bishops were inhibited to execute any part of the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the bounds where the Superintendents served,
without their consent and approbation. This crossing of one another
proceedings, did set the Church and Regent so far asunder, that whilst he
continued in office, there was no sound liking amongst them.

The discontents of the country were so great by the Justice Aires (as they
called them) that went through the country, The Country vexed with Justice
Courts.
and were exerced with much rigor, people of all sorts being forced to
compone, and redeem themselves from trouble by payment of moneys imposed. The
Merchants called in question for the transport of coin, were fined in great
sums, and warded in the Castle of Blackness, till they gave satisfaction. Nor
left he any means unassayed, that served to bring in moneys to his Coffers:
which drew upon him a great deal of hatred and envy.

I find at this time a motion made for compiling a body of our Law, A motion
for compiling a body of our Law.
and making a collection of such ancient statures, as were meet to be retained
in practice; which were ordained to be supplied out of the Civil law, where was
any necessity; to the end Judges might know what to determine in every case,
and the subjects be foreseen of the equity and issue they might expect of their
controversies. This was entertained a while, and of good men much desired, as a
thing beneficial to the country, and like to have cut off the occasion of many
pleas. But it sorted to no effect, by the subtle dealing of those that made
their gain of the corruptions of Law.

It happened John Ormeston (commonly called Black Ormeston, Black O^meston
executed for the Kings murder.
because of his Iron color) to be apprehended, and brought to trial at the
same time for the murder of the Kings Father. This man was thought to be privy
unto all Bothwels doings, and a more particular discovery expected by him of
the form, and manner of that murder. Yet at this execution he did only confess
that Bothwel had communicated the purpose to him, An. 1575.
and showed him the subscriptions of the Earls of Argile, Huntley, Secretary
Leithington, and Mr. James Balfour, testifying their consents to that wicked
fact. Nottheless the Regent, to the offense of many, did suffer the said
Balfour to enjoy the benefit of the pacification, and passed an Act thereof in
open Council. Whether the subscriptions of Argile and Huntley were counterfeit
or not, it was uncertain, but of the other two it was easily believed, as being
men universally hated. Argile died in September following, in whose place the
Lord Glamis was created Chancellor.

In the same month Adam Heriot Minister at Aberdene departed this life, Adam
Heriot Minister at Aberdene, his death and qualities.
a man worthy to be remembered. He was sometime a Friar of the Order of S.
Austin, and lived in the Abbey of S. Andrews, an eloquent Preacher, and well
seen in Scholastic Divinity. Queen Regent coming on a time to the City, and
hearing him preach, was taken with such an opinion of his learning and
integrity, that in a reasoning with some Noblemen upon the Article of real
presence, she made offer to stand to Heriots determination. Warning of this
being given, and he required to deliver his mind upon that subject in a Sermon
which the Queen intended to hear, he did so prevaricate, as all that were
present, did offend and depart unsatisfied. Being sharply rebuked for this by
some that loved him, he fell in a great trouble of mind, and found no rest,
till he did openly renounce Popery, and join himself with those of the
Congregation. Afterward when Order was taken for the distribution of Ministers
amongst the Burgs, he was nominated for the City of Aberdene (in which there
lived diverse addicted to the Roman profession) as one that was learned in
Scholastic Divinity, and for his moderation apt to reclaim men from their
errors. Neither did he fail the hope conceived of him, for by his diligence in
teaching Schools, and Church, he did gain all that people to the profession of
the truth; 14. years he labored among them, and in end was forced by sickness
to quit his charge. He died of the Apoplexy the 28. of August, in the 60. year
of his age, greatly beloved of the Citizens for his humane and courteous
conversation, and of the poorer sort much lamented, to whom he was in his life
very beneficial.

The next summer there fell out an accident which was like to have caused great
trouble, and divided the two Kingdoms. A conflict betwixt the Scots and English.
Sir John Forrester Warden of the English side, and Sir John Carmichael of the
Scottish, meeting in the Borders at a place called the Red Swyre for redressing
some wrongs that had been committed, it fell out that a Bill (so they used to
speak) was filed upon an English, for which Carmichael according to the law of
the Borders, required him to be delivered, till satisfaction was made. Sir John
Forrester either wearied with the multitude of business, or desiring to shift
the matter, answered that enough was done that day, and at the next meeting the
complainer should have satisfaction. Carmichael urging a present performance,
they fell foul in words; which made the companies that attended draw their
weapons. A great tumult there was, and at first the Scots being inferior in
number to the English, gave back. But as they were fleeing, they met with a
company of Iedburgh men, who were come to attend the Warden. This giving them
new courage, they turned upon the English, and made them flee. The chase held
the space of two miles. Sir George Heron, Warden of Tindale and Rhedesdale,
with 24. English was killed, the Warden himself, Francis Russel son to the Earl
of Bedford, Cuthbert Collinwood, James Ogle, Henry Fenwick, and many others of
good note were taken prisoners. When the Regent heard it, he was sore
displeased, knowing the Queen of England would be much offended; whereupon he
sent for the prisoners, and using them with all courtesy, excused what was
done, and permitted them to return home. And the Queen indeed at the first
report was much incensed, and thereupon sent Mr. Killigrew to the Regent, to
require the delivery of Carmichael, which diverse of the Council withstood. Yet
such was the Regents care to please the Queen as he caused him enter into
England, A meeting in the Borders betwixt the Regent and the Earl of Huntington.
where he was a while detained. But the provocation being tried to have been
made by the English, the Queen dimitted him honorably, and not without
rewards. At his return, the Regent meeting the Earl of Huntington the English
Commissioner at Foulden some two miles from Berwick, all things were peaceably
composed.

This year the Duke of Chattellerault ended his life: A Nobleman well inclined,
open, Duke Hamilton dies.
plain and without all dissimulation and fraud, but too easily led by them he
trusted, which bred him much trouble; yet by the goodness of God, who does
always favor the innocent and honest minded, he went through all, and died
honorably and in peace. Not long after his son Lord John Hamilton riding to
Aberbrothock, accompanied only with his ordinary train, (for he held himself
secured by the pacification) was pursued by William Douglas of Lochlevin, Lord
Aberbrothock pursued by Lochlevin.
who did lie with a number in his way, of intention to kill him. As he was
refreshing himself at Couper, he was advertised of the danger, and presently
resolved to single himself from his company, and flee to the Castle of
Lewchars, deeming (as also it fell out) that they would follow the greater
company, which he directed to keep together, and take the South of the River of
Edin. Neither had they passed far, when they were invaded by a troop of
horsemen, and forced to yield themselves. The Nobleman beholding this from the
other side of the River, and knowing how soon they found themselves deceived,
that they would make haste to overtake him, changed his first resolution, He is
saved in the house of Darsey.
and fled to the house of Darsey, where he was received. Lochlevin belayed the
house, and kept him enclosed all that night, and the day following. But being
charged by an Herald of Arms to dissolve his forces, and hearing that the
Noblemans friends were gathering for his release, he departed home.

Being called before the Council for his insolency, and charged with the
breach of the pacification; he alleged the exception of the first Regents
murder; but that being found no warrant, and he refusing to give assurance for
keeping peace, was committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, where he remained till
surety was given.

In the Church this year began the innovations to break forth, Innovations in
the Church of Mr. Andrew Melvil.
that to this day have kept it in a continual unquietness. Mr. Andrew Melvil,
who was lately come from Geneva, a man learned (chiefly in the tongues) but hot
and eager upon any thing he went about, laboring with a burning desire to
bring into this Church, the Presbyterial discipline of Geneva: and having
insinuated himself into the favor of diverse Preachers, stirred up John Dury
one of the Ministers of Edinburgh in an Assembly which was then convened, to
propound a question touching the lawfulness of the Episcopal function, and the
authority of ^hapters in their election. He himself as though he had not been
acquainted with the motion, The Episcopal function called in question.
after he had commended the Speakers zeal, and seconded the purpose with a long
discourse of the flourishing estate of the Church of Geneva; and the opinions
of Calvin, and Theodore Beze, concerning Church Government, came to affirm,
That none ought to be office bearers in the Church, whose titles were not found
in the book of God. And for the title of Bishops, albeit the same was found in
Scripture, yet was it not to be taken in the sense, that the common sort did
conceive, there being no superiority allowed by Christ amongst Ministers; he
being the only Lord of his Church, and all the same servants in the same
degree, and having the like power. In end he said, that the corruptions crept
into the estate of Bishops were so great, as unless the same were removed, it
could not go well with the Church, nor could Religion be long preserved in
purity.

This his discourse was applauded by many, Some brethren selected to confer
upon the question.
and some brethren set apart to reason and confer upon the question proponed.
For the one part Mr. David Lindesay, Mr. George Hay, and Mr. John Row were
nominated: These three sustained the lawfulness of Episcopal function in the
Church. For the other part Mr. James Lawson, Mr. John Craig, and Mr. Andrew
Melvil, were chosed to impugn the same. After diverse meetings, and long
disceptation amongst themselves, they presented their opinions to the Assembly
in writing, as follows. 1. First that they did not hold it expedient to
answer the questions proponed, for the present. But if any Bishop was chosen
that had not qualities required by the word of God, he should be tried by the
General Assembly. 2. That they judged the name of a Bishop, to be common to all
Mininisters that had the charge of a particular flock. And that by the word of
God his chief function consisted in the preaching of the word, the ministration
of the Sacraments, and exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline, with consent of
his Elders. 3. That from among the Ministers some one might be chosen, to
oversee and visit such reasonable bounds, besides his own flock, as the General
Assembly should appoint. 4. That the Minister so elected, might in those bounds
appoint Preachers, with the advice of the Ministers of that Province, and the
consent of the flock which they should be admitted. And fifthly, that he might
suspend Ministers from the exercise of their office upon reasonable causes,
with the consent of the Ministers of the bounds.


There were present in this Assembly, The Bishops present in the Assembly.
the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Dunkeld, Galloway, Brichen, Dumblane,
and Isles, with the Superintendents of Lothian, and Angus; all of them
interessed in that business. Yet neither were they called to the conference,
nor does it appear by the Register of those proceedings, that they did so much
as open their mouths in defense of their office and calling. What respect
soever it was, that made them keep so quiet; whether, as I have heard, that
they expected those motions should have been dashed by the Regent, or
otherwise, that they affected the praise of humility: it was no wisdom in them
to have given a way to such novelties, and have suffered the lawfulness of
their vocation to be thus drawn in question. Another Assembly of the Church.


In the next Assembly I find the same matter moved of new, and put to voices,
but with a little change of the question, which was thus formed. Whether
Bishops as they were then in Scotland, had their function warranted by the word
of God? The Assembly without giving a direct answer, after long reasoning, did
for the greatest part (so the records bear) approve the opinions presented in
the last meeting, with this addition, That the Bishops should take themselves
to the service of some one Church within their Dioces, and condescend upon the
particular flocks, whereof they would accept the charge. The Regents motion to
the Assembly.


The Regent hearing how the Church had proceeded, and taking ill the deposition
of Mr. James Patton Bishop of Dunkeld, who was in the former Assembly deprived
for dilapidation of his benefice; sent to require of them, whether they would
stand to the policy agreed unto at Leth; and if not, to desire them to settle
upon some form of government, at which they would abide. The Assembly taking
the advantage of this proposition, answered, that they were to think of that
business, and should with all diligence set down a constant form of Church
policy, and present the same to be allowed by the Council. To this effect they
nominated Mr. Andrew Melvil, Mr. Andrew Hay, Mr. David Cuningham, Mr. George
Hay, Mr. Alexander Arthbuthnet, The Archbishop of Glasgow urged with a
particular flock, answers the Assembly.
Mr. David Lindesay, and a number more; the Archbishop of Glasgow was named
amongst the rest, but he being urged to take the charge of a particular flock,
excused himself, saying, That he had entered to his office according to the
order taken by the Church, and Estates, and could do nothing contrary ther^to,
lest he should be thought to have transgressed his oath, and be challenged for
altering a member of the Estate. Yet that it might appear how willing he was to
bestow the gifts wherewith God had endued him to the good of the Church, he
should teach ordinarily at Glasgow, when he had his residence in the City, and
when he remained in the Sheriffdome of Air, he should do the like in any
Church they would appoint; but without astricting himself unto the same, and
prejudging in any sort the jurisdiction he had received at his admission. Mr.
Patrick Adamson provided to S. Andrews.
This his declaration made, he was no more troubled with that employment.

Mean while the Sea of S. Andrews falling void by the death of Mr. John
Douglas, the Regent did recommend to the Chapter his Chaplain Mr. Patrick
Adamson for the place; the Chapter continuing the election, till the Assembly
of the Church did convene, An. 1576.
imparted to them the warrant they had received: and Mr. Patrick being enquired
(for he was present at the time) whether he would submit himself to trial, and
receive the office with those injunctions the Church would prescrive: Answered,
that he was discharged by the Regent to accept the office otherwise then was
appointed by mutual consent of the Church, The Church off (...) with the
Bishop^ answer.
and Estate. Hereupon the Chaptour was inhibited to proceed. Notthelesse upon a
new charge given them, they convened and made choice of him, which did so
irritate the Church, as in the next meeting they gave Commission to the
Superintendent of Lothian Mr. Robert Pont, Mr. James Lawson, and David Ferguson
to call him before them, and prohibit him to exerce any part of his
jurisdiction, till he should be authorized thereto by the Assembly.

A form of Church policy was in the mean time drawn up and presented to the
Regent by Mr. David Lindesay, A form of policy presented to the Regent.
Mr. James Lawson, and Mr. Robert Pont. In a short Preface set before it, they
protested to wish nothing more, then as God had made him a notable instrument
in purging the Realm of Popery, and settling the same in a perfect peace, that
he would also honor him with the establishing of a godly and spiritual policy
in the Church; entreating his Grace to receive the Articles presented, and if
any of them did seem not agreeable to reason, to vouchsafe audience to the
brethren, whom they had named to attend. Not that they did account it a work
complete, to which nothing might be added, or from which nothing might be
diminished; for as God should reveal further unto them, they should be willing
to help, and renew the same The Regent reading the preface, though he did not
like the purpose they were about, gave them a better countenance then in former
times, and named certain of the Council to confer with them, and make report
of the heads whereupon they agreed. But the conference was not well begun, when
it brake off by occasion of troubles that arose

The discontents in the country were great and daily increasing by the Regents
severe proceedings. One against Adam whitford of Milneton did open the mouths
of many men against him. The discontents great in the country.
This Gentleman was accused as one set on by John Lord Hamilton of
Aberbrothock, and Lord Claud his brother to have killed the Regent. The
suspicion did arise of some rash and boasting speeches, John Semple and Adam
Whitford accused for conspiring the Regents death.
uttered by John Semple of Biltrees, out of his spleen against the Regent for
an action intended against him concerning some lands belonging to the Crown,
which had been given by the Queen to Mary Levingston his wife, one of her Maids
of honor. His words were the more taken hold of, because he was Milnetons
Uncle, and upon offer of the Torture was brought to confession; upon which also
he was arraigned and condemned to death, and the Scaffold prepared for the
execution; but was pardoned, which did manifest that which before was
suspected, that by underhand promise of favor, he was induced to this
confession. The same means were tried with Milneton to have furnished evidence
against these Noblemen for their forfeiture, which was the chief end of this
trial But he upon his Uncles confession being put to the Torture, valuing more
his honor nor his safety, endured it with such resolution, showed both by his
words and countenance, as was in all men's opinion taken for an undoubted
argument of his innocence, and the others testimony nothing reg^rded: But the
Regent much blamed for such rigorous proceeding against him upon a false or
faint-hearted man's confession extorted by fear, or drawn from him by other base
respects; wherefore he was detested of his nearest kinsmen, as the other was
honored in all men's estimation for his courage and constancy. Amongst other
proecsses he had intended for helping the revenues of the Crown, one was for
the recovery of a parcel of ground, which the Queen had gifted to Mary
Levingston one of her maids. The Gentlewomans husband called John Semple, made
the best defense he could, and fearing the Regents rigor, had burst forth in
some passionate speeches, avowing, that if he did lose the lands, he should
lose his life also. This reported to the Regent, brought him to be suspected of
some plot, for a speech was given out that Lord John Hamilton, and his brother
Lord Claud were discontented with some of the Regents proceedings, and had
instigated this Gentleman with his Nephew Adam Whitford of Milton, to kill him
as he went down the street toward the Palace with an Harquebuse. An. 1577.
Semple called in question for this, and his other rash speeches, upon
representation of the torture confessed all, for he was a fearful man and of no
courage. Milton being apprehended in the Isle of Bute, and brought to his
examination, denied that any such motion had been made to him, and being put to
the torture, endured the same patiently, not confessing any thing. His
constancy and the resolution he showed both in words and countenance, made the
others confession not to be credited, every one interpreting the same to have
proceeded of weakness, and want of courage. The Gentleman's case was much pitied,
and the mouths of many opened against the Regent for using such rigor, only
upon the confession of a fearful and faint-hearted man: but the troubles we
mentioned did arise by another occasion.

In the Highlands one Allester dow Macallan, The Earl of Argile and Athol at
variance.
a notorious thief, who had committed many robberies, was apprehended by the
Earl of Athol, who minding to put him to a trial, was inhibited by the Council,
and charges directed against him for exhibition of the man. The fellow being
presented after he had stayed a while in prison, was upon Argiles desire set at
liberty, and falling to his accustomed depredations, committed diverse
insolences in the bounds of Atholl. The Earl to repair this wrong done to his
people, prepared to invade Argile, and he making to defend his country, all
those parts were in an uproar. This reported to the Regent, a messenger of
Arms was sent to discharge those convocations, and cite them both before the
Council; but they disobeyed, and by the mediation of friends were shortly after
reconciled.

This trouble was no sooner pacified then upon an injury done by the Clandonald
to the Earl of Argile, A great insolence committed by Argile.
he took Arms, and being charged to dissolve his forces, in stead of obeying,
he laid hands on the messenger, tare his letters in pieces, and made him and
his witnesses swear never to return into Argile for the like business. This
insolency, whereof the like had not been seen nor heard since the Regents
acceptance of the government, incensed him mightily, but not knowing how to
overtake him in that season (for it was done in the beginning of Winter) he
resolved to use the course of law, and proclaim him rebel.

Alexander Areskin who attended the King, having his own discontents, and
trusting to better his condition by a change of the government, Alexander
A^^skin practices a change.
dealt secretly with the two Earls, Argile and Athol, after he understood them
to be agreed, and advised them to come, one after another, but much about one
time, and mean their case to the King, Argile and Athol agreed.
to whom he promised they should find access. Argile coming first, complained
of the Regents extreme dealing, in that he had denounced him rebel to his
Majesty, whose true and faithful servant he had always been, and requested his
Majesty to assemble the Nobility, Argile complains of the Regent to the King.
and do him right according to the laws: withal, he entreated that he might
be permitted to remain with his Majesty till the Nobility should meet for trial
of his complaint. The Earl of Athol came some two days after, Athol his advice
to the King, for trying Argiles complaint.
to whom the King did communicate Argiles complaint, craving his advice in the
business. And he as thought he had known nothing of the matter, answered that
the Noblemans petition seemed reasonable, and that his Majesty could not take a
better course, then call the Nobility, and by their advice take order for
preventing the troubles that might arise by their dissensions. The King liking
the advice, commanded letters to be written for all the Noblemen in the
country to meet at Striveling the tenth day of March: yet the advertisement
went only (the two Earls having the direction of the letters) to those that
were their own friends, and enemies to the Regent. Amongst others, the Lords
Maxwel and Ogilvy were invited to come; of whom the first had been lately
dispatched from his office of Wardanrie in the West Marches, and committed in
the Castle of Blackness, The Regent sends to inform the King of Argiles
contempt.
the other had of a long time been confined in the City of S. Andrews.

How soon the Regent was advertised of Argile and Athols being with the King,
and that they had moved him to call the Nobility to a meeting, upon a pretext
of trying Argiles complaint; he sent the Earl of Angus, the Lord Glammis
Chancelcellour, and the Lord Ruthven Thesaurer, with a letter and certain notes
under his hand to be communicated to the King. In the notes he made a
particular relation of the contempt done by the Earl of Argile to his Majesty's
authority, and of his practices with Athol to disturb the common peace:
desiring to know his Majesty's pleasure concerning them; that if his Highness
would allow him to follow the course of law, he might do his duty; if otherwise
his Majesty thought fit to oversee their disobedience, His offer to dimit the
Reg^ncy.
that he would be pleased to disburthen him of his office, and not suffer his
own name and authority to be despised in the person of his servant: for as he
had at sundry times made offer to dimit the Regiment whenever his Majesty was
pleased to take it in his own hands, so will he now most willingly resign the
same, so as a substantial course were taken for the preservation of his
Highness person, the ordering of his Majesty's house, and the dispensing of the
revenues of the Crown. Herewith he recommended the keeping of the peace
contracted with England, because of the danger that a war might bring, not
only to the Realm, but also to his Highness title, and right of succession in
that Kingdom. And having recounted the services done by himself, from his
Majesty's birth unto that present; specially his assistance at the Kings
Coronation; the danger whereunto he exposed himself and his friends in Lanside
field, and at the siege of Brichen; The legations which he had undertaken to
England; the recovery of the Castle of Edinburgh; the pacification of the
Realm, which at his entry to the government he found in great trouble; the
redeeming of the jewels and movables pertaining to the Cown, and the restoring
of the royal Patrimony to some reasonable estate: in regard of all these
services he craved no more, but an allowance of what he had done in his office,
and a discharge of his intromissions by the Estates of Parliament.

These notes being showed to the Noblemen who were about the King, The King is
advised to accept ^he Regents dimission.
(for numbers were come upon the rumor of a change that was in hand) they did
all advise him to take hold of the offer of dimission made by the Regent, and
accept the government in his own person, after which he might deliberate upon
such things, as the Regent had moved. Some were of opinion that the King should
write to the Regent, and require of him a dimission; but the greater part
misliking delays did reckon it more sure, to do that which was meant at once,
and not to protract time with a communing, such as that manner of proceedings
would necessarily breed; The King liking best the persuasions that were given
him to reign, (a thing natural to Princes) resolution was taken to discharge
the Regent of his authority, and publish the Kings acceptance of the
government.

This conclusion was the same day imparted to the Regent, A Commission from the
King to the Regent.
who thereupon sent the Lord of Whittingham to desire the King before any
innovation was made, to reconcile those of the Nobility that were in variance
with others; thinking this way to hold off the publication intended at least
for some days. But it availed nothing, for immediately were the Chancellor and
Lord Hereis sent with this Commission to him in writing: That his Majesty
considering the dislike which many had of his government, and the apparent
troubles to fail upon the Realm, had by the advice of the Nobility determined
to accept the rule in his own person; and because delay of time might breed
some further grudge, and inconvenience, he did therefore require him to send
his Declaration in writ with all speed, for testifying his obedience and
allowance of what was done, and to abstain from all further administration or
exercise of the office of Regency. As concerning his desires, for the surety of
his Majesty's person, the ordering of his house, and revenues of the Crown,
with preservation of the peace with England, and the settling of the Borders and
Highlands, his Highness should omit nothing that lay in his power to do for
effecting the same, and therein would follow the counsel, which he and the rest
of the Nobility should give unto him; and for the discharge of his
administration, he should have all granted, which with reason he could require,
the form whereof his Majesty did will him to draw up, that he might deliberate
with his Council what was fit to be done therein, assuring him that he should
be well and graciously used. With this Commission they did likewise carry a
letter written by the King himself in very loving terms, declaring, that
because he saw no other way to maintain concord amongst his subjects, he had
accepted the government in his own hands, and that he was confident to have the
defects of his age and experience supplied by his Nobility, especially by
himself, whom he would ever love, and acknowledge as his trusty Co^sen most
tender to him in blood (these be the words of the letter) and one of his true
and faithful Counselors.

In the mean time the Kings acceptance was published at Striveling, The Kings
acceptance of the Government.
and the next day being the 12th of March proclaimed at Edinburgh, where the
Regent himself was assisting, and took instruments of his dimission in the
hands of two Notaries. It grieved diverse of his friends that he had so easily
condescended to quit the place, which they thought he might with good reason
have kept, The Lord Boyd chideth the Regent for his dimission.
till a Parliament had been called for that purpose. Amongst others the Lord
Boyd, who was most entire with him, and came to Edinburgh some few hours after
his dimission, did chide him bitterly, speaking to this effect. That he did
presume too much of his own wit, who in a matter of so great moment would not
once ask the opinion of his friends; and that in a short time he should find
that he had done unwisely, to forsake the place committed to him by the whole
Estates of the Kingdom, at the pleasure of his enemies. For it is sufficiently
known, said he, that the King is a child, and that these motions have not
proceeded from himself. Now when he has assumed the government, and ye left
the place entrusted to you, shall he not be governed by those that are about
him, whom you know to be your enemies? But ye perhaps do promise ease and
safety to your self in a private life: as if you might descend without any
danger, from the place which ye have held. Wise men have observed that between
highest, and nothing there is not a mean; and it fears me you have wronged
your self in imagining the rest you shall never find. If you had kept your
place, they should have seen the faces of men, and not carried things thus at
their pleasure; but having forsaken your self, there is nothing left to your
friends, but to lament your misfortune; and God grant that this be the worst of
things. This said, he went aside, and burst forth in tears. The Regent (whom we
will no more call so) excused his doing, by the instance that the King made for
his dimission, saying, that his refuse would have made a great commotion in the
Realm; yet did he perceive his error, and in his secret thoughts, which he
covered so well as he could, blamed his own rash and precipitate yielding. But
there being no place left to resile, The Chancellor and Earl of Angus employed
in the Regents dimission to the King.
the next best he thought was to secure himself, and his friends, by discharge
of all things, that might be laid to him or them, during his administration;
and therein he employed the Earl of Angus, and the Chancellor, whom he did
constitute his procurators to compeir before the King, and make dimission of
his office, with such solemnities as by law were requisite.

This done, the discharge was given him in most ample form. Therein after a
general approbation of his service, he was declared not to be accusable of any
manner of crime, The Regents discharge of his administration.
of whatsoever greatness or weight, without exception, that might be alleged
to have been committed by him in times past: which declaration was ordained to
be as valid, and sufficient in all respects, as if the highest crime that could
or might be imputed to any person, had been specially expressed in the same. He
was also exonerated of all sums of money, rents, and profits, as well of
property, as casualty intrometted with by him or his factours and servants,
since his acceptance of the Regiment (the jewels of the Crown, the furniture
of his Majesty's house, Munition and Artillery only excepted.) A provision was
adjected, That the present discharge should not prejudge the King and his
successors in the revocation or reduction of whatsoever infeoffments, given of
the property, during his Highness minority^, or of whatsoever lands, Lordships,
offices, or dignities, fallen in his Majesty's hands by forfeiture,
recognition, bastardy, or by any other right, and privilege of the Crown. In
all other points the discharge was ordained to stand firm and sure for him, his
heirs, and successors, and the same never to be revoked, or any thing attempted
to the contrary: and for his greater assurance, the same was promised to be
confirmed by the Estates of Parliament in their first convention and meeting.
The Noblemen, and others of the Estates then present with the King, did
likewise bind themselves, their heirs and successors, to see all the foresaid
points truly fulfilled, under the pain of five hundred thousand pound. So as
nothing was omitted, which he could devise for his securing. Yet in all this he
found no assurance: to teach men, that it is not to be had in any worldly
thing, but to be sought of God alone. All men are compelled to acknowledge so
much in the end, though often too late; which was the case of this Nobleman, as
we shall hear. But better late, as the saying is, then never.

THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Contents.
The things that happened after his Majesty's assuming of the Government in his
own person, unto his happy succession to the Crown of ENGLAND.

THE King was not yet twelve years complete, when in the manner ye have heard
they moved him to assume the Government, Mortons enemies are still practicing
against him.
yet did he show more judgment in his very beginning, then could be expected
from one of his years. The Earl of Mortons enemies, not satisfied with his
displacing, were still casting how to bring him into the Kings dislike. And
first showing, that there was a necessity of the Kings residing at Edinburgh,
where was the place of Justice; they desired he should be charged to render the
Castle. Then informed that he had amassed a great treasure in the time of his
Regiment, they moved the King to require of him some moneys, for supporting the
charges whereunto he would be put at his first entry. They did further talk of
the Mint-house, and the commodity he reaped thereby. And to denude him of all
power, they desired the state of the borders to be looked unto, and the office
of Lieutenandry which the Earl of Angus his Nephew had in those parts,
discharged. To one or other of these they conceived he should be unwilling, and
so they should find some matter against him.

But the King refusing to use him with charges, The King his calm proceedings
with Morton.
took a more moderate course, and sent the Chancellor and Thesaurer to feel
his mind in those things. He lay then at Dalkeith, and having heard their
propositions, howbeit he knew those motions did proceed from his adversaries,
and was not ignorant what they intended, he answered calmly, That the jewels
and movables appertaining to the Crown, being received of his hand, and he and
his deputies discharged, the Castle should be rendered most willingly. But for
the advancing of moneys he excused himself, saying, that was not unknown, how
he had received his office in a time full of trouble, and when the country was
embroiled in a civil war, the burden whereof he sustained upon his private
Charge; and that since the troubles ceased, he had paid a great many debts,
repaired his Majesty's houses and Castles, and put them in a better case, then
for many years before they had been: That the entertainment of his Majesty's
house, and maintaining of his own as Regent, was a matter of no small charge;
which the ordinary revenues of the Crown would hardly do: yet when his Majesty
should be of perfect age, and his honorable occasions did require it, he
should not be wanting according to his ability, and bestow all his means for
his Majesty's honor. Concerning the Mint-house, he said, that he had kept it
in the best order he could, and having now no more charge of it, he wished the
King to do therewith as he thought best. For the affairs of the border, that he
had moved the Earl of Angus to undertake that service for the quietness of the
country, but seeing he had no lands in those quarters, and that the offices of
Wardenrie might suffice to hold those parts in order, An. 1578.
he would advise the King to dispose them to the most sufficient that could be
found.

The Noblemen returning with these answers, A pitiful Accident.
the King did rest well satisfied. But a pitiful accident that fell out in the
time, gave an hinderance to these business. The Chancellor going to the Castle
to make his report to the King, as he returned to his lodging, did encounter
the Earl of Crawford in the street, called commonly the Schoolhouse wynd. There
had been an old grudge bewixt the two families, whereupon the Noblemen passed
by others without salutations; the street being narrow, and the companies of
each side great, when they were almost parted, two base fellows fell a
struggling for the way, and by thrusting one at another raised a tumult, The
Chancellor killed in a tumult.
in the very beginning whereof, the Chancellor was killed with the shot of a
Pistol. It was certainly known, that the Noblemen did purpose no harm to
others, for Crawford did call to his followers to give way to the Chancellor,
as he on the other side called to give way to the Earl of Crawford, yet by this
unhappy accident were the old dissensions that had long slept revived; and a
fresh enmity raised, which turned to the great hurt of both. The death of the
Chancellor was much lamented, falling out in the time when the King and
country stood in most need of his service. He had carried himself with much
commendation in his place, and acquired a great authority: most careful was he
to have peace conserved both in the country and Church, and labored much to
have the question of Church policy settled; upon which subject, he interchanged
diverse letters with Theodore Beze. Some have blamed him of too great curiosity
in that matter, but his intention certainly was pious and commendable.

Upon his death the Earl of Athol was preferred to be Chancellor; The Earl of
Athol created Chancellor.
at which the Church did mightily offend; as likewise of the admission of the
Earls of Cathnes, and Eglinton, with the Lord Ogilvy upon the Council, who were
all thought to be Popishly inclined. This being meaned to the King, was in some
sort satisfied by their promises, and subscriptions to the Articles of
religion; yet the suspicions of their unsoundness still continued. And now
began they who longed for the change of Mortons government, to repent the
alteration that was made; for howsoever he did not favor the novations in
Church policy urged by some Ministers, he kept a severe hand over Papists,
permitting none to enjoy and public office, who was not sincerely affected to
the truth.

The first of April the Castle of Edinburgh was delivered to the Lords Ruthven
and Lindesay, who were appointed by the King to receive the house, The Castle
of Edinburgh delivered to the Earl of Mar.
and a discharge given to the Earl of Morton of the jewels, munition, and
movables within the same. And the same day John Seaton of Touch, and John
Cunningham of Drumwhassil received the keys in name of Alexander Areskin Uncle
to the Earl of Mar, upon a warrant directed to them for that effect. The Earl
of Morton resolving to live private, and to have no more meddling in public
affairs, retired to Lochlevin, where he stayed not long, being recalled to
Court by this occasion. The friends of the house of Mar, The Castle of
Striveling surprised by the Earl of Mar his friends.
of whom the principals were the Abbots of Driburgh and Cambuskenneth, out of
some jealousy they conceived of Alexander Areskin his courses, and a fear that
the young Nobleman who was then grown to some years, might be prejudged of his
right in keeping the Castle; practiced secretly to exclude him, and entering one
morning with a number of his followers, seized upon the keeper of the gate,
took the keys from him by force, and putting him and his men forth, placed
others in their rooms, whom they caused swear fidelity to the Earl of Mar.

How soon the Council (which then remained at Edinburgh) was advertised of this
change, The Council goes to Striveling and composeth the controversy.
they prepared to go to Striveling, and for their greater security were
furnished with some companies of men by the Town of Edinburgh, but by letters
from the King they were stayed. In these letters the King showed that it was a
private dissension only that had happened betwixt the friends of the house of
Mar, which he would have peaceably composed, and therefore desired them to
come unto him after a day or two in quiet and sober manner, and assist the
reconcilement. They obeyed, and coming to Striveling, in a frequent Council
kept the third of May, the controversy was in these terms composed: That the
Earl of Mar being new come to a reasonable age, he should attend the Kings
person, and have the custody of the Castle of Striveling, and that the Master
his Uncle should remain Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, and when he came to
Court have his table kept as before, and enjoy the place of a Gentleman of his
Majesty's chamber. Conditions prescrived to the Earl of Mar.
The conditions prescrived to the Earl of Mar were, That he should guard the
Castle, attend the Kings person therein, and not remove him to any place
whatsoever without the knowledge and consent of the Council. That he should not
receive any within the house, whom he knew not to be well affected to the King;
admitting an Earl with two only in train, a Lord with one, and Gentleman
single; that Mr. George Buchannan and Mr. Peter Young should continue his
instructers, and no others be admitted without the Councels consent, nor any
religious exercise kept within the Castle, but that which the Parliament had
approved. For the observing of these Articles, the Earls of Athol, Angus,
Argile, and Montross, with the Lords Ruthven and Lindesay, became sureties. For
the Master his Uncle, and his fidelity in keeping the Castle of Edinburgh, with
the jewels, munition, and other movables, the Earls of Athol, Argile,
Montross, and the Lord Ruthven gave their bond and obligation. Some days after
this broile, the Captain his eldest son (called Alexander) a youth of great
hopes, departed this life, as it was thought, of a grief he conceived for the
indignity done to his Father.

This agreement being made, A Convention at Striveling.
and the Lords being then to return to Edinburgh, the King did signify unto
them, that because the Parliament was indicted to the tenth of July, he would
before that time call a number of every estate together, for the preparing of
matters; and that all emulations laid aside, they might concur and join their
counsels for the public good of the Realm. The Diet for this meeting he
appointed at Striveling the tenth of June. the Convention at the time was
frequent; of the Clergy, eight Bishops, and as many Abbots were present: of the
Nobility nine Earls, and eleven Lords, and diverse Commissioners of Burghs. The
Earl of Morton comes to Striveling.
The Earl of Morton at the Kings earnest entreaty came also thither, and at his
coming was admitted upon the Council, having the precedence allowed him, with
the consent of the rest, because of the Regency he had a long time sustained.

In the first meeting the King after he had given thanks to the whole number
for the readiness they had showed to convene in that place, The Kings motion
to the Lords and the rest of the Estates.
proponed two things. One was touching the Parliament, and the place where it
should hold. The other concerned an Embassage, which he intended to send into
England. For the Parliament he said, that he longed to see a meeting of the
Estates, and would have the time to which it was called precisely observed,
wishing them all to addr^sse themselves thereto in time, and to come in a
peaceable manner, as men disposed to do good, and seeking the common profit of
their country. And for the place, seeing his own presence was necessary, and
that he could not conveniently remove from Striveling, he desired the
Parliament to be fenced at Edinburgh, at the day appointed, and then prorogated
some four or five days, and brought to Striveling. For the Embassage, he gave
diverse reasons, First, that having assumed the government in his own hands, he
was bound in courtesy to visit the Queen of England, and give her thanks for
the kindness he had received of her in his minority. Next, that the disorder
lately fallen out in the borders, (for about that time some borderers had
entered into England and committed great robberies) laid a necessity upon him,
to clear the country of that fact, and make offer of redress. Thirdly, that
he had a private business, which touched him nearly, his Grandmother the Lady
Lennox being newly deceased, and he being her only heir; it concerned him, he
said, to inquire what her last will was, and to see that no prejudice was done
to him in his succession to the lands she possessed in England. Lastly, if they
did think meet (but this he remitted to their wisdoms) he showed that he could
like well to have a motion made of a more strict league betwixt the two Realms,
during the Queens life and his.

It grieved the ordinary Counselors much, The Counselors dissuade the
change of the place of Parliament.
that the place of Parliament should be changed, who therefore labored to
dissuade the King from it; but perceiving him resolved that way, they gave
their consents, though most unwillingly. When they came to speak of the
Embassage to England, they acknowledged the necessity thereof; but took
exception at the league, pretending the ancient league with France. It was
replied, That the case of things was much altered from that in former times;
that England and Scotland had now the same enemies because of their common
profession, so as for their own safety it was needful they should join together
in strict friendship; and that the league with England might be so contracted,
as the old amity with France should remain inviolate. An Embassage to the Queen
of England.
The King further declared, that he did not mean to give power to his
Ambassador for concluding a league, wherein he would do nothing rashly, nor
without the advice of the Estates; only be desired, the same should be moved,
and upon the report of the Queens liking thereof, that the conditions of the
league should be well and gravely advised. After long reasoning, the matter
being put unto voices, it was by plurality agreed, that the same should be made
one of the Ambassadors instructions; against which, the Earls of Argile,
Montross, and Cathnes, the Lords Lindesay, and Innermaith, with the
Commendatary of Deir took public protestation.

These things bred a new heart-burning amongst the Noblemen, Jealousies among
the Noblemen:
for they took Morton to be deviser of all, and that he was craftily drawing
back the administration of affairs unto himself, which albeit they dissembled
for the present, brake forth after a few days in an open dissension. The
Citizens of Edinburgh were much offended with the Kings remaining in
Striveling, and the remove of the Parliament from their town; and as it
happens in such times of discontent, rumors were dispersed that the King was
detained captive, and was shortly to be sent into England, and the ancient
league with France dissolved. A Proclamation against the false rumors dispersed.
This being in the mouths of all men and talked of not in corners, but in open
and public meetings, a Proclamation was given out the sixth of July, Declaring
the falsehood of those rumors, and that the same were raised by some seditious
spirits that could not live quiet, under any sort of government; for as to the
Kings detention, it was known to be most false, and that it was his own choice
to remain at Striveling, attended by those, whom the Council by common consent
had appointed for the safe custody of his person; And for the Parliament, which
they said, was to treat of the dissolution of peace with their old
confederates, and to make up new leagues with others, there was no such matter;
it being his Majesty's only purpose to have such things entreated in that
meeting, as might tend to the advancement of Gods honor, the safety of his
Royal person, and the establishment of good laws for the quietness of the
Realm. Whereof if any made doubt, they might be resolved at their coming to the
Parliament, which was now approaching. Therefore were all good subjects
advertised, not to believe those seditious reports, nor suffer themselves to be
led by such wicked suggestions into rebellion.

This declaration prevailed little with the most part, The Lords remaining at
Edinburgh, protest against the holding of the Parliament.
for the minds of men were much exasperated. And the time of Parliament come,
the Lords that remained at Edinburgh, took counsel not to go thither, but to
send of their number one or two to protest against the lawfulness of it. The
Earl of Montross, and Lord Lindesay were chosen to that purpose, who coming to
Striveling, show the King the Noblemens excuse, and declared all they had in
Commission to say; wishing his Majesty to prorogate the Parliament unto a
better time, and make choice of a fitter place. But he resolved by the counsel
of those that were present, to go on, and coming the next day, which was the
16th of July, to the great Hall, where the Estates were advertised to meet, he
made a short speech touching the liberty of Parliaments, and the necessity he
had to keep one at that time, and in that place, assuring all persons who had
any thing to move, or propone, that they should have free access, and receive
satisfaction according to Justice. Mantross and Lindesay charged to keep their
lodgings for using the protestation.
After the King had closed his speech, the Earl of Montross and Lord Lindesay
arose, and in the name of the Council, and others of the Nobility adhering to
them, protested against the lawfulness of the Parliament, in so far as it was
kept within the Castle, whither they could not safely repair, the same being in
the enemies power. The King offended with the protestation, commanded them to
keep their lodgings, and not to depart forth of Striveling without his license:
which the Lord Lindesay obeyed; but Montross the next day early in the morning
went away, and returned to Edinburgh, where it was given out, that he had
brought from the King a secret direction to the Lords, to convene the subjects
in Arms, and liberate him out of Mortons hands.

Thereupon a Declaration was published, bearing that his Majesty having assumed
the government in his own person, because of the enormities committed in the
time of Mortons Regiment, A Declaration of the Lords remaining at Edinburgh.
had appointed the Council to remain at Edinburgh for the better ministration
of Justice And that by the care they took of affairs, all things had gone well,
and peaceably, till Morton out of his ambitious desire to rule, did suborn some
instruments to surprise the Kings house and person at Striveling, injuriously
displace the Captain, and put his family and servants to the gates: Of which
seditious enterprise, although he did pretend ignorance, yet the progress of
his actions continually since that time, did show that he was the chief plotter
of that business; for after his coming to ^ourt, and admission to be one of
the Council, he had disordered all things, thralling the King so far, that
his best subjects could have no free access unto him, and usurping the
jurisdiction of his Majesty's ordinary Council in translating the Parliament
from Edinburgh the Principal ^ity of the Realm, unto the Castle of Striveling.
Like as to bear out his wicked and violent designs he had of late presumed to
levy soldiers at the Kings cost and charge, intending thereby to maintain his
usurped authority, and oppress his Majesty's obedient and lawful subjects. In
consideration of which abuses, and lest notorious presumptions should by their
continual patience grow to a further height, they had resolved, laying aside
all difficulties, to withstand the violences practiced by him under the title
of the Kings authority, and to hazard their goods, lives, and lands for the
delivery of his Majesty's person out of his thraldom; protesting that the
inconveniences which should ensue upon the present troubles, should not be
imputed to them, in as much as they were forced unto it for their own just and
necessary defense, the restitution of their native Prince to liberty, and the
delivering of the Church and Commonwealth from the Tyranny of such as have ever
sought, and still do seek the ruin and overthrow of both.

This declaration published, Proclamations to follow the King or his Lieutenant.
all parts of the Realm were in a commotion: Soldiers were levied on either
side, Horse and Foot; and Proclamations sent to the Sheriffdomes of Edinburgh,
Hadington, Linlithgow, Clackmannan, Kinress, Perth, Fife, Forfar, Lanark,
Dumbarton, and to the Bailiaries of Kyle, and Cunningham, to prepare themselves
with victuals for 15. days, and be in readiness to follow the King or his
Lieutenants upon six hours warning, as they should be directed. Herewith a
Commission of Lieutenandry was given to the Earl of Angus for convocating the
subjects, and pursuing the rebels who had usurped the Kings authority with all
sort of rigor: The Lords charged to depart out of Edinburgh.
charges were also directed to command the Earls of Athol and Argile to depart
forth of Edinburgh within the space of 24. hours, and return to the places of
their dwelling, under the pain of treason; the Magistrates of Edinburgh were
enjoined to apprehend the persons that had taken Arms within their Town, and
not to suffer any armed men to enter in the same, except such as should have
direction from his Majesty. The Provost of Edinburgh committed.
Which when the Provost ( Archibald Stewart) came to excuse, as not being in
the Towns power, to withstand the forces of the Noblemen, he himself, was sent
prisoner to the Castle of Down.

The Parliament in this mean time went on, A Proclamation for dissolving the
forces convened at Edinburgh.
and all things proceeded therein as in a time of most secure peace. Upon their
dissolving, when it was told the King that the Lords were gathering forces, and
that they gave out the same to be done by warrant from him, he commanded by a
new Proclamation, all that were assembled in Arms, to separate and return to
their dwellings within the space of six hours, promising pardon to such as
obeyed. And lest any should be deceived with the rumors of his captivity, and
secret warrants from himself, he again declared, That it was his own desire to
remain at Striveling and be served by the Earl of Mar, with whom he knew his
surety was greater, then if he should be at the devotion of those that caused
the present troubles, whose meanings toward him could be no better then it had
been in times past. For the Warrants they pretended, he called God to witness,
that they had neither word nor writ from him; therefore willed all his good
subjects to live quiet, and not to be misled by such false informations. The
Lords march toward Striveling.
This Proclamation the Lords would not suffer to be published at Edinburgh, but
making the greater expedition, drew together their companies and marched
toward Striveling, the first night they camped at Linlithgow, and the day
following having mustered their Army, which they found to be about 4000. they
went to Falkirk.

The Earl of Angus as Lieutenant for the King, took the fields, and displaying
the Royal Banner made toward them. The English Ambassador labors to to
compose matters.
In number he did not equal the others, but they were Gentlemen all, active,
and resolute. Sir Robert Bows the English Ambassador, riding betwixt the
Armies, traveled earnestly to bring them to an agreement, and by his
entreaties, and the proponing of honorable conditions did keep them from
joining. In which time one Tait a follower of Cesford, who as then was of the
Lords party, came forth in a bravery, and called to the opposite horsemen,
asking if any among them had courage to break a lance for his Mistress; he was
answered by one Iohnston servant to the Master of Glammis, and his challenge
accepted. The place chosen was a little plain at the river of Carron: on both
sides whereof the horsemen stood spectators. At the first encounter Tait having
his body pierced through, fell from his horse, and presently died. This was
taken by those of Mortons side to be a presage of victory. But by the
Ambassadors travails the parties were drawn to the conditions following. 1.
That the forces on either side should presently separate, Conditions agreed
upon.
and a few horsemen only be retained upon his Majesty's charges, who should be
employed for quieting the borders, and not against the Lords convened at
Falkirk, or their adherents in the present action. 2. That the proceedings of
the Lords and other partakers with the Chancellor since the tenth of July
last, should be allowed as good service done to the King, in respect his
Majesty was assured of their good affection toward his own person. 3. That the
Chancellor and Earl of Argile should have their lodging within the Castle of
Striveling, with the like numbers that were permitted to other Noblemen. 4.
That all the Noblemen, Barons, and other Gentlemen, who pleased to come unto
the King, should be freely admitted to his presence, and have liberty to
propone their own affairs. 5. That the Earl of Montross and Lord Lindesay
should be received in the number of the Council. 6. That the King calling to
himself eight Noblemen, that is, four of each party, to be nominated by
themselves, should consider the griefs and offenses of either side, take order
for removing the same, and make up a perfect reconcilement amongst the
Nobility. 7. That the Commission of Lieutenantry granted to the Earl of Angus,
should be discharged. 8. And last, that the Captains of the Castle of Edinburgh
and Dumbarton should enjoy their offices, till the reconciliation intended was
brought to an end.


These Articles being signed by the King, The Articles signed.
and subscrived by the principals of both parties, the accord and heads thereof
were published at Striveling and Falkirk the fourteenth of August, upon which
the Armies dissolved. No stir in our memory was more happily pacified; for
should it have come to the worst, as it was not far off, such was the heat and
hate of both factions, that the mischief could not but have been great, which
would have ensued.

The place and time of the Noblemens meeting for considering the grievances of
both parties, The twentieth of September appointed for a meeting of Noblemen at
Striveling.
being left to the Kings appointing, because delay might breed greater
difficulties, his Majesty did assign the 20. of September to meet at
Striveling, whereof he caused the Ambassador give the Chancellor notice, and
to desire him to name the four Noblemen, whose advice he and the rest would use
in that treaty. The Chancellor answered by letter, The Noblemen decline the
meeting.
That neither he nor Argile could agree to meet at Striveling, nor could they
design the four Noblemen whom they would use, because death, sickness, and
other accidents might hinder one, or more of them to convene, but if it should
please the King to appoint the place of meeting at Edinburgh, about the end of
November, they should keep the day, and for the present nominate ten, of which
number hey should choose some four at that time as arbiters for their party.
The petitions of the Chance^^^^r and the Lords and Gentlemen adhering to him.
The ten they named were the Earls of Montross and Cathnes, the Lords Lindesay,
Maxwel, Hereis, Ogilvy, and Innermeath, the Abbot of Newbottle, and the Lairds
of Bargenny and Drumwhassil. Herewith he desired three things to be granted;
One was, that license might be given to such an one as they would choose to
pass into England: next, that they who were dispossessed of their places and
offices since the tenth of July, might be restored; namely Mr. Mark Ker, son
to the Abbot of Newbottle, Master of Requests, and William Cunningham, son to
the Lord of Drumwhassil, Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber: Thirdly, that none
should be called in question for their absence upon the late Proclamations,
seeing all they who came not to Striveling, must be understood to have been
their adherents.

This answer communicated to the King, The King offended with the petition.
did highly offend him. First, that they should usurp the appointing of the
time and place of meeting, which was left in his power: next, that they would
presume to send a message into England, they being his subjects, and neither
acquaint him with the person nor the message. For the other Petitions he judged
them impertinent, and more fit to be proponed at the meeting of the Noblemen;
wherefore in a letter sent by Mr. William Areskin to the Chancellor, he showed
that since they had delayed to nominate the four Noblemen, he himself would
make choice of four of them, whose names they had given to the Ambassador; to
wit, the Lords Lindesay, Ogilvy, Innermeath, and Hereis; to whom he would join
the Earls of Rothes and Buchan, with the Lords Ruthven and Boyd; and by their
advice proceed in the reconciliation by him intended; which if they should
refuse, he would notify to the Queen of England and other Christian Princes,
the care he had taken to perform all things, as they had been lately accorded.

To this letter no answer was given but that they should advise with their
friends, The Noblemen cited to appear at Striveling.
and afterward signify their minds; wherewith the King being discontent, he
summoned the Noblemen to meet at Striveling the 20. of September, warning all
the subjects, whom that business concerned to address themselves thither
against the day. At the day none of them appeared, and the more careful the
King was to have peace made, the more they seemed to draw back, protracting
time upon frivolous excuses; Wherefore the King for the last Diet appointed the
20. of October, which most of them kept. His Majestics speech at the meeting.
Being all assembled, the King spoke to them to this effect. Ye do all
understand what an earnest desire I have that you should join in friendship one
with another, which cannot be more contentment to me then it is benefit to your
selves; although I have many occasions given me to fall from that desire, yet I
abide in the same mind, and shall wish you to lay aside your needless
jealousies and suspicions. For as to me I will sindy to be indifferent, and
bestow my favors unpartially, and never repose my self upon any one so much as
to deny others the regard which is due to them. Ye that are Noblemen have a
special interest in me, and unless there be a correspondence of wills and
minds amongst you, I shall never find that concurrence that ought to be for
mine honor and the good of the Commonwealth. It is not long since, at your own
desires I accepted the government of the Realm, being persuaded by you that
this was the only way to cease all grudges, but now that I see them increased,
it repents me to have yielded to your desires, and entangled my self in such
business. What should let you to be reconciled, and become perfect friends, I
know not: if there by any grief or offense that has exasperated your minds,
will ye show it? I am here with the advice of my Lords to remove it, and see
satisfaction made, by those that have done the wrong. I hope you do not carry
minds irreconcilcable; ye professed that ye laid down Arms for the love ye
bare to your King; by the same love I entreat you to lay aside jealousies, and
suspic^ons, which ye will doubtless do except ye mind to expose your country
and your selves to utter ruin.

The Lords moved with this speech, The Lords are desire^ to set down their
complaints in writing.
professed themselves willing at his Majesty's desire to bury all discords; and
that their agreement might be the more sound, they were required to set down in
writing the injuries, and unkindness whereof they complained, that satisfaction
might be made at the sight of the King, and Noblemen whom he had named.
Hereupon the Chancellor and Argile presented their grievances in some short
Articles, bearing the unkindnesse they had received from the Earl of Morton in
the time of his Regiment. Whereunto he answered, first generally, that what he
did in that time was done by order of law, and that they themselves had allowed
his proceedings, and were sureties for ratifying the same in Parliament. Then
replying more particularly to every Article, he gave the King and other
Noblemen full satisfaction, and made it seen, that on the part of the other
Lords, there was a great mistaking: for what he did he could not leave undone,
without a manifest violation of justice. Yet for himself, he said, although he
had been ill rewarded by them for his pains taken in the public service, and
received more unkindnesse at their hands, then he had deserved, he would freely
remit all at the Kings desire. The Lords reconciled.
After some days spent in such reckonings, they were brought in end to join
hands.

During these contentions in the State, A form of Church-policy presented to
the Parliament, and remitted to certain Commissionres.
Mr. Andrew Melvil held the Church busied with the matter of policy which was
put in form, and presented to the Parliament at their sitting in Striveling.
The Estates having no leisure to peruse it, gave a Commission to diverse of
their number to meet and confer with the Commissioners of the Church; and if
they did agree to insert the same among the Acts of Parliament. How these
affairs went, and what effect the Commission took, because of the great
business, that afterward was made about the same, is necessary to be known;
wherefore I thought meet to set down the form of policy, as it was presented,
with the notes of their agreement and disagreement, as they stand in the
Original, which I have by me.

Heads and conclusions of the Church, and first of the Policy thereof in
general, wherein it differs from Civil.
FIrst, 1. Agreed.
the Church of God is sometimes largely taken for all them that profess the
Evangel of Jesus Christ, and so it is a company and fellowship, not only of the
godly, but also hypocrites, professing outwardly one true Religion.

2. 2. Agreed.
At other times it is taken for the elect only, and the godly; and sometimes
for them that exercise the spiritual function amongst the congregation of them
that profess the truth.

3. 3. Agreed that the Church is sometimes taken for them that exercise the
spiritual function in particular congregations.
The Church in this last sense has a certain power granted by God, according
to which it uses a proper jurisdiction and government, exercised to the
comfort of the whole Church.

4. 4. Continued to further reasoning, and when it is said this power shows
from God to his Church, whether this should be understood of the whole Church,
or of the officebearers, and wheither it shows mediately, or immediately.
This power Ecclesiastical is an authority granted by God the Father, through
the mediation of Jesus Christ, unto his Church gathered, and having the ground
in the word of God, to be put in execution by them, unto whom the spiritual
government of the Church by lawful calling is committed.

5. 5. Referred to further reasoning.
The policy of the Church flowing from this power is an order or form of
spiritual government, which is exerced by the members appointed thereto by the
word of God; and therefore is given immediately to the Office-bearer, by whom
it is exercised to the weal of the whole body.

6. 6. The last words of the Article are thought not necessary, and therefore
to be delete.
This power is diversely used, for sometime it is severally exercised (chiefly
by the teachers) sometime conjunctly by mutual consent of them that bare office
and charge, after the form of judgment; the former is called potestas Ordinis,
the other potestas Iurisdictionis.

7. 7. Agreed.
These two kinds of power have both one ground, one final cause, but are
different in the form and manner of execution, as is evident by the speech of
our Savior in the 16th and 18th of S. Matthew.

8. 8. Agreed.
This power and policy is different and distinct in the own nature, from that
power and policy, which is called the Civil power; and appertains to the civil
government of the Commonwealth, albeit they be both of God, and tend to one
end, if they be rightly used, that is, to advance the glory of God, and to have
godly and good subjects.

9. 9. Say in stead hereof, For this power is spiritual, not having-deleting
the other words.
For this power Ecclesiastical flows from God immediately, and the mediator
Jesus Christ, and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but
only Christ, the only spiritual King, and Governor of the Church.

10. 10. Agreed.
It is a title falsely usurped by Antichrist to call himself the head of the
Church, and ought not to be attributed to Angel or to man, of what estate
soever he be, saving to Christ the head, and only Monarch of the Church.

11. 11. Agreed.
Therefore this power and policy of the Church should lean upon the Word
immediately, as the only ground thereof, and should be taken from the pure
fountains of the Scriptures, hearing the voice of Christ the only spiritual
King, and being ruled by his laws.

12. 12. Agreed changing these word, they should not be called Lords over their
flock.
It is proper to Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, to be called Lords and
Dominators over their subjects, whom they govern civilly; but it is proper to
Christ only to be called Lord and Master in the spiritual government of the
Church, and all others that bear office therein, ought not to usurp dominion,
nor be called Lords, but Ministers Disciples, and servants: for it is proper to
Christ's office to command, and rule his Church universally, and every
particular Church, through his Spirit and Word, by the ministry of men.

13. 13. Change the last words of Ecclesiastical government, and Ecclesiastical
discipline, according to the word of God.
Notwithstanding as the Ministers and others of the Ecclesiastical state are
subject to the Magistrate civilly: so ought the person of the Magistrate be
subject to the Church spiritually, and in Ecclesiastical government.

14. 14. Referred to further reasoning, when the order of Bishops shall be
discussed.
And the exercise of both these jurisdictions cannot stand in one person
ordinarily.

15. 15. Referred till they come to the attribution of the power.
The Civil power is called the power of the Sword, the other power, the power
of the Keys.

16. 16. Agreed as the words are conceived.
The Civil power should command the spiritual to exercise and to do their
office according to the word of God; the spiritual rulers should require the
Christian Magistrate to minister Justice, and punish vice, and to maintain the
liberty of the Church, and quietness within their bounds.

17. 17. Disserreth this to be resclved with the 15.
The Magistrate commands in things external for external peace and quietness
among the subjects, the Minister handles external things only for conscience
cause.

18. 18. Referred.
The Magistrate external things only, and actions done before men; but the
spiritual ruler judges both the affection and the external actions, in respect
of conscience, by the word of God.

19. 19.
The Civil Magistrate gets obedience by the sword and other external means,
but the Minister by the spiritual sword, and spiritual means.

20. 20. Agreed that neither ought the Magistrate preach, nor minister the
Sacraments, nor execute the censures of the Church, which is to be understood
of excommunication, and refers the second part of this Article to further
reasoning.
The Magistrate ought neither preach, minister the Sacraments, nor execute the
censures of the Church, nor yet prescribe any rule how it should be done, but
command the Minister to observe the rule prescrived in the Word, and punish
transgressors by civil means: the Minister again exercies not the civil
jurisdiction, but teaches the Magistrate how it should be exercised according
to the Word.

21. 21. Referred.
The Magistrate ought to assist, maintain, and fortify the jurisdiction of the
Church, the Ministers should assist their Princes in all things agreeable to
the Word, providing they neglect not their charge in involving themselves in
civil affairs.

22. 22. Referred.
Finally, as Ministers are subject to the judgment and punishment of
Magistrates in external things, if they offend: so ought the Magistrates submit
themselves to the discipline of the Church, if they transgress in matter of
conscience, and Religion.

CHAP. 2. Of the parts of policy of the Church, and persons, or Officebearers
to whom the administration is committed.
FIrst, 1. The name of the Church in this Article is taken for the Church in
the first signification, to wit for the whole Church. Agreed with the rest of
the Articles.
as in the policy Civil, the whole Commonwealth consists in them that are
Governors or Magistrates, and them that are governed, and subjects; so in the
policy of the Church, some are appointed to be rulers, and the rest of the
members are to be ruled, and obey according to Gods word, and the inspiration
of his Spirit always under one Head, and chief Governor Jesus Christ.

2. 2. Referred.
Again, the whole policy of the Church consists in three things, chiefly in
doctrine, discipline and distribution; With doctrine is annexed the
ministration of the Sacraments.

3. 3. Referred.
And according to this division arises a sort of threefold Officiars in the
Church; to wit, Ministers or Preachers, Elders or Governors, and Deacons or
Distributers: and all these may be called by one general word, Ministers of the
Church.

4. 4. Referred.
For albeit the Church of God be ruled and governed by Jesus Christ, who is the
only King, high Priest, and Head thereof; yet he uses the ministry of men,
as a necessary mids for this purpose.

5. 5. Referred.
For so he has from time to time, before the Law, under the Law, and in the
time of the Evangel, for our great comfort, raised up men endowed with the
gifts of his Spirit for the spiritual government of his Church, exercising by
them his power through his Spirit and Word, to the building of the same.

6. 6. Referred to reasoning of the head of Visiters.
And to take away all occasion of Tyranny, he wills that they should rule with
mutual consent of brethren, and equality of power, every one according to their
functions.

7. 7. Referred.
In the New Testament, and time of the Evangel he has used the Ministry of
the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, in administration of
the Word: The eldership for good order, and administration of discipline: The
Deaconship to have the care of Ecclesiastical goods.

8. 8. Referred.
Some of these Ecclesiastical functions are ordinary, some extraordinary, or
temporal; the extraordinary, are the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which
are not perpetual, and now have ceased in the Church, except when it pleases
God extraordinarily for a time to stir up some of them again.

9. 9. Referred.
There are four ordinary offices or functions in the Church of God, the Pastor,
Minister or Bishop, the Doctor, the Presbyter or Elder, and the Deacon.

10. 10. Referred.
These Offices are ordinary, and ought to continue perpetually in the Church as
necessary for the government and policy of the same, and no mo offices ought to
be received, or suffered in the true Church of God, established by his Word.

11. 11. Referred.
Therefore all the ambitious titles invented in the Kingdom of Antichrist, and
his usurped Hierarchy, which are not one of those four sorts, together with the
offices depending thereupon, ought in one word to be rejected.

CHAP. 3. How the persons that bear Ecclesiastical functions, are admitted to
their Offices.
FIrst, 1. Agreed.
Vocation or Calling is common to all that should bear office in the Church,
which is a lawful way by which qualified persons are promoved to any special
office in the Church of God.

2. 2. Agreed.
Without this calling it was never lawful for any person to meddle with any
Ecclesiastical function.

3. 3. Agreed.
There are two sorts of Calling, one extraordinary by God immediately, as were
the Apostles and Prophets, which within a Church already well established, has
no place.

4. 4. Agreed.
The other calling is ordinary, which beside the calling of God, and the inward
testimony of a good conscience, has the lawful approbation of men according to
Gods word, and the order established in the Church.

5. 5. Agreed.
None ought to presume to enter in any office Ecclesiastical, unless he have a
good testimony in his conscience before God, who only knows the hearts of
men.

6. 6.
This ordinary and outward calling has two parts, Election, and Ordination.

7. 7. Referred.
Election is the choosing out of one man or person to the office that is void,
by the judgment of the Eldership, and consent of the congregation, to whom the
person presented is to be appointed.

8. 8. Agreed with the generality hereof.
The qualities in general required in all them who should have charge in the
Church, consist in soundness of Religion and godliness of life, according as
they are set forth in the Word.

9. 9. Agreed.
In this ordinary election it is to be eschewed, that no person be intruded in
any of the offices of the Church contrary to the will of the congregation to
whom they are appointed, or without the voice of the Eldership.

10. None ought to be intruded or placed in the ministry in places already
planted, or in any room that is not void, for any wordly respect; and that
which is called, the benefice, ought to be nothing but the stipend of the
Minister, who is lawfully called.

11. 11. Agreed.
Ordination is the separation and sanctifying of the person appointed by God
and his Church, after that he is well tried, and found qualified.

12. 12. Agreed.
The ceremonies of Ordination are fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands of
the Eldership.

13 13. Agreed.
All these as they must be raised up by God, and made able for the work
whereunto they are called, so they ought know, that their message is limited
within Gods word.

14. 14. Agreed.
These should take the names and titles only (lest they be exalted and pussed
up in themselves) which the Scripture gives them, as these which import labor,
travel, and work, and are names of offices and service, and not of idleness,
dignity, worldly honor, or pre-eminence, which by Christ our Master is
expressly reproved and forbidden.

15. 15. Agreed.
All these office bearers should have their own particular flocks, amongst whom
they ought to exerce their charge, and should make residence with them, taking
inspection and oversight of them every one in his vocation.

16. 16. Agreed.
And generally ought to respect two things; that is, the glory of God, and
edifying of his Church, by discharging their duties in their callings.

CHAP. 4. Of the Office-bearers in particular, and first of the Pastors and
Ministers.
1. 1. Agreed, saving the word Bishop, is referred to the place of Visitation.
PAstors, Bishops, or Ministers are they who are appointed to particular
congregations, which they rule by the word of God, and over which they watch;
in respect whereof sometime they are called Pastors, because they feed their
congregation; sometime Episcopi or Bishops, because they watch over their
flock; sometime Ministers, by reason of their service and office; sometime also
Presbyters or Seniors for the gravity in manners which they ought to have,
taking care of the spiritual government, which ought to be most dear unto them.

2. 2. Agreed.
They that are called the Ministry, or offer themselves thereto, ought not to
be elected without one certain flock to be assigned to them.

3. 3. Agreed.
No man ought to ingyre himself, or usurp this office without a lawful calling.

4. 4. Agreed.
They who are once called of God, and duly elected by men, having once accepted
the charge of the Ministry, may not leave their functions; and the desertors
ought to be admonished, and in case of disobedience excommunicated.

5. 5. Referred.
No Pastor may leave his flock without license of the Provincial Assembly;
which if he do, after admonition not obeyed, let the censures of the Church
strike upon him.

6. To the Pastor belongs the preaching of the word of God, in season and out
of season, publicly and privately, always to edify and discharge his
conscience, as God has prescribed. And unto them only appertains the
ministration of the Sacraments; for both these are appointed by the word of God
as means to teach us, the one by the ear, and the other by the eyes and other
senses, that by both knowledge may be conveyed to the mind.

7. 7. Agreed.
By the same reason it pertains to Pastors to pray for the people, and namely
for the flock committed to their charge, and to bless them in the name of God,
who will not suffer the blessings of his faithful servants to be frustrate.

8. 8. Agreed.
He ought also to watch over the manners of his flock, that he may the better
apply his doctrine to them, in reprehending the dissolute, and exhorting the
godly, to continue in the fear of the Lord.

9. 9. Agreed, that the Minister of the Word may pronounce the sentence of
excommunication, after lawful proceeding.
It appertains to the Minister, after lawful proceeding of the Eldership, to
pronounce the sentence of binding and loosing upon any person, according to the
power of the keys granted to the Church.

10. 10. Agreed with the present orders concerning marriage.
It belongs to him likewise after lawful proceeding in the matter by the
Eldership, to solemnize marriage betwixt those that are contracted, and to
pronounce the blessing of the Lord upon them that enter in that bond, in the
fear of God. And generally, all public denunciations that are made in the
Church before the congregation concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, belong to the
Ministers office, for he is the messenger and herault betwixt God and the
people in all these affairs.

CHAP. 5. Of Doctors and their Offices, and of Schools.
1. This whole Chapter referred to further reasoning.
ONe of the two ordinary and perpetual functions that labor in the Word, is
the office of Doctor, who may also be called Prophet, Bishop, Elder, and
Catechiser, that is, the teacher of the Catechism, and rudiments of the
Religion.

2. His office is to open up the mind of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures
simply, without such application as the Minister uses, to the end that the
faithful may be instructed in sound doctrine, the purity of the Gospel taught,
and not corrupted through ignorant or evil opinions.

3. He is different from the Pastor, not only in name, but in diversity of
gifts; for to the Doctor is given the gift of knowledge, to open up by simple
teaching the mysteries of faith; to the Pastor the gift of wisdom, to apply the
same by exhortation to the manners of the flock, as occasion craves.

4. Under the name and office of Doctor, we comprehend also the order in
Schools, Colleges, and Universities, which have from time to time been
carefully maintained, as well amongst Jews, and Christians, as among profane
nations.

5. The Doctor being an Elder, should assist the Pastor in the government of
the Church, and concur with the Elders his brethren in all Assemblies, by
reason the interpretation of the Word, which is only judged in matters
Ecclesiastical, is committed to his charge.

6. But to preach unto the people, to minister the Sacraments, and celebrate
Marriages, pertains not to the Doctor, unless he be otherwise called
ordinarily; yet may the Pastor teach in Schools, as he who has the gift of
knowledge oftentimes, which the example of Polycarpus and others testify.

CHAP. 6. The Elders and their Office.
1. 1. Passed over.
THe word Elder in the Scripture, is sometime the name of Age, sometime the
name of Office; and when it has the name of office is sometimes taken largely,
comprehending as well the Pastors, and Doctors, as these who are called
Seniors, or Elders.

2. 2. Agreed, that name of Elders be joined with Ministers.
In our division, we call these Elders, whom the Apostle calls Presidents, or
Governors, whose office as it is ordinary, so it is perpetual, and always
necessary in the Church of God, and a special function, as is the Ministry.

3. 3. The perpepetuity of Elders referred to further deliberation.
Elders once lawfully called to the office, and having gifts of God fit to
exercise the same, may not leave it again; yet such a number of Elders may be
chosen in certain congregations, as one part may relieve another for a
reasonable space, as was amongst the Levites under the Law, in serving the
Temple.

4. 4. Agreed.
The number of Elders in every congregation cannot be limited, but should be
according to the bounds and necessity of the people.

5. 5. Referred.
It is not necessary, that all Elders be teachers of the word, albeit chiefly
they ought to be such, and so worthy of double honor.

6. 6. Referred.
What manner of persons they ought to be, we remit it to the express word, and
the Canons set down by the Apostle S. Paul.

7. 7. Agreed.
Their office is as well severally as conjunctly, to watch with diligence over
the flock committed to their charge, both publicly and privately, that no
corruption of Religion or manners grow amongst them.

8. 8. Agreed.
As the Pastors and Doctors should be diligent in teaching and sowing the seed
of the Word, so the Elders should be careful in seeking the fruits of the same
among the people.

9. 9. Agreed.
It pertains to them to assist the Pastor, in examining those that come to the
Lords table, and in visiting the sick.

10. 10. Agreed.
They should cause the Acts of the Assemblies, as well particular as general,
to be put carefully in execution.

11. 11. Agreed.
They should be diligent in admonishing all men of their duties, according to
the rule of the Word.

12. 12. Agreed.
Things that they cannot correct by private admonitions they should bring to
the Eldership.

13. 13. Agreed.
Their principal office is to hold Assemblies with the Pastors and Doctors, who
are also of their number for establishing good order and execution of
discipline, unto which Assemblies all persons are subject that remain within
the bounds.

CHAP. 7. Of Elderships and Assemblies and Discipline.
1. 1. Agreed that Ministers and Elders may judge spiritual things within their
own bounds.
ELderships are commonly constitute of Pastors, Doctors, and such as we call
commonly Elders that labor not in the Word and doctrine, of whom, and of their
power we have spoken.

2. 2. Agreed.
Assemblies are of four sorts, for either they are of a particular
congregation, or of a Province, or of a whole Nation, or of all; and diverse
Christian Nations.

3. 3. Agreed that Synods be kept twice in the year, by him that has the
charge of visitation.
All Ecclesiastical Assemblies have power to convene lawfully together, for
treating of things concerning the Churches pertaining to their charge.

4. 4. General Assemblies once yearly, his Majesty's authority being
interponed, and from the General Assembly, Noblemen, and such as please to
come, shall not be excluded, providing that fifteen only, with his Majesty's
Commissioner, have voice therein.
They have power to appoint times and places to that effect, and every Assembly
to appoint the Diet, time and place for another.

5. 5. Agreed.
In all Assemblies a Moderator should be chosen by common consent of the whole
brethren convened, who should propone matters, gather voices, and cause good
order to be kept.

6. 6. Agreed.
Diligence ought to be taken chiefly by the Moderator, that only
Ecclesiastical things be handled in the Assemblies, and no meddling be with any
thing pertaining to Civil jurisdiction.

7. 7. Agreed.
Every Assembly has power to send forth of their own number, one or mo
Visitours to see how all things are ruled in their jurisdiction.

8. 8. Differed to the head of Bishops, and their Reformation.
Visitation of Churches is not an ordinary office Ecclesiastical in the person
of one man, neither may the name of a Bishop be attributed to a Visitour only;
neither is it necessary to abide in the person of one man always, but it is the
power of the Eldership to send out qualified persons to visit prorenata.

9. 9. Agreed.
The final end of all Assemblies is first to keep the Religion and Doctrine in
purity without error and corruption; next to keep comeliness and good order
in the Church.

10. 10. Agreed, joining in the end of the Article these words, or spiritual
things only.
For this orders cause, they may make rules and constistitutions pertaining to
the good behavior of all the members in the Church in their vocation.

11. 11. Agreed, that as they make Acts in spiritual things, so they may alter
the same as the necessity of time requires.
They have power also to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and Ordinances
concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisome and unprofitable, and
agree not with the time, or are abused by the people.

12. 12. Referred.
They have power to execute discipline, and punishment Ecclesiastical upon all
transgressors, and proud contemners of the good order and policy of the Church,
so as the whole discipline is in their hands.

13. 13. Referred.
The first sort and kind of Assemblies, although they be within particular
congregations, yet they exerce the power, authority, and jurisdiction of the
Church with mutual consent, and therefore bear some time the name of the Church.

14. 14. Referred.
When we speak of Elders of particular congregations, we mean not that every
particular Parish Church can, or may have their particular Elderships,
especially to Landwart; but we think three or four, mo, or fewer particular
Churches, may have a common Eldership to them all, to judge their
Ecclesiastical causes.

15. 15. Referred.
Albeit it is meet, that some of the Elders be chosen out of every particular
congregation, to concur with the rest of their brethren in the common
Assemblies, and to take up the delation of offenses within their own Churches,
and bring them to the Assembly.

16. 16. Referred.
This we gather of the practice of the primitive Church, where Elders, or
Colleges of Seniors, were constitute in cities and famous places.

17. 17. Referred.
The power of the particular Eldership, is to give diligent labor in the
bounds committed to their charge, that the Churches be kept in good order: to
inquire of naughty and unruly persons, and travel to bring the way again,
either by admonition and threatening of Gods judgments, or by correction.

18. 18. Referred.
It pertains to the Eldership to take heed that the word of God be purely
preached within their bounds, the Sacraments rightly ministered, discipline
maintained, and the Ecclesiastical goods uncorruptly distributed.

19. 19. Referred.
It belongs to this kind of Assembly, to cause the Ordinances made by the
Assemblies Provincial, National, and General, to be kept and put in execution.
To make constitutions which concern (...) for the decent order of these
particular Churches, which they govern; providing they alter no rules made by
the Provincial and general Assemblies. And that they make the Provincial
Assemblies foreseen of those rules they make, and to abolish such constitutions
as tend to the hurt of the same.

20. 20. Referred.
It has power to excommunicate the obstinate.

21. 21. Referred.
The power of election of them, who bear Ecclesiastical charge, pertains to
this Assembly within their own bounds, be well constitute, and erected of many
Pastors and Elders of good ability.

22. 22. Referred.
By the like reason their deposition also pertains to this Assembly, as of them
that teach erroneous doctrine, that be of a scandalous life, and after
admonition defist not, that be given to schism or rebellion against the
Church, manifest blasphemy, simony, and all corruption of bribes, falsehood,
perjury, whoredom, theft, drunkenness, fighting worthy of punishment by the
law, usury, dancing, and such dissoluteness, as imports civil infamy: And all
other that deserve separation from the Church.

23. 23. Referred.
These also who are altogether found unable to execute their charge ought to be
deposed, and other Churches advertised thereof, lest they receive the persons
deposed.

24. 24.
But they who through age or sickness, or any other accident become unmeet to
do their office, their honor should remain to them, and others be provided to
their office, the Church maintaining those who are by that occasion disabled.

25. 25. Referred.
Provincial Assemblies we call lawful Conventions of the Pastors, Doctors, and
other Elders of any Province gathered for the common affairs of the Churches
thereof, which may also be called the conference of the Church and brethren.

26. 26. Referred.
These Assemblies are institute of weighty matters to be entreated by mutual
consent, and assistance of the brethren within the Province, if need be.

27. 27. Referred.
This Assembly has power to redress, order, and handle all things committed
or done amiss in the particular Assemblies.

28. 28. Referred.
It has power to depose the Office-bearers of that Province for good and just
causes deserving deprivation. and generally these Assemblies have the whole
power of the particular elderships whereof they are collected.

29. 29. Referred.
National Assembly which we call general, is a lawful Convention of the whole
Church of the Realm or Nation where it is gathered, for the common affairs of
the Church, and may be called the general Eldership of the whole Church within
the Realm.

30. 30. Passed over.
None are subject to repair unto this Assembly for giving voice, but
Ecclesiastical persons; to such a number, as shall be thought good by the same
Assembly; not excluding other persons that will repair to it for propounding,
hearing, and reasoning.

31. 31. Answered before.
This Assembly is institute, that all that is either committed, or done amiss
in the Provincial Assemblies, may be redressed, and things generally serving
for the good of the whole body of the Church within the Realm, may be foreseen,
entreated and set forth to Gods glory.

32. 32. The last part of the Article referred to the heads of Bishops.
It should take care that Churches be planted in places where they are not
planted; and prescrive a rule for the proceeding of the other two sorts of
Assemblies in all things.

33. 33. Diff^rred.
This Assembly should take heed that the spiritual jurisdiction and civil be
not confounded nor abused, and generally toward all weighty affairs that
concern the good order of the Churches within the Realm, it ought to interpone
authority thereto.

34. 34. Agreed in spiritual matters.
There is besides these another more general. Assembly which is of all Nations,
and of all estates of persons within the Church, representing the universal
Church of Christ, which may be properly called the general Assembly, or general
Council of the whole Church of God.

35. 35. Referred.
These Assemblies were appointed and called together, specially when any great
schism or controversy in doctrine did arise in the Church, and were
convocated at the command of godly Emperors, being for the time, for avoiding
of schisms within the universal Church of God, which because they pertain not
to the particular state of our Realm, we pass by.

CHAP. 8. Of Deacons and their office, the last ordinary function in the Church.
1. 1. The Chapter of Deacons and (...) of the Church, are thought to be
suppressed till the head of corruptions be teasoned.
THe word (...) is sometimes largely taken as comprehending all them that bear
office in the Ministry, and spiritual function in the Church, but as we now
speak, is only taken for them, to whom the collection and distribution of Alms
of the faithful, and Ecclesiastical goods do belong.

2. The office of Deacon so taken, is an ordinary and perpetual function in the
Church; of what properties and duties they ought to be that are called thereto,
we remit to the Scriptures.

3. The Deacon ought to be called and elected as the rest of the spiritual
officers, and their office and power is to receive and distribute the whole
Ecclesiastical goods to whom they are appointed.

4. This they ought to do according to the judgment and appointment of the
Presbyteries, or Elderships, of the which the Deacons are not, that the
patrimony of the Church and poor be not converted to private men's uses, nor
wrongfully distributed.

CHAP. 9. Of the Patrimony of the Church, and distribution thereof.
1. By the Patrimony of the Church, we understand whatsoever thing has been at
any time before, or shall be hereafter given, or by universal consent or
custom of countries professing christian Religion applied to the public use,
and utility of the Church.

2. So that under the Patrimony of the Church we comprehend all things given or
to be given to the Church and service of God, as lands, buildings, possessions,
annual rents, and the like, wherewith the Church is endowed, either by
donations, foundations, mortifications, or any other lawful titles of Kings,
Princes, or any other persons inferior to them, together with the continual
oblations of the faithful.

3. We comprehend also all such things, as by laws, customs, or use of
countries has been applied to use, and utility of the Church: of which sort
are tithes, Manses, gleibs, and the like; which by the common and municipal
laws, and universal custom are possessed by the Church.

4. To take any part of this Patrimony by unlawful means, and convert to the
particular and profane use of any person, we hold a detestable sacrilege
before God.

5. The goods Eccclesiastical ought to be collected and distributed by Deacons,
as the word of God appoints, that they who bear office in the Church, may be
provided for without care, or solicitude.

6. In the Apostolic Church the Deacons were appointed to collect and
distribute, whatsoever was collected of the faithful, to the necessity of the
Saints, so as none amongst them did want.

7. These collections were not only of that which was gathered by way of Alms,
as some suppose, but of other goods moveable and unmovable, of lands, and
possessions; the price whereof was brought and laid at the Apostles feet.

8. This office continued in the Deacons hands, who intromitted with the whole
goods of the Church, till the estate thereof was corrupted by Antichrist, as
the ancient Canons bear witness.

9. The same Canons make mention of a fourfold distribution of the Patrimony of
the Church, whereof one part was applied to the Pastor, or for his sustentation
and hospitality; another to the Elders and Deacons, and the whole Clergy; the
third to the poor, sick persons, and strangers; and the fourth to uphold the
edifice of the Church, and other affairs specially extraordinary.

10. We add hereunto the Schools, and Schoolmasters, who ought and may well
be sustained of the same goods, and are comprehended under the Clergy; To whom
we join Clerks of Assemblies, as well particular as general, Procurators of the
Church affairs, takers up of Psalms, and other officers of the Church, who are
necessary.

CHAP. 10. Of the offices of a Christian Magistrate in the Church.
1. 1. For this whole Chapter it is thought meet, that an Article be presented
to his Majesty, and Estates, craving a punishment to be appointed for those
that put violent hands in Ministers, and likewise to desire such immunities and
privileges to them, as shall be thought convenient.
Although all members of the Church are holden according to their vocation, to
advance the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, so far as lies in their power; yet
chiefly christian Princes, Kings, and other Magistrates are holden to do the
same, for they are called in the Scripture, Nurses of the Church; because by
them it is, or at least ought to be maintained and defended, against all those
that would procure the hurt thereof.

2. So it pertains to the office of a christian Magistrate, to fortify and
assist the godly proceedings of the Church, and namely to see that the public
estate and ministry thereof be maintained, and sustained, as appertains to the
word of God.

3. To see that the Church be not invaded, or hurt by false teachers, and
hirelings, nor the rooms thereof occupied by dumb dogs or idle bellies.

4. To assist and maintain the discipline of the Church, and punish them
civilly, that will not obey their censures, without confounding the one
jurisdiction with the other.

5. To see that sufficient provision be made for the Ministry, Schools, and
poor, and if they have not sufficient to await upon their charges, to supply
their indigence with their own rents.

6. To hold hand as well to the safety of the persons from injury and open
violence, and their rents and possessions; that they be not defrauded, robbed,
and spoiled thereof; and not to suffer the Patrimony of the Church to be
applied to profane and unlawful uses, or to be devoured by idle bellies, and
such as have no lawful function in the Church, to the hurt of the Ministry,
Schools, poor, and other godly uses, upon which the same ought to be bestowed.

7. To make laws and constitutions agreeable to Gods word for the advancement
of the Church, and policy thereof; without usurping any thing that pertains not
to the Civil sword, but belongs to the offices merely Ecclesiastical; as the
ministry of the Word, Sacraments, or using the Ecclesiastical discipline, and
spiritual execution thereof, or any part of the spiritual keys, which the Lord
Jesus gave to the Apostles, and their true successors.

8. And although Kings and Princes that be godly, sometime by their own
authority, when Churches are corrupted, and all things out of order, do place
Ministers and restore the true service of God, after the ensample of some godly
Kings of Judah, and diverse godly Emperors and Kings also, in the days of the
New Testament: yet where the ministry of the Church is once well constitute,
and they that are placed, do their office faithfully; all godly Princes and
Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of
God speaking by them.

CHAP. 11. Of the present abuses remaining in the Church which are desired to
be reformed.
1. AS it is the duty of the godly Magistrate to maintain the present liberty
which God has granted by preaching of the Word, and the true ministration of
the Sacraments within this Realm; so it is to provide that all abuses, which as
yet remain in the Church, be removed and taken away.

2. Therefore first the admission of men to Papistical titles of Benefices,
such as serve not nor have any function in the reformed Church of Christ, as
Abbots, Commendators, Priors, Prioresses, and other titles of Abbeys, whose
places are now by the just judgment of God demolished, and purged of idolatry,
is plain abusion, and not to be received in the Kingdom of Christ amongst us.

3. 3. Let his Majesty and Estates be supplicated for dissolving these
Prelacies, that Ministers may be provided to the several Churches, at least
after the death of the present possessors.
In like manner, seeing they that were called of old the Chaptors, and Convents
of Abbeys, Cathedral Churches, and the like places, serve for nothing now, but
to set Fewes, and Leases of Church lands, (if any be left) and Tithes, to the
hurt and prejudice thereof, as daily experience teaches, the same ought to be
utterly abolished and abrogated.

4. 4. Passed over.
Of the like nature are the Deanes, Archdeacons, Chantors, Subchantors,
Thesaurers, Chancellors and others, having the like titles which flowed from
the Pope and Canon law only, and have no place in the reformed Church.

5. 5. Passed over.
The Churches also which are united and joined together by annexation to
Benefices, ought to be separated and divided, and given to qualified Ministers,
as Gods word requires: neither ought such abusers of the Patrimony of the
Church, have voice in Parliament; nor sit in Council in name of the Church, and
Churchmen, to the hurt and prejudice of the liberty thereof, and laws of the
Realm, made in favors of the Reformed Church.

6. 6. Answered by the act of dissolution.
Much less is it lawful that one person amongst these should have five or six,
ten or twenty Churches, all having the cure of souls, and enjoy the Patrimony
thereof; either by admission of the Prince, or of the Church in this light of
the Gospel: for it is but mockery to crave reformation, where the like have
place.

7. 7. An Act to be sought for disposing these united Churches to Ministers
after decease of the present possessors.
And albeit it was thought good for avoiding greater inconveniences, that the
old possessors of such benefices who embraced the Religion, should enjoy by
permission the two parts of the rents which they possessed before, during their
life time; yet it is not tolerable to continue in the like abuse, to give these
places, and other benefices of new to men as unmeet, or rather unmeeter, who
have no mind to serve in the Church, but live an idle life as others did, who
enjoyed the same in time of blindness.

8. 8. Referred.
And whereas by the order taken at Leith 1571. it appears that such may be
admitted, being found qualified, either that pretended order is against all
good order, or else it must be understood, not of them that are qualified for
worldly affairs, or to serve in Court; but such as are qualified to teach Gods
word, and have their lawful admission of the Church.

9. 6. The last part of the Article differred.
As to Bishops, if the name be properly taken, it is all one with the name of
Minister, as was declared; for it is not the name of superiority or Lordship,
but of office and watching. Yet because in the corruption of the Church this
name has been abused, and is like to be, we cannot allow this fashion of these
new chosen Bishops, nor of the Chaptors, that are their electors to such in
office.

10. 10. Agreed that Bishops have a particular flock.
True Bishops should addict themselves to one particular flock, which diverse of
them refuse, neither should they usurp Lordship over their brethren, and the
inheritance of Christ.

11, 11. Let the Diocese be divided in such sort as a man may reasonably visit,
and for the perpetuity of Visitors, it is referred to further reasoning.
and 12. Pastors, in so far as they Pastors, have not the visitation of mo
Churches, joined to the Pastorship, unless it be committed to them.

12. It is a corruption that Bishops should have further bounds to visit, then
they may conveniently overtake; neither ought any man to have the visitation of
Churches, but he that is chosen by the Presbytery.

13. 13. Passed over.
The Elderships well established, have power to send out Visitors with
Commission to visit the bounds within their Eldership, and after account taken,
be either continued or changed from time to time, being subject always to
their Elderships.

14. 14. Agreed.
The criminal jurisdiction in the person of a Pastor, is a corruption.

15. 15. Passed over.
It agrees not with the word of God, that Bishops should be Pastors of Pastors,
or Pastors of many flocks, and yet be without a certain flock, and no ordinary
teacher; nor does it agree with the Scripture, that they should be exeemed from
the correction of their brethren, and the discipline of the particular
elderships of the Church, where they shall serve; neither that they usurp the
office of visitation of other Churches, nor any other function, besides that of
other Ministers, unless the same be committed to them by the Church.

16. 16. Passed over.
Heretofore we desire the Bishops that now are, either to agree to that order
which Gods word requires, and not to pass the bounds prescrived by the general
Church, either in Civil or Ecclesiastical affairs, or to be deposed from all
function in the Church.

17. 17. Agreed.
We ceny not in the mean time that Ministers may, and should assist their
Princes when they are required, in all things agreeable to the word of God,
whether it be in Council or Parliament, or out of Council: providing always
they neither neglect their own charges, nor through flattery of Princes hurt
the public estate of the Church.

18. 18. Referred.
But generally we say, that no Pastor under whatsoever title of the Church, and
specially the abused titles in Popery, of Prelates, Chaptors, and Convents,
ought to attempt any thing in the Churches name; either in Parliament, or out
of Council, without the Commission of the Reformed Church within this Realm.

19. 19. Agreed, that an Act be made that none hurt or diminish the patrimony
of the Church.
It is provided by Act of Parliament, that the Papistical Church and
jurisdiction shall have no place within the Realm, and that no Bishop, nor
Prelate should use any jurisdiction in time coming, flowing from the Popes
authority: And likewise that no other Ecclesiastical jurisdiction should be
acknowledged within this Realm, but that which is, and shall be in the Reformed
Church, and flowing from the same. And such we esteem the Chaptors holden in
Papistical manner, either of Cathedral Churches, Abbeys, Colleges, or other
conventual places, usurping the name and authority of the Church, 5 Agreed.
to hurt the Patrimony thereof; or use any other Act to the prejudice ^of the
same since the year 1560. by abusion and corruption, contrary to the liberty of
the Church, and laws of the Realm; which therefore ought to be annulled,
reduced, and in time coming utterly discharged.

20. The dependences also of the Papistical jurisdiction are to be abolished,
of which sort is the mingled jurisdiction of the Commissars, in so far as they
meddle with Ecclesiastical matters, and have no Commission of the Church
thereto; but were elected in time of our Sovereigns mother, when things were
out of order; It is an absurd thing that diverse of them having no function in
the Church, should be Judges in deposing Ministers from their places. Wherefore
they would be either discharged to meddle with Ecclesiastical matters, or it
would be limited to them in what matters they might judge, and not hurt the
liberty of the Church.

31. They also that before were of the Ecclesiastical estate in the Popes
Church, 21. Answered before.
or that are admitted of new to the Papistical titles, and now tolerated by the
laws of the Realm, to possess the two parts of their Ecclesiastical rents,
ought not to have any further liberty, but to intromet with the portion granted
and assigned unto them for their life times, and not under the abused titles;
which they carry to dispone the Church rents, setting in fewes and leases the
same at their pleasure, to the great hurt of the poor laborers that dwell upon
the Church lands, and the prejudice of the Church, contrary to good conscience
and all order.

CHAP. 12. Special heads craved to be reformed.
1. WHatsoever has been spoken of Church offices, the several power of
office-bearers, their conjunct powers, and last of the Patrimony of the Church,
we understand it to be the right reformation which God requires, but because
something would be touched in particular, concerning the estate of the
country, and that which we crave presently to be reformed in the same, we have
collected them in the heads following.

2. 2. Agreed.
Seeing the whole country is divided in Provinces, and these Provinces in
Parishes, as well to Landwart, and in Towns, in every Parish, and reasonable
congregation there would be placed one or mo Pastors, and no Pastor or Minister
be burdened with the charge of more Churches then are allenarly.

3. 3. Agreed.
And because it will be thought hard to find out Ministers to all the parish
Churches of the Realm, we think by the advice of such as the Prince or Church
may appoint, Parishes in small villages, or to Landwart may be united, and the
principal or most commodious Church, at which the Minister resides, repaired
sufficiently; the rest that are not found necessary, being suffered to decay,
and the Churchyards reserved for burial places. As also where the congregation
is too large, the same would be divided.

4. 4. Agreed.
Doctors would be appointed in Universities, Colleges, and other places
needful for opening the Scriptures, and teaching the Rudiments of Religion, who
would also be sufficiently provided.

5. 5. Differred until joining of Churches.
As to Elders there would be in every congregation one or mo appointed for
censuring of manners, but not an Assembly of Elders, except in Towns, and
famous places, where men of judgment and ability may be had. And these to have
a common Eldership placed amongst them, to treat of all things that concern the
congregations, of whom they have the oversight.

6. 6. Agreed as depending on the former.
And as there ought men to be appointed for the dividing or uniting of
parishes, as need and commodity requires; so by the general Church with the
consent of the Prince, some that fear God, and know the estate of the
countries, would be chosen to design the places, where particular eldership
should convene; taking consideration of the Dioces, as they were divided of
old, and of the estate of the countries and Provinces.

7. 7. Passed over in the Article of Provincial Assemblies.
Likewise concerning Provincial and Synodal Assemblies consideration would be
taken, how many, and in what places they should convene; how often the same
must be referred to the liberty of the general Church.

8. 8. Agreed as before.
The National Assemblies called commonly the general, ought to be maintained in
their liberty, and have their own place, with power to the Church to appoint
times and places of meeting. And all men, as well Magistrates as subjects, be
subject to their judgment in causes Ecclesiastical, without reclamation or
appellation to any Judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical.

9. 9. Agreed to the general.
The liberty of electing persons to Ecclesiastical functions, observed without
interruption, so long as the Church was not corrupted by Antichrist, we desire
to be restored, and retained within this Realm; So as none be intruded upon any
congregation, either by the Prince or any other inferior person, without
lawful election, and the assent of the people, over whom the person is placed,
according to the practice of the Apostolic and primitive Church.

10. 10. Referred.
And because this order cannot stand with Patronages, and presentation of
benefices used in the Popes Church, we desire all those that truly fear God, to
consider, that Patronages and Benefices have no ground in the word of God, but
is contrary to the same, and to the liberty of election of Pastors, and ought
not now to have place in the light of reformation. And therefore whosoever will
embrace the light of Gods word, and desires the Kingdom of his Son Jesus
Christ to be advanced, would also embrace, and receive the policy which the
word of God craves, otherwise it is in vain that they have professed the same.

11. 11. To be sought of the Parliament.
Notwithstanding for other patronages of Benefices not having Curam animarum,
such as Chaplanries, Prebendaries, founded upon temporal lands, annuals or such
like, they may be reserved to the ancient Patrones, and be disponed by them to
Scholars, Bursers, when they fall void, as they are required by Act of
Parliament.

12. 12. Referred to the head of Deacons.
As to the Church rents in general, we desire that order be maintained and
admitted, which may stand with the sincerity of Gods word and practice of the
Church of Christ, in the purest times thereof: That is, that the whole
patrimony of the Church (the small Patronages before mentioned being excepted)
may be divided in four portions, one thereof to be assigned to the Pastor, for
his entertainment and keeping hospitality; another to the Elders, Deacons, and
other Officers of the Church, as Clerks of Assemblies, takers up of Psalms,
Bedles, and keepers of the Church, so far as they are necessary, joining
therewith the Doctors of Schools, for help of the old foundations, where need
requires; the third portion to be bestowed upon the poor members of Christ, and
the fourth upon the reparations of Churches, and other extraordinary charges,
that are profitable to the Church and Commonwealth.

13. We desire therefore the Ecclesiastical goods to be uplifted and faithfully
distributed by the Deacons, to whose office the collection and distribution
belongs, that the poor may be answered of their portion, the Ministers not
distracted from their callings, and the rest of the Thesaury of the Church,
bestowed upon the right uses.

14. If these Deacons be elected with such qualities, as Gods word requires
there is no fear to be taken of their abuse; yet because this vocation appears
to be dangerous to many, let them be obliged as they were of old in an yearly
account to the Pastors and Eldership. And if the Church and the Prince think
expedient, let surety be found for their fidelity, and that the Church rents
shall no way be dilapidated.

15. And to the effect this order may take place, all other intromettors with
the Church rents, Collectors general or special, whether by the appointment of
the Prince, or otherwise, must be discharged of further intromission, and
suffer the Church rents, hereafter to be wholly intrometted with by the
Deacons, and distributed to the uses before mentioned.

16. And also to the effect that the Ecclesiastical rents may suffice these
uses, we desire all alienations by fewis, or leases of the rents of the Church,
as well lands, as tithes, in diminution of the old rentals to be reduced and
annulled, and the patrimony of the Church fully restored. As likewise that in
time coming the tithes be set to none but to the laborers of the ground, as
was agreed, and subscrived by the Nobility, or then not set at all.

CHAP. 13. The conclusion showing the utility that shall flow from this
reformation to all Estates.
1. SEeing the end of this spiritual government and policy is, that God may be
glorified, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ advanced, and they who are of his
mystical body live peaceably, keeping a good conscience, we do boldly affirm
that and all who have true respect to these ends, will even for conscience
cause gladly agree, conform themselves to this order, advancing the same so far
as lies in them; that their conscience being set at rest, they may be
replenished with spiritual gladness in giving full obedience to Gods word, and
refusing all corruption contrary to the same.

Next this Realm shall become an ensample and pattern of good and godly order
to other Nations, Countries, and Churches, professing the same Religion; that
as they have praised God for our continuing in the sincerity of the Word
without all errors; so they may have the like occasion when we shall conform
our selves to that discipline, policy, and good order, which the same Word and
purity of Reformation craves at our hands; otherwise that fearful sentence may
be justly said to us, That servant that knows the Masters will and does it
not, etc.

3. Moreover, if we have any pity or respect of the poor members of Jesus
Christ who greatly increase and multiply amongst us, we will not suffer them to
be longer defrauded of that part of the patrimony of the Church, that justly
belongs to them. And by this order, if it be duly put in execution, the
burden of the poor shall be taken off the country, and the streets cleansed
of their cryings, and murmurings, so as we shall not be any more a scandal to
other Nations, as we have hitherto been.

4. Besides, it shall be a great ease and commodity to the whole Commons,
relieving them of the building and repairing of their Churches, Bridges, and
other like public works; It shall be a relief to the laborers of the ground
in payment of their tithes, and all other things, wherein they have hitherto
been rigorously used by them that were falsely called Churchmen, and their
Tasksmen, Factours, Chamberlains, and Extortioners.

5. Finally to the Kings Majesty and Estate this profit shall redound, that the
affairs of the Church being sufficiently provided, according to the foresaid
distribution, the Superplus may be liberally bestowed for the supporting the
Princes estate, and the affairs of the Commonwealth.

6. So to conclude all, being willing to apply themselves to this order, the
people suffering themselves to be ruled according thereto, the Princes and
Magistrates not exempted, and they that are placed in the Ecclesiastical
estate, ruling and governing rightly; God shall be glorified, the Church
edified, and the bounds thereof enlarged, Christ Jesus and his kingdom
advanced, Satan and the kingdom of darkness subverted, and God shall dwell in
the midst of us to our comfort in Jesus Christ, who with the Father and Holy
Ghost, abides blessed in all eternity. AMEN.

This was the form of policy presented to the Parliament, This was the course
the Assembly took for admitting this form of policy.
and the effect of the Commission granted for the same, such general heads as
did not touch the authority of the King, nor prejudge the liberty of the
Estate, were easily agreed. The rest were passed over, or deferred as we have
seen, to further reasoning, which could not after this time be obtained of the
Council, one excuse or other being still pretended. The Ministers perceiving
they would not speed this way, did in their next Assembly resolve to put their
conclusions in practice, without insisting any more for ratification thereof.
And beginning with Mr. James Boyd Archbishop of Glasgow, The Archbishop of
Glasgow urged to submit himself.
whom they hoped to find most tractable, he was desired to submit himself to
the Assembly, and to suffer the corruptions of the Episcopal estate to be
reformed in his person. After long reasoning kept with him by the Moderator
David Ferguson and some others, he presented his answer in writing.

I understand the name, office, and reverence given to a Bishop to be lawful
and allowable by the Scriptures of God, The Archbishops answer presented in
writing.
and being elected by the Church and King to be Bishop of Glasgow, I esteem my
calling and office lawful, and shall endeavor with all my power to perform the
duties required, submitting my self to the judgment of the Church, if I shall
be tried to offend, so as nothing be required of me, but the performance of
those duties which the Apostle prescribes. As to the rent, living, and
privileges granted to me and my successors, I think I may lawfully, and with
a good conscience enjoy the same. And for assisting the King with my best
service in Council and Parliament, as my subjection ties me thereto; so I
esteem it no hurt, but a benefit to the Church, that some of their number
should be always present at the making of Laws and Statutes, wherein for my
self I neither intend, nor by the grace of God shall ever do any thing, but
that which I believe may stand with the purity of the word of God, and the good
of the Church and country.

This answer read in open Assembly was judged insufficient, The answer does not
content be Assembly.
and he required to bethink himself better, and be present in the afternoon.
But he excusing himself, returned not to the Assembly, whereupon Commission was
given to Mr. Andrew Hay, Mr. Andrew Melvil, and some brethren in the West, to
urge his subscription to the Act made at Striveling for reformation of the
estate Episcopal; and if he did refuse, to proceed against him with the
censures of the Church. The Bishop taking grievously these proceedings, and
having received about the same time a great wrong at the hands of his Cosen
Robert Boyd of Baydinheth, by the demolishing of the house of Lockwood, The
Archbishop contracts sickness, and dies.
which is in the Barony of Glasgow, contracted a melancholy, whereof he died
not long after at Glasgow. Nothing did more grieve him, then the ingratitude of
Mr. Andrew Melvil and his uncourteous forms; he had brought the man to
Glasgow, placed him Principal in the College, bestowed otherwise liberally
upon him, and was paid for this his kindness with most disgraceful contempt.
In private, and at the Bishops table (to which he was ever welcome) no man did
use him with greater respect, giving him his titles of dignity and honor; but
in the public meetings where he owed him greatest reverence, he would call him
by his proper name, and use him most uncivilly. The Commission of the Assembly
he exerced with all rigor, and by threatening the Bishop with the censures of
the Church, induced him to set his hand to certain Articles, which as he
professed in his sickness, did sore vex his mind; yet being comforted by Mr.
Andrew Polwart Subdean of Glasgow, he departed this life in great quietness He
was a wise, learned, religious Prelate, and worthy to have lived in better
times, then he fell into. His corpse was solemnly buried in the Quire of the
Cathedral, and laid in the sepulcher of Mr. Gawan Dumbar, one of his
predecessors.

The small respect carried to Bishops in these Assemblies of the Church, The
conditions prescribed to Bishops.
made them dishaunt, and come no more unto the same. Yet matters went on, and
because the Archbishop of S. Andrews did absent himself, Commission was given
to certain of their number to call him before them, and charge him to remove
the corruptions in the estates of Bishops in his own person, which they
reckoned to be seven; ordaining him and the Bishops that would submit
themselves to correction, to set their hands to the conditions following. 1.
That they should be content to be Ministers and Pastors of a flock. 2. That
they should not usurp any criminal jurisdiction. 3. That they should not vote
in Parliament in name of the Church, unless they had a Commission from the
general Assembly. 4. That they should not take up for maintaining their
ambition, the rents which might maintain many Pastors, Schools, and poor, but
content themselves with a reasonable portion for discharging their office. 5.
That they should not claim the title of temporal Lords, nor usurp any Civil
jurisdiction, whereby they might be withdrawn from their charge. 6. That they
should not empire over Presbyteries, but be subject to the same. 7. That they
should not usurp the power of Presbyteries, nor take upon them to visit any
bounds that were not committed to them by the Church. Lastly, it was provided,
that if any more corruptions should afterward be tried, the Bishops should
agree to have them reformed.


What troubles hereupon arose, both in the Church and Country, we shall
afterward hear.

In Glasgow the next spring there happened a little disturbance by this
occasion. A tumult in Glasgow for pulling down the Cathedral.
The Magistrates of the City by the earnest dealing of Mr. Andrew Melvil and
other Ministers, had condescended to demolish the Cathedral, and build with the
materials thereof some little Churches in other parts for the ease of the
Citizens. Diverse reasons were given for it; such as the resort of superstitious
people to do their devotion in that place; the huge vastness of the Church,
and that the voice of a Preacher could not be heard by the multitudes that
convened to Sermon; the more commodious service of the people; and the removing
of that idolatrous monument (so they called it) which was of all the Cathedrals
in the Country only left unruined, and in a possibility to be repaired. To do
this work, a number of Quarriers, Masons, and other workmen was conduced, and
the day assigned when it should take beginning. Intimation being given thereof,
and the workmen by sound of a Drum warned to go unto their work, the Crafts of
the City in a tumult took Arms, swearing with many oaths, that he who did
cast down the first stone, should be buried under it. Neither could they be
pacified, till the workmen were discharged by the Magistrates. A complaint was
hereupon made, and the principals cited before the Council for insurrection;
where the King, not as then thirteen years of age, The matter brou^ht before
the Council.
taking the protection of the Crafts, did allow the opposition they had made,
and inhibited the Ministers (for they were the complainers) to meddle any more
in that business, saying, That too many Churches had been already destroyed,
and that he would not tolerate more abuses in that kind.

A little before this time the Abbot of Dunfermlin being returned from England,
The Abbot of Dunfermlin returned from England.
related in Council the effects of his negotiation, and was approved by all.
For that which he had in Commission touching the Lady Lennox, he remitted the
answer to the Queens own letters delivered to the King. Concerning the
disorders fallen out in the Borders, the Queen, he said, did accept the excuse
he made in good part, saying, she was assured, The report of his Commission.
that both the King and Council were offended therewith, and that she was
content the same should be redressed by the advice of the Wardens on both
sides: only desired that in time coming the King would make choice of wise and
experienced men, inclined to peace and justice, to command in those parts. As
to the League, he declared that the Queen had a good inclination unto it;
holding the same a most sure means to repress the practices of enemies both at
home and abroad: But in regard he had no warrant to descend into particulars,
he had abstained from any dealing therein, and could not but testify, that he
saw in her a great care of the King his good Estate, and that both he and his
message were most kindly accepted.

The King in this mean time to pacify the Borders, The Lord Ruthven made
Lieutenant of the Borders.
which were broken loose, chiefly in the West parts, gave the Lord Ruthven a
Commission of Lieutenandry, which he discharged with great commendation, and
bringing with him the Lord Maxwel, who was Warden of the bounds, returned to
Striveling the twentieth of January. A frequent Council was there kept for the
time, wherein the Lord Maxwel being challenged of negligence in his office, did
answer, That he had only the title of a Warden, and that the limitations of his
charge, and the exceptions granted to the Gentlemen of the Country made the
office needless and contemptible. But if the King should be pleased to
discharge the exceptions, and give him a free Commission, such as his
predecessors had wont to have, he should strive to do his best service to his
Majesty and the Country. This answer was not well taken, and the Lord Hereis
(as one known to have greatest experience in these matters) being desired to
give his opinion, delivered the same in a long speech, to this purpose. Your
Majesty, said he, has in deliberation a business of great importance, whereof
it were more fitting any man should give his opinion, then I, by reason of the
suspicion I stand in with the present Warden; for what I say, will be
interpreted to proceed of spleen, and of a desire to have the charge taken from
him, An. 1579.
and not of any care I take of your Majesty's service, or the good and benefit
of the Country, yet seeing your Majesty commands me to speak, I will rather
hazard on such misinterpretings, then keep back any thing which I know to be
useful and necessary for the errand. And what I speak, I desire it to be
understood of the West marches only, to which my experience chiefly reaches.
But because the evils would first be known, I will begin at them, and then
propone the fittest and most easy remedies to my conception. Sir, a little
before the death of your Majesty's Noble Grandfather King James the fifth, some
few disloyal subjects of this Realm fleeing into England, did plant themselves
in a parcel of waste ground, that lies opposite to the West Borders of
Scotland, and being maintained by the English grew unto such numbers, and
became so insolent, as they made daily incursions upon the Country. Your
Majesty's Grandfather did hereupon employ certain forces against them,
intending to sack and destroy their houses, and make them unable from
thenceforth to annoy his subjects. But these forces not being rightly governed,
and lacking the provision that was required for such an enterprise, were put to
the worse, and shamefully discomfited. At that time, what by ransoming
prisoners, what by the spoil they got, they gained above one hundred thousand
Merks, wherewith, and by the depredations they have made since that time, they
are become wealthy, have built eight or nine strong houses upon the frontiers
of your Realm, that no Wardens power is able to force. They have joined in
alliance with diverse of our own Borders, as wickedly disposed as themselves,
and are so feared, that every man is glad of their friendship; without which
none is thought to have any surety, either of life or goods. When your
Grandfather departed this life, which was in the year 1542. they did not exceed
the number of 20. or 30. men at most. Now they are grown to three or four
hundred, dwell nigh to others, are well armed, have good horses, and upon a
simple shout are ready to join in defense one of another. The Borderers on the
Scots side are not in this condition; for the space of twenty miles, there is
not a strength in which an honest man may sleep safe, no town nor strong hold
to retire unto in time of necessity, neither is the country populous, nor is
it fruitful, the ground being a pasture ground, barren and profitable only for
the bestial, the people that inhabit the same, poor* unruly, and not subject to
order. So what for the number of these wicked men, that live in the English
Borders, what for the evil disposition of our own, it is a charge most
difficile to guard these marches, and to contain the people from doing or
receiving wrong. The only remedy in this time of peace is, to keep our own
countrymen in awe and fear of justice, so as neither they break loose
themselves, nor have any dealing with their neighbors under hand, in their
wicked practices. And how this may be done most surely, your Majesty and this
honorable Council is to think; my opinion I have set down in some Articles,
which I humbly submit to your Majesty's and Councels censure.

Having thus spoken, he presented a writing containing these heads. 1. That the
Warden should make his residence in Lochmaben with his family, Articles
presented by the Lord Hereis.
and if in the Winter season he made his stay in Dumfreis, he should depute a
sufficient Gentleman, for holding Courts of Justice weekly, according to the
ancient form. 2. That the Warden should be assisted with five or six of the
wisest men in the country, of which number two should be of the name of
Iohnston; and lest their chief should think the Wardens proceeding against his
followers partial, and done out of old rancor, that a moderate course should be
kept in confiscation of their goods, the half being allowed to the wives and
children of them that should happen to be convicted and executed, and the other
half disponed to the Lord of Iohnston himself. 3. That the Barons and landed
men within the bounds should present their tenants and servants as they should
be required, and no man excused or exempted. 4. That the Lords Carlisle and
Hereis, the Lairds of Drumlanrig, Apilgirth, Lag, and Iohnston, should remain
nigh to the Warden, and when the Lord Maxwell has not the charge, that he be
obliged to dwell in the house of Langhome, or if he be Warden himself, that he
maintain a Captain therein, with twelve horsemen to be ready upon all
occasions. 5. That the Warden be allowed a guard of 24. horsemen with their
Captain, who shall be laid in the town of Annand. 6. That the Kings houses of
Lochmaben, and Annand, with the watchtower called Repentance, be repaired, a
great bell and firepan put into it, with some honest man to watch and give
warning to the country where the fray is, and a husband land allowed him for
his service. 7. That the lands called The debateable lands be visited; that it
may be known how much thereof is claimed by the broken men of the country to
be their steedings, and security taken of them for keeping good order. 8. That
days of truce be kept every 40. days once, or within two months at least, and
such as shall be found to be robbed of their goods, be redressed to the double,
and with safer, according to the law of Marches. Lastly, that his Majesty every
year in the month of September, send one or two of the Council to try the
estate of the country, what duty the Warden does, and if the Barons and landed
men do give their assistance, that where any defect is found, the same may be
punished.


At these Articles the Lord Maxwel took exception, The Lord Maxwel excepteth
against the Articles.
especially at the first and second; for the house of Lochmaben, he said was
his own as heretable Stewart of Annandale, and that any part of the Escheats
should be given to the Lord of Iohnston, he held it prejudicial to the Wardens
office, and said it would be an occasion for other Barons to suite the like.
But that which did most displease him (though this he dissembled) was, that any
should be joined with him as assisters: for he would needs be absolute in these
parts, and have all to depend of him, which ambition he still nourished, and
thereby in end wrought his own ruin. Yet the King not willing to displace him
(for he understood his power to be great in these marches) made offer to
continue him in the charge, and to allow him a company of 24. horsemen, with a
Captain for repressing the outlawes, upon three conditions. First, that he
should take the advice of the Barons of the country in all affairs, and
proceed in the ministering of justice by their counsel. Next, that none should
be declared fugitives, but by their consents. And thirdly, that the servants of
landed men should not be apprehended, till their Masters were first charged to
exhibit them, unless they were taken in the fact, and as they speak with the
red ^and. He excusing himself, and professing a great willingness to give his
attendance to any other, whom his Majesty should appoint; the Lord Hereis was
chosen Warden, and the custody of the West Marches committed to him.

In the beginning of this year (to wit, The Earl of Athol dies.
upon the 24. of April, the Earl of Athol died at Kincarne, of a sickness
contracted in Striveling, where he and some other Noblemen had been feasted by
the Earl of Morton, and as report speaks always the worst of great men's
deaths, so the rumor at this time went, that Morton had made him away by
poison: which his Lady and friends did so strongly apprehend, as when the
Council was examining the Physicians that embalmed his corpse, whether they
perceived any sign of poison at his unbowelling, they took upon protestation
that the trial of the Council should not prejudge the criminal pursuit, which
they intended before the Justice. And albeit the Physicians did upon their
oaths declare, that his death was not caused by any extraordinary mean, yet
the scandal was fostered a long time by a sort of rhyming Libels, which were
afterward tried to be composed by one Turnbull a Schoolmaster at Edinburgh,
Certain Libellers executed at Striveling.
and another called William Scot, who were executed for the same at Striveling
in the end of the Summer.

A consultation was held at the same time in Striveling, Commission for
apprehending the Lord Hamilton and his brother Lord Claud.
for punishing the murderers of the two Regents, which by the edict of
pacification was delayed unto the King his assuming of the government in his
own person. Touching the form of proceeding, the opinions of those that were
privy to the business were different: for some thought that the persons who
were suspected, should be summoned to a day and form of process kept with them;
others judged that there needed no such formality, seeing the Authors were
known, and the sentence of forfeiture pronounced against them, stood unreduced.
To use a citation they said, was to give them warning to flee, whereas
otherwise they might be taken unprovided, and brought to their censure. At last
it was agreed that a Commission should be given to some Noblemen that had
power, and affected the business, to apprehend them. This Commission was given
to the Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, and to the Lords of Ruthven,
(...), and Boyd; which was not so closely carried, but advertisement went to
the Lord Hamilton and his brother Lord Claud, so as they escaped. The Lord
Hamilton going on foot through the most part of England in the habit of a
Seaman, fled into France. They escape and depart forth of the Realm.
Lord Claud after he had lurked a while amongst his friends at home, found
refuge in the North parts of England: others of their friendship who stood in
fear, saved themselves where best they could.

Upon the report of their escape, Charges directed for the rendering the houses
of Hamilton and Draffan.
charges were directed for rendering the houses of Hamilton and Draffan, which
belonged to the Earl of Arran their elder Brother, and were possessed by the
Lord Hamilton as administrator to his brother because of his disease. The Earl
of Arran himself they had kept in the Castle of Draffan, attended by some
servants, and he was known to have no part in any of these facts, wherewith
they were charged, so as by way of justice his estate could not fall under
forfeiture; yet some color of right behoved to be made for bringing the same
under the Courts disposing. To this effect it was devised, that a complaint
should be preferred in the name of the Earl of Arran, and his Majesty's
Advocates, bearing the miserable condition of the said Earl, and how he was
detained in close prison by his two brothers without fire, air, and the
company of his honest friends; A complaint presented in name of the Earl of
Arran.
his living violently possessed by the Commendators of Aberbrothock, his
Sheriffeship of La^rick usurped, himself denied the benefit of marriage, and
debarred from succession against all law: for if he was an idiot or furious (as
they gave out) he ought to have had Curators given him by the King; and if he
was mentis compos, it was an intolerable wrong to use him in that sort.
Therefore desired letters to be directed for his exhibition before the Council,
that it might be known in what estate he was, and an honorable provision
appointed unto him, such as befitted his birth and condition. This desire being
judged reasonable, summons were directed against the two brothers that were
fled, and they not appearing at the day, were denounced Rebels. But this not
sufficing to work their ends, the disobedience of the Keepers in not rendering
the strengths when they were charged, was made the Earls crime, and he found to
have incurred the pain of treason; an act of the greatest injustice that could
be done. Notthelesse upon this ground were both the Castles at that time
demolished, and Captain James Stewart afterward preferred to the Earldome of
Arran.

Whilst these things were doing, Monsieur No a Frenchman, The Queen of Scots,
her Secretary denied access to the King.
Secretary to the Queen of Scots came to Striveling with letters, and some
presents to the King, but because in the superscription of the letters he was
only entitled Prince of Scotland, the messenger was denied access, and
neither his letters nor presents received. The rest of this summer was spent
for the most part in summoning the Gentlemen of the name of Hamilton, The
Gentlemen of the name of Hamilton put under surety.
and putting them under surety, that they should not give supply to the
fugitives, and be always ready to answer before the Council, when they should
be called. Dame Margaret Lion Countess of Cassils, who not long before had
married the Commendator of Aberbrothock, was suffered to possess the Joincture
she had by her first husband upon the like condition. And because many were put
in fear by this proceeding, that the pacification of Perth should be altogether
annulled, his Majesty made a public declaration, That what was done in the
present pursuit, was only for the murder of his Father and Regents, (unto
which both in honor and conscience he was tied) And that no Article of the
pacification should be infringed, or called in question.

In the beginning of July the Earl of Athols funerals were performed with great
solemnity, The Earl of Argile created Chancellor.
and his body interred in the Church of S. Giles at Edinburgh, after which
Colin Earl of Argile was created Chancellor in his place. The King then
resolving to show himself to his people, A Parliament indicted.
and to fall into the exercise of his Princely authority, caused proclaim a
Parliament to be kept at Edinburgh the twentieth of October.

Whilst things were preparing for his remove, An. 1580.
the Lord D' Ambigny arrived from France, of purpose to visit the King, as
being nigh of blood, and Cosen german to his Father. The Lord D' Aubigny
comes from France.
The King receiving him kindly, after a few days entertainment at Striveling,
took him in company to Edinburgh, when he grew into such favor by his
courteous and modest behavior, as the King would not permit him to return unto
France; and moving his grand Uncle to resign in his favors the Earldom of
Lennox, he gave to him in recompense the title of the Earldom of March. Soon
after the Abbacy of Aberbrothock which was fallen by Lord John Hamiltons
forfeiture was bestowed on him, He is created Earl of Lennox.
and he preferred to be one of the privy Council.

This sudden and unexpected preferment got him much hatred, and being of the
Roman profession, The Earl of Lennox hated because of his credit with the King.
his enemies filled the country with rumors, that he was sent from France
only to pervert the King in his Religion. Notthelesse, in the Parliament which
held at the time appointed, diverse good acts were made in favor of the Church,
but the matters of jurisdiction, which the Ministers did chiefly urge, was put
off to a new Commission. The King writes to the Assembly of the Church.
Some months before, the King had required them, by a letter directed with
John Doncanson his Minister, to abstain from making any novation in the Church
policy, and to suffer things to continue in the state wherein they were, unto
the Parliament approaching; without prejudging the decision of the Estates by
their conclusions. But they neglecting the letter, went to examine the
conference kept at Striveling the year preceding, and whereas in that
conference diverse heads were remitted to a further consultation, they ordained
nothing to be altered either in form or matter, of that which amongst
themselves was concluded. They further called the Archbishop of S. Andrews in
question for granting collations upon some Benefices, and for giving voice in
Parliament, not being authorized thereto by the Church. This did so displease
the King, as from that time forth he did not countenance the Ministers as in
former times, and upon the complaint of persons who otherwise deserved not much
regard (that the Church might find in what need they stood of his favor) he
suffered diverse sentences to pass in Council, The proceedings of the Church
displease the King.
suspending their censures and excommunications.

This dissension betwixt the King and the Church brought with it many evils,
Jesuits and Priests resort to the country.
for upon the notice of it diverse Jesuits and Priests did resort into the
country, and at home, such as were Popishly affected, began openly to avow
their profession. In S. Andrews Mr. Nicholl Burn professor of Philosophy in S.
Leonards College, made open Apostasy from the truth; as Mr. Archihald and
John Hamiltons Regents in the new College, had (not long before) done. In
Dumfreis Mr. Ninean Daliel Schoolmaster, did read to his Scholars the Roman
Catechism, and in Paisley a number of Papists assembling together, did in
derision sing a Soul Mass for the Ministers, as if they and their religion
had been utterly gone. These things being complained of, and not much hearkened
to, the Ministers in their Sermons fell to regrate the countenance given to
Papists in the Court, and the dangers wherein both the King and country were
brought by the secret practices of the French.

The King to stay these declaimings which he knew to be made against the Earl
of Lennox, The King his care for reclaiming the Earl of Lennox.
called the Ministers to Edinburgh, and showed them what travel he had taken to
convert his Cosen, and how he had obtained his consent for taking a Minister
in his house, which would be to good purpose, and serve both to debar Jesuits
from access to the Nobleman, and win him by conference to a greater liking of
the truth, desiring therefore that one of their number might be appointed for
some short space to attend him. Mr. David Lindesay then Minister at Leth, being
held the fittest, as well for his skill in the French tongue, as for his
moderation otherwise, was with the Kings approbation nominated to this service;
by whose labors, the Nobleman was brought in a short space, to join himself to
the Church, and openly in S. Giles to renounce the errors wherein he had been
educated. Yet did not this remove the jealousies of the people, which were
increased by the intercepting of certain dispensations sent from Rome; whereby
the Catholics were permitted to promise, The Earl joins himself to the Church,
but is still suspected.
swear, subscribe, and do what else should be required of them, so as in mind
they continued firm, and did use their diligence to advance in secret the
Roman Faith.

These dispensations being showed to the King, he caused his Minister Mr. John
Craig form a short confession of faith, wherein all the corruptions of Rome, as
well in doctrine, A confession of faith formed because of the dispensations
from Rome.
as outward rites, were particularly abjured, and a clause inserted (because of
these dispensations) by which the subscribers did call God to witness, that in
their minds and hearts they did fully agree to the said Confession, and did not
fain or dissemble in any sort. This confession the King for an Example to
others, did publicly swear and subscribe; the like was done by the whole
Council and Court; and observers appointed to take notice of those that did not
resort to Sermon, or behaved themselves in any sort scandalously. So careful
was the King to have the Church satisfied, and the rumors of the Courts
defection from Religion repressed.

After this all things continued quiet for a while, A rumor raised against the
Earl of Morton.
till by a bruit suddenly raised, none knew by whom, the Earl of Morton was
taxed for keeping secret intelligence with the Queen of England, and a purpose
he had to put the King in her hands. Morton complains of this in Council, and
desires a trial. But the King not willing to make business for a tale,
whereof the Author would hardly be found, put it off saying, that he knew it
to be a lie, and a malicious invention of enemies, and thereupon sent forth a
Proclamation against lies and carriers of tales, tending to breed discord
betwixt him and his Nobility. Yet as if some such thing had been feared, a
motion was made some days after in Council for guarding the Kings person, and
electing of an high Chamberlain (which office none had borne for many years in
this Kingdom) who should have twenty four to attend him, A motion of electing
a Chamberlain.
all of them the sons of Barons or Noblemen, and be ever at hand to accompany
the King whither soever he went.

The motion was applauded of all, The Earl of Lennox created Chamberlain.
and after some ten days deliberation the Earl of Lennox preferred to the
place. Alexander Areskin Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh, was chosen to be
his Deputy, and a roll made of the Gentlemen that should give attendance. These
were the Masters of Marshall, Rothes, Cassils, Lindesay, Levingston,
Elphingston, Hereis, and Ogilvy, the Lairds of Cowdinknowes, Bargainy, Bomby,
Kilsyth, Minto, Strathurd and Moncreeffe, Mr. Mark Ker of Preston Grange,
George Douglas of Rumgawy, Captain James Stewart son to the Lord Ochiltrie,
Alexander Ruthven the Commendator of Inchaffrey, the Prior of Coldingham,
Alexander Home of North-Berwick, and James Chisholme. As extraordinaries, the
Lord Maxwel, the Lairds of Cesford, Alexander Home of Manderston, and William
Stewart of Caverston, were added to the number. All these took the oath of
fidelity to the King, and obedience to his Chamberlain in the things they
should be directed for his Majesty's service.

The Earl of Morton, A trouble betwixt Oliphant and Ruthven.
albeit he was much displeased with these courses, did carry a fair
countenance, and concealing his discontents, waited still on the King, and was
assisting in Council and public meetings. Once he minded to have withdrawn
himself from Court, and to have lived privately, but was detained by a
dissension that fell out in the time betwixt the Lord Ruthven and Master of
Oliphant, who had married a daughter of Lochlevin; whom whilst he labored to
protect, he drew upon himself the hatred of the Lord Ruthven, and thereby was
laid more open to the malice of his enemies. The Earl of Lennox charged by the
Ambassador of England.
Sir Robert Bows being sent at the same time Ambassador from England, to
charge the Earl of Lennox with some practices against the peace of the two
Realms; the blame as well of his employments, as his sudden departing, was laid
upon him: for the Ambassadors Commission and instructions being questioned,
and he desired to exhibit the same before the Council, he refused to show them
but to the King himself; which not being admitted, he went away complaining,
that the Queen had deserved better then thus to have her Embassage misregarded.

His sudden departure amazed the Court not a little before, Alexander Home
sent into England.
wherefore to excuse the King, and try what the accusations were, wherewith
Lennox should have been charged, Alexander Home of North-Berwick was sent in
Commission to England: but the Queen denying him access, he was remitted to
the Lord Thesaurer, who courteously told him, He is remitted to the Lord
Thesaurer.
That the Queen had refused him presence, not for any dislike she had of
himself, whom she knew to be sound in Religion, and one that loved his King and
his Country, but because the King had not used her well, calling in question
the credit of her Ambassador, and requiring him to show his instructions,
which was strange, he keeping himself within the bounds of his Commission. The
Thesaurers conference with Alexander Home.
But your King, says he, is young, and misled by new Counselors, whose fault
the Queen knows it to be; I should therefore advise your King to hearken to
her Majesty's counsel, who carries to him a true motherly affection, and make
more account of her, then of his French Cosen, who is subject to the French
King, matched with a French woman, addicted wholly to that faction, and what
profession soever he makes, a Papist in Religion. The Hamiltons, says he,
being now exiled, he hops to be designed successor and heir to the Crown: but
let your King know, that ambition has no limits, and that the troubles which
the French made in Scotland, are not yet forgotten, which would have perilled
the liberty of that Kingdom, if the Queen by her prudence and power had not
prevented the same.

The Gentleman professing his thankfulness for her Majesty's good opinion of
him, Alexander Homes his answer to the Thesaurer.
answered, That if he should be permitted to speak with the Queen, he would
satisfy her Majesty in that point which concerned her Ambassador. And for the
King his Master, albeit he was young, and of few years, yet God had given him
great wisdom and understanding; and that he would never willingly do the thing
that might displease the Queen, nor hearken to any that should otherwise advise
him; for he knew her Majesty's good affection, and would not forget the care
she had of him in his tender age. That he could not be justly blamed for
favoring his Cosen; but as the Nobleman (he believed) would never advise the
King his Master to any that might prejudice the amity with England; so he was
persuaded, that his credit did not extend so far, as to make any public
breach with the Queen. But there are more dangerous plots in hand, says the
Thesaurer, then your King is wary of, and it is no wisdom to put too much
confidence in any one person. Vlt. De^emb.
Always time will discover the truth of every thing, at the present you must
have patience, for the Queen will not see you. Thus was he dimitted.

Upon his return, The Earl of Morton challenged for the murder of the Kings
father.
and report of the conference he had with the Thesaurer, the King was easily
made to believe, that all proceeded from the Earl of Morton and his
intelligence in the Court of England, which by one way or other was held
needful to be stopped. After some consultation taken about this, it was resolved
to charge him with the murder of the Kings Father; for a rumor had gone in
former times, that he was conscious and privy unto it. Captain James Stewart (a
man eager to win credit by what means soever) takes the matter in hand, and
coming one day, as the King was sitting in Council at Halirudhouse, desired to
be heard; being admitted, he fell upon his knees, and directing his speech to
the King, he said, Out of the duty I owe to your Majesty I am come hither to
reveal a wickedness that has been long obscured. The Earl of Morton, who
sits there in a place unseemly for him, was one of those that conspired your
Fathers death, and how dangerous it is to your Majesty's person, that he should
be so near unto you, let the Noblemen here present consider; for me, I shall
make good what I speak, only let him be committed and put to trial.

The Earl rising up with a disdainful smile, The Earl of Morton his answer.
answered, By whose instigation this Gentleman comes to accuse me, I know not,
and I wonder what grounds he builds upon in charging me with this crime; for
none that ever suffered for it did touch me therewith, and it is known what
diligence and severity I used against those that were suspected of that
murder. If I pleased I could many ways decline this challenge, but my
innocence is such, as I fear not the most rigorous trial. Sir, (with this he
turned himself to the King and said) do in it as you please; either here or
before any other Judge, I shall be ready to answer, and when my innocence is
cleared, your Majesty will think what the malice of those that have set on this
man to accuse me, deserves.

Captain James Stewart sitting all this time on his knees, Captain James
Stewart his reply.
replied, that by no man's instigation, nor out of any private grudge of his
own, did he intend this accusation, but his detestation of the fact, and the
love of his Majesty's safety and honor, had only incited him thereto. For that
he speaks of his diligence and severity; let me but ask him, said he, how and
why he did prefer Mr. Archibald Douglas his Cosen to the place of a Senator
in the College of Justice, who was known to have been an actor in that
murder, if he himself had no part in it? As the Earl was about to answer, the
King commanded the Captain to go forth, and the Earl being likewise removed,
after a short deliberation taken with the Council, he was committed in a
chamber of the Palace, where he abode two nights. Morton is committed 2^^
Ianuarii.
The third day he was conveyed to the Castle with a company of his own friends,
who did earnestly move him to make an escape. But he chiding them with great
bitterness said, That he had rather die ten thousand deaths, then betray his
innocence in declining trial. 18. Ianuar.
After some few days he was removed to Dumbritton Castle, that he might be
further from his friends, and kept from all intelligence with them. The King
had sent privily to apprehend Mr. Archibald Douglas who dwelt then at Norham,
but he having notice of the Earls committing, fled into England.

In the July preceding, An Assembly of the Church, with their proceedings
against the Bishops.
the Assembly of the Church had convened at Dundy, where it was concluded, That
the office of a Bishop as it was then used, and commonly taken within the
Realm, had neither foundation, ground, nor warrant in the word of God; and
thereupon an Ordinance was made, that all persons either called to the said
office, or that should be called thereto at any time thereafter, should be
charged to dimit and forsake the same, as an office whereunto they are not
called of God. As also to desist and cease from preaching, ministering the
Sacraments, or using in any sort the office of a Pastor, till they should be
admitted of new of the general Assembly, under the pain of excommunication. In
the end of the Act it was directed, That concerning the patrimony of the Church
possessed by the Bishops, the next Assembly should reason and advise upon the
disponing thereof.

Whether the folly or iniquity of this Ordinance was greater, The iniquity of
their proceedings.
it can hardly be said; for granting that the office of a Bishop had been as
they judged unlawful, there was no reason to discharge them of using the
ministerial office, till they should be received of new. And what a foolish
thing was it to think that the Prince and Estates would permit the rents of the
Bishops to be disponed at their appetites? They saw what was done with the
other Prelaces, and how the Abbots and Priors were no sooner declared to be no
office-bearers in the Church, but presently they turned temporal Lords, and
carried the rents with them quite away from the Church. And could they look for
other dealing with the Bishoprics? sure it was, if the titulars themselves did
not find the credit to enjoy them, that others of the Laity would have invaded
the same, as afterward also they did.

But to pass this, A letter from the Earl of Lennox to the Assembly.
the Earl of Lennox desiring by all means to win the favor of the Church, sent
to this Assembly Sir William Stewart a brother of Traquaire, with a letter to
this effect; That it was not unknown to them, how it had pleased God to bring
him since his coming into the country, to the knowledge of the truth, which he
esteemed more then all worldly happiness, and that he had made open profession
thereof, first in S. Giles Church at Edinburgh, and afterward subscribed the
confession of faith at Striveling, and was yet, if any farther was thought
needful, ready to perform whatsoever should be required: assuring them of his
best advice in all things tending to God his glory, and to the good of the
Church, requesting, together with the assistance of their prayers, that he
might continue in their good favors. But all this could not remove their
suspicions of his counterfeiting, still he was taxed in public Sermons, and
made odious to the people. Neither was it long after this assembly dissolved,
that John Dury one of the Ministers of Edinburgh was called before the Council,
John Dury committed to the Castle.
and committed in the Castle for certain speeches of that kind uttered by him
in Pulpit, but upon the supplication of his fellow Ministers and promise of
forbearing, he was after a short stay in the Castle, licenced to return to his
charge.

In October following, Mr. John Row Minister of Perth departed this life, who
for his piety and singular moderation deserves here to be mentioned. The death
of Mr. John Row.
In his younger years having applied his mind to letters, and taking the degree
of a Master in Arts, he became a pleader in the Consistory of S. Andrews, (a
Judicatory then much frequented) and grew to be so skilled in the Canon law, as
he was chosen to negotiate the affairs of the Church in the Court of Rome.
Julius the third did then govern that See, of whom he was well accepted, and in
possibility to have attained unto some preferment, if he would have stayed
there, for he gained the favor of all to whom he was known; and was in special
grace with Guido Ascanius Sfortia, Cardinal of Sancta Flora, who made such
account of his skill and knowledge in the laws, that he would have him pass
Doctor in the University, whereof he was Chancellor. After some eight or nine
years abode in those parts coming home to visit his country, and giving
account of the affairs, wherewith he had been trusted, he found the state of
the Church quite overturned, and the country all in tumult, by the reformation
which was then in hand. Thereupon doubting what course then to take, and
minding to return to Rome, he was dissuaded by the Prior of S. Andrews, who
held him in good esteem, and afterward induced by the persuasion of John Knox
to betake himself to the Ministry, which he exercised a certain space at... in
Fife, till by the General Assembly he was translated to the Town of Perth,
there he continued unto his death, which happened in the year of our Lord 1580.
and of his age the 54. a man whilst he lived well respected, and much lamented
at his death by the people whom he served.

In January next Sir Thomas Randolph came Ambassador from England, An
Ambassador from England.
his errand was to intercede with the King for the Earl of Morton his liberty;
to which purpose, having called to mind the services done by the Nobleman in
his Majesty's minority, and chiefly the diligence he had used in finding out
and punishing the murderers of his Father, which by the malice of his
adversaries was now laid to his charge, he requested in the name of the Queen
his Mistress, that the Nobleman might be released from his Ward, declaring that
her Majesty would esteem it a singular kindness done unto her, and otherwise
would take it ill to be denied in so just and reasonable a matter. His
Majesty's answer to the Ambassador.
The King after he had heard him patiently, made answer, That the many good
offices he had received from his sister the Queen, did tie him to a thankful
requital, but in that particular which touched him so nigh, (the trial of his
Fathers murder) he knew she would excuse him; always, because of her
intercession, he would be the more careful to have the trial rightly carried,
and as liberty had been given to his adversaries to accuse, so the like, and
greater should be allowed him for his defense.

The Assembly of the Estates being called at the same time, An Assembly of the
Estates.
and the Ambassador pretending that his instructions concerned them in a part,
did in the hearing of them all charge the Earl of Lennox as one that had
traveled to divert the Kings mind from keeping friendship with England; and
done besides many ill offices since his coming to Scotland, both to the King
and Kingdom; For he has put, said he, the Kings most faithful subjects and
servants from their places, brought in others nothing so trusty, stirred up the
King against the Ministers of Gods word, making no other account of them, then
as of seditious rulers and turbulent persons; he has loosed the Borders, said
he, and made Justice there to cease, and has practiced with forair Princes for
the invading of England: which he offered to manifest by letters intercepted
and brought to the Queen his Mistress. But this beyond all measure does grieve
her, that a Prince of such hopes, joined in such neerness of blood, and for
whom she had taken so great care, should be thus misled and abused by wicked
devices. If such a person ought to be tolerated to possess the King alone, and
rule all things at his pleasure, your honors may judge. This discourse moved
few or none, the wiser sort esteeming the letters he produced counterfeit, as
afterward also was known.

This course not prevailing, The Ambassador labors with Noblemen to take
Arms for Mortons liberty.
he dealt privately with the friends of Morton, and those that he knew envied
Lennox his credit, to take Arms, and procure both Mortons liberty, and the
banishment of the Earl of Lennox; assuring them of aid both of men and moneys
from the Queen of England: and by his persuasions brought the Earls of Argile,
Montrosse, Angus, Mar, and Glencarn to enter into a confederation for
performance both of the one, and other. But this combination held not long,
being quickly discovered and broken. Of all the number, Angus and Mar only
stood firm, resolving to hazard all, rather then Morton should perish.

The Queen of England to make good her Ambassadors promise, Forces sent by the
Queen of England to the Borders.
sent down at the same time certain forces to the Borders; which troubled the
Court a little, but was to no purpose, only it gave occasion to hasten Mortons
trial and execution. The King not to be taken unprovided, if invasion should be
made by England, sent forth Proclamations, commanding all the subjects to be in
readiness, for resisting such attempts; and withal levied some companies of
horse and foot, to guard his person against any sudden assault. An. 1581.
Next, a course was taken for confining those of Mortons friendship in some
remote parts of the Realm, and the Earl of Angus charged to keep Ward beyond
the river of Spey; The proceeding against Mortons friends at Court.
the Lord of Lochlevin being benorth the water of Cromarty. The Lairds of
Mains and Carmichal with Mortons two natural sons, James and Archibald, were
cited to appear before the Council. The Lord of Iohnston was discharged of his
Wardenry in the West marches, and the Lord Maxwel put in his place. Angus for
not entering within the time prefixed, was denounced Rebel, and prohibitions
made to resset or supply him in any sort under pain of treason. Mains and
Carmichall and Mortons two sons not appearing before the Council, were
likewise proclaimed Rebels.

This rigorous proceeding, and a fear the Ambassador took that his practices
were discovered, The Ambassador departs secretly to Berwick.
made him to depart secretly to Berwick. Sir John Seaton Master of the horses,
was thereupon directed to complain both of his dealings, and of the forces sent
unto the Borders in a time of peace, but he was stayed at Berwick, and not
suffered to go any further. Then order was taken for bringing Morton to his
trial, Sir John Seaton denied passage into England.
and Commission given to the Earl of Montrosse, and Captain James, who was then
first styled Earl of Arran, to make his convoy to Edinburgh. When the
Commission was showed to the Earl of Morton, Morton brought from Dumbritton to
Edinburgh.
and that he found named in it James Earl of Arran, he wondered what man he
was, for he knew the Earl of Arran to be deceased, and had not heard that
Captain James did assume that title. Thereupon asking the Keeper of the Castle,
who was Earl of Arran? when it was answered, that Captain James was the man;
after a short pause, he said, And is it so? I know then what I may look for;
meaning as was thought, that the old prophecy of the falling of the heart by
the mouth of Arran, should then be fulfilled. Whether this was his mind or not,
it is not known; but some spared not at the time when the Hamiltons were
banished, in which business he was held too earnest, to say, that he stood in
fear of that prediction, and went that course only to disappoint it. But if so
it was, he did find himself now deluded, for he fell by the mouth of another
Arran, then he imagined. However it was, this is sure, that the news did at
first perplexe his mind not a little, and that after this time, he gave over
all hope of life.

Being brought to Edinburgh his process was made the first of June. Morton his
indictment.
The indictment charged him with conspiring, and concealing the murder of King
Henry, and of being art and part (as the phrase is) in committing the same. He
denied all, and pleaded not guilty. The Jutors being called, he excepted
against Argile, the Lord Seaton and the Lord Waughton, yet they were all
received upon their purgation, that they had not given any counsel to his hurt
or prejudice. This done, Sentence pronounced.
and they all sworn according to the custom, they went apart, and after they
had consulted a while, returning into the Court, the Earl of Montrosse
Chancellor of the Assise, declared him convict of counsel, concealing, and
being art and part of the Kings murder. At these last words he showed himself
much grieved, and beating the ground once or twice with a little staff he
carried in his hand, said, Art and part, art and part! God knows the
contrary. When doom was given, that he should be taken to the place of
execution, hanged on the gibbet, have his head cut off, his body quartered and
affixed in the most public places, he uttered not a word, nor did he seem to
be moved therewith, and because it was drawing toward night, he was conveyed
back to the lodging wherein he was kept.

In the morning Mr. James Lawson, The Ministers conference with the Earl of
Morton.
with two or three other Ministers, did visit him. They asking how he had
rested that night, he answered, that of a long time he had not slept more
soundly; Now I am, says he, at an end of my troubles, some nights before my
trial, I was thinking what to answer for my self, and that kept me from sleep,
but this night I had no such thoughts. Then falling to speak of his present
case, and the sentence pronounced against him, they said that he should do well
to unburthen his mind, and declare what his part was of the Kings murder, he
answered with a great attestation that he never gave consent to that wicked
fact. The Earl Bothwel, said he, upon my return from England, (where I remained
a while, because of Seignior Davies slaughter) came to me in Whittingham, and
after a long discourse brake the matter unto me, saying, that the Queen would
have the King taken away, for that she blamed him more of Davies mother, then
all the actors; and asked, What would my part be therein? I made him this
answer, that being newly relieved of a great trouble, I would not willingly
enter into another, and that I would have no meddling in that business. He not
satisfied with my answer, insisted to have me consent, saying, The Queen would
have it done. If so be, said I, bring me the Queens handwriting, that I may
know that it is her mind. This he never did, and if he had brought it, I was
fully resolved to have turned my back upon Scotland, and banished my self, till
I saw better times. Next, they inquired whether Mr. Archibald Douglas had any
dealing with him in that purpose. Whereunto he answered, that Mr. Archibald
(being at that time a depender upon Bothwell) did bring him (he being then at
S. Andrews) a letter from Bothwell, containing credit and that he traveled to
persuade him to give his assistance to that fact: but he excused himself,
because he saw no warrant from the Queen, as Bothwell had promised. After the
murder committed, he said, that Mr. Archibald came again unto him, and told
him that he did accompany Bothwell and Huntley to the place, and was assisting
to the fact. Therefore can I not not deny, says he, that I foreknew and
concealed the same; but to whom should I have revealed it? for the King when he
was advertised of the danger, would not believe it; But they have condemned me
of art and part, said he, which is more then concealing; but as I wish God to
be merciful to me now at my last, I never gave counsel nor consent thereto. The
Ministers replying that he could not justly complain of the sentence, being
guilty of foreknowledge, and concealing by his own declaration; he acknowledged
the same to be true, but says he, It would have gone alike with me, if I had
been as innocent as S. Steven, or as guilty as Judas. But of that I am not to
complain, nor will I stand to my justification, being assured, howsoever men
have carried themselves in it, God has dealt justly with me; and that I am to
suffer nothing, but that which I have merited, yea worse.

This confession reported to the King, The sentence mitigated.
the rigor of the sentence was mitigated, and order given that he should be
beheaded only, and his body committed to burial. In the afternoon, when it was
told him by his Keeper, that the time was come, and all things were in a
readiness, Arran desires Morton to subscribe his confession.
he said, I praise God I am also ready: And making forth was met by the Earl of
Arran in the very entry, who desired him to stay, and subscribe his confession;
he answered, I pray you trouble me not, for I am now to prepare my self for
death, and cannot write in this estate. The Earl ceasing to urge that point any
further, desired he might be reconciled with him, protesting that he had done
nothing upon any particular grudge: Morton his Answer.
he answered, It was no time to reckon quarrels, I forgive you and all others.
When he was come to the scaffold, which was erected in the public street, he
repeated the substance of his confession; and in some few words exhorted the
people to continue in the profession of the true Religion, and maintain it at
their power, entreating them to assist him with their prayers to God. The chief
Minister did then conceive a prayer, during the time whereof, he lay prostrate
upon his face, and was greatly moved, as appeared by the rebounding with many
sobbes and sighs. The prayer ended, diverse came to be reconciled with him,
Morton his behavior at his death.
whom he received very kindly, all the rest that were on the scaffold he took
by the hand, bidding them farewell, and going toward the Block, laid down his
head, and cried aloud; In thine hand O Lord I commit my spirit: Lord Jesus
receive my soul. Which words he was still uttering, when as the axe fell, and
cut off his head. His corpse left on the place, lay from the hour of execution
to Sunne-seting, covered with a beggarly cloak, every man fearing to show any
kindness, or so much as to express a sign of sorrow; his corpse was afterward
carried by some base fellows to the common sepulcher, and his head fixed on
the Tolbuith.

Never was seen a more notable example of fortunes mutability; Mortons
qualities and good parts.
he who a few years before had been reverenced of all men, and feared as a
King, abounding in wealth, honor and number of friends and followers; was now
at his end forsaken of all, and made the very scorn of fortune; to teach men
how little stability there is in honor, wealth, friendship and the rest of
these worldly things, which men so much admire. He was of personage comely, of
a men stature, and a graceful countenance, and singular courage; whereof in the
civil troubles he gave many proofs; wise and able for government, a lover of
justice, order, and policy; but inclined to covetousness, which the wants and
necessity he endured in his younger years, was thought to have caused; and
given too much to the pleasures of the flesh, as at his dying he acknowledged
with a great remorse. In this lastly most happy, that though his death in the
worlds eye was shameful and violent, yet did he take it most patiently,
quitting this life with the assurance of a better.

The day following, Arrans proceeding against Morton and his servants approved.
the Earl of Arran in Council made a discourse of his proceedings in the trial
of Morton, declaring what he had done, and how to come to the knowledge of the
fact, for which he had suffered, he was forced to use some rigorous dealing
toward his servants, and put certain of them to the torture: lest this should
be imputed to him as a crime, his desire was to have his Majesty's and the
Councels approbation. This was easily obtained, and an Act made ratifying all
that he had done in that business, as good service to his Majesty and the
Estate; Yet was it well enough known, that the inquisition he made upon Mortons
servants, was to find out where his gold and money was hidden, Arran his
marriage with the Countess of March.
and for no purpose else. Near about the same time, he took to wife the Earl of
March his Lady, a woman intolerable in all the imperfections incident to that
sex. She had forsaken her husband not long before, and obtained sentence
against him for alleged impotency, yet was she known to be with child even
then by Arran, which made the Process on her part more shameful; nor was his
part a whit better, nay rather much worse; having been a long time entertained
in the Noblemans house, and furnished by him in every thing necessary, whilst
his estate was but yet mean; to have repayed the Nobleman so dishonourably, was
accounted a vile ingratitude. The marriage always went on, and their unlawful
love held that way legitimated.

In August next the Earl of Lennox was created Duke of Lennox, Lord Robert
Stewart Uncle to the King by his Mother made Earl of Orkney, William Lord
Ruthven Earl of Gowry, and John Lord Maxwel Earl of Morton. Arran although he
had assumed the title before, would then also be created Earl, which was done
with great solemnity, and the first place bestowed on him, for he would not
endure to be second to any, and took so ill the credit which he saw the Duke
carried with the King, as he spared not to affront him at all occasions. The
Lord of Farnherst was then newly returned from France, where he had lived
diverse years in exile, and by the Dukes favor, to whom the King could deny
nothing, had respit given him for certain crimes committed in the Kings
minority. As it was passing in Council, the Earl of Arran did protest against
it, alleging an oath made at Striveling by the Counselors, not to give way
to respits, or remissions granted to the Kings enemies. Herewith the Duke
offended, and a great heart-burning grew amongst them, which in the Parliament
kept at Edinburgh in the month of October following, burst forth in an open
breach. The question was about some privileges belonging to the Chamberlain in
time of Parliament, which Arran would not acknowledge, taking upon him, as
Captain of the Guard, to place near unto the King whom he pleased. The Duke not
enduring this insolency, absented himself from Parliament, which did so
irritate the King, as the next day he went to Dalkeith, taking the Duke with
him, and charged Arran not to come toward Court. Many were glad to see them
thus committed amongst themselves, and for a while matters went so hot, as it
was not expected the discord should be suddenly appeased. The Duke had the
advantage of the Kings favor, Arran strengthened himself with the common
cause, giving out that the quarrel was for religion, and for opposing the Dukes
courses, who craftily sought the overthrow thereof. And all this time this
frowning of the Court continued, you should have seen him and his Lady repair
so devoutly to Sermon and prayers, that the people believed this to be the
ground of the dissension, and that he was only disliked for his sincerity in
Religion. But Arran knowing this would not long bear out, and fearing to lose
the Kings favor altogether, he employed some friends to make offer of
satisfaction to the Duke; and in end things were so composed; as Arran did quit
the commandment of the Guard, and the charge thereof was given to the Duke.

To return to the matters of the Church, there was a general Synod this year
kept at Glasgow in the month of April, wherein the question of Bishops was
again agitated; and because of the scruples which some brethren had at the Act
concluded in Dundy the year preceding, especially where it was said, that the
office of a Bishop had no warrant of the word of God; the Assembly declared,
that their meaning was to condemn the estate of Bishops as they were then in
Scotland. A number of the more wise and moderate sort interceded, that the
conclusion of that matter might be for a time deferred, because of the
inconveniences it would draw upon the Church, but they were cried down by the
multitude. Amongst others, one Mr. Robert Montgomery Minister at Striveling,
was so servent in the cause, as he would have the Assembly censure those that
had spoken in defense of that corrupted estate. Yet before the end of that
year, this zealous man did suffer himself to be more pitifully corrupted, the
story whereof shall now be related: The Sea of Glasgow being then void, it was
suggested to the Duke of Lennox by some flatterers, that he had a fair occasion
presented, to make himself Lord of that City, and of the lands pertaining to
that See, if he should only procure a gift thereof to some one that would make
a disposition of the same to him and his heirs. The offer was made to diverse,
who refused all, because of the condition required; Montgomery his Simoniacal
bargain for the Bishopric of Glasgow.
At last, the agents in that business fell upon this Montgomery, who was
content to accept it. A gift was thereupon formed, and a Bond given by him,
That how soon he was admitted Bishop, he should dispone the Lands, Lordships,
and whatsoever belongs to that Prelacy, to the Duke and his heirs, for the
yearly payment of one thousand pounds Scots, with some horse-corn and poultry.
A vile bargain it was, for which justly he ought to have been repulsed. But the
Church passing this point, made quarrel to him for accepting the Bishopric,
which the King would not acknowledge to be a reason sufficient. If they could
charge him with any fault in doctrine or life, he was content they should keep
their order, but to challenge him for accepting the Bishopric, he would not
permit the same, having lately ratified the Acts agreed upon at Leth, Anno
1571. touching the admission of Bishops, and ordained the same to stand in
force until his perfect age, or till a change was made thereof in Parliament.

This related to the Church, Inquisition made of Montgomehy his life and
doctrine.
they did appoint Montgomehy his life and doctrine to be inquired upon, if
possibly they could find any matter against him: which done, an accusation was
framed, and he cited to answer in the next Assembly. The Articles laid to his
charge were these. 1. That he preaching at Striveling had proponed a question
touching the circumcision of women, and affirmed, they were circumcised in the
skin of their forehead. 2. That teaching in Glasgow he should say, the
discipline was a thing indifferent, and might stand this or that way. 3. That
he called the Ministers captious, and men of curious brains. 4. That he
labored to bring the Original languages in contempt, abusing the words of the
Apostle in the 1. Cor. 14. and jeastingly asked, In what School were Peter and
Paul graduated? 5. That to prove the lawfulness of Bishops in the Church, he
had used the examples of Ambrose and Augustine. 6. That in his doctrine he said
it was sufficient to baptize in the name of the Father only, or in the name of
the Son, or in the name of the holy Ghost, seeing they are all one God, and
to that effect alleged the nineteenth of the Acts. 7. That he should have
called matters of discipline, and the lawful calling of the Church, trifles of
policy. 8. That he charged the Ministry with sedition, warning them not to put
on or off Crowns; for if they meddled therewith, they would be reproved. 9.
That he condemned the particular application of Scripture, disdainfully asking,
In what Scripture they found a Bishop for a thousand pounds, horsecorne, and
poultry, etc. 10. That he oppugned the doctrine of our Savior speaking of the
number of the wicked, and them that perish. 11. That he denied any mention to
be made in the New Testament of a Presbytery, or Eldership. 12. That he accused
the Ministers of Pasquils, lying, backbiting, etc. 13. That the Church being
traduced with infamous libels, he did not only not find fault therewith, but
seemed to approve the same, having used in his preaching, the very words of the
Libel cast in the Kings chamber against the Ministers. 14. That these three
months past, he had been negligent in doctrine and discipline, and giving no
assistance to the Eldership.


The Articles were sent to the King by some Ministers, The Articles against
Montgomery communicated to the King.
who were desired to show his Majesty, that the accusation was not founded upon
the accepting of the Bishopric, but upon erroneous points of doctrine. The
King answered, That whatsoever color they gave to the process, he knew, that
his yielding to accept the place, was the true quarrel; and for himself, albeit
he loved the Religion, and agreed fully therewith, he allowed not diverse heads
of their policy; always for the particular in hands, he would leave the man to
make his own answer. This reported to the Assembly, they went on with the
accusation, and Montgomery being called, Mr. Andrew Melvil became his accuser.
The Articles upon his denial were admitted to probation, but few of them were
verified, yet the conclusion of the Assembly was, that he should continue in
his Ministry at Striveling, and meddle no more with the Bishopric under pain
of excommunication. Mean while the Presbytery of Striveling (for they had now
erected Presbyteries in diverse places of the country) was enjoined to try his
conversation and how he did exercise discipline, if possibly any thing might be
found against him that way.

It fell out at the same time, Mr. Walter Balcanquel questioned for speeches in
Pulpit.
that Mr. Walter Balcanquel one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, did utter some
reproachful speeches in a Sermon against the Duke of Lennox, saying, That
within these four years Popery had entered into the country and Court, and was
maintained in the Kings Hall by the tyranny of a great Champion, who was called
Grace. But if his Grace continued in opposing himself to God and his word, he
should come to little Grace in the end. The King advertised of this, sent James
Melvil his servant to complain to the Assembly, requiring some order to be
taken therein. The Minister being put to his answer, said, That he praised God
for two things, First, Balcanquels answer.
that he was not accused for any thing done against his Majesty and the Laws:
Secondly, that he perceived the Church had obtained some victory: For when he
was last questioned for his Sermon, the Council did make themselves Judges of
Ministers doctrine: Now that he saw the complaint remitted to the Assembly, he
was glad, and willingly submitted his doctrine to their trial: Only that he
should not give advantage to his enemies, he desired the Apostolic Canon to be
kept, which prohibiteth an accusation to be received against an Elder, but
under two or three Witnesses.

Mr. Thomas Smeton, The King cease from pursuing the complaint.
and David Ferynson were upon this directed to show the King, that the Assembly
was willing and ready to try the complaint: but withal, that the liberty
craved by the person accused could not be denied, he being a Presbyter. So if
it should please his Majesty to send an accuser assisted by two or three
witnesses, the accusation should be received, and justice done. The King not
liking this answer, for he knew the difficulties he should have to find out an
accuser, followed the business no more; but the Minister not contenting, that
the cause should thus desert, would needs have the judgment of the Assembly,
whether or not he had uttered in his Sermon any scandalous or offensive words?
for they had been all Auditors of that he spoke. This being put to voices, the
Assembly declared his doctrine to have been good and sound, and that he had
given no just offense thereby to any person. When this was told the King, he
was much offended; for not many days before, Balcanquels Sermon approved by
the Assembly.
when as the same Minister with his Colleague John Dury was called to give
account of some speeches they had uttered in Pulpit, it was excepted, that the
King and Council could not be Judges of their doctrine; and now his Majesty
having complained to themselves, and they being Auditors of the speeches, when
he expected some censure to be inflicted, they had justified all that was
spoken, and so would force him to take other courses, An. 1582.
then he desired to follow.

But to return to Montgomery his cause, the Ministers of Striveling, as they
were enjoined, Montgomery suspended by the Presbytery of Striveling.
made a visit of the Church, to try what they could find against him. All they
got delated was, that he had baptized some children begotten in fornication,
not calling the offenders before his Session. Upon this declaration he was
cited to appear, and because he kept not the Diet, suspended from his function,
he notthelesse preached still, and exercised all the parts of his Ministry, as
in former times; which they took to be an high contempt, and therefore did
summon him to the Assembly (which was shortly to meet at S. Andrews) to hear
their sentence approved, and to answer to such other things as in that meeting
should be laid to his charge; and because they understood, that against the
inhibition of the last Assembly he was still laboring to secure himself in the
Bishopric of Glasgow, He is cited to appear before the Synod of Lothian.
and had cited the Chaptor before the Council, for refusing to convene to his
Election, they likewise charged him to compeir before the Synod of Lothian, to
hear the sentence of excommunication pronounced against him.

The King being informed of this, caused warn the Synod to appear the twelfth
of April at Striveling, The Synod inhibited to proceed.
discharging in the mean time all proceeding in the business. Mr. Robert Pont,
and with him a few others compeiring at the day, he in the name of the rest
protested, That albeit they had compeired to testify their obedience to his
Majesty, yet he did not acknowledge his Majesty and Council Judges in that
matter, the same being a cause Ecclesiastic, and that nothing done at that
time should prejudge the liberties of the Church, and Laws of the Realm. This
protestation the Council rejected, inhibiting the Ministers to use any
proceeding against Montgomery, which because of the General Assemblies
approaching they yielded unto; only they caused charge him to appear before
the Assembly. When the Diet came, he appeared, and first protesting for remedy,
if they should use him wrongfully; he said, that the process of Striveling could
not be allowed, for that he was never lawfully summoned to hear any sentence
given against him. An Assembly at S. Andrews.
The Presbytery of Striveling remitting themselves to the process, the Assembly
declared the same to be rightly deduced, and ratified the suspension
pronounced. Mr. Mark Ker sent to discharge the Assemblies proceeding.
As they were proceeding to his censure, for contempt of the sentence, Mr. Mark
Ker, then Master of the Requests, presented a letter from his Majesty,
inhibiting them to trouble the Bishop for any thing that concerned the
Bishopric, or whatsoever cause preceding; for that the King would have those
things heard and handled in his own presence. The Assembly answered, that
because of his Majesty's request, they should look more carefully to the
business, and see all things carried rightly, according to justice.

The Master of Requests replying that his Majesty had willed them by his letter
to desist, The Assembly discharged under pain of Rebellion to desist.
and treat no more of that business: Mr. Andrew Melvil, who presided for the
time, answered, that they did not meddle with things belonging to the Civil
power; and for matters Ecclesiastic, they were warranted to proceed in these,
specially with one of their own number. He perceiving that notwithstanding of
his Majesty's letter they would proceed, caused a messenger of Arms whom he
had brought with him, charge them under pain of Rebellion to desist. Then was
Montgomery called to see if he would abide by the charges used at his instance;
But he was retired to his lodging, and could not be found; and (the night
drawing on) was appointed to be summoned to the next morning to receive his
censure. After the hour appointed, one William Montgomery having procuration
from him, appeared, and appealing from the Assembly to the King and Council,
The Assembly proceeds, and finds him culpable of diverse crimes.
gave this for a reason amongst others, that he who was his accuser in the last
Assembly, was turned to be his Judge. But the Assembly rejecting the
Appellation, fell presently a reading the enorm crimes (so they called them)
whereof he was guilty; nor was there any thing omitted that served to aggravate
the same; corruption in doctrine, dissoluteness of life, contempt of the
Churches sentence, falsehood, and breach of promise, lying, perjury, moving of
sedition, and stirring up certain of the Nobility against the Church. Of all
these he was declared culpable, Montgomery falling from his resolution, submits
himself to the Assembly,
and ordained therefore to be deprived, and cast forth of the Church.

How soon he heard that this conclusion was taken, his courage which seemed
before high and resolute, began to cool; whereupon presenting himself to the
Assembly, he renounced his appeal, desiring conference of some godly and
learned brethren: which granted, he was induced by them to confess his offense
in diverse particulars, submitting himself to the will of the Assembly; and in
end, to promise solemnly in the presence of the whole number, that he should
meddle no further with the Bishopric of Glasgow, and neither accept of it, nor
of any other office in the Church, without the advice and consent of the
General Assembly. Yet this gave not an end to the business; for how soon he
returned to the Court, and perceived the King countenance cast down upon him
for that he had done, he undertook of new to settle himself at Glasgow, and had
letters from his Majesty to the Gentlemen of those parts to assist him.
Montgomery changes, and returns to his first course.
At his coming to Glasgow with purpose to preach the Sunday following, a number
of the Students in the College entered into the Church on Saturday at night,
and excluding him, did keep the Chair for Mr. Thomas Smeton their Principal;
Mr. Thomas Smeton his Sermon at Glasgow.
who taking for his Theme that saying in the Gospel, He that enters not by the
door, but by the window, is a thief and a robber, inveighed against the Bishop
for his simonaical entry, and the levity he had showed in all his proceedings.
The next Sunday the Bishop with a great convocation of Gentlemen came to the
Church, and displacing the ordinary Preacher, Mr. David Weymes, made the Sermon
himself. Montgomery processed for preaching at Glasgow.
The Presbytery of Glasgow intending process against him for molestation of the
Church, and usurping the place of the ordinary Preacher; Matthew Stewart of
Minto Provost of the City, came and presented a Warrant from the King, to stay
all proceedings against the Bishop, willing them to desist: Mr. John Howeson
Minister of Cambustange, The Moder^tor of the Presbytery imprisoned in the
Tolbuith.
moderating in his course (as the custom then was) and replying somewhat
peremptorily, that notwithstanding his Warrant they would proceed, some words
of offense passed, whereupon the Provost pulling him from the Seat, made him
prisoner in the Tolbuith.

The rumor of this fact ran quickly through the Kingdom, A solemn Fast kept.
and a solemn fast being kept by the appointment of the former Assembly, the
causes whereof were made to be the abundance of sin, the oppression of the
Church, the dilapidation of the rents, and the danger wherein the King stood by
the company of wicked persons, who did seek to corrupt him in manners and
Religion; the insolency committed at Glasgow was likewise adjected, and
furnished matter of long discourse to the Preachers. Amongst others, John Dury
did exclaim mightily against the Duke of Lennox, upon whom the blame of all
things was laid, and thereby did so irritate the King, as he would needs have
him removed forth of the Town. Charges to that effect were directed, John Dury
Minister at Edinburgh, was removed from his charge.
commanding the Magistrates within the space of 24. hours to remove him: who
not daring disobey, yet being unwilling to use their Minister in that sort,
traveled with him to depart quietly, and leave the Town. The Minister
proponing the case to the General Assembly, (for upon advertisement given by
the Ministers of Edinburgh, they were there convened) desired their advice:
for, to leave his flock at the pleasure of the Court, he said, might work a
prejudice to the Church, and to depart privately as the Magistrates advised
him, might be imputed to fear, or then make him to be thought guilty of some
fault. The brethren after a short consultation did advise him to stay,
Ministers directed to the King.
till he should be commanded to depart, and then obey. Mean while, Mr. Thomas
Buchannan and David Ferguson were sent to the King, who was then at Striveling,
to entreat his Majesty's favor unto him, and therewith to request a
continuation of the Diet, for the appearing of the Ministers of Glasgow at
Perth. The King desiring to have matters quieted, answered the last proposition
first, saying, That if the Assembly would delay the process which they had
against the Provest of Glasgow, and his assisters, he would likewise dispense
with the appearing of the Ministers at the appointed time. And as to John Dury
he said, that upon his suppli^ation, how soon the Duke returned to Court, whose
interesse was greatest in that business, order should be taken with him, and
consideration had of the Assemblies request. But they not satisfied herewith,
striving to make good what they had taken in hand, went on with the process of
Glasgow, and leading probation against Minto and the rest, decerned them to be
excommunicated, and cast forth of the society of the Church, only the
pronouncing of the sentence was delayed, till they saw what course was kept
with their brethren before the Council.

Mr. John Davidson then Minister at Liberton, pretending a warrant from the
Church, had in his private Parish pronounced Bishop Montgomery excommunicate,
Mr. John Davidson excommunicated Montgomrie.
which (albeit done against all form) was allowed, and intimated in all the
Churches of the country. The Duke of Lennox notwithstanding did still
entertain him in his company, and at some occasions had made him to preach
publicly. Thereupon Mr. Alexander Archbuthnet, and Mr. Adam Iohnston were
directed by the Assembly, to intimate unto the Duke his excommunication, and
the Acts of the Church against such as kept excommunicate persons in their
company. The Duke taking them up somewhat hotly, asked them, Whether the King
or the Church were superiors; and thereafter answered them directly, That he
was commanded by the King and Council to entertain him, which he would not
forbear to do, for any fear he had of their censures. This amongst other
grievances of the Church was ordained to be represented to his Majesty by the
Commissioners appointed to attend the Council at Perth. But touching this, the
King answered, That the excommunication was null, and declared such by the
Council, as being pronounced against equity and all lawful form, no citation
being used, nor any admonition preceding, which all laws, and even their own
discipline appointed to be observed. To their other grievances they received
general answers, and for the brethren of Glasgow, their trial was continued to
the tenth of September next.

Before which time the surprise of the Kings person at Ruthven fell out, The
surprise of the King at Ruthven 23. Aug. 1582.
which altered the state of all affairs, some of the Nobility combining
themselves for defense of Religion and the liberty of the Kingdom (as they
pretended) upon notice of the Duke of Arrans absence from the Court, placed
themselves about the King, and detained him some days at the house of Ruthven.
The principals in this attempt were John Earl of Mar, William Earl of Gowry,
Patrick Lord Lindesay, Robert Lord Boyd, The King stayed from his sport by the
Master of Glammit.
the Masters of Glammis and Oliphant, the Abbots of Dunfermlin, Paisley,
Driburgh, and Cambush keneth, the Lairds of Lochlevin, Easter Weemes, Cleish,
and the Constable of Dundy. The King at their first coming suspected there was
some practice in hand, yet dissembled the matter, thinking to free himself the
next day, when he went abroad to his sport; but as he was about to go, the
Master of Glammit stepped to the door of the Parlour, and told him he must stay.
The King asked the reason; he answered, he should know it shortly. When he saw
it to be so, and found his liberty restrained, he grew into a passion, and
after some threatening speeches burst forth in tears. The Master seeing him
weep, said, It is no matter of his tears, better that bairnes should weep, then
bearded men: which words entered so deeply into the Kings heart, as he did
never forget them. The news went quickly of the Noblemens being at Court in
such numbers, which made the Earl of Arran haste thither, for he held himself
assured of the Earl of Gowries friendship, as being of his alliance, and having
kept one course in the pursuit of the Earl of Morton; his only fear was, that
he should be stayed by the way, therefore having crossed the ferry, he singled
himself from his company, and taking one only servant with himself, directed
his brother William Stewart to keep the high way with the rest. By this mean he
did escape those that lay in wait for him, and came in the evening to Ruthven;
where, when he had entered the gate, Arran withholden from the the King.
he asked what the King was doing, as meaning to go directly to him, but was
conveyed to another room, and told that he must have patience, and think his
fortune good, that he was come to that place with his life saved; as he himself
judged, when a little after he heard that the horsemen which lay in wait of
him, and encountered his brother near unto Dublin, after diverse wounds given
him, had taken him prisoner.

A day or two after, The Duke of Lennox sends to enquire of the Kings Estate.
some Noblemen employed by the Duke of Lennox, who remained then in Dalkeith,
came to Court, but were not permitted to speak with the King, nor see him
except in Council. Being examined what their business was, they told that the
Duke of Lennox had sent them to learn of the King in what condition he was, and
if he was detained against his will, as the rumor went, he might, with the
assistance of other good subjects, see him made free. The King presently cried
out, that he was captive, which he desired all his subjects know, and that the
Duke should do what he might to procure his liberty. The Lords prayed his
Majesty not to say so, for that he should not be denied to go whither he
pleased, only they would not permit the Duke of Lennox and Earl of Arran to
mislead him any longer, The Duke of Lennox willed to retire to France.
and oppress both Church and Kingdom, as they have done. Wherefore he should
do well to cause the Duke retire himself quietly to France, otherwise they
would be forced to bring him to an account of his doings, and proceed against
him with rigor of law. This they willed the same Noblemen whom he had sent, to
signify unto the Duke, and that they were resolved to maintain what they had
undertaken at the utmost hazard of their lives and estates.

After they were gone, A Proclamation declaring the Kings contentment with his
stay at Perth.
the Kings anger being somewhat assuaged, and fearing the Dukes case more then
his own, he was moved to send forth a Proclamation to this effect. That for
pacifying the present commotions, and removing some differences fallen out
amongst the Nobility, his Majesty had thought it expedient to interpose himself
a Mediator; and for the better working of an union amongst them, had resolved
to make his residence in Perth for a time, till he saw what good effects his
travels might produce. And lest his stay in these parts should be interpreted
to be a detention of his person, because of the Noblemen and others that had
lately repaired to Court, his Majesty declared, that it was his own free and
voluntary choice to abide there; and that the Noblemen and others who did
presently attend, had done nothing, but what their duties obliged them unto,
and which he took for a good service performed both to himself and to the
Commonwealth. Therefore inhibited all the subjects to attempt any thing that
might tend to the disturbance of the Realm, commanding them also that had
levied any forces upon pretext of his Majesty's restraint, to dissolve the same
within six hours under the pain of death. This Proclamation was dated at Perth
the 28. of August, some six days after the surprise of his person at Ruthven.

The Duke in the mean time was gathering forces, The Duke is advised to go unto
Dumbritton.
and grown to be strong by his friends and others that repaired unto him; when
a letter came from the King, signifying that it was his pleasure, he should
leave the Realm, and depart forth thereof before the 20. of September. The
letter he communicated to his friends, who did all advise him to retire unto
Dumbritton, where he might with more safety stay for a while, and if he found
not an opportunity to right himself, should have good occasion of shipping for
France. When he was come thither, the resort of Noblemen and Barons, and
others, were so great unto him, that the Nobility offending therewith, directed
letters, charging him to live more private with his ordinary retinue, and all
others that were in his company, to return to their houses within 12. hours
after the charge, and not to come nigh the part where he remained, or should
happen to reside, during the time of his abode in the Country.

The bruit of this change being carried to England, An Ambassador from England
September 12.
the Queen sent Sir Henry Carry and Sir Bobert Bows unto the King to advise
him, in regard of the danger he was fallen into by the perverse counsels of the
Duke and Earl of Arran, to take in good part the Lords enterprise, The Earl of
Angus received in favor October 12.
and restore the Earl of Angus, who had lived exiled in England, since the time
of Mortons execution. This last they obtained with no great difficulty, so as
the Nobleman was soon after reconciled, and accepted in favor: but to the
first point, the King having a suspicion that the attempt was not made without
the Queen of Englands knowledge, he gave good general answers, whereby it was
hoped that upon the Noblemans good behavior, in a short time his offense would
be mitigated. The King also conceiving that a gentle usage would bring them to
reconcile with the Duke of Lennox, began to give them a more gracious
countenance then before. But he found them untractable, and not without great
instance, did purchase their consents to a few days prorogation of his
departing, upon promise that he should be pursued as a Rebel, if he went not
away at the time appointed, wind and weather serving: yet was his going put off
upon diverse occasions till the midst of December, at which time he was forced
to depart as we shall hear.

The Lords in the mean while careful to strengthen themselves, The Lords bring
the King to Halirudhouse October. 8.
brought the King to Halirudhouse in the beginning of October, knowing that the
people of Edinburgh did affect their enterprise, as appeared by the reducing of
John Dury their Minister immediately upon the news of the Kings restraint, and
the triumph they made, singing as they went up the street the 124. Psalm, Now
Israel may say, etc. They understood also that the Assembly of the Church was
to convene in the same town the nineth of that month, An Assembly of the
Church at Edinburgh.
and doubted not to find them favorable enough. To this Assembly Mr. William
Areskin (styled then Commendatory of Paisley) was sent by the Noblemen to
declare that the causes moving them to that enterprise, were the evident peril
they perceived the Religion was brought unto, with the disorders and confusions
introduced into the State: whereof having discoursed a while, he came in end to
desire the Assemblies approbation of their proceedings, as that which would
encourage them much, The Lords ^end to obtain the Assemblies approbation.
and dishearten the common adversary. This proposition made, first it was
voyced, whether the dangers of the Church and disorders of State were such as
in their hearing were related: which being affirmatively answered by the whole
Assembly, Mr. James Lawson, Mr. David Lindesay, and Mr. John Craig were
appointed to signify unto the King what the Assembly had found, and to require
his own judgment therein. The King esteeming it most sure for himself to
temporize, said, That he believed Religion was in hazard, and indirect courses
taken to overturn the same, wherewith he acknowledged his own danger to be
conjoined; and for abuses crept into the Commonwealth, as they were too many,
so he expected that all good subjects, and they for their own parts would help
to remove the same. This answer returned to the Assembly, they concluded an Act
in this form.

For as much as the Noblemen and others joined with them in the late action of
reformation, The Assemblies ratificacation of the attempt at Ruthven.
out of a desire to have the Church, and whole professors of the true Religion,
understand the grounds and occasions moving them to repair toward the Kings
Majesty, to seek redress of the disorders fallen out in the Commonwealth, have
made public attestation to the whole Assembly, that the motions and grounds of
their enterprise were, and are, to deliver the Church of God within this Realm,
and the true Religion therein professed, from the evident peril and danger
wherein all men perceived the same to stand; as likewise to guard and preserve
the innocent person of the King his Majesty and Estate, being in no less hazard
then the other, and to remove the corruptions and confusion entered into the
body of the Commonwealth: wherein as they are well persuaded themselves, to
have done good service to God, and to have performed their duty to their
Sovereign and country; so they wished all that feared God should judge and
esteem well of their action, especially that the brethren of this Assembly
should declare their good liking and approbation thereof, and ordain all the
Pastors and Ministers within the Realm, to publish in their particular Churches
the causes and grounds moving them to the said enterprise; exhorting all
Noblemen, Barons, and other faithful subjects to give their best concurrence
and assistance thereto. The Assembly having weighed the said desire with the
whole circumstances thereof, have in the fear of God after mature deliberation
resolved, found and voted, no man gainsaying, That not only the Church of God
within this Realm, and true Religion professed in the same, but also the King
his most noble person and royal estate, were and stood in extreme danger and
hazard, besides the manifold gross abuses that had invaded the Commonwealth
before the late enterprise, which his Majesty had acknowledged and professed to
the Commissioners of the present Assembly. And that therefore the said brethren
could not but think their Honors, employing themselves hereafter for averting
the like dangers, to have done good and acceptable service to God, their
Sovereign and native country. And the prosecution thereof, all partiality
aside, will be acceptable to all that fear God, and tender the preservation of
the Kings person, and prosperous estate of the Realm. And to the effect the
same may be made the more manfest and notorious, it is thought expedient that
all the Ministers within the Realm upon the first occasion shall publicly
declare unto their particular flocks the peril wherein the Church of God and
true Religion, the King his most noble person, and estate stood, with the
grounds that moved the said Noblemen unto the late action, recommending the
same to the consideration of all good subjects, exhorting them as they tender
the glory of God, and love the preservation of the King and country,
faithfully to concur and join with the said Noblemen in prosecuting the said
grounds to the full deliverance of the Church, and perfect reformation of the
Commonwealth; And if any should be found either by word maliciously, or
violently by way of deed, to oppose to that good cause, they shall be called
before the particular Elderships, and order put unto them by the censures of
the Church; and in case of their wilful and obstinate continuing therein, be
delated to the King and Council, to be punished for their offense civilly.

This Act of the date the thirteenth of October 1582. was published in all the
Churches of the Realm, to the offense of many good men, who were grieved to see
had cause thus colored and defended. A Convention of the Estates at Edinburgh.
But the Lords knowing that this approbation could not secure them, had
labored the King to convocate the Estates for the same purpose; The eighteenth
of the same month being appointed for their meeting, there came to the
convention for the Church estate, the Archbishop of S. Andrews, the Bishops of
Dunkeld and Orkney, the Abbots of Dunfermlin, Newbottle, Paisley, Driburgh,
Cambuskenneth, Culrosse, Inchaffray, Coldingham, and Pittinweyme; of the
Nobility there were present the Earls of March, Arrol, Marshal, Bothwel (who
some few months before returned from beyond Sea) Mar, Rothes, Glencarn,
Eglinton, Gowrie, and Morton; the Lords Lindesay, Home, Ogilvy, Hereis,
Boyd,... and Sinclare. But from the Burghes there came not any Commissioners,
nor could they be moved to countenance this action in any sort; conceiving, as
it fell out, that how soon the King obtained his liberty, he would censure and
condemn the fact as treasonable.

To these always that convened the King had a speech, The Kings speech to the
Estates.
much to this effect, That of all the vexations he had tried since his
acceptance of the government in his own person, the distraction of the
Nobility was the greatest, and at the present did grieve him most; for the
removing whereof, he had called them together, and expected their best counsel
and help. In other things, he said, that needed reformation, he would be
willing to follow their advice. One of the Lords, I find him not named, made
answer, that the dissensions of the Nobility were caused chiefly by some, that
having his Majesty's ear, did abuse his favors, ruling all things at their
pleasure, and disdaining the advice of other fellow counselors. Then falling
into particulars he said, that the Duke of Lennox and Earl of Arran had
misgoverned all affairs, The attempt of Ruthven declared to be good service.
and brought diverse abuses into the State, which unless some Noblemen had
taken a course to remedy by their repairing to his Majesty, both Religion and
State in a short time had been subverted. After this, the Earl of Mar, Gowry,
and Glencarne, who had been the chief actors in that attempt, rose up, and
having declared the cause, which moved them to take that action in hand, did
humbly offer to submit themselves to the censure of his Majesty and the
Estates, and thereupon removing themselves forth of the Convention, it was
found and declared, That in their repairing to the King upon the 22. of August
last, and abiding with him since that time; they had done good, thankful, and
necessary service to the King and country. Also that their taking of Arms,
making of Conventions, entering in conflicts, taking and detaining of prisoners,
contracting of leagues and bonds, and all other deeds done by them, which might
appear to be against his Majesty's authority, in so far as the same was done
without his Highness warrant, should be reputed, and esteemed good service done
to the King and State. And that they and their partakers should be exonered of
all action, civil, or criminal, that might be intended against them, or any of
them in that respect: Inhibiting therefore all the subjects to speak or utter
any thing to the contrary, under the pain to be esteemed calumniators and
dispersers of false rumors; and to be punished for the same accordingly.

The declaration passed, it was ordained that the Earl of Arran should be
detained in the Castle of Ruthven, The Earl of Arran ordained to be detained
till the Duke was gone.
till the Duke was gone out of the Realm, after which he should be confined on
the North of the water of Iern: and that four companies should be levied upon
the public charges, two of horsemen, and as many foot to guard the King and
Noblemen, who did attend him, till the present troubles were quieted. Then were
some grievances proponed in name of the Church, but these laid by till another
time, the Lords not willing to irritate the King for such matters having once
secured themselves.

The Duke to keep the word which the King had given for his departing took
shiping in the West parts, The Duke falling sick at Seat takes journey by land.
about the midst of October, and being hindered by contrary winds fell sick at
Sea. The King advertised of his ill disposition, advised him to travel through
England in regard of the winter season, and to remain at Blackness till a safe
conduct was procured from the Queen. He had not stayed many days there, when a
rumor was raised, as was thought, by his enemies, that he was to be brought
again to Court, and the Lords turned out, or used with more violence. This made
a new stir, whereupon the Lord Hereis was sent to command him to begin his
journey and to be in Berwick the 22. day of December, The Duke dering to see
the King before he went away, is denied.
he craved to see the King and be permitted only to salute him, but this being
denied, he departed in great heaviness.

In the beginning of January two Ambassadors arrived sent by the French King,
the one named Monsieur la Motte, the other Monsieur Menevel: La Motte came by
England (with whom came along, Two Ambassador from France, La Mott and
Menevil.
Mr. Davidson Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth) the other by Sea, both having
the same instructions, which were to work the Kings liberty in the best sort
they could; to confirm his mind in the love he bare to the French, and to renew
the purpose of Association. The purpose of association renewed.
This last business was set on foot the year before, and almost concluded in
this sort; That the Queen of Scots should communicate the Crown with her son,
and both be joined in the administration of affairs; that so he might be
acknowledged for a lawful King by all Christian Princes, and all domestic
factions suppressed. But upon the Dukes sequestring from Court, it was left
off, and not mentioned again till now. The Assembly of the Church in the last
meeting, had made this one of their special grievances, and complained of it as
a most wicked practice. And now the Ministers of Edinburgh, hearing that
purpose to be moved of new by the French Ambassadors, The Ministers declared
in their Sermons against the Ambassadors.
declaimed bitterly against them in their Sermons; especially against La Motte,
who being a Knight of the order of S. Esprit, did wear the badge of a white
Cross upon his shoulder. This they called the badge of Antichrist, and him the
Ambassador of the bloody murther^r, meaning the Duke of Guise, who they said,
procured him to be sent hither.

It grieved the Ambassadors much to hear these outcries, The Magistrates of
Edinburgh desired to feast the Ambassadors.
which daily were brought unto them, but perceiving the Kings authority not
able to restrain the liberty, which the Preachers had taken; they did not
complain, but urged earnestly their dimission. The King desirous to entertain
the ancient amity betwixt the two nations, and dimit them with some
contentment, desired the Magistrates of Edinburgh to give them the Feast before
their parting. To impede this Feast, the Ministers did on the Sunday preceding
proclaim a Fast to be kept the same day, on which the Feast was appointed: The
Ministers proclaim a fast, Febr. 16.
and to detain the people at Church, the three ordinary Preachers did one after
another make Sermon in S. Giles Church, without any intermission of time,
thundering curses against the Magistrates, and other Noblemen that waited on
the Ambassadors by the Kings direction; nor stayed their folly here, but the
Ambassadors being gone, they pursued the Magistrates with the censures of the
Church, and were with difficulty enough stayed from proceeding with
excommunication against them, for not observing the Fast they proclaimed.

Of all this the King seemed to take no notice; The Duke of Lennox dies at
Paris.
for he saw not a way to repress these disorders, and much perplexed he was
with the reports of the Duke of Lennox his death, who partly of grief, partly
through the long and troublesome journey he made in that cold and rainy season,
contracted a fever at his coming to Paris, whereof after a few days he died.
26. May, 1583.
Some hours before his expiring, there came to him a Priest or two, to do their
accustomed service, whom he could not admit, professing to die in the faith of
the Church of Scotland, and to keep the oath he had given to the King
inviolate. This the King made to be proclaimed at Edinburgh, that the people
might see what wrong the Duke had sustained during his abode in the Realm, by
the uncharitable suspicions both of Ministers and others. But this belongs to
the year following.

Meanwhile, The King directe^h Am^assadours to England.
the King ceascth not to think of his own liberty, using all means to put the
Lords that attended him, out of an opinion that he had any meaning to free
himself. And the Duke being gone whom they feared most, they esteemed the
danger the less, for Arran was not well loved because of his violent courses;
and Morton who had the greatest following, was put from his charge in the
Borders, and the same given to the Lord of Iohnston; The King had likewise by
their advice sent Colonel Stewart, and Mr. John Colvil in a joint Commission to
the Queen of England, to move her for restoring the lands in that Kingdom,
which appertained to his Grandfather the Earl of Lennox, and the Lady Margaret
his Grandmother; together with the by-run profits intrometted by the Thesaurer,
or Master of Wards; as likewise to communicate unto her the course he had taken
for quieting the Realm, An. 1583.
and to desire her aid and assistance therein. Some instructions besides were
given them to propone, as touching the Kings marriage, the matters of the
Border, and the contracting of a defensive league; by all which they held
themselves secured of his Majesty's favor. The negotiation took no effect.
But for the negotiation it sorted to no effect, by the contrary courses the
two Commissioners took, after their coming to the Court of England. The King
foreseeing the same, when they were first employed, had moved Mr. David
Lindesay Preacher at Leth, (a man wise and moderate) to accompany them, and
pacify the contentions which possibly might arise amongst them; but their
emulations were so great, as all he could do, scarce served to keep them from
open discord.

Before I enter upon the accidents of the next year, The life and death of Mr.
George Buchannan.
the death of Mr. George Buchannan, which happened in the end of September,
must not be passed, a man so well deserving of his country, as none more; he
was of an excellent wit, and learning incomparable, born nigh to the Highlands
within the Parish of Killern, and of the house of Drunmakill; his Uncle by the
mother called Herriot, took care to have him trained up in letters, perceiving
his inclination to be set that way: wherein he profited so much, as he went
beyond all his instructors; Nature, it seems, having formed him thereunto. In
the year 1539 being called in question by the Franciscan Friars upon the malice
they bare him for some bitter verses written against them, and their
profession, which he did to please King James the fifth, whom they had in some
things offended, he was committed, as suspected of Lutheranisme; but made an
escape to France, where he lived a long time, and became acquainted with many
learned men, with which that country did then abound. His paraphrase of the
Psalms, a rare work, and other Poems, he wrote for most part, whilst he
stayed abroad; and for his learning and quick ingenie was admired of all men.
Returning into Scotland about the year 1560. after he had professed Philosophy
some years in S. Leonards College within the University of S. Andrews, he was
chosen to attend the King, and bring him up in letters. In his age he applied
himself to write the Scottish History, which he penned with such judgment and
eloquence, as no country can show a better. Only in this is he justly blamed,
that with the factions of the time, and to justify the proceedings of the
Noblemen against the Queen, he went too far in depressing the Royal authority
of Princes, and allowing their controllment by subjects: his bitterness also
in writing of the Queen, and troubles of the time, all wise men have disliked.
But otherwise no man did merit better of his nation for learning, nor thereby
did bring to it more glory. He died in a great age at Edinburgh, and was buried
in the common place, though worthy to have been laid in marble, and have had
some Statue erected for his memory. But such pompous monuments in his life he
was wont to scorn and despise, esteeming it a greater credit, as it was said
of the Roman Cato, to have it asked why he does lack a Statue, then to have had
one, though never so glorious, erected.

The summer following the King found the occasion to free himself of his
attenders. For being at Falkland, and pretending to visit his Uncle the Earl of
March, The King freeth himself of his attenders Ianuar. 28.
who did then reside in the Abbey of S. Andrews: after he had taken some
little refreshment, he went to take a view of the Castle, accompanied with
Colonel Stewart Captain of the Guard, to whom he had communicated his purpose,
and having entered into the Castle, commanded the gates to be shut, and these
that followed to be excluded. The Earls of Argile, Marshal, Montross, and
Rothes, came thither the next morning, and were all welcomed by the King. Of
the Noblemen that had waited on him since his restraint at Ruthven, only the
Earl of Gowry was admitted into the Castle, by the Colonels means; for he had
sometimes followed him as a servant. The Earl of Gowry confesses his fault,
and is pardoned.
The Earl how soon he came in presence fell on his knees, and craving pardon
for the fact of Ruthven, did humbly submit himself to the Kings mercy, who
after he had checked him in some few, but grave speeches, for his ingratitude
to the Duke of Lennox, accepted him in favor, upon condition of a more loyal
behavior in time coming.

Some few days the King abode in the Castle, and in a Council keptthere the
second of July, made choice of the Earls of March, Argile, Gowry, Marshal,
Montrosse, and Rothes, to remain with him, as Noblemen that he held of best
judgment, most indifferent and freest of faction, the rest he commanded to
retire to their houses, till he should take further order. An Act following the
service of Colonel Stewart.
In the same meeting was Colonel Stewarts service approved, and a Proclamation
ordained to be made, charging all the subjects to contain themselves in
quietness, and prohibiting any to come toward Court, accompanied with a
greater number then was appointed; to wit, 15. with an Earl, as many with a
Bishop, ten with a Lord, and as many with an Abbot or Prior, with a Baron six,
and all these commanded to come in a peaceable manner, under great penalties.

Then the King to show himself at liberty, The Earl of Arran called again to
Court.
went to Edinburgh, and from thence he went to Falkland, then to Perth, where
he remained some weeks. Being there, the Earl of Arran by Gowries procurement
was brought again to Court, after whose coming, a Declaration was published by
the King to this effect.

We with advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, His Majesty's Declaration
touching the attempt of Ruthven.
having thought expedient to notify unto the world, but especially to all our
good and loyal subjects, our true mind touching the things that fell out in the
year past, declare the same to be as follows. That is, howsoever for
preserving of public quietness, we did patiently endure the restraint of our
person at Ruthven, with the secluding of our Counselors from us, and all that
ensued thereupon, yet did we take it deeply to heart, and did account no
otherwise of it, then a fact most treasonable, attending till it should please
God to restore us to our former estate and liberty: which having now by his
goodness obtained, to make known our indifferent disposition toward all our
good subjects, and that we do not seek the harm and ruin of any one
whomsoever; we have resolved to forgive and forget all offenses bygone,
especially that which was committed in August last, and has been since that
time strongly maintained, providing the Actors and assisters do show themselves
penitent for the same, ask pardon in due time, and do not provoke us by their
unlawful actions hereafter, to remember that attempt. Willing all our subjects,
by the example of this our clemency (whereof some already have made proof) to
discharge all quarrels amongst themselves, and not to malice one another for
whatsoever cause by gone, all which we will have buried in oblivion; and to
this have ordained publication to be made hereof in all the principal Burghs,
etc.

The discontented Lords notwithstanding of this declaration, The discontented
Lords confined.
were still convening, and making the best provision they could for their own
surety. For at Arrans hand, who had now the disposing of all things, they
expected no good. The King hereupon took purpose to confine some of the
principals in several countries, and to commit others who were reckoned most
turbulent. The Earl of Angus was confined beyond Spey, John Levingston of
Dunypace, and Patrick Drummond of Carnock in the country of Galloway,
Lochlevin and Buchan in Innerness, the Master of Glammis, Abbot of Dunfermlin,
and Lord of Cleish, were charged to enter themselves in the Castle of
Dumbritton, William Commendator of Paisley in Blackness, and Mr. John Colvil
commanded to keep Ward in Edinburgh. All of them ( Angus except) for their
disobedience were denounced Rebels.
The whole ( Angus only excepted) disobeying the charge, were denounced rebels;
and Proclamations made, commanding all the subjects to be in readiness for
resisting the practices of seditious subjects. An oath also was taken of all
the Kings domestics, that they should not keep intelligence with any of the
rebels or others known to be in his Majesty's mal-grace; and at this time was
Mr. John Metellan, who came afterward to be Chancellor, admitted Counselor
of Estate.

The Queen of England being advertised of this alteration in Court, Embassage
from England the beginning of September.
sent Sir Francis Walsingham, her principal Secretary to the King, to challenge
him for breach of promise in readmitting the Earl of Arran, and casting off the
Noblemen who had maintained his authority, and hazarded their lives and estates
in defense of his Crown. His Majesty's answer to the Ambassador.
The King answered, that he was a free Prince, and in ruling his affairs,
might follow the course which he thought to be most convenient; that the Queen
would not take it well, if he or any other should direct her in matters that
concerned her subjects; and for the promise alleged, he said, it was made in
time of his restraint, to the performance whereof he was not tied. As to these
subjects of whom the Queen seemed so careful, he said, that he had freely
offered to pardon them, upon the acknowledgement of their offense, and promise
of amendment; which he would faithfully observe, expecting of the Queen his
sister, that neighborhood which became Princes living in amity and friendship,
and that she would not countenance his subjects in their rebellion.

The Ambassador replying, The Ambassador complains of a Jesuits escape.
Sir, the Queen my Mistress will never meddle with your affairs, but to work
your good and quietness; Yet she takes it unkindly, that the promises made
unto her are so lightly regarded. One Holt an English Jesuit, who is thought to
have an hand in Throgmortons treason, that was of late detected, being in your
prison, at the request of the French Ambassador was permitted to escape,
whereas the Queen my Sovereign looked daily to have been delivered in England,
His Majesty's answer.
as was promised. Nay, said the King, it was not promised, that he should be
delivered, but as the Queen answered my Ambassadors, when I desired, Mr.
Archibald Douglas to be rendered, who is known to be guilty of my Fathers
murder; I said that the man was charged with certain suspicious practices in
my Kingdom, which I believed first to try; and if the Queen had been pleased to
have delivered my subject to me, whom I had more then reason to remand, I would
have made no delay in the rendering of Holt. But for his dimission or my
connivence at his escape, there is no such thing; and if you know, or can learn
that any indirect means have been used for letting him go, the trial and
punishment of the doers shall clear my part. This said, the Ambassador, (who
was a most worthy and discreet Gentleman) declaring that he was satisfied, fell
to speak of the preservation of peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, and of a new
league to be made with the Queen; whereof the King did show a good liking, and
in these terms they left for that time.

In October next, An Assembly of the Church.
the Church Assembly convened at Edinburgh, where great regrates were made, and
presented in certain Articles to the King; First, they complained that the
benefit of pacification was extended to Mr. David Chalmers a professed enemy to
Religion, and suspected of the murder of his Majesty's Father. Next,
Grievances presented to his Majesty by the Church.
that Papists were grown too familiar in Court, and namely, the Lord of
Fintry, who had made defection from the true Religion, in which he was
educated. 3. That Holt a wicked Papist, sent to the country to traffic
against Religion and the State, was suffered to escape, and no trial taken of
the workers thereof. 4. That his Majesty seemed to favor too much the enemies
of the truth, both in France and at home. 5. That he had received in his
service men of dissolute life, and who had never given any testimony of their
good meaning either to Religion or the state of the country, and put others
from his service that were known to be zealous of Gods cause, and faithful to
his Majesty's self from his very tender age. 6. That since his acceptance of
the government, the Church had received many fair promises without any
performance, and that to the contrary the liberties and privileges thereof
were daily infringed. 7. That the thirds were set in taks or leases in defraud
of the Church. 8. That Abbacies were disponed against the Acts of Parliament,
and no care taken for provision of the Ministers that served at the Churches
annexed. 9. That spiritual livings were conferred to children, and erected in
temporal Lordships. 10. That there were no punishment for incest, adultery,
witchcraft, and the like abominations. 11. That there was an universal murmur,
that no man could be assured of his lands and life, the laws of the country
being wholly perverted. 12. That his Majesty did interpone his authority to
stay the execution of the Churches Acts, in matters properly Ecclesiastical.
Lastly, they regrated the division of the Nobility, one part seeking the ruin
and overthrow of another: for which they did entreat his Majesty to call unto
himself the most wise and indifferent amongst them, and by their advice to take
some moderate course for uniting the hearts of all good subjects to the
maintenance of Gods truth, the preservation of his Highness person and estate,
and the comfort of all that were grieved at the present division.

The King desiring to give the Church satisfaction, made answer the next day to
all these particulars. And first, concerning Mr. David Chalmers, he said, that
he was only forfeited for the common action for being at Landside field, The
King his answer to the grievances.
field, for which pardon had been given to many, so as it should not be thought
strange to give him the like benefit, especially at their request, who had
moved him therein, and that he no ways intended to grant oversight to him or
any others that should be found culpable of his fathers murder, or yet
professed themselves adversaries to the Religion. Touching Fintry he said, that
he had not impeded the proceedings of the Church against him or any other
Popishly affected, nor had he been countenanced at Court, if the Minister of
Edinburgh had not testified that he was willing to conform. That for Holts
escape, he had satisfied the English Ambassador, and that it was no uncouth
thing to see a prisoner deceive his keepers. Concerning the intelligence he
kept with forain Princes, for the entertaining of civil peace; that he did not
think the Assembly would disallow it, seeing diversity of Religion made not
leagues of friendship unlawful. And that they should meddle with the choice of
his servants, he held it strange; This he hoped they would remit to himself,
and not to be too curious in examining the occasions of their placing or
displacing. And where they complained, that since his accepting of the
government, the liberties of the Church had been refringed; he said, that since
that time, more good and profitable laws had been made for the advancement of
true Religion, then ever before; and if any thing lacked in the execution, the
fault was not his. For that which concerned the Church rents, he answered, that
those things must be helped in Parliament, and that he should assist the
reformation thereof at his power. As for the punishment of the abominations
mentioned, that the fault could not be imputed to him, since he was willing to
give Commission to such as the Ministers should judge most fit for the
execution of laws. And for Ecclesiastical Acts which his authority was said to
impede, he knew none of late, only he had stayed the remove of Mr. Alexander
Arbuthnet from the College of Aberdene to be Minister of S. Andrews, which
being rightly considered, would not be found prejudicial to the Church, nor
impertinent for him to deal in. Lastly, for the murmur of people, perverting of
laws and difference amongst the Nobility, his Majesty said, that he was ready
to hearken to any good advice, for reformation of that which should be found
amiss.

The answers all most reasonable, The answer did not satisfy the Church.
and proceeding from the King, ought to have been well taken, but the
discontent they had received for the late change in Court, made every thing
distasteful, and still the displeasure betwixt the King and Church did grow as
we shall hear.

In the beginning of November, Lodowick (eldest son to the late Duke of Lennox)
arrived at Leth, Lodowick son and heir to the late deceased Duke of Lennox
comes into Scotland, November. 13.
and was conveyed by the Earls of Huntley, Crawford, and Montross to the King,
who lay then at Kinneill. Soon after the advertisement of the Noblemans death,
the King had sent the Master of Gray into France, to bring home all his
children: But Lodowick excepted (who then was 13. years of age) the rest were
young, and not able to endure so long a journey. The King receiving him with
great expressions of love, did presently invest him in his Fathers lands and
honors, committing the trust of his affairs to the Earl of Montrosse, till he
should grow up to maturity; The King his kindness to the Duke his children.
for his education in letters, Mr. Gilbert Moncreef, the King his principal
Physician, was appointed to attend him, a man wise, and of good learning. Some
years after two of his sisters were brought into the country; Henrietta the
eldest was married to George Earl of Huntley, Mary the younger of the two to
John Earl of Mar, to the third the King had provided an honorable match, but
she having vowed her self to God, would not be won from the Cloister by any
persuasion; a younger son came to the King, after he went into England, and was
by him advanced to great honors. Thus the untimely loss of their Father, did
turn to the childrens benefit, by the constant and unmatchable kindness of a
loving King.

In the country matters grew daily more and more troubled. Those that
disobeyed the charges given them for entering in Ward, pretended the time
assigned for their entry, to have been so short, and the distance of the place
so great, as there was no possibility in them to obey, yet under hand they were
still seeking to strengthen themselves, and associate others to be of their
faction. To take from them this pretext the first of December was allowed them
for their entering in Ward, and so many as should find surety to obey, had
favor promised them. The Lord of Braid, Colluthy, Mr. David Lindesay, and Mr.
Andrew Hay, were licenced also to confer with them, and with all that had any
part in the attempt of Ruthven, for informing them of his Majesty's gracious
inclination toward all of that number, who should acknowledge their offense,
and live obedient and peaceably from thenceforth. But little or nothing was
wrought this way, A Convention of Estates.
whereupon the King took purpose to convene the Estates this 17th of December,
and having exponed his whole proceeding in that business, an Act was passed by
an universal consent, of this tenor.

Albeit the late surprise and restraint of our person perpetrated in August
bygone a year, was a crime of laesae Majestatis, heinous in it self, of
dangerous sequel, and most pernicious example; meriting the more severe
punishment, because the committers thereof for the most part, besides the
allegiance and common duty of subjects, Prorogation granted to those that were
charged to enter in Ward.
were specially bound to us by particular favors and benefits bestowed on
them: yet out of our natural disposition to clemency, we resolved to reduce
them by all gentle means to their duties; and not only forbear to use them with
rigor, but made offer of pardon and mercy to such as would acknowledge their
offense, and continue thereafter in a dutiful obedience; satisfying our selves
with that moderate declaration which tended not in any sort to their detriment,
An offer of pardon to those who will acknowledge their offense at Ruthven.
and prorogating days and months, to see what they could perform. Hereof we
gave our promise to the Queen of England, which was certified to them by
diverse, and of late by certain Ministers and well disposed Gentlemen, whom we
licenced to confer with them, for persuading them of our sincere meaning:
behaving our selves in all this, as a kind Father that seeks to recover his
children, and not as a Prince that respected his estate. But our lenity not
having produced the effects which were wished, we took counsel to assemble our
Estates, and make them witnesses of our clemency, whatsoever might happen to
their persons hereafter: and now by their advice we have determined to
prosecute with all rigor, such of that number as shall continue in their
disobedience, and shall not embrace the offers of pardon made unto them. In the
execution whereof, our Nobility and Estates convened, have solemnly promised
their assistance, and for the greater authority both We and our said Estates
have subscribed this Act with our hands. Further, by their advice We have
ordained, and ordain the Act of Council past in October 1582. touching the
attempt at Ruthven, to be delete forth of the Books, inhibiting all and sundry
of whatsoever estate, quality, and degree, to allow by word, writing, or
otherwise, the foresaid fact, which We (being now at liberty) and our Estates,
have so publicly condemned.

This Act made, The Earl of Rothes his protestation.
the Earl of Rothes protested, that his subscription to the Act in October,
1582. approving the attempt of Ruthven for good service, should not be laid to
his charge, seeing he did the same unwillingly, and by his Majesty's special
command and direction, like as soon after the committing of the fact, he had
satisfied his dislike thereof. The King acknowledging the same to be of truth,
made his protestation to be admitted. Then began all the faction to fall
asunder, every man suing his pardon; which was granted upon condition, they
should depart forth of the Realm, and not return without his Majesty's license.
The Earl of Mar, the Master of Glammis, with the Abbots of Driburgh, and
Cambuskenneth, went into Ireland; the Lord Boid, Lochlevin, and Easter Weymis
unto France; others of the meaner sort were confined within certain bounds. The
Earl of Gowry notwithstanding he was reconciled to Arran, fearing to be
troubled, obtained license to go into France; but whilst he delays to go, and
puts off his journey from day to day, he falls into new practices, which
brought him unto his end.

The rest of the winter was quiet, John Dury questioned for allowing the
attempt of Ruthven.
but now and then the Court was kept in exercises by the Sermons of some
Preachers, who were therefore called in question: John Dury Minister at
Edinburgh, had in one of his Sermons justified publicly the fact of Ruthven:
for which being cited before the Council, he stood to the defense of that he
had spoken; yet after advice taken with Mr. James Lawson his Colleague, he was
moved to submit himself to the King, who continued the declaration of his
pleasure, An. 1584.
till he had proof of his better behavior. The business with Mr. Andrew
Melvil was greater, for he being cited to answer for certain speeches uttered
by him in a Sermon preached at S. Andrews, declined the judgment of the King
and Council, affirming, That what was spoken in Pulpit, ought first to be tried
and judged by the Presbytery, and that neither the King nor Council might, in
prima instantia, meddle therewith, though the speeches were treasonable. When
by no persuasion he could be induced to submit himself; and that the King and
Council finding themselves Judges, did proceed to examine the witnesses; he
burst forth in undutiful speeches against the King, Mr. Andrew Melvil flees
into England.
saying, he perverted the laws both of God and man; which unreverent words
proceeding from a Divine, in whom moderation and humility should chiefly have
appeared, did greatly offend the Council. Thereupon was he charged to enter his
person in Blackness, within the space of ten hours; but in stead of obeying, he
turned his back, and fled that night to Berwick. Then did all the Pulpits
sound, and every day were the Ministers exclaiming, that the light of the
country for learning, and he that was only most fit to resist the adversaries
of religion was exiled, and compelled for safety of his life to quit the
Kingdom.

Pity it is to think how the King was then used, The King his Proclamations
misregarded.
for though he cleared himself by Proclamations, showing that the man's flight
was voluntary, and that he meant not to have used him with any rigor, yet
nothing was believed, and every where people began to stir. Hereupon charges
were directed, commanding those who had obtained leave to depart out of the
Realm, to use the benefit of their licenses, and inhibiting all intelligence by
letters, or otherwise, with those that are already gone. This wrought not much,
only made those that traveled to and fro with advertisements, the more wary
and circumspect. The Earl of (...)
The Earl of Gowry, to liberate himself of suspicion, came to Dundy, and
conducing a ship, gave out that he would forthwith depart, yet still he
lingered, attending the return of the Earl of Mar, and the Master of Glammis
from Ireland, at which time he and others of that faction were to join and take
Arms for reformation of abuses, the securing of Religion, and preservation of
the King his person and estate; for that was made the pretext.

The King having notice given him of these practices, sent Colonel Stewart
Captain of the guard, Being at Dundy, he is apprehended by Colonel Stewart,
April 16.
to apprehend the Earl of Gowry, who was suspected because of his lingering. The
Colonel coming upon him unexpected as he lay in the house of William Drummond,
Burgess of Dundy, he made to defend the lodging, and stood to it some space;
but the Town concurring with the Captain, he was forced to yield, and the next
day conveyed to Edinburgh, and committed to the custody of Arran. A night or
two after, the Earls of Angus and Mar, with some of their friends and
followers, surprised the Town and Castle of Striveling, intending there to
fortify themselves. The Castle of Striveling sur^^^ed April 18.
But the sudden expedition which the King made, compelled them to fly into
England, and leave the Castle victualled for some days, and in it a few
Gentlemen, whom they promised to relieve. Such a readiness the King found in
his subjects at this time, as upon a short warning a greater Army and better
appointed was in no man's memory known to have been assembled. The Town of
Edinburgh showed a great forwardness; for both they advanced moneys to levy
soldiers, and put diverse of their own inhabitants in Arms to attend the King.
The King (...) to go toward Striveling.
It was the 19th of April, when knowledge was given first of the taking of
Striveling, and before 24. all the Army was in readiness to march. The same
day advertisement came of the Rebels flight; whereupon the Wardens and Keepers
of the Marches were directed to pursue them. The Rebels flee into England.
The King himself with the Army marching toward Striveling, Alexander Master
of Levingston was sent to enclose the Castle, The Castle rendered April 27.
which yielded upon the hearing of his Majesty's approach, and was delivered in
keeping to the Earl of Arran.

The Earl of Gowry after he had been kept some days in Kinneil, Gowry examined
touching the conspiracy.
was brought to Striveling. Before his transporting from Edinburgh, the Earl of
Montrosse, the Lord Down, and Mr. Robert Melvil, were directed to examine him,
and hopes given that he should find favor if he would discover the conspiracy,
and what the Rebels had intended to do: he upon promise that what he declared
should not be made an endictment against himself, disclosed all the plot,
setting down the same with his own hand, as follows.

Perceiving his Majesty's favor altered toward me, His confession set down by
himself in writing.
by misreport of my unfriends, and my life and my living aimed at, I was of
necessity forced to seek my relief by concurring with others of the Nobility,
who labored to secure themselves and their estates. And hearing that there was
some trafficking betwixt the Noblemen in Ireland and others at home, I used all
means, though I was suspected by them, to know what their courses and hopes
were; after some diligence I made that way, I met with Mr. James Areskin, who
traveled to and fro betwixt them. And he at first obscured himself from me,
and would not be plain, till I promised my assistance: Then he showed me, that
he had been with the Earl of Angus, whom he found cold, and in some hope to
make address for himself, and so less careful of their relief, who were
absent. Yet he believed, if the Nobleman saw any good concurrence of others, he
would give his assistance: but refused to deal in these matters, till they
should return, and things be determined with a common consent. This I thought
likewise fittest, but in the mean time I prepared to depart, and would have
been gone, if contrary winds had not stayed me. The same Gentleman came
afterward unto me, and showed that they were returned, and would shortly be
seen at Striveling. This moved me to remain, albeit doubting of a sufficient
concurrence of Noblemen, I was not resolved what course to take, and lay in a
careless security at Dundy, more inclined to go then to stay. I protest always
before God, that I never heard, nor was in counsel of any plot against his
Majesty's Person, Crown, or Estate, but only studied to keep my self from ruin
by the assistance of others. At our meeting together, unto which time all was
deferred, it was thought that a course should be taken by common advice, for
securing our selves in his Majesty's favor. And whereas I am asked what
Noblemen were privy to the enterprise, and what was looked for from England, I
will truly declare all, upon the firm assurance of his Majesty's clemency. At
home it was expected, that all those who subscribed the bond in that first
alteration, would join themselves with us, and besides those diverse others:
namely, the Earl of Marshal and Bothwel, with the Lord Lindesay, and some of
the West parts. So it was affirmed to me, but how truly I cannot say. From
England we expected a supply, but no certain time was appointed, and it was
said, that the Queen minded to intercede for restitution of the Hamiltons, if
she found the King tractable. This is all I know, and if there by any other
particular tending to his Majesty's well or hurt, which I do not at the present
remember, I shall plainly reveal the same, whosoever be offended therewith.

At his coming to Striveling, A letter from Gowry to his Majesty.
he sent to the King a letter penned in this form, Please your Majesty, it is
neither diffidence nor despair in your Highness favor and clemency toward
me, nor any desire I have to live in this world, that moves me to require some
short audience of your Majesty. But there is a purpose of so weighty
importance, which I desire to impart unto your Highness, which might have
endangered the life and estate of your mother and your self, if I had not
stayed and impeded the same, the revealing whereof may avail your Majesty more,
then the lives and livings of 500. such as my self; most humbly therefore I
beseech your Highness that my Petition may be granted. I assure my self of
your Majesty's gracious answer. Striveling the last of April 1584. In a
Postscript this was added. The matter I have to speak, is not the concealing of
treason, but the revealing of a benefit.

This Petition was denied, He is denied audience and put to the trial of a Jury.
and the same made a part of his indictment, for being brought to his trial the
fourth of May, Mr. John Grahame sitting as Justice, and assisted by Sir John
Gordon of Lochinvar, Alexander Master of Levingston, Alexander Bruce of Airth,
and James Edminston of Duntraith, he was indicted of four points. First, that
in the beginning of February Mr. David Home, The points of his endictment.
servant to the Earl of Mar, came to him privately in the town of Perth,
under silence of night, and communicated to him the treasonable device of
surprising the Burghs of Perth and Striveling, at least of one or other of
them; and that he agreed to the taking and fortifying of the said towns,
whereby he had incurred the crime of Treason, as well in concealing, as
consenting to that wicked purpose. 2. That understanding Mr. James Areskin to
be a trafficker betwixt Mar, Angus, and others, he did belay the ways, to the
end he might speak with him, and after meeting kept conference with him,
touching the surprise of the Castle of Striveling, and the furnishing thereof
with men and ammunition. 3. That being charged in Dundy by his Majesty's
letters to render himself to the Lord Petten Weyme his Majesty's Chancellor,
and Captain of his Highness guard, he did enter into the house of William
Drummond Burgess of Dundy, and with his Accomplices defended the same by the
space of 6. hours, making exclamations to the people, that he was pursued for
Religion, and desiring them to aid and assist him. 4. That he being obliged to
maintain his Majesty's person, life, honor, and Crown, and having intelligence
of a most weighty purpose, that concerned the life and estate of the King and
the Queen his mother, he had treasonably concealed the same, and did as yet
keep up the specialties thereof; albeit he professed, he knew it so perfectly,
that in his letter written to the King, he says, that it had not failed to
have taken effect, if he had not stayed and impeded the same.

The indictment read, His exceptions repelled.
he first excepted against Lochinvar, that he could not be assessor to the
Justice in his trial in regard of the deadly enmity betwixt Gartland (who had
married his Ladies sister) and him. This exception was repelled, because the
propinquity alleged, was only affinitas affinitatis. Then he complained that
the Noblemen who were sent to examine him, had not kept their word; having
promised, that whatsoever he had confessed, should not be laid to his charge.
It was answered, that the Noblemens word could not warrant him. Thirdly, he
said, that being indicted for treason, he ought to have been cited upon 40.
days, and a delation made by some accuser, which was not observed. The Advocate
replied, that in matters of Treason the King might arrest any person upon the
space it pleased him. Fourthly, he alleged the license granted him to depart
the country. This was found naught, except he did therewith produce a respit
or permission. To the last point of the indictment, he said, that what he
offered to reveal, tended to his benefit if he had vouchsafed him hearing, and
was no matter of treason. It was answered, that the concealing of that might
tend to the hurt of the Kings life, and mothers, was treason.

So the indictment was found relevant, The names of the Assisers.
and the persons of the Jury called. These were, Colin Earl of Argile, David
Earl of Crawford, John Earl of Montrosse, James Earl of Glencarne, Hugh Earl of
Eglinton, James Earl of Arran, George Earl of Marshal, Alexander Lord Seaton,
Hugh Lord Sommervil, James Lord Down, William Lord Levingston, Patrick Lord
Drummond, James Lord Ogilvy, Alexander Master of Oliphant, and John Murray of
Tillibardin. They retiring themselves, Gowry found guilty, and sentence
pronounced.
as the custom is, and returning within a short space, pronounced him guilty:
whereupon sentence was given, that he should be taken to the Market Cross,
have his head cut off, and be dismembered as a traitor. The last part thereof
was dispensed, and he in the evening beheaded. His servants were permitted to
take the head with the body, and bury it. This was the end of that Nobleman,
who in his life was much honored, and employed in the chief offices of Court;
a man wise, but said to have been too curious, and to have consulted with
Wizards, touching the state of things in future times; yet was he not charged
with this, nor seemed he to be touched therewith in his death, which to the
judgment of the beholders was very peaceable and quiet. He was heard to make
that common regret, which many great men have done in such misfortunes; His
execution and manner of death.
That if he had served God as faithfully as he had done the King, he had not
come to that end: but otherwise died patiently, with a contempt of the world,
and assurance of mercy at the hands of God.

The same day Archibald Douglas (called the Constable) and Mr. John Forbes,
Archibald Douglas and another executed.
servant to the Earl of Mar, were executed; the rest who were taken in the
Castle, had their lives spared, and were banished the country, and David Home
of Argaty, and one John Shaw, were pardoned.

The King after this returned to Edinburgh, The houses of the Rebels charged.
where he gave order for charging the houses of the fugitive Lords, and their
friends; and upon information made, that certain of the Ministry had dealing
with the Rebels; summons were directed to charge Mr. Andrew Hay Parson of
Ranfrew, Mr. Andrew Polwart Subdean of Glasgow, Mr. Patrick Galloway, and Mr.
James Carmichael Ministers, to compeir before the Council. Ministers called in
question for the conspiracy.
Mr. Andrew Hay compeired, and nothing being qualified against him, was upon
suspicion confined in the North. The other three not compeiring were denounced
Rebels, and fled into England.

The Parliament declared current at the time, for the more speedy dispatch of
business, convened the 22. of May: In it his Majesty's declaration concerning
the attempt of Ruthven was ratified; The King his authority over all persons,
in all causes confirmed; The declining of his Majesty's judgment, and the
Councels, in whatsoever matter, declared to be Treason; The impugning of the
authority of the three Estates, or procuring the innovation or diminution of
the power of any of them, inhibited under the same pain. All jurisdictions and
judicatures, spiritual, or temporal, not approved of by his Highness, and the
three Estates discharged, and an Ordinance made. That none, of whatsoever
function, quality, or degree, should presume privately or publicly, in
Sermons, Declamations, or familiar conferences, to utter any false, untrue, or
slanderous speeches, to the reproach of his Majesty, his Council, and
proceedings, or to the dishonor, hurt, or prejudice of his Highness, his
parents, and progenitors, or to meddle with the affairs of his Highness and
Estate, under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliaments made against the
makers and reporters of lies.

Whilst these statutes were in framing, Mr. David Lindesay Minister at Leth
committed.
the Ministers who were informed thereof, to work at least a delay, sent Mr.
David Lindesay to entreat the King that nothing should pass in Act concerning
the Church, till they were first heard. Arran getting intelligence of this,
caused arrest him, as one that kept intelligence with England; so as he was not
permitted to come toward the King. The first night he was kept in
Halirudhouse, and the next morning sent prisoner to Blackness, where he was
detained 47. weeks. Mr. James Lawson, The Ministers at Edinburgh flee to
England.
and Mr. Walter Balcanquell Ministers of Edinburgh, hearing that he was
committed, forsook their charge, and fled into England, leaving a short writing
behind them, to show the reasons of their departing.

John Dury some weeks before was removed and confined in the Town of Montrosse,
so as Edinburgh was left without any Preacher. Mr. Robert Pont Minister of S.
Cutberts, Mr. Robert Pont protesseth against the Acts.
and one of the Senators of the College of Justice, because of the misregard
of the Church, as he pretended, in concluding these Acts (as the Heralds were
proclaiming them according to the Custom) took instruments in the hands of a
Notary of the Churches disassenting, and that they were not obliged to give
their obedience thereto; which done, he likewise fleeing, was denounced Rebel,
and put from the place in Session.

Rumors hereupon being dispersed, that the King was declined to Popery, had
made diverse Acts to hinder the free passage of the Gospel, and abolish all
order and policy in the Church; Command was given to form a brief declaration
of his Majesty's intention in those Acts that concerned the Church, and to
publish the same for detecting the falsehood of those rumors. In this
declaration the occasions that enforced the King to the making of these
statutes, were particularly set down, and the equity thereof maintained by
diverse reasons. Amongst the occasions were reckoned the allowance of the fact
of Ruthven, by the assembly of the Church; Mr. Andrew Melvil his declining of
the King and Council; the fast kept at the feasting of the French Ambassadors;
general fasts indicted through the Realm, without the King his knowledge; the
usurping of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by a number of Ministers and
Gentlemen; the alteration of the laws at their pleasure, and a number of like
abuses. And for satisfying good people, strangers as well as subjects, touching
his Majesty's good affection toward the maintenance of Religion; certain
Articles were drawn up and subjoyned to the said Declaration, Libells and
pamphlets against the Rulers of the Court.
to make it appear that his Majesty had intended nothing but to have a settled
form of policy established in the Church.

But these things gave not much satisfaction (so great was the discontent) and
were replied unto in Pamphlets, defamatory libels, and scurril poems, which
daily came forth against the Court, and the rulers of it. To furnish the vacant
places of Edinburgh, till some were moved to undertake the charge, the King did
appoint his own Ministers, Mr. John Craig, and Mr. John Duncanson, the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews supplying the ordinary preaching at Court. Soon
after, there came a letter from the Ministers directed to the Session of the
Church at Edinburgh, and to the Council of the town, of this tenor.

That seeing they were assured many calumnies would be forged against them for
absenting themselves from their flock; A letter from the Ministers of Edinburgh
to the Session of the Church and Council of the Town.
they had good to write unto them the true causes thereof; which were as they
said. The great indignation conceived against them by the rulers of the Court,
for resisting the dangerous courses then in hand; the Acts made in the late
Parliament repugnant to the word of God and doctrine oftentimes by them
preached; the iniquity committed in the passing the said Acts, and violence,
wherein they were defended; the Articles penned and presented to some Ministers
for submitting themselves to the tyrannical Regiment of Bishops, whom they
called gross libertines, belly-gods, and infamous; the charge given to the
Provost and Bayliffes of Edinburgh, to take and apprehend all Ministers that
should convene to the Eldership, and those that in Sermon should utter any
thing against the Acts, and present unhappy course; with the insolent words
cast forth against them, That if they followed the same course they were in,
though their heads were as haystacks, they should be laid at their heels. These
things they said did cast them in a grievous temptation; for to go from their
good course they could not, unless they should be traitors to God; to continue
in it and stay, would be counted treason against the King, and be hazardous of
their flock that was charged to apprehend them, in case of condemning these
Acts which, they could not do, and that after a long wrestling, they had
resolved to depart and reserve themselves to better times, which they were
assured was the pleasure of God, and that he would make the world understand
that he had his own work in it. In end beseeching them to stand to these things
which they had heard from them, and embraced as the truth of God, they
forewarned them of wolves that should intrude themselves, teachers that sought
themselves and not Christ Jesus; which often they had foretold the contempt of
the truth would work: And concluded with an hope that they should sustain the
present Cross patiently, and be united to them again in God his good time.

The King hearing of this letter sent for the same, By the Kings direction an
answer is returned in this form.
and offending greatly thereat, would have the Session and Council to answer
them in this form.

We have received and read your letter, for the which offense we have humbly
craved his Majesty's pardon, and not only obtained the same, but have likewise
purchased liberty to write unto you this present, wherein we use you more
charitably then ye have used us, remitting to learned men and your own
consciences to show you, seeing you are not blinded with ignorance, nor lack
learning (at the least some of you) how far ye have strayed from the right
way in your letter lately sent to us; unreverently affirming his Highness Acts
of Parliament to be repugnant to the word of God: we tell you that the same do
fully content and satisfy us, seeing we can find no part of Scripture that is
contrary thereto. And since we see by the first Act, the liberty of preaching
the Word, as the same is presently professed, and ministration of the
Sacraments ratified and allowed, and that we know there are wise men, and
fearing God amongst the Estates who concluded these Acts; we are r^solved to
follow the Apostles counsel in Romans 13. whereunto you did seldom exhort us. And
now in respect you have so contemptuously slandered these good and necessary
laws established by his Majesty and the Estates, and labored so far as you
can to draw men unto dislike thereof, fled out of the Realm unchallenged, and
unpursued, and thereby have not only declared your selves guilty, but also
misbehaved your selves to us your late flock; first, in leaving us without our
knowledge, against your duty, and the conditions made unto us; next in drawing
upon us his Majesty's suspicion, that we foreknew your departure, which of new
ye have confirmed by sending a letter to us, you being his Majesty's Rebels and
fugitives; In respect we say, of all the foresaid causes, we by these presents
discharge our selves unto you, esteeming our selves no longer your flock, nor
you any more our Pastors; and thanking God the revealer of secrets, that he
has made you manifest to your shame, and relieved us of wolves instead of
Pastors; Thus hoping his Majesty will provide us of good and quieter spirited
Ministers, we commit you to Gods mercy, who may give you to repent of your
foresaid offenses.

This letter sent to the Council and Session of the Church to be subscribed
made a great business, The letter grieveth the Ministers exceedingly.
the Town fearing to displease the King, and to discharge with their Ministers
in such a form, laying upon them the reproaches of Fugitives, Rebels, Wolves,
and the rest, they thought would be ill taken of all good men, yet after much
ado, sixteen of the principals put their hands unto it, and so was it
dispatched. The Ministers having received and read the letter were mightily
grieved, especially Mr. James Lawson, who had taken greatly to heart the
troubles of the Church, and the advertisements which were given him of the
success of matters at home; and now perceiving by this letter, that some who
professed themselves very forward in the cause, had turned their backs upon it,
he fell in a great sorrow, and thereby contracted a sickness, Mr. James Lawson
died at London.
whereof he died at London in October following. A man he was of good learning
and judgment, of a pious and peaceable disposition, but carried too much with
the idle rumors of the people. After his course of studies passed in the
University of S. Andrews, he was employed by the Countess of Crawford a Noble
Lady, to attend her three sons, whom she sent to France, and upon their
return to show his gratitude unto the School wherein he was educated, gave
himself to read the Hebrew tongue to some youths in the same University; from
thence he was called to be Principal in the old College of Aberdene, and after
three years profitably spent in that place, was brought, as we showed before,
to Edinburgh, where he continued Preacher the space of 12. years, in great
esteem and reputation, until these unhappy times, which bereft his Church and
country of him and his labors. He died in the 46. year of his age, and was
buried in the new Church yard of London, at the side of Mr. Dearing, a famous
Preacher in that Church.

His death brings to mind other two learned men in this Church, Mr. Alexander
Arbuthnet, and Mr. Thomas Smeton, the one Principal of Aberdene, and the other
of Glasgow College, who in the end of the last year nigh about the same time
departed this life, Mr. Alexander Arbuthnet his death.
to the great loss both of the country and Church; The first a Gentleman born
of the house of Arbuthnet in Mernis, being trained up in the study of letters,
and having the course of Philosophy in the same College with Mr. Lawson, went
to France at the age of twenty three years; there applying himself to the laws,
he lived five years an Auditor of that great Doctor Cuiacius, and being made
licenciate, returned to Scotland in the year one thousand five hundred three
score and six, of purpose to follow that calling, but God otherwise disposing,
in the year 1569. he was made Principal of the College of Aberdene, where by
his diligent teaching and dexterous government, he not only revived the study
of good letters, but gained many from the superstitions, whereunto they were
given. He was greatly loved of all men, hated of none, and in such account for
his moderation with the chief men of these parts, that without his advice they
could almost do nothing: which put him in a great fasherce, whereof he did
often complain. Pleasant and jocund in conversation, and in all sciences
expert; a good Poet, Mathematician, Philosopher, Theologue, Lawyer, and in
medicine skilful, so as in every subject he could promptly discourse, and to
good purpose; he died in the 45. year of his age much lamented, and was buried
in the College Church at Aberdene the 20. of October 1583.

Within some few days he was followed by Mr. Thomas Smeton; Mr. Thomas Smeton
his death.
this man born in Gaske, a little Village not far from Perth, studied
Philosophy in S. Salvators College at S. Andrews, under Mr. William Cranston
at that time Provost of the House, by whose persuasion he went beyond Sea, and
after he had remained a while at Paris, took journey to Rome, where entering
the society of the Jesuits, he abode three years. Thereafter coming home for
some private business, when he had settled the same, he returned to Paris, and
kept still in that Society: in the year 1571. Thomas Metellan traveling
through France into Italy, did request his company in that journey, whereunto
he yielded, and went with him to Italy; but the Gentleman contracting sickness
by the way, and dying, he returned by Geneva, and was there confirmed in the
Religion to which a little before he was inclining when he went to Paris; after
he had revealed himself to some Principals of the Society, he forsook their
profession, and was in danger to have been killed at the Massacre, which fell
out at the same time, but by the favor of Sir Thomas Walsingham the English
Ambassador, he was saved, and came in his company to England. Five years he
remained at Colchester in Essex, teaching some youths of the country, and in
the year 1578. returned into Stotland. In the year 1580. upon the remove of Mr.
Andrew Melvil to the new College of S. Andrews, he was chosen Principal of
the College of Glasgow, and taught the controversies there some three years,
with great profit; he was a man learned in the languages, and well seen in
ancient Fathers, the reading of whose works he did ever seriously recommend to
the youth. The answer he penned in defense of this Church against Mr. Archibald
Hamilton and other dictates, which are yet in the hands of his disciples, do
show his worth, and the loss this Church received by his death, he deceased at
Glasgow the 6. of December, 1583. in the 47. year of his age, and was buried in
the Cathedral Church.

These deaths falling so quick one after another, The Ministers charged with
the subscription of certain Articles.
were taken to be a presage of great troubles in the Church, nor was it long
before these sturres happened, of which we have spoken. All this Summer the
same continued, the Ministers being daily called before the Council, and a
great business made of their subscription to certain Articles which concerned
their obedience to the Bishops; they who refused, had their stipends
sequestrated, which caused a great outcrying amongst the people, and made the
Rebels to be more favored. The King to rid himself of these vexations, did
call the principal Ministers, and having showed that all his desire was to have
the Church peaceably governed, and a decent policy established, he willed them
to set down in writing the Reasons which moved them to refuse subscription,
that he might consider the same, and satisfy their doubts. They choosing rather
to propound the same by word of mouth, were after some conference induced to
set their hands to the Articles; this clause being added [ agreeing with the
word of God.]

Yet new occasions of trouble were still breaking forth, Mr. Nicol Dalgleish
condemned.
upon information that Mr. Nicoll Dalgleish Minister at S. Cuthberts, did in
his public prayers remember the exiled brethren; he was called before the
Council, and accused for praying for the Kings Rebels, as also for keeping
intelligence with them by letters. The Minister confessed his praying for the
brethren, maintaining the same to be lawful, but the intelligence he denied;
only granted that he had seen a letter written by Mr. Walter Balcanquel to his
wife, wherein he was kindly remembered. The King offended with his answers,
commanded the Advocate to pursue him criminally, which was done the next day.
At his appearing before the Justice, when he heard the indictment, he said,
That he ought not to be questioned for one and the same fact before two
Iudicatories, and that having answered these points before the Council, he
should not be put again to it. The Advocate replying that the Councels
proceeding could not stay the criminal Judge, he was commanded to answer, and
to do it advisedly, seeing it concerned his life. If I must answer, said he, I
do not think that I have offended in praying for my brethren, who are in
trouble; and for the letter I saw, if the concealing thereof be a fault, I
submit my self to his Majesty's will. The Jury proceeding, declared him guilty
of treason, yet the sentence was continued, and he sent to the Tolbuith, where
he remained some months, and in end upon his supplication was pardoned, and
put to liberty.

In the same Court David Home of Argathy, David Home and his brother executed.
with Patrick Home his brother, were condemned to die for keeping intelligence
with the Commendatory of Driburgh, and in the afternoon executed: Yet was it no
matter of State; but some private accounts, that rested undischarged at his
parting forth of the Country, wherein they had interchanged one or two
letters. This severity was universally disliked, but that which shortly after
ensued; was much more hateful. To breed a terror in people, and cause them
abstain from communicating in any sort with the exiled Lords, Robert Hamilton
of Eglismachan delateth the Lairds of D^uwwhasil and Mains.
a Proclamation was made, That whosoever should discover any person offending
in that kind, should besides his own pardon, receive a special reward. Hereupon
did one Robert Hamilton of Eglismachan, delate Malcolm Douglas of Mains, and
John Cunningham of Drumwhasill for having conspired to intercept the King at
hunting, and detain him in some strong hold, till the Lords might come and
receive him. A mere forgery, yet gladly hearkened unto by those that desired to
be rid of them; for they were both Gentlemen of good respect, and mistrusted of
the Court, Mains especially because of his valor and manhood. To make out the
accusation, it was devised, that Sir James Edmonston of Duntraith, who had
lived in great familiarity with them, should be charged with the said crime,
and upon his confession to be pardoned; which by the policy of the accuser, to
his own perpetual discredit, he was menaced to yield unto.

Matters thus dressed, Drumwhasil and Mains put to a trial.
Colonel William Stewart was sent to apprehend them, who finding them in their
own houses, did without any resistance bring them prisoners to Edinburgh. The
ninth of February they were presented before the Justice, Mr. John Ghrame
sitting as Deputy, and Mr. Edward Bicace as Assessor, beginning made with
Duntraith, he was indicted for conspiring with Mains and Drumwhasill, (the
accuser Hamilton) and others for taking and detaining the King, in the manner
aforesaid, which was said to be plotted by the Earl of Angus, and imparted to
him and the rest on panel, by John Home commonly called black John: he without
making any defense, confessed all betaking him to the Kings mercy. Drumwhasill
accused of the same conspiracy, and of consulting with Duntraith thereupon, at
the Churches of Strablen and Killern, was further charged with the treasonable
attempt of Ru^hven, whereof he had been partaker. What he answered, I find not
in the process, but when Mains his indictment was read, he denied all, and so
cleared himself by the unlikelyhood, and their impossibility to compass a
business of that importance, to all that were present, as in their hearts they
did pronounce him innocent. Notwithstanding they all three were convicted and
declared guilty of treason; They are found guilty and executed.
doom was only pronounced against Drumwhasill and Mains, and they the same day
hanged in the public street of Edinburgh. The Gentlemen's case was much pitied,
Mains his case especially; Hamilton who made the delation, lived after this in
a continual fear, and abhorred of all men, he kept still in the company of
Arran unto the alteration of Court at Striveling, The unhappy end of Hamilton
the delator.
at which time James Iohnston of Westraw, pretending a vow that he had made to
revenge Mains his death, did kill him as he was flying through the Park, on the
South side of the Town.

These cruel and rigorous proceedings caused such a general fear, Arran his
power and credit at Court.
as all familiar society and intercourse of humanity was in a manner left, no
man knowing to whom he might safely speak, or open his mind. Arran in the mean
time went on, drawing into his own hands the whole managing of affairs, for he
would be sole and supreme over all. The Earl of Argile having departed this
life the year preceding, he was created Chancellor. The office of Secretary he
gave to Mr. John Metellan, Lethingtons son, having banished the Abbot of
Dunfermlin, who formerly possessed the same. The Castles of Edinburgh and
Striveling he had himself in custody, then made himself be chosen Provost of
the Town; and as if all this had not been enough, he was declared General
Lieutenant over the whole Kingdom. In a word, whatsoever he was pleased was
done, and without him nothing could be done. This stirred up great emulation
against him in Court. The Master of Gray, a great favorite at that time, did
take it disdainfully, that every thing should be governed by him; Sir Lewis
Ballenden Justice Clerk, a man of brave spirit, did also hardly endure it; and
Mr. John Metellan, though he had followed still from Mortons execution to that
time, began to fall away and work his own credit: those things were cunningly
dissembled as among Courtiers, and all outward respect given him by those that
were plotting his ruin.

To his felicity nothing as he thought was wanting but the friendship of
England; Arran labors to gain the Queen of England.
this he was advised by the Master of Gray to seek by the Lord Hunsdons means,
who lay then Governor of Berwick: a meeting whereupon wrought betwixt them,
and at Foulden some three miles from Berwick (whither Arran went) matters so
dressed, 12. Augusti*
as upon the assurance of his service to the Queen of England, it was promised
that the exiled Lords who lay near the borders, waiting to raise some stirs,
should be called to London, and upon verification of the conspiracy wherewith
Mains and the rest were charged, put forth of England, In this hope the Master
of Gray is sent into England, An. 1585.
and Commission given him for remanding the fugitive Rebels; or if that could
not be obtained, for removing them further off from the Borders of Scotland:
The Master of Gray sent into England the beginning of October.
more privately he was desired to use all means for winning the Queens favor
to the Earl of Arran, And for preparing the way to his Legation, the Archbishop
of S. Andrews was sent some weeks before to inform the Queen of the King his
sinccerity in Religion, because of the rumor which the Ministers who fled
thither, The Archbishop of S. Andrews sent into England.
had dispersed to the contrary. The Queen professing to have received great
content by his information, recommended to the King above all things, constancy
in his profession, assuring him in that case of her unchangeable friendship.

The Master of Gray as his coming had favorable acceptance, The Queens answer
to the Master of Gray.
though he was known to be a Catholic Roman; and for the point of remanding
was answered, that she did not think those Gentlemen whom the King called
Rebels, intended any harm to his person, but if the contrary was made to
appear, they should be suffered to remain in her Kingdoms: And for that the
King required touching their further remove from the Borders, the same was
promised, and the Lords accordingly called from thence, and commanded to stay
at Norwich. This answer reported to the King by the Master of Gray at his
return, The Justice Clerk directed into England, April 1585.
drew another Legation, wherein Sir Lewis Ballenden Justice Clerk was employed,
the thing committed to him was the accusation of the banished Lords, and
verifying against them the conspiracy for which Mains and Drumwhasill had
suffered.

The Lords upon this were brought from Norwich to London, and there challenged
by the Ambassador, who as appeared, The banished Lords challenged by the
Justice Clerk.
insisted with great servour against them; But the Master of Glammis answering
for the rest, made their innocence in that particular to be clearly seen, which
was heard no less willingly by the Judges, then delivered by the Speaker,
Neither was the accuser any worse minded toward them, for all the show he
made; and at the same time were grounds laid, both for their restitution, and
Arran his subversion; the Queen and Council of England being privy to all, and
secretly advancing their enterprise, Arran in the mean time had assurance given
him of the Queens friendship, and supposing all things to be right, went on in
his accustomed manner, not caring what enmity he drew upon himself. Arran
draws much envy upon himself.
The Earl of Athol, the Lord Home, and Master of Cassils, were committed to
prison. The first because he refused to divorce from his wife (a daughter of
the Earl of Gowry) and intaile his lands to him; the next for that he denied
him his part of the lands of Dirleton; and the third for denying him a loan of
some moneys, which it was thought he might spare.

His last falling out in that kind, His falling out with the Lord Maxwel.
was with the Lord Maxwel for an excambion of the Barony of Mernis, and the
lands of Maxwel heath, with the Barony of Kinnel, which he possessed by the
forfeiture of the Hamiltons. Maxwel not liking to change his old inheritance,
with such a new and uncertain purchase, excused himself, and would not hearken
to the change, but he thinking to force him thereto by some indirect means,
travelleth with the Lady Iohnston, who gave attendance at Court, to cause her
husband to accept of the Provostry of Dumfreis, and moves the King to write
unto the Town, to elect Iohnston their Provost; for that he being Warden of the
West marches, would thereby be made more able to keep good order in these
parts. Maxwel interpreting this to be done, as it was, to his disgrace; at the
time of Election convocated his friends, and debarring Iohnston from entering
the Town, procured himself to be continued in the office. Hereupon informations
were made to the King, that there could no quietness be expected in these
parts, unless Maxwel his power was curbed. Charges were also directed to cause
him present certain of the name of Armestrong, for whom he was obliged; which
he not performing, was denounced Rebel, and Commission given to the Lord
Iohnston to pursue him; for whose better enabling he had two companies of hired
soldiers allowed him, under the charge of two Captains, Lamby and Cranston,
Maxwel hearing of these preparations, gathered his forces, and with a part
thereof sent his natural brother Robert Maxwel to intercept the two Captains,
ere they should join with Iohnston. They encountering in the Moore of Crawford,
after a sharp conflict the Captains were defeated, Lamby and most of his
company killed, and Cranston with diverse others taken prisoners.

Iohnston, left he should be thought to do nothing, did then make incursions
upon Maxwels lands, Troubles betwixt the Maxwels and Iohnstons.
raising fire, and carrying away great spoil: which Maxwel repayed with the
burning of the house of Lockwood, and the slaughter of some of Iohnstons in
Annandale. And thus did they make war one against another, till it happened
that Iohnston in a certain conflict was taken by Maxwel, Johnston taken
prisoner, and shortly after dies.
and made prisoner. The grief of this overthrow gave Iohnston shortly after he
was liberated his death, but the wrath of the Court still continuing, a
convention of the Estates was called to suppress Maxwel, and a Subsidy granted
of 20000. pounds for levying of soldiers to pursue him. Thereafter, all that
could bear Arms dwelling on the South of Forth, were commanded to be in
readiness for attending the King in an expedition that he intended toward
these parts. But the plague breaking out in Edinburgh, did rage so vehemently
all that summer, as nothing could be done; so the expedition was put off for
certain months.

Mean while, Sir Francis Russel, son to the Earl of Bedford, killed at a
meeting in the Borders.
there fell out an accident which did quite alienate the Queen of Englands
favor from Arran. Sir John Forrester and Thomas Kar of Farnherst, Wardens of
the middle Marches, being met for restoring some goods taken from the English,
a tumult fell out wherein Sir Francis Russel son to the Earl of Bedford was
killed; this was laid upon Farnherst, and he said to have done it by Arrans
instigation: for they two were at that time in great friendship. And when the
Queen did require Farnherst to be delivered, Arran did strongly oppose it, yet
the King for her satisfaction did confine them both, Arran and Farnherst
confined.
the one in S. Andrews, and the other in Aberdene. Arran after a little time
was relieved to his house at Kinneil; the other contracting sickness kept bed a
long space, and as was thought died of displeasure at Aberdene. Farnherst dies
at Aberdene.
A man he was of an haughty spirit, and had endured much trouble in the service
of the Kings mother, which he esteemed should have made him better respected,
then as he conceived he was.

Shortly after this accident, Sir Edward Wotton Ambassador to Scotland about
the beginning of June, 1585.
Sir Edward Wotton was employed in an Embassage from England, for contracting a
league offensive and defensive with the King in the cause of Religion. For then
came that holy league, as they called it, to be discovered; which the Pope, the
Spanish King, the Guises and others had made to extirpate the Reformed
Religion. The Queen of England understanding her self to be principally aimed
at, found nothing better then to make a counter-league with the Princes
reformed: and to that effect sent Sir Thomas Bodley to treat with the King of
Denmark, and the Protestant princes in Germany, and at the same time employed
Sir Edward Wotton toward the King. A convention of the Estates at S. Andrews.
The motion did so please him, as presently he called the Estates at S.
Andrews, and having in a long and pithy speech expressed the dangers threatened
to Religion, with the necessity that the reformed Princes had to unite
themselves strongly together, procured the act following to be concluded.

We the Nobility and Estates presently convened, A league continued with the
Queen of England.
understanding that diverse Princes and Potentates who term themselves
Catholics, have joined under the Popes authority in a most unchristian
confederacy against the true Religion and Professors thereof, with full intent
to prosecute their wicked resolution, not only within their own estates and
dominions, but likewise in other Kingdoms, where they can pretend no lawful
power nor authority. A purpose long since projected, and hitherto cunningly
carried, but now openly manifested, and in diverse parts begun to be executed
with hard and cruel effects. And considering withal how it has pleased God to
bless this Realm with the sincerity of the Gospel (the defense whereof is the
most just and lawful cause that Christians can maintain) we have thought it
requisite not only to unite our selves and join the whole forces which God has
granted us, under our most religious and Christian Sovereign, for the better
assurance of our own estates, and the more peaceable enjoying of so great a
benefit; but also for withstanding the dangerous course intended against all
the professors of the truth, we have judged it needful, that a general League
and Christian confederacy of Princes and States, professing the true Religion,
should be opposed to the ungodly confederacy of the enemies thereof; especially
that the two Crowns of Scotland and England, which nature, blood, habitation,
and the profession of one Religion has joined, may be unseparably united by a
more firm and strict League then has been betwixt any Princes their
Progenitors in times past for which effect, we under subscribing for our
selves, and in name and behalf of the whole Estates of this Realm, whose body
in this convention we represent, have given and granted, like as we by the
tenor hereof do give and grant to our Sovereign Lord King James the sixth, his
Council or such of them as his Majesty shall please to nominate, our full
power, privilege, assent and authority whatsoever, competent to us and to the
three Estates of this Realm, to treat or cause to treat, confer, transact,
and conclude a Christian league betwixt his Majesty and his Highness dearest
sister and Cosen, the Queen of England, and to nominate and appoint
Commissioners for that purpose, who shall meet at such time and place, as his
Highness shall agree upon with the Commissioners to be directed from his said
dearest sister, the nomination and election of whom we have remitted, and do
humbly remit to our dread Sovereign Lord, faithfully promising for us, and in
behalf foresaid to ratify, approve and confirm in the first Parliament,
whatsoever thing his Majesty shall agree unto, or his Highness Commissioners
in his name shall contract, indent, subscribe, or seal concerning the said
league; with all heads, clauses, and Articles thereof, which we do and have the
more willingly done, because of the trust we repose in his Majesty's wisdom,
circumspection, earnest zeal to maintain the truth of God against all that
shall happen to attempt anything to the contrary: providing always that the
league do not infringe, or prejudge in any sort any former alliances and
leagues betwixt this Realm, and any other ancient friends and confederates
thereof, except only in matter of Religion, concerning which we do fully
consent, that the said league be made offensive and defensive, avowing, and by
our solemn oaths swearing, neither to spare life, lands, houses, goods, nor
whatsoever it has pleased God to grant unto us, in defense and maintenance
thereof.

This Act was past on the last of July with a great consent, and was subscribed
by the Archbishops of S. Andrews, and Glasgow, the Bishop of Dunkeld, the
Commendators of Culross, Balmerinoch, Driburgh, Kinloss, Lindors, Blanire, and
Pettin Weyme, representing the spiritual estate by the Earls of Arran, March,
Athol, Montrosse, Marshall, and Rothes; the Lords Oliphant, Thirlstane, Gray,
Sinclare, Down, and Fleming for the Nobility, and by the Commissioners of
Burghs, and all the Officers of Estate, amongst the rest by the Master of Gray,
who though he did profess him^ himself a Roman Catholic, would in nothing
that the King affected, be thought refractary.

It was thought that the Ambassador did rest well satisfied with the Kings
forwardness toward the league, and that he should have presently returned;
But he had some other business in trust, which was carried more closely. This
was to make friends to the exiled Lords, and labor their restitution, as had
been concluded in England. To this effect he kept diverse private meetings with
the Master of Gray, the Secretary and Justice Clerk; giving the Lords
intelligence from time to time of his proceedings; among other means he thought
expedient that they should reconcile their private quarrels with the Lord
Hamilton, and his brother Claud, who were likewise exiled, and lived then in
England; he wrought so as they were brought, as it seemed, to a perfect accord,
promising to take one course, and join all in the same cause. Lord Claud after
his agreement with the banished Lords takes a course by himself.
But Claud fearing either the event of the enterprise, or not having buried his
former grudges, did afterward separate, and by discovering their purpose,
procured to himself liberty to return; yet did he not find that acceptance
which he expected, being shortly after his coming confined in Aberdene, and
within a little while commanded to leave the country, and go into France.

There came this Summer from Denmark certain Ambassadors to redeem,
Ambassadors from Denmark, July 12.
as they pretended, the Isles of Orkney and Shetland, alienated of old from
that Crown, yet the true errand was to propone that marriage unto the King,
which was some four years after happily perfected. The King receiving them
kindly, and excusing himsel for the matter of Orkney because of the Pestilence
which raged as then in Edinburgh (Where the Registers of the Kingdom were kept)
promised how soon commodity served, The King advertised of the enterprise of
the banished Lords.
to give all reasonable satisfaction, and to send some in Commission to treat
of those matters.

How soon they were dimitted, the King went into Striveling, and from thence to
Hamilton, to recreate himself as he was accustomed, where he received
advertisement that the banished Lords were come down to the borders, and that
Maxwel was to join his forces with them. Hereupon he returns to Striveling,
and sending for Arran, A Proclamation to meet the King at the Castle of
Crawford.
made Proclamations to go through the country, commanding all the subjects to
meet him at the Castle of Crawford the 22. of October, for resisting the
attempts of the Rebels. But things were so prepared at Court by the English
Ambassador, as the Lords did prevent the King in his expedition. They had
appointed their rendezvous at Linton in Tweddale, and meeting there, did
solemnly swear, not to separate nor give over the profecution of their
enterprise, till the King should be moved to accept them in favor, and put
Arran forth of his company. Maxwel brough with him 300 soldiers that had
served against Iohnston, and about 700 horsemen, all the others did scarce
equal that number, though Bothwel, Home, Yester, Cesford, and Drumlanrig had
joined with them. To justify their proceedings, they gave forth a Proclamation
in all the places they came unto, A Proclamation given out by the banished
Lords.
declaring the causes of their enterprise to be, the defense of the truth, the
deliverance of the King from corrupt Counselors, and the preserving of amity
with England. In this Proclamation nothing was left unsaid, that might make
Arran odious, and hateful; amongst other things he was charged to have bragged
of his descent from Duck Mordoch (who was beheaded in the time of King James
the first) and to lay claim to the Crown by that title, calling himself King
James the seventh. It is true, that in the Parliament held the year preceding,
he took protestation in open Court, that he renounced any title, that he might
pretend to the Crown that way, which I suppose he did to purge himself of that
aspersion; but the protestation was laughed at, in the time, by the wiser sort,
and gave them to think that such a folly had once possessed his mind.

The Proclamation did often mention him and Col. Stewart as abusers of the
King. The Ambassador went, not saluting the King.
Of the rest of the Counselors there was no speech, which increased Arrans
jealousy of them. Now how soon the Ambassador heard that the Lords were entered
in the country, fearing that some notice should be taken of his dealing, he
left Striveling, and went in haste to Berwick, without saluting any man. They
sent a Post after him with a letter, A Post is sent after him, and his excuse.
desiring to know the cause of his sudden departure, and whether he was
directed by the Queen his Sovereign to go away in such sort. Being overtaken at
Anwick, he answered, that he had no such direction from the Queen, when he was
first employed, but that of late he had received a command to retire, because
she saw no hope of the delivery of that wretched Farnherst. This he made the
pretext of his departure, yet in reason he could not allege it. Farnherst
lying bedfast at the time in Aberdene, where he was committed, which was
notified to him, and he knew to be a truth; In the conclusion of his letter, he
said, that he could not grant that he had departed insalutato hospite, seeing
he performed that office, both with his heart and hand, and that he should by
all possible means endeavor that his departure should rather help to maintain,
then dissolve the amity betwixt his Sovereign and him. That which he speaks
of his hand, was a letter that he left to be given to the King, the day after
he was gone, in which he laid the cause upon Arrans credit, without whom he saw
nothing could be obtained, Arran seeing the letter that he left to be given to
the King, began to think that all was not sound, and accused the Master of
Gray, as being privy to the Ambassadors departure, which he denied; yet all
that time nothing was done that was sitting either for the Kings safety or
reputation, and not so much as the Castle furnished with victuals, which might
have easily been provided.

Neither were the Lords ignorant of this, The Lords make haste to Striveling.
which made them use the greater speed, marching directly to Falkirk, and the
next day, which was the last of October, to Striveling, At the Church called
Sanct Nineans (a half mile or less from the Town) they put themselves in order
of battle, and stood so till night fell; at which time, upon warning given them
by their friends within the Town, they advanced, and knowing all the passages,
entered by a certain back way without any resistance.

Arran had taken upon him to watch that night, The town of Striveling taken.
and was keeping the Town gate, when a cry was raised that the Town was taken.
The Earl of Crawford who watched with him, fled to the Castle, but he escaped
by the bridge, of which he kept the keys. Some weak resistance was made by
Colonel Stewart, at the head of the Market street, but he was soon put back
with the slaughter of one or two of his company. The borderers according to
their custom fell upon the stables, and made prey of all the Gentlemen's
horses, whereof they found good store. The spoil otherwise was not great, as
of a town not very rich in merchandise.

In the morning betimes the Castle was enclosed, which they knew could not long
hold out, for it was unfurnished, and scarce provided with victuals of one day:
in this extremity the King was advised to employ two of his Council toward the
Lords, Two of the Council directed to the Lords.
to ask what they intended. Choice was made of the Secretary and Justice Clerk,
as men whom they would willingly hear. At the first meeting, the Secretary was
rough enough with them, saying, That such violent forms were not to be
approved, and to deal in that manner with their King, they would find it
unsure; for what was extorted from him by force or fear, he would soon find
means to undo, and never want men to serve him in that whereunto his will was
bent; that humble Petitions became subjects, and had been more fitting then to
come in the manner they did. The Lords Answer.
The Lords answered, that it grieved them fore to be reduced to that necessity,
nothing being more dear to them then the Kings honor and safety. But what
could they have done? they were banished from their country, put from their
livings, their friends used with cruelty, the King not permitted to hear them
in their just defense, and always shut up from presenting their Petitions.
That their coming in that manner was not to dishonor, nor force the King, to
whom they would be most humble supplicants, and upon their knees if they should
find access, beg mercy at his hands. All they did was to save themselves from
ruin, and to be secured from their adversaries, who had wronged them, and the
whole States of the Kingdom: wherefore they besought them, as their countrymen
and friends, to intercede with his Majesty, that they might be accepted in
favor, and all things composed in the most quiet and honorable manner for the
King and State that could be devised.

This reported to the King, did mitigate his mind a little; For my self, said
he, I did never like that man's violence (meaning Arran) and howbeit I cannot
but offend with their doings; yet for the countries sake, and preservation of
public quietness, I can pardon and overpasse all; but one thing I desire you
that have been in conference with them, to look to; The Kings care of those
that attented him.
that none in my company receive any harm. I know there are quarrels betwixt
the Earl of Crawford and the Master of Glammis; That the Earl of Angus does not
like Montrosse; and I believe that Colonel Stewart is not well beloved for
things done in my service. These I cannot see with mine honor, hurt; provide
for that, and that they may be in safety, and I shall willingly admit them.

When this was showed the Lords, The King is pleased to admit the Lords in his
presence.
they said, that they had not taken up Arms for any private quarrel, nor would
they mix their particulars with the public; but it should be good for
eschewing such inconveniences as might happen, that the Noblemen (whom the King
had named) were put in custody with some special persons, and that the Colonel
should be discharged from his office of the guard, and the same conferred to
another. This being declared to the King, he gave his consent to receive them.

Being brought unto his prefence, The Lord Hamilton in name of the rest,
supplicates mercy.
they fell all upon their knees, and the Lord Hamilton (who had the precedence
in regard of blood) taking the speech, said, that they were come in most humble
manner to beg mercy, and his Majesty's love and favor; The King answered, My
Lord, I did never see you before, and must confess, The Kings Answer.
that of all this company, you have been most wronged: you were a faithful
servant to the Queen my mother in my minority, and when I understood not, as I
do, the estate of things, hardly used. The rest of you, that have since that
time been exiled, and put from your livings, cannot say but it was your own
fault, and that your misbehaviour procured the same; The Kings speech to Bothwel
But ( turning himself to Bothwel) what should have moved thee Francis, said
he, to take this course, and come in Arms against me? did I ever thee any
wrong, or what cause had thou to offend? I wish thee a more quiet spirit, and
that thou may learn to live as a Subject, otherwise thou will fall in
trouble. To you all, who, as I truly think, have not meant any harm to any
person, I am pleased to give both my hand, and my heart, and will remember
nothing that is past, providing you carry your selves from henceforth as
becomes men of your places, and behave your selves as dutiful subjects. So they
arose one by one, and kissed his Majesty's hands. It was observed that he
received the Lord Hamilton with greatest kindness, and gave him more respect
then any others. This was the day after their entering into Striveling.

Two days after in Council, The King his pardon proclaimed.
the King renewing his promise, did by public Act confirm the pardon granted
to them, and their Assisters, which was by sound of trumpet proclaimed. The
Earls of Crawford and Montross were commended to the Lord Hamilton, who used
them honorably, and Colonel Stewart suffered quietly to depart. Arran after
his flight went unto Coile, and lived private amongst his friends, deprived of
all his honors. The charge of the guard was given to the Master of Glammis,
The Master of Glammis made Captain of the Guard.
the Castle of Dumbritton put in the Lord Hamiltons custody, Striveling
restored to the Earl of Mar, and the Castle of Edinburgh delivered to Sir
James Home of Coldinkn^ws. In this manner did the banished Lords recover his
Majesty's favor, Thuan. hist. 1. 43.
and return to their places; albeit Thuan deceived by some information, has
otherwise related the same.

How soon the Noblemens peace was proclaimed, Duntraith confesses the
deposition he made against the Lords to be false.
Duntraith who had touched them in his deposition against Maius (saying that he
was told by one John Home, the Lords had hired every one of them two men to
kill the King) so comperired before the Council undesired (so the Act of
Council bears) and confessed that he was suborned by Captain James (who is
henceforth to be so named, the title of Arran being returned to the right
owner) to make that deposition, which in it self was false and untrue, out of
fear and to save his life. For verifying whereof, and to show that he did not
confess this to please the Noblemen, whom he had wronged by such a confession,
he declared that for the space of eight weeks before their return, he had
revealed the same to the Master of Gray, and to the Provost of Linclouden, both
which upon oath testified no less to the King. The Council for clearing the
Noblemen, ordained his confession to be published, which was not very needful,
(for no man did believe the delation) only it served to discover the falsehood
of the suborner.

In December following a Parliament was held at Linlithgow for ratifying the
peace, A Parliament at Linlithgow.
and abolishing the memory of things past. In this meeting the Ministers who
returned in company of the Lords, did earnestly urge the repealing of the Acts
concluded the year preceding, against their discipline: which the King did
utterly refuse, ordaining, that none should either publicly declare, or
privately speak or write in reproach of his Majesty's person, estate, or
government, as is to be seen in the first Act of the parliament. The Ministers
offend with the reconciled Lords.
The Ministers offending greatly therewith, especially with the Lords, who had
promised to see these Statutes repealed, stirred up one Mr. William Watson in
his preaching before the King, to complain of the neglect that was made of the
Church, and condemn the acts above mentioned.

This young man the Bishop of S. Andrews had placed in Edinburgh, Mr. William
Watson Minister committed.
after the departing of the Ministers of England, and he to this time had
carried himself very orderly: but now either fearing that his admission by the
Bishop should be questioned, or to insinuate himself this way in the favors of
the Ministers, who he thought would rule all matters of Church as they pleased,
he took the boldness to reprove the King to his face. This his unseasonable
and insolent doing was by all wisemen condemned, and he therefore committed to
the Castle of Blackness. Notthelesse another of the same humor, James Gibson
committed for the like insolence.
called James Gibson Minister at that time at Pencaitland, usurping the Pulpit
at Edinburgh, where the sickness was somewhat relented, fell out in the like
impertinent railing, saying, That Captain James, with his Lady Jesabel, and
William Stewart (meaning the Colonel) were taken to be the persecutors of the
Church; but that now it was seen to be the King himself, against whom he
denounced the curse that fell on Jeroboam, That he should die childless, and be
the last of his race. This man called before the Council, confessed the
speeches, and proudly maintained the same, for which he was likewise committed.
Watson upon promise to amend and behave himself more dutifully, was suffered to
return to his charge; but the business with the other lasted to a longer time,
as we will afterward hear.

A few days before this Parliament deceased Mr. John Spottiswood Superintendant
of Lothian, a son of the house of Spottiswood in the Mers, within the Barony
of Gordon, The Superintendent of Lothian his death, with a short description of
his life.
of which Surname it seems his first progenitors were by the arms they have
common with the Gordons: his Father was killed at Floudon in the unfortunate
battle wherein King James the fourth died, and he left an Orphane of four years
old. When he was come to some years, his friends put him to School in Glasgow,
where he took the degree of a Master of Arts, and having a purpose to study
Divinity, which he most affected, was wholly diverted from following the same,
by the perfecutions he saw used against those they called heretics. So leaving
the country he went into England, and there falling in familiarity with
Archbishop Cranmer, was by his means brought to the knowledge of the truth.
Soon after the death of King James the fifth, he returned to Scotland, and
stayed a long time with Alexander Earl of Glencarne, who was known to be
affected that way. In his company he came to be acquainted with Matthew Earl of
Lennox, and was by him employed toward Henry the eighth, at the time that
France did cast him off by the Cardinals dealing, as we touched before. Matters
succeeding to the Earl of Lennox his mind, and he settled in England, he
remained with him some months, after which, longing to visit his friends, he
returned; and being known to Sir James Sandylands of Calder, a man of great
authority in those times, he was by him allowed to accept the Parsonage of
Calder, which fell then void. And living sometimes with him, sometimes with the
Prior of S. Andrews, in whose company he went to France at the time of the
Queens marriage; he made no great stay in any one place, till the work of
reformation began; at which time he took himself to reside in Calder, and was
how soon those troubles ended, chosen Superintendent of the Churches of
Lothian, Mers, and Tiviotdale; which by the space of 20. years he governed most
wisely, his care in teaching, planting of Churches, reducing people, and
persons of all sorts into the right way, was great, and so successful, as
within the bounds of his charge none was found refractary from the Religion
professed. In his last days when he saw the Ministers take such liberty as they
did, and heard of the disorders raised in the Church through that confused
parity which men labored to introduce; as likewise the irritations the King
received, by a sort of foolish Preachers; he lamented extremely the case of the
Church to those that came to visit him, (who were not a few, and of the better
sort) he continually foretold, That the Ministers by their follies would bring
Religion in hazard, and as he feared, provoke the King to forsake the truth:
Therefore wished some to be placed in authority over them to keep them in awe;
for, the doctrine, said he, we profess is good, but the old policy was
undoubtedly the better; God is my witness, I lie not. And that these were his
ordinary speeches some two years before his death, many then alive could
witness. He was a man well esteemed for his piety and wisdom, loving, and
beloved of all persons; charitable to the poor, and careful above all things to
give no man offense. His happy life was crowned with a blessed death, which
happened the 5. of December, 1585. in the 76. year of his age.

But to turn to the history; An Assembly of the Church at Edinburgh
the King having settled with the Noblemen, was very desirous to be at rest with
the Church, and for that effect called some of the principal Ministers to a
conference, wherein certain Articles were agreed for the better ordering of the
Ecclesiastical affairs; the full determination thereof being remitted to the
general Assembly of the Church, which was appointed to meet at Edinburgh the
tenth of May following. In the mean time, Maxwel puffed up with the victory at
Striveling, the praise whereof he ascrived wholly to himself, grew so insolent,
as that the next Christmas taking with him a company of lewd and dissolute
persons, he went in procession from Dumfreis to the College Church of
Lincluden, and caused a Mass to be said: The Lord Maxwel go^th to Mass, and
is committed.
complaint being made to the King, he was brought before the Council, and
committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, where he remained some months. This gave
occasion to the Proclamations which followed against Priests, Jesuits, and
traffiquing Papists, who were all commanded to leave the country before a
certain day, under pain of death.

Whilst these things were a doing, Mr. Andrew Melvil to be revenged of Saint
Andrews, An. 1586.
who had devised, as he imagined, the Acts made in the parliament 1584. A Synod
at S. Andrews called against the Bishop, April 1586.
and penned the Declaration thereafter published, did in a Synod holden at S.
Andrews, raise a new stir, calling a number of Barons, Gentlemen, and
Ministers together, as to a Synod; Mr. James Melvil his Cosen made the
exhortation; in which, after a bitter Invective against the devisers of the
foresaid Acts, he admonished the Assembly to censure him that was known to have
had a chief hand therein, meaning the Bishop. The exhortation ended, Mr. Robert
Wilkie Professor of Philosophy in S. Leonards, was chosen Moderator; and their
doctrine, as their manner was, being approved, it was proponed, that according
to the admonition given them, they should proceed in censuring the Bishop. The
opinions were diverse, some holding it dangerous, and doubting what might be the
consequence of it; others inquiring if he was cired to the Diet a third sort
more zealous then the rest, cried out that it was the cause of God, in which no
man ought to forecast or fear any danger; and that a citation needed not where
the iniquiry was so manifest; or if that was thought necessary, that he might
be warned to the next Session; being then in the City. This course was held
most formal, and so was he ordained to be cired.

In the afternoon he compeired, The Bishop being cited compeireth, and
protests against the Judicatory.
and protesting that he did not acknowledge that Iudicatory, desired to
understand what they could charge him with, that he might justify himself.
They misregarding the Protestation, did accuse him of devising the Statutes
made in the year 1584. of penning the Declaration published thereafter by his
Majesty, of traducing the brethren that fled into England in the time of his
Embassage, His accusation.
and a number the like. To this the Bishop repeating his protestation,
answered, That the Statutes were not of his devising, but when they were
proponed, he gave his opinion that they were good and lawful Acts, and therein
had served his conscience, the very second Act of that Parliament being an
express confirmation of Popery, in so far as by it the dignity and authority
of the three Estates was ordained to stand unaltered according to the ancient
custom of the Realm. This, said they, is a ratifying of the Episcopal
jurisdiction, according as it was in time of Popery. The Bishop replied, That
the Bishops were not by themselves an estate, but they represented in a part
the estate of the Church, which was ever reputed the first estate of the Realm,
since the Kingdom became Chiristian; and that in the Act alleged, no
jurisdiction was established; howbeit for the Episcopal power, there was enough
to be said, if the time and place were fitting. But if they had no further to
say, he would leave them, putting them again in mind that they were not his
Judges, and that these were matters too high for subjects to meddle in. At last
perceiving they would proceed with their censures, He appealeth to the King,
and Estates.
he appealed to his Majesty, the Council, and three Estates of the Realm, or
any other lawful Assembly convened by his Majesty, and so departed.

When he was gone, they entered into consultation what to do; many were of the
judgment, that after appellation there could be no proceeding: others though,
that the appellation was not to be regarded. The Bishop excommunicated by the
Synod.
The matter being put to voices, it was concludeded only by two voices more
that he should presently be excommunicated. The Moderator by his place was to
pronounce the sentence, but he refused, albeit he was no friend to the Bishop
at that time; nor would any other of the Assembly take on them to do it. In end
when all were dissolving, and a great part gone forth out of the Schools (for
the Assembly was kept in S. Leonards) a young fellow named Mr. Andrew Hunter,
willed them to stay, professed that he was warned by the Spirit to pronounce
the sentence, and so ascending the chair, he read the same out of the book, a
few only remaining as witnesses.

This scornful and disorderly proceeding, Mr. Andrew and Mr. James Melvil
excommunicated by a servant and Cosen of the Bishop.
was the next day required in a form nothing better. Two of the Bishops
servants going to the Church at the time of prayer, caused one Mr. Samuel
Cunningham Cosen to the Bishop, go unto the Readers seat, and pronounce the
same sentence against Mr. Andrew, and Mr. James Melvil, and some others of the
Ministers of Fife, who had been most eager and forward against the Bishop.

The Appellation was sent by the Bishop to the King, wherein first he excepted
against the Synod as being unlawfully convened; Next, against their unjust
proceedings. The first he proved, saying, That convention was express against
the Statutes of Parliament, The Appellation with the reasons sent to the King.
and neither convocated by his Majesty's letters, nor by the Bishop of the
Dioces: moderated by a Laick person, that had no imposition of hands, made up
of a company of Barons, Gentlemen, Masters of Schools and Colleges, who bare
no function in the Church, and ought not to have any suffrage in Ecclesiastic
Assemblies, and no sufficient number of Ministers assisting; who though they
had been present, by the Apostles rule were subject ot the Bishops censure, and
he not to theirs. The injustice of their proceeding he qualified; first, by
their citation, which neither contained a lawful cause, nor did allow him a
reasonable time for his appearing. 2. That at his compeiring, (which was under
protestation that he did in no sort acknowledge that judicatory) they accused
him for defending his Majesty's authority in matters Ecclesiastic, and for his
consent given to the Statutes made in Parliament 1584. which were the laws of
the King and three Estates, which they ought not to take on them to condemn. 3.
That they transgressed the order set down in their own Assemblies, which
appoints admonitions and prayers to be used for persons, before the sentence be
pronounced. 4. That the conclusion they took to excommunicate, passed not with
consent of those who were present, and was carried only by the voices of two
ignorant Ministers. 5. That the Moderator of the pretended Synod, refusing to
pronounce the sentence, one Hunter servant to Mr. Andrew Melvil, had taken on
him to do the same, alleging he was moved thereto by the Spirit of God: which
was a conceit of the Anabaptists, and ought to be severely punished. And, 6.
That Ministers in their Synods, were they never so lawfully convened, may not
excommunicate any person without consent of the Church, whereof he is a member.
Saint Paul (on whose example they grounded their excommunications) not
presuming by himself to cast forth the incestuous man, but writing to the
Church of Corinth, that when they were convened together, they should do the
same. In end he entreated his Majesty whom it specially concerned to take
cognition of their unruly and tumultuous proceeding, and to consider how
dangerous a thing it was to put the spiritual sword in the hands of such men,
who might possibly attempt the like against his Majesty's self, and others of
the Council.

When the King heard of this business, A transaction betwixt the Bishop and the
Assembly.
he was greatly commoved, yet because the Diet of the Assembly was approaching,
he thought best to continue the matter to that time; where in stead of
examining the process, or discussing the Bishops Appellation, a transaction was
made in this sort. That the Bishop by his handwriting or personal appearance
in the Assembly, should deny that ever he publicly professed or meaned to
claim any supremacy, or to be Judge over other Pastors, and Ministers, or yet
avowed the same to have a ground in Gods word; and if so he had done, it had
been an error against his conscience, and knowledge. That he should also deny,
that in the last Synodal Assembly, he did claim to be Judge of the same, and if
he had done it, that he erred therein, and in his emperious behavior, and
contempt of the said Synod. That thirdly, he should promise to behave himself
better in time coming, and crave pardon for any oversight by him committed,
claiming no further then justly he might, by Gods word: and in all other things
carry himself as a moderate Pastor ought, laboring to be the Bishop described
by S. Paul, submitting his life and doctrine to the judgment and censure of the
general Assembly, without any reclamation, provocation, or appellation from the
same in any time coming. That the Assembly on the other part, for his Majesty's
satisfaction, and to give testimony of their willing minds to obey his
Highness, so far as they could, and in conscience they might, and for the good
hope they had of his Majesty's favorable concurrence in building up the house
of God; should hold the said process and sentence as undeduced, and not
pronounced, and restore the Bishop in so far as concerned the said process and
sentence, to the estate wherein he was before the pronouncing of the same;
especially because the said process was led and deduced during the time of the
conference, whereupon his Majesty had conceived offense: with this proviso,
Always that the Bishop should observe what he promised in the premises, and
carry himself dutifully in his vocation, in all times thereafter.

What should have moved the King to hearken to a mediation so prejudicial, The
reasons moving the King to give way to this transaction.
both to his own authority, and the Episcopal jurisdiction which he labored to
establish, cannot well be conjectured; except we will think, that by yiedling
to the Churches advice in this particular, he hoped to win them in end to
those things which served for his peace, and their own quietness; or, which I
rather believe, that he did only temporise not seeing another way how to come
by his ends, and was content to keep them in any tolerable terms, till he
should find himself of power sufficient to redress these confusions.
Whatsoever the reason was the Bishop did set his hand to the conditions
proposed by the Assembly, and received that declaratour for an absolution. Yet
did not this satisfy the adverse party, who peremptorily urged the justifying
of their process, with the confirmation of the sentence they had pronounced;
which when they could not obtain, the same Hunter that pronounced the sentence,
protested publicly against the Assemblies proceeding, and that notwithstanding
the absolution granted, the Bishop should still be esteemed as one justly
delivered to Satan, till his conversion were seen to be true and effectual:
unto which protestation Mr. Andrew Melvil and Mr. Thomas Buchannan did adhere.

A motion was made in the same Assembly for censuring the Ministers that had
allowed the Acts concluded in the Parliament 1584. The Ministers exhor^ed to
judge charitably one of another.
by their subscriptions; but they were found to be so many, as it was feared,
the urging thereof would breed aschisme and division in the Church; wherefore
after some altercation the matter was left, and all the Ministers exhorted to
judge charitably one of another, notwithstanding their diversity of opinions.

The Articles agreed upon in the conference with certain Ministers, Acts
concluded in the Assembly.
whereof the determination was remitted to this Assembly, made more ado; for
they having condescended to accept Bishops, and to give them a chief hand in
the government of Church affairs, they always being subject to the censure of
the general Assembly, It was strongly opposed, and after a long dispute
concluded; That in respect the Bishop was a Pastor, as other ordinary Pastors
are, he should for matters of life and doctrine be tried by the Presbytery and
Synod; and for his Commission otherwise in Church affairs be subject to the
general Assembly. The Secretary, Justice Clerk, with the Lord Privy Seal, and
other Commissioners for the King, disassented and made protestation, That
seeing the Assembly had gone from the Articles agreed upon in the conference,
nothing either then, or at the present concluded should stand in force. And
thus were they like to dissolve, but that Mr. Robert Pont, James Martin, and
Patrick Galloway, being directed to inform his Majesty of the difference,
things were drawn to this midst; That the Bishops and others having
Commission to visit Churches, should be only subject to the trial of the
general Assembly, and such as had power from them, till further order was
taken. And that where Bishops and Commissioners were resident, they should
preside in the meetings of Presbyteries and Synods, Fife only excepted, where
Mr. Robert Wilkie was appointed to moderate the Presbytery of Saint Andrews,
until the next Synod. In the mean time was the order of the Presbyteries set
down, and their power defined, the King taking no notice of their doings in
that kind.

The Secretary who then supplied the place of Chancellor, His Majesty's answer
to the advice given him by the Chancellor.
perceiving the King so vexed with the affairs of the Church, and the Ministers
so refractary and unwilling to be ruled, did advise him to leave them to their
own courses, saying, That in a short time they would become so intolerable, as
the people would chase them forth of the country. True, answered the King, if
I were purposed to undo the Church and Religion, I should think your counsel
not ill, but my mind is to maintain both, therefore can I not suffer them run
into these disorders, that will make Religion to be despised. This answer did
show the Kings love to the Church, and his care of the good estate thereof,
which in this place I thought was not to be passed.

In the Estate matters went not much better at this time, and amongst others,
nothing gave more offense then the acquitting of Mr. Archibald Douglas, by form
of Assise. This man was known to be guilty of the murder of the King his
Father, and had fled into England six years before. The Earl of Morton at his
death, and one Binny Mr. Archibalds own servant, who was executed about the
same time, did both declare, that he was present at the doing of that wicked
fact, for which the King had often by his letters and Ambassages entreated the
Queen of England to have him delivered, yet could not obtain it. At this time a
remission being purchased to him for the concealing of that murder, with a
letter of rehabilitation, whereby he might stand in judgment and plead against
his forfeiture; he was in a Jury held the 26. of May, declared innocent, and
absolved of the crime.

This was done by the procurement of the Prior of Blantire, who had intruded
himself in the Parsonage of Glasgow, whereof Mr. Archibald had been titular,
and otherwise then by his restoring could have no right in law to retain it.
Many were grieved to see Justice in that sort abused, for maintaining a
facrilegious possession; but to have sent him back to England, with a
Commission to reside there as Ambassador for the King, which likewise was done,
was an error inexcusable; and how he and the Master of Gray, who was chief
man in that led Assise, carried themselves in the Queen of Scotlands business,
wherewith they were trusted, we will hear in the end of this year.

In the Isles this Summer there arose great trouble betwixt Mackoneil, and
Macklain, two principal men in those parts. Macklain, by his education in the
continent, had learned civility and good manners, and living accordingly, was
in great respect both with his own people, and all his neighbors about,
Mackoneil out of an emulation made many quarrels to the other, and in end laid
a plot to murder him (though he had married his sister) which he went about in
this manner. He sent a message to Macklain offering to visit him at his house,
and to stay some days, providing he would come back, and make merry with him in
his country, that the world might see all injuries were forgotten, and that
they loved one another as brethren, and good neighbors ought to do. Macklain
answered, that he should be welcome, but for his going back with him, they
should talk at meeting. Mackoneil receiving this answer, came the next day and
was received very kindly by Macklain. Some four or five days he stayed, using
the fairest shows of amity that could be wished, and being to part homewards,
entreated Macklain to go with him, saying, that he would leave his eldest son,
and a brother-germane pledges for his safety: Macklain upon his importunity
yielded to go, but refused the pledges, left he should seem to distrust him,
and so went, taking with him of the trustiest of his kindred and servants, some
45.

They arrived in Kyntire early in the morning, A trouble in the Isles betwixt
Macko^^il and Macklain.
and all that day were welcomed with liberal feasting, according to that
peoples custom. At night when they were gone to rest, Mackoneil beset the
house, wherein Macklain and his people lay, with a number of men, and called
him to come forth and drink; he answered, that of drink they had too much, and
that it was then time to rest. Yet it is my will, said Mackoneil, that ye arise
and come forth. Macklain hearing this, began to suspect some bad dealing, and
dressing himself and his men, did open the door, where perceiving a company in
Arms, and Mackoneil with his sword drawn; he asked what the matter was, and if
he meant to break his faith. No faith, said he, I gave none, and must now have
an account of you, and your friends for the wrong I have received. Macklain had
taken that night his nephew a little child to bed with him, and being put to
his defense, kept the child upon his left shoulder in manner of a targe. The
child cried for mercy to his Uncle: wherewith Mackoneil moved, did promise to
spare his life, providing he would render his weapons, and become his prisoner.
Macklain seeing no better, was content, and thereupon was conveyed with some
keepers to another house; All the rest (two excepted) upon the like promise
rendered themselves. The two whom he refused to spare, defended the door so
desperately, as neither he nor his men durst enter: whereupon fire was put to
the house, and they burnt within the same. The others that rendered,
notwithstanding the promise given them, were all beheaded in Macklains sight,
some of them the next morning, and the rest the days following. Macklain
himself had gone the same way, but that it happened Mackoneil by a fall from
his horse to break his leg, by which accident his execution was prolonged. In
the mean time, upon notice given to the King of that barbarous fact, an Herald
was sent with a charge to deliver Macklain to the Earl of Argile; but this
availed not, but still he was detained and compelled to yield unto most
unreasonable conditions, before he got his liberty; which was no sooner
obtained, then Macklain to revenge himself, fell upon Mackoneils bounds,
burning and killing man wife and child, without mercy; and so took a cruel
revenge of the others treachery.

A little before this trouble in the Isles, The Earl of Eglington treacherously
murdered.
Hugh Montgomry Earl of Eglington, a young Nobleman of good expectation, was
likewise treacherously killed by certain Cunninghams, who envying the Noblemans
worth (otherwise they could pretend no just quarrel) did conspire his death.
The chief Actors, David Cunningham of Robert-land, Alexander Cunningham of
Aiket, and John Cunningham of Corsell, who were set on work by the Earl of
Glencarne, upon promise that he should maintain them; which afterward he
disclaimed. This unhappy fact did cost much blood, and was afterward
honorably revenged by Robert Master of Eglington, the Noblemans brother.

In the month of June was the league with England concluded, A league with
England concluded.
which the year preceding had been carefully labored, and by Commissioners
sent from both Princes in a meeting at Berwick, accorded in this form.

1. That both their Majesty's finding by the course of the present proceedings
in forain parts, The Articles of the league.
that diverse Princes terming themselves Catholics, and acknowledging the Popes
authority, were joined in confederacy for extirpating true Religion, not only
within their own States and Dominions, but also in other Kingdoms; left they
should seem to be less solicitous for the defense thereof, then were their
enemies who thought to overthrow the same; have thought it necessary as well
for the preservation of their own persons, on whose safety does the Well of
their subjects, depend, as for the better maintenance of the true ancient
Christian Religion which they now profess, to join and unite themselves in a
more strict league then has been between any Princes their Progenitors.

2. That they should labor and procure by their best endeavors to draw the
Princes professing the same Religion to join and concur with them in the like
defense thereof.

3. That this league should be offensive and defensive against all that should
attempt to disturb the exercise true Religion within their Kingdoms,
notwithstanding of any former leagues of friendship or amity, contracted with
the said attemptors.

4. That if any Prince or State whatsoever, should invade the Realms and
Dominions of either of their Majesty's, or attempt any injury against their
persons or subjects; upon notice thereof given or received, neither of them
should yield aid, counsel, advice, or support, directly or indirectly, to the
said inuader, notwithstanding any consanguinity, affinity, league or treaty,
made or to be made.

That in case of invasion they should aid and assist each other in manner and
form following. That is to say, if the Realm of England should be invaded by
any forain forces in parts remote from the Realm of Scotland, the King upon
signification made unto him by the Queen of England should furnish 2000
horsemen, and 5000 footmen, or a lesser number, as it shall please the said
Queen to require, and should cause them be conducted from the borders of
Scotland into any part of the Kingdom of England, upon the charges of the said
Queen; And in case the said Realm of Scotland be invaded in any part remote
from the borders of England by any forain force, the Queen of England upon
requisition made to her by the King, should furnish 3000 horsemen, and 6000
footmen, or a lesser number at the option of the said King, and shall cause
them to be conducted to any part of the Realm of Scotland, upon the Kings
charges.

6. That in case the invasion should be upon the North parts of the Realm of
England, within 60 miles of the borders of Scotland, the King being required by
the Queen, should gather all the forces he could make, and join with the
English power for pursuing the said invaders, and keep them together for the
space of thirty days or so much longer (if it be required) as the subjects of
Scotland are usually accustomed to stay in the fields for the defense of their
own Kingdom.

7. That upon any invasion or trouble arising in the Realm of Ireland, the King
upon notice given to him thereof, should not only inhibit the repair thither of
any of the inhabitants of Argile, Isles and places adjacent, or any other parts
of his dominions; but also if it shall happen them or any of them to go into
Ireland with a number extraordinary, and in hostile manner, the King upon
signification of the same, should denonnce them his Rebels, and pursue them as
Traitors.

8. That neither of their Majesty's should hereafter aid, supply, assist or
entertain the Rebels or adversaries of the other, nor permit them to reside
either privately or publicly in any part of their dominions, but upon the
first requisition of the Prince, to whom they are Rebels, they should
undelayedly be delivered according to the old leagues and treaties, or then
expulsed forth of their dominions, and redress made for any injuries they
should happen to commit, during their abode in the same.

9. That all controversies about matters of borders or wrongs committed in the
Marches since the time of the Kings accepting the government in his own person,
and by the space of four years preceding; should be friendly determined and
satisfied at the sight of Commissioners to be appointed on both sides, who
should meet at the within six months after the date of the presents, and
decide thereupon.

10. That neither of their Majesty's should enter into any league or treaty
(without the consent of the other, by letters signed with their hands under
their privy signet) with any other Prince or State whatsoever, to the prejudice
of the present Treaty.

11. That all former treaties betwixt their Majesty's progenitors, and both
Realms, notwithstanding any discontinuance thereof, should stand in full force,
so far as they should not be found derogatory to the present treaty, and that
this treaty should not infringe any league made by either of their Majesty's or
their progenitors, with other their friends and confederates, in any time
bygone, the cause of Religion only excepted, wherein the present league is
declared to be offensive and defensive.

12. That both their Majesty's should confirm the league by their oaths and
great Seals, which should be interchanged, and mutually delivered to others.

13. Lastly, that the King at his coming to the perfect age of 25. years,
should cause the present league to be ratified by the States of the Kingdom;
like as the Queen at the same time should cause it to be confirmed in her
Parliament of England

These were the Articles of the league concluded at Berwick, The names of the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms.
and signed by Francis Earl Bothwel, Robert Lord Boyd, and Sir James Home of
Coldinknowes, Commissioners for the King; As likewise by Edward Earl of
Rutland, William Lord Evers, and Sir Thomas Randolph, Commissioners for the
Queen of England.

It was believed, that this amity contracted with such deliberation should have
continued firm; A new breach between the King and Queen of England.
for (besides the public league) the Queen had sent to the King a letter under
her own hand, wherein she did faithfully promise to suffer nothing to be done,
that might derogate or prejudge his right and title to the Crown of England.
And for a further demonstration of her kindness, had presented him with a gift
of annuity answerable to the lands possessed by the Lady Lennox in her time,
which the King by diverse Ambassadors had formerly required, as due to him. Yet
a few months after, brake out a business that put them in worse terms then
before, and was with no small difficulty pacified; the story whereof shall next
be related.

The Queen of Scots being touched in the trial of Babingtons conspiracy, The
proceedings against the Queen of Scots.
as having interchanged diverse letters with him, a consultation was kept
concerning her, and what was fittest to be done; for they considered that all
the conspiracies made against the Queen of England, being chiefly intended in
hope of the Scottish Queen her succession so long as she lived, their Sovereign
should never be secured, and that therefore the surest course was to put her
out of the way; But how this should be done, the opinions were different. The
Earl of Leicester advising to dispatch her secretly by poison, Secretary
Walsingham did mightily oppose it, as that which would draw upon the Queen both
danger and dishonor, and besides, in it self was a thing injust, and no better
then a cruel murder. Wherefore his opinion was, that the course of Law should
be kept, and Commission given for making her process, and as the trial should
prove, for giving sentence and judgment. This opinion prevailing, certain
Noblemen Counselors and Judges were chosen for the business, who meeting at
the Castle of Fotheringham (where the Queen of Scots was kept) the eleventh of
October, and calling her before them, did charge her with the said conspiracy,
and intercourse of letters. She refusing to answer, and be tried as a subject,
being her self an absolute Queen; they notthelesse went on, and finding her
guilty, Sentence of death pronounced against her.
pronounced the sentence of death; which was shortly thereafter confirmed by
the Estates of Parliament, and a supplication therewith delivered to the Queen
for putting their decree in execution.

How soon the King was advertised hereof, he sent William Keith sent into
England about the midst of November.
William Keith Gentleman of his chamber to the Queen, with a letter to this
effect. That howbeit it seemed strange to him that the Nobility and Counselors
of England should take upon them to give sentence upon a Queen of Scotland, and
one descended of the Royal blood of England, yet he would think it much more
strange, if she should stain her hands with the blood of his mother, who was of
the same Royal condition with her self, and of the same sex: which as he could
not believe, would enter into her heart to do; so if it should be, he desired
her to consider how much it touched him in honor, that was both a King and a
son, to suffer his mother an absolute Prince, to be put to an infamous death.

No answer being returned to this, A letter to William Keith from the King.
upon new advertisement that the Queen was like to be drawn by the importunity
of her Estates to give way to the execution, he wrote to William Keith more
sharply, requiring him to show the Queen how unjust he held that proceeding
against his mother, and that it did neither agree with the will of God, who
prohibiteth to touch his anointed ones, nor with the law of Nations; That an
absolute Prince should be sentenced and judged by subjects: and if she would be
the first to give that pernicious example of profaning her own and other
Princes Diadems, to remember her, that both in respect of nature and honor it
concerned him to be revenged of so great an indignity; which if he should not
do, he should peril his credit both at home and abroad; and therefore willed
him for to labor for a delay, until he should send an Ambassador with
overtures that might content and satisfy her Majesty. For by a letter sent from
Mr. Archibald Douglas that stayed as Leiger in England, he found him not well
disposed in the business, and thereupon resolved to employ a more honorable
person, and one of greater trust

William Keith having entreated the Queen for a delay, The Queen in passion at
the sight of the letter.
when as he could not obtain the same, did show her the direction he had
received from the King: at which she grew into such a passion, that if
Leicester and others of the Council who stood by, had not pacified her (saying
that the King did only request that his mother might be well used, which was a
thing natural, and in him an honorable part; and that some ill affected
persons possibly had stirred him up to write so sharply) she had simply refused
him any more hearing. But after she had calmed a little she said, That she
would give no answer in anger, and would think of it to the next morning. At
which time calling him again, she said, That no precipitation should be used,
and if any did come from the King within a few days, she would stay all
proceeding to that time, and be glad to hear such overtures, as might save the
Queen of Scots life, and assure her own.

The King advertised of this, The King excuses the sharpness of his letter.
and conceiving some hope that matters would draw to an agreement, wrote of new
to the Queen, and showed he was sorry to understand that his letter sent to
William Keith, had been construed as if he did threaten her and her Estates,
whereas his purpose was only to inform her of the rumors going in the
country, and how much his subjects were moved at these forms of proceeding
with their Queen. That for himself, he knew well enough how hardly she was
pressed by objecting unto her the peril of her own life; and that he never
blamed her directly for any thing that was done. Therefore prayed her to
account him her most honest and steadfast friend, since he never had nor should
deserve any other at her hand, and that for his sake she would continue any
proceeding against his mother, till his overtures should be heard, which the
Master of Gray should bring with him, who was to take journey on the Saturday
following.

This letter was speedily carried to the Queen, which gave her some content,
The Master of Gray and Sir Robert Melvil sent into England.
for thereby she perceived the rumors to be vain which were dispersed, that he
was minded to break the league, and denounce war. The King in the mean time
having convocated the Estates, and imparted to them the case wherein his mother
stood, had very liberal promises given him, and a present supply of money
granted for dispatch of his Ambassador. And being advised by the Estates to
join Sir Robert Melvil in Commission with the Master of Gray, as one that had
served his mother long, and was truly affected unto her, the Commission was
given to them both, and they put in equal trust. So parting from Halirudhouse
the 20th of December, they came to London the penult of the month.

The next day Master Archtbald Douglas being sent to desire audience, The first
audience.
the same was refused upon information that they had been with Monsieur
Bellieur the French Ambassador, who was employed in the same errand, and had
parted from the Queen in wrath; yet the contrary being showed, and that they
refused to make any visit till they had prefence of her Majesty, they had
access granted the first of January. At her first meeting she quarrelled the
letter sent to William Keith, asking if they were sent with the like threats.
They answering that his Majesty's letter might receive a good construction, and
that he had interpreted himself by another, directed since that time to her
Majesty's self, she brake forth into these speeches, I am unmeasurably sorry
that there can be no means found to save the life of your Kings mother, and
assure mine own, I have labored to conserve the life of us both, but now I see
it cannot be done. The Ambassador replied, that the case was nothing so
desperate, and that means would be found to put her Majesty in assurance; yet
because they perceived her to be somewhat commoved, they did not think meet to
enter at that time more deeply in the business.

At their second audience which was on the tenth day, The second audience and
effect thereof.
the Queen begun with them, in this sort. A thing long looked for, should be
good when it comes; I would now hear what are your Kings offers. The Master
(as having the first place) answered, no man makes offer, but for some cause.
If it like your Majesty, we desire to know if the person be extant for whom we
offer, (for the rumor went constantly that the execution was past.) As yet,
said the Queen, I think she be, but will not promise an hour. Nay said the
Master, we come not to shift, but to offer from our Sovereign whatsoever in
reason can be required; specially, that he shall interpose his credit in behalf
of his mother, and give the chief of his Nobility for pledges, that no plot nor
practice should be contrived against your Majesty with her knowledge or
privity: or if that be not sufficient, and that it shall please your Majesty to
set her at liberty, and send her into Scotland, a course shall be taken for
securing your Majesty from all such attempts by her occasion.

The Queen calling the Earl of Leicester, with the Lords Admiral and
Chamberlain, who were nigh by, repeated in their hearing these offers, setting
them all at naught: whereupon the Master took occasion to ask, What should move
any man to attempt against her Majesty for the Queen of Scots? Because said the
Queen, they think she shall succeed to me, and that she is a Papist. And if
these means shall be taken away, said the Master, apparently the danger will
cease. This, says the Queen, I would be glad to understand. If her right
succession to England shall be made over in our Sovereigns person (said he)
Papists will have no more hope, and this I think the Queen his mother will
dimit and resign to him. But she has no right, said the Queen, for she is
declared incapable of succession. And if she have no right, said the Master,
the hope of Papists cease, and it is not to be feared that they will
enterprise for her. But the Papists, said the Queen, do not allow our
Declaration. Then let it fall, said he, in the Kings person by her resignation.

The Earl of Leicester ob^ecting that she was a prisoner, and could not dimit,
the Master answered, That the dimission being made to her son, with the advice
of all the friends in Europe, in case (as God forbid) the Queen by any attempt
should be cut off, she would have none to partake with her against her son, all
the princes her friends standing obliged for her resignation, that it should be
valid and effectual to her son. The Queen making as though she did not
understand him, the Earl of Leicester said, that the Ambassadors meaning was,
that the king should be in his Mothers place, Is it so? says the Queen, then I
put my self in worse case before; By Gods passion (this was her oath) that were
to cut mine own throat: he shall never come in that place, and be party to me.
The Master answered, that he would be more party, if he should come in his
Mothers place through her death. Well, said the Queen, tell your King what I
have done for him, to keep the Crown on his head since he was born, and that
for my part, I mind to keep the league that stands betwixt us; which if he
break, it shall be a double fault. And with these words she made away; Sir
Robert Melvil following her, requested for some eight days continuance of the
execution, whereunto she answered, Not an hour.

The King advertised of this conference, A letter from the King to the Master
of Gray.
and that nothing but extremity was to be expected, wrote with his own hand to
the Master of Gray, as follows. Reserve your self no longer in your dealing
for my mother, for you have done it too long, and think not that any thing will
do good if her life be lost, for then adicu with further dealing with that
State. Therefore if you look for the continuance of my favor, spare no pains
nor plainness in this case, but read my letter written to William Keith, and
conform your self wholly to the contents thereof, and in this let me reap the
fruits of your great credit there, either now or never. Farewell.

But before this letter came unto the Master, The Master of Gray drawn upon
another course.
he was drawn upon another course and made more cold in the business, and (as
the fame went) had taken upon him to pacify the King, though the execution
proceeded. Mean while the Earl of Leicester wrote to the King a letter, wherein
not obscurely showing what was resolved, he advised him to deal more moderately
in that matter of his mother, her cause not being worth the losing of such a
friend as the Queen his Sovereign was. For albeit no man, said he, can blame
your Majesty to speak for the safety of your mothers life; yet under your
favor, your Majesty being a Prince and a King, you ought to weigh without
partiality the case of other Kings and Princes, as if it might be your own.
Justice should in the bosom of all Princes have such place, that whatsoever
affection may draw them, if the thing which any of them does for the
preservation of their own life and estate be warranted, it ought to be borne
withal by others. And proceeding in this manner, he said, Let the case of the
Queen my Sovereign be made your Majesty's, and that any King or Prince being in
your hands, claiming title to your Crown, would raise war within your Realm
against you, or conspire with traitors within your Court or country to kill
you; in that case I would fain know what would be thought fit by any faithful
or good subject of yours, that you should do to such a one? Nay, give me leave
I humbly beseech you, to ask even of your self, what you would think fit in
such a case: there is no other difference, but that this offense is done to the
Queen Majesty by your mother. And after that a little (for the letter is long)
If my plain speech may be without offense to your Majesty, I would wish you to
think well of this case: remember how near it is to you, and how much nearer it
may be to you; it is seen to all the world wherefore the life of our Mistress is
sought, whose death may be as far out of your way, as your mothers liberty
has heretofore been dangerous to your estate. And if it be true which I have
heard, your Majesty's self by her will, had as well been dispossessed of the
possession of that you have, as defeated of any remainder you thought to have
interest in. And therefore as Kings be, and ought to be jealous of their own
estate, so I doubt not but your Majesty will deeply consider of this case of
your mothers, wherein you may perform both the Office of a Son, and of a King.
And as I have always advised you, so do I still, except for a just cause (which
I am persuaded you shall never have) give not her Majesty any cause to conceive
a breach of love and friendship on your part. She is the person and Prince in
the world, that may do you most good or most harm; let no persuasion or device
make you think otherwise: the world is full of practice, and the worst heads
most busy, etc.

At the same time Secretary Walsingham writing to the Lord Thirlstan the Kings
Secretary, Secretary Walsingham writes to the Lord Thirlstan.
with whom he kept intelligence, declared that it was wondered by all wise and
religious men in England, that the King should be so earnest in the cause of
his mother, seeing all the Papists in Europe that affected the change of
Religion in both Realms, did build their hopes altogether upon her, and that
she had showed her self so passionate in point of Religion, as she had
transferred her pretended right to both the Crowns untothe King of Spain, in
case the King her son should persist in his profession.

It is true that such informations were given out amongst the Papists to divert
the King from constancy in his profession, but that any such tranflation was
made by her it is not probable, and a thing not to be believed; her Declaration
at the time of her death being far other, as we shall hear; Albeit a Popish
Abbot descriving the life of Laurens the Cardinal, who was at that time
Protector of the Scottish Nation, affirms the foresaid translation to have
been in his hands, and to have been delivered to him by Count Olivarez the
Spanish Ambassador at Rome. But that does merit little credit: such forged
titles would perhaps have served, if the enterprise of the 88. had succeeded,
but they are now of little purpose.

The King perceiving by all these letters that the death of his mother was
determined, The King commands the Ministers to remember his mother in their
prayers.
called back his Ambassadors; and at home gave order to the Ministers to
remember her in their public prayers: which they denied to do, though the form
prescrived was most Christian and lawful: which was, that it might please God
to illuminate her with the light of his truth, and save her from the apparent
danger wherein she was cast. Upon their denial charges were directed to command
all Bishops, Ministers, and other office-bearers in the Church, to make mention
of her distress in their public prayers, and commend her to God in the form
appointed. But of all the number, Mr. David Lindesay at Leth, and the Kings own
Ministers, gave obedience. At Edinburgh, where the disobedience was most
public, the King purposing to have their fault amended, The third of February,
appointed for solemn prayers in her behalf.
did appoint the third of February for solemn prayers to be made in her behalf,
commanding the Bishop of S. Andrews to prepare himself for that day; which when
the Ministers understood, they stirred up Mr. John Cowper a young man not
entered as yet in the function, to take the Pulpit before the time, The Bishop
of S. Andrews appointed to preach, Mr. John Cowper usurpeth the place.
and exclude the Bishop. The King coming at the hour appointed, and seeing him
in the place, called to him from his seat, and said, Mr. John, that place was
destinate for another, yet since you are there, if you will obey the charge
that is given, and remember my mother in your prayers, you shall go on; he
replying, he would do as the spirit of God should direct him, was commanded to
leave the place: and making as though he would stay, the Captain of the Guard
went to pull him out; whereupon he burst forth in these speeches, This day
shall be a witness against the King, in the great day of the Lord: and then
denouncing a woe to the inhabitants of Edinburgh, he went down, and the Bishop
of S. Andrews, entering the Pulpit, did perform the duty required. The noise
was great for a while amongst the people, but after they were quieted, and had
heard the Bishop (as he was a most powerful Preacher) out of that text to
Timothy, discourse of the duty of Christians in praying for all men, they
grieved fore to see their teachers so far overtaken, and condemned their
obstinacy in that point. In the afternoon Cowper was called before the Council,
where Mr. Walter Balcanquel, and Mr. William Watson Ministers, accompanying
him, for some idle speeches that escaped them, were both discharged from
preaching in Edinburgh, The Ministers at Edinburgh discharged.
during his Majesty's pleasure, and Cowper sent prisoner to Blackness.

The Queen of Scots some months before, The Queen of Scots her request to the
Queen of England.
having notice given her of the sentence pronounced against her, and being
willed to prepare her self for death, was nothing thereby dejected, but thanked
God for that her sorrowful life was now to end, entreated the Queen of England
by her letters, for three things: First, that her body might be carried by her
servants into France, to be buried besides her mother. Next, that she should
not to be put to death secretly, but in the presence of her servants and
others, who might bear witness of her dying in Christ, against the false
rumors which her adversaries might disperse of her. Thirdly, that her servants
might have leave to go whither they would, and enjoy the mean legacies she had
bequeathed unto them in her Testament; which things she requested, in the name
of Jesus Christ, by the soul and memory of Henry the 7th Progenitor to them
both, and by the royal honor and title which she had carried. In the same
letters she complained of the indignity done unto her, in the taking away of
her royal furniture, and that her keepers did use her without that respect
which was due to her estate and birth. But to none of these desires was any
answer given, the Queen of England dissembling that she had received any such
letter.

Yet was she much perplexed and doubtful what to do, The Queen of England, is
doubtful which way to take.
whether to take her out of the way or not. If she should be spared, she
doubted the Noblemen who had given sentence against her, would take it ill, and
perhaps run other courses to free themselves from her malice; and to take her
away, she knew it would be interpreted a great cruelty on her part, as likewise
that the King her son would be sore displeased: for albeit that the Master of
Gray at his parting from her, had in private given hopes that the Kings title
being reserved, and no prejudice made thereto by the sentence given against his
mother, her death would be forgotten; yet Sir Robert Melvil who was joined in
Commission with him had assured her, if rigor were used, that friendship would
no longer be kept. Debating thus with her self some days upon the most
expedient, she signed a warrant for the execution, and gave it to Davison one
of her Secretaries to be passed the great Seal: which was no sooner done, then
repenting the direction, she told him that she would take another way. But
having before communicated the Warrant with the Council, they presently sent
Beal their Clerk with the Mandate and Letters to the Earls of Shrewsbury, Kent,
Derby, and Cumberland, to see the same performed.

The Earls accompanied with the Sheriff of the Shire and Justices of Peace,
The Queen of Scots willed to prepare her self for death.
came to Fotheringham on Tuesday the 7th of February, and having signified the
cause of their coming, willed the Queen to prepare her self to die, for that
she was to suffer the next morning. She was no way moved, as it seemed, and
said, I did not think that Queen Elizabeth my Sister, would have consented to
my death, but since it is so, death is to me most welcome. That soul is not
worthy of the heavens joys, whose body cannot endure one blow of the hangman:
only I will request, said she, that I may speak with my Confessor, and Melvil
my Steward. It was answered, that her Confessor would not be permitted to come
unto her, but she should have the Bishop, or Dean of Peterborow who were nigh
by to give her comfort. She replied, They are of another profession, and cannot
be sit comforters to me: but since you will not allow my Confessor to come at
me, I will comfort my self in God.

Some other speeches passed amongst them touching Babington, Her behavior and
preparation.
and her Secretaries, No, and Curle, who had both confessed the enterchange of
letters with Babington; after which the Earls departed; she calling for supper,
commanded her servants to make haste, that she might have leisure to set things
in order. Having supped sparingly (as her custom was) she made an Inventory of
her goods and movables, setting down the names of those, for whom she
appointed them; and unto some she gave money with her own hand. This done, she
wrote unto her Confessor, entreating him to pray unto God for her; and a few
lines to the French King, and Duke of Guise, in behalf of her servants; at the
ordinary hour she went to bed and slept some hours quietly, after which having
awaked, she spent the rest of the night in prayer.

The day beginning to break, she apparelled her self as she was wont to do on
the Festival days, and calling together her servants, showed unto them her
Will, desiring them to take in good part the Legacies she had bequeathed unto
them since her means were at the time no better; and then gave her self wholly
to devotion. About eight of the clock, the Sheriff of the Shire named named
Thomas Andrews entered the Chapel, where she was praying on her knees, and
told her that all was ready: and, I am likewise, said she. Thus arising, she
came forth to her Chamber of presence, where she made a short speech to her
servants, willing them to fear God, and live virtuously: and so kissing her
women, and giving the menservants her hand to kiss, she bad them farewell.

The Earls and other Gentlemen meeting her, She bids her servants farewell.
she showed a most cheerful countenance, nothing dejected, but looking grave
and devout, with a Crucifix of Ivory in her hands. As she was going towar^s the
Hall, where she was to suffer, when Andrew Melvil her Steward did bewail his
mishap, in that he should be the carrier of the news of his Ladies death into
Scotland, she said, Do not lament, but rather be glad, for thou shall
straightway see Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares; you may tell them,
that I die constant in my Religion, and firm in affection toward Scotland and
France. Hitherto thou haft served me faithfully, and howbeit I take thee to be
in Religion a Protestant, and I my self am Catholic, yet seeing there is but
one Christ, I charge thee upon thine account to him, that thou carry these my
last wo^ds to my son, and show that I pray him to serve God, Her directions
to Andrew Melvil her Steward.
to defend the Catholic Church, and govern his Kingdom in peace, and never to
put himself in the power of another, as I have done. Certify him that I have
done nothing pre^udicial to the Crown of Scotland, and will him to keep
friendship wi^h the ^ueen England and serve thou him faithfully. With these
words some tears falling from her e^e, she bad him farewell.

After this, She is brought to the place of execution.
she was brought to the Hall, in the midst whereof, over against the Chimney
(where was a great fire) a scaffold was erected of two foot high, and twe^ve
^oot broad, h^ving two steps to ascend; the Scaffold was railed about almost a
yard high, and all covered with black cloth, as were the Chair, Stools, and
block, and Cu^hions to kneel upon. Before she went up turning to the Earls, she
requested that her servants might stand by at her death; They answered, that
their passionate weeping would diquiet her and do no good else. Nay, said she,
I will promise for them, they shall not do so: it is but a small favor, and
such as Queen Elizabeth would not deny me, to have my maids present. She named
Melvil her Steward, Bu^got^ her Physician, her Apothecary, and Surgeon, with
two maids.

Being on the Scaffold, The Dean of Peterbur^ow offers to comfort her.
and silence made; the Cle^k of the Council did read the Commission, which she
listened to, as it had been some other matter. That ended, the Dean of
Pe^erburrow began to remember her of her present condition, and to comfort her
in the best way he could; she interrupting his speech, willed him to hold his
peace, for that she would not hear him. An when excusing himself, that what he
did was by command of her Majesty's Council, he began again to speak, Peace Mr.
Dean, said she, I have nothing to do with you, nor you with me. The Noblemen
desiring him not to trouble her further, she said, That is best, for I am
settled in the ancient Catholic Religion, wherein I was born and bred, and new
will die in the same. The Earl of Kent saying, that as yet they would not cease
to pray unto God for her, that he would vouchsafe to open her eyes, and
enlighten her mind with the knowledge of his truth, that she might die therein.
She answered, That you may do at your pleasure, She prays by her self.
but I will pray by my self. So the Dean conceiving a prayer, and all the
company following him, she likewise prayed aloud in the Latin Tongue; and when
the Dean had finished, she in the English Language commended unto God the
estate of the afflicted Church; prayed for her son, that he might prosper and
live happily, and for Queen Elizabeth that she might live long, and govern her
subjects peace bly^a^ding, that she hoped only to be saved by the blood of
Christ, at the fee^ of whose picture presented on the Crucifix, she would
willingly shed her blood. Then lifting up the ^rucifix and kissing it, she
said, As thy arms O Christ, were spread abroad on the Cr^sse so with the on
stretched Arms of thy mercy receive me, and forgive me my sins.

This said she rose up, The manner of the execution.
and was by two of her women disrobed of her upper garments, the executioners
offering their help, and putting to their hands, she put them back saying, She
was not accustomed to be served with such grooms, nor dressed before such a
multitude. Her upper robe taken off, she did quickly lose her doublet, which
was laced on the back, and putting on her Arms a pair of silken sleeves, her
body covered with a smock only, she kissed her maids again, and bad them
farewell. They bursting forth in tears, she said, I promised for you that you
should be quiet, get you hence, and remember me. After which, kneeling down
most resolutely, and with the least token of fear that might be, having her
eyes covered with a handkerchief, she repeated the Psalm, In te, Domine,
confido, ne confundar in aeternum. Then stretching forth her body with great
quietness, and laying her neck over the block, she cried aloud, In manus tuas,
Domine, commendo spiritum meum. One of the executioners holding down her hands,
the other at two blows cut off her head; which falling out of her attire,
seemed to be somewhat gray. All things about her were taken from the
executioners, and they not suffered to carry their Aprons, or anything else
with them that her blood had touched, the clothes and block were also burnt,
her body embalmed, and in solemn manner buried in the Cathedral Church at
Peterburrow; and after many years taken up by the King her son, and interred at
Westminster amongst the rest of the Kings.

This was the end of Queen Mary's life, A brief description of her fortune.
a Princess of many rare virtues, but crossed with all the crosses of Fortune,
which never any did bear with greater courage and magnanimity to the last. Upon
her return from France, for the first two or three years, she carried her self
most worthily; but then giving ear to some wicked persons, and transported with
the passion of revenge, for the indignity done unto her in the murder of David
Rizio her Secretary, she fell into a Labyrinth of troubles, which forced her to
flee into England; where after 19. years captivity, she was put to death in the
manner yon have heard. Nigh unto her Sepulcher at Peterburrow was affixed at
the time, by some friend that bewailed her death, this inscription.

MARIA Scotorum Regina, The inscription secretly affixed on her Sepulcher.
Regis filia, Regis Gallorum vidua, Regina Angliae agnata, and haeres proxima,
virtutibus Regiis, and animo Regio ornata, jure regio frustra saepius
implorato, barbara, and tyrannica ^rudelitate, ornamentum nostri seculi, and
lumen vere regium extinguitur; eodemque nefario judicio, and MARIA Scotorum
Regina, morte naturali, and omnes superstites Reges plebeii facti morte
mulctantur, hic extat. Cum sacris enim vivae MARIAE cineribus, omnium Regum
atque Principum violatam atque prostratam Majestatem hic jacere scito: and quia
tacitum regale satis superque Reges sui officit monet, plura non addo, viator.

That is, MARY Queen of Scotland, The same Englished.
daughter of a King, Widow of the King of France, kinswoman and next heir to
the Queen of England, adorned with royal virtues, and a Princely spirit; having
often, but in vain implored to have the right due to a Prince done unto her,
the ornament of our age, and mirror of Princes, by a barbarous and tyrannical
cruelty is cut off; And by one and the same infamous judgment, both MARY Queen
of Scotland is punished with death, and all Kings living are made liable to the
same: A strange and uncouth kind of grave this is, wherein the living are
included with the dead; for with the Ashes of this blessed MARY, thou shall
know, that the Majesty of all Kings and Princes lies here depressed, and
violated. But because the regal secret does admonish all Kings of their duty,
Travellour, I will say no more.

The Author was not known, nor could be found out, so it was taken away. But
as soon as it was told the Queen, that the execution was done, she grieved
exceedingly, and put on a mourning habit, laying all the fault upon Secretary
Davison, to whom she had said, that she would take another way. Mean while she
sent Mr. Robert Carry one of the Lord Hunsdons sons to the King, with this
letter of her own handwriting.

My dear brother, The Queen of England writes to the King by Mr. Robert Carry.
I would you knew, though not felt, the extreme dolor that overwhelmeth my
mind, for that miserable accident which far contrary to my meaning has
befalne. I have sent this kinsman of mine, whom ere now it has pleased you to
favor, to instract you truly of that, which is too irksome for my pen to tell
you. I beseech you, that as God, and many no know, how innocent I am in this
case, so you will believe me, that if I had done it, I would have abode by it;
I am not so base minded, that the fear of any living creature, should make me
afraid to do what is just, or done, to deny the same, I am not so degenerate,
nor carry so vile a mind; but as not to disguise, fits most a King, so will I
never dissemble my actions, but cause them show as I mean them. This assure
your self for me, that as I know it was deserved, if I had meant it, I would
never over another shoulders, and to impute to my self that, which I did not
so much as think of, I will not. The circumst^nces you will be pleased to hear
of this bearer: And for my part, think you have not in the world a more loving
kinswoman, and more dear friend, nor any tha^ will watch more carefully to
preserve you and your state. And if any would otherwise persuade you, think
they bear more good will to others, then to you. Thus in haste, I leave to
trouble you, beseeching God to send you a long Reign.

Your most assured loving Sister and Cosen, ELIZABETH: R.


The King denying him presence and refusing to receive his Letters, The King
denies him access.
he advertised the Queen, who willed him if he could not find access to his
Majesty, to deliver his Message, and Letters to some of the Council, if it
should be the Kings pleasure to take information from them. This after the
delay of a few days was ye^ded unto, and with the Letters a writing delivered
to be showed his Majesty of this Tenor.

WHereas the Queens Majesty my Mistress, Mr. ca^ies Declaration in writing.
desiring to have your Majesty certified aright of the death of the Queen your
mother, and in what sort the same was done, has commanded me, since I am
denied your presence, to declare my message to certain of your Council; I have
thought best to put it in writing, because words may be mistaken, and my charge
this way better performed. First, she commanded me to assure your Majesty that
it never entered in her thought to put the Queen your mo^her to death,
notwithstanding the daily p^^swasions of her Council, th^supplications of the
Nobility, Knights, and Gentlemen, and the hourly outcries of her poor people
and commonalty, wherewith she was wearied, and out of measure grieved to see
their determination fixed that way. And that upon advertisements coming every
day unto her, of th preparation of ships and men, both in France and Spain, to
invade her Realm; and reports ^f the breaking open of Fotheringham Castle, and
the Queen your mothers escape; lest she should in any such extremity be
unprovided, she had signed a Warrant to her Council, for doing what they
thought best with your mother; which warrant she delivered to her Secretary Mr.
Davison to be kept, not intending it should be given out of his hands, except
some invasion from abroad, or insurrection of Rebels at home, were made to
procure her liberty. But her Secretary otherwise then she had purposed, having
showed the Warrant to two or three of the Council, they called the whole number
together, and presently sent a mandate for her execution; which was done, she
protests to God, before she knew of it. Hereupon the Secretary is committed,
and will not escape her high displeasure. This is the effect of my message,
which if I could express so lively, as I did hear her utter it with a heavy
heart, and sorrowful countenance; I think your Majesty would rather pity the
grief which she endures, then in any sort blame her for the fact whereunto she
never gave consent.

This Declaration gave the King no content, The Declaration gives no content
to the King.
for he could not think that her Council would have presumed without her own
knowledge to take the life of his mother; and for the censure of the Secretary,
he did esteem it but a mockery, and not a repairing of the wrong he had
received. Neither wanted he persons about him to sharpen him to take rev^nge.
Some out of a desire to have all things troubled; others out of the hatred they
bare to Religion, and some truly resenting the injury as done to the whole
nation. Which when the Queen understood, and that her messenger was returned
without audience, she labored by her Ministers, of whom she was ever well
furnished, The Queen laboure^h to divert the King from War.
to pacify his mind, and divert him from the War he had intended. These
working privately with the Kings chief Counselors, and such of his chamber as
he was known to affect, dealt so, as they kept off things from breaking forth
unto open hostility, which was every day expected. Secretary Walsingham first
by a long letter, directed to the Lord Thirlstane, who was then in most credit,
and had the chief administration of affairs, proponed diverse weighty and
important considerations, that should keep the King from taking any such
resolution. Because the letter contained the very true reasons, that in end
moved his Majesty to forhear violence, and take a more calm course, I thought
meet to set it down word by word, as it stands in the Original.

SIr, being absent from Court, A letter of Wals^gham to the Lord Th^ls^an
when the late execution of the Queen your Sovereigns mother happened, I did
forthwith upon my return impart to Mr. Douglas some things concerning the
course was conceived here, by your said Sovereigns best friends, fit to be
holden in this remediless accident for continuance of peace and amity between
the two Crowns, as a thing for the weal of both Nations to be desired. But
finding him unwilling to meddle therewith, I have thought good to write to the
same effect unto your self. The rather for that I presently understand, by some
advertisements out of that country, that the death of the Queen is likely to
breed so strange an alienation of his Majesty's mind toward this Realm,
tending (as is reported) wholly to violence, and to revenge of that which has
been so necessarily done by the whole body of the same; whereof, as for mine
own part, I should be right sorry, so it is generally hoped, that his Majesty
being of that singular judgment himself, by the good help and advice of such
as you are, in credit and authority about him, men of wisdom and experience,
whom he will hear; this mischief will notwithstanding be carefully and
prudently prevented, considering how every way, all things being rightly
weighed, this course will be found prejudicial as well to your said Sovereigns
estate, as to his reputation, if he resolve to persist therein.

For first, the enterprise will undoubtedly be condemned in the sight of all
such as shall not be transported with some particular passion: for that they
shall see, that he takes Arms for revenge of an Action, besides the necessity
wherein it is grounded, full of so honorable and just proceedings, as
howsoever the effect was contrary to their liking, the manner thereof by the
late Queens great favorers, could not but be approved and allowed. And as on
the one side, the King your Sovereign oppugning the course of Justice, of so
unlawful, unjust, and desperate a quarrel, cannot be expected any other thing,
then a most unhappy and miserable issue: so we being assured that in the
defense of Justice the assistance of his mighty arm will not fail us, whose
judgment this was, need not to fear whatsoever man shall attempt to the
contrary against this Realm.

But not to stand upon the justness of the quarrel, which every man perhaps
will not so much regard; It would be considered what means your Sovereign shall
have to go through with such an enterprise, if he take it in hand. For the
forces of his own Realm, being so far inferior to these in England, no man
is so simple, but sees it were no way safe for his Majesty, trusting only
thereto, to make head against the power of this land; neither is it thought
that any man will be found so unadvised, as to wish him so to do.

But as it may be, that a great number for lack of understanding are carried
away with such vain discourses, as some without solid ground imagine of that
might be done in this case, by a King of Scotland, backed and assisted (as they
conceive in the air) with the French, and Spanish aid; so it is likely enough,
there shall not want those, that either satisfaction of their private passions,
or supply of their necessities, or better affectionating some other their
private designs; would be content to serve themselves of this present public
occasion and opportunity: who will propound, and promise also more to his
Majesty of such forain assistance, then they know in their consciences can be
performed, if he would declare himself enemy to this Realm; which that he
should, (though to his own ruin) the enemies of both Realms will do what they
can to procure.

But men of wisdom and understanding, laying before their eyes as well the
accustomed delays, and after long solicitation and pursuit, the simple
supplies and support, commonly found at these forain Potentates hands; as also,
how doubtful and uncertain the success of war may prove, England (God be
thanked) being so prepared, and in case to defend it self, both otherwise, and
by the conjunction of Holland and Zelands forces by Sea, in respect whereof
this Realm need not fear, what all the Potentates of Europe being bended
against us, can do for to annoy the same; Due consideration, I say, being taken
hereof, you will easily judge and find, how vain it were for your Sovereign
upon so uncertain hopes to embark himself and estate in an unnecessary war.
But much more if you shall consider, what a sequel and train of dangers and
hazards this war draws therewith, the consequence whereof, reaches to
whatsoever your Sovereign possesses, or hops for in this life. For escaping
to be slain in field, if he should happen to be taken prisoner; or be
constrained to retire himself out of the Realm, (things that have fallen out
often in experience) and then having incensed this whole Realm against him, he
should be disabled from any right in the succession of this Crown, (as
authority is given to do it by the same Statute, whereby they proceeded against
the mother) for attempting the invasion of this land, what extremity should he
be reduced unto?

And truly it could not otherwise be, the ancient enmity between the two
Nations now forgotten, being by drawing blood one of another again, likely to
be in such sort revived, as it would be impossible to make them like of a
Prince of that Nation, and specially him who had been upon so unjust a ground
the author of that unfortunate breach.

Besides, that the greatest part of the ancient Nobility, by whose judgment
the late Queen was condemned, and the rest of the principal Gentlemen of the
Realm, who confirmed the same in Parliament, should have just cause to
adventure any thing even to the marching over their bellies, rather then to
yield to his government, who carrying such a vindictive mind, they might doubt
would one day call their lives and honors in question.

And as for the remedy and relief which he might attend (standing in these
terms) of forain Princes; there are many examples of the former ages, and
within fresh memory. As the King of Navarres Grandfather by the mothers side,
and Christiern King of Denmark, both were allied to Francis the first, and
Charles the fist, two of the mightiest Potentates that reigned in long time;
And that this present Don Antonio may suffice for ensamples, to teach all
Princes, if they can avoid it, to beware how they fall into that state whereby
they shall be enforced to seek their own by other Potentates means. Princes are
not so ready in these days, to embrace other men's quarrels, but where they are
extraordinarily interressed in their own fortunes.

Wherefore I doubt not, but it will be seen by men of judgment, not
transported with passion, or led away with private respects; that it should be
every way the only best course for your Sovereign, by a good and kind usage of
her Majesty, and by showing that Princely moderation; as well in this grievous
accident of his mothers death, as his whole proceeding with this Realm, (which
the excellency of his Highness education seems to promise) to seek to win the
hearty good wills of this Realm, as the chief and principal assurance he can in
any sort obtain.

For to trust or depend either upon the French King, or the King of Spain, as
if by their assistance he might attain to the present possession of this Crown,
which be indeed the only two Potentates, whom he must have recourse unto, if he
reject the Amity of England, whosoever shall so counsel your Sovereign, as
things presently stand, shall in the judgment of men of best understanding,
bewray great want either of fidelity or judgment, drawing his Majesty unto so
untoward and desperate a course.

For it is no way safe for any Prince to repose his trust and strength upon
their favor and assistance, to whose desires and designs his greatness may
yield any impeachment and hinderance; so were it clearly against common reason
to expect other support and assistance from them, then might stand with their
own commodities and pretensions, in respect whereof neither of the two foresaid
Kings can simply and roundly join with your Sovereign to his good.

First, his Religion being odious to them both, and likely to prove most
prejudicial to the Catholic cause, he growing so great, as he should be made
by the union of the two Crowns, the consideration whereof, caused his mothers
affairs to stick a long time, and made now in end leave him quite out of the
reckoning, ordaining the King of Spain her heir, if her son became not
Catholic.

Next, it is merely repugnant to the policy of France, were it but in respect
of the ancient claim England makes to that Crown, to suffer the uniting of
this Island under one Prince.

They have been content in former times, when England had a footing in France,
to serve themselves of your Nation, therewith to annoy this Realm, by the means
of diverting or dividing the forces thereof; and so perhaps the Politics of
France can be content to wish at this day, by your Sovereigns quarrel, or any
other such like, to be eased of the burden, and miseries of the present War
wherewith they are plagued, by transporting the same into this Island. But as
this Realm has good means to prevent that mischief if it were intended, so
were your Sovereign to look, when all were done, but to be made an instrument,
as his predecessors have been, of the effusion of much Scottish blood for
French quarrels, and the desolation of that Realm.

And as things stand presently in France, it is not thought that you should
find the King ready to hearken to any enterprise against this Land, the said
King being most desirous to live in peace, both with his neighbors abroad, and
his subjects at home, but that he has been forced full sore against his will,
by the practice of them of the house of Guise, to countenance with his
authority the Civil War raised in that Realm; which makes him, whatsoever
show he makes of the contrary, to hate them in his heart

Neither would it be held sound counsel to be given him by any that depends
upon his fortune, to further the advancement of a King of Scots, so nearly
allied to that family, which he has discovered, and greatly fears to level
at his own Crown, with any intention to depose him, which by the greatness of
a King of Scots, they should be so much the sooner and better able to effect.

The King of Spains assistance, being now in War with this Realm, were more
likely to be obtained, but far more dangerous to be used in respect of his
insatiable ambition, deep practices and power accompanied in this case, with a
color of right; wherein how far he would seek to prevail, any opportunity or
advantage being offered, it may justly be doubted, by the experience that
sundry States have had, which upon slender grounds of title have been extorted
and wrung from the true inheritours, and annexed to his own Kingdom, as
Navarre, Portugal, and all he possesses in Italy has been.

It is believed that the King of Spain considering his years and unsettled
estate every way, would willingly incline to peace if it were offered with
reasonable conditions, and not over-readily at this present, embark himself in
any new enterprise.

But otherwise it is well known, that as he had fancied to himself an Empire of
all this part of Europe, so he had an eye to this Realm ever since he was King
in right of his wife. The conquest was intended under color of Religion, as
was discovered by some that were of his own Privy Council at that time; his
pretention to be the heir of the house of Lancaster, and since the late Queens
death, the first Catholic Prince of the blood Royal of England, as also the
donation of this Crown made him by the Queen of Scots in her letters with a
promise to confirm it by Testiment (things blazed abroad by the said Kings
Ambassador at Paris) ought to breed jealousy and suspicion in your Sovereigns
head, and give him to think how he should be used at such an assistants hand.
Auxiliary forces have ever been reputed dangerous, if they either in number or
policy were superior to them that called them in. The assistance therefore of
Spain and France, being of this nature, as your Sovereign has need of neither,
so he shall do well to forbear them both, and so shall it be most for his ease.

It may be some will pretend, that by change of his Religion, your Sovereign
shall better his condition, in regard of these forain Princes, besides a great
party within this Realm, that thereby shall be drawn wholly to depend upon his
fortune. But the poor distressed estate of Don Anthonio, being a Catholic
Prince spoiled by a Catholic, and receiving so little succor at Catholic
Princes hands, shall be a sufficient bar to all that can be alleged in that
behalf.

As for the Catholic party in England, in his mothers life it was never so
united, as they drew all in one line, much less will they be brought suddenly
to rely upon him if he should alter his Religion (as God defend) which would
be his utter discredit and overthrow both with the one and the other party,
neither having cause to repose any confidence in him: The Protestants because
he had renounced the Religion, wherein he was with great care brought up; the
Papists because they could not be assured in short space, that he was truly
turned to their faith. Yea, all men should have reason to forsake him, who had
thus dissembled and forsaken his God.

And where it was given out, that diverse do insinuate unto your Sovereign, that
his honor and reputation is so deeply interessed herein, as it must
necessarily turn to his perpetual ignominy and reproach, if he give not some
notable testimony to the world, of the affection and dutiful love he bare to
his mother; your King being of that singular judgment, that he is thought to
have, cannot be ignorant how far true honor ought to possess a Christian
Prince; that is, not whither passion or fury uses to carry men, but whether
reason and wisdom have laid the bounds, that is, within the compass of
possibility, decency and justice. If the late Queen had been innocent, revenge
had been necessarily just and honorable, but being culpable, contrary in all
reasonable men's judgments, he has sufficiently discharged the duty of a son,
in mediating for his mother so long as she was alive, and so far as he was
able to prevail. They which require more at his Highness hands, may be
presumed not to regard what beseems his place and dignity, but to seek the
satisfaction of their own particular passions and desires.

And whosoever persuades his Highness, that the mediation used by him for his
Mother, contrary to the humble pursuit of the whole Parliament, has already
given that offense to the Nobility and people of this land, as it behooves him
of force to have recourse to forain supports, does greatly abuse both his
Highness and this Realm: for as they were not ignorant what nature might and
ought to move his Highness unto, so long as there was any hope of her life; so
they do not doubt but that reason will induce him to leave sorrowing, and
thinking of her in due time.

Thus have I troubled you with a long discourse, whereunto the desire I have of
the continuance of amity between the two Crowns, has carried me unawares
further then I purposed; all which I refer to your good consideration, not
doubting, but you will afford most readily and willingly all good offices that
shall lie in your power, to the end that a happy conclusion may ensue hereof,
which shall tend to the common good of the whole Island; and so I commit you to
God.

From the Court at Greenwich the 4th of March, 1586. Your Lordships assured
Friend, FRA. WALSINGHAM.


THis letter showed to the King, served much to allay his anger; as afterward
appeared. In the May after, A Convention of the Estates.
the Estates being assembled at Halirudhouse, they show a great forwardness
all of them for assisting the revenge of his Mothers death, every man offering
to spend his goods and life in that quarrel; yet the business was so timed out
that summer, by the private dealing of certain Counselors, as hopes were given
to the Queen, The King is informed of certain speeches uttered by the Master of
Gray, 20. Apr.
that matters should compose, and a more peaceable course be taken.

It was at this time that Sir William Stewart brother to Captain James,
returned again to Court, and gave his attendance upon the Master of Gray. The
Master then was plotting a change of Court, and had conspired with the Lord
Maxwel to kill the Lord Thirlstane, Sir James Home of Coldingknowes, and Mr.
Robert Douglas, Collector, whose power with the King he greatly envied. This he
reveals to Sir William, as one that he believed would take part in the
business; and to make him the more forward, tells, that it was Thirlstane, the
Justice Clerk, Blantyre, and himself that brought in the Lords at Striveling,
and put his brother from Court, which he repented, and would help so far as
he could, to recall him. Sir William knowing the man's nature, and that he was
not to be trusted, gave him some hopes of joining with him, but in the mean
time related all to the King. This coming to Thirlstanes knowledge, he
complains thereof in Council, and desires a trial. The Master denied that
any such purpose had passed betwixt them; whereupon Sir William was called, and
standing to that he had told the King, they two fell a contesting; after some
bitter speeches, Sir William taking him up roundly, said, that he deserved no
credit, as having abused his embassage to England, and treacherously consented
to the death of the Kings Mother.

There had a rumor gone of a letter written by the Master to the Queen of
England after his parting from that Court, The Master of Gray and Sir William
Stewart committed.
advising her to put the Queen of Scots out of the way; and the words he had
used, Mortui non mordent, Dead folks bite not, were in every man's mouth: and
now the challenge being made public the Council moved the King to put the
Master to trial, and commit both the one and the other. So were they both the
same night sent to the Castle of Edinburgh. The Lord Thirlstane, and those
others that were touched with the enterprise of Striveling, made great instance
to be cleared in that point, but the King not liking to search too deeply in
those businesses, said, That their own purgation, with the Declaration of the
Noblemen that came home at that time, was sufficient. There were present of
that number, the Lord Hamilton, the Earls of Mar and Bothwel, who upon oath
declared, that they had no assurance from any about the King at the time of
their coming, till they were received by his Majesty in favor. The like
purgation was made by the Lord Thirlstane, the Justice Clerk, and the rest, and
so that business ceased.

After some two or three days, Sir William Stewart insists in the challenge of
the Master of Gray.
the Master of Gray and his accuser were brought again before the Council,
where the same things that before we heard, being repeated by Sir William
Stewart, he added further, That he knew the Master to be a traffiquer against
Religion, and that he had written diverse letters to the King of France, and
Duke of Guise, declaring that the King was to seek their assistance, in revenge
of his mothers death, but entreated them not to grant him any help, unless he
did grant toleration to the Catholics, for exercise of their Religion. The
Master being desired to answer, and as he looked for any favor to deal
ingenuously, and confess the truth, said, That he could not deny his dealing
for toleration of Catholics, and that he disliked some of the officers of
State, and could have wished an alteration, but that ^e never had so much as a
thought against his Majesty's person, beseeching to impute these things wherein
he had offended, to his youth and foolish ambition. Being enquired touching the
letter sent to the Queen of England, he confessed, That when he perceived her
inclining to take the Queen of Scots life, he advised her rather to take her
away in some private way, then to do it in form of Justice; and acknowledged
the words Mortui non mordent, to be his, but not used by him to the sense they
were detorted.

His confession did liberate his accuser, Sir William Stewart liberated, and
the Master of Gray imprisoned.
who was presently set at liberty, and he himself sent to the Tolbuith of
Edinburgh to attend his arraignment, which was made a few days after. There,
having repeated the same things in effect, he submitted himself to the Kings
mercy; who thereupon gave order to the Justice to banish him the Realm, and in
case he did return without license to pronounce the sentence of death. Mean
while he was prohibited to go either into England or Ireland, under the like
pain. A punishment too mild, as many at that time judged, for crimes so hateful
and odious. But the innated clemency of the King, and his unwillingnesse to use
rigor toward them whom he had once favored, did not suffer him to inflict
the punishment which the offense had merited.

Captain James* Captain Iame, information against the Lord Thirlstane.
who since the enterprise of Striveling had lurked amongst his friends, did now
begin to show himself, and importune the King, with delations of Thirlstan: and
some other Counselors, as being accessory to his mothers death, and having a
purpose to deliver him into England. An. 1587.
These informations he sent enclosed in a letter to the King by Henry Stewart
of Craigihall. The King communicating the same to the Council, direction was
given to charge him to enter his person within the Palace of Linlithgow, and
remain there till the truth of these delations should be tried: certifying him
that if he failed to obey, process of forfeiture should be laid against him,
as a sower of discord betwixt the King and his Nobility. When at the time
prefixed he entered not, Thirlstane created Chancellor.
the office of Chancellary, whereof as yet he used the title, was declared
void, and bestowed upon the Lord Thirlstane.

The King being now 21. years complete, A Parliament indicted at Edinburgh.
a Parliament was indicted to be holden at Edinburgh the 29. of July, for a
preparation thereto, and that the King might find the better assistance, the
Noblemen were sent for, they especially betwixt whom there were known to be any
quarrels. At their coming the King did press them with a submission of all
controversies, The Noblemen reconciled
and having obtained their consents, made them all friends. Only William Lord
Yester refusing to reconcile with Traquaire, was committed and sent to the
Castle of Edinburgh, where he was detained some months, till that variance was
also composed. Such content the King conceived of their agreement, that he did
feast them all royally at Halirudhouse, thereafter caused them walk in hands
two and two in form of procession, from the Palace to the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, where they sealed their concord by drinking healths one to another,
to the exceeding great joy of all the beholders.

A general Assembly was then also called by his Majesty's Proclamation to the
20. of June, A general Assembly of the Church.
where the King did purpose to have all matters settled betwixt him and the
Church; The Kings propositions to the Assembly by his Commissioners.
but this meeting had not the like success. For the Chancellar, and Justice
Clerk being sent thither with certain Articles, of which two specials were to
desire satisfaction for the offenses committed by James Gibson and Mr. John
Cowper, Ministers; and that Mr. Robert Montgomery might be received without any
ceremonies into their fellowship; answer was made, That if the Petitions of the
Church in the approaching Parliament should be granted, they would labor to
bring matters to such a midst, as might best agree with the honor of the
Ministry, satisfy the offense of the godly, and the conscience of their
brethren, against whom his Majesty had taken offense. And for Mr. Robert
Montgomery, they should dispense with some ceremonies used in admitting
excommunicants, in case the King was willing to remit somewhat of the
satisfaction craved of the other two brethren. This answer did so displease the
King, as refusing to enter into any such capitulations, he left off all further
treating with them at that time.

But Montgomery being redacted to great necessity, Montgomery resigneth the
Bishopric of Glasgow to Mr. William Ereskin.
and not knowing what course to take (for the Duke of Lennox his agents having
possessed themselves in the Bishopric, he was no more acknowledged) did resign
his title in favor of Mr. William Areskin Parson of Campsie, a friend and
follower of the Earl of Mar. This Gentleman being well beloved of the
Ministry, and otherwise of good parts, obtained the consent of the Presbytery
of Glasgow, and was admitted thereto by them, although he was a Laick and bare
no charge in the Church. They being called to an account of this their doing in
the next Assembly, excused themselves, saying, That since Churchmen were not
permitted to enjoy the Bishopric, they esteemed it better he should in title
of it then any other, and that he had given his bonds to renounce the same, in
case the general Assembly did not allow of his admission. The excuse for the
time was accepted, yet their doing was disallowed, and they ordained to pursue
him upon his bonds for disanulling the admission: but he found means to retain
the same, till Bishop James Beaton (who lived in France) was restored.
Montgomery his resignation being then made public, he was shortly after, as
informally absolved as he was excommunicated, and placed at a Church in
Cunningham, where he lived in a poor estate to his death.

The Parliament keeping at the time appointed, The Churches petition to the
Parliament against the Prelates.
Mr. David Lindesay, Mr. Robert Pont, and some others, having Commission from
the Church, did present themselves in the Parliament house at the first
sitting, and in name of the Church desired the Prelates that were presented to
be removed, as having no authority from the Church, and the most of them no
function, nor charge in it at all. Mr. Edward Bruce. Abbot of Kinlosse, rising
up and directing his speech to the King, made a long discourse of the right
they had to sit, and give voice for the Church in these meetings; complaining,
that the Ministers had most disorderly shut them forth of their places in the
Church, and now they thought to exclude them from their places in the Estate,
which they hoped his Majesty would not suffer, and would punish as a
presumptuous arrogance, on the part of the Petitioners. Mr. Robert Pont
replying some what bitterly, the King willed them to be quiet, and present
their Petitions orderly to the Lords of the Articles, where they should be
answered according to reason. When it came to the Articles, this being in the
front of their Petitions, was simply rejected; some other Petitions were
passed, as they had desired, for ratifying all laws made in the Kings minority
in favors of the Church, for trying and censuring the adversaries of true
Religion, and for the punishment of such as did menace or invade the Ministers
of the Church.

It was in this Parliament, The temporalty of Benefices annexed to the Crown.
that the temporality of Benefices was annexed to the Crown upon a pretext of
bettering the Patrimony thereof, and that the King might have means to bear
forth the honor of his Estate, and not burden his subjects with taxations for
his support. This was the public pretext, and the King made to believe that
the reservation of the Prelates houses, and precincts, with the tithes of the
Churches annexed to their benefices, would suffice to maintain their dignity
and estate. But privately to such of the ministry as sought the subversion of
Episcopal government, it was whispered, That this was the only way to undo the
Prelacy, for there being no livings to maintain them (as in this case there
would be little or nothing remaining, most of the Bishoprics being founded on
temporal lands, and having but Churches annexed) none would be found to accept
those places: which also proved true. Hopes besides were given to those
Ministers, that they should have the tithes to use, and dispone at their
pleasure; yet was it not long, ere the King did find himself abused, the
temporalities formerly disponed, (which were not a few) being all in the same
Parliament confirmed and those that remained, in a short time begged from him,
and given away to the followers of Court, so as nothing was left to benefit, or
reward any well deserving servant. When as he saw this, and that the spiritual
Estate was by this mean utterly decayed, The King forthinketh the passing of
the annexation.
the Priors and Abbots being all turned temporal Lords, he did sore forthink
the passing of the Act, calling it (...) (...) lib. 2. page 43.
a vile and pernicious Act, and recommending to the Prince his son, the
annulling thereof. The Ministers that looked for restoring the tithes,
perceiving themselves likewise deluded, began also to exclaim, and condemn the
course, howbeit somewhat too late.

In the same Parliament an Act was made in favor of the small Barons, The
small Barons admitted to give voice in Parliament.
giving them by their Commissioners a voice in Parliament, and Conventions with
the others Estates. The Earl of Crawford did strongly oppose, and in name of
the Nobility protested against their receiving. That which the King intended by
this, was to free the Barons of their dependence upon Noblemen, and have the
Estates more particularly informed at their meeting of the abuses in the
country. But so far was he from obtaining these ends, as to the contrary
they did work him great business in all the ensuing Parliaments.

Soon after the Estates dissolved, The Lord Hunsdon has presence of the King.
the Lord Hunsdon Governor of Berwick, sent to entreat presence of the King,
who yielded the more willingly, because he of all the Nobility of England, had
meddled least in the proceedings against his Mother. The Nobleman proposing the
same reasons in effect which Walsingham had used in his letter to the
Chancellor, and laying before the King the danger, wherein he might bring the
title and right of succession, (which otherwise was undoubted) if he should
enter into open war with England; did earnestly beseech him, seeing that
which was done could not be undone, to give place unto necessity, promising
(because it was still beaten into the Kings ears, that the execution of his
Mother did bar his succession) to bring unto him a Declaration under the
hands of all the Judges of England, that the sentence given against his Mother,
was no hurt to his right, nor could work any prejudice to his succession.

This conference did break the King very much from his resolution, A
Proclamation against incursions in England.
yet the outcries of the country were great, and their desires so vehement for
revenge, that he parted with Hunsdon in doubtful terms. But when the
Declaration of the Judges, which he had promised, was brought unto him, and
therewith the sentence given against Davison in the Star Chamber, (whereby it
appeared that the execution was done without the Queens knowledge) he became
more appeased, and suffered Proclamations to go out, inhibiting all that dwelt
in the Borders, to make incursions upon England as they were begun to do.

About the same time did Patrick Vaus of Barnbarrough, The Ambassadors sent
into Denmark, return.
and Mr. Peter Young his Majesty's Elemosynar (who had bin sent unto Denmark to
treat of the marriage 15. May.
) return Latter end of August.
making report of their agreement: whereupon conclusion was taken, that in the
opening of the spring, a Nobleman should be directed to accomplish the
ceremonies, and bring home the young Queen. But the death of King Frederick her
Father, who departed this life in the month of April next, with other
occasions that intervened, made the business to be delayed certain months.

In the end of the year there came from beyond Sea diverse Jesuits and Priests,
A Proclamation against Jesuits and Priests.
to deal with the Catholic Noblemen for assisting the Spanish Armada, which
was then preparing to invade England, if possibly they should take land in
Scotland; for their hope was to find the King favorable, because of the Queens
proceedings against his Mother, and that he should join his forces with the
Spanish, for revenge of that wrong. But he considering his own danger, if
strangers should set foot in the Isle, and not trusting that the Spaniard would
take the pains to conquer for him the Crown of England, (for that also was
proffered) refused to give ear unto such motions. Mr. James Gordon Jesuit, and
Uncle to the Earl of Huntley, had been all the summer before in the country,
and was overseen because of his Nephew, whom the King intended to match with
the Duke of Lennox his eldest sister; neither was he much feared, as being a
simple man, and not deeply learned; Mr. Edmond Hay brother to Peter Hay of
Megnish, a Jesuit also, but of greater account, and more politic and wise, did
thereafter arrive, pretending that he came to take his farewell of his friends,
and after him came diverse others, which made the King give out a Proclamation
against the resetters, and for apprehending their persons.

In this Proclamation, The Jesuits find caution to depart.
besides Mr. James Gordon and the said Mr. Edmond Hay, I find named Mr. Gilbert
Brown Abbot of Newbottle, Mr. John Drury son natural to George Drury sometimes
Abbot of Dunfermling, Mr. Alexander Mackwhirry, Mr. James Cheyn, Mr. Alexander
Meldrum, Mr. William Crichton, Mr. James Seaton, and Mr. John Morton; most of
these upon their supplications and sureties given to depart in the first ships,
obtained a protection unto the last of January: which did so offend the
Ministers, A general Assembly of the Church.
as they did call a number of Noblemen, Barons, and Commissioners of Burghs, to
meet at Edinburgh the sixth of February, for advising upon some remedy against
the present dangers. The meeting was frequent, and Mr. Robert Bruce by the
suffrages of all chosen to preside. He had preached ordinarily at Edinburgh a
year or somewhat more, and was in great respect with all sorts of people, but
had not entered as yet unto the ministerial function.

Certain assessors chosen according to the custom, A Proposition made for the
dangers threatened to Religion.
the first thing proposed, was touching the dangers threatened to Religion, and
the readiest means for quenching the fire of Papistry kindled through the whole
country, which they were all greatly exhorted to take to heart, and to
consider what course was best, to obviate these dangers. And to the end things
might be done advisedly, the Noblemen were advised to meet apart, the Barons
and Commissioners of Burghes likewise apart, to set down their advice in
writing, and present the same to the whole Assembly the next Session.

The day following all being convened, The advice of the Noblemen and Barons.
the advice of the Noblemen and Barons was presented, containing three heads.
1. That the laws of the country should be prosecuted against Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, Idolaters, and the maintainers thereof. And for the more speedy
effectuating of the same, that the names of all such should be enrolled, and
delivered to the Thesaurer, with the names of their resetters, and
entertainers, to the end citations might be directed against them. 2. That in
regard of the danger so imminent, his Majesty and Council should be earnesty
solicited to proceed in execution of the laws against the principal Jesuits,
and their maintainers without delay. 3. That the Noblemen, Barons, Ministers,
and whole Assembly should go together to his Majesty, and regrate the peril
whereunto the Church and Kingdom was brought by the practices of Jesuits,
making offer of their lives, lands, and friendship to be employed at his
Majesty's direction for preventing their wicked devices.

This advice being approved, The King refuses access to the multitude.
command was given to meet at two of the clock in the afternoon, that all might
go together from the place of the Assembly to the Palace of Halirudhouse, where
the King then remained. When this was told to the King, and that they were to
present themselves in such numbers, he grew into choler, and said, They meant
to boast him with their power, and force the execution of their demands.
Therefore refusing access to the multitude, some few of the principals only
were called, to whom he uttered his dislike of those irreverent and tumultuary
forms. Yet because he did acknowledge their complaint to be just, and that
there was need of a remedy to the evils complained of, he promised to appoint
six of the Council to meet with such as the Assembly should design, for
advising upon the best remedies.

This reported to the Assembly, A conference betwixt certain of the Council and
the Assembly.
they did nominate the Lords of Wedderburn, Colluthie, Caprinton, Ormston, and
Whittingham, John Iohnston Commissioner for Edinburgh, Oliver Peblis for Perth,
and William Menzeis for Aberdene: Mr. Robert Pont, David Lindesay, Andrew
Melvil, and Peter Blackburn to attend. These convening the next day, with the
Chancellor and some others of the Council, did urge in name of the Church, That
Mr. James Gordon, and Mr. William Crichton Jesuits, who were known to be in
Town, should be apprehended; and that the resetters of Jesuits and Priests,
none excepted, whether they were Noblemen, or others of an inferior degree,
should be punished according to the laws. For the Noblemen, the Chancellor
answered, that the King did mean to use them more calmly, and as he had begun
with the Earl of Huntley (of whose conversion there were good hopes) so he
would proceed with others of that degree. For the two Jesuits, it was promised,
that order should be taken for their dispatch forth of the country.

The Assembly no ways pleased with the report of this conference, The
grievances of the Church, presented to the King.
resolved to present their griefs to his Majesty in writing, and insist for a
more direct answer to their desires, as they did, exhibiting therewith the
names of Jesuits, Priests, and their resetters, such as had been delated to the
Assembly. Among others they complained of the Lord Hereis, and the disorders
committed by him at Dumfreis, where he had openly erected Mass, and forced the
Ministers to leave the Town. The King having considered the griefs, made
answer, That albeit they had no warrant from him to assemble at that time, yet
(as he had signified before to the Noblemen that were sent unto him) he was
glad to hear that they were convened in so frequent a number, the business
being of such importance, and that he should do what became him as a King to
do, neither should any of those that he found unreclameable, have credit or
countenance of him. For the Lord Hereis, he said, that he was more offended
with him, then any of themselves, and had resolved to take journey in the
beginning of March unto Dumfreis, for punishing that and all other insolences
committed by him.

This answer reported by the Chancellor, The Minister James Gibson censured for
his speeches against the King.
gave some content, thereafter as he was directed, he showed the Assembly that
the King did expect a reparation of the offense committed by the Minister James
Gibson, for he had obtained his liberty, upon promise that he should give
satisfaction at the Churches sight. Hereupon the Minister was called, who
acknowledged his offense, and was enjoined the next Sermon day to preach, and
publicly acknowledge the speeches complained of, to have been unadvised and
rashly uttered. This he promised to do, yet when he came to the place, he made
no mention at all of that business; and being immediately charged for not
doing that he had promised, he answered, That out of infirmity and weakness he
had confessed a fault, albeit his conscience did tell him, he had not spoken
any thing that might give just offense. The Chancellor perceiving the man's
inconstancy, and that he had been diverted by some ill disposed persons,
required the judgment of the Assembly, Whether or not they did esteem it an
offense, to call the King a persecutor of the Church, and to affirm in pulpit,
that he should be the last of that race. The question was a while declined, An.
1588.
yet in end being put to voices, it was found, that the speeches were
slanderous and offensive, and that he ought therefore to be censured.

It being then 12. of the clock, the defining of the censure was continued to
the afternoon, and the Minister warned to attend. The hour come, and he not
appearing, the business was greater then before; some alleging that citation
must be used, ere any censure was inflicted, others excused his absence upon
just fear, being pursued by so great personages. Hereto it was replied, That
there was no fear of any indirect or violent course to be taken; the King, who
by his own authority might have punished him, having for the regard he carried
to the Church, choosed to complain to the Assembly, and remit the offender to
be censured by themselves. Next for the citation required, it was answered,
That the warning given him in the face of the Assembly was sufficient, Gibson
suspended from his ministry.
and that by his not appearing, he had added contumay to his offense. These
answers being held sufficient, and the voices asked touching his censure; by the
greater number he was ordained to be suspended from the ministry, during the
pleasure of the Assembly. Yet this did not end the business; for in August
thereafter, another Assembly being convened, the Minister appearing declared,
That the reason why he withdrew himself in the former Assembly, was not any
contempt or stubbornness on his part, but the care he had of the Churches
peace, the affairs whereof, as he was informed, had been cast off if he had
compeired, and not been punished. Upon this Declaration, without once
acquainting the King, he was purged of contumacy, and thereby a way made to his
reponing. The King, as he had reason, being greatly offended with these
proceedings, and intending to right himself otherwise, the Minister fled to
England, and remained there a long space, entertained by the factious brethren
in those parts, who were laboring at that time to bring in the holy
discipline, as they termed it, into that Church.

The Lord Hereis in the mean time being certified of the Kings intended
expedition into the West Marches, The Lord Hereis cleared of the accusation
made against him.
prevented him and came to Court, offering himself to trial; nothing being
found but certain neglects in the administration of his office (for the
complaint of erecting Mass at Dumfreis, and compelling the Minister to leave
the Town, was not verified.) Upon promise to amend, and surety given that he
should resort to Sermons, and suffer nothing to be done within his Wardenry to
the prejudice of Religion, he was sent back to his charge.

Soon after the Lord Maxwel, who had been licenced to go abroad, and had
remained some months in Spain; having seen the preparation made for invading
of England, by the advice of some Scottish Catholics, returned into the
country (notwithstanding the assurance he had given not to return without
license) taking land at Kirkudbright (a part of Galloway) about the end of
April. The Borders begin to stir upon the Lord Maxwels return.
It was then expected that the Navy should take their course to the West parts
of Scotland where they might land more safely, and with the assistance of
Maxwel and others that would join with them, enter into England by the Borders;
which if they had done, would doubtless have been more to their advantage, but
they took their counsels, as we shall hear.

Upon Maxwels return number of broken men, The Kings expedition to Dumfreis.
and country people resorted unto him, conjecturing there was somewhat in hand
which would give them work. The Lord Hereis not able to command them, and
fearing if any disorder arose, the same should be imputed to him, came and
showed the King what appearance there was of trouble. Charges were incontinent
directed for Maxwels appearing before the Council, but he disobeyed, and
fortifying his houses, and other strengths that he had in custody, began to
levy some companies of foot and horse: which being told to the King, he with
such forces as he could have of a sudden, took journey to Dumfries, and came
upon him so unexpected, as he had almost surprised hin in his house at
Dumfries. But upon warning given him, an hour before the Kings coming he
escaped and went to Galloway. Some little resistance was made at the Port,
which gave him leisure to escape, and was excused by the Towns ignorance of the
King his being there in person.

The next narrow which was the 28 of May, the houses of Lochmaben, Langholm,
Treve, and Carlaverok, were summoned to render; all which obeyed, the Castle of
Lochmaben excepted. This was kept by one Mr. David Maxwell, who trusting
foolishly to the strength, Lochmaben rendered, and the Keeper executed.
refused to yield, though the King himself going thither, did call him by name
(for he knew the man) commanding him to render. Upon his disobedience the house
was enclosed; and because there was no munition at hand whereby to batter it, a
Post was directed to borrow some Ordinance from the English Warden, which was
quickly conveyed thither, and a company of soldiers sent to guard the same.
These began no sooner to play, then the Keepers terrified with the noise,
craved a parley. Sir William Stewart brother to Captain James, being employed
to confer with them they yielded, upon promise as was said, that their lives
should be spared. But the Captain, because he had refused the King himself at
first, was hanged, the rest were pardoned, and suffered to depart.

The King returning the same night to Dumfreis, The Lord Maxwel taken prisoner
at sea by Sir William Stewart, and brought prisoner to Edinburgh.
directed Sir William Stewart to try what course Maxwell had taken, and to do
as he found occasion: having learned that he had taken sea in a small Bark, he
followed in a ship rigged forth by the town of Air, and overtaking him some
miles off, brought him back and delivered him prisoner to the King, who was
then returned to Edinburgh. It was no small piece of service, and by all men so
esteemed. But the countenance the King gave him, Sir William Stewart killed by
Bothwel Penult. Iulii.
made the man so swell, as falling in a contest for I know not what matter,
with the Earl of Bothwel, he used some uncivil speeches to the Nobleman, who
meeting him a few days after in the high street of Edinburgh, did in a sudden
conflict kill him outright.

The news of the Spanish Navy being then divulged, A meeting of the Estates
upon the rumor of the Spanish Navy beginning of August.
and the King advertised of their setting forth; he called the Estates to a
meeting at Edinburgh, and imparting to them the advertisements he had received,
did ask their advice how he should carry himself in that business. For
howbeit, said he, I have no great occasion for my self to fear, being under
league and friendship with all Christian Princes and Estates, yet the case of
England ere it be long may turn to be our own, His Majesty's speech to the
Estates.
and we forced to share with them in their troubles. The intention of Spain, I
know, is against England; and considering the right I have to that Crown after
the Queens death that now reigns, I see not how it shall be safe for me, to
let another possess himself of that Kingdom; nor will any man make me to think,
that the King of Spain, if he shall chance to prevail, will part with it, and
give place to my right, having once made conquest thereof. As now whilst the
event is doubtful, they speak fair and make liberal promises; but if matters
succeed to their minds, we shall hear other words. They take Religion for a
pretext of their invasion, but it is the kingdom they seek: and granting that
Religion were the true cause, are not we our selves in the same case with
England? The prosecution of the holy league, will strike no less upon us, then
them. But for my self, I have ever thought mine own safety, and the safety of
Religion to be so conjoined, as they cannot well be separated; neither desire I
to live, to reign any longer then I may serve to maintain the same. I am not
ignorant what the opinion of many is, and that they think I have now a fair
occasion to revenge the wrong and unkindness I received by the death of my
mother. But whatsoever I think of the excuses which the Queen has made to me,
I will not be so foolish, as to take the help of one that is mightier then my
self; nor will I give such liberty to mine own passions, as therefore to
neglect Religion, and cast in hazard both this Kingdom, and those others that
belong to me after her death. By this you see what my mind is, and the reasons
that lead me to it. I I have called you that I may have your counsel and
assistance at this time, and therefore desire to hear of you, what is the best
both for you and me to do.

This speech was seconded by the Chancellor, The Chancellor his speech
seconding the King.
who did out of his reading adduce diverse Histories, to make good what the King
had said, That it was no way expedient to side with Spain in that invasion, or
suffer him to possess himself of England: yet since the Queen had not required
any aid from him, his opinion was, that he should strive to assure his own
Kingdom, and not to permit them to take land in his bounds; That a general
muster should be taken in the whole Realm, and some Noblemen named, unto whom
upon occasion, the subjects might resort, watches appointed at all the
Seaports, and Beacons erected in the highest places, for advertising the
country if any fleet was seen at Sea, and that the King and Council should
stay at Edinburgh to attend the success of things, and direct the subjects
accordingly. His opinion was applauded of all, Bothwell excepted, Bothwel
persuades the invasion of England.
who was earnest to have the occasion embraced of invading England, and therein
was so forward, that upon his own charges he had levied soldiers to serve
under him, if the resolution which he expected should have been taken. But the
King willing him to look unto the Sea, (for he was Admiral by his office) and
to take care that the ships within the country were ready for service, he
acquiesced.

A little after the Convention dissolved, Colonel Semple his arrive at Leth.
Colonel Semple, who had betrayed the town of Lire to the Spaniard some six
years before, and remained for the most part with the Prince of Parma in
Flanders, arrived at Leth, pretending a Commission from that Prince to the
King. But the matters he proponed were of so small importance, as the King
apprehending the Commission to have been given him rather for a color of his
practices, with some ill disposed subjects, then for the business pretended;
commanded Sir John Carmichael Captain of the Guard, to have an eye upon him
unto his return, (for he was then going to Falkland) and if he perceived any
letters brought unto him in the mean time, to take and present them to the
Council, Carmichael getting notice that a Pinnace was arrived in the Firth, and
a passenger landed, went straight to the Colonels lodging in Leth, and finding
him unsealing the letters, The Colonel apprehended, and relieved by the Earl of
Huntley.
showed what he had in charge, and what it concerned him to present the same to
the Lords. The Colonel offering to go himself to the Council, the Earl of
Huntley who did then reside in a lodging near the Palace of Halirudhouse, with
his young Lady whom he had married a few days before, 21. July.
upon notice of his apprehension did meet Carmichael in the way, and forced him
to quit his prisoner, saying, that he would enter him to the Council.
Advertisement going of this to the Chancellor, who was then at the Evening
service in S. Giles (for it was a time of public humiliation) he came forth,
and being followed by a great number of people, made toward Huntley, and had
certainly taken back the Colonel, if the King who was then come from Falkland,
had not happened to encounter him as he went down the street, with whom he
returned to the lodging within the City, where at that time, and most of the
Winter, the King did keep his residence.

There the Chancellor declared what had fallen out, Huntley offers to present
the Colonel to the Council.
and whither he was going, entreating his Majesty to take some order with the
insolency committed. Huntley being called, after some frivolous excuse, did
promise to present the Colonel the next morning, but he escaping the same
night, was not any more seen. The King did highly offend at his escape, yet was
loath to use the Nobleman with rigor, having matched him so lately to his
Cosen; only he discharged him to come in his presence, neither was he admitted
unto it till the news were brought of the dissipation of the Navy; and then as
in a time of public joy, that fault was overseen and pardoned.

The Queen of England in the mean time hearing what course the King had taken,
Sir Robert Sidney sent from England to the King, 29. August.
how he had committed Maxwel to prison, and was preparing to resist the
Spaniard; sent Sir Robert Sidney to give him thanks for his good affection, and
to make offer of her assistance, if the Spaniard should make offer to land in
Scotland. The King received him graciously, and as he was discoursing of the
ambition of Spain, and his purpose to take in England, said, that the King
needed not to expect any greater kindness at his hand, if he prevailed. The
King merrily answered, That he looked for no other benefit of the Spaniard in
that case, then that which Polyphemus promised to Ulysses; namely, to devour
him after all his fellows were devoured. Neither did Sidney sooner return,
then a fresh advertisement was sent from the Queen of their overthrow.

Of this Navy and the destruction that befell it, The History of the Spanish
Navy.
many have written so particularly, as nothing can be added. Yet because the
benefit redounded to this Church and Kingdom, no less then others; and that
the spoils of that wreck fell for some part in our Northern Isles, we shall
touch it a little. The Navy consisted of 134. sail, a great part whereof were
Galleasses, and rather like Castles pitched in the Seas, then ships. The
vessels carried 8000. sailors, 22000. soldiers and above, besides the
Commanders, and voluntary adventurers, who were reckoned 124. and for provision
they had abundance of whatsoever was necessary, either at sea or at land. Their
direction was to join with the Prince of Parma, and his forces, who were
appointed to meet them in the narrow Seas, and to invade England together. But
whether the Prince had not time sufficient to prepare himself, or that he was
kept in by the Holland Fleet, he came not as was expected. At Plimmouth the
English had the first sight of the Navy, and kept combat with them till they
anchored in the road of Callais. Before they came thither, they lost the
Gallion wherein Don Pedro de Valder, and diverse other Noblemen were, which was
taken in fight and sent to Plimmouth. And the Gallion commanded by Don Michael
de Oquendo, took fire, and therein many were burnt to death, yet the nether
part of the ship, being saved, was likewise sent thither. The Galliasse of
Naples commanded by Don Hugo de Moncada perished in the sands of Callais; where
whilst they lay at Anchor, Captain Drake by a stratagem put them in great
confusion; Captain Drakes stratagem.
for choosing out eight small ships that were least useful, he filled them with
pitch, brimstone, gunpowder, and the like combustible matter, and charged the
Ordinance with bullets, stones, broken iron, and chains. The ships driven with
the wind and tide into the midst of the Navy, and the trains taking fire, put
the Spanish in such fear, (the same falling out in the night season) as having
no leisure to weigh their Anchors, they were forced to cut their Cables, and
make to the Sea.

The next morning ranging themselves again in order, they approached to
Graveling; but no supply coming from Parma, and the English ships hotly
pursuing them, they were compelled to passeby. In this conflict perished the
Gallion of Biskay, and two other great ships. Two Gallions of Portugal, the one
called S. Philip, the other S. Matthew having lost their tackling, and being
torn with shot, made toward the coast of Flanders, and were taken by the
Zelanders. Once as it seemed, the General with the rest of the Navy, bent their
course toward Scotland, but not knowing what favor they should find there,
and the wind blowing fair, they resolved to make home by the North Isles. The
General himself with the best provided vessels, The Navy returns to Spain.
took the main Ocean toward Biscay; and arrived safely in Spain. The rest
seeking to take in fresh water, partly in the Isles, and partly in Ireland,
were so tossed with tempests and contrary winds, that 40. and above were cast
away in those Seas. A ship of Florence driven upon the West coast of Scotland,
was spoiled and set on fire by certain Highlanders. Shortly, the destruction
was so great, as of the 134. Ships, that set fail from Lisbone, 53. only
returned to Spain; of the soldiers, besides the mariners, 13500. were lost by
one way or other. And as they write, not a family in Spain of any note there
was, which suffered not in this expedition, having lost either a son or a
brother, or some nigh kinsman. Such was the success of the Spanish Navy, which
had been four years in preparing with no small cost, and in a few days was thus
overthrown; one English ship only being lost, and about 100. men in all. The
King caused solemn thanksgiving for this deliverance to be given to God in all
Churches of the Kingdom, beginning in his own Court for an ensample to others.

This was the mavelous year, The death of Archibald Earl of Angus.
talked of so long before by the Astrologues, which this defeat, and the
accidents that fell forth in France about the end of the same year, did in a
part make good. In this kingdom (which we ought ever to remember with
thankfulness to Almighty God) happened no dysaster, for which we had cause to
be grieved, the death of Archibald Earl of Angus excepted, who deceased in the
month of July: a Nobleman as in place and rank, so in worth and virtue above
other subjects; of a comely personage, affable and full of grace, a lover of
Justice, peaceable, sober, and given to all goodness, and which crowned all
his virtues, truly pious. A long time he lived in exile in England, not through
his own fault, but the misfortune of his friends, whom he could not forsake.
After he was restored to the Kings favor, no man did carry himself in better
sort, and in that time which was full of factions, he kept himself free of all
partakings; being employed in the Lieftenandry of the Borders, he discharged
himself to his Majesty's great content, and to the liking of all the subjects;
and not long after, fell into that disease, whereof he died, leaving no heir
male, and one only daughter by his second marriage, who did not long survive
him. An. 1589.
Never died any Nobleman with greater regrate, and so much the more was his
death lamented, that as it was then thought, and afterward confessed, that he
was taken away by forcery and incantation. In the time of his sickness, His
disposition in his sickness.
when the Physicians found his disease not to proceed of any natural cause, one
Richard Graham, who was executed some years after for witchcraft, being brought
to give his opinion of it, made offer to cure him, saying, as the manner of
these Wizards is, that he had received wrong. But when he heard that the man
was suspected to use unlawful arts, he would by no means admit him, saying,
That his life was not so dear unto him, as for the continuance of it some years
he would be beholden to any of the Devils instruments; That he held his life of
God, and was willing to render the same at his good pleasure, knowing he should
change it for a better. Thus after a long and languishing disease, he died in
Smeton near to Dalkeith, and was buried in Abernethy, in the sepulcher of his
progenitors. The houses of Angus, and Morton, which within his person were
conjoined, went by provision of Tail to the Lairds of Glenbervy and Lochlevin.

The hopes that our Catholics conceived of the Spanish Navy being now
frustrated, A message from the Prince of Parma to the Catholic Lords.
they had lost heart quite, but that the Prince of Parma did of new encourage
them by his letters, showing that the loss was nothing so great as it was
given out to be, and giving them hopes of another Army that set out more
timely, and to be with them the next spring. These letters were sent by one Mr.
Robert Bruce, and delivered to Huntley, to be communicated with the rest of
that faction. Shortly after came one John Chesholme, bringing with him ten
thousand Crowns, which were delivered to Bruce, to be used as he thought most
fit, for advancing the cause. The Earl of Huntley made instance to have the
third part of the sum; Lord Claud Hamilton pleaded for as much, and Maxwel
lying then in prison, held no less to be due to him. But Bruce excused himself
by the charge he had to dispone the money by the advice of David Graham of
Fintrey, who was warded at the same time in Dundey, and paid them all with one
answer. The Lord Claud more covetous then the rest, because he could not come
by any part of the money, Huntley reconciled to the Church.
grew more cold in the business. Maxwel had some sent him, for his consolation
in the prison: But Huntley, having at the Kings desire subscrived the
confession of faith, and reconciled himself to the Church, was wholly neglected.

This he excused afterward by a letter to the Prince of Parma, professing,
That after the escape of Colonel Semple, he found himself so busied on all
hands, and in such sort pressed by the King, as it behoved him either to yield,
or depart out of the country, Huntley excuses his reconcilement by a letter.
or then to have taken the fields: which well he could not do, all hope of help
being taken from him by the return of the Navy of Spain, but in what he had
failed he should endeavor to amend, by some good service tending to the
advancement of the cause of God, who had put him, he said, in such credit with
the King, as he had broken his former guards, and made him establish others
about his person, by whom at all occasions he might assure himself, and be
Master of the King, and so when the support promised should arrive, spoil the
heretics of his authority, and make sure the Catholics enterprises. Therefore
besought him to be persuaded of his unchangeable affection, albeit in outward
action he was forced to accommodate himself to the necessity of the time. This
letter was dated at Edinburgh the 24. of January 1589.

Another of the same date was sent by the Earl of Arrol (whom Mr. Edmond Hay
the Jesuit had seduced and brought on that course) to Parma, A letter from the
Earl of Arroll to the Prince of Parma.
bearing, That since his conversion to the Catholic faith he did ever think
himself obliged to procure the advancement of the Catholic Kings enterprises,
tending principally to that end, and to another civil cause, which had great
affinity and conjunction with things at home, in regard whereof he said, that
ever before his conversion, he had been in his affection one of his friends,
and servitours; and that Religion, which was the greatest, and most important
cause of the world, being now joined to the other, he was become altogether
his. This he did entreat his Highness to signify to his Catholic Majesty, and
to assure him that in Scotland he had not a more affectionate servant then
himself. The like he did profess to the Prince, remitting his intentions to be
more fully declared by him, that should deliver the letters.

There went other Letters at the same time from the Earls of Huntley, Letters
sent to the King of Spain from the Catholic Lords.
Crawford, and Morton (so did the Lord Maxwel style himself) to the King of
Spain, wherein after they had expressed their great regrate for the
disappointment of his preparations, they said, That if his Naval Army had
visited them, the same should have found no resistance in Scotland, and with
the support they would have made given enough to do to England, but that it
seemed the English Catholics who had their refuge in Spain, out of an
unchristian enmity did extenuate the means of the Scottish aid, to magnify
their own, and to have it thought that they were able to do all by themselves;
Therefore they prayed his Majesty to make such account of the one, as he
neglected not the other, and to serve himself with them both, to the ends he
did aim at. Then remitting to the Declaration of some of his own subjects who
had been in those parts, the commodity and advantage of landing an Army in
Scotland; they said, That having 6000. men of his own country, with money to
levy as many more, they might within six hours of their arrival be well
advanced in England to assist the forces that he should send thither, and that
the expense bestowed upon ane Galliass, would profit more being so employed,
then many of them put to Sea could do. Withal, they advised him not to make
any more Armies by Sea, but to send a part of his forces to Scotland, and
another by the back of Ireland toward England, and so divide the English
forces, which should be partly attending at Sea, partly employed in Scotland,
where they should believe all their forces to be landed. A further Declaration
hereof they remitted to Colonel Semple, and so praying God to give him a full
accomplishment of all his holy enterprises, they took their leave.

Neither were the Jesuits that lurked in the country in this mean time idle;
The Jesuits stir up the Lords to enterprise somewhat by themselves.
of these the principals were, Mr. Edmond Hay, and Mr. William Creichton, who
had been prisoners some few months in the Tower of London. They advising the
Popish Lords to attempt somewhat by themselvus, which would make the King of
Spain more earnest to give succourse; a plot was laid to take the King out of
the Chancellor and Thesaurers hand, by whose counsel they thought he was only
ruled, and that the pretense should be the neglect of the Nobility, and the ill
managing of public affairs. A plot for taking the King.
This way they hoped to procure the assistance of other Noblemen that were
discontented, and that no mention being made of Religion, the country would be
more cold in resisting their enterprise. The time and place of meeting being
condescended on, Fintrie undertook to bring the Earl of Montrosse to the
party, and of Bothwell they held themselves assured, as well for the malice he
professed to the Queen of England, as because in a conference with Bruce the
Spanish Agent, he had promised if he should assure him of the two Abbeys of
Coldingham and Kelso, which he possessed, he should presently turn to their
side.

To bring about this their purpose, A practice against the Chancellor.
the device was, that they should meet all at the quarrel holes betwixt Leth
and Edinburgh, and go from thence to Halirudhouse, and settle themselves about
the King, secluding those two Counselors, or if they found them with the King,
that they should presently kill them. But this device was overthrown by the
Kings remaining in Edinburgh, who suspecting some plots against the Chancellor,
did for his security stay in the same lodging with him. Bothwel abode at that
time in his house at Creichton, and kept about him the soldiers that he had
conduced, pretending a journey to the Isles, and the collecting of the Kings
duties in those parts. Crawford and Arrol came with their friendship to the
North Ferry. Montross saigned a visit of his Cosen Mr. John Graham at
Halyards, some six miles from Edinburgh, and upon advertisement that the King
did keep lodging within the Town, advanced no further. But Huntley who resided
then with his Lady at Dunfermlin, presuming much of the Kings affection, held
on his way, and in the evening on which they had appointed to meet, Huntley
comes to the King.
came unexpected to the Kings lodging, where he found him in conference with
the Chancellor.

The King seeing him brack of his purpose, asked whence he came, and how he fell
to be so late, and from that falling into another discourse, the Chancellor
stepped aside to the window. Huntley had brought with him the Lord of Kinfawns,
brother to the Earl of Crawford, and some of Arrols men, that were esteemed of
best courage and action. These filling the presence, and looking as men that
had some purpose in hand; the Chancellors friends began to suspect the worst,
whereupon the Lord of Ormeston, Carmichael, and the Provost of Linclowden drew
nigh and stood by him, after the King had talked a while with the Earl, he
retired to his Cabinet, and staying somewhat longer then was expected, the
Chancellor asking the Usher if it was time of supper, and he answering, that it
was more then time; then said he, Let us go: and with those three that kept
fast by him, passed forth of the Chamber, and through the company that stood in
the presence (all of them making way) to his own lodgings, which were just
above the Kings rooms. How soon he came there, he sent one to show the King,
how unseemly it was to fill the presence with such companies, and men armed as
they were, saying, that he would not have permitted the same, if he had been
alone in the lodging, nor have cast himself in such danger.

Presently the rooms were ushed, Huntley committed in the Castle of Edinburgh.
and the Earl with his company went forth. The next morning the King sent for
him, and at his coming began to examine wherefore he came to Town, and why in
that manner: his answers not satisfying, he was committed in the Castle. By
advertisement given the same day of the companies that were with Crawford and
Arroll at the North Ferry, and there dissolving, the whole purpose was
discovered, whereupon the Earls of Arroll and Bothwel were cited to appear
before the Council, and for their disobedience denounced Rebels. Montrosse and
Crawford were not called, having excused themselves as it was said, and
promised to meddle no more in that business. Huntley upon the like promise,
after a few days obtained his liberty, Huntley set at liberty.
and went into the North. In his going thither, whether of purpose or by
accident, it is uncertain; the Earl of Crawford did meet him at Perth, where at
first they concluded to fortify the town as a place most convenient for
drawing forces together from all quarters; but doubting how they should make
good the enterprise, they gave it over, and getting intelligence that the
Thesaurer was come to Angus, and had appointed a meeting of some friends at the
Church of Megle; they belayed the ways, and gave him the Chase unto the house
of Ki^khill, where he was received: being desired to render, upon his refuse,
fire was cast to the house, and he forced to yield himself, as he did, to his
Cosen the Lord of Achindown who kept him some weeks prisoner in the North.

The Letters written to the King of Spain, A letter from the Queen of England
to the King.
and Prince of Parma, whereof we made mention, and some others from Mr. Bruce
directed to the same Prince being about this time intercepted, laid open all
the practices of these Noblemen; which being reported to the Queen of England,
she wrote to the King a sharp letter, wherein complaining of his remissness in
punishing these treacheries, and of the entertainment he gave to the Spaniards
that had fled into Scotland, after their wrack in the Irish Seas; she besought
him not to overslip such happy occasions, as it^ had pleased God to offer him
by revealing these practices; as likewise to rid the Realm of those strangers,
and send them away with speed. Hereupon order was taken for their dispatch, and
ships conduced to transport them unto West-Flanders. The Hollanders advertised
of their coming, sent forth some ships to intercept them, and meeting them some
two miles from the coast of Flanders, took one of the vessels and put to the
sword all the Spaniards that were therein, the rest ran their vessels on
ground, where a number seeking to save themselves by swimming, were pitifully
drowned.

A Proclamation was likewise renewed against the Jesuits, The Lords make open
insurrection.
and their ressetters, and Mr. Edmond Hay, Mr. William Creichton, Mr. Robert
Bruce, and David Graham of Fentry, commanded under pain of death to depart the
Realm. But they contemning the charges, did stir up the Earls of Huntley,
Crawford, and Arrol, to make open insurrection. These three taking Arms, and
assembling all the forces they could gather, came to Aberdene in the beginning
of April, where they made Proclamations in the Kings name, Declaring that he
was held captive, and forced against his mind to use his Nobles more rigorously
then he desired, requiring all the Lieges to concur and assist them for
setting his person at liberty. Their hopes were that Bothwel with his
friendship in the South, should make the King such business, as they needed
not to fear any sudden pursuit; but the King having caused denounce Bothwel
and the chief of his followers Rebels, resolved to begin with them, and leave
him to his return. The Subjects warned to accompany the King.
So charges being directed to warn all the subjects remaining on the South of
Aberdene to accompany the King, and they gathering somewhat slowly, he made
forward with those he had in his company toward the middle of April, and having
advanced as far as Cowy (a little Village some ten miles off Aberdene) was
there advertised that the Earls were 3000. strong, and marching directly
toward him.

The King nothing dismayed, His Majesty's speech to the Noblemen in his Army.
called the Noblemen that were in the Army together, and spoke cheerfully unto
them, saying, That they had a great deal of advantage of their enemies, the
better cause, and the King on their part. Neither oaths nor subscriptions, said
he, can assure these men, and if benefits or good deeds could have made them
loyal and obedient, I have not been sparing to them all. Now that I am drawn
against my will by their open Rebellion to use force, I do assure my self of
your fidelity, and that you will not forsake me. I shall desire you stand no
longer then ye see me stand, and howbeit, I do not think they dare set their
faces against me, yet I shall pray you to dispose all things in the best order
you can.

This speech he delivered with such a grace, A question for leading the
Vant-guard.
as thereby the Noblemen, and others that stood by, were greatly encouraged,
every one avowing to do their uttermost for his Majesty's honor. But a
question falling between the Lord Hamilton and the Earl of Angus for leading
the Vant-guard, was like to have caused some trouble; Angus claiming the place
by the privileges granted to his predecessors; and the Lord Hamilton
alleging, that none ought to contend with him in honor, because of his
proximity to the Royal blood: but the King interposing his authority, gave the
leading of the Vant-guard for that time to the Lord Hamilton, reserving the
rights and privileges of the house of Angus, whereunto nothing was done at
that time should work any prejudice.

All that night the King did watch himself, The Lords dissolve their forces.
and kept his Army on foot. In the morning early he was advertised that the
Rebels were dispersed, and gone back: for Huntley understanding that the King
was resolved to put it to a day, declined the fight, because of the danger that
might come to the Kings person; Crawford for the same reason seemed not very
bent: but Arroll insisting to have gone forward, when he saw they would not be
moved, parted from them at the bridge of Dee in great wrath. The King goes to
Aberdene.
The King came the same day to Aberdene, and calling the Magistrates, did
threaten them sharply for receiving the Rebels into their City. They excused
themselves by their weakness, and the want of power to resist the great
forces: which was admitted, upon promise that they should look better to their
town in after times. Whilst the King stayed there, the Noblemen and Barons of
the country came in and made offer of their service, giving surety not to
reset nor intercommune with the Rebels, and to concur with his Majesty's
Lieutenant, when they should be required.

This done the King returned to Edinburgh, He returns to Edinburgh about the
beninning of May.
for he was then about the directing of the Earl of Marshall to Denmark for the
accomplishing of his marriage, and bringing home the Queen; there went with him
Andrew Lord Dingwell, Sir James Scrymgeour of Dudap, Mr. John Sheen Advocate,
and Mr. George Young Archdeacon of S. Andrews. The Earl Marshall goes to
Denmark to accomplish the marriage. 10. June.
For defraying the Ambassadors charges, a Subsidy of an hundred thousand
pounds was granted by the Council, according to a warrant given them in the
Parliament 1587. whereof the subjects made ready payment: so great was their
desire to have the King matched, and the royal succession established in his
race.

The enterprise of the Rebels being in this sort defeated, The Rebels offer to
submit themselves.
the Thesaurer was put to liberty, and at his coming to Court did solicit the
King in favors of the Earl of Huntley and Crawford, who forthinking the
attempt they had made, did offer to enter their persons in Ward, and submit
themselves to the punishment his Majesty should be pleased to impose. The
Chancellor made the like intercession for Bothwell, but for Arroll none did
speak. After the King had thought a little of it, he was content they should
enter, and present themselves to the Justice; but would give no condition. For
this effect the 24. of May was assigned; at the day Mr. Edward Bruce, Mr.
William Oliphant, and Mr. James Wardlaw, sitting Judges in the criminal Court
by Commission, the three Earls compiered. Of Noblemen and others charged to
pass upon their Assise, there were present the Lord Hamilton, the Earls of
Angus, Morton, Atholl, Mar, and Marshall, the Lords Seaton, Somervill,
Dingwell, and Cathcart, the Lairds of Pittarrow, Closburn, Lagg, and the
Constable of Dundy.

These taking oath as the manner is, Huntley, Crawford, and Bothwel impanelled.
the indictment was read, which consisted of seven or eight points, First, they
were charged with practicing with Jesuits, seminary Priests, and other
strangers against Religion, receiving of Spanish gold, The points of their
indictment.
and hiring soldiers therewith to disturb the quiet of the Realm. 2. That they
had entered in bond and confederacy with the Earls of Arroll, Montrosse, and
others contrary to the Laws, kept Conventicles, and treasonably surprised the
Town of Perth, of purpose to have fortified the same against his Majesty. 3.
That they had conspired to take the King prisoner at Halyrudhouse, and kill his
servants, and Counselors, especially Sir John Maitland of Thirlstane
Chancellor. 4. That they had besieged the house of Kirkhill, put fire to the
same, and forced the Master of Glammis Thesaurer to render himself captive. 5.
That they had convocated the subjects by open Proclamation, and given out that
the King was detained prisoner against his will. 6. That they came with
displayed banners to the Bridge of Dee, of mind to invade the King, whom they
knew to be upon an expedition to the North parts. 7. That they had taken the
Kings Herald at Arms in the City of Aberdene, spoiled him of his Coat, and
Letters, when he was about to proclaim them. The 8. and last, concerned
Bothwell particularly, who besides the rest, was charged to have hired
soldiers, as well strangers, as men within the country, entertaining them in
Dalkeith, and threatening to invade the town of Leth, at his Majesty's being in
the North.

Bothwell confessing that he had waged soldiers, The Lords found guilty, and
committed to several Wards.
and entered in bonds with other Noblemen, did therefore put himself in his
Majesty's will, the rest of the points he denied, remitting himself to the
trial of his Peers. Crawford confessed that he was in the fields at the taking
of Kirkhill, and with the Earl of Huntley in Aberdene, but denied the other
points; Huntley come in will for the whole. The Assise removing by themselves,
found Bothwell guilty of the enterprise at the quarrel holes, besides that
which he confessed. They filed Crawford of surprising the Town of Perth, and
coming in Arms to the Bridge of Dee; Huntley by his own confession was found
guilty in all. The sentence upon the Kings Warrant was suspended, and they
committed to diverse places: Bothwell in Tantallon, Crawford in Blackness, and
Huntley in the Castle of Edinburgh.

In June following, An Assembly of the Church at Edinburgh.
the Assembly of the Church convened at Edinburgh, where the King giving his
presence, after he had spoken a little of his good affection toward the
Church; showed that he was come to desire Mr. Patrick Galloway to be appointed
one of his Ministers: the Assembly by the mouth of their Moderator, rendering
his Majesty humble thanks for the beginnings he had made in suppressing the
enemies of Religion, did entreat him to prosecute the business, and made offer
of their humble service and assistance to the uttermost of their power. As to
that which he desired, they acknowledged that his Majesty might command any
Minister wheresoever he served, to attend himself and his Court; and so
ordained Mr. Patrick Galloway to leave his charge at Perth, and wait upon the
King.

It was a good beginning, and this gave no small content to all well disposed
men. But things continued not long in that case, for before that meeting took
an end, a fresh offense was given. The year preceding, the King having
contracted his Cosen the Duke of Lennox his sister to the Earl of Huntley, had
caused the Bishop of S. Andrews celebrate the marriage, The Bishop of S.
Andrews deprived for the marriage of Huntley.
at which the Ministers of Edinburgh taking exception, they complained of the
same, in a preceding Assembly, and had obtained a Commission to the Presbytery
for calling and censuring the Bishop according to the Acts of the Church.
Whether the Bishop would not ackowledge them for Judges, or that he esteemed
his Majesty's command a Warrant sufficient for what he had done; whilst as he
neglected their proceedings, they pronounce him deprived from all office and
function in the Church; and presenting the process in this assembly, the same
was found formal, the sentence ratified, and ordained to be published in all
the Churches of the Kingdom, only to make the Bishop hateful, and
contemptible. He complains to the King, who showed himself extremely
displeased with their doings; but what course he should take he was doubtful,
for every day he was expecting the arrival of his Queen, and loved to have all
things quiet, and settled at her coming, especially in the Church; with whom it
grieved him not a little to be still in question: but espying no better way, he
resolved in end to dissemble his anger toward them, and to take the imprisoned
Lords in favor, lest he should make himself too much business. Thereupon he
returns to the North^ gives Arroll a pardon, puts Crawford to liberty, The
course taken with the imprisoned Lords.
and fully remits him; Huntley and Bothwell he freeth from imprisonment, but to
hold them in awe, he deferres the Declaration of his will concerning them. The
Lord Maxwel, upon his bond not to practice against Religion, under the pain of
an hundred thousand pounds, is likewise dimitted.

And in this case stood things when advertisement came that the marriage was
accomplished, Advertisement to the King of the marriage with the Queen.
and the Queen ready to take Sea. All diligence was thereupon used to prepare
for her reception, and nothing left undone that was required for so great a
solemnity. But a second and unlookt for message comes shortly after, showing
that the Navy appointed for her conduct was driven by a tempest into Norway,
and that it was thought she should stay in those parts unto the spring. The
King taking this impatiently, The King intends a journey to Norway.
concludes with himself to go thither in person; and because he knew many
impediments would be made, if his purpose were known, he gives out that he
would send the Chancellor and Justice Clerk to transport her in Scottish
Vessels, if the Danes would not adventure theirs in that season. How soon the
ships were prepared for their journey, no man expecting any such matter, he
takes Sea himself, 22. October.
leaving direction to the Council for the government of affairs during his
absence, with the following Declaration written all with his own hand, but not
seen to any till he was gone.

In respect I know that the motion of my voyage will be at this time diversely
scanned, He leaves a Declaration under his hand.
and misinterpreting may be made as well to my dishononr, as to the blame of
innocents; I have thought fit to leave this Declaration, for resolving all good
subjects, first of the causes that moved me to undertake this voyage, then in
the fashion in which I resolved to make the same. As to the causes, I have been
generally blamed by all men for deferring my marriage so long, being alone,
without Father, Mother, Brother or Sister; and yet a King not only of this
Realm, but heir apparent of another. This my nakedness made me weak, and mine
enemies strong; for one man is no man as they speak, and where there is no hope
of succession, it breeds contempt, and disdain; yea the delay I have used has
begot in many a suspicion of impotency in me, as if I were a barren stock;
These and other reasons moved me to hasten my marriage, from which I could yet
have longer abstained, if the weal of my country could have permitted. I am
not known to be rash in my weightiest affairs, neither am I so carried with
passion as not to give place to reason; but the treaty being perfected, and the
Queen on her journey, when I was advertised of her stay by contrary winds, and
that it was not like she should perfect her voyage this year, I resolved to
make it on my part possible, which was unpossible on hers.

The place where I first took this resolution was in Craigmillar, none of my
Council being present; and as I took it by myself, so I bethought me of a way
to follow the same. And first I advised to employ the Earl of Bothwel in the
voyage, in regard he is Admiral; but his preparations took so long a time, that
I was forced to call the Council, and send for the Chancellor and Justice
Clerk, who were then in Lawder. When as they met, they found so many
difficulties in sending forth a number of ships for the Queens convey (for so I
gave it out) and who should be the Ambassadors, that I was compelled to avouch,
if none should be found to go, I should go my self alone in a ship: adding that
if men had been as willing as became them, I would not have needed to have been
in these straits: This the Chancellor taking to touch him (for he knew he had
been standered all that time for impeding my marriage) partly out of zeal to my
service, and partly fearing that I should make good my word, if no better way
could be found, made offer to go himself in that service. This I embraced,
keeping my intention from all men, because I thought it enough for me to put my
foot in a ship when all things were ready, and from the Chancellor himself,
(from whom I never kept any of my weightiest businesses) for two reasons.
First, because if I had made him of my Council in that purpose, he had been
blamed, for putting the same in my head, (which had not been his duty) for it
becomes no subject to give his Prince advice in such matters; withal
considering, what hatred and envy he sustained injustly for leading me by the
nose as it were to all his appetites, as though I were an unreasonable
creature, or a child that could do nothing of my self, I thought pity to heap
mo unjust slanders on his head. The other reason was, that I perceived it was
for staying my journey, that he made offer to go; so was I assured if he had
known my purpose, he would either have stayed himself at home, or thinking it
too heavy a burden for him to undertake my convoy, he would have lingered so
long, as there should not have been a possibility for making the voyage. This I
thought meet to declare, (and upon my honor it is the truth) lest I should be
esteemed an imprudent Ass, that can do nothing of my self, and to save the
innocence of that man from unjust reproaches. For my part, besides that which I
have said, the shortness of the way, the surety of the passage, being clear of
all sands, forelands, and such other perils; safe harbors in these parts, and
no forain fleets resorting in these Seas; it is my pleasure that no man grudge
at this my proceeding, but that all conform themselves to the directions I have
given to be followed unto my return, which shall be within 20. days, wind and
weather serving; and if any shall contravene these, I will take it as a
sufficient proof, that he bears me no good will in his heart; as to the
contrary I will respect all that reverence my Commandments, in the best sort I
may. Farewell.

This Declaration written and signed with his Majesty's own hand, Directions to
the Council.
was the next day after he was shipped, presented to the Council by Alexander
Hay Clerk of Register, together with the directions mentioned in the end
thereof, which were thus conceived.

Seeing it has pleased Almighty God to bring us to man's age, and that nothing
has been more earnestly wished by all our good subjects, then to see us
honorably matched, so that the Crown might descend to our own succession after
so many worthy progenitors; me to satisfy their desires, having resolved upon a
personage, that for blood and other commodities of alliance, could not be
thought but most worthy; did enter into contract with Frederick King of Denmark
lately deceased, and by advice of our Council directed our Ambassador to
solemnize the marriage, and conduct her unto this Realm: But having
intelligence, that by contrarious winds she and her company was driven to
Norway, and that it being remitted to her choice, whether she would return unto
Denmark, or make stay there until the opening of the spring, she had embraced
the last condition, as the best and most liking to her desire: Albeit hitherto
we have not behaved our self dissolutely, but patiently attended the good
occasion that God should offer; yet now taking to heart her pains and danger,
with the difficulties that have occurred in her transport, we could find no
contentment, till that we enterprised to make a voyage toward her, and bring
her home, which we are in good hope to do, within the space of 20. days wind
and weather serving.

Yet fearing the time of my stay may be longer at Gods good pleasure, lest any
looseness during our absence should fall into the government, we have of our
own motion, and not counseled by any, left a Declaration with the Clerk of
Register, and willed no man to grudge at our absence, seeing in former times
the Kingdom has wanted a Governor longer, then we trust in God, it shall want
us; as namely from the death of our Grandmother the Queen Regent, unto the
arrival of our dearest mother form France, the space of 14. months, during
which time, for the reverence and love carried unto her, albeit a woman and
minor in years, no violence was committed by any person, and greater peace and
quietness observed then was before, or since that time known to have been
kept. And notwithstanding our expectation is nothing less, of the good
behavior of our subjects in this our absence, we have taken order for the
better government of the public affairs, that our privy Council should reside
at Edinburgh, and ordained the Duke of Lennox our Nephew to be President
thereof, and to be assisted by our Cosen Francis Earl of Bothwel, whom we
appoint to attend him, with the other officers of State, namely the Thesaurer,
Comptroller, Master of requests, Privy Seal, the Captain of the Castle of
Edinburgh, Advocate and Clerk of Register, who shall ever be present, five of
them at least with our said Nephew.

We have likewise given order, that some Noblemen in their courses shall attend
at Edinburgh the space of 15. days; the Earls of Angus and Athol, with the
Lords Fleming, and Innermeth to begin; and the next course to be kept by the
Earls of Mar and Morton, with the Lords Seaton, and Yester. The Barons of
Lothian, Fife, Sriveling-shire, and Strathern, we appoint to attend as they
shall be warned, and directed by the Council. For the South parts, we have made
the Lord Hamilton our Lieutenant, that is, within the three Wardenries and
Sheriffdom of Lanrick, and to be assisted, when need is, by the Lords Boyd
Hereis, Maxwell, Home, Cesford, and other chief Barons within the Marches; his
residence to be at Dumfreis, or Jedburgh, and his charges to be furnished out
of the readiest of the Taxation by Mr. John Colvill Collector thereof. And that
peace and quietness may be the better observed, we discharge all Conventions
for any cause whatsoever unto our return. Finally, we require the Ministers,
and Preachers of the Word, to exhort the people to peace and obedience, and
commend us and our journey in their prayers to the protection of Almighty God.
As this is our desire, so we expect that all our good subjects, will follow the
same, especially they who have tried our favor of late, and that they will
persist in the loyalty promised by them: certifying those that do in the
contrary, that they shall incur our high displeasure, and be punished with
all rigor; as on the other part, we shall remember the peaceable and obedient
thankfully, when occasion presents.

By another Missive presented at the same time to the Council, the Earl Bothwel
was declared second to the Duke of Lennox, Sir Robert Melvil Vicechancellor,
Alexander Hay Secretary for the Scottish language, and Mr. James Elphinston for
the Latin and French.

The King having thus provided for the public affairs, took with him in
company Sir. John Maitland Chancellor, Sir Lewis Ballenden, Justice Clerk, Mr.
Robert Douglas, Provost of Linclowden, the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and other
ordinary officers of the house. He took also with him Mr. David Lindesay
Minister at Leth, leaving Mr. Patrick Galloway his ordinary Preacher to attend
the Council; and having a prosperous wind, arrived safely in a Sound or Haven
of Norway (not far from Upslo where the Queen remained) the fourth or fifth
day after his embarking.

The Sunday following he solemnized the Marriage in his own person, The
marriage solemnized at vpslo.
Mr. David Lindesay performing the ceremony in the French language. After
which, consultation being taken for his return unto Scotland, because it was
held dangerous to go to Sea in that season, and that the Counselors of Denmark
did oppose the journey, advising him rather to visit the Queens mother, and her
son Christiern elected King of Denmark, he was easily induced to follow their
advice, and send back the Scottish ships with Mr. James, Sir Krymgeour, and Mr.
John Skein. Whilst the King lay at Upslo, The Earl of Marshals proceedings
rat^fied.
the Earl Marshall in Council made report of his proceedings in the Embassage,
and how according to the contract past, and interchangeably sealed and signed,
the Marriage was completed, and a form of Attestation taken touching the Isles
of Orkney, bearing, that the King and Regents of Denmark should supersede all
claim of right to the said Isles unto the Kings perfect age, reserving to each
Kingdom their own Right, which by that treaty should not be prejudged; as the
Copy thereof subscrived by the four Governors, presently exhibited did show;
together with the attestation, he produced the form of an oath given by him and
his associats, for his Majesty's performing of all things promised on his part,
concerning the Marriage; and was in all and every one of these, found to have
done good service, and have carried himself honorably according to his
Commission.

Soon after this came certain Ambassadors from Denmark to invite the King
thither, The Kings journey from Norway to Denmark.
who parting from Upslo with his Queen the 22. of December, came to Bahouse, (a
Castle standing in the Borders of Norway and Sweden) the first of January.
There he remained seven days, attending a safe conduct from the King of
Sweden, which Captain William Murray was employed to bring from Stockholme,
where that King kept his residence. An. 1590.
The conduct brought, he removed from Bahouse the eighth of January, and was
met by a Captain of Sweden upon the River then frozen, with 400. horsemen, and
by the space of two Dutch miles, conveyed unto the land of Denmark. The next
day he went to the Castle of wertbury, where he remained five days, and from
thence journeying by Falkenburgh the Town of Holmestade, and Castle of Cowholm,
he came to Elsingburgh where he was stayed some three days from crossing the
Ferry by tempest of weather; and on the 21. of January was received at
Crownenburgh Castle, by the Queen Mother, the young King, the Duke of Holstat
his brother, and the four Regents of the Realm, with all magnificence possible.
There he remained to the end of February royally entertained; and because he
was to stay upon the marriage of his Queens eldest sister, with the Duke of
Brunswick which was appointed in April next, he directed home William Shaw
Master of Work to advertise the Council of the reason of his stay, and to
cause some ships, and expert Pilots be sent with all diligence, for his more
safe convoy. Colonel Stewart sent with ships to the King.
The Council upon this advertisement employed Colonel William Stewart, with
six well furnished ships together, Penult. Martii.
and with him Mr. Patrick Galloway the Kings Minister was sent to further his
Majesty's return. They arriving at Elsingore about the middlest of April, in
the very time that Brunswicks marriage was solemnizing, did signify to the King
the longing that the subjects had for his return, and the peace that had been
observed since his going from Scotland. For all that while (which considering
the feuds of the country was strange) two riots only did happen, one committed
by Archibald Wachop of Nudry a wicked and insolent man; another by the
Clangregore in Bachudder. It rejoiced the King to hear that the subjects had
been so quiet, as he did likewise account it a great happiness, that in his
own company there had no quarrels fallen out, either amongst themselves, or
with the strangers; whereas it is hard for men in drink, at which they were
continually kept, long to agree. A little strife at his first coming to Upslo
arose betwixt the Chancellor and Earl Marshal for priority of place, the Earl
thinking it due to him because of the honor he had in the espousal of the
Queen; and the Chancellor excepting, that his Embassage ceased in regard of the
Kings presence, and that the same precedence belonged to him by virtue of his
office in those parts, being with the King, that he had at home. But this was
pacified without any noise by the Kings determination, who declared the place
to belong to the Chancellor.

Brunswicks Marriage and solemnity thereof finished, the King conveyed with
many great ships, The King and Queen return to Scotland.
took journey homewards, and arrived with his Queen at Leth the 20. of May,
where he was received with a wonderful joy, and a great concourse of people.
After his landing, he went first to Church, and caused public thanks to be
given to God for his safe and happy return; then after to the Noblemen and
Council he gave many thanks for the care they had taken in administration of
affairs, and the quietness they had maintained in the country. The Earl of
Bothwel besides the rest, was received with a most gracious countenance, for
that contrary to all men's expectation he had carried himself orderly all that
time. Bothwel his satisfaction to the Church.
And he indeed soon after the Kings departing (whether to purchase the opinion
of a reformed man, or that, as he pretended, remorse of conscience did move
him) in a conference with James Gibson Minister, who was then privately
returned from England, did offer for removing the many scandals he had given by
his dissoluteness, to acknowledge publicly his offense, and make any
satisfaction the Church should enjoin; which also he performed, appearing (as
he was appointed) in the Church where Mr. Robert Bruce did ordinarily preach,
and making confession of his sins, promised to live more regularly, and not
to give offense thereafter to good Christians. But it was not long after the
Kings return, that falling to his wonted forms, he became more disordered then
ever, and there through procuring the Kings displeasure, wrought his own
undoing, as we shall hear.

The next day after the Kings arrival, A difference among the Clergy for
anointing the Queen.
the Council assembled to advise upon the Queens Coronation. The King
determining to have it done in most solemn manner, because none of the Bishops
were present, nor could conveniently be brought against the day, made choice of
Mr. Robert Bruce to perform the ceremony. The Ministers that were in town being
therewith acquainted, some of the number more curious then wise, did except
against the ceremony of Unction saying, that it was Jewish, and abolished at
the coming of Christ, introduced into Christian Kingdoms by the Pope, and not
to be used. The chief of this opposition was one Mr. John Davison, an idle and
turbulent man, who as then had no charge in the Church, but had gained some
credit with certain foolish people, that would be thought more holy and zealous
then other. Mr. Andrew Melvil sided with him at first, reasoning for the same
opinion. It was showed them, The ceremony of Unction not Jewish.
That the ceremony could not be Jewish seeing it never had the beginning from
the Jews, nor was it used by that people only. That the anointing of Kings was
mentioned in the book of Judges, which albeit uttered in a parable, did show
that it was a custom received in creating of Kings. And that it was practiced
in other Kingdoms, besides that of Judea, was a thing manifest, for Hasael
King of Aram, was anointed by Elias, and Cyrus King of Persia, is called by
Esaias Gods anointed: Both these were strangers to the Law and people of the
Jews, yet were they anointed; wherefore the ceremony could not be Jewish. Then
where they said that this rite was introduced by the Pope of Rome; as that
could not be made out, so no reasonable man would think that every rite used
amongst Papists was to be rejected; for in that case we should be forced to
remove many things that are both of good institution and use. Seeing therefore
the function and authority of Princes continues the same, and is alike in all
free Monarchies, their anointing could no more be excepted against, then their
crowning, and the bearing of the Sword, and Scepter before them, which have all
the like warrant. The Queens Coronation at Halyrudhouse.
Thus they were reasoned with, but nothing could remove their scruples: which
the King hearing, he called them before him, and finding them obstinate in
their opinions, told them, That he would not have the right of Unction omitted,
and if Mr. Robert Bruce would not do it (for they had threatened him with Church
censures) he would prorogue the day of Coronation, and stay till one of the
Bishops came who would not refuse. Upon this they fell to a second
deliberation, and Mr. Andrew Melvil altogether misliking that a Bishop should
be employed in the action, divided from the others, so that by the plurality of
voices, in end it was concluded that the ceremony should be used. Thus the
Sunday following the Queen was solemnly crowned, and all the rites accustomed,
performed by Mr. Robert Bruce in the Abbey Church of Halyrudhouse.

On Tuesday thereafter, The Queens entry into Edinburgh.
she made her triumphant entry into the Town of Edinburgh, where nothing was
omitted that might serve to express the love and affection of the people. The
rest of the month, and much of the next was spent in banquets and royal
shows, for the entertaining of the strangers. These finished, and order taken
for administration of the rents assigned to the Queen, the strangers were
dimitted, and had rich presents given them both from the King and Queen.

How soon they were gone, The Ministers challenged for permitting James Gibson
to preach.
the King upon information that the Ministers of Edinburgh and Dalkeith, had
permitted James Gibson to preach in their Churches, notwithstanding he was
silenced by the general Assembly, caused cite them before the Council. They
answered, That his silencing, as they took it, was only to the time of his
appearance before the Assembly, and that he was purged of contumacy; But the
Act being produced, and hearing that he was silenced during the pleasure of the
Assembly, which as yet was not declared, they confessed their oversight, and
promised that he should not have place amongst them till his Majesty was
satisfied. The King constructing their answer to the best, gave order to summon
Gibson for his contempt, and he not appearing, was denounced Rebel.

At the same time there was a marriage treated betwixt the Earl of Arrol and a
daughter of the Earl of Morton, The King offended with the alliance of Morton
with Arrol.
at which the King took exception, and did inhibit the same, as not liking that
he who had so lately rebelled, and was not yet reconciled to the Church, should
be strengthened by such an alliance; Notthelesse the marriage went on, for
which the Earl of Morton being called before the Council, answered, that he
could not restrain the affection of his daughter, and was forced to give way
unto it. The Council finding him to have failed in his duty, did remit his
censure to the King himself, who as he was a Prince most tractable, did pass
it, upon the Earl his submission.

In the month of June the Assembly of the Church convened at Edinburgh, which
the King did honor with his presence; Mr. Patrick Galloway elected to preside
in name of the Church, did put up three Petitions to his Majesty: One for
establishing the Churches jurisdiction, An Assembly of the Church.
and the abolishing of all Acts made to the contrary. Another for purging the
country of Jesuits, seminary Priests, and excommunicate persons, trafficking
against Religion. The third was for providing a competent maintenance to
Ministers, forth of the tithes of the Parishes where they served, and applying
what was above, to the sustentation of Schools, maintaining of the poor,
repairing of the fabric of Churches, and other the like necessary uses. To the
first his Majesty answered, That in all Parliaments the first Act that was
concluded, did concern the liberty of the Church, which he should have care to
see observed as in times passed. For the second he said, that it was known what
pains he had taken therein before his journey to Denmark, and that he would do
what lawfully could be done, for purging the country of Papists. And touching
the third, because many were interessed therein, he did advise them to make
choice of the most discreet of their number to meet with such of the Council,
as he should appoint, for conferring upon the readiest means to effectuate that
which they desired. The King Commended to the Assembly the removing of the
deadly feuds.
Thereafter his Majesty falling to speak of the barbarous feuds which were
entertained in the Realm, and the many odious murders there through committed,
did seriously commend to them (as those who should of all others most study to
make peace) the removing of such barbarities, so far as in them lay, wishing
them in their Sermons to strike on that point, and make people understand how
sinful it was, and how shameful to the whole Nation; as likewise to employ the
most wise amongst them for reconciling the variances that abounded in the
country. For my self, said he, I will employ all the power I have that way,
and if you shall apply your selves in your places to do the like, my work shall
be the more easy, and have the better success. This was greatly applauded of
all; and indeed after that time he took such pains, partly calling those that
were at variance, before the Council, and causing them submit their quarrels;
partly making strict laws against the troublers of the common peace, as he
never ceased till he got the feuds wholly abolished.

Yet this was not wrought but after some time, A trouble betwixt the Earl of
Huntley and the Earl of Murray.
and with much difficulty, new troubles daily arising in sundry parts of the
country. In the North a dissension brake out betwixt the Earls of Huntley and
Murray, that kept those parts a long time in trouble, the occasion whereof was
this: John Gordon son to Thomas Gordon of Cluny, having married the widow of
Grant of Ballendallagh, it happens in a private quarrel, one of Gordons
servants to be killed by the Tutor of the house: Gordon pursuing him before the
Justice, for not appearing he was denounced Rebel, and Commission given to the
Earl of Huntley as Sheriff of the country to apprehend him. The Earl making
search for him comes to the house of Ballendallagh, and after some resistance
takes it by force, but finds not the Tutor. This the family of the Grants
interpreting to be done in their disgrace, they betook themselves to the
patrociny of the Earl of Murray, and with them the Clanchatton, and diverse of
the name of Dumbarre did join. Huntley offending that any in those parts should
make head against him, and having understood that the Earls of Atholl and
Murray were to meet these Glammis in Forres, for making up a confederacy; did
assemble his friends, and went thither to dissolve the meeting, but before his
coming they had severed, and the Earl of Murray was returned to his house of
Tarnway, Huntley taking that way home, and some of his company riding about the
house in manner of a Bravado, they within discharging some Muskets upon them,
it happened the same Gordon that married the widow, to be killed; To be
revenged of this affront, Huntley gathered forces to invade the Earl of Murray,
and he assisted by the Earl of Athol his Cosen, prepares to defend. The
convocations were great on either side, whereof the King receiving
advertisement, charges were directed to command Atholl home, and inhibit
Huntley from coming by West the River of Spey, and Murray not to come on the
East of Findorne; this course did restrain them for a time, but gave not an end
to those troubles.

A little after this fell out the slaughter of William Ker of Ancram a
Gentleman of great sufficiency, who was killed in Edinburgh under night, by Sir
Robert Ker apparent of Cesfourd; There had been a long and old emulation
betwixt the two families of Cesfourd and Farnherst for the Wardenry of the
middle Marches, An. 1591.
and the Provostry of Iedburgh. But Farnherst being then deceased, and the heir
left young; this Gentleman as descended of the house, did what he could to
maintain the reputation of it, which was an eyesore to the other. It happened
also some little time before, this Gentleman in the trial of goods stolen from
England, to find out the committer of the theft, and when the same was denied
(for the matter was brought before the Council) to verify the same by clear
testimonies, which was taken to be done out of spleen, and to rub some infamy
upon Cesfourd, who was then Warden; for the man accused was one of his
followers. This the Lady Cesfourd a woman of an haughty spirit, did apprehend
so deeply, as she never ceased till she had moved her son being then very
young, to bereave the Gentleman of his life. A hateful fact it was, both for
the manner in which it was done, and for the loss the country received by the
Gentleman's death; for he was a man generally well given, wise of great courage,
and expert beyond others in the Laws and Customs of the Borders. The King was
highly offended, and was resolved to use exemplary Justice upon the Actor. But
he eschewing, and living a fugitive some months, was pardoned, upon
satisfaction made to the Gentleman's children, as was thought by the Chancellors
intercession, who afterward married him to his Niece, a daughter of Lethington.

Most of this Winter was spent in the discovery and examination of Witches and
Sorcerers: A sorceresse Agnes Samson apprehended.
Amongst these Agnes Samson (commonly called the wise wife of Keith) was most
remarkable; a woman not of the base and ignorant sort of Witches; but
Matron-like, grave, and settled in her answers, which were all to some purpose.
In her examination she declared, That she had a familiar spirit, who upon her
call did appear in a visible form, and resolve her of any doubtful matter,
especially concerning the life or death of persons lying sick. And being asked
what words she used when she called the spirit, she said her words was, Holla
Master, and that he had learned her so to do. She further confessed, That the
Earl Bothwel had moved her to enquire what should become of the King, how long
he should reign, and what should happen after his death; and that the spirit
having undertaken to make away the King, after he had failed in performing, and
was challenged by her, confessed it was not in his power, speaking words she
understood not, but as she did take them, the words were, Il' est homme de
dieu. Richard Graham another notorious Sorcerer, being apprehended at the same
time, made the like confession of Bothwel, Bothwell committed for consulting
with witches.
which was the cause of his committing in April following; for such curiosities
are not thought to possess the minds of those that wish well to their
Princes, and has proved the cause of many men's ruin.

In the end of the year died John Ereskin of Dun Superintendent of Angus and
Mernis, The Lord of Dun his death.
a man famous for the services performed to his Prince and Country, and worthy
to be remembered for his travels in the Church, which out of zeal to the truth
he undertook, preaching and advancing it by all means. Before the Reformation,
his house was to those who in that time were called Heretics, a special place
of refuge; afterward such was the scarcity of Ministers, that he took upon him
the charge, and was chosen with the first to have the oversight of the Churches
in these North parts, which he governed to his death most wisely, and with
great authority, giving no way to the Novations introduced, nor suffering them
to take place within the bounds of his charge, whilst he lived. A Baron he was
of good rank, wise, learned, liberal, of singular courage, who for diverse
resemblances may well be said to have been another Ambrose: he died the 12. of
March, in the 82. year of his Age, leaving behind him a numerous posterity, and
of himself, and his virtues a memory that shall never be forgotten.

Bothwel had not stayed above a month in Ward, Bothwell breaks his Ward.
when seducing his keeper, he made an escape, and thereby increased the
suspicion of his guiltiness; whereupon the King gave order to pronounce the
doom of forfeiture against him, according to the conviction passed in May,
1589. and causing denounce him Traitor did inhibit by Proclamation all the
subjects to intercommune or keep intelligence with him. And lest the proceeding
should have been thought too rigorous, it was declared in the Proclamation,
that he being tender in blood to his Majesty, and advanced by him to sundry
honors and offices, The doom of forfeiture pronounced against him.
had out of his ungodly and unnatural humor, after diverse slaughters committed
by him, and overseen, taken Arms against the King, and practiced with
strangers for subversion of Religion, and endangering his Majesty's Crown,
whereof being convicted in a Justice Court holden in Edinburgh the 24. of May
1589. the doom and sentence was superseded in hope of his amendment. And that
notwithstanding all these favors, he continued in his wicked course; and
heaping treason upon treason, had now at last consulted with Witches and
Negromancers, His Majesty's Declaration concerning Bothwell.
for bereaving his Majesty of his life, (as was manifest by the confession of
some that had already suffered, and others yet alive who were shortly to be
executed) and for the same being committed in the Castle of Edinburgh, he had
broken Ward, and thereby taken the crime upon him, whereupon the doom which at
that time was delayed, being now pronounced, his Majesty did will all his
subjects to acknowledge him for no other but a Rebel and Traitor.

Bothwell taking the course of all Rebels, Bothwell lays the blame of his
rebellion upon the Chancellor.
which is to turn their malice against some about the King, laid the blame of
all upon the Chancellor, and drew together some companies of men, as intending
to be revenged to him. With him the Lord Hume and diverse others did join, but
to little purpose; for Hume upon better advice forsook him, and submitted
himself to the King; and others following his example, used their best means to
obtain pardon, so as Bothwell was compelled to flee into England, with some few
that went with him.

In the Assembly of the Church that convened this summer at Edinburgh, A
contest between the Church and Lords of Session.
fell out a great contest betwixt them and the Lords of Session, upon this
occasion: Mr. John Graham one of the Senators had intended in right of his wife
an Action of removing against certain fewars of Halyeards within the Parish of
Kirkliston, and to bear out the plea, suborned a Notary in Striveling, called
Robert Ramsay, to give him forth an instrument that made for his purpose. The
defendants having offered to improve the instrument, did in the mean time upon
a private Warrant obtained from his Majesty, apprehend the Notary, who
confessed that the Instrument which he subscribed, was brought formed to him,
by William Graham brother to Mr. John, and that he knew nothing of the
business; and being pursued criminally, was upon his confession condemned of
falsehood, and executed to the death. The pursuer, as he was a man bold and
impudent, to maintain the truth of the instrument, did intend Action against
Mr. Patrick Simpson, Minister at Striveling, (who had dealt with the Notary to
bring him to a confession) alleging that he had seduced the man, and made him
deny the instrument. The Minister complains to the Assembly, and thereupon
Mr. John Graham was summoned to answer for the scandal raised upon one of their
members. He compeiring, answered, That he would prove what he had alleged
before the Judge competent. The Assembly replied, That he must qualify it
before them, otherwise they would censure him as a slanderer. Hereupon was the
Lord Provant President, with the Lords of Culros and Barnbarrogh, two of the
Senators, sent to desire the Assembly not to meddle in causes proper to their
cognition, especially in the cause depending before them, at the instance of
the Lord Halyeards, (so they styled him) against Mr. Patrick Simpson. The
Assembly answered, That what they did, was no way hurtful to the privileges
of Session, nor were they minded to meddle in any Civil matter, but in the
purging of one of their own members, they might proceed without the prejudice
of the Civil judicatory, therefore wished them not to take ill the Churches
dealing in the trial of one of their own number.

The Lords dimitted with this answer, Mr. John Graham questioned by the Church.
Mr. John Graham was called, who excepted against the Judgment* affirming the
cause to be Civil, and that the judgment thereof belonged to the Lords of
Session, primario, in regard the same was depending before them. The Assembly
repelling the declinatour, found themselves Judges in the cause, therefore
willed him to say what he could in his own defense, otherwise they would give
process, and minister Justice. But he taking documents of their Interloquutor,
and protesting for remedy of law departed. The Lords esteeming this an
encroaching upon their privileges, and that upon such grounds all actions that
touched any Minister might be drawn from their Judicatory, resolved to send a
prohibition to the Assembly and discharge their proceeding; but by the
mediation of some well disposed persons, that did not like to have questions of
Jurisdiction moved, the business was settled, and both actions ordained to
cease. Not the less the instrument was sustained by the Lords and judges to
make faith, which turned in end to the pursuers undoing.

In this Assembly certain Articles were presented subscribed by the Archbishop
of S. Andrews, The Archbishop of S Andrews his recantation.
allowing the Presbyterial discipline, and condemning the Government Episcopal,
which were afterward imprinted under the title of M. Patrick Adamsons
recantation. The Bishop lay bedfast at the time, and was fallen into great
necessity by his own misgovernment; whereof his Adversaries taking advantage,
it was devised, that he should be visited by some of the brethren, and desired
to leave a testimony under his hand, of his opinion of matters of discipline;
This being moved unto him, he said, That he did not trouble himself with such
thoughts at that time, and had never allowed of any other Bishop in the church,
but S. Paul's Bishop, which he would willingly set his hand to. Upon this his
answer were these Articles drawn up and subscribed by him. Whether he knew what
was contained in them, or that he was induced thereto by a poor collection they
gave him in the time, (for so the report went) or otherwise, it is uncertain;
but when it was told him that such a recantation was published in his name, he
complained heavily of the wrong that was done him and committing his cause to
God, ended his days in the end of this year. A man he was of great learning,
and a most persuasive Preacher, but an ill administrator of the Church
Patrimony, which brought him to the misery that is pitiful to think of. Diverse
works he left, of which some are extant, that show his learning; but his
prelections upon the Epistles to Timothy, which were most desired, falling into
the hands of his adversaries, were suppressed.

In the same Assembly a general revocation was made in name of the Church, A
revocation made in name of the Church.
by M. Robert Pont, of all things done in prejudice of the Rents, and Patrimony
thereof, either by Ministers that were beneficed, or by others bearing the
title of Churchmen. This in the opinion of wise men was esteemed to be a good
way for pleading restitution, according to the priveledge of ancient Laws; but
was derided and scoffed at by those that had filled their hands with the spoils
of the Church. And folly it was sure to think they could enjoy any benefit by
these privileges, having destroyed the estate, and dignity of the Church, by
which these privileges should have been preserved.

Soon after this meeting there happened a great division in the Presbytery of
S. Andrews, A Schism in the Presbytery of S. Andrews.
for planting the Church of Luchars. The pretenders were M. Patrick Weimes and
M. Robert Wallace: M. Andrew Melvill with some few that followed him, stood for
M. Wallace, M. Thomas Buchannan and the rest for M. Patrick Weimes. The matter
after a hot contention being put to voices, M. Thomas Buchannan and some 19 or
20 with him gave their suffrages to M. Weimes; M Andrew and other six that
adhered to him gave their voices to M. Robert Wallace. M. Andrew taking it
impatiently to be thus oversweyed, left the place where the Presbytery did
meet, and with his six went to the Schools of the new College, and made up
another Presbytery. M. Thomas and the rest abode in the place, and according as
they had voyced, appointed Mr. Patrick Weimes on the next Sunday to be received
Minister of Luchars: M. Andrew with his company gave forth the like Ordinance
for M. Robert Wallace, and thus both were instituted and admitted Ministers to
the Church upon one day. The Gentlemen of the parish went likewise in factions,
some holding with the one and some with the other, which caused a great
scandal. There being none to pacify the strife, M. Andrew Lamb the Minister
at BruntIsland) was directed from the Synod of Fife to entreat some of the
Ministers of Lothian to take the pains of bringing them to an agreement. For
this effect, M. David Lindesay, M. Robert Bruce, and M. I. Spotswood were
chosen; who coming to S. Andrews in the Month of October, called the parties
before them, to understand the reasons of their dissension. M. Andrew did plead
for the one party, and M. Thomas Buchannan for the other. It was laid to M.
Andrew his charge, That he had made a secession, forsaken the place of meeting,
and the fellowship of his brethren, and with some six only that followed him,
presumed to overturn the conclusion of the greater number. His defense was,
That albeit he and his followers had left the place, yet they could not be
judged to have made secession, by reason the others had given the cause, and
conspired to prefer a person in worth not comparable to him whom they had
elected. As to the number of voices, he said, quod suffragia essent ponder
anda, non numer anda, that voices ought not to be numbered, but to be weighed
and pondered. Two days they continued reasoning, and in end the mediators
finding no other means of their agreement, took course to displace both the
young men, and to appoint a third person for the service of the Church: and for
eschewing such contentions thereafter, which were feared because of the heat
betwixt M. Thomas and M. Andrew, they did appoint the Presbytery to be divided
in two, a part to sit at Couper, and the rest to abide at S. Andrews. Thus was
that strife pacified, which many held to be ominous, and that the government,
which in the beginning did break forth into such schisms, could not long
continue; for this every man noted, That of all men, none could worse endure
parity and loved more to command, then they who had introduced it into the
Church.

But to leave the matters of the Church for a while; Bothwells attempt upon
Halyrudhouse.
when as the King did think that all was quiet, and Bothwell so weakened as he
could not make any trouble (for Bacleugh his son in law was by license gone
into France, and all the gentlemen of the South parts, who were of any worth,
had given surety to have no meddling with him) there were found in the Court it
self, instruments apt enough to serve his turn. For of the Duke of Lennox his
retinue some that envied the Chancellors credit with the King, and others whose
hopes wholly depended upon the trouble of the State, did by secret messages
incite Bothwell to enterprise somewhat for himself, offering to bring him
within the Kings Palace unperceived, where with a few hands he might make
himself master of the King, and all the Court. Bothwell is easily drawn to
condescend, and the conspiracy so ordered, that he with his followers should
under night be let in at a back passage, that lay through the Lord Duke his
Stables; and first they should seize upon the Gates, take the keys from the
Porter, and go after that to the Kings Chamber, and make him sure. Within the
Palace were diverse privy to the conspiracy, especially Colonel William
Stewart, John Neswith Surgeon to the King, and James Douglas of Spot, who
was brought to take part in that enterprise by this occasion: Some days before
it happened George Home of Spot his father in law to be killed by certain
Mersemen of the surname of Home and Craw. Sir George Home Nephew to Spot, and
one of the masters of the Kings Esquiry, did charge James Douglas as author, or
accessory to the murder, because of a fear he had conceived that his Father in
law should by a new right possess his Nephew Sir George in some part of the
lands, to which he had right by his marriage: upon this suspicion three of his
servants were apprehended and detained prisoners within the Palace, till they
should be tried by torture. The Chancellor, on whom James Douglas depended,
labored all he could to free his servants from that extraordinary form of
trial; but the presumptions being pregnant, the King would have them to be
tortured; which when Spot understood and saw that the same would not be
eschewed, he thrust himself desperately in the action, which but a few hours
before was communicated to him by one of the Associates.

This fell out happily for the King, The success of the attempt.
and was it, that marred the whole conspiracy; for when Bothwell with his
company had entered by the way named, and was come to the inner Court of the
Palace, James Douglas that minded nothing but the relief of his servants, drew
a number to break open the doors where they were detained, and by the noise
thereof, all in the palace were put upon their guard. The King was then at
supper, and being told that armed men were in the nether Court, leaving the
rooms, wherein he lodged, went up to the Tower as to a place of greater surety.
Bothwell having directed some to enclose the Chancellors lodgings lest he
should escape, made toward the Queens rooms where he expected to find entry,
and perceiving all shut upon him, called to bring fire. But ere they could find
any, Sir James Sandilands, one of his Majesty's chamber who had supped without
the palace, with a number of the people of Edinburgh, entering by the Church of
Halirud-house, did beat him and his company from the doors, and was in
possibility to have taken them all, if there had been any lights; but those
being all extinguished, Bothwell with the principals of his company made shift
in the dark, and escaped, returning by the same way that he entered, in his
out-going he was encountered by a Gentleman of the Esquiry, named John Shaw,
whom he killed with a Pistol, yet lost some nine of his followers, men of
small note, who were executed the next morning.

The enterprise thus defeated, The Earl of Murray slain at Dunyb^issell, 7 Feb.
1692.
Bothwell went into the North, looking to be supplied by the Earl of Murray his
Cosen germane: which the King suspecting, Andrew Lord Ochiltry was sent to
bring Murray unto the South of purpose to work a reconcilement betwixt him and
Huntly. But a rumor being raised in the mean while that the Earl of Murray was
seen in the Palace with Bothwell on the night of the enterprise, the same was
entertained by Huntly, (who waited then at Court) to make him suspected of the
King, and prevailed so far, as he did purchase a Commission to apprehend and
bring Murray to his trial. The Nobleman not fearing that any such course
should be used, was come to Dunybirsill a house situated on the north side of
Forth and belonging to his mother the Lady Down; Huntly being advertised of
his coming, and how he lay there secure, accompanied only with the Sheriff of
Murray and a few of his own retinue, went thither and beset the house,
requiring him to render. The Earl of Murray refusing to put himself in the
hands of his enemy, after some defense made, wherein the Sheriff was killed,
fire was set to the house, and they within forced by the violence of the smoke
and flame to come forth. The Earl stayed a great space after the rest, and the
night falling down, ventured among his Enemies, and breaking through the midst
of them did so far outrun them all as they supposed he was escaped, yet
searching him among the rocks, he was discovered by the tip of his head-peece
which had taken fire before he left the house, and unmercifully slain. The
report went that Huntlies friends fearing he should disclaim the fact (for he
desired rather to have taken him alive) made him light from his horse, and give
some strokes to the dead corpse. This done, Gordon of Buckie was dispatched to
advertise the King what had happened, and Huntly himself took journey
Northwards, in such have as he left Captain Gordon his Cosen, that was lying
on the ground wounded, behind him. This Captain was brought the next day to
Edinburgh and publicly executed.

The death of the Nobleman was universally lamented, The murder universally
ill taken.
and the clamours of the people so great, especially against the Chancellor
upon whom all the blame was laid; that the King not esteeming it safe to abide
at Edinburgh, removed with the Council to Glasgow, where he remained until
Huntly did enter himself in Ward in Blackness, as he was charged. But he stayed
not there many days, being dimitted upon Caution to answer before the Justice
whenever he should be called. The corpse of the Earl and Sheriff of Murray
were brought to the Church of Leth in two coffines, and there lay diverse
Months unburied, their friends refusing to commit their bodies to the earth
till the slaughter was punished. The Lord Ochiltrie makes defection to
Bothwell.
Nor did any man think himself so much interessed in that fact, as the Lord
Ochiltry, who had persuaded the Earl of Murray to come south, whereupon he fell
afterward away to Bothwell, and joined with him for revenge of the Murder.

The Parliament which had been now twice prorogated, An. 1592.
did keep in the month of June. In behalf of the Church it was there
petitioned, 1 That the Acts of Parliament made in the year 1584. Petitions in
behalf of the Church.
against the Discipline of the Church and liberty thereof, should be abrogated
and annulled, and a ratification granted of the discipline whereof they were
then in practice. 2. That the Act of annexation should be repealed, and
restitution made of the Churches Patrimony. 3. That the Abbots, Priors, and
other Prelates bearing the titles of Churchmen and giving voice for the Church
without any power, and Commission from the Church, should not be admitted in
time coming to give voice in Parliament, or conveen in their name. And 4. That
a solid order might be taken for purging the Realm of idolatry and blood
wherewith it was miserably polluted. The second and third Petitions rejected,
consultation taken about the other two, and satisfying the last, it was
condescended, That saying of Mass, receiving of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
trafficking Papists against the Kings Majesty, and Religion presently
professed; should be a just cause to infer the pain and crime of treason
against Jesuits, Mass Priests, trafficking Papists, and their ressetters: with
a provision, That if the Jesuits and seminary Priests did satisfy the Prince
and the Church, the foresaid penalty should not strick upon the ressetters;
which in effect was no restraint, neither was the trafficking against Religion
declared to be a crime of Treason, unless the same was proved a trafficking
likewise against the King. So in this point the Church received small
satisfaction. As to the complaint of blood, the same was remitted to the
ordinary course of Justice.

But the first Petition was longer debated, The first Petition granted, and in
what manner.
the King being unwilling either to abrogate the Acts of the 84. or grant the
ratification desired of the present discipline: for he foresaw the
inconvenients that would grow by the liberty that Ministers should assume to
themselves; yet Bothwels business, and the many discontentments within the
Realm, moved him to give way, lest he should be troubled likewise with their
outcries. So the Act passed, but in the most wary terms that could be devised.
As for the Statute confirming his Majesty's royal power, the abrogation
whereof was chiefly sought; it was only declared, That the said Statute should
be no ways prejudicial, nor derogatory to the privilege that God has given
to the spiritual office-bearer in the Church, concerning heads of Religion,
matters of Heresy, Excommunication, collation or deprivation of Ministers, or
any such essential censures grounded, and having warrant of the Word of God.

Upon the end of the Parliament the King went to Falkland, Bothwells attempt at
Falkland.
where Bothwell made a new attempt, encouraged thereunto by the Earls of Angus
and Arroll, the Master of Gray, Colonel Stewart, and the Lairds of Iohnston
and Balwery, who did all promise their concurrence in bringing him unto the
Kings presence. The Master of Gray and Balwery did meet him with a good number
of horse, Angus kept the Diet but with a small company, Arroll remained with
the King within the Palace, and had taken upon him with the assistance of
Colonel Stewart to open the Gates; but either out of fear, their hearts failing
them, or not having a number sufficient to make good their undertaking, nothing
was done; yet upon suspicions they were apprehended, Arroll and Collonell
Stewart committed.
and Arroll sent to the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Colonel to Blackness; the
company that came with Bothwell was not great, and did not exceed sixscore in
all, broken men for the most part, whom he had taken up in the English and
Scottish borders; with these he had journied 2 days and nights, without either
meat or sleep, and came to Falkland a little before midnight, where finding his
expectation disappointed, and those in the Palace provided to defend, he stayed
on the side of the hill, till a little after Sunrising; some of his followers
in the mean time breaking open the Queens stables, took away the horses, and
what else they could lay hands upon. The night was then at the shortest, for it
was the 26. of June, and the Country gathering from all parts to relieve the
King, Bothwell and his company flies.
he was forced to flee: But what way to take he was uncertain, for to pass the
Ferrie with his company he could not safely, and to return by the bridge of
Striveling was a long way, which neither the horses nor their riders after so
long watching could endure, yet seeing no better then to be gone, with the
haste he could make, about nine of the clock he caused sound the trumpets, and
retired.

The King after the Country people were come followed by the Queens Ferry, The
King pursues and comes to Edinburgh.
thinking he had gone that way, but finding that he had taken his course by
Striveling, and knowing that the company would separate how soon they had
passed the bridge, he directed most of his followers to apprehend such as they
could overtake. Diverse were taken in the Moors of Calder and Carnwath, but
suffered to escape by their takers: many horses were found straying in the
fields, the riders being overcome with sleep and fallen from them. Nidry taken
by the Lord Hamilton and dimitted by his Lady.
Amongst others, Archibald Wachop of Nudry, and some 7. or 8. with him, whilst
they lay sleeping in a meadow nigh to Cambusnetham, were taken by the Lord
Hamilton, and sent to be kept in the Castle of Draffan, but his Lady the day
after, out of a womanly commiseration whilst her Lord was absent, suffered
them to depart. Bothwell himself fled unto the West borders, and from thence
into England.

The badness of this attempt put the borders in a great fear, Pardon granted to
those that would forsake Bothwell.
for many of them, especially of the Iohnstons had followed him in that
journey: yet so great was the Kings clemency, as being at Dumfreise, whither he
went in the beginning of July, a general pardon was proclaimed to all that
would submit themselves; whereupon numbers did enter, and were received in
favor. Bothwell thus forsaken almost of all, did notwithstanding in the Court
again find some that out of emulation, and private rancour, more then for any
affection they carried unto him, wrought the King new troubles.

Alexander Lindesay Lord Spinie, The Lord Spinie delated for practicing with
the Lord Bothwell.
a great favorite in that time, out of the malice he bare to the Master of
Glamis Thesaurer, whom he knew Bothwell also hated, did secretly practice to
bring him into the Kings presence, and make his reconciliation. This coming to
the knowledge of Colonel Stewart, who was still detained in Blackness, to
procure his own liberty, and recover the Kings favor, he signified the same to
the King by Sir James Sandelands, who as then was keeper of the house, and
being brought before the Council at Dalkeith stood to the declaration,
affirming, that the Lord Spinie had resset Bothwell in his Ladies house at
Aberdowre; which he offered to prove by witnesses, circumstances and other
clear demonstrations. These were his words. Spinie denying all, appealed the
Colonel to combat, which the King would not permit, assigning the 12 of
September for his trial before the Justice. Spinie appearing at the day, the
Colonel excused himself by the shortness of the time, and had a new diet
assigned him, at which his probation failing, Spinie was restored to his
honor, dignity and service, yet did he never recover his former credit with
the King, but was held still suspected, and whether offending at this, or that
the first declaration was true in it self, the year following he took open part
with Bothwell, and was therefore denounced Rebel.

At the same time John Weymis younger of Logie, John Weymis of Logie committed
for his practices with Bothwell escaped.
Gentleman of his Majesty's Chamber, and in great favor both with the King and
Queen, was discovered to have the like dealing with Bothwell, and being
committed to the keeping of the Guard, escaped by the policy of one of the
Dutch Maids, with whom he entertained a secret love. The Gentlewoman, named
mistress Margaret Twinslace, coming one night whilst the King and Queen were
in bed, to his keepers, showed that the King called for the prisoner to ask of
him some question; the keepers suspecting nothing; for they knew her to be the
principal Maid in the Chamber, conveyed him to the door of the Bedchamber,
and making a stay without as they were commanded, the Gentlewoman did let him
down at a window by a cord that she had prepared. The keepers waiting upon his
return stayed there till the morning, and then found themselves deceived. This
with the manner of the escape, ministered great occasion of laughter, and not
many days after the King being pacified by the Queens means, he was pardoned,
and took to wife the Gentlewoman, who had in this sort hazarded her credit for
his safety. These dealings at Court increased not a little the boldness of
others in the Country, so as some of all ranks, both Barons, Gentlemen and
Burgesses, became followers of Bothwell, and feared not to entertain him
openly. All Teviotdale ran after him; whereupon the King made an expedition to
Iedburgh 12. October, and finding some of his ressetters took bonds of them
for their better behavior.

At his return he found new vexations by a faction made at Court against the
Chancellor, A faction made against the Chancellor.
whereof the heads were, the Duke of Lennox, the Earls of Argile and Morton,
the master of Glamis and Lord Home; with these the Earls of Angus and Arroll,
who were released from their wards by the Queens intercession, did afterward
join. That which gave the occasion, was a claim made by the Queen of the
Lordship of Mussylbrugh, as being a part of Dumfermelin, which she desired the
Chancellor to resign, for he had acquired an heritable right thereof, at the
making the act of Annexation. The Chancellor excusing himself, and in effect
denying to satisfy her desire, she grew offended, and drew in these Noblemen
to oppose him; whereupon he withdrew himself from Court, and remained in
Nidisdale the rest of that year.

In the North there was likewise great unquietness, Troubles in the North
betwixt Huntley and the Clanhattan.
for the Clanhattans conducted by Angus Williamston, to revenge the Earl of
Murrayes death, made great spoil upon the Earl of Huntlies lands in Strathspey,
and Glemmuck, killing diverse, and amongst others an honest aged man called
Gordon of Barcklay, against whom they could pretend no quarrel: Huntly to be
revenged of this wrong made an incursion upon the lands of Petty, which the
Clanhattan did then possess, exercing great cruelty, and understanding that
William Malcolmtoshe was at the same time spoiling the lands of Colerick
encountered him at the head of Staplegate hill, where after a short conflict
some threescore of the Clanhattan were killed, a few only falling on his side.
Shortly after in another expedition upon the same lands having drawn together a
number of High-landers from Lochabar, Badenoch, and Strathdawn, he wasted,
burnt and spoiled all that Country, killing a great many people.

The King to pacify these troubles, The Earl of Angus employed in a Commission
to the North in November.
directed the Earl of Angus with a Commission of Lieutenandry unto the North,
where he wrought so much as the public incursions of both sides did cease, and
in this time was Mr. George Ker, brother to the Lord Newbotle, intercepted as
he lay at the Isle of Cumray, intending a journey toward Spain; with him were
deprehended diverse missive letters and blanks signed by the Earls of Angus,
Huntly and Arroll, and by Sir Patrick Gordon of Aughendown. Mr. Andrew Knox
then Minister of Pasley, who was afterward made Bishop of the Isles, upon some
discovery made to him, did interprise his taking, and making him to be
conveyed with a strong guard, delivered him to the Provost of the City, the
King being then in Alloway at the Christmasse with the Earl of Mar, who but a
few pays before had married the Duke of Lennox his sister. Advertisement made
of his apprehension, and of the letters deprehended with him, the King made
haste to return. The night before his coming was the Earl of Angus returned
from the North, The Earl of Angus imprisoned in the Castle.
and not having heard any thing of Mr. George Kers taking, went as he was
accustomed to his lodging in Edinburgh, but was presently arrested by the
Provost and Baylifes, and sent prisoner to the Castle. The King esteeming this
too great a presumption in them, to have used a Nobleman and Counselor lately
returned from such a public employment, without warrant in that manner, was
not a little offended; yet because of the heinous accusations laid against him,
their forwardness was excused, and his imprisonment allowed for good service
by Act of Council.

Mr. George Ker at his examination did ingenuously confess all that he knew of
the business, Mr. George Ker his Confession
the sum whereof was as follows. That upon a letter sent from Mr. William
Creichton the Jesuit, then residing in Spain, and assurance given of the King
of Spains aid for the alteration of Religion, Mr. James Gordon, and Mr. Robert
Abercrombie Jesuits, had devised to send one to Spain, to certify the King of
the concurrence of the Scottish Catholics in his service, and that for the
greater secrecy, the three forenamed Earls should undertake for the rest, and
by their letters testify the same. That this being proponed to the Noblemen,
they did willingly consent, and accordingly set their hands to eight blanks,
six whereof were to be filled, as missives from them to the King of Spain, and
the two other with procurations, one for the messengers credit, the other for
the Articles, that should be drawn up in Spain; That the filling of the blanks
was trusted to Mr. William Chreichton, and Mr. James Tyrie, and that Sir James
Chisholm, one of the Kings Master households was first chosen to be carrier of
the blanks, but that he being impeded through some private business, they were
delivered to him, subscribed in the month of October, he being then in
Edinburgh. He further declared, that by conference at the same time with the
Earls of Angus and Arroll, he understood that the King of Spain was to send an
Army of thirty thousand men into Scotland, whereof 15000. should remain in the
Country, and with the assistance of the Catholics either alter the present
Religion, or procure liberty to their own profession: and that the rest of the
army should invade England, being conveyed thither by the Catholic Lords who
were to meet the Army at their landing, which was appointed to be either at
Kirkudbright in Galloway, or in the mouth of Cl^ydo. This was the sum of his
confession.

The Earl of Angus charged with these points denied, affirming the blanks and
subscriptions to be counterfeited. But David Graham of Fintry, who was
apprehended upon suspicion at the same time, The Earl of Angus denies the
blanks.
declared that Mr. Robert Abercrombie had revealed the purpose to him, and
showed that the blanks were trusted to Master George Ker.

This so manifest a discovery of Popish plots tending not only to the
overthrow of Religion, The Kings resolution published for punishing that
conspiracy.
but also of the Realm, which by this treasonable practice should have been
reduced to a miserable slavery, did animate the King much against the Jesuits,
whereupon he published his resolution to spare none that should try guilty of
the Treason, but make them an example to all post^rities, requiring in most
serious manner all his good subjects to beware of these Jesuits, traitors to
their native Country, and in their prayers to implore the mercy of God for
preservation of themselves, their wives and children from the conspiracy
intended. The Ministers of Edinburgh esteeming it their duty to make the
Churches of the Country foreseen of the conspiracy that was detected, gave
notice thereof by their letters to such as were most nigh at hand, desiring
them to meet at Edinburgh the 8. of January for giving their advice touching
these dangers, and how the same might best be prevented.

The meeting was frequent, A Meeting of the Mininistery.
for the report of the discovery drew many thither. Mr. Robert Bruce in a short
speech having related the peril wherein the Country and Church were brought
by these practices, it was thought meet by some Commissioners to entreat of his
Majesty the execution of the laws against Jesuits, and their ressetters, with
the punishment of such as should be found guilty of the present conspiracy. The
King his desire proponed to the Meeting.
The King accepting graciously those that were sent unto him, and giving the
whole Assembly thanks for the readiness they showed to assist him in the
prosecution of that trial, wished them to consider of what importance the
business was, and not only to give their advice for the course that should be
taken, but also to let him know what help they would contribute for
strengthening him in his proceeding against the unnatural Subjects.

His Majesty's desire being reported to the Meeting their advice was, An offer
made by the Meeting.
that a Parliament should be indicted and the subscrivers of the blanks cited
thereto, and because it was not expected that they would appear so as his
Majesty should be compelled to pursue them by force of Arms; they did humbly
offer their attendance upon his Majesty's person, till they should be
apprehended or expulsed the Country; as likewise to entertain a guard to his
Majesty of three hundredth horsemen, and an hundredth foot, so long as any
necessity was, and till the laws of the Country had taken effect against the
rebels; providing it should not be drawn into a custom, nor prejudge the
liberty of the Realm in time coming. The offer was thankfully accepted, and a
Proclamation made to meet the King at Aberdene the 20 of February, for settling
the North parts; and for a beginning of Justice David Graham of Fintrie was
arraigned, Fintry beheaded.
and being found guilty, beheaded in the public street of Edinburgh the 16. of
February.

Some two days before his execution, Mr. John Graham one of the Senators of
the College of Justice, being charged (because of the business he made in
behalf of Fintrie) to depart forth of the Town, and keep ward in Strathern, was
killed as he was going to the tide at Leith. There had been a question long
depending betwixt Sir James Sanderlands and him, for the lands of Halyards, and
by reason thereof a professed enmity amongst them; and it falling out at the
same time, when he was going to Leith, that the Duke of Lennox accompanied with
Sir James, and diverse others, was making toward their sport in the sands, Mr.
John Graham apprehending that they did pursue him, made a turn upon that ascent
which is without the gate of the town, as if he would stand there to his
defense, which S. James taking for a sort of provocation, he made toward him,
and entering in conflict, Sir Alexander Stewart, a grave Gentleman, servant to
the Duke of Lennox, was killed by the shot of a pistol, presently after M.
John Graham by another shot was stricken in the breast and fell to the ground,
they who did give him the convoy, seeing him fall, did all fly, and the
companies separating, he was led to a poor Cottage, near unto the place, and as
he lay in bed, killed by the said Sir Alexander his Page, in revenge of his
Masters death.

A man he was, An. 1593.
but meanly born and descended of that unhappy race, which had an hand in the
murder of King James the first: a long time he served as Deputy to the Earl of
Argile in the Justice Courts, The disposition and qualities of Mr. John Graham.
and after his death waited on Captain James Stewart, by whose means he was
preferred to be one of the Senators of the College of Justice in the place of
Mr. Robert Pont: of a quick wit, and a good and ready utterance, but was
excessively proud, covetous and unhonest in his dealings, as appeared in
suborning of the Notary of whom we spoke, and the fraud which he used to Mr.
Andrew Polwart subdean of Glasgow, a man of great learning, who being forced to
fly into England in the year 1584. with the other Ministers that took their
refuge thither, had entrusted him with his living and rent, upon assurance to
be repossessed when the time should change, yet being returned and having
obtained his peace, could he never bring him to fulfill his promise; whereupon
after a long plea at law, not finding an outgate, the honest man conceived a
displeasure and died.

The Earl of Angus the same day that he was killed made an escape out of the
Castle of Edinburgh by the connivence of the keepers, The Earl of Angus escapes
and flying to the North, joined with Huntley and Arroll. They upon the report
of the Kings coming to Aberdene, left their houses, and betook themselves to
the mountains, sending their Ladies to intercede for them, and make offer of
the keys of their houses which they had been charged to render.

The King receiving the Ladies courteously, The houses of the rebels rendered.
told them that if their husbands would enter and abide trial, they should
receive no wrong, otherwise the crime laid to their charge, did so highly touch
the Estate, as he could not stay the course of Justice. Atholl and Marshall
made Lieutenants of the North.
In the mean time for preserving the Country in peace, the Earl of Atholl was
made Lieutenant within the bounds of Elgin, Forres, Narne, Innernesse, and
Cromartie; and the like Commission given to the Earl of Marshall of the
Sherifdoms of Kincardin, Bamffe and Aberdene.

This done the King returned to Edinburgh, 26. March
where the Lord Burgh did meet him. He was sent from the Queen of England to
congratulate the discoveries of these treacherous practices, A message from the
Queen of England.
and make offer of her assistance, in pursuing and punishing those that should
try culpable, wherein she wished him to do as a King ought in such a case,
and if he could not apprehend their persons, to confiscate their lands and
rents, whereby he should undo them, and better the Estate of his Crown. And
seeing the cause was common and touched all Princes professing the same
Religion, she desired to be certified what his resolution was, that she might
assure other Princes her confederates of the course taken in both their
dominions for resisting the attempts of Spain. The King thanking the Queen for
her friendly offer and advice, said, That he knew Sir Robert Bows her resident
Ambassador had advertised her of the whole particulars, and of the blanks and
letters intercepted: that he had made a beginning, and was fully resolved to
prosecute the same with all rigor against those that he should try culpable;
but willed her to consider how dangerous it was for him to have so many great
men his Rebels, and what a business it would be, to hunt them out of those
holes, and desert places where they lurked; That he would stand in need of her
help and supply, which he doubted not to find, it being more dangerous for her
estate to have the Spaniard set foot in his Kingdom, then either in France, or
the Low Countries, both which she had liberally helped and supplied with men
and moneys. But what particular supply he would crave, his own Ambassador whom
he minded to send speedily should declare. This was the effect of the
conference kept with the Lord Burgh at his first hearing.

At the next audience the Ambassador falling again upon the same purpose, The
Ambassador intercedeth for Bothwell.
said, That her Majesty did wish the King to fortify himself with a wise,
sound and well affected Council, that might help to discover such wicked
practices, and repress them when they were detected; and then casting in
somewhat of the punishment, that the Queen had taken of those that had given
Bothwel countenance in England; he wished the King to consider what course was
best to be held with him in so troublesome a time; and if it were not for his
Majesty's quiet (having so many rebels) to receive him upon his submission in
favor.

The King passing that which he had told of the punishing of Bothwells
ressetters, albeit he knew no such thing was done; answered, An. 1592.
That if the Queen did either respect his countenance, or her own honor, she
would be so far from giving him refuge in her Dominions, as he thought
certainly she would deliver him according to the tenor of the league standing
among them. But for taking him in favor, his offenses were unpardonable, and
to be abhorred of all sovereign Princes, therefore desired him to show the
Queen his Mistress, that if he should understand any resset to be given
Bothwell after that time, he could not but join with her greatest enemies for
his own safety. As for his resolution in persecuting the trial begun, Midst of
April.
he should have it with him in a Letter of his own hand. This done he was
dimitted, Sir Robert Bows residing still as Legier.

In the end of April there was an Assembly kept at Dundy, An Assembly of the
Church at Dundi^.
wherein his Majesty directed Sir James Melvill of Halhill, with certain
Articles, in the first whereof he declared, That he would not suffer the
privilege and honor of his Crown to be diminished, and Assemblies to be made
when and where they pleased. Therefore willed them before the dissolution of
the present Assembly, to send two or three of their number, by whom they should
know his mind touching the time and place of their next meeting.

By the second it was desired, Articles sent by his Majesty to the Church.
That an Act should be made inhibiting Ministers to declame in Pulpit against
the proceedings of his Majesty and Council, under pain of deprivation, both in
regard of his Majesty's good intentions known to themselves for maintaining
Religion and Justice, and for the easy access that diverse of the Ministry
had unto him, by whom they might signify their complaints and grievances if
any they had.

Thirdly, In regard of Mr. Craigs decrepit age, his Majesty desired to have
five or six nominated to him by the Assembly, that he might choose some two of
them to serve in his house.

Fourthly, Seeing the standing of Religion, and safety of his person were so
straightly eonjoyned, as they that were enemies to the one, could not be
friends to the other, that some of every Presbytery should be appointed to
inform and advertise his Majesty of the practices of the Papists and the
ressetters of Bothwell; whose whole courses tended to the subversion of
Religion, no less then the indangering of his Majesty's person.

And fifthly, That they should appoint some of their number to cause the
Magistrates of Burghes, where there are any Seaports, try those that came into
the Countery, or passed forth of the same, to delate their names, that the
plots and practices against Religion might be better discovered.

These Articles, The Assemblies Answer.
especially the first two, savouring of discontent, were answered generally by
the Assembly: concerning their Meetings, they said, that they should follow the
Act of Parliament made the year preceding: and for the declaming in Pulpit, an
Act was made prohibiting any Minister to utter in Pulpit any rash or
irreveverent speeches against his Majesty and Council, or their proceedings;
and to give their admonitions upon just and necessary causes, and in all fear,
love and reverence. Which the King esteeming to be no restraint, but rather to
minister an excuse to the unruly sort when they transgressed, then otherwise,
rejected as not satisfying his demand; whereupon the Petitions of the Church
proponed against Papists at the same time, and against the erections of Tithes
in Temporalities, were not much regarded.

In this Assembly it was enacted That none professing Religion within the
Church of Scotland, should from thenceforth repair to any of the King of Spains
Dominions, where the tyranny of Inquisition was used, for traffic of
Merchandise, or other the like negotiations, till the King did obtain liberty
from the King of Spain to his Subjects for traffic in these bounds, without
any danger of their person or goods for the cause of Religion, under the pain
of Excommunication.

The Merchants offending hereat, did petition his Majesty and Council for
maintaining their liberty of traffic; which was granted. Notwithstanding
whereof the Ministers proceeded in their censures, till the Merchants made
offer to surcease their trade with Spain, how soon their accounts were made,
and they paid by their creditors in those parts.

But the abolishing of the Mondayes Market in Edinburgh, A change of the
Mondayes Market urged at Edinburgh.
though assented unto by the Council of the Town, and past in an Act, took not
the like effect; for the shoomakers who were most interessed in that business,
hearing that the same was to be put in execution tumultuously gathering
themselves together, An. 1593.
come to the Ministers houses, menacing to chase them forth of the town, if
they did urge that matter any more; after which the motion ceased, the Market
continuing as before. This did minister great occasions of sport at that time
in Court, where it was said, That rascals and sowtars could obtain at the
Ministers hands, what the King could not in matters more reasonable.

In the beginning of June, Sir Robert Melvill sent into England.
Sir Robert Melvil was sent in Embassage to England; his Commissionwas to
signify what had been done in the prosecution of the Authors, and contrivers
of the last practices since the Lord Burgh his return, and to require some aid
and assistance for inabling the King to follow that business to an end; and
particularly he was desired to crave a supply in money for levying 600.
Soldiers, and entertaining them some months, till the service was finished,
and the Rebels either apprehended, or forced to quit the Realm; withal he was
appointed to renew the former complaints of Bothwel his resset and
entertainment in the borders of England, and to crave his delivery according to
the league. But while he was pressing that business in England, Bothwel
surprised the King at home, and for a while made all these purposes to sleep,
so as he returned without effecting any thing.

The occasion and manner of the surprise was this. The King surprised by
Bothwell.
The Chancellor who had all that year been absent from Court, upon a
discontent the Queen conceived against him, had sent to the King a Letter
requesting his license to depart forth of the Country, since he could not with
safety attend his service; for that to remain at home, and live deprived of his
Majesty's presence, he said was to him a very hell, which he could hardly
endure; promising to return at such time, as his Majesty should find convenient
to recall him to his service.

The King did show the letter to the Queen, The manner of the surprise.
because in the same he had protested much of his sincere affection toward
her, and being loath to quite him whom he had tried to be so able a servant,
moved her to forget all quarrels, so as he would resign the Lordship of
Mussilbrugh, which had bred this dissension. The resignation made, and the
Chancellor being on the point to return to Court, the Duke of Lennox by the
advice of Atholl, Ochiltrie, and others of the name of Stewart, resolved to
prevent his coming by the inbringing of Bothwell. The Parliament had broke up
some two days before, and the Noblemen resorting to the Palace to take their
leave of the King, the Gates were kept patent, and less heed taken of those
who entered. Atholl with his Lady had lodged all that time in the house, then
pertaining to the Earl of Gowry, at the back of the Palace, and kept Bothwell
private with Mr. John Colvill, one of his followers. So early in the morning
the Lady pretending to bid the King farewell, and making her entry through the
Postern Gate, takes Bothwell and his companion along with her, and brings
them unperceived of any into the Kings bedchamber; The King was then private in
a retiring room, and when he came back, and saw them stand with their swords in
their hands, cried aloud, Treason, treason: They falling on their knees called
for mercy; Nay, said the King, you have dishonored me; and placing himself in
his chair, Strike Traitor, says he to Bothwell, and make an end of thy work,
for I desire not to live any longer. He protesting with many oaths, that he
came only to beg pardon, and to put himself in his Majesty's will: the King
replied, That mercy extorted by violence, was not mercy, and that it was not
the form of supplicants to come with weapons in their hands. Whilst the King
was thus talking, the Earl of Mar, and Sir William Keith entered into the
Chamber, and presently after them a number of Bothwells faction, who by this
time had possessed the utter Court, and assumed the charge of the Gates.

The report of this accident going to the City the people went to arms, The
City in arms.
and conducted by Sir Alexander Home their Provost, made toward the Palace to
give the King relief; but he was then become somewhat pacified, and following
the Earl of Mar his advice, after he had showed himself from a window to the
people, and given them thanks for their readiness, he willed them to return to
their houses and attend his advertisement. All that day matters were carried
fairly in a sort, (...) using speeches, and offering himself to trial for the
consultation which began his trouble; for his other misdemeanors he desired
mercy, excusing himself by the want, and necessity, whereunto he and his
friends were driven. But when he perceived the Kings countenance not to be
toward him, as he wished, he changed his forms, and letting some words fall
that sounded not well, gave diverse to suspect that he should attempt some
violence. This did set the English Ambassador on work, who being assisted by
the Ministers of Edinburgh, did after long travel and much persuasion induce
the King to set his hand to the Articles following.

1 That remission should be granted to Bothwell, Conditions granted to Bothwell
by the Ambassadors mediation
his friends and partakers for all attempts against his Majesty's person and
authority in any time past, and promise made never to call or pursue him and
his foresaids for any bypast fact; as likewise to repossess them in their
houses, and lands, notwithstanding whatsoever process laid against them.

2 That a Parliament should be called in November next, and such an Act past in
his and their favors as was made at Linlithgow Anno 1585 for their greater
security.

3 That during that time, the King should not receive in his Company the
Chancellor, the Lord Home, the Master of Glammis, and Sir George Home knight.

4 That from henceforth, the Earl Bothwell, his friends and followers should be
esteemed as good and lawful subjects, and used with much favor as if they had
never offended.

These Articles the King did in the word of a Prince promise to perform,
Articles subscribed by the witnesses.
and for Bothwells greater satisfaction after he had signed the same with his
own hand, caused so many of the Council as were present together with the
Magistrates and Ministers of Edinburgh subscrive as Witnesses. The subscribers
were, the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Atholl, the Lords, Forbes, Ochiltry,
Spiny, and Urquhart, the Master of Gray, M. James Elphinston, Mircarny, the
Clerk of Register, Nicoll Edward, John Morison, George Fodrick, and David
Williamson, Baylifes of Edinburgh; M. David Lindesay, M. Robert Bruce, M.
Robert Rollock, M. Walter Balcanquell and M. Patrick Galloway, Ministers. For
Bothwell it was promised that he should leave the Court, and not come toward
the King till he was called by his Majesty.

These things were done at Halirudhouse the 14 of August 1593. The King goes
to Falkland
some twenty days after the surprise. The next day the King went to Falkland,
attended by the Duke of Lennox, the Lord Ochiltry, and Chreichton of Clany a
follower of Atholl, who did promise to wait upon the the King unto November,
and debar those others that by the Articles were not to be admitted. The rest
of the month the King stayed at Falkland, and in that time Bothwell did obtain
himself purged by an Assise of practicing and consulting with Witches, which
had been the original of his mischief.

In the beginning of September the King went to Striveling, A Convention at
Striveling 7. Sept.
where he had appointed a Convention to meet for taking order with the broken
men of the Highlands and borders; Thither came the Lord Hamilton, the Earls of
Mar, Morton, Glencarne, and Montrose, with the Lords Lindesay and Levingston;
of the Church estate, the Bishops of Dunkeld, and Aberdene, the Prior of
Blantyre, and Abbot of Lundors, and diverse Commissioners of Burghes. After some
speeches concerning the borders and Highlands, and the means to quiet them
which was the errand pretended, the King declared, that he had called them, to
that meeting for business that touched him more nigh: and then relating the
many indignities he had endured at Bothwells hands, which they all knew, he
desired to have their advice touching the Conditions granted to him of late,
The Estates find the Conditions given to Bothwell dishonorable.
and whether they did think him tied to the performance thereof, the same being
extorted by the importunity of those that took on them to mediate betwixt him
and Bothwell, and yielded unto by him upon just fear. The answer of the
Convention was, That they judged the fact of Bothwell Treasonable, and the
Conditions granted in such a manner to carry no necessity of performance; that
for the remission promised to him, and his followers, the same depended upon
his Majesty's own pleasure, and that he should do therein what seemed to him
good; but to be tied not to receive in his company his servants and officers,
they held it not to stand with the honor and dignity of a King. For the
remission, said the King, I could be content for the quiet of the Realm, to
grant the same upon his humble suite, and supplication, when I am now at
liberty, but to be forced thereto and by way of capitulation to grant the same,
I do not think it agrees with mine honor. That which I require of you since I
judge the conditions unlawful, and that neither in law nor conscience I am
bound to observe them, is, that by public Act the same be declared, and that
as a free Prince I may presently, and in all time coming, admit and receive
into my company, such of the Nobility, Council, Officiars, and other good
subjects, as I shall think good to use in the administration of my affairs. All
esteeming this to be most reasonable, an Act was made declaring, That his
Majesty with the advice of the Estates, had recalled the grant made to Bothwell
in August last, and that being a free Prince he might use the service of any of
his subjects and call them to him at his pleasure.

This Declaration made, The Prior of Blantyre and sir Robert Melvill directed
to Bothwell.
the Prior of Blantyre and Sir Robert Melvill, were directed to Bothwell to
show him that albeit the King did not think himself bound in law, or hnour to
perform the Conditions made at Halyrudhouse, yet if he should now make humble
suit for pardon to himself, and his followers, the same should be granted, with
a double Proviso: first that he should supplicate his pardon, and pass the same
formally before the 20 of November; secondly, that the remission being exped,
he should depart forth of the Realm and abide in such parts beyond Sea, as the
King should appoint, and not return into the Country without his Majesty's
license.

Bothwell at first did take the offer well and seemed therewith content,
Bothwell falls to his wonted forms.
but when he was returned to Edinburgh (for the intimation was made to him at
Linlithgow) and heard that the Lord Home, and those others against whom he took
exception, were received in Court, he was greatly commoved, and falling to his
wonted forms, threatened to make the King observe the Conditions, and keep what
he had promised. To this purpose he advertised the Earl of Atholl, desiring he
should meet him at Striveling the first of October with his forces: Atholl kept
the Diet, accompanied with the Earl of Montrosse and a great number of men; but
the King was parted from Striveling and remained then at Linlithgow, attended
by the Lord Hamilton* and diverse other noble men, which made Bothwell change
his purpose and disappoint the interprise.

The King understanding that Atholl with his forces was come to Striveling,
Atholl coming to Striveling is charged to return home in the beginning of
October.
sent a messenger to charge him to return home, and dissolve his companies;
which he obeyed, pretending that his business was only to hold a Court at Down
Castle, (a house pertaining to the Earl of Murray whereof he had the Ward) and
that the messenger might witness the truth thereof, he took him along with him
the next morning to Down. The stay of the messenger put the King in suspicion
that the Charge was not obeyed, and that Atholl did wait upon Bothwells coming.
Whereupon he went back to Striveling, and understanding that Atholl was gone to
Down he followed thither. Montrosse taken by the Lord Home.
The Lord Home who was appointed to ride before and view the fields,
encountering the Earl of Montrosse, made him prisoner, and used him and his men
somewhat roughly. But he professing to be sent by Atholl to the King for making
his excuse, and declaring the true cause of his coming in those parts, was
dimitted, the next day upon his promise to appear before the Council
whenever he should be charged. Bothwell denounced Rebel.
After this the King going to Edinburgh, Bothwell was cited before the
Council; and not appearing, was of new denounced Rebel.

Leaving these affairs for a while, we will now return to the Popish Lotds.
They had been cited to the Parliament which was kept in July preceding, but
upon some informalities, and defects in the libell the process was remitted by
the Estates to the King and Council. This being ill interpreted, and taken to
be done in their favor, The Popish Lords excommicated by the Synod of Fi^e.
the Ministers of the Synod of Fife meeting at S. Andrews in the beginning of
October, did summarily excommunicate the Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Arroll,
the Lord Home* and Sir James Chisholme. They sent letters also to all the
Presbyteries, desiring their excommunication to be published in all the
Churches; and particularly required the ministers of Edinburgh to call a
meeting of some principal ministers, and well affected Barons to advise what
course was fittest to be taken for the defense of Religion and repressing the
practices of enemies. The King upon advertisement of these proceedings, called
M. Robert Bruce (who was then in great favor) and willed him to stay the
publication of sentence, The King deals with with M Robert Bruce to stay the
publication of the sentence
as being unjust, and altogether informal, for that neither were these persons
subject to the Synod of Fife, nor were they cited to answer; And if this be
your order, said he, that the Ministers of one Synod may excommunicate, and at
their desire all the rest shall make intimation, who can be sure or how shall
it be eschewed, but number shall this may be brought in troubles? M. Robert
answering that it was not in his power to stay the publication, the brethren
having already concluded the same; and that the Ministers of Fife had their own
reasons, and were answerable to the general Assembly. Well, said the King, I
could have no rest, till ye got that which ye call the Discipline of the Church
established, now seeing I have fonnd it abused, and that none amongst you has
power to stay such disorderly proceedings, I will think of a mean to help it.

The intimation in the mean time went on, The Popish Lords mee^ing the King at
Falaw desire a trial.
and according to the motion made for convening some principal Ministers and
Barons, there assembled a good number at Edinburgh the 17 of October. The King
was gone then to Iedburgh, for pacifying some tumults in the borders, and in
his going thither, was met at Falaw by the Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Arroll,
who humbly entreated a trial, and that they should not be condemned unheard,
offering to enter themselves what time, and in what place his Majesty should
appoint. There were diverse of the Council with the King at the time, They are
commanded to enter themselves in Perth.
by whose advice they were enjoined to enter their persons in the town of Perth
the 24 of that month, and abide there, till order was taken for their trial.
And lest casting of themselves in the Kings way, should be thought to have
proceeded upon an intelligence, that the King did keep with them; the Master of
Glammis and Abbot of Lundors were directed to inform the English Ambassador and
Ministers of Edinburgh of that which had happened, and the answer that the
Lords received.

How soon this was known, Petitions of the Church sent to the King at Iedburgh.
Commissioners were sent from the Assembly to the King with certain Petitions
conceived in this form.

The Commissioners of the Church, Barons, Burgesses, convened from diverse parts
of the realm, foreseeing the present danger, wherein the Church of God, the
person of the King, and whole Country do stand, have thought it their duty to
petition his Majesty and propone their advice as follows.

1 Seeing the Commissioners are informed that the excommunicate Lords, namely
the Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Arroll with their accomplices are to be put to
the trial of an Assise, they humbly crave that the trial be not precipitated,
and that the Diet assigned, may be prorogated, till such time as the professors
of Religion (who are minded to be their accusers, and to pursue them for the
treasons they have contrived) may be thoroughly advised with the business, and
resolve what is convenient to be done.

2 That according to the laws and customs observed in such crimes those
excommunicate and treasonable apostates may be committed to sure custody in the
town of Edinburgh, Dundy, and Striveling, or other places that shall be thought
expedient, till order be taken with Papists of new faction, they are known to
be the heads, and till the estates advice upon the form of their trial.

3 That when the Estates after mature deliberation shall put the foresaid
traitors to trial, the Jury be not nominated at the option of the parties
accused, but by the party accuser, who are the whole professors of the Gospel.

4 That seeing the aforesaid traitors are excommunicated, and by the just
sentence of the Church cut off from the society of Christ's body, that they are
not admitted to stand in judgment, or have any benefit of law, till they be
reconciled to the Church according to the laws of the Country, and his
Majesty's own promise, as likewise in respect they have made themselves guilty,
partly through their escape forth of Ward, and partly by playing the fugitives
and not appearing neither at S. Andrews, to which they were first cited, nor at
the time of the last Parliament.

5 Or if his Majesty will not alter the day appointed at Perth, as we do not
doubt but after good consideration he will, then we desire that such as profess
Religion, may be a guard to his Majesty at the time to defend his person from
violence, and to accuse and pursue them to the uttermost, which we are minded
to do, although it should be with the loss of all our lives in one day, being
fully resolved if they continue enemies to God and his truth, that the Country
shall not brook them and us together.

The Commissioners coming to Iedburgh had presence given them, The Conference
betwixt his Majesty and the Commissioners of the Church.
and having presented the Petitions, the King at the reading of the inscription
grew incensed, saying, That he would not acknowledge any such Convention, nor
them for Commissioners, seeing they had assembled themselves without his
consent and knowledge. They answered, that the meeting was warranted by his
Majesty's Proclamations. A long reasoning was kept upon that point; in end the
King condescended to hear them as subjects, and satisfy them with reason in
every particular, but to accept of their Commission or return any answer to
that meeting he would not. This passed, he said, That he was not foreseen of
the coming of these Earls unto him at Falow, nor had he any intelligence with
them; but when they came, and did humbly offer themselves to trial, he could
not of his Princely duty refuse it, though they had been the meanest and
simplest persons of the land, that he had dismissed them without any promise or
the smallest assurance of favor, whereof he had many witnesses; and for the
time and place assigned to their trial, the same was done by advice of such of
the Council as were present, but that he had since considered the time to be
too short and the town of Perth not so convenient, and therefore had appointed
a meeting of the Estates at Linlithgow the last of that month, by whose advice
he would proceed and do that which was fitting. It has been, said he, the
suite of the Ministers to have those Earls brought to their trial, and now
when they offer themselves unto it, it is strange there should be such business
made for a delay. As for himself, he had resolved what time and place soever
were appointed for the trial to have all things rightly done, and that neither
the Judges nor Jurors, if the matter came to that point, should be other then
men indifferent and well affected to Religion.

The Commissioners putting his Majesty in mind of that he had said at the
first view of the Blancks and the hearing of M. George Ker his confession, that
the crime was above the reach of his power to pardon, and beseeching him to
regard his honor and surety, seeing it was dangerous to permit the Earls to
come accompanied with such numbers, as they intended to bring; he said that he
could provide for any dangers that way. And when they did offer, as in the
Articles, to come and attend his Majesty as a guard at the time of trial; he
answered, That he would make choice of his own guard, that those whom he called
to that Diet should be welcome, and such as came undesired should not be so.

Then they show what offense was taken at the Lord Hume his entertainment in
Court, who was both excommunicated and known to be a professed enemy to
Religion: the King replied, That a day was given him to satisfy the Church by
the Ministers themselves, which was not as yet expired, and if he did not
satisfy, that he should remain no longer at Court. But said they, he does not
keep promise and is thought to have been a chief instrument in bringing these
excommunicates to your Majesty's presence. For that, said the King, I know it
not, and if you will accuse him, he can speak for himself. After these
speeches, they humbly besought his Majesty to vouchsafe the Assembly some
answer in writing, but he absolutely refused, and so they took their leave.

These answers reported, The assembly resolved to keep the Diet appointed for
the Lords trial
did no way content the Meeting, whereupon it was resolved that upon
advertisement they should all convene in arms at the place which should be
assigned for the trial of the Lords, and be their pursuers; to which purpose
some was left at Edinburgh to make timely warning to the rest. The King being
informed of this conclusion at his return to Edinburgh, called the special
Ministers that were in town, and showed that it was an undutifull part in them
to convocate the subjects, and cause them take arms without his warrant;
prohibiting any such advertisement to be given as was appointed. They excusing
themselves, said, That it was the cause of God, and in defense thereof they
could not be deficient.

Hereupon a Proclamation was made; Declaring the course that his Majesty had
taken to try the Conspiracy of the Popish Lords, and how after some p^ins taken
in that business, A Proclamation inhibiting all convocations.
he had indicted a Parliament in July last for that cause, at which time
nothing being done (albeit not in his default) and he impeshed a long time
after by the practices of Bothwell and other troubles in the Country, was no
sooner received forth of his hands then he fell again upon the same thoughts;
and that now he had appointed a Convention of Estates at Linlithgow, for taking
their advice touching the surety of his own person, the relief of the subjects
oppression, and the ordering of all that business, especially since the said
Lords had by their letters and otherwise most humbly desired a trial, which he
doubted not the Estates would consider and so proceed therein, as might best
serve to the preserving of Religion, and the quietness of the Country; his
own intention being no other, but to have them satisfy the Church, or if they
refused, to cause them to be expulsed and banished the Country. And for that
end he had commanded them to remain at Perth, and attend the resolution of the
Estates, dissolving their forces if any they had assembled. Whereof his Majesty
did think meet to give all his subjects notice, that they might know his care
for the maintenance of true Religion against all the enemies thereof. And
therefore inhibited the subjects to make any Convocations; or if any were
already made by the sinistrous informations of ill disposed people, they were
commanded to dissolve and turn to their houses till they should be advertised
either by missive Letters or Proclamations, and not otherwise, under the pains
appointed for seditious persons and disturbers of the public peace.

Notwithstanding of this discharge, A Convocation of the Estates.
there came great companies to Edinburgh, and in all parts of the Country were
people stirring; so that the Convention which was called to meet at the same
time being not very frequent kept a short while together. The offers and
Petitions of the Popish Lords being only read, the consideration thereof was
remitted to certain chosen by the Estates. These were the Lord Thirlestane
Chancellor, Certain of the Estates selected to judge of the Lords offers.
the Earls Marshall, Mar, Montrosse, and Rothes, the Lord Levingston, Scot of
Balwery, John Murray of Tullibarden, Alexander Bruce of Airth, Mr. George
Louder of Basse, William Scot of Abbotshall, Mr. David Carnagie of Colluthie,
Sir Alexander Hume of North-Berwick Provost of Edinburgh, Clement Core Baily,
with the Commissioners of the towns of Dundie, Couper, Striveling and
Linlithgow; to these or any four of every estate, together with his Majesty's
Officers, power was given to consider the Petitions and offers of the said
Lords, to try their accusations, purgations and the truth thereof, and to
conclude therein, as they should think most expedient for the surety of
Religion, and redressing of disorders within the Realm, ordaining their
determination to be as valid and effectual, as if the same had been concluded
in Parliament or Convention. It was likewise ordained that Mr. Robert Lindesay,
Mr. Robert Bruce, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. Patrick Calloway, and Mr. James
Carmichael and John Duncauson should be admitted to the said conference if they
should desire. And that in the absence of any of the Estates nominated, such as
were present should appoint others at their pleasure. The Commissioners
nominated having conveened at Edinburgh the 12. of November, after many days
reasoning, grew to this conclusion.

That the King for the public peace of the Realm, Conclusion taken, touching
the Popish Lords.
and to remove all troubles and the occasion thereof, after mature deliberation
and conference kept with the Ministers, had by the advice of the Commissioners
elected by the Estates, declared, and by irrevocable Edict ordained, That the
true Religion established in the first year of his Majesty's reign, should be
only professed and exercised in all time coming within the Realm, and that
none should supply or resset any Jesuits Priests, and other adversaries of
Religion under the pains contained in the Acts of Parliament.

That such as have not embraced Religion, or made defection from the same,
should conform themselves before the ^ of February next, satisfy the Church,
and obey such things as shall be prescribed to them by the King and the Church;
or if any of them did think it difficile so to do, for any scruple of
Conscience, that they should depart forth of the Realm to such parts beyond
Sea, as his Majesty should appoint, betwixt and the said day, and not return
till they were resolved to embrace the truth and satisfy the Church, they
always and their heirs enjoying their lands and livings, and their procurators
being licensed to appear before the ordinary Judges for debating their actions
notwithstanding of any pr^cesse laid against them.

That the Earls of Angus, Huntley and Arroll, the Lord of Achindowne and Sir
James Chisholme should be unaccusable of the crimes contained in the summons
executed against them by occasion of blanks and letters intercepted, and
concerning their traficking with strangers to the prejudice of Religion, and
the said process extinct for ever, discharging the Justice, Advocate and other
Officers present and to come of all calling, and proceeding against them and
their heirs therefore in time coming. But in case they have sent, or after
this time shall send any pledges forth of the Realm for fulfilling of
Conditions tending to the overthrow of Religion, in that case the said
abolition should be null, neither should it be further extended, then to the
crimes contained in the summons, and no way comprehend any murders,
fire-raisings or other crimes committed by them.

That such of the said Earls and others as should resolve to obey his Highness
Laws in professing the true Religion, before the 1 of February, should remain
in the places and bounds to be appointed for them, and forbear all practicing
or intelligence with the Jesuits, Priests and other Papists, debarring them
from and forth of their company.

That they should neither dispute, nor permit disputing at their Tables against
the truth, or in favor of Popery, and entertain in their houses a Minister,
and be ready to hear conference, and resolve themselves of doubts, that they
may be the better prepared to subscribe the Confession of Faith at the day
appointed, unless it please the Chrrch to prorogate their subscription for
some longer space.

That the Earls of Huntley and Arroll should before the 1 of February remove
out of their company Mr. James Gordon and Mr. William Ogilvie Jesuits, and
find surety under the pain of forty thousand pounds, each of them to abide by
their subscriptions, and not to make defection from the Religion: Achindowne
and Sir James Chisholme finding the like surety under the pain of ten thousand
pounds.

That such of them as make choice to leave the Country, and will not embrace
the true Religion, should give assurance to forbear all practicing with Jesuits
and others against Religion and the State when they are abroad, and till their
departing keep no intelligence with any of that Sect.

That they should declare their choice of the two conditions before the 1 of
January to the King and Church, otherwise in case they do not accept the same
in manner, and within the time above specified, they should enjoy no benefit by
virtue thereof, but should be liable to trial and punishment of Law, as if the
same had never been proponed nor offered unto them.

That the Church should in the mean time call all suspected persons before
them, requiring them to satisfy, and if they be obstinate delate their names
to his Majesty and Council, that they may be punished; and that Masters and
Landlords be holden to answer for persons so suspected, as for other crimes.

These were the conclusions taken in this meeting by the Deputies of the
Estates and signed by the King and them, which likewise were to be subscribed
by the 3 Earls and their accomplices in token of their acceptance; what effect
the same took, we shall afterward hear.

In the end of this year, Troubles betwixt the Maxwells and the Iohnstons.
there fell out great troubles in the west marches, some of the surname of
Iohnston, having in the July preceding made a great depredation upon thelands
of Sanwhare and Drumlanrig, and killed eighteen persons that followed for
rescue of their goods; a Commission was given to the Lord Maxwell, then Warden
for pursuing the doers with all hostility. Not long before, a great friendship
had been contracted betwixt him and the Lord of Iohnston, and bonds
interchanged for assisting one another, which the Lord Sanwhare, Drumlanrig,
and others interessed by the Iohnstons feared should make him remiss in
executing the Commission, yet considering his disposition, and that he loved
above all things to be followed, they took advice to offer their services so as
he would join with them for suppressing the power of the Iohnstons. Maxwell
thinking this to be a good occasion for bringing all Niddisdale to depend upon
him, embraced the offer; whereupon a bond was formed, and subscribed by them
and these others, with diverse of their friendship. This bond being negligently
kept, fell into the hands of one Iohnston of Commertries who served the Lord
Maxwell, and was by him carried to the Lord Iohnston, who resolving to
dissemble his knowledge of the Bond, sent a Gentleman to learn of the Lord
Maxwell himself, if any such friendship was made up amongst them as was noysed
in the Country. Maxwell at first denied that there was any such thing, but
having missed the Bond, and suspecting the same to have fallen into Iohnstons
hands, he excused the matter by the Commission that was sent to him, saying, He
must obey the King, and do as he was directed.

Iohnston seeing whereto matters would turn, Iohnston preventeth the Lord
Maxwell, and kills Captain Oliphant.
did associate to himself the Scots of Teviotdale, the Eliots and Grahams of
Eske, and hearing that Maxwell had levied some companies of horse and foot, and
placed the foot company with their Captain called Oliphant in Lochmaben to
attend his coming to Annandale, resolved to prevent him and cut them off, and
so falling upon them unexpected, killed the Captain and diverse of the
soldiers. Some fled to the Church thinking to save themselves, but the same
being set on fire, Maxwell invadeth Annandale.
they came forth and rendered. Maxwell to repair his dishonor, gathered in
haste as good as 2000. men, and entered into Annandale with displayed banner as
the Kings Lieutenant, intending to raze the houses of Lochwood and Lockerby.
Iohnston not equalling his forces, kept aloof, and after the Border fashion,
sent forth some prickers to ride, and make provocation. Against them a number
went out of Maxwells Army, who encountering with a great company were beaten and
chased back to the stall or main host, which by their breaking in was wholly
disordered. Iohnston, that stood in a piece of high ground, beholding the issue
of the skirmish, took the advantage of their confusion, and breaking upon them,
without any resistance made, put them all to flight.

The Lord Maxwell, The Lord Maxwell killed 6. December.
a tall man and heavy in armor, was in the chase overtaken and stricken from
his horse. The report went that he called to Iohnston, and desired to to be
taken, as he had some time taken his father, but was unmercifully used, and the
hand that he reached forth cut off. But of this I can affirm nothing. There
always the Lord Maxwell fell, having received many wounds. He was a Nobleman
of great spirit, humane, courteous, and more learned then Noblemen commonly are,
but aspiring, and ambitious of Rule: his fall was pitied of many, for that he
was not known to have done much wrong in his time; and was rather hurtful to
himself then others.

The King took these news very hardly, The Lord Here is and Barons of the
Country appointed to remain at Drumfreis.
that his Warden a Nobleman bearing his authority should be cut off in such a
manner; and he kept in such a business, what with Bothwel on the one hand, and
the Popish Lords on the other, as he could not take journey to those parts; it
grieved him exceedingly, always for quieting the Country, order was taken
that the Lord Hereis, Drumlanrig, Lagg and some other Barons should abide at
Dumfreis with their friends, and be ready upon all occasions to repress
whatsoever stirs might arise.

The 18. of January in a convention of Estates called at Halirudhouse the Earls
of Angus, A Convention of the Estates.
Huntley and Arroll were declared to have amitted the benefit of the Act of
Abolition, because of their misregard of his Majesty's favor, and not
accepting of the benefit offered, before the day prefixed. The Popish Lords
declared to have lost the benefit of Abolition.
The King had used diverse means to gain them, and would gladly upon assurance
of their good behavior have winked at crimes past, but all was in vain, the
Jesuits prevailing with their counsels, and feeding them still with hopes of
forain aid; whereupon charges were directed for entering their persons in ward,
till trial was taken of the accusations laid against them. Angus was charged
to enter in Blackness, Huntley in Dumbriton, and Arroll in the Castle of
Edinburgh and Achindowne in Tentallon; but none of them gave obedience.

Now the time of the Queens lying drawing near, the King went to Striveling
where she then abode and remained with her until she was delivered upon the
19. of February of a son, An. 1594.
about which time came the Lord Souche Ambassador from the Queen of England,
The Queen delivered of a son at Striveling: The Lord Souche Ambassador from
England.
to complain of the King his lenity in proceeding against the Popish Lords: for
she had seen the conditions granted them in November, and was highly displeased
therewith. But when the Ambassador understood that they had lost the benefit
of that grant in their own default, and that the King had proceeded so far as
to make public Declaration thereof, he was satisfied, and insisted to have the
sentence of forfeiture pronounced against them. This not proceeding with such
haste as he desired, he fell to treat secretly with Bothwell, who was making
new stirrs, and had drawn numbers of all sorts to follow him; yea with some
specialls of the Ministry he found such credit, as both in their public
Sermons, and otherwise by their private dealings, they did encourage people to
join with them; Mr. Andrew Hunter Minister waits upon Bothwell as his
Chaplain.
and which did most offense the King, sent one Mr. Andrew Hunter a Minister to
be his Preacher and attend him as a Chaplain; nor did their folly, or madness
rather, subsist here, but even the moneys which had been collected in the
Churches for the supply of Geneva, which was then in trouble, and deposed in
the hands of Mr. James Melvill Minister of Anstruther, were given to Robert
Melvill and George Strong, Bothwell prepares of new to invade the King.
two Captains, for leavying Soldiers to assist him. Bothwell was then
gathering new forces, and had appointed with the Earls of Argile and Atholl to
meet at Leith, for the banishing of the Popish Lords, and revenge of the Earl
of Murray his slaughter (that was the pretext) and with them did the English
Ambassador keep intelligence.

This being discovered to the King, The Ambassadors dealing with Bothwell
discovered.
one of his servants, who had been spied in Bothwells company, was committed in
the Castle of Edinburgh. Being examined, he confessed, that by direction of his
Master he had spoken with Bothwell, and Mr. John Colvill, and that he believed
they had some enterprise in hand, but what it was he knew not. The King
perceiving by his Confession, that the Ambassador had a secret dealing with
Bothwell, was greatly offended; yet because he would not seem to infringe the
privileges of Ambassadors, after he had checked him with some sharp words, he
dimitted his servant, and the Ambassador departed, the King not vouchsafing him
a farewell.

Bothwell in the mean time with the forces that he had gathered in the Borders,
The Road of Leith.
being about 400 horsemen, or thereby, advanced and came to Leith the 2. of
April at 3 of the clock in the morning. The King Commanded the people to Arm.
The King remained at the time in Edinburgh, not well accompanied, yet hearing
that Bothwell was come so high he commanded the Citizens and those that were
with him to arm. He himself going to Church, made a speech at the end of the
Sermon to the people, for the removing the suspicions conceived of his
favoring the Popish Lords: and recounting Bothwells treacherous attempts,
desired them to remember that he was their King, to whom they owed all
fidelity, and to consider in what case they themselves should be, if Bothwell
with his Borderers, men given to theft and robbery, should get the upper hand.
The hearers moved with his speeches, showed great forwardness, and went
incontinent to arms. The Lord Hume was commanded to take the fields, and lead
the horsemen that were in town; The King stayed with the foot, and before them
marched the Canon, which was brought forth of the Castle, and making directly
toward Leith.

How soon Bothwell understood that the Kings forces were marching, Bothwell
removes from Leith.
considering he could not equal them in number, he removed from Leith, and
dividing his men in three troops, took the way by Restalrig toward Dalkeith.
The Lord Hume with the horsemen followed to observe what course he held, and
the King with the foot removing to the other side of the town made his stand in
the field, called the Borrow moore. The Conflict betwixt Bothwell and Hume.
Hume with his company being advanced so far as Muddry edge, Bothwell turned
upon him, and being far superior in horsemen, gave him the chase, which they
that stood by the King perceiving, advised him to return into the town, but he
refusing to stir, answered, That he would never quit the fields to a Traitor:
yet the danger was great, and in the opinion of many, if Bothwell had taken his
course directly to the King, and not pursued the chase so hotly, he might have
carried the day; but in following, it happened his horse to stumble and fall to
the ground, and he bruised with the fall was forced to retire. That night he
went to Dalkeith, and on the morrow dissolved all his troops, which when Atholl
heard, he also went back into his Country. The Fiffe Captains with their
soldiers arriving at Leith about midnight, when they understood how things had
passed turned sail, and went sundry ways.

This purpose so defeated, The Lord Colvill and Mr. Edward Bruce directed to
England.
the King sent the Lord Colvill and M. Edward Bruce to the Queen of England to
complain of the misdemeanor of her Ambassador, and the resset that Bothwell
found in her kingdom: In his letter to the Queen using a round plainness, he
said, That although it had pleased her to commend the Ambassador she had
employed, The Kings letter to the Queen of England.
for a wise, religious and honest man; yet he had in his opinion been fitter to
carry the message of an Herald, then a friendly Commission betwixt two
neighbor Princes. That he had seen nothing in him but pride, and wilfulness,
and that therefore denying to give him any answer, he chused to send the same
by his own messengers; whom he desired her to credit as himself in all that
they had in charge to deliver. For Bothwell, he said, That he wondered how
notwithstanding of the many solemn promises made as well by her Ambassadors, as
by letters of her own hand, that he should have no harbor within her Country,
yet was he not only resset by her people, but suffered to reside in some of her
proper houses, and had received a good sum of English money, wherewith he
waged both Scots and English in this late treacherous attempt. To think this
was by her direction or privity he would not, so far it was against all
princely honor; on the other part, that she being so wise, and prudent a
Prince, and having so long, and so happily governed her kingdoms, should be so
slighted and contemned by a number of her subjects, as that such things should
be done without her knowledge, it could hardly be believed; wherefore leaving
it to her self to solve these doubts, he would only remember her of the
promise made at the delivery of Ororick an Irish rebel, and desire her not to
put him in balance with such a traitorous counterpoise, lest he should be
constrained to say with the Poet, Flectere si nequeo superos, etc.

This was the substance of the letter, The Commission given to the Ambassadors.
the credit committed to them was to assure the Queen, That seeing the Popish
Lords had not embraced the conditions offered, he should prosecute the Laws
against them, proscribe their persons and confiscate their lands; and to crave
of her, as one whom that cause equally touched, a supply of moneys, till either
they were expulsed the Realm, or their persons apprehended and presented to
justice.

The Queen excusing the oversight given to Bothwell by the slow pursuit of the
Popish Lords, The Queen of Englands answer.
and the favor showed to them, promised that from thenceforth he should find
no more resset in her Country; and for pursuing the Popish Earls, the King
should lack no supply that was in her power to give. The Queen discharges
Bothwell his resset in England.
With this answer did Mr. Edward Bruce return, for the Lord Colvill went from
that into France to congratulate the victorious and happy success of the
French King against those of the League, and invite him to assist the Baptism
of the Prince, which was to be in July next.

The Queen of England immediately upon the Ambassadors return, An Assembly of
the Church.
by a Proclamation in all the Borders did inhibit the resset and harboring of
Bothwell, and the aiding of him in any sort; which the king did so kindly
accept, as rendering her many thanks for the same, he did therewith entreat her
to assist the Baptism of the Prince his son. The like employment Peter Young
his Majesty's Elemosynar received for Denmark, the Dukes of Brunswick and
Megleburgh and to the general Estates; Sir William Keith, and Captain William
Murray the Provost of Saint Andrews were directed.

The Parliament being in the mean time indicted to the 27. of May, the Assembly
of the Church conveened at Edinburgh the seventh of the same month, where the
Excommunication of the Popish Lords was ratified and ordained to be published
in all the Churches of the Kingdom. The King did reside then at Striveling;
and thither were Mr. Patrick Galloway, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. Patrick Simson,
Mr. James Melvill, and Mr. James Nicholson directed by the Assembly to
represent the dangers wherein his Majesty's Person, Crown and Liberty of the
Country stood, and to propone such remedies as in their judgment were fittest
for preventing the same.

Both the one and the other were conceived in this form;
The perils which often before were threatened by the pernicious practices of
Jesuits, Petitions directed from the Church to the King.
and the malicious, unnatural and treasonable conspiracies of the Earl of
Huntley, Arroll and Angus and their accomplices, in betraying their native
Country to the cruel and merciless Spaniard, are no less urgent, and now
more to be feared, then when the danger seemed to be greatest, as may appear by
the reasons following.

1. It is certain that the Spaniard, A Remonstrance of the perils threatened to
Religion.
who with so great preparations in the year 1588. enterprised the Conquest of
the whole Isle, retains the same intention, wanting an occasion only to
accomplish his promise, as is manifest by the intelligence he has kept with
the Popish Lords, ever since the disputation of that Navy.

2. The open rebellion of the said Lords, at the bridge of De Falkland, etc.
with their continuance in the like treasonable attempts, notwithstanding his
Majesty's clemency in pardoning the same, does evidence their obstinacy in
prosecuting the same conspiracies.

3. Whereas the Church has not ceased at all occasions to lay open these
dangers, and humbly entreated that some remedy should be provided, nothing has
been obtained: to the emboldening of the enemies in their practices and
attempts.

4. Notwithstanding, that it was enacted in Council, that none should presume
to request for the said Popish Lords, under the pain of losing their places and
Offices, yet none are in such credit as their favorers, who contrary to their
promises labor still to procure them oversight and immunitie.

5. The Masses openly celebrated in the house of Balgawy pertaining to Mr.
Walter Lindesay, the house of Birnes appertaining to the young Lord of
Bonyton, the houses of Douglas, Strathbolgy, Logyamont and Slams pertaining to
the said Earls, do show, that either they think themselves assured of favor
in the Court, or of such assistance in the Country, as may maintain their
cause, or then that they are persuaded to be supplied by strangers.

6. The Act of oblivion offered to them, with the great discontent of all good
subjects, would not have been rejected, except they had looked for greater
favor and better conditions.

7. The disobedience they have showed in entering to their wards when they were
charged, does prove that they think themselves assured of the aid and
concurrence of others.

8. The arriving of the Spanish Bark lately at Montrosse declares, that they
have some practice to be put in execution presently, if the same shall not be
timely prevented.

9. The open conventions they keep since the arriving of the said Bark, do show
that they esteem their plots so substantially laid, as they regard not what can
be done for resisting the same.

10. The diligence they use in preparing, and putting their friends and
followers in arms, specially in the North parts, is an argument of some
interprise they go about.

11. And last, whereas his Majesty and Estates did upon the first discovery of
their plots and practices, apprehend a great danger to Religion; the Kings
Estate, and liberty of the Country; notwithstanding, that the cause is not
removed, there is no care taken to withstand their courses, which declares
that there is either a purpose to cover, extenuate and bear forth their
wickedness, or that the Lord has in his judgment blinded and hardened the
hearts of all Estates, that while the danger is greatest, they can neither see,
nor apprehend the same.

The remedies of the foresaid dangers were proponed, as follows:
1. That the Parliament indicted to the 27. The remedies of the dangers.
of the same month should not be prorogated, but the time thereof precisely
kept, and the Popish Lords forfeited, and to that effect, the Advocate
sufficiently instructed for maintaining the relievancy of the summons and
probation in due time provided.

2. That none suspected in Religion be chosen upon the Articles.

3. That after the forfeiture, they be pursued with all extremity, their Lands
and Rents annexed to the Crown, and no part thereof disponed in favors of the
persons forfeited.

4. That the Guard be employed for apprehending Mr. Walter Lindesay, the Abbot
of New-Abbey, James Wood of Bonyton younger, Mr. George Ker (who had made an
escape out of the Castle the year before) Mr. Alexander Lesley, Thomas Tyrie
and other Traffiquers and Jesuits.

5. That the houses of the Rebels be possessed, and their livings intrometted
with, to his Majesty's use.

6. That all persons be inhibited to resset, supply or entertain any
intelligence with the said Lords, especially their vassals and dependers, and
that none under whatsoever pretext contravene the same.

7. That the subjects be charged to put themselves in arms by all good means,
and be in readiness to pursue and defend, as they shall be warned by his
Majesty, or otherwise upon urgent occasions.

8. That the Bark arrived at Montrosse be apprehended, and the persons that
were within her, with such others as have had any dealing with them, and that
they be examined diligently for the discovery of the practice they have
presently in hand.

Somewhat was adjected concerning the Lord Hume, The Lord Hume reconciled to
the Church.
but he compeiring in the same Assembly, gave satisfaction to the Church, and
was absolved from the sentence of Excommunication. All the remedies the King
allowed, promising how soon the forfeiture was past, to follow forth the same:
Only at the 7. he took exception, where it was desired* that the subjects
should put themselves in arms upon urgent ^ccasions, for he had not as yet
forgotten the stirs of the year preceding; and would have none to arm but upon
his own warrant.

Withal he sent Sir Robert Melvill, Instructions sent from the King to the
Church and Assembly.
and Alexander Hume of North Berwick with certain instructions to the Assembly;
whereof one was, That they should inhibit the Ministers to utter any irreverent
speeches in Pulpit against his Majesty's person, Council or Estate, under pain
of deprivation: and because one of their number called John Rosse, had in a
Sermon preached before the Synod of Perth, uttered diverse treasonable and
irreverent speeches of his Majesty, it was craved that they should censure him
as his fault had deserved. Another was, That they should excommunicate Mr.
Andrew Hunter, for the scandal he had brought upon their profession, he being
the first open Traitor of their function against a Christian King of their own
Religion, and their natural Sovereign. A third instruction was, That by Act of
Assembly Ministers should be ordained to dissuade both by public and private
exhortation, their flocks from concurring with Bothwell in his treasonable
attempts, or any other that should make insurrection against the authority
established by God in his Majesty's person. The last was assented unto and an
Act made thereof, but the censure of the Minister Rosse was carried more
slightly, and he only admonished to speak in time coming so reverently and
discreetly of his Majesty, as there might be no just cause of complaint against
him. Hunter was deposed from the Ministry, as a desertor of his flock, and one
suspected to have joined himself with the Kings rebels, but the
excommunication was not pronounced.

The Parliament did hold at the time appointed, A Parliament wherein the Lords
are forfeited.
yet because the Noblemen convened slowly, 3 or 4. days were spent without
doing any thing. In end when by the excuses that diverse made a greater number
was not expected, they that were present assembled in the Parliament house, and
keeping the form accustomed made choice of a number for the Articles of
Noblemen, there were three Earls, and six Lords only present. Beginning was
made at the summons of forfeiture, the Letters and blanks intercepted with Mr.
George Ker presented, and the handwrits cognosced by witnesses. Some question
there was about the Blancks, and that which should have been insert in them,
but the presumptions were so clear, as none would doubt what the subject should
have been. Yet the Noblemen urged a delay of the trial to a more full
convention: which the King would not admit, knowing what misinterpretings that
would make, and so by pluralities of voices, the crimes of Treason were found
to be sufficiently proved, and the sentence of forfeiture pronounced against
the three Earls, and Achindown; their Scutcheons of Arms (as the manner is)
torn by Herald, and they declared to have lost their honors, lands and
estates for treasonable practices against the King, and their Native Country.

In this Parliament diverse Statutes were concluded, some in favors of the
Church, and others very beneficial to the Country, as the Stature made for
punishment of theft, robbery, and oppression; another against usury, and a
third against buying of Pleas by Judges and other members of the Court of
Justice.

The next month passed in receiving the Ambassadors that came to assist the
Baptism, which in the latter end of August next was performed with great
solemnity, from England the Earl of Sussex was sent; the King of Denmark, the
Duke of Brunswick, Megelbrugh, with the Estates of the united Provinces, had
their Ambassadors present. But from the French King there came not any, though
they also were expected at the day appointed for the solemnity. The Prince was
brought from his own chamber to the Queens Chamber of presence, and laid in a
bed dressed in a most stately form; the Ambassadors entered into the Chamber,
the Countess of Mar accompanied with a number of Ladies took up the Prince,
and delivered him to the Duke of Lennox, who presented him to the Ambassadors.
Sussex as having the first place received him, and carried him in his arms to
the Chapel, the rest marching in their ranks, and followed by the Ladies of
honor, the Mistress nurse, and others of inferior note. Before them went the
Lord Hume, carrying the Ducall Crown, the Lord Levingston carried the Towell or
Napkin, the Lord Seaton the Basin, and the Lord Semple the Laver. Above the
English Ambassador there was a Pale or Canabie born by the Lord of Cesford,
Buclerogh, Duddope and Traquier. The Princes train was sustained by the Lords
Sinclar and Urqhart. In this manner they walked toward the Chapel, a guard of
the youths of Edinburgh well arrayed, standing on each side of the way, and the
trumpets sounding.

Being entered the Chapel, the King arose from his seat, and received the
Ambassadors at the door of the Quire, and then was the Prince delivered to
the Duke of Lennox, who gave him to the Nurse: After which the Ambassadors
were conveyed to their places, which were ordered in this manner: Upon the
Kings right hand a chair was set for the French Ambassador, but this was
empty; next to him the Ambassador of Denmark was placed; on the left the
English Ambassador and Legier did fit, and next after them the Ambassadors of
Brunswick, Megelburgh, and the States; every chair had a tassell board covered
with fine Velvet, and the Ambassador of England besides the others had office
men standing by him to wait.

The Service did then begin, and upon the end thereof, the English Ambassador
arose and presented the Prince to the Bishop, who was appointed to administer
the Sacrament. This was Mr. David Cunningham Bishop of Aberdene. The action
finished, Mr. David Lindsey Minister at Leith, had a learned speech in French
to the Ambassadors. After which they returned to the Chapel in the same
order that they came. Then was the Prince laid upon a bed of honor, and his
Titles in this sort proclaimed by the Lion Herald, Henry Frederick Knight and
Baron of Renfrew, Lord of the Isles, Earl of Karrick, Duke of Rothsay, Prince
and Stewart of Scotland: This done, certain pieces of silver and gold were cast
forth at a window among the people, and a number of Knights created at night
(for it was in the afternoon that the Baptism was ministered) The Ambassadors
with their train, and the Noblemen present were royally feasted, nothing
lacking that was required to such a triumph. The rest of the month was spent
in Plays, running at Tilt, and such other exercises as might give delight to
the strangers.

Amidst these joys the King was not forgetting his own serious affairs, sent
his Secretary Sir Richard Cockborne of Clerkinton to England, to desire the
Queens assistance in pursuing the Popish Lords according to the many promises
made by the Lord Souche and Mr. Bows that how soon he should enter into action
against them she would have an honorable consideration of him and his
burdens. And that now the sentence of forfeiture being pronounced, it
concerned him both in honor and safety not to permit their longer stay in the
Realm. For the support desired and quantity thereof, he was commanded to follow
the instructions given to Sir Robert Melvill in his last Embassage, and was
enjoined to complain of one Mr. Lock his intertainment in the Court, who
professed himself an Agent for Bothwell; as likewise of Mr. John Colvill his
public residence in Twedmouth. In the last points he received satisfaction;
and shortly after, Mr. John Colwill wearied of Bothwells courses, by mediation
of friends obtained his pardon: But for the matter of moneys, diverse shifts and
excuses were made; only some part of the money was advanced, which was due
otherwise to the King.

In the beginning of September, the Ambassadors were dimitted with many
thanks, nor were they sooner gone, then a new conspiracy was detected. Bothwell
having joined himself with the Popish Lords, and received a part of the forain
gold sent to them, did undertake to raise such perturbations in the South
parts, as the King should be compelled to relinquish the expedition he intended
to the North; and if he could apprehend his person to carry him to Blackness,
(the keeper whereof he had corrupted) and there detain him captive, till they
might come and make their own conditions.

This enterprise was concluded in an hostlary at the Church of Memmure in
August; where Huntley, Arroll, Angus, Bothwell, Achindown and diverse others,
convened and subscribed a Bond, which was given in custody to Sir James Scot of
Balwery. By the apprehension of Mr. Allan Orme servant to Bothwell, and some
papers that were found with him, the whole purpose was discovered; which the
King caused to be published, that people might see what trust was to be given
to Bothwells religion.

This Gentleman's case at his dying was greatly pitied and much entreaty made
as well for him, as for James Cockram keeper of Blackness: but the clemency
showed in former times to the followers of Bothwell was judged so hurtful, as
the King against his nature was compelled to use rigor. Thus the two Gentlemen
were condemned, and executed in the public street of Edinburgh in the
beginning of October.

Immediately after, the Parliament upon intelligence had arrived in the Barque
at Montrosse, and brought with them some gold for supply of the Popish Lords,
Commission was given to the Earl of Argile and Atholl, the Lord Forbes and a
number of Barons to go and expulse them forth of the Country. But Argile being
young, and the rest declining the employment till his forces or he himself
should take the fields, nothing was done. Whereupon Mr. Robert Bruise taking
with him Mr. James Balfour made a journey to Argile, and partly upon promises
of recompense from the Queen of England, partly upon hopes given that the lands
of the Rebels should be at his bestowing, persuaded the Earl to undertake the
Commission. So gathering his forces he set forward about the end of September,
and traveling through the mountains came to Badenoch the 27. of that month,
where he laid siege to the Castle of Ruthven, but this was by the Clampherson
so strongly defended as he was forcedto leave the siege and turn unto the
Low-lands for joining with the Lord Forbes, the Lairds of Balqhain, Drum, and
Mackenze, who were all preparing to meet him.

In his own company was the Lairds of Tillibarden, Grant, Macklain, Mackintosh,
Clangregory, and Mackneill of Baray with their friends and followers, reckoned
in whole to 10000. and above. Huntley advertised of his coming did resolve to
fight him before his joining with Forbes and those of the Inland, and was
thereunto encouraged by the Earl of Arroll, who brought with him a small number
of five or six score at most, but resolute Gentlemen all. They of Huntleys part
were thought not to exceed 900. With this small number did he adventure,
marching the first day from Strathbolgie to Achindowne, where he encamped the
second of October, Captain Ker that had served him many years, a man of good
experience, being sent the next morning to try what way Argile took, did
quickly return, and show that the enemy was at hand. The two Earls hereupon
diving their forces, Arrol took the leading of the Vantguard wherein were 300.
the rest abode with Huntley and made the battle.

How soon the forces came in sight one of another, Argile was somewhat
troubled, for he was made to believe he should see no enemy, yet trusting to
his numbers he command Macklain who had the leading of his Vant to advance, he
himself keeping the advantage of the ground, made the army stay on the side of
a hill which was full of moss and bogs. Huntley he carried with him certain
Field pieces wherewith he played upon them in his approach, and therewith put
them in great confusion, for the Highlanders casting themselves on the ground,
as their custom is, could hardly be raised so long as they heard the noise of
the Ordinance. Arroll perceiving this made to give the charge, but by reason of
the steep ascent he was driven to make a little compass turning his side to the
adversaries, who by that time were got on foot and resuming a new courage did
rain upon Arroll and his men in their passing such a shower of darts and
arrows, that as they affirmed who were present, for the space of a quarter of
an hour the light of day was palpably eclipsed. Achindown was at this time
killed and Arroll dangerously wounded in his arm and and leg, many had their
horses killed, and were compelled to take them to their feet.

Macklain whose number were greater environing Arroll and his company held them
so engaged betwixt himself and Argile, as they had been all cut in pieces if
Huntley had not with speed come to their relief. But he perceived the danger
and charged with such fury as the Vant and many of both Armies being joined
they entered into a cruel fight, which continued almost two hours; in the end
Argiles men were disordered and put to rout, the Earl himself labored all he
could to rally them again together, but it would not be, so amazed they were as
without once looking back down they went to the other side of the hill with all
the speed they could make. Macklain with a few Isles men stood long unto it
after the rest were gone, and retired in good order with the small company he
had; Huntley persued the chase to the foot of the hill, though the steepness of
it be such that a man can scarce walk down it on foot, but the eagerness made
all dangers forgotten: There in a little burn or brook called Alwhaunachy he
had his horse killed, and before he could be again mounted the enemy was gone
to another hill whereas horsemen could not follow, and so the chase ceased. In
this conflict Argile lost two cousens, Archibald Campbell of Lochinzell, his
brother James Campbell, Mackneill Baray and about 700 commonsouldiers, on
Huntleys part besides his uncle Achindown 12 only were killed, but many were
hurt and wounded.

This fight happened on Thursday the 3 of October 1594, and is called by the
Country people the battle of Glenlivat, albeit it was fought on a hill three
quarters of a mile distant. The victory fell happily on Huntleys side for the
Country people, who should otherwise been miserably spoiled, if Argile with
his forces had prevailed.

The Lord Forbes with the Lairds of Bughan and Drumchat were advancing to
assist Argile; upon advertisement of his defeat and that he was turned back,
made after him, thinking to persuade him return. But by the way a gentleman of
the name of Irwyn being killed by the shot of a Pistol in the dark of the night
there entered such a distrust and jealousy amongst them, none knowing who was
the doer, as presently they separated and went home.

The King had the news of Argiles defeat brought him to Dundee, which made him
hasten his journey to the North. The 16 of October he came to Aberdene, where
council was taken for demolishing the houses of Strathbolgy, An. 1595.
Slains and Newton. In this service the Earl of Marshall was employed, having
some Companies of horse and foot allowed him till the same was accomplished.

Huntley and Arroll during that time did lurk in Sutherland, thinking how soon
the King returned Southto come back into their Countries; but the Duke of
Lennox being left Lieutenant in those parts by the counsel and assistance of
those that were appointed to attend him, put them to such extremity as they
made offer to depart forth of the Realm, and laid surety neither to return
without his Majesty's license, nor to practice against Religion and the State
whilst they stayed abroad. It was debated a while, whether or not such a
capitulation might stand with the Kings honor, and his Majesty being thereupon
consulted in regard of the many difficulties that pressed him in the time, and
that it made for the quietness of the kingdom to have them put away, the
surety offered was accepted; which done, the Duke of Lennox having stayed in
those parts three months returned about the third of February to Edinburgh.

Bothwell now was in miserable plight being hated of the Queen of England for
his combining with the Popish Lords, Excommunicated by the Church and forsaken
of his fellows, especially M. John Colvell, who had followed him in all his
troubles, and knew the places of his resset; for he had made his peace, and (as
the rumor went) betrayed Hercules Stewart Bothwells brother, who the same time
was executed publicly in the street of Edinburgh. These things did so increase
his fears, as not knowing whom to trust he stole away privately to France. The
King hearing that he was gone and had taken land at New haven in Normandy, sent
a Gentleman to the French King to demand him as one who was declared a traitor:
and if that was denied, to desire that he might be banished France. The answer
of the French King was, That he should give him no Countenance; but since he
had taken his refuge thither, he could not but suffer him enjoy the free air
of his Country. Some months he remained there, till either wearied of the bad
entertainment he found; or, as it was said, for challenging a Gentleman to
combat against the Kings edict, he was forced to quit those parts and fly
into Spain; from thence he went to Naples, where he lived in a poor estate unto
his death, which happened some years after the King his going into England.

How soon Bothwell was gone, The bond betwixt the Popish Lords and Balwery
exhibited.
all his followers did sue for pardon: Sr. James Scot of Balwery offering to
exhibit the bond made at the Church of Menmore betwixt Bothwell and the Popish
Lords, which he had in custody, was brought before the Council, and having
produced the same, laid open all their plots. By his deposition it appeared
that Sir James Duglas of Spot was the principal worker of that agreement.
Whereupon the Ministers of Edinburgh were called, Sir James Duglas of Spot
excommunicated.
and the bonds showed unto them bearing a mutual concurrence in all things,
Religion not excepted. Whereupon they were desired to pronounce Spot
excommunicated as one that had made defection from the truth, and was otherwise
suspected of heinous crimes; but they excusing themselves, the Commissioners of
the general Assembly were called to meet at Striveling, who after some
debating, the sentence was pronounced against him. Balwery after a few days
imprisoned, was set at liberty and remitted, but never prospered after that
time, and ruined his house utterly, for an ensample to all that will be meddling
with factious and seditious Rebels.

The year following an Assembly of the Church was kept at Montrose in the
month of June, An. 1695.
An assembly of the Church at Montrose.
where the Commissioners for the King did urge these Articles. First, Whosoever
did meddle or practice in any treasonable enterprise against his Majesty's
person and estate being found and declared culpable by law, they should
likewise incur the sentence of Excommunication, Articles sent from the King
to the Assembly.
that so there might be an inseparable union betwixt the two swords. Secondly,
that no Excommunication, should be pronounced at the appetite of particular
men, but that a sufficient number of the Church should be first Assembled, and
the same determined by public consent. Thirdly, That none should be
Excommunicated, for civil causes, crimes of light importance, or particular
wrongs of Ministers, lest the censure should fall into contempt and become like
the Popes cursing. Fourthly, That no summare Excommunication should be
thenceforth used, An. 1595.
but that lawful citation of parties should go before in all causes whatsoever.

To the first the Assembly agreed with the clause Legitima cognitione
Ecclesiastica praeeunte. The Assemblies answer.
To the second they likewise condescended. But to the third and fourth they
answered, that those being points of great weight and craving a mature
deliberation, could not on the sudden be determined; and so continued the
resolution thereof to the next Assembly, discharging in the mean time any
summary Excommunication to be used, with this exception, Nisi salus ecclesiae
periclitetur. The exception displeased the King, for he thought it would serve
the turbulent sort for a color to all their proceedings.

But there fell out in the mean time a business which made all these things be
forgotten. The Queen seeks to have the Prince in custody.
The Queen moved by some that envied the Earl of Mar his credit, labored to
have the Prince her son in her own custody and had drawn the Chancellor and
diverse of the Council to promise their assistance. Advertisement given of this
to the King, who was then at Falkland, he came to the Queen at Halyrudhouse,
and inhibiting any of the Council to come toward him till he should call
them, dealt so with the Queen that he diverted her from that course, and made
her go and remain at Striveling. The King diverteth her from that course.
How soon she was gone, calling the Chancellor and such of the Council as were
suspected to have suffered her in those conceits, he showed himself much
displeased, and chiding them bitterly followed the Queen to Striveling, where
he remained not long but returning to Falkland left to the Earl of Mar a
Warrant written with his own hand, and conceived in this form. The Kings letter
to the Earl of Mar for receiving the Prince.
My Lord of Mar, because in the surety of my son consists my surety, and I
have concredited unto you the charge of his keeping upon the trust I have of
your honesty, this I command you out of my own mouth being in the company of
those I like otherwise for any charge or necessity that can come from me you
shall not deliver him. And in case God call me at any time see that neither for
the Queen nor Estates their pleasure you deliver him till he be 18 years of
age, and that he command you himself. Striveling the 24 of July 1595. This
warrant as it showed the Kings displeasure at those that had combined in the
plots, so it declared the great trust he put in the Nobleman.

Shortly after the Chancellor taking to heart the Kings offense contracted a
hearty sickness at his house of Lawder, The Chancellor contracteth sickness and
dies.
and sending his Cosen the secretary to the King who remained then at
Hamilton, did by him excuse the dealing in that matter, and with a solemn
protestation of his fidelity in all his Majesty's services, seriously commend
his Lady, children and friends, now that he was to end his life, to his
Majesty's protection. The King was much troubled with the news, and wrote unto
him with his own hand the letter following. The Kings letter to the Chancellor.
Chancellor, how sorry I am of these news I leave it to your self to judge, I
was never a dissembler of my affections. And yet I trust that God will not
spoil me of you so untimely; Therefore will pray you, so far as you may, with
a valiant heart resist the assaults of your sickness, hoping in the goodness of
my fortune that God will reserve you yet to me as Hezekiah was to his people,
for the necessity between Prince and subject is reciproque, nor can any
sickness how heavy soever it be take away the life, if God cut not the threads
thereof. As to your suits, if God calls you, I need no remembrance: for since I
made you a pattern of my constant favor during your life (as your self has
often time said) I am much more bound of Princely duty to make your wife and
posterity that bears your image a vive representation of my thankful memory.
And to comfort you in this, remember what I have done to the Duke, and my Lady
Huntley, for their fathers sake. This may assure you that in case of the worst
(which God forbid) your thoughts shall be prevented herein by my thankful
behavior to them; and for your cousin the Secretary, he shall be the better at
my hand in losing you. But I green to hear better news: And if time and
distance of place could have permitted me in any way, I should not have spared
to have carried my own message my self. God send you your health, and keep you
to me, and to your Native Country.

This showed in what account the King held him! The Chancellor his qualities.
and in truth he deserved nothing less; for he was a man of rare parts, and of
a deep wit, learned, full of courage, and most faithful to his King and
Master. In that last business which the Queen went about of taking the Prince
from the Earl of Mar, he was consenting; (for the two Noble men had their
private emulations, but it was ever with a reservation of his Majesty's
pleasure.) No man did ever carry himself in his place more wisely, nor sustain
it more courageously against his enemies then he did. Being visited in his
sickness by Mr. Robert Bruce, and the Ministers of Edinburgh, he expressed a
great contempt of the world, and of the vanities of it, lamenting that he had
not done the good which he would and might have done in his place, being
impeded as he said by the malice of his adversaries, who were ever plotting his
death and ruin. Two months he continued under that languishing sickness, and
ended his days most happily the 3. of October, 1595. The King did greatly
lament his death, and honored him with this Epitaph.

Thou passenger that spies with gazing eyes
This Trophy sad, His Epitaph written by the King.
of deaths triumphant dart,
Consider when this outward Tomb thou sees,
How rare a man leaves here his earthly part.
His wisdom, and his uprightness of heart,
His piety, his practice of our State,
His quick Engine so verst in every Art,
As equally not all were in debate.
Thus justly has his death brought forth of late,
An heavy grief in Prince and Subjects all,
That virtue love, and vice do bear at hate,
Though vicious men rejoices at his fall.
So for himself most happy does he die,
Though for his Prince it most unhappy be.
Others for all this spared not to express their malice in Libells and Rythmes
after his death; some whereof were cast in the Kings Chamber at Linlithgow and
other places: but as the Authors were not known, so were the Rythmes despised
and contemned by all good men. His body was some days after conveyed to
Hadington, and solemnly interred in the Sepulcher of his fathers.

This year was by the vulgar people reckoned among the ill years, Great death
of Corns, and great bloodshed in the Country.
because of the dearth and scarcity of Corns, which the abundance of winds in
the Harvest time had caused, yet for the bloodshed and slaughters committed in
all quarters of the Country was it more justly to be so accounted; For in the
South parts the Iohnstons and Maxwells had a bloody conflict, wherein diverse
were killed; the greatest loss falling upon the Maxwells that went from the
West parts besides Glasgow, to assist their friends in the South.

In the Isles and Highlands were likewise great troubles: nor was the
Incountrey more quiet, bloods and slaughters daily falling out in every place.
Among which none was more odious then the slaughter of David Forrester Citizen
of Striveling, David Forester Citizen of Striveling treacherously betrayed.
killed as he was returning from Edinburgh by some that lay in wait for his
life. The Lairds of Arth and Dunnypearce, were thought to have hounded out the
committers upon a spleen conceived against the Gentleman for the credit he had
with his Master the Earl of Mar: for no other quarrel could be pretended.
The Nobleman taking this greatly to heart, caused to bring the body of his
servant to Linlithgow, (for he was killed nigh to Linlithgow) and with his
whole friendship conveyed the same to Striveling there to be interred, carrying
along the portraite of the dead with the wounds he had received in a white
sheet, to move the beholders, to a great detestation of the fact. The Corpse
buried, and the Earl following the course of Law, the Lords Levingston and
Elphingston did party the Committers. And though the King by his Proclamation
did prohibit the assisting either of the pursuit or defenders, commanding
Justice to be done, nothing could take effect in that troublesome time; so
powerful was the combination of parties. But that which by the ordinary way of
Justice could not as then be required, we have since visibly punished in the
fall and ruin of those Families, for a lesson to all men to fly and abhor
the shedding of innocent blood.

The year preceding the King had directed, as we showed, Sir Richard Cockborn
of Clerkington his Secretary to England, and amongst other instructions willed
him to urge the payment of the moneys which the Lord Souch and Mr. Bows the
Queens Ambassadors had often promised. A Commission to eight of the Council to
rule the Exchequer.
Wherein finding nothing but delays, and his necessities daily growing, he
resolved to look to his own estate at home, and order his revenues to the best
profit. For this effect he made choice of eight persons to rule the affairs of
the Exchequer. These were Alexander Lord Urqhart, President of the College of
Justice, Walter Commendator of Blantry, Lord Privy Seal, Mr. David Carnegy of
Colluthy, Mr. John Lindersey Parson of Menmure, and James Elphingston of
Ennernathie, Mr. Thomas Hamilton of Dummany, Mr. John Sken Clerk of Register,
all Senators of the College of Justice, and Mr. Peter Young of Seaton his
Elemosynar.

To these eight or any five of them was entrusted the full and free
administration of the whole Rents and Duties pertaining to the Offices of
Controllery and Collectory, The tenor of the Commission.
resigned and committed by the four Officers in his Majesty's hands, with power
to deprive and discharge all inferior Chamberlains, Under-collectors,
Customers, Secretaries, Intrometters whatsoever, with any of the said Rents,
all inferior Clerks of the said Offices, and to appoint new Clerks, Receivers
and Intrometters with the same (excepting only the Office of the Clerk of
Register his fees) privileges, and other commodities belonging to him or any
of his Predecessors, to hear and exact account of Steward, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Provosts of Burghs, Customs, Clerks of Cockquet, Searchers, Chamberlains,
Receivers, Factours and Intrometters, with the Farms, Males, Profits and
Duties, Caves, Customs, Fishings, Cole-houses, Parks, Steadings, Orchards and
other Rents of the property annexed of old and of new, or unannexed and
belonging any way to the Patrimony of the Crown, as also to hear the unmade
accounts of the Treasurer and his Deputies, the General and Warden of the
Coin, and Taskmen and laborers of the Mines and Metalls, the Collectours of
the Taxation, the Master of the Wardrobe Jewels and movables, the Master of
the work, the munition and plenishing of Castles, the Monks portions, the
payment of the Guard and men of War, the rents of Colleges, Hospitalls,
Schools and Students, the common good of Burghs, the Dowry of whole moneys
appertaining to the King, as well within the Realm as coming from other parts,
and to allow or refuse allowance thereof, as they should find meet; with power
likewise to appoint and set Fines and Penalties for offenses, to make and set
down the prices of Wines, Victuals and Corns, yearly to put an order to his
Majesty's house, and Esquiery and stable, and make provision therefore; to
repair the decayed Customs, appoint the Order of uplifting the same, and to
rowpe and set them to the best profit; to consider the state of the present
Coin, and therein direct what they should think requisite to assist the
Treasurer and the Compositors in the expeding of signators, and that without
advice nothing should pass; to examine the diligence of Sheriffs and other
inferior Judges with their Officers, and negligence to correct and punish the
faults of Officers of Arms; to compone, transact or uplift the escheats of
persons denounced to the horn; and generally to do and perform all things
proper to the Exchequer, they enoying such places in Council, and Parliament,
as the Officers thereof had in former times with all the power, privileges,
honors and immunities that belonged thereto, either by Acts of Parliament, or
by consuetude of the Realm.

The King did further promise in verbo principis not to join any more to the
present Commission at any time hereafter; The King his promise to the
Commissioners.
and in case a place fell void by decease of any of the present Commissioners,
to receive and admit none, but by advice and consent of those that remained
alive, as also not to sign any letter or signatour concerning the disposition
of any of the rents of property, collectory, or new augmentations,
confirmatives or ratifications of any former gifts, dispositions, pensions, or
infestments or licenses for transporting of forbidden goods, unless the same
were first heard, allowed and subscribed by the said Lords, or any five of them
sitting in Council by way of Action, Exception or Reply, notwithstanding the
Seals were appended thereto. The keeper whereof were discharged to append any
signet or seal, except the letters or signatures were subscribed in manner
above rehearsed, under the pain of losing their offices. Moreover, it was
declared that the said Lords should have power to direct letters of horning,
poynding and caption upon their own acts and decretes, and that no suspension
of any charges for ingathering any part of the Patrimony should pass, except in
Exchequer or Session three of the said Lords subscribing the same.

The Lords again made faith, The Commissioners make faith.
That the next unto God, and good Conscience they should in all things respect
his Majesty's weal, honor and advancement of his revenue, and neither for
tenderness of blood, commodity to themselves, awe or fear of any person consent
to the disposition of any part of the patrimony, whereby his Majesty's profits
might be diminished, and that they should not give their consents severally,
but being assembled, at least five of them, in Exchequer, under protestation
that the accepting of the said Commission should not be a reason of declining
them in Action that concerned his Majesty, seeing they did neither receive fee,
nor were intrometters with any part of the rents, but only directed the
receivers and collectors of the same.

This Commission approved by the Lords of Council, Exception taken at the
ampleness of the Commissioners.
was published at the market Cross of Edinburgh the 12 of January 1595. diverse
excepting at the ampleness of it, and saying, That the King had left nothing to
himself but the naked title of a King, and put all his power and means in the
hands of others, so as subjects were to expect no benefit nor reward from him.
The Courtiers, they especially of the bedchamber, did grudge exceedingly, The
Commissioners possess themselves with offices of Estate.
that all occasion to do good to themselves or their friends was this way cut
off. Nor was it long before these Commissioners became extremely disliked,
partly for their strict dealing with the subjects, and partly for drawing all
the offices into their own hands. Beginning was made at M. David Magill
Advocate, whom they pressed to dimit and resign his office by reason of his
age and imbecillitie as they pretended, and when by no persuasion he could be
moved unto it, they did associate with him in office M. Thomas Hamilton one of
their own number; which bred him such a grief, as shortly after he ended his
days. Next they fell upon the Master of Glamys Treasurer and his deputy Sir
Robert Melvill, and by examining their accounts found them liable in such sums
to the King, as to obtain a Quietus est they were glad to resign the
Treasurer, which was bestowed on the Prior of Blantyre: Then did they labor
the Secretary Sir Richard Cockborne to resign his place, and exchange it with
the office of Privy Seal, which Blantyre had dimitted in favor of Mr. John
Lindesey. This was easily effected, the gentlemen not liking to contend or fall
in question with them. The office of the Collectorie, resigned by the Provost
of Linclowden, was given to Mr. James Elphinston. The President they intended
to make Chancellor; but to this the King would not condescend, knowing how he
stood affected in Religion, and that his preferment to that chief place would
open the mouths of the Ministers, and raise a clamor in the Country. These
proceedings did work them much hatred, and (as is the lot of those that rule in
Estates) whatsoever was amiss, they carried the blame albeit in many things
they were innocent.

The next year begun with a trouble in the borders, An. 1596.
which was like to have destroyed the peace betwixt the two Realms, and arose
upon this occasion: The Lord Scroope being then Warden of the West-Marches of
England; and the Lord of Baclugh having the charge of Liddisdale, they sent
their Deputies to keep a day of Truce for redress of some ordinary matters.
The place of meeting was at the Dayholme of Kershop, where a small Brook
divides England from Scotland, and Liddisdale from Bewcastle. There met as
Deputy for the Lord of Baclugh, Robert Scott of Hayninge; and for the Lord
Scroope, a Gentleman within the West Wardenrie, called Mr. Salkeld. These two,
after truce taken and proclaimed, as the custom was, by sound of Trumpet met
friendly, and upon mutual redress of such wrongs as were then complained of,
parted in good terms, each of them taking his way homewards. Mean while it
happened one William Armstrong, commonly called Will of Kinmouth to be in
company with the Scottish Deputy, against whom the English had a quarrel for
many wrongs he had committed, as he was indeed a notorious thief. William
Armstrong called Will of Kinmouth, taken Prisoner.
This man having taken his leave of the Scots Deputy, and riding down the
River of Liddell on the Scottish side toward his own house, was pursued by the
English that espied him from the other side of the River, and after a chase of
three or four miles, taken prisoner, and brought back to the English Deputy,
who carried him away to the Castle of Carlisle.

The Lord of Baclugh complaining of the breach of truce (which was always
taken from the time of meeting unto the next day at sun rising) wrote to Mr.
Salkeld, The Lord of Baclugh complains of the breach of truce.
and craved redress; he excused himself by the absence of the Lord Scroope;
whereupon Baclugh sent to the Lord Scroope, and desired the prisoner might be
set at liberty without any bond or condition, seeing he was unlawfully taken.
Scroope answered, that he could do nothing in the matter, it having so
happened, without a direction from the Queen and Council of England,
considering the man was such a Malefactor. Baclugh loath to inform the King of
what was done, lest it might have bred some misliking betwixt the Princes,
dealt with Mr. Bows the Resident Ambassador of England for the Prisoners
liberty, who wrote very seriously to the Lord Scroope in that business,
advising him to set the man free, and not to bring the matter to a further
hearing; but no answer was returned: the matter thereupon was imparted to the
King, and the Queen of England solicited by Letters to give direction for his
liberty; yet nothing was obtained: which Baclugh perceiving, and apprehending
both the King and himself as the Kings officer to be touched in honor, he
resolved to work the Prisoners relief by the best means he could.

And upon intelligence that the Castle of Carlisle, No satisfaction made,
Baclugh sets the Prisoner at liberty.
wherein the Prisoner was kept, was surprisable, he employed some trusty
persons to take a view of the Posterngate, and measure the height of the wall,
which he meant to scale by ladders; and if those failed, to break through the
wall with some iron instruments, and force the gates. This done so closely as
he could, he drew together some 200 horse, assigning the place of meeting at
the Tower of Morton, some ten miles from Carlisle an hour before sunset. With
this company passing the water of Esk about the falling, two hours before day
he crossed Eden beneath Carlisle bridge (the water through the rain that had
fallen being thick) and came to the Sacery, a plain under the Castle; There,
making a little halt at the side of a small Bourn which they call Cadage, he
caused 80 of the company to light from their horses and take the ladders and
other instruments which he had prepared with them, he himself accompanying them
to the foot of the wall, caused the ladders to be set to it, which proving too
short he gave order to use the other instruments for opening the wall nigh the
Postern, and finding the business like to succeed, retired to the rest whom he
had left on horseback for assuring those that entered upon the Castle against
any eruption from the Town. The Castle of Carlisle surprised, and the Prisoner
freed.
With some little labor a breach was made for single men to enter, and they
who first went in brake open the Postern for the rest; the watchmen and some
few the noise awaked, made a little restraint, but they were quickly repressed
and taken captive, after which they passed to the Chamber wherein the Prisoner
was kept, and having brought him forth, sounded a trumpet, which was a signal
to them without that the enterprise was performed. My Lord Scroope and Mr
Salkeld were both within the house, and to them the Prisoner cried a good
night. The captives taken in the first encounter were brought to Baclugh, who
presently returned them to their Master, and would not suffer any spoil or
booty, as they term it, to be carried away: he had straightly forbidden to break
open any door but that where the Prisoner was kept, though he might have made
prey of all the goods within the Castle, and taken the Warden himself captive;
for he would have it seen that he did intend nothing but the reparation of his
Majesty's honor. By this time the Prisoner was brought forth, the Town had
taken the Alarm, the drums were beating, the bells ringing, and a beacon put
on the top of the Castle to give warning to the Country. Whereupon Baclugh
commanded those that entered the Castle and the Prisoner to horse, and march
again by the Sacery, made to the River at the stony bank: on the other side
whereof certain were assembled to stop his passage, but he causing sound the
Trumpet took the River, day being then broken, and they choosing to give him way
he retired in order through the Grahams of Esk (men at that time of great power
and his unfriends, and came back into Scottish ground two hours after
sunrising, and so homewards.

This fell out the 13 of April 1596. The Queen of England greatly offended
with the enterprise.
The Queen of England having notice sent her of what was done stormed not a
little, one of her chief Castles surprised, a prisoner taken forth of the hands
of the Warden and carried away so far within England, she esteemed a great
affront. The Lieger M. Bows in a frequent Convention kept at Edinburgh the ^2
of May did, as he was charged, in a long Oration aggravate the hainousness of
the fact, concluding that peace could not longer continue betwixt the two
Realms, unless Baclugh were delivered in England to be punished at the Queens
pleasure. This matter debated in Council.
Baclugh compiering and charged with the fact made answer, That he went not
into England with intention to assault any of the Queens houses, or to do wrong
to any of her Subjects, but only to relieve a subject of Scotland unlawfully
taken and more unlawfully detained; That in the time of a general assurance in
a day of truce he was taken prisoner against all order, neither did he attempt
his relief till redress was refused; and that he had carried the business in
such a moderate manner as no hostility was committed, nor the least wrong
offered to any within the Castle: yet was he content according to the ancient
treaties observed betwixt the two Realms, when as mutual injuries were
alleged, to be tried by the Commissioners that it should please their
Majesty's to appoint, and submit himself to that which they should decern. The
Convention esteeming the answer reasonable did acquaint the Ambassador
therewith, and offered to send Commissioners to the borders with all diligence
to treat with such as the Queen should be pleased to appoint for her part.

But she not satisfied with the answer refused to appoint any Commissioners;
The trouble quieted by Baclugh in England.
whereupon the Council of England did renew the complaint in July thereafter,
and the business being of new agitated it was resolved of as before, and that
the same should be remitted to the trial of Commissioners: the King
protesting, That he might with great reason crave the delivery of the Lord
Scroop for the injury committed by his deputy, It being less favorable to take
a prisoner then relieve him that is unlawfully taken; yet for the continuing of
peace he would forbear to do it, and omit nothing on his part that could be
desired either in equity, or by the laws of friendship. The borderers in the
mean time making daily incursions one upon another filled all their parts with
trouble, the English being continually p^t to the worse; neither were they made
quiet till for satisfying the Queen the Lord of Baclugh was first committed in
S. Andrews, and afterward entered in England, where he remained not long.

At the same time for bringing the Isles to obedience Collonell Steward was
employed to levy 1000 men, Col. Stewart designed Lieutenant for the Isles.
every shire furnishing 20 horsemen and 30 foot, or so much money as would
sustain them, allowing the horsemen 24 pounds monthly and the foot 12 pound,
besides the supply of the free burghes. These companies were appointed to meet
at Dumbalton the 20 of August for aiding the King or his Lieutenant for the
space of 40 days according to the customs, and when the days were come were
commanded to follow the Colonel as designed Lieutenant assigned by the King.
But upon the brute of this expedition the principals of the Isles did all
submit themselves, offering obedience to appear before the King at the time his
Majesty should appoint: so that expedition ceased, the Colonel going no
further then Ila, where he remained a few days and took assurance for their
appearance.

In the March preceding the Assembly of the Church convened at Edinburgh for
consulting upon the dangers threatened to religion by the invasion of the
Spaniard, An Assembly of the Church at Edinburgh.
which was then generally noised. Some brethren directed to lay open the perils
to his Majesty returned with this answer; That albeit there was no great cause
to fear any such invasion at that time, yet they should do well to give their
advice as if the danger were at hand, which would serve when necessity did
require. The Assembly upon this thought meet to enter into consideration both
of the dangers and remedies, A search of the causes of the present fear of
invasion.
and first to enquire upon the causes that had provoked God to threaten the
Realm with that tyrannous Nation, to the end the same might be removed; then to
deliberate how by ordinary lawful means the enemy should be resisted. The
causes they condescended to be sins of all estates, and especially the sins of
the Ministry; which they held best should be penned and drawn to certain
heads, that the corruptions being laid open the remedies might be the better
provided. For this work some of the brethren were named and set apart, who
after a day or two presented in writing a number of Articles touching the
corruption of Ministers as well in their offices as in their lives and manners;
the offenses in the Kings house; in the Court and in the Judgment seats; the
defection and faults commune to all estates; and the remedies which in their
opinion were fit to be used.

The Assembly allowing their labors and acknowledging their own guiltiness in
that which concerned themselves, A new Covenant made by the Ministers for
abiding to the profession of the truth and living according to the same.
ordained a day of humiliation to be kept on Tuesday the week following by the
Ministers that were there present, for reconciling themselves to God, and
making up a new Covenant for the better discharge of their duties.

This is the Covenant that by some is so often objected and said to be violated
by those that gave obedience to the Canons of the Church, albeit in it there is
not a word or syllable that sounds either to confirming of the Church
government then in use, or to the rejecting of that which since has been
established. But when other Arguments fail them, somewhat must be said to
entertain the conceits of the popular. By this Covenant all did bind
themselves to abide in the profession of the truth, and to walk according to
the same as God should enable them. But for the rules of policy or ceremonies
serving to good order or decency, let inspection be taken of the Register which
is extant, and it shall plainly appear, that at the time there was not so much
as any mention thereof made.

But to proceed; Advice for resisting the enemies of Religion.
The advices they gave for resisting the practices of the enemy was, That all
who had kithed in action with the Popish Lords should enter their persons in
ward, till assurance was given that they should neither keep intelligence with
the Rebels, nor join with them in case they did return into the Country. That
the rents and livings of the Rebels should be uplifted for entertainment of
soldiers, and supporting other necessary affairs. That in every Parish
Captains should be chosen for the mustering and training of men in Arms, and
some Commanders in every Shire appointed for convening the County at needful
occasions. Lastly, that they who were Sureties for the good behavior of the
Rebels without the Realm should be called, and to pay the sums contained in
their bonds.

This advice presented to the King went much against his mind; The King
desires to have the Noblemen reclaimed.
for his desire was to have the banished Lords reclaimed and brought to
obedience, which he esteemed to be the greatest assurance both of his own peace
and the Countries quiet; therefore did he only answer, That if it could be
proved that the Lords since their departing from Scotland had traffiqued with
strangers to the prejudice of Religion or State, they should be used with all
extremity; but otherwise neither could their Cautioners be convicted, nor would
he change the course which he had kept with their wives and children. He
communicated his mind with M. Robert Bruce.
Not long before this Assembly, the King had communicated his mind to Mr.
Robert Bruce touching that business, hoping that by the sway he carried in
those meetings some such Propositions as tended to the reclaiming of the
banished Lords should have been made by the Assembly; but finding his
expectation not answered, he brake to him the matter of new, and showed how
greatly it concerned his estate to have them reduced and called home; That the
Queen of England was grown old, and if any should after her death withstand his
Title, he would have need of his subjects assistance. And that having so many
Nobles exiled he would be less respected of strangers, and be a great deal
weaker at home. If he could therefore win them to acknowledge their offense,
and so embrace the true Religion (without which they should never get any
favor from him) he believed the course would not be disallowed of wise men,
and those that loved him. Always he desired to know his judgment, for as yet
he had not showed his mind in that matter to any person.

Mr. Robert Bruce, being as then in great favor and credit with the King, M.
Robert Bruce his answer and advice.
said that he did think well of his Majesty's reasons; and that he should not
do amiss to bring home Angus and Arroll, so as they would conform themselves
in Religion. But that Huntley could not be pardoned being so hated as he was of
the subjects. The King reasoning to the contrary, that if Huntley be willing to
satisfy the Church and fulfill the Conditions which he would require of him,
he saw no reason why he should not be received as well as the other two; The
King reasons with him to the contrary of his advise.
And as he could not but know that his care of that man was great; and he
having married his Cousin, whom he accounted his own Daughter; so was he the
man of greatest power, and one that could stand him in most stead. Therefore
desired Mr. Robert to think of that matter, and after a day or two give him his
advice in it. At the next meeting being enquired what he had thought of the
business, he answered as before, saying, That Huntley's return would be ill
interpreted, and offend all good men. The King repeating the former Reasons,
and adding. That if he brought one home he would bring them all; Mr. Robert's
saucy Reply to the King.
he replied, I see Sir that your resolution is to take Huntley in favor; which
if you do, I will oppose, and you shall choose whether you will lose Huntley
or me; for us both you cannot keep. This saucy reply the King did never forget,
and it was this which lost him the favor which formerly he carried with the
King.

The exiled Lords not finding that respect given unto them in forain parts
which they expected, Shortly after the Lords exiled return.
took a resolution to return, and to use all means for reconciling themselves
to the King and Church. And that their return might be the more secret, they
separated one from another; Arroll taking his journey homewards through the
United Provinces was intercepted and delivered into the hands of Mr. Robert
Danielston Conservator of the Scottish privileges, to be kept by him till the
King should be advertised. The Earl of Arroll intercepted in the Low Countries
escapes.
But whether by the Conservators knowledge, or otherwise, he made an escape and
came into the Country. Huntley came some months before, and lurking secretly
in the North, sent a supplication to his Majesty, and the Convention which met
at Falkland the 12 of August, the effect whereof was, that he might be
permitted to return and remain within any part of the Country his Majesty
should appoint, A Convention at Falkland.
he giving sufficient surety for his quiet and peaceable behavior.

The King having heard the Supplication, The King's judgment of Huntley's
supplication.
took occasion to say, That one of the two courses was needful to be followed
with him and the rest that were in his condition; that is, either utterly to
exterminate them, their race, and posterity, or then upon their humble
acknowledgment of their offense and surety made for the state of Religion to
receive in favor; for to continue in the condition wherein they presently
were, could not stand either with the safety of Religion, or with his own
honor and estate. The first course, said he, has the own difficulties, and
will not be performed without great trouble; And for my self, so long as there
is any hope that they may be reduced to the profession of the truth, I desire
not their destruction, but like rather to extend my clemency toward them;
which I believe is the mind of all good and peaceable men. As to the present
offer made by Huntley, I do not think it well general, and to no purpose;
therefore by your advise I would have particular Conditions condescended upon,
such as may serve for security of Religion, mine own honor, and the
tranquillity of the Country; such Conditions being offered and security found
for performance, I should then think that license might be granted him to
return, he being confined in such a part of the Country as should be thought
most convenient. The Convention approving his Majesty's judgment, resolved upon
this as the fittest course, remitting the Conditions to be formed by his
Highness and the Lords of Council.

September the same conclusion was ratified at another Convention of the
Estates at Dunfermling, A Convention at Dunfermling.
and the Baptism of the Princess who was born the 19 of August, appointed to
be at Halyrud-house the 28 of November next.

How soon this their return into the Country was known, The Commissioners for
the Church upon the report of the Lords meet at Edinburgh.
and that such an Act was passed in their favors, the Commissioners of the
Church assembled at Edinburgh, where falling to consider the dangers threatened
to Religion by their return, it was thought necessary to acquaint all the
Presbyteries with the present state of things; particularly that the forfaited
Earls were returned into the Country without his Majesty's warrant and
approbation, that they remained peaceably in the same, using all means to be
restored to their livings: albeit they had neither acknowledged their offense
in that treasonable dealing with the King of Spain, nor their defection and
apostasy from the truth. And that they had maintained an Act of Council in
their favors at the Convention of Falkland, which was ratified thereafter at
Dunfermling, whereby they were licensed to remain upon certain Conditions to be
prescribed unto them by his Majesty and Council, to the manifest hazard both
of Church and State, considering their continuance in the same disposition to
work mischief as before: of these things they were desired to inform their
flocks; and both in public doctrine and private conference to stir up the
Countrey-people to apprehend the danger, and to be in readiness to resist the
same so far as lawfully they might. A public humiliation indicted.
It was further thought meet, that public humiliation should be indicted
through the whole Country the first Sunday of December, and the cause thereof
declared to be the return of the excommunicated Lords, and dangers thereby
threatened to Religion, which the Ministers should enlarge according to their
discretions, as also that the Presbyteries should call before them their
Entertainers, Reffetters, and such as kept company with them, and proceed
summarily with the Censures of the Church, una citatione quia periclitatur
salus Ecclesiae and Reipublicae. Lastly, they concluded that a number of
Commissioners selected out of all the Quarters of the Country should reside at
Edinburgh, and convene every day with some of the Presbytery of Edinburgh, to
receive Advertisements as should be sent from other places, and take counsel
upon the most expedient in every case. Persons nominated to attend at Edinburgh
for the Church.
The Brethren nominated to this purpose were Mr. Alexander Douglas, M. Peter
Blaickborure, M. George Gladstaves, and M. James Nicholson for the North parts;
Mr. James Melvill, Mr. Thomas Buchannan, Mr. Alexander Lindesey, and Mr.
William Striveling for the middle part of the Country; Mr. John Clapperton,
Mr. John Knox, Mr. George Ramsey, and Mr. James Carmichaell for the South; and
for the West Mr. John Howson, Mr. Andrew Knox, John Porterfield, and Mr. Robert
Wilkie. Their attendance was ordained to be monthly, and to begin in November.
At which time Mr. James Nicholson, Mr. James Melvill, Mr. Andrew Knox, Mr. John
Howson, and Mr. George Ramsey were appointed to wait: Mr. Robert Bruce, Mr.
Robert Pont, Mr. David Lindesey, Mr. James Balfour, Mr. Patrick Gallaway, and
Mr. Walter Balcanquell observing ordinarily all the meeting.

These Conventions were by a new name called, The Lord Seaton President of the
Session cited to appear before the Synod of Lothian.
the Council of the Church, and appointed to be kept once every day at least
for taking advice in every business that occurred by direction of this
Council. Lord Alexander Seaton President of the Session, was called before the
Synod of Lothian for keeping intelligence with the Earl of Huntley, and by them
remitted back to that Council; before whom, with many attestations, he purged
himself of any dealing with Huntley, or any of the Papist Lords, and upon
promise not employ his credit that way was dimitted.

The King suspecting their beginnings should end in some trouble, A Conference
betwixt certain of the Council and some moderate men of the Ministry.
but not like to fall in contrary terms with the Church, if by any means the
same could be eschewed, commanded the President, Secretary, Advocate, and Lord
of Colluthle to confer with the most moderate of the Ministry, and use their
best means for satisfying them touching the return of the forfeited Lords. Mr.
David Lindesey, Mr. Patrick Gallaway, Mr. James Nicholson, and Mr. James
Melvill being sent for to this Conference were desired to give their opinions,
Whether or not, due satisfaction being made to the Church by the Lords (for
otherwise the King did not mean to show them any favor) they might be pardoned
and restored to their estates. The Ministers answered, They came only to hear
what was proponed and in a matter of that importance could say nothing
unacquainting their brethren. The Conference was delayed till afternoon. At
which time returning they said, That the brethren were glad of the respect
carried by his Majesty to the Church; and that his resolution was to give no
favor to those Rebels till the Church was first satisfied. But in their
judgments they having by Gods law deserved death, and being by the most
sovereign Court of the Kingdom sentenced to have lost their estates, they
could not be lawfully pardoned nor restored. And if the King and his Council
would take on them to do it, they had God and the Country to answer unto; but
for them they would give no assent, but protest to the contrary that they were
free thereof before God and man.

This answer seeming rather to proceed of passion then any good zeal; it was
next urged, Whether upon their humble, and submisse suite to be reconciled, the
Church could not deny to receive them, The King offended with the pertinacy of
the Ministers.
it being commonly held, that the bosom of the Church should ever be patent to
repenting sinners. They answered, That the Church indeed could not refuse their
satisfaction, if it were truly offered; nevertheless the King stood obliged to
do justice. When by no reasoning they could be wrought from these extremities,
the Conference brake off, and the effects thereof being reported to the King,
he was greatly commoved, inveighing against Ministers at his table,
Commissioners directed to his Majesty.
in Council, and every where. The wiser sort that foresaw the ill effects this
rancour would breed, advised the Ministers to send some of their number, to
understand what it was that did offend the King, and offer all satisfaction on
their parts; withal to lay open their grievances, and in humble manner entreat
a redress of the things which they esteemed hurtful.

Herein the same Brethren being employed they found the Kings answers more
biting, and peremptory then they expected; His Majesty's peremptory answer to
the Commissioners.
for being desired to show what it was that made his majesty so offended with
the Church, and professing to amend it so far as lay in them; he said There
could be no agreement so long as the marches of the two Jurisdictions were not
distinguished; that in their preachings they did censure the affairs ^f the
Estate and Council; convocate General Assemblies without his license;
conclude what they thought good, not once desiring his allowance and
approbation; and is their Synods, Presbyteries, and particular Sessions, meddle
with every thing upon color of scandal; besides diverse other disorders which
at another time he would propound, and have reformed; othe^wise it was vain to
think of any agreement, or that the same being made, could stand and continue
any while.

The Ministers not willing to dip in these matters, The grievances of the
Church proponed.
after they had in sober manner replied to each of these points, fell to speak
of their own grievances: as first the favor granted to the Popish Lords in the
late Conventions at Falkland, and Dunfermlin, the countenance given to the Lady
Huntley, and her invitation to the Baptism of the Princess, the putting her
in the hands of the Lady Levingston, an avowed and obstinate Papist; and which
grieved them more then any thing else, the alienation of his Majesty's heart
from the Ministers, as appeared by all his speeches public and private. The
King his answer.
To this last the King did first reply, saying, That they had given him too
just cause by their railing against him, and his proceedings in their Sermons.
for the Popish Lords, he had granted nothing to them, but what the Estate had
found needful for the peace and quiet of the Realm. As to the Lady Huntley, he
esteemed her a good discreet Lady and worthy of his countenance; and that she
was a Papist they might blame themselves, who had never taken care to enform
her of the truth. Lastly, for his Daughter the Princess, he had trusted her to
the Lord Levingston, a Nobleman known to be of good Religion, and not to his
Lady who should not be suffered to take any care of her, unless she conformed
in point of Religion.

Whilst things thus past betwixt the King and the Church, A new trouble by Mr.
David Blake, a Minister at S. Andrews.
a new occasion of trouble was presented by M. David Blake one of the Ministers
of S. Andrews, who had in one of his Sermons cast forth diverse speeches full of
spite against the King, the Queen, the Lords of Council and Session, and
amongst the rest, had called the Queen of England, an Atheist, a woman of no
Religion. This being dilated to the English Ambassador he complained to the
King, and thereupon was Mr. David Blake cited to appear before the Council the
10 of November. Mr. Andrew Melvill accompanying him to Edinburgh did labor to
make this a common cause, Mr. Andrew Melvill labourreth to make it a common
cause.
giving out that the same was done only for a preparative against the
Ministers to bring the^r Doctrine under the censure and controlement of the
King and Council; and so far he prevailed with the Commissioners of the
Church, as they sent certain of their number to entreat the deserting of the
Diet, saying, It would be ill taken to draw Ministers in question upon trifling
delations, when as the enemies of the truth were spared, and overseen. The King
some days before, had published the Conditions upon which he was to grant a
Protection to Huntley, and asking those Commissioners, if they had seen the
Conditions, said, That both he and the rest should either satisfy the Church
in every point, or be pursued with all extremity, so as they should have no
reason to complain of the oversight of Papists. For Master Blake he said he did
not think much of that matter, only they should cause him appear and take some
course for pacifying the English Ambassador. But take heed, said the King,
that you do not decline the judicatory; for if you do, it will be worse then
any thing yet fallen out.

Now the Conditions proponed to Huntley were, as follows,

That he should give sufficient and reasonable caution of Inland-men and landed
Barons, The Conditions proponed to Huntley.
to the number of sixteen at least, who should be acted in the Books of
Council, under the pain of forty thousand pounds (each two of the Cautioners
conjunctly and severally for five thousand pounds of the said sum) that he
should faithfully observe and fulfill the whole Articles undermentioned, and
every one of them, as first, that betwixt and the first day of April next to
come, he should either satisfy the Church for his Apostasy, and return to the
bosom thereof in uniformity of Religion, or before the expiring of the said
time depart again forth of the Country, and not return again without his
Majesty's license.

2 Next, that during the said space, he should not receive in his company any
Jesuit, Mass Priests, or excommunicate Papists, nor have any dealing,
communication, or intelligence with them, especially with his Uncle Mr. James
Gordon, nor suffer his Children, in case any be brought forth in the mean time,
to be baptized by another then a Minister.

3 That so long as he remained in the Country, as likewise in case of his
departing at the time aforesaid, he should not traffic with any stranger or
others whomsoever for alteration of the true Religion, or disquieting the state
of the Country in any sort.

4 That his former Cautioners should remain obliged, in case after lawful
trial it should be found that since his last departing he had trafficked with
strangers for subversion of Religion or the alteration of the State, in the
sums for which they were bound.

5 That he should presently enter his person in ward within such a place as his
Majesty should appoint.

6 That within fifteen days next he should enter his eldest Son and apparent
Heir as a Hostage to his Majesty for observing the Articles before and after
mentioned, and that his said Son should abide in such company, ward, or Castle,
as his Majesty should appoint, where most conveniently he might be instructed
in the true Religion, and not escape by his Fathers knowledge or assistance.

Lastly, that he should compeir personally before the Council whenever he
should be called upon fifteen days warning, for trying the contravention of
any of the Articles above expressed: providing the cause for which he should be
charged were expressed in the Letters, and warrant given him^ that he should
not be challenged for any other fact done before his last passing forth of
Scotland.

These Articles the King caused to be imprinted, The Conditions give no content.
that all men might see he meant not to bestow any favor either upon him or
the rest, unless they joined themselves to the Religion publicly professed,
yet this served not to stop the mouths of people, nor did it remove the
jealousy of the Preachers, who were daily complaining, That Papists were
favored, the Ministers troubled for the free rebuke of sin, and the scepter of
Christ's kingdom sought to be overthrown. The process, they said, intended
against Mr. Blake was but a policy to divert the Ministers from prosecuting
their suite against the Popish Earls; and if he should submit his Doctrine to
the trial of the Council, the liberties of the Church and spiritual
government of the house of God, would be quite subverted. In any case therefore
they concluded, A Declinatour advised to be droponed.
that a Declinator should be used, and protestation made against these
proceedings. This was held a dangerous course, and earnestly dissuaded by some
few, but they were cried down by the greater number, that said it was the cause
of God, whereunto it concerned them to stand at all hazard. So a Declinator was
formed and given Mr. Blake to present, bearing this in substance:

That howbeit the conscience of his innocence did uphold him sufficiently
against the calumnies of whomsoever, and that he was ready to defend the
doctrine uttered by him, whether in opening the words, M. David Blake his
Declinator.
or in application; yet seeing he was brought thither to be judged by his
Majesty and Council for his doctrine, and that his answering to the pretended
accusation, might import a prejudice to the liberties of the Church, and be
taken for an acknowledgement of his Majesty's jurisdiction in matters merely
spiritual, he was constrained in all humility to decline that Judicatory for
the reasons following: First, because the Lord Jesus, of whom he had the grace
of his calling, had given him (albeit unworthy of the honor to bear his name)
his Word for a rule, to his preaching, and that he could not fall in the
reverence of any Civil law, but in so far as he should be tried to have
passed his instructions, which trial belonged only to the Prophets and
Pastors, the spirits of the Prophets being subject to them alone; for as first
it must be declared whether he had kept his instruction or not.

2 In regard the liberty of the Church, and discipline presently exercised was
confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament, and the office-bearers thereof
peaceably possessed therein, particularly in the judicatory of the word
preached, (as was clear by diverse late examples) he ought to be remitted for
his preaching to the Ecclesiastic Senate, as his competent Judge, in the first
instance. For which and for other weighty considerations, and namely for
eschewing the inconveniences that might fall to Religion, and his Majesty's
own estate, by the appearance of distraction and alienation of his Majesty's
mind from the Ministry and the cause of God in their hands; he for himself, and
in name of the Commissioners of the general Assembly, who had subscrived the
same Declinatour, did humbly beseech his Majesty not to infringe the liberty of
the Church, but rather manifest his care in maintaining the same.

When the Diet came, and the summons were read, M. Blakes answer to the Diet.
being desired to answer, he said, That albeit he might object against the
citation, the same being directed super inquirendis, contrary to the form
prescrived by Parliament, and no particular specified therein; yet he would
take him to the usual remedy of law, and desire to be remitted to his own
Ordinary. Being asked whom he meant? he answered, the Presbytery, where the
doctrine was taught. The King then replying that the matter laid to his charge
was Civil, and that the generality of the summons was restricted to the
particular letter produced by the English Ambassador; he said, That the
speeches wherewith he was charged being uttered in pulpit, must be judged by
the Church, In prima instantia. Again being inquired whether the King might not
judge matters of Treason, as well as the Church did matters of Heresy? he
said, That speeches delivered in pulpit, albeit alleged to be treasonable,
could not be judged by the King till the Church took first cognition thereof;
but that he was not come thither to solve questions, and so presented the
Declinatour. The King notwithstanding that he was greatly offended, (because
the day appointed for the baptism of the Princess was approaching) continued
all further proceeding to the last of November.

Mean while had the Commissioners for the Church sent a copy of M. Blakes
declinatour with a letter to all the Presbyteries requiring them for the
greater corroboration of their doings to subscrive the same, The Declinatour
sent to the Presbyteries to be subserived.
and to commend the cause in hand in their private and public prayers to God,
using their best credit with their flocks, and employing all their labors for
the maintenance thereof. The King being mightily incensed with this doing as
tending to a direct mutiny, and the stirring up of the subjects to rebellion,
gave forth a Proclamation, wherein he said,

That certain persons of the Ministry, abiding in the town of Edinburgh, A
Proclamation discharing the meeting of the Commissioners
had of long time continued together devising plots prejudicial to his
Majesty's authority, and usurping a power over their brethren, had directed
letters for subscriving a Declinatour formed, and already subscrived by
themselves, requiring them with the return of their subscriptions to send some
of their number to assist their proceedings as though they were not subjects,
and that the King had no power, nor authority over them, intending, as appeared
by convocations and the like tumultuous forms, to break the peace, and make an
insurrection in the Country; whereas no care in the mean time was taken of
their flocks, but the same left comfortless and destitute of the preaching of
the word, all which they colored with a general Commission alleged to be
given by the last general assembly, albeit there was no such Commission; that
which he produced, containing only a power to consult, and report, and not to
set down Acts, or exercise any jurisdiction: and granting that such a
Commission had been given, the same could not be lawful, as given without the
consent and approbation of his Majesty's Commissioners who were present at the
time. Therefore to prevent the disorders and confusion which therethrough might
arise, his Highness with the advice of the Council, discharged the said
Commission, as unlawful in it self, and more unlawfully executed by the said
Commissioners; commanding the persons under written, namely, M. Andrew Melvill,
M. James Melvill, M. John Davidson, M. Nicoll Dalgleish, M. James Nicolson, M.
James Carmichaell and John Clapperton, to depart home to their several flocks
within 24 hours, after the charge, and to attend upon the lawful discharge of
their callings, and no ways to return for keeping such unlawful convocations
either within the said burgh or without, under the pain of Rebellion.

The Commissioners upon information that such a charge was directed fell to
consult what course they should take; The Commissioners of the Church upon this
discharge enter into a new consultation.
and first they resolved, That since they were convened by the warrant of
Christ, in a most needful and dangerous time to see unto the good of the
Church, Et ne quid Ecclesia detrimenti caperet, they should obey God rather
then man; and notwithstanding of any charge that should be given, continue
together so long as conveniently they might, and in the mean time send some of
the number to the Octavians (this was the title commonly given to those eight
Counselors that were trusted with all affairs) to advertise them, They sent a
Commission to the Octavians.
that seeing the Church at their entry to their places enjoyed a full peace and
liberty, and that now it was cast into great troubles, and the enemies of the
truth spared, and overlooked, they could not but think that all this proceeded
from their counsels; and therefore whatsoever the event should be, the Church
would take her self to them, and they only should bear the blame. The
President answering in choler said, That these controversies were begun without
their advice, and so they should end; that for their good service they had
reaped small thanks, and drawn upon themselves much envy, and therefore would
have no meddling in that business betwixt the King and them, but leave it to him
and his Nobility.

This answer put them to a second advice, Commissioners sent to his Majesty for
surceasing M. Blakes proeess.
and thinking they were mistaken and that these Commissioners were not in the
fault, but that all proceeded from the King himself, they sent M. David
Lindesay, M. Robert Rollock, M. James Nicolson and James Melvill, to declare
unto his Majesty the great inconveniences that were like to arise upon this
hard dealing with the Church, and humbly entreat a surcease of the Process
intended against M. David Blake, and that all other controversies might be left
off till some order was taken with the Papists, and an Assembly convocated for
deciding these questions to his Highness content. The King answered, That it
was not his fault, His Majesty's offer to the Commissioners.
and that he was no less displeased then they were with the controversies
arisen, and that yet if they would pass from the declinator, or declare at
least, that it was not a general, but only a particular declinator, used in the
cause of M. David Blake as being a cause of slander, and partaining to the
judgment of the Church, he should also pass from the summons and cease his
pursuit.

This yielding offer of the King was by the advice of the wiser sort thought
good to be accepted, The wiser sort of the Ministers advise to accept of the
offer, but they are overruled.
that there might be an end of contention; For if, said they, we go to try our
strength with the King, we shall be found too weak; as yet the Court stands in
some awe of the Church, and whilst they are in this conceit, it shall be meet
to take the best conditions we can have; for if by our strictness matters go to
the worst, our weakness shall soon appear; and thereafter shall the Church be
no more feared nor regarded; too great stiffness does seldom succeed well, and
it is often seen, that they who will have all their wills, do lose all in the
end. This was the reasoning of the wise and more moderate sort. Others
flattering themselves in their preciseness held, That the only way to prevail,
was to stand by their grounds; the cause was Gods, which he would maintain;
that worldly powers were not to be feared, and that God had in his hand the
hearts of Princes to turn them whither he pleased, whereof in the present
business they had seen a proof. The debate held long, and in end by most voices
it was concluded that they should stand to the Declinator, unless the King
would pass from the summons, and remitting the pursuit to the ecclesiastical
Judge make an Act of Council, that no Minister should be charged for his
preaching, at lest before the meeting of the general Assembly. The King
perceiving this offer neglected was in great wrath, and told them who were sent
unto him, that he would hearken to no agreement unless they would pass simply
from the declinator, M. Blake cited to the last of November.
and cause M. Blake compeir, and acknowledge the Judicatory; Which being
refused, the Proclamation was published, the Commissioners charged to depart
forth of the Town, and M. Blake by a new summons cited to the last of November.

The next day being Sunday and the day of the Princes Christening, The Baptism
of the Princess Elizabeth.
the same was kept in the Palace of Halyrudhouse with great joy and feasting.
The English Ambassador did name the Princess Elizabeth after the Queen his
Mistress; the Town of Edinburgh by the Magistrates assisting as witnesses,
such honor did the King unto them. But all that day in the Town Churches were
bitter invectives made against the two Proclamations; for besides the charge
given the Commissioners to leave the Town, by another Proclamation the Barons,
Gentlemen, and all other subjects were discharged to convene with the Ministry,
either in Presbyteries, or Synods, or any other Ecclesiastical meetings under
whatsoever color or pretense, without his Majesty's license. These things were
mightily aggravated by the preachers, and the people exceedingly stirred, at
which the King more and more offending, he resolved to keep the Diet assigned
for M. Blakes appearing in the Council house of Edinburgh, accompanied with
his Nobles, that were present at the Baptism.

The Commissioners advertised of this (for all that time some Gentlemen of the
Chamber in hatred of the Octavians, A Petition presented by the Commissioners
to his Majesty and Council.
gave intelligence of every thing that was intended) did form a Petition, to be
presented to his Majesty and the Noblemen, consisting of three heads. First,
they entreated the King, that seeing the decision of such thorny and intricate
questions as was moved at that time to the trouble of the Church, could work no
good, and was subtly urged, only to engender a dissension between his
Majesty and the Ministers, he would be pleased to remit the determination
thereof to a lawful Assembly, and not to incroach upon the limits of Christ's
Kingdom upon any pretense, bending his actions according to the present
necessity, against the common enemies of Religion and State. Next, they
exhorted the Noblemen to give his Majesty a free and faithful counsel in that
business; and as to the honor of God, and their own just praise they had kept
themselves free both in counsel, and action from working any prejudice to the
liberty of the Gospel, so they would not suffer themselves to be drawn at that
time under the guiltiness of so great a sin, by the craft of those who were
subtly seeking the thraldom of the Gospel, and thought to make their honors
the executors of their malicious devices. And thereby that by their credit they
would procure a continuation of all controversies unto a free and lawful
Assembly, where the same might be gravely reasoned, and concluded. This
Petition was given to M. David Lindesay, M. Robert Bruce, and M. Robert
Rollock, to be presented, and if the same was refused they were enjoined to
protest against the proceeding of the Council.

The King receiving this Petition, The Petition rejected.
after he had overviewed it did reject the same as not worthy of answer,
commanding to call M. Blake, and read the summons. Therein he was charged, The
points laid to M. Blaks charge.
First, to have affirmed in Pulpit that the Popish Lords were returned into the
Country with his Majesty's knowledge, and upon his assurance, and said that in
so doing he had detected the treachery of his heart. Secondly, that he had
called all Kings the Devils Barns, adding that the Devil was in the Court and
in the guiders of it. Thirdly, in his prayer for the Queen, he had used these
words, We must pray for her for the fashion, but we have no cause, she will
never do us good. Fourthly, that he had called the Queen of England, an
Atheist. Fifthly, that he had discussed a suspension granted by the Lords of
Session in Pulpit, and called them miscreants and bribers. Sixthly, that
speaking of the Nobility, he said they were degenerated, Godless, dissemblers,
and enemies to the Church; likewise speaking of the Council, that he had
called them Holliglasses, Cormorants and men of no Religion. Lastly, that he
had convocated diverse Noblemen, Barons and others within S. Andrews in the
month of June 1594, caused them take arms, and divide themselves in Troops of
horse and foot, and had thereby usurped the power of the King and Civil
Magistrate.

After reading of the summons Mr. Robert Pont protested, that the process in
hand and whatsoever followed thereof, Mr. Robert Pont protests for the
liberties of the Church.
should not prejudge the liberty of the Church in matters of Doctrine. The
king answered, That he was not to meddle with any matter of doctrine, but to
censure the treasonable speeches of a Minister in sermon, which he and his
Council would judge, except by clear scripture it should be proved, That
Ministers were not subject in these cases to his Iudicatory. Thereafter Mr.
Blake being commanded to answer, said, that all these accusations were false,
untrue calumnies, producing two testimonials, Mr. Blake declineth the Council
of new.
one of the Provost Baylies and council of St. Andrews, the other of the
Rector, Dean of faculty, Professors and Regents of the Universitie, which he
alleged should be preferred to any report whatsoever. Next he said for the
first six points, the Lords of the Council were not competent Judges; the
speeches alleged being uttered in pulpit, but the same ought to be censured by
the Presbytery, where the Sermon was delivered: And then repeating his former
declinator, The Council write the Declinatour.
presented a new one, in substance the same with the first. For the last point
he made offer to submit himself to the trial of the King and Council. Being
removed and the Declinatour put to voices, it was found, That the crimes and
accusations contained in the summons were seditious and treasonable, and that
his Majesty, his Council and other Judges substitute by his authority were
competent Judges in all matters either criminal or civil, as well to
Ministers as to other subjects. This pronounced the witnesses were called and
admitted, but their examination was delayed to the next day.

After the Council dissolved, the Prior of Blantyre Treasurer and Alexander
Hume Provost of Edinburgh were sent from the King to the Ministers, that
notwithstanding of that his proceeding against Mr. Blake, The Kings care to
keep peace with the Church.
he did not mean to use him with rigor, but if they should move him to come
and resolve his Majesty touching the truth of the points libelled, he would
rest upon his own declaration, and send him back to his charge: so careful was
the King of peace, and so desirous to be in good terms with the Church. Night
was then fallen, and the Commissioners gone to their lodgings, yet finding Mr.
Robert Bruce, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. James Nicolson and Mr. James Melvill
together, they declared what they had in Commission to have declared to the
whole number. Mr. Robert Bruce answering in the name of the rest, said, That if
the matter did touch Mr. Blake alone the offer might be accepted, but the
liberty of Christ's kingdom had received such a wound by the Proclamations
published the Saturday preceding and that Day by the usurpation of the
spiritual Iudicatorie, as if Mr. Blakes life and the lives of twenty others
had been taken, it would not have grieved the hearts of good brethren so much,
as these injurious proceedings had done; and that either these things behooved
to be retreated, or they would oppose so long as they had breath.

This answer reported, The King conferreth with some Ministers touching Mr.
Blakes business.
the King the next morning called some two or three of the Ministers unto him,
did confer with them a long space, showing that he was so far from impairing
the Spiritual Jurisdiction or abridging any of the Church Liberties, as he
would not only maintain them in what they enjoyed, but would enlarge and
amplisie the same, when he saw it to be for their good; But this licencious
Discoursing, said he, of affairs of state in Pulpit can not be tolerated. My
claim is only to Judge in matters of sedition and other civil and criminal
causes, and of speeches that may import such crimes, wheresoever they be
uttered; for that the Pulpit should be a place privileged, and under color of
Doctrine People stirred to sedition, no good man. I think will allow. If
treason and sedition be crimes punishable when they are committed, much more if
they be committed in the Pulpit, where the word of truth should only be taught
and heard. One of the Ministers answering, that they did not plead for the
privilege of the place, but to the respect that was due to the message and
Commission they carried, which having received from God, the same ought not to
be controlled in any civil Judicature. Would you keep you to your message,
said the King, there would be no strife; but I trust your message be not to
rule estates, and when courses dislike you to stir the people to sedition;
and make your King and those that rule under him odious by your railings and
outcries. If any do so, said the Minister, and be tried to have passed the
bounds, it is reason he be punished with all extremity, but this must be
cognosced by the Church. And shall not I, said the King, have power to call and
punish a Minister that breaks out in treasonable speeches, but must come to
your presbytery and be a complainer? I have good proof in the process with
Gibson and Rosse, what justice you will do me: and were it in a doubtful and
ambiguous case, where by any color the speeches might be justified, it were
some way favorable to say that the Minister should be called and convict by
his brethren; but as in the present action with M. Blake, who has said, The
treachery of the Kings heart is discovered; all Kings are the Devils Barns,
etc. who sees not the man has passed his bounds, and not kept him to his
message? I am not ignorant what agitations France of late, and England in
former times, has suffered by the violence of such spirits, and I have been in
my time reasonably exercised with them, and ye must not think that I will
tolerate such licentiousness. As for any lawful power or liberty ye or your
Assemblies have granted either by the word of God, or by the laws of the
kingdom, I mean not to diminish the same; and if ye think meet, I will publish
so much by a Declaration for satisfying you, and all other my subjects.

With this the Ministers were dimitted, The Ministers desire a declaration to
be made in favor of Church Assemblies.
who having related the conference they had with his Majesty to the rest of
their brethren, it was agreed in regard of the many inconveniences which might
ensue upon these distractions betwixt his Majesty and the Church, that if they
could obtain a Declaration in Council that by the Acts and Proclamations
published his Majesty did not intend to discharge any Church Assembly, nor to
annull any conclusion thereof, but that the same should stand in force as they
had been in use by the warrant of the word and approbation of his Highness
laws; and that the discharge of Barons and Gentlemen to convene with the
Ministers, was not extended to any Ecclesiastical conventions, but only meant
of their convening in Arms, matters should be passed over for the present; the
interloquutor in M. Blakes business not being used against him, nor any other
Minister unto a lawful general Assembly, wherein the question concerning the
limits of the Civil and the Spiritual Jurisdiction might be reasoned and
defined.

This being propounded the King assented to the Declaration craved, His
Majesty consents to the Declaration.
offering further to delete the Acts whereupon the Proclamations were founded.
And for M. Blake, he was content that he should be brought to his presence, and
declaring upon his conscience the truth of the points libelled, in the hearing
of M. David Lindesay, M. James Nicolson, and M. Thomas Buchannan, they three
should have power to determine what they thought meet. The business was now
thought to be at an end, but in the afternoon by the suggestion, as it was
supposed, of the President, the King would have M. Blake to come before the
Council and acknowledge his offense to the Queen; Mr. Blake refuses to
acknowledge his offense to the Queen.
which done he should be pardoned of all. This M. Blake refused; saying, he
would neither condemn himself, nor approve the proceedings of the Council, who
have taken upon them to judge of his Sermons, had admitted a sort of ignorant,
and partially affected people to be witnesses against him, rejecting the
testimonies of the Town and University. The witnesses examined, and Mr. Blake
found guilty.
When by no persuasion he could be moved unto it, the King went to Council,
and the same day, it being the second of December, caused read the deposition
of the witnesses, who did clearly testify that all the speeches libelled were
uttered by M. Blake in Pulpit. Thereupon sentence was given that he had falsely
slandered, and treasonably calumniated the Kings Majesty, his bedfellow the
Queen, his neighbor Princess the Queen of England, the Lords of his Highness
Council and Session, and therefore (his punishment being remitted to the King)
it was ordained, that till his Majesty's pleasure should be declared, he should
be confined beyond the North water, and enter to his ward within six days.

Notwithstanding of this Sentence the day following a new Treaty began, A new
treaty for making an accord.
which continued some ten days, and was like to have produced an agreement,
for the King was content, as before, to delete the Acts of Council at which
the Ministers took offense, by writing on the margent of the book according to
the custom of deleting, This matter is agreed, and the Act delete. He was
likewise pleased to mend the Narrative of the Proclamation, turning that upon
the Papists and enemies of Religion, that was said of Ministers; and for Mr.
Blakes business, was content that the Interloquutor pronounced should not be
made a preparative against any other Minister, and that none should be called
upon their preaching before the Council, till it was found in a lawful
Assembly, that the King might judge of those that passed their bounds in
Doctrine; Provided he might in the mean time be assured of the good behavior
of the Ministers, and that they should not speak unreverently of him, or of his
Council, Conditions craved by his Majesty.
which assurance he would have in writing. Some punishment also he would have
afflicted on Mr. Blake, as either to transport him from S. Andrews to another
Congregation, or suspend him for a time from his charge: punishments not very
rigorous, nor answerable to the quality of the offense.

The Commissioners being herewith advised liked well of all, The Commissioners
refuse to agree to any censure of M. Blake.
the last excepted. A punishment, they said, could not be afflicted where no
cognition had proceeded: for as to the trial taken, neither was it done by the
proper Judge, nor was that equity observed which ought to have been; witnesses
that were under the Censures of the Church, and illaffected to Mr. Blake, being
admitted to depone against him. This reported to the King, he made offer to
name twenty persons, against whom no exception could be alleged, and to give
Mr. Blake his choice of seven or eight of that number, who should be new
examined touching the verity of the speeches whereof he was accused: if they
upon their consciences did absolve him, he should rest satisfied, if otherwise,
he would crave him to be deposed. But this came to no effect, nor could any
overture, albeit diverse were proponed, serve to work an accord, so as the
communing broke off, and greater displeasures arose on both hands, then before.
For the Commissioners having directed two of the Brethren to show the King, The
Ministers indict a fast, and complain of wrong done to the kingdom of Christ.
That since they could obtain no redress for the wrongs done unto Christ's
kingdom, and saw nothing but the enemies of the truth were favored, and the
faithful Pastors of the Church reviled, and pursued, they could not abstain
from opposing these proceedings with the spiritual armor given them by God;
and did therefore indict a Fast to be kept the Sunday following, being the 12
day of December, with solemn prayers for averting the judgments which the
present courses did threaten.

The King on the other side, made his displeasure and the scorn he took of
these proceedings known by a Declaration, His Majesty's Declaration published.
published on the 15 day, wherein he showed, That out of a desire he had to
keep peace with the Ministers he did condescend to abstain from troubling in
any case bygone, until by a convention of Estates, and a General Assembly of
the Ministry the difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical judgments
might be removed; providing they should promise not to disgrace him and his
proceedings in their Sermons, which he was in hope to obtain by sundry
Conferences and meetings that he had kept with some of them, till at last
publicly they had opposed themselves in Pulpit by approving the doings of Mr.
David Blake accusing himself of persecution, A Bond of obedience subscrived by
the Ministers.
and falsely suggesting to the people that all Church Assemblies were
discharged; whereas his resolution was, and is to maintain Religion and the
Church discipline established by law, and to suffer nothing to be done in
prejudice thereof by whomsoever: which his Highness thought good to make known
to all his subjects, ordaining all Ministers to subscrive their obedience to
his Majesty, and set their hands to the bonds which should be presented to them
for that effect, under the pain of sequestring their rents and stipends ay and
while they gave the obedience required. Master Blake charged to go to his ward,
and the Commissioners to leave the Town.
The same day was Mr. Blake charged to go unto his ward, and the Commissioners
of new commanded to remove themselves forth of the Town.

How soon they were gone, A new motion of agreement overthrown by the practice
of some of his Majesty's Chamber.
the Secretary Mr. John Lindesey thinking the Ministers of Edinburgh would be
more tractable, being left to themselves, did move the King to send for them,
and make a fresh Proposition for settling these divisions.

But they refusing to enter in any communing, except the Commissioners were
recalled by as public a Proclamation as that whereby they were discharged;
hope was given that the next day the same should be done, and all questions
laid over unto their return; which some of the Kings Chamber having understood,
and fearing if matters were once accorded, the Octavians (against whom they
were chiefly set) should contine in their employment; among other reports they
informed the King that a mighty watch was kept in Edinburgh about the Ministers
houses for fear of some violence to be offered unto them; which laid an heavy
imputation upon his Majesty, and that the Ministers would never be quiet till
these factious people were put forth of the Town. The advice, as truly meant,
was hearkened unto, and direction given to some 24 of the Burgesses that were
best affected to the Ministers, The Ministers deluded by a counterfeit Letter.
to depart the Town within the space of six hours. This they knew would be ill
taken by the Ministers, and to put them in a greater fear, they did advertise
them by a counterfeit Letter to look unto themselves, because Huntley had been
with the King that night late, and caused that charge to be given. This Letter
sent to Mr. Robert Bruce was by him communicate to Mr. Walter Balcanquall, M.
Walter Balcanquall in his Sermon inveigheth against the Counselors.
whose course it was to preach that morning, and they both apprehending the
information to be true, did think it the safest way for themselves to make the
people advertised of the danger; so when the hour of Sermon came, the Preacher
reading his Text out of the book of Canticles, which was his ordinary at that
time, and taking occasion of the present troubles of the Church; he made a
particular relation of the proceedings and treacherous forms (so he called
them) wherewith they were used by the Court, laying the whole blame upon the
President, Controller, and Advocate, He exhorts the Noblemen and B^rons to a
meeting.
whom he particularly named, and used with most reproachful terms. Then
turning to the Noblemen and Barons, he put them in mind of the zeal which
their predecessors had showed in planting Religion, and exhorted them with the
like courage and constancy to maintain the same. Having closed the Sermon with
a Prayer, as use is, he requested the Noblemen and Barons to meet in the little
Church, for assisting the Ministry with their best advice.

There assembled in the place many people, A Petition directed to the King from
the meeting.
besides those that were desired, and so great was the throng, as the Ministers
could hardly find entrance. Mr. Robert Bruce at last having made way unto
himself, went to the table where the Noblemen and Barons were placed, and after
a short Prayer, declared in what danger the Church was brought by the return of
the Popish Lords; how they had regrated the case to the King, and when they
expected that order should have been taken therewith, a new business was moved,
and one of their Brethren called in question for his preaching, about which
they had been in long conference, but could come to no end; and that now at
last the best affected of their people were charged to leave the Town, whereby
they were brought to suspect some worse practices. Mr. R. Bruce his Speech to
those that convened.
They did therefore request them humbly to intercede and entreat his Majesty,
that they might be permitted to serve God in their callings without
molestation. The desire seemed reasonable: the Lords Lindesey and Forbes, with
the Lairds of Bargenny and Blaquhan, Mr. Robert Bruce and Mr. William Watson
were chosen to prefer the Petition.

By some occasion the King was that day come to the Session, The King offended
with the meeting.
and being in the Upper House, the Lords with these others were admitted, where
Mr. Robert Bruce taking the Speech, said, That they were sent by the Noblemen
and Barons convened in the little Church to bemoan the dangers threatened to
Religion by the dealing that was against the Ministers and true professors.
What dangers see you, said the King? Under communing, said he, our best
affected people, that tender Religion, are discharged of the Town; the Lady
Huntley a professed Papist entertained at Court, and it is suspected that her
husband is not far off. The King leaving that purpose, asked, who they were
that durst convene against his Proclamation. The Lord Lindesey in passion
replied, The Ld Lindesey his insolent words to the King.
That they durst do more then so, and that they would not suffer Religion to
be overthrown. Numbers of people were at this time thronging unmannerly into
the room: whereupon the King not making any answer arose, and went down to the
Lower House where the Judges do sit, commanding the doors to be shut. They
that were sent returning to the Church show that they were not heard, nor was
there any hope, so long as the Counselors remained about the King, that they
should receive any favorable answer, and were therefore to think of some other
course.

No course, said the Lord Lindesay, but one, let us stay together that are
here, and promise to take one part, Atumult raised in the Church and City.
and advertise our friends and the favorers of Religion to come unto us; for
it shall be either theirs or ours. Upon these speeches followed such a clamor,
and lifting up of hands, as none could hear what another spoke. The sedition
increasing, some cried to Arm, others to bring out Haman, (for whilst the
Lords were with the King, M. Michael Cranstone Minister of Cramond had been
reading to the people that story) others cried, The sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon: and so great was the fury of people, as if one of the Deacons of
Crafts-called John Wat, had not kept them back, A Deacon of the Crafts
appeaseth the fury of the people.
with a guard of Crafts men that followed him, they had undoubttedly forced the
doors, and wrought some mischief. Sir Alexander Hume Provost of the Town, was
then lying sick, yet being told what a tumult was raised, he came to the
street, and as he was wise and skillful in handling the people, with his fair
speeches brought them after a little time to lay down their weapons and retire
to their lodgings.

The commotion thus raised, Noble men directed from the King to inquire the
cause of the tumult.
the King directed the Earl of Mar, the Lord Pittenweem and Lord of Traquair
to confer with the Ministers, and ask the cause of the tumult. They were then
walking at the back of the Church, (for the tumult had scattered the meeting)
and professing a great dislike of that which had happened, besought the Noble
men to show the King, that they were not in fault, and had done their best to
appease the multitude. The cause, they said, to their conjecture was, that his
Majesty refused to hear their Petition, which they knew came not from himself
but of others. The Earl of Mar replied, that any reasonable Petition would be
heard and answered, The Ministers purge themselves.
being preferred in a dutiful manner; wherefore they should do wisely to go
together and supplicate his Majesty for remedy of these things wherein they
were grieved. Whereupon they returned to the little Church, and after a short
deliberation, sent the Lord Forbes, the Lord of Bargenny and M. Robert Rollock
with these Petitions. First, that all which have been done in prejudice of the
Church the last four or five weeks, A new Petition moved to the King.
might be rescinded. Next, that in the things that concerned the Church, the
President, Controller and Advocate should have no voice, as being suspected in
Religion, and opposite enemies to the Church. Thirdly, that the Citizens of
Edinburgh who were charged to leave the Town, might be permitted to stay at
home, upon surety to appear whenever they were called. The King answered very
calmly, That his doings had been greatly mistaken by the Ministers, The Kings
answer to the Petions proponed
and that as these controversies were moved against his will, so he wished
nothing more then to have them quietly settled. But that it could not stand with
his honor to rescind so hastily the conclusions taken in Council, nor to
remove Counselors from their places upon naked suspicions, except somewhat
could be verified that might disable them. At afternoon he should call the
Council and satisfy them in every thing, which with reason they could desire.
For the Citizens, he said, that the supplications made in their behalf, would
come better from the Provost and Baylifs of the Town, and the same upon their
Petition should be granted. With these answers the Lord Forbes and the rest
returned; and with them the Lord Ochiltry, and Lord of Cesford were sent by
the King to desire them to put their Petitions in reasonable terms, and await
on the Council at two of the clock. Matters thus quieted, the King with the
Lords went down the street peaceably to his palace.

At afternoon the Noblemen, and Barons assembling with the Ministry, after
long reasoning did condescend upon the supplication and Articles following.

In most humble manner, Articles condescended upon to be proponed to his
Majesty.
we the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Ministers, this day by the
mercy of God convened, do beseech your Majesty to apprehend the great danger
wherein the state of Religion, Commonwealth and your Majesty's own honor and
person are brought, by the means of crafty and deceitful Counselors, who
respecting only their own preferment and standing, labor to file your
Majesty's eyes that you should not perceive their courses: for albeit it has
pleased God to endue your Majesty with knowledge, wisdom and graces, beyond
all Princes that have ruled this kingdom at any time, yet it is no strange
thing to behold good Kings brought upon ill courses, by the devices of such as
pretend love, but in very deed hate them maliciously. That such courses are now
in hand, please your Majesty to consider what a division is made and
entertained between your Majesty, and the Church, who was ever to this time
inseparably joined; and how under colorable pretexts the liberty of preaching
and faithful applying of the word, is sought to be restrained and taken away,
which cannot but bring many evils and inconveniences with it, as this days
tumult may partly teach. And now seeing, blessed be God, the same is settled
without the harm of any person, for preventing the like, or worse, we humbly
desire the Articles following to be weighed and considered by your Majesty.

1 That professed Papists, processed by the Church, be not suffered to reside
at Court, and that the Lady Huntley and Lord Sauwhar be removed and sent home.

2 That Alexander Seaton President, Mr. Thomas Hamilton Advocate, and Mr. James
Elphingston be not admitted to sit in Council, at least when the cause of
Religion, and matters of the Church are treated, seeing they are enemies to the
quietness thereof, and have by their devices raised the troubles that presently
do vex the same.

3 That the Acts of Council, Proclamations, Decrees, and Interloquutors passed
in prejudice of the Church and Ministers these last five weeks, be rescinded
and annulled.

4 That the Commissioners of the Church be recalled by Proclamation, and the
Burgesses of the Town permitted to remain and attend their callings.

5 That the bond advised by the foresaid enemies to be subscrived by all the
Ministers under the pain of losing their Benefices and stipends, be discharged,
seeing the same is prejudicial to the Gospel, and that Commission, as use is,
to modifie stipends, for the present year.

Lastly, that an Act of Council be made allowing the proceedings of the
Church, and the concurrencie given them by the Noblemen, Barons and others in
the present action.

It was late and the night fallen before these Articles were put in form, The
Commissioners chused to present the Articles.
the day being then at the shortest, the persons chosen to present them, were
the Lairds of Bargenny, P^tarrow, Faudonside, Mr. David Lindesay, and Mr.
Robert Rollock. Before their coming the Council had concluded not to receive
the Petitions, as was promised, and to commit those that did present them, yet
doubtful what might be the event thereof, it was thought fitter to terrify
them from presenting the same; for this effect the Lord Ochiltry was appointed
to meet them at the utter gate, who drawing Bargenny aside advised him to go
back, because of the anger which the King had conceived, and to meddle no more
in that business; for the King he said knew he was brought upon it unwillingly,
and would excuse his part, if he went no further. Bargenny declineth the charge
the business cease.
Bargenny forthinking his employment and not knowing how to color it to his
associates, the Lord Ochiltry drew them aside, and said that he had brought the
Lord of Bargenny to the Town for affairs that did nearly touch him, and that
he did not think to meet with such business at his coming, therefore desired
them to have his friend excused for that time; and seeing they were a number
sufficient to do the errand they might go to it, or if they pleased to delay
the same to the next morrow, he should be with them. They answered, that they
were alse little foreseen at their coming of those matters as he was, and
seeing they were all joined in one Commission, if he was the principal did
decline it, they could do nothing by themselves; and so the businese was left
for that night.

In the morning early the King and Council departed to Linlithgow, The King
with the Council departs to Linlithgow.
leaving a Proclamation which was presently published at the Market Cross of
Edinbough, of this Tenor. That the King considering the late treasonable uproar
moved by certain factious persons of the Ministry of Edinburgh (who after they
had uttered most seditious speeches in Pulpit, did convene a number of
Noblemen, Barons and others in the little Church and sent some of their number
to his Majesty being then in the upper house of Session, using him in a most
irreverent manner and with speeches ill-beseeming any subject. And that a
multitude of the Townsmen by persuasion of the said Ministry had treasonably
put themselves in Arms, A Proclamation discharging all Judicatories to sit in
Edinburgh.
intending to bereave his Majesty and his Council of their lives) did think
the said Town an unfit place for the ministration of justice, and had therefore
ordained the Lords of Session, the Sheriffs, Commissioners, and Justice, with
their several members and Deputies to remove themselves forth of the Town of
Edinburgh, and be in readiness to repair unto such places as should be
appointed; commanding in like sort all Noblemen and Barons to dispatch unto
their houses, and not to presume to convene either in that or any other place
without his Majesty's license, under the pain of his Highness displeasure.

This Proclamation with the Kings sudden departing wrought a great alteration
in the minds of the people. A great alteration in the minds of people.
They began then to see their error, and looked heavy one upon another; the
better sort being in a great perplexity what they should do, called their
Council together, but could not resolve what course to take: To follow the King
and plead for the Town, they could not think any of them would be accepted;
(and it being the last day of the week, hardly would any others undertake the
employment) so as they saw no way but to be quiet till they heard what the King
and Council concluded to do. But the Ministers persisting in their first
resolution labored to have the Noblemen and Barons remain together, and to
send for others well-affected in Religion, who as they thought would join in
the cause. A Bond for mutual concurrence.
A Bond to this effect was drawn up, and subscrived by some few. The Council
of the Town excused themselves, saying. Their good will was known, and that
they were not to leave their dwellings; which made diverse keep back their
hands. Always it was thought meet that the Ministers should write to the Lord
Hamilton and the Lord of Bacleugh, of whose assistance they held themselves
assured, entreating them to repair to the Town and countenance the cause, as
likewise that the rest of the Ministers in the Country should be convened as
unto a General Assembly, and desired to bring with them the best affected
Gentlemen within their Parishes.

They were at the same time in a long deliberation, The excommunication of the
President deferred.
whether or not they should excommunicate the Lord President and Advocate,
which diverse urged. The Controller was in some better opinion with them by
reason of a Message sent quietly to M. Rob: Bruce. But in end they resolved to
continue that business to the meeting of the Assembly, A Fast in the City.
when the Sentence might be pronounced with greater authority. Mean while to
keep the people in a good disposition, a Fast was proclaimed through the City,
and Sermons of preparation ordained to be made that afternoon in all the
Churches.

A Minister named Mr. John Welsh making offer to supply the place in the high
Church, M. Welsh and his Sermon.
was allowed to preach, who taking for his theme, the Epistle sent to the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus, did rail pitifully against the King, saying, He was
possessed with a Devil; and one Devil being put out seven worse were entered in
place. And that the subjects might lawfully rise, and take the sword out of his
hand: which he confirmed by the example of a Father that falling in a frenzy
might be taken by the Children and servants of the family, and tied hand and
foot from doing violence. A most execrable Doctrine and directly repugnant to
holy Scriptures; which yet was taken by many of the hearers, as a sound and
free application: so ready are men to flatter themselves in wickedness, A
rumor dispersed that Arroll had some forces assembled.
and even to justify impiety it self. A rumor was then also dispersed about
the Town, that in the day of tumult the Earl of Arroll did come to the Queens
ferry with 500 horse, and was gone back upon report of the stir. This upon
the Sunday took up a great part of the Ministers Sermons, and was brought to
justify the multitudes proceedings, as though they had been directed by a
secret providence to disappoint the wicked practices that were in hand. A
manifest forgery it was, yet believed at the same time by foolish and credulous
people.

The Messenger sent to the Lord Hamilton was at his coming well received; The
copy of the Letter sent to the Lord Hamilton showed to the King.
at first the Nobleman made a show that he would go for Edinburgh, but upon
better advice he turned to Linlithgow, and taking the copy of the Letter that
was sent unto him (for he rendered the principal to the bearer) he showed the
King what an invitation he had from those at Edinburgh. The King at sight of
the Letter grew exceeding angry, for therein after a short narrative of the
injuries the Church had received by the malice of some Counselors, it was
said, That the people animated by the word, and motion of Gods Spirit had gone
to Arms, and that the godly Barons and other Gentlemen that were in Town, had
convened themselves and taken on them the patrocinie of the Church, and her
cause: only they lacked a Head and special Noblemen to countenance the matter,
and since with one consent they had made choice of his Lordship, their desire
was that he should come to Edinburgh with all convenient diligence, and utter
his affection to the good cause, accepting the honor which was offered unto
him.

This Letter endited by Mr. Robert Bruce, This Letter did offend many of the
better sort.
and subscrived by him and Mr. Walter Balcanquell, was of all that yet had
happened the worst, nor could it receive any good construction; for albeit in
an apology afterward set forth, it was said to be penned only to please the
Nobleman, who was of an ambitious humor; yet put the case he had accepted, and
taken before him to be their Head as he was desired, who can tell what mischief
might have ensued, and if it might not have turned to the wrack and ruin of
many innocents? But faults follow one upon another, and when men have once
passed bounds, they run easily into error.

On Monday early, A charge for apprehending the Ministers.
a Charge was directed to the Provost and Bailiffs for imprisoning the
Ministers; but they upon some advertisement fled, and went to Newcastle in
England. The Town the same day sent John Arnot, Hugh Brown, George Heriot, and
John VVat, to purge themselves of the Tumult, and offer their obedience in
every thing his Majesty and Council should be pleased to enjoin for repairing
the indignity and dishonor done to his Highness; providing they should not be
thought guilty of the crime, The King refuses the purgation offered by the
Town. The tumult declared treason by act of Counsel.
which from their hearts they detested. But the King would receive no
purgation, saying, That fair and humble words could not excuse such a fault,
and that he should come ere it were long, and let them know he was their King.
The next day in Council, the Tumult was declared to be treason, and the
Devisers, Executors, and Partakers to be Traitors, as likewise all that should
thereafter partake and assist the committers thereof.

This put the Town in a great fear, The Town employed others toward the King.
neither did they expect any other then an utter ruin. All the Judicatories
were removed to Leth; the Session ordained to sit at Perth after the first of
February; their Ministers were fled, the Magistrates not regarded; and those of
greatest power about the King their enemies; what they should do they were
doubtful: after diverse opinions given, they are resolved that some should be
sent who would be more acceptable, to supplicate the King, and excuse the Towns
part, for that perhaps would be taken better at other men's hands then any of
their own. To this errand none was held so sit, as Mr. David Lindesey Mr. John
Preston, and Mr. John Sharp, men in favor with the King, and free of all
faction.

These coming to the King at Linlithgow, The Proposition made by those that
were sent by the Town.
after they had showed the miserable estate of the Town, and how grieved all
honest men were for the displeasure he had conceived against them; did beseech
him not to use the extremity of rigor, but to put a difference between the
innocent and guilty. In great Towns such as that was, they said, there would
ever be some bad spirits, and if the insolences of a rascal multitude should
be imputed to the Town, it would be thought hard, specially since the
Magistrates had done their duties and repressed the Tumult. If on their part
there had been any connivence, or the smallest appearance that they did favor
the sedition, they protested, that they would not have opened their mouths in
their favor, but since it was known that none were more offended with the
Tumult then they, and that they were careful to find out the authors and
present them to punishment, they could not but humbly entreat his Majesty to
relent his wrath, and to be mitigated toward the Town.

The King after a little pause answered, His Majesty's answer.
That he could not think the Town to be free, for if some of the Principalls
had not approved the Multitude in their doings, the Tumult could not have been
so great, but howsoever the Magistrates negligence could not be excused, in so
far as they did not prevent the disorder; always his resolution was to
proceed by form of law, and not to use any violent course; but he had appointed
the Estates to meet in the same place where the dishonor was done unto him, and
would follow their advice both in the trial and punishment. With this answer
they were dimitted.

The last of December, The King comes to Leth and the next day to Edinburgh.
which was the day preceding the Convention, the King came to Leth and stayed
there all night, giving order for his entry into the Town the next morning,
which was in this manner, The keys of the Town being delivered to one of the
Kings Officers, a guard of armed men was placed in the streets, and the
Citizens being commanded to stay within their houses and forbidden to carry any
weapon. The Earl of Mar with the Lord Seaton and Ochiltrie had the charge of
the Town given them, without the admission of the Magistrates; and they having
disposed all things in the best fashion, the King accompanied with a great
train of Nobles, entered the Town, and riding up the street lighted at the
Tolbuith; where the Estates were appointed to meet; after some general
discourses of the Tumult, the King was advised to call the Magistrates and hear
what they could say in behalf of the Town.

Sir Alexander Hume of North-berwick Provost, Offers made by the Town for
pacifying his Majesty's anger.
Roger Matmath, George Todrick, Patrick Cothran, and Alexander Hunter
Bayliffes, with a number of the Town Council compeiring and falling on their
knees, after some few words delivered by the Provost, did present in writing
the offers following.

That for pacifying his Majesty's wrath and satisfying the Lords of Council,
they should upon their great oath purge themselves of all foreknowledge and
partaking in that seditious Tumult. And as already they had made a diligent
search to find out the authors, so they should not cease till they had brought
the trial unto the uttermost point: or if his Majesty and Council do think
any others more fit to take the examination, they should willingly resign
their places to such as his Highness would appoint, and assist them at their
power. And because his Majesty had taken that Tumult to proceed from certain
Sermons preached by their Ministers, who were now denounced Rebels, they should
promise never to readmit any of those Ministers, unless his Majesty did command
otherwise. As also that the like should not fall out thereafter, the Town
should be obliged never to receive any Minister in time coming, but by his
Majesty's advice and approbation; and in the election of their Magistrates,
they should yearly present their lites to his Majesty and the Lords of Session,
to be allowed or disallowed at their pleasure, and propone such others as his
Majesty should think more apt and sufficient for the Charge, and to that
effect, should alter the time of their election, and make the same on some day
of November, when the Lords of Session were conveened and might give their
advice thereto. They did lastly offer to fulfill whatsoever his Majesty and
Council should think fit to be done in the premises, under protestation that
they did not take upon them the crime, and that it should not be thought to
have been committed of their foreknowledge.

Thus it proved true, The effects of the mutiny contrary to that which was
intended.
which Tacitus says, that all conspiracies of the Subjects, if they succeed
not, advance the Sovereignty: for by this Tumult was the Kings authority in
matters Ecclesiastical so far advanced, as he received little or no
opposition thereafter.

The offers of the Town, Advice given to raze the Town.
howbeit made in great submission, were not accepted, and counsel given by
some Noblemen to raze the Town, and erect a Pillar in place thereof, for a
monument of the insolency committed, and the just punishment taken thereof.
Others were more mild in their opinions; but for that time nothing was
concluded.

The Queen of England upon notice sent to her of these broiles, did write to
the King a letter, which (for the loving advice it contained) I thought meet
here to insert.

My dear brother,
If arare accident, The Queen of Englands letter to the King.
and ill welcomed news had not broken my long silence, I had not used now
Pen-speech, as being careful of your quiet, and mindful of your safety. To
omit the expressing of both, by letting you know how untimely I take this new
begun frenzy that may urge you to take such a course as may bring into
opinion the verifying of such a scandal, as ye avowed to me to be far from
your thought. In this sort I mean it, some members of the Church with their
companies, have over audaciously emboldened themselves to redress some
injurious acts that they feared might overthrow their profession, which though
I grant no King for the manner ought to bear with, yet at the instant when the
new banished Lords returned, and they seen to be winked at without restraint,
and the spring time going on, when promised succor is attend, together with
many letters from Rome and elsewhere sent abroad, to tell the names of men
authorized by you, as they say, (though I hope falsely) to assure your
conformity, as time may serve you, to establish the dangerous party and fail
your own. I wail in unfeigned sort, that any just cause should be given you, to
call in doubt so disguised acts, and hope that you will so try this cause, as
that it harm not you, though it ruin them.

Of this you may be sure, that if you make your strength of so sandy a
foundation, as to call to your aid such as be not of your flock, when as the
one side be foolish, rash, headstrong, and brainsick, yet such as may defend
you, having no sure anchorage for themselves, if you fail them; and the others,
who have other props to sustain them, though they lack you, yea such as though
your private love to their persons, may inveigle your eyes, not to pierce in
the depth of their treason; yet it is well known, that their many petitions for
forain aid, might have tended to your peril, and your Countries wrack; for
seldom comes a stranger to a weaker soil, that thralleth not the possessour,
or indangereth him at least. I trust you think no less; or else they must
justify themselves to condemn you, for without your displeasure, not feared
for such a fact, no answer can shield them from blame. Now to utter my folly in
seeming busy in another affairs, I suppose you will not mislike, since the
source of all is care of your good, to desire that naught be done that may
embolden the enemy, decrease your love, and endanger your surety: This is in
sum the line whereto I tend, and God I beseech to direct your heart in such
sort, as ye please not your worst subjects, but make all know in a measure what
is fit for them, and make difference between error and malice. So God bless
you with a true thought of her that means you best,

Your most affectionate sister ELIZABETH R.


This letter was to the Kings mind, for albeit he judged the offense great, The
letter pleased the King well.
yet it was not his purpose to use rigor, The tumult declared Treason in the
Convention of Estates.
but to assure the obedience of the subjects in time coming, and make his own
advantage of their disorders. Therefore in the next meeting, which was kept at
Halyrudhouse, the tumult being of new declared to be treason by the Estates, no
further was done, but a conclusion taken to pursue the Town criminally before
the Justice; The Town of Edinburgh charged to appear at Perth.
and to charge the Provost, Baylies, Council, and Deacons of Crafts, as
representing the whole body of the Town, to enter their persons within the Town
of Perth before the first of February, and there to keep ward till they should
be cleared, or found guilty of the uproar.

In this convention the Octavians not according well amongst themselves (for
the Prior of Blantire did keep a course with the Gentlemen of the Chamber, The
Octavians quit their Commission of the Exchequer.
and underhand informed the Ministry of the ill affection that the President
and Advocate carried unto them) gave over their Commission of Exchequer in his
Majesty's hands. They pretended the many burdens, which they sustained
otherwise, their services in Council, and Session, with the charge of the
Queens Rent and living, but the true cause was, the malice and envy carried unto
them for the credit and place they had with the King, which their service had
well deserved; for never were the rents of the Crown so thriftily, and so
rightly used as in that short time of their employment. But the King loved to
have peace though with his own loss, neither did they like to be the
instruments of his trouble.

A little before these stirs with the Church, Captain James Stewart killed.
Captain James Stewart (who had been sometimes Chancellor, and carried the
Title of the Earl of Arran) was James Douglas of Torthorald. This man after he
was put from Court had lived obscure in the North parts, and was entertained by
the Lady Salton his sister in-law, being in some hope to come again by the
office of Chancellarie, which was yet void by the death of the Lord Thirlestan,
he came South, and had a long conference with the King, which did greatly
encourage him, but till matters might be better prepared, he took purpose to
visit his friends in Kyle. Taking his journey by Symington nigh unto Douglas,
he was advised by his friends in those parts to look to himself, and not ride
so openly because of Tortherald that lived not far off, whose Uncle he had
followed (as they spoke) to the death. His reply (as he was a man proud and
disdainful) That he would not leave his way for him, nor for all the name of
Douglas, being overheard by a fellow, and reported to Tortherald, did so
inflame him, the old ulcer remaining uncured, as he avouched to have his life
at all hazards. So getting intelligence that he had taken horse, he made after
him with three of his servants, and overtaking him in a valley called Catslack,
after he had stricken him from his horse, did kill him without any resistance.
It is said that when Captain James saw the horsemen following, he asked how
they called the piece of ground on which they were, and when he heard the name
of it, he commanded the company to ride more quickly, as having gotten a
response to beware of such a part: he was a man full of violence, and when he
was in place of rule executed it with much cruelty, which was now paid home in
the end.

The King, A National Assembly indicted at Perth.
who longed to see a decent order established in the Church, such as agreed
with the Word of God, the allowable custom of the primitive times, and with
the Laws of the Country, did think this a fit time to effectuate his purpose,
and thereupon to hold a National Assembly to meet at Perth the last of
February, for treating and determining the bounds and exercise of the
spiritual jurisdiction; and to the end that all might come the better
prepared, and be duly advised with the matters then to be entreated, he caused
some Articles to be drawn up and imprinted with a Preface, Articles published
in print for the better preparation to the Assembly.
wherein he took God the searcher of all hearts to record, that his intention
was not to trouble the peace of the Church by thorny questions, nor yet to
claim to himself any tyrannical or unlawful government over the same, but
only to have these doubts solved, which might either in his time, or in the
time of his successors engender debate; and to have the policy of the Church
so cleared, as all corruptions being removed, a pleasant harmony might be
settled betwixt him and the Ministry, to the glory of Almighty God, the content
of all good men, and terror of the wicked.

The Articles were 55 in number, and drawn up in form of Questions, as
follows: 1 May not the matters of external gubernation of the Church be
disputed, salva fide, and religione? 2 Is it the King severally, or the Pastors
severally, or both conjunctly, that should establish the Acts concerning the
gubernation of the Church, or what is the form of their conjunction in the
making of laws? 3 Is not the consent of the most part of the flock, and also of
the Patron, necessary in the election of Pastors? 4 Is it lawful for the
Pastor to leave his flock against their wills, albeit he have the consent of
the Presbytery, and for what cause should the Presbytery consent thereto? 5 Is
it lawful for a Minister to use such application then that which may edify
his own flock, or is the whole world the flock of every particular Pastor? 6 Is
he a lawful Minister who wants impositionem manuum? 7 Is it lawful to Pastors
to express in particular the names of Counselors, Magistrates, or others
whatsoever in pulpit, or so lively to descrive them that the people may
understand, by whom they mean, without notorious declared vices, and private
admonitions preceding? 8 For what vices should admonitions and reproving of
Magistrates pass publicly from Pulpits, in their absence or presence,
respective? 9 Is the application of doctrine in pulpits lawful, which is
founded upon informations, bruits, and rumors, suspicions, and conditions, if
this be or that be, probabilities, likeliness, or unlikeliness of things to
come in civil matters, which all may be false, and consequently the doctrine
following thereupon; or should all applications be grounded upon the verity of
known and notorious vices? 10 Is the Text which is read in pulpit, the ground
whereupon all the doctrine should be built; or may all things be spoken upon
all texts, so that the reading thereof is but a ceremony? 11 May a simple
Pastor exercise any jurisdiction, without consent of the most part of his
particular Session? 12 Is his Session Judge to his Doctrine? 13 Should not the
Moderator of the Session be chosen yearly, or any who has voice therein? 14
May the Session be elected lawfully by Ministers only, without the consent of
the whole Congregation? 15 Why should not Elders and Deacons of particular
Sessions be elected ad vitam? 16 How many Presbyteries are meet to be in the
whole Country, in what places, and how many Pastors of Churches in every
Presbytery? 17 Should not the Elders and Deacons of every particular Session
have voice in Presbyteries, or the Pastors only? 18 What are the matters
belonging to the jurisdiction of the Presbytery, which may not be entreated in
particular Sessions? 19 What form of process in libelling and citation, what
terms and diets, and what probations should be used before the said particular
Sessions and Presbyteries respective? 20 What matters should the Synodall
Assemblies treat upon, which may not be decided in Presbyteries? 21 Should not
all who have voice in Presbyteries, and in the particular Sessions, have voice
in the Synodall Assemblies? 22 Should each University or College, or every
Master or Regent within Colleges, have voice in Presbyteries, and Synods, the
Towns and Countries where they are, as likewise what form of voice should they
have in General Assemblies? 23 Is it lawful to convocate the General
Assembly without his Majesty's license, he being pius and Christianus
Magistratus? 24 Is it necessary that the General Assembly should be ordinarily
convened for weighty causes concerning the whole Church? 25 Have not all men of
good Religion and learning, voice in the General Assembly? 26 Is every
particular Pastor obliged to repair to the General Assembly, or is it
sufficient that only Commissioners come from every particular Session,
Presbytery, or Synodall? 27 Who should choose the Commissioners to come from
every Shire to give voice in the Generally Assembly? 28 What is the number of
those that give voices, which is necessary to the lawfulness of a General
Assembly, and how many of the number should be Pastors, and how many other men?
29 May any thing be enacted in the Assembly, to which his Majesty consents not?
30 Is it necessary that the twe part of them who have jus suffragii should
consent to any things decerned in Ecclesiastic judgments, that matters pass
not by one voice, mo or less? 31 Has not every judgment inferior to the
General Assembly, a Territory limited, without the which they have no power of
citation, or jurisdiction? 32 What is the ordinary Ecclesiastic judgment for
his Majesty's household and Council, removable with his Majesty to any part of
the Realm? 33 Should there be libelled precepts containing the cause of the
citation and certification of the Censures before all Ecclesiastic judgments,
or should they answer super inquirendis? 34 Have the Inferior Judgments power
to summon any to compeir before the Superior? or should men be summoned only
by the authority of that Judgment, before which they ought to compeir? 35 Is it
not necessary, that private admonitions, with reasonable intervalls of time,
pass before all manner of Citations? 36 What intervall of time is necessary
between every private admonition, and between the first Citation, and the day
of Compeirance, and betwixt the Citation, and the last admonition in every one
of the said Judgments? 37 How many citations should infer contumacie? 38 Is
simple contumacie without probation of a crime, or is any crime without
contumacie, a sufficient cause of Excommunication? 39 Are there not diverse
kinds of Censures, such as prohibitio privati convictus, interdictio a coena,
not published to the people; and last of all, publica traditio Satanae? 40
Should the Presbyteries be Judges of all things that import slander, and if so
be, whereof are they not Judges? 41 Can Excommunication be used against
thieves, murderers, usurers, and not payers of their debts; and if so it may
be, why are not the Highland and Border-thieves cursed, as also all the
forswearing merchants and usurers amongst the Buroughs? 42 Is there any
appellation from the Inferior to the Superior Judgment, and is not the
sentence suspended during the appellation? 43 Should not all Processes, and
Acts be extracted to parties having interesse? 44 Is summary Excommunication
lawful in any case without admonition and citation preceding? 45 Have any
others but Pastors voice in Excommunication? 46 Has every Ecclesiastical
Judgment a like power to excommunicate? 47 Is it lawful to excommunicate such
Papists as never professed our Religion? 48 A woman being excommunicated,
having a faithful husband, should he thereafter abstain from her company? 49
Is it not reasonable that before any Letters of horning be granted by the
Session upon the process of excommunication, that the party should be cited
to hear them granted? 50 Has not a Christian King power to annull a notorious
unjust sentence of excommunication? 51 May any Council or University be
excommunicated, for what cause, by whom, and the manner thereof? 52 When the
Pastors do not their duties, or when one Jurisdiction usurpeth upon another,
or any other Schism falls out, should not a Christian King amend such
disorders? 53 May Fasts for general causes be proclaimed without a Christian
Kings command? 54 May any Ecclesiastical judgment compel a man to swear in
suam turpitudinem? 55 Should there any thing be entreated in the
Ecclesiastical judgment prejudicial to the Civil jurisdiction or private men's
rights, and may not the Civil Magistrates stay all such proceedings?


How soon these Questions were divulged, The Ministers greatly perplexed with
these Questions.
and that its seen they all touched upon the abuses crept into the discipline,
the Ministers that stood affected to the present order were much perplexed,
neither did any thing more offend them, then that the government should be
brought in dispute, which they had given out always to be a part of the
Gospel. This at any hand they thought was to be prevented; and many private
Conferences were kept to this purpose: neither did the King neglect to provide
himself of a party against that meeting; and thinking he should gain most
easily the Ministers in the North parts, Sir Patrick Murray directed to the
North to deal with the Ministers.
he employed Sir Patrick Murray Gentleman of his Chamber, to deal with them,
giving him direction first to show what a slander the Ministers of Edinburgh
had brought upon Religion by stirring up of the late uproar, and the inciting
of the Lord Hamilton, and others of the Nobility to open Rebellion against him;
how for the same they were become Fugitives, and denounced his Majesty's
Rebels; and thereupon to desire them by some public Act or Declaration to
utter their dislike of the seditious and treasonable courses. He was next
desired to urge their subscription to the Bond, which was appointed to be
subscribed by the Ministers for acknowledging his Majesty's Royal power above
them in all causes of sedition, treason, and other civil and criminal
matters, and in all speeches uttered by them in Pulpits, Schools, or otherwise,
which might import the said crimes, or any of them. 3ly, To require them to
accept the Earl of Huntley his offers for satisfying the Church, and to absolve
him from his Excommunication, they finding his offers reasonable, seeing the
bosom of the Church ought always to be open to penitents; and that they
should be more ready to receive then cast out; wherefore as the Presbytery of
S. Andrews, to the which he was not subject, had pronounced him excommunicate,
they under whose jurisdiction he lived, might and ought with better reason
declare him absolved. Neither should the pretext of the General Assemblies
ratification of the sentence be a stay unto them, considering it was done many
months after the pronouncing of the sentence, and that the absolution they
should give might in the like manner be ratified at the next Assembly; much
less ought the prohibition of the Presbytery of Edinburgh (whereof his
Majesty was informed) be any hindrance, to them, seeing they were neither
subject, nor subordinate to them, but as free in all respects as themselves.

And if any doubt should arise upon the form of the Earls satisfaction, he was
to remember them, that the same is expressly defined in the Act of Parliament,
An. 1572, made against Apostates, and other adversar^es of the true Religion,
where it is said, That they which have made defection from the truth, should
not be received to our Sovereign Lords mercy and favor, till they have given
of new the confession of their faith, and promised to continue in the
profession thereof all time coming, and to fortify the Preachers of the same
against whatsoever enemies.

Last of all, he was appointed to deliver them a Copy of the imprinted
Questions, and to desire the most discreet of their number to be sent
Commissioners to the Assembly appointed at Perth, with promise of special
favor to them in all their business, his good will toward the Ministry
being no way altered by the wrong he had received from those insolent Ministers
of Edinburgh. This was the substance of his instructions.

The Ministers with the reverence that was due, The Ministers Answer.
That for the Tumult of Edinburgh they were ignorant of the Ministers behavior
therein, as likewise of their flight; and having no jurisdiction over them,
they could give forth no judgment or censure; only in the general they would
say, that whosoever with just trial should be found authors of that
Insurrection deserved to be punished as Traitors, and if they were Ministers,
to be doubly punished.

For their subscription to the Bonds, They answered, That at their acception of
the Ministry they had taken oath for acknowledging his Majesty's power and
authority, and would not decline the same; but where the Bond did mention
speeches uttered in pulpit, because the same concerned application of doctrine,
which his Majesty had proponed, as a Question to be decided in the approaching
Assembly, they did humbly entreat his Majesty to spare them in that point, unto
that time, which they promised precisely to keep.

For the Earl of Huntley, they said, His repentance should be most acceptable
to them; that they were content to give him conference, and use all means for
his resolution; but they did not find him so willing to conform as they
wished, nor very earnest for his absolution.

This was the sum of their Answer; which the King did accept the better,
because of the hopes given to his servant of all satisfaction on their parts at
the meeting of Perth: which they also performed; for both then and afterward
in all Assemblies and conventions they did stick fast unto him. But the King
being made to understand that Huntley did linger and delay to make offers for
satisfying the Church, he sent him the Letter following written all with his
own hand.

My Lord,
I Am sure ye consider, and do remember how often I have incurred skaith and
hazard for your cause, His Majesty's Letter to the Earl of Huntley.
therefore to be short, resolve you either to satisfy the Church betwixt the
day that is appointed without any more delay, or else if your conscience be so
kittle, as it cannot permit you, make for another Land betwixt and that day,
where ye may use freely your own conscience: your Wife and Barns shall in that
case enjoy your living; but for your self look never to be a Scottish man again.
Deceive not your self to think that by lingering of time your Wife and your
Allies shall ever get you better conditions. And think not that I will suffer
any professing a contrary Religion to dwell in this Land. If you obey me in
this, you may once again be settled in a good estate, and made able to do me
service, which from my heart I would wish. The rest I remit to the bearer,
whose directions ye shall follow if you wish your own well. Farewell.

From Dunfermlin. JAMES R.


Such was the Kings care for reclaiming the Nobleman to the profession of the
truth, Letters directed to the Presbyteries for keeping the Assembly.
whilst people suffered themselves to be abused with rumors, that he himself
was declining. Letters in the mean time were directed to all the Presbyteries,
advertising them of the meeting at Perth and desiring they should send their
Commissioners thither instructed, with power to treat and conclude in all
matters proponed. When the day came, the Assembly was frequent enough, but
diverse Commissioners bearing a power only to convene, hear, and report, and not
to question any thing concluded in former Assemblies, the King sent Sir John
Cockborne of Ormeston Sir John Preston, and Mr. Edward Bruce, to ask those that
were convened. Whether they did account that meeting a lawful General
Assembly, having power sufficient to treat and conclude in the Articles that
should be proponed, according to his Majesty's missive Letters directed to the
several Presbyteries? The Assembly declared to be a lawful General Assembly.
After long reasoning, answer was made, That they did esteem the meeting to be
a lawful General Assembly, called extraordinarily by his Majesty's Letters,
and that they would hear, treat, and conclude of things that should be moved
unto them, according to the Commissions wherewith they were authorized.

This Answer given, note they presented the Articles following. Articles
presented by his Commissioners to the Assembly.
Seeing the quietness of the Church, and the freeing of the same from slander,
which upon the contrary effects would necessarily follow, is the principal
scope and end, at which his Majesty aims in this present Assembly,
foreshewing fashions and long disputes, whereupon controversies and debates
might arise; his Majesty has thought good to remit the decision of a great
number of the Questions imprinted to better opportunity, and will content
himself with the determination of a few that he has made choice of, which with
a greater could not be longer delayed.

As first, that it be not thought unlawful either to the Prince or any of the
Pastors, at any time hereafter to move doubts, and crave reformation of any
points in the external policy, and discipline of the Church, which are not
essential concerning salvation, nor expressly defined in Scripture; providing
it be done decenter in right time and place, animo aedificandi non tentandi.

2 That seeing the civil and politic government of the Country belongs
properly to the Kings office and his Counselors; and it is no way pertinent
to the spiritual Ministry of the Word; that no Minister should thereafter
meddle with matters of Estate in Pulpit, or with any of his Majesty's laws,
statutes, or ordinances; but if any of them seem hurtful to Religion, they
should complain to the King and Council.

3 That it should not be lawful to Ministers to name any particular men's names
in Pulpit, or so vively to descrive them, as may be equivalent to their naming,
except upon the notoriety of a crime, which notoriety must only be defined by
the guilty persons being fugitive for the crimes, or the declaration of an
Assise, or their excommunication for the same.

4 That every Minister in his particular application have only respect to the
edification of his own flock, and present auditory, without expatiating in
other discourses no way pertinent to their congregation.

5 That every particular Presbytery be commanded to take a diligent account of
the doctrine of their Ministers, and see that they keep themselves within
bounds in the premises.

6 That summar excommunication be utterly discharged, and that three lawful
citations at least of eight days intervall betwixt every one of them, precede
the sentence.

7 That no Session, Prebytery, or Synod use Censures upon any but those that
are within their bounds, otherwise their decreets and sentences to be null.

8 That all summons contain a special cause and crime, and none be used super
inquirendis, quod est mere tyrannicum.

9 That no meeting or convention be amongst the Ministers without his Majesty's
knowledge and consent, except the ordinary Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods.

10 That in the principal Burghs no Ministers be placed without the consent of
his Majesty, and the flock; and this order to begin presently in Edinburgh.

11 That all matters concerning the rest of his Majesty's Questions be
suspended, and neither condemned nor rebuked, either in pulpit, or any other
judicatory, till the same be decided in the next General Assembly; especially
that no matters be called before the Ecclesiastical judicatories, as importing
slander, wherein his Majesty's authority may be prejudged; but that they meddle
only with causes merely Ecclesiastical.

12 That some wise and discreet Ministers to the number of seven or eight, be
authorized by Commission, to reason upon the rest of the Questions, when
opportunity of time shall serve.

Lastly, that the present Assembly grant Commission to the Ministers of the
North Country, to absolve the Earl of Huntley from his Excommunication, if he
satisfy the Church.

For the better determining of the said Articles. The advice of certain
Brethren set apart to consider the Articles,
it was thought meet that some brethren should be desired to confer of them
apart, and report their opinions to the Assembly, which they did the next
morning. Touching the first Article, they said, that they held it not expedient
to make any law, or act concerning that matter, lest a door should be opened
thereby to turbulent spirits; otherwise they did think it lawful to his
Majesty by himself or by his Commissioners to propone in a General Assembly
whatsoever point his Majesty desired to be resolved in, or to be reformed in
specie externi ordinis, seeing substantia externae administrationis
Ecclesiasticae, est plenissime prodita in sacris literis. And as the General
Assembly has accepted well of this manner of doing in all times past, so in
their opinion they should do the like in time coming.

For the second their advice was, that the Acts already made which are hurtful
to Religion and prejudicial to the liberty of the Word, should be discharged,
and no Act thereafter past concerning Religion without the advice and consent
of the Church. As for matters of Estate mentioned in the Article, they craved a
further explanation of that point.

The third they esteemed reasonable, that no man's name should be expressed to
his rebuke in pulpit, unless the fault was notorious and public, but they
esteemed notoriety must be defined otherwise then by the three ways set down
in the Article; for contumacy after citation, the public commission of a
crime, such as was Bothwell's treasonable contempt at Leth, the Burning of
Dumebirsell, and the like, make also a notoriety. As to the vive description,
said to be equivalent, they thought it hard to set any law to that, seeing
every guilty person will think himself descrived, when his fault is rebuked,
albeit the Minister does not think of him.

The fourth, and fifth Articles they judged lawful: but for the sixth, which
craves a simple charge of summar Excommunication, they advised to remit the
same to the next Assembly, suspending the practice thereof, in the mean time:
the seventh, they thought likewise was to be remitted: to the eighth they
agreed; and for the nineth that concerned the meeting of Pastors, they said
that besides Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods, Pastors are accustomed to meet,
for visitation of Churches, admission of Ministers, taking up of feods,
resolving of questions.

The tenth they esteemed reasonable; the eleventh Article seeming to import a
discharge of many points of discipline, they said, was so large that it could
not be presently answered; and the last two they remitted to the full Assembly
judging that they ought to be granted.

These answers showed to the King were not liked, The Assembly required to meet
with the Estates.
and held unsufficient; whereupon the Assembly was desired to repair to the
place where his Majesty and the Estates were convened for treating upon the
foresaid Articles: at their coming the King had a speech much to this purpose;
That they could not be ignorant either of the occasion or of his purpose in
calling the present Assembly; and for the occasion, that it grieved him to
remember it, not for any injury or displeasure done to himself, but for the
shame and slander cast upon Religion; for have not the adversaries, said he,
too just a ground against us, who say that our profession teaches the contempt
of Princes, and maintains insurrections against them? I know it is the fault of
men and not of the profession, and none of you that are met here, I take to be
guilty of the late attempt, but it is in your hands to clear your selves, if
any think otherwise, and so to free your profession of that scandal. As for
the purpose for which I have called you together at this time, it is to mend
such things as are amiss, and to take away the questions that may move trouble
afterward: if you for your parts be willing to have matters righted, things may
yet go well. I claim nothing but what is due to every Christian King within his
dominion, that is to be Custos and vindex disciplinae* Corruptions are crept
in, and more daily growing by this liberty, that preachers take in the
application of their doctrine, and censuring every thing that is not to their
mind. This I must have mended; for such discourses serve only to move sedition
and raise tumults. Let the truth of God be taught in the Chair of truth, and
wickedness be reproved but in such sort as the offender may be bettered, and
vice made more odious. To rail against men in Pulpit, and express their names
as we know was done of late, there being no just cause, and make the word of
God which is ordained to guide men in the way of salvation, an instrument of
sedition, is a sin, I am sure, beyond all other that can be committed on earth:
hold you within your limits, and I will never blame you, nor suffer others to
work you any vexation. The civil Government is committed to me, it is not your
subject, nor are ye to meddle with it. After such words as these he began to
speak of the Articles proponed, desiring to hear what reasons they had to the
contrary.

Mr. Thomas Buchannan, as he was appointed, did first protest in the name of
the Assembly, Protestation made by Mr. Tho: Buchannan in name of the Church.
That their coming to that place, was only to testify their obedience to his
Majesty, and to hear what shall be proponed, but not to submit matters
Ecclesiastic, either concerning doctrine or discipline. to their Judicatory;
or yet to make themselves one Assembly with the Estates; and that therefore
they should be permitted to return to the place of their Assembly to treat,
reason, and conclude in the points moved unto them according to the word of God
and good consciences: which protestation was admitted. Then he did humbly thank
his Majesty for his good affection to the Church, and care he had to redress
things that were amiss in so peaceable a manner. And for the particulars
proponed, he showed what was the mind of the Assembly, and the reasons that
led them unto it, saying, they were willing to hear and give place to better
information. Hereupon ensued a reasoning, which kept a long time, and ended in
a good agreementL: so the ministers were dimitted, and Assembling again in the
ordinary place, they corrected their first answers in this sort.

1 That it is lawful to his Majesty by himself or his Commissioners, The
answers of the Articles reformed.
or to the Pastors, to propone in a general Assembly whatsoever point his
Majesty, or they desire to be resolved, or reformed in matters of external
government, alterable according to circumstances, providing it be done in right
time and place, animo aedificandi non tentandi.

2 That no Minister should reprove his Majesty's Laws, Acts, Statutes, and
Ordinance, unto such time as first he has by the advice of his Presbytery,
Synodall or general Assemblies, complained and sought remedy of the same from
his Majesty, and made report of his Majesty's answer before any further
proceeding.

3 That no man's name should be expressed in Pulpit to his rebuke, except the
fault be notorious, and public; which notoriety is thus defined; if the person
be fugitive, convict by Assise, excommunicate, contumax after citation or
lawful admonition; nor yet should any man be descrived vively by any other
circumstances then public vices always damnable.

4 That no Minister should use application, wherein he has not a principal
respect to the edifying of his own flock, and present auditory.

5 That every Presbyter take diligent account of the Pastors doctrine, and that
he keep himself within the bounds of his words.

6 That the answers of the sixth Article shall be superseded unto the next
general Assembly, suspending in the mean time all summary excommunication unto
the said Assembly.

7 That the seventh Article be remitted to the next Assembly.

8 That all summons contain the special cause and crime, and none to be given
out super inquirendis.

9 That no conventions shall be amongst the Pastors without his Majesty's
knowledge and consent; except their Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods the
meetings of the visitations of Churches, admission or deprivation of Ministers,
taking up of deadly fewds, and the like which have not been found fault with by
his Majesty.

10 That in all principal Towns the Ministers shall not be chosen without his
Majesty's consent, and the consent of the flock.

11 That all matters concerning remnant questions shall be suspended, and
neither damned nor rebuked in Pulpit or other Judicatories till they be decided
in the general Assembly; and that no matters importing slander shall be called
before them in the mean time, wherein his Majesty's authority is prejudged,
causes Ecclesiastical only excepted.

Lastly, Persons nominated to reason the questions.
for reasoning the said questions according to his Majesty's desire the
Assembly did ordain Mr. James Nicolson, Mr. John Coldelewch, Mr. Andrew
Clayhills, Mr. Thomas Buchannan, Mr. David Lindsey, Mr. James Melvill, Mr.
Robert Wilky, Mr. William Cowper, Mr. John Cowper, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr.
Patrick Galloway, Mr. Robert Howy, John Duncanson, and Mr. James Bryson to
convene at such time and place, as his Majesty should be pleased to appoint,
and to report their opinion and advice to the next general Assembly.

These conclusions taken, which for a beginning did satisfy the King,
Commission given for absolving the Popish Lords.
a Commission was also given at his Majesty's desire to the Ministers of
Aberdene and Murray, with some others of Mernis and Angus, for reconciling the
Popish Lords. The conditions required of Huntley to be fulfilled before his
absolution were

1 That he should appear before the Commissioners appointed by the Assembly the
22 of March at Aberdene, The conditions required of the Earl of Huntley.
and remain in that City during the time of their conference with him, to the
effect he might be instructed in the truth, and brought to condescend with
knowledge unto the religion professed, and to the detestation of the contrary.
2 That he should acknowledge the Church of Scotland to be a true Church, and
adjoyn himself thereto, hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, and be obedient
to the discipline thereof. 3 That he should solemnly promise to remove forth of
his company, and from the bounds that were under his power, all Jesuits,
Priests, and excommunicate persons. 4 That he swear and subscribe the
confession of the faith in presence of the whole Commissioners. 5 That he
acknowledge the sentence of excommunication to have been justly pronounced
against him for his apostasy from the truth, the slaughter of the Earl of
Murray and burning of Dumbrissill, and that he declare himself penitent
therefore, promising asfithment to the party whenever he should be moved to
accept the same. 6 That he provide sufficient maintenance to the Churches
within his bounds by the advice of his best advised friends, and have an
ordinary Minister to reside with him in his family. And lastly, that he be
content to reconcile with all that he is esteemed to carry any grudge unto; and
profess no quarrel to any of those that assisted the King in his pursuit.

The like conditions were required of Angus and Arroll (that which concerned
the Earl of Murray only excepted.) The like condition prescrived to Angus and
Arroll.
All matters being thus peaceably accorded, the King caused publish the good
agreement he had made with the Church, taking in his protection the Ministers
with their families, goods and possessions, The King takes the Ministers in
his protection.
and charging all Papists (those excepted that were in terms of satisfaction)
to depart forth of the Country before the first of June.

The Assembly finding the King so well pleased, The Assembly intercedes for the
Ministry of Edunburgh, and others charged with the tumuls.
made bold to intercede for the Ministers, the Town of Edinburgh, and the
Gentlemen that were challenged for the tumult. For the Town his Majesty
answered, that he was not minded to trouble innocent men, and should shortly
settle with them. Touching the Gentlemen he said, they should do well to
present their supplications by their friends; But for the Ministers, he
esteemed them most guilty, and knew not what course to take with them. It being
replied, that by the examinations taken it appeared that they all, especially
Mr. Robert Bruce, was a chief instrument in the staying of the tumult, and that
they should therefore be rather rewarded then punished. The Kings answer.
He answered, that granting they did stay the tumult, yet they were the cause
of it, and if they for that fault were first corrected, he would not not be
much troubled with their reward. Nottheless at the assemblies request he would
be content they should be relaxed upon caution to underly the trial of Law.
Thus an end was put to that meeting, and the next Assembly by his Majesty's
consent appointed to be at Dundy the 10. of May following.

This year Mr. John Lesly Bishop of Rosse departed this life at Bruxels in
Flanders, The death of Mr. John Lesly Bishop of Rosse.
where for the most part he abode after the Queen of Scotlands execution. A man
(though differing from us in Religion) worthy to be remembered for his fidelity
to the Queen his Mistress, and the extraordinary pains he took to procure her
liberty, traveling with all the neighbor Princes to interpose their credit
with the Qu. of England for her relief: neither was he deficient otherwise in
ministering the best consolations he could furnish for bearing patiently her
cross, whereof one treatise he afterward published full of piety and learning.
How heavily he took her death, it cannot well be expressed: yet comforting
himself in the best sort he could, he put off to this time, and being much
weakened by a languishing sickness that held him some months he ended quietly
his days. The History of his Country from the beginning of the Nation unto
these last times written by him in the Latin Tongue, does witness both his
learning and judgment. It being just to give unto every man (albeit an enemy)
his due commendation, I could not pass him unremembred. Mr. David Lindesay
Minister at Leth was in the year following provided to that Sea.

The Diet assigned for the appearing of the Town of Edinburgh at Perth was upon
their petition continued first to the 15 day of February, The Town of Edinburgh
denounced Rebels.
and from the 15 again put off to the 1 day of March, with a declaration, That
if two of the Bayliffes, with the Deane of Guild, Treasurer, four of the
principal Deacons, four of the Council and their Clerk, making 13 in all, did
enter themselves the said day and bring a sufficient Commission from the
Provost, Bayliffes, Council and Community of the Town for underlying the order
that should be taken with them, as representing the whole body, their
compeirance by so many should serve for all the rest.

It was the 5. An. 1597.
of March before they were called, at which time there appeared a number of
persons and presented a procuratory under the seal of the Town, and the
subscription of the Clerks thereof, which his Majesty caused to be read. Then
asked if all contained in the Commission were present: it was answered that
they were all there, William Mauld excepted, who had his Majesty's letter of
dispensation, which they produced; But the same being granted the 11, of
January, long before the deliverance upon their petition, which expressly
ordained that they should have thirteen persons present for undergoing the
trial, it was declared to be no warrant, and so for not fulfilling the
Ordinance of the Council the Town was denounced, the burgesses declared
Rebels, and their Common goods (so they call the rents belonging to the Town)
arrested to the Kings use.

It was pitiful to behold the desolation wherein the Town was then cast, The
Magistrates renounced their Offices and would carry no more Charge, the People
were left without direction wanting both Magistrates and Ministers, The Town
received into favor at the intercession of Noblemen.
and in this state did they continue for the space of fifteen days. At last by
the intercession of some Noblemen, the King was pleased to receive the Town in
favor, and the Provost, Bayliffes, Council and Deacons of Crafts being
brought unto his presence at Halyrudhouse the 21 of March, and falling upon
their knees did with tears beg pardon for their negligence in not timely
preventing that Tumult, raifed (as they said) by a number of ill disposed
people, beseeching his Majesty to take pity of the Town which did submit it
self simply to his Hghness mercy. The King after he had sharply rebuked them,
and showed in many words the greatness of their offense, commanded them to
remove that he might think what was fittest to be done. Then calling for their
Officers they had formerly made he caused eke unto them the Articles following.
Articles enjoined to be performed by the Town.
That the lodgings in the Church `yard wherein the Ministers dwelt, and kept
their consultations, should be given to his Majesty and used at his pleasure.
That the Ministers that should thereafter serve in the Town should dwell in
their own quarters and live dispersed, That the Town should be obliged, for the
indemnity of the Lords of Session during their sitting, under the penalty of
forty thousand marks. That the nether Council house wherein the Provost and
Bayliffes did keep their meetings should be appointed for the Exchequer; and
that for the offense committed the Town should be fined in twenty thousand
marks to be paid in four months. These conditions accepted, the King did
pardon the Town giving order to receive them to his peace, and by Proclamation
recalled the Session to sit in their former place. Never did any King,
considering the offense, temper his authority with more grace and clemency then
did his Majesty at this time: which the people did all acknowledge, ascriving
their life and safety only to his favor.

Shortly after, the Ministers were also permitted to return, and had their
peace granted, The Ministers of Edinburgh suffered to return but inhibited to
preach.
but were not suffered to preach in their places, the King taking now the
occasion of finishing the work, which some two years before had been moved, for
distributing the People in several Parishes and planting more Ministers among
them. The let he knew was in the Town that still put off the business, because
of the burden it would draw upon them; and knowing that the desire they had to
have their old Ministers reponed, would make them the more forward that way, he
refuses to readmit them until the distribution intended was perfected, and
other four Ministers adjoined to them for the better instruction and more
orderly government of the People. The Ministers themselves did also profess
that they were wearied of that confused Ministry, An Assembly at Dundy.
as they called it, and compeiting in the Assembly which held at the time
appointed in Dundie, they resigned their offices, denying to serve any longer,
unless they had a particular flock designed. But because that work required a
longer time, then the Assembly could well abide together, the same was
committed to certain delegates, and the Ministers dwelling near unto Edinburgh,
ordained to furnish the Pulpits for the interim.

In the Assembly Mr. Robert Rollock was elected to preside, Mr. Robert Rollock
elected to preside,
though he was not as yet in orders: In so great esteem he was with all good
men for his learning, holiness, and moderation, The first thing done was the
taking of an account of the Ministers travells with the Earls of Angus,
Huntley, Arrol, and of their obedience to the injunctions given in the former
Assembly. This was testified by the Ministers that had the charge, to have been
in all points so well performed, as no more could be required of them. For
verifying thereof their several subscriptions were produced, together with an
humble supplication to the Assembly for accepting their satisfaction, and
receiving them in the bosom of the Church: which accordingly was decerned, and
order given that they should be received by the same Commissioners, Order given
for absolution of the Popish Lords.
who were appointed to meet at a certain time, and pronounce their absolution.

The next thing proponed was touching the questions left unresolved in the last
Assembly, Proceedings of the Assembly.
and because exception was taken by some brethren that were absent at the
Articles concluded at Perth, especially that it should have been acknowledged
for a lawful general Assembly, it was of new declared to be a lawful
Assembly, and certain explanations added, by the rest of the Acts, as in the
point of Notoriety the crime should be reputed notorious that was so manifest
and known, Ut nulla tergiversatione celari possit: and for the convening of
Pastors with his Majesty's consent, the same was declared to be extended to all
Assemblies either general or particular, authorized by his Highness laws, and
having warrant in the word of God. His Majesty did likewise express his meaning
touching the provision of Burgs with Ministers in this sort, that when the
Assembly should find it necessary to place a Minister in any Town, The rest of
the questions determined.
he should either yield his consent or give a sufficient reason of his refuse.
With these declarations the whole number was so well pleased, as proceeding in
the rest of the questions, they determined as follows. First, Where his
Majesty does crave that before the conclusion of any weighty matter, his
Highness advice and approbation should be had thereto; The Assembly will be
very glad to have his Majesty's authority interponed to all Acts of any
importance made by the Church, so as matters formerly treated and concluded be
not drawn in question. 2 That there should be an uniform order kept in the
ordination of Ministers, and none admitted but by imposition of hands, and to a
certain flock on which they shall be astricted to attend. As also such as have
not received Ordination, should not be permitted to teach in great rooms,
except upon urgent necessity and in the defect of actual Ministers, and that
good heed shall be taken that they did not pass their bounds, especially in
application. 3 That no Minister should exercise any jurisdiction either by
making of constitutions, or leading of processes, without advice and
concurrence of his Session, Presbytery, Synod or general Assembly. 4 That all
Sessions should be elected with consent of their own congregations. 5 That
Sessions, Presbyteries and Synods should labor to be formal in their
proceedings, and that the inferior judicatories should be tried in this point
by their superiors. 6 That in the exercise of the Word whereunto Ministers
convene, there should no application be used. 7 That in matters of importance,
if the voices be different only by two or three, nothing should be concluded
until a better resolution was taken, and he who holds the negative, give
rationem negandi. 8 That Presbyteries should not meddle with any thing that is
not known without all controversy to belong to the Ecclesiastical judicatory,
and that therein uniformity should be observed throughout the Country. 9 That
no Processes and Acts should be extracted at the desire of parties having
interessed. 10 Summary excommunication should be suspended as before, and in
great crimes after public intimation, the Committer debarred a sacris and a
privato convictu. 11 That where any Presbytery should be desired by his
Majesty's missive to stay their proceedings, as being prejudicial to the
Civil jurisdiction or private men's rights, they should desist until his
Majesty did receive satisfaction.


The principal questions being thus decided, A general commission for Church
affairs.
it was thought meet to supersede the treating of the rest, and to give a
general Commission to certain of the most wise and discreet brethren, for all
affairs that might concern the good of the Church. For this effect choice was
made of Mr. David Lindsay. Mr. Thomas Nicolson, Mr. Thomas Buchannan, Mr.
Robert Pont, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. Alexander Douglas, Mr. George Gladstaves,
Mr. Patrick Galloway, John Duncanson, Mr. Patrick Sharp, Mr. James Melvill,
Mr. William Cowper, and John Clapperton, to whom, or to any seven of them,
power was given to convene with his Majesty at such times as they should be
required, for taking order touching the Provision of Ministers to the Towns of
Edinburgh, Dundie, and St Andrews, the houses of the King and Prince, and to
any other Churches within the Realm, that should stand in need to be planted;
as likewise to present the Petitions and grievances of the Church to his
Majesty, either general or particular, and to give their advice to his
Highness in all matters that might serve to the weal and peace of the Church.

Howsoon the Assembly dissolved, Sir Patrick Murray directed to the North.
Sir Patrick Murray was sent by the King unto the North to see the Conditions
made by the three Earls to the Church performed, and to assist the
Commissioners appointed for their absolution. He had further in charge to cause
them to subscrive the general bonds for the peace and quietness of the
Country, and to find caution each of them under the pain of Twenty thousand
pounds, to traffic nor keep intelligence with any forainers without his
Majesty's license by word or writing; particularly for the Earl of Huntly it is
enjoined, that he should follow the counsel of certain Barons, and Ministers
that the King did nominate unto him, and proceed by their advice in all weighty
affairs, especially in matters that concerned his Majesty's service. The
Barons nominated to him were, the Lord of Finlatour, the Lord of Innes, the
Lord of Phiborth, the Tutor of Cromartie, the Lord of Pitlarge and Lord of
Cluny, or any three of them; the Ministers were, the Bishop of Aberdene; Mr.
Peter Blackburne, Mr. John Forbes, Mr. Robert Howy the Parson of Turresso, and
Mr. Alexander Douglas, or any three of them.

Whilst the King was thus busied to reconcile Huntly to the Church, A
Proclamation against Mr. James Gourdon.
Mr. James Gourdon Jesuit came into the Country of intention to divert him
from giving obedience, against whom a strict Proclamation was made, inhibiting
the subjects to resset, supply, or intertain any intelligence with him under
pain of treason, and a Thousand Crowns promised to any that should apprehend
and bring him to the King. And at the same time was discovered a practice of
fortifying the Isle of Elsay in the West seas, for receiving certain forces
that the Spanisih King had promised to send thither. The contriver of this
plot, was one Hugh Barclay of Lady-land, who being committed the year before in
the Castle of Glasgow, had made an escape and gone to Spain: this year
returning to make good what he had undertaken, with some few assisters he
entered into the Isle (a huge rock it is, four miles in compass, wherein an old
ruinous Tower built on the ascent of the rock of difficult access) meaning to
have victualled the same. Mr. John Knox (the same who took Mr. George Ker with
the blanks some five years before) getting intelligence of the purpose, came
upon him unlooked, and landing in the Isle did encounter him in the very shore:
for the most of his company being gone to seek their sport, he had stayed to
see who those were that he espied coming to the Isle, not thinking that his
purpose was known, The Lord of Lady-land having surprised the rock Elsa. is
drowned.
or that any would pursue him; but when he perceived them to be unfriends, and
to be set for his apprehension, he ran into the Sea, and drowned himself. The
King did esteem this, as it was indeed, a piece of good service; and the news
thereof going to the Popish Lords made them more willing to fulfill that which
they had promised: So that on the 26. of June, the Earls of Huntly and Arroll
upon their solemn repentance, oaths and subscriptions to the Articles of faith
were absolved in the Church of Aberdene. The Earl of Angus in the same manner
was received by the Ministers of Mernis and Angus.

This business ended, the King for repressing the barbarous fewds which
abounded at that time in the North parts, The Kings care for removing of deadly
fewds.
sent a Commission to the Bishop of Aberdene, with concurrence of Sir Patrick
Murray and some Ministers, for taking up their quarrels, and with charges to
cause the parties give assurance one to another which should endure to the
first of April, 1598. The fewds mentioned in the instructions sent to Sir
Patrick Murray were the fewds betwixt the Earl of Huntley and Lord Forbes, the
Earl of Arroll and the Lord of Ladwherne, the Lord of Drum and young
Frendraucht. with a number more: but the most deadly and dangerous betwixt the
families of Huntley and Murray, the King reserved to be his own work, and
ceased not till the same was removed, and a friendship made up by marriage,
which should in all reason be most lasting. Those others were by the diligence
of the Bishop and Ministers settled, and so the North parts reduced unto
quietness.

In the end of June the King called the Commissioners of the Assembly to a
meeting at Falkland; A meeting of the Commissioners of the Assembly at Falkland.
where amongst other business a complaint was preferred by Mr. John Lindesay of
Balcarres Secretary, against Mr. Robert Wallace Minister at S. Andrews, for
certain injurious speeches uttered in his Sermons, having called him a briber,
and said, That albeit he had made conquest of fifty Chalders victual in Fife,
and built a house to the skies, yet his posterity should beg their bread, which
some of his Auditors should see; and that it was doubtful if ever God should
grant him repentance. The Secretary had complained of this to the Presbytery,
The Secretary complains of Mr. Robert Wallace Minister at S. Andrews.
but they refused to admit his accusation, unless the same was assisted by two
witnesses, who could affirm that the accuser had just cause to pursue the
complaint, which they alleged to be the Apostles Canon in the 1 of Timothy,
chapter 5. v. 19. and showed themselves so partially affected, as he was forced to
pursue the complaint before his Majesty and Commissioners.

Mr. Wallace being summoned to that Diet, Mr. Wallace declineth the
Commissioners.
and desired to answer to the complaint, refused to acknowledge the judgment,
alleging, That the general Assembly had given them no Commission in that
particular, and that the accusation once before the Presbytery of S. Andrews
ought to have been orderly taken out of their hands, Mr. Nicoll Dalgleish
protests against the Commissioners proceedings.
which was not done. This Declinatour being proponed, compeired Mr. Nicoll
Dalgleish Moderator of the Presbytery, and in their name protested against the
proceedings of the Commissioners in that cause as being once intended before
them, seeing by that form of doing all the Presbyteries of Scotland should be
prejudged, and that the General Assembly, of whom they had their Commission,
would not take unto them the trial of any cause, with a neglect of the
inferior judicatories. Then said the King, I will likewise protest, that
seeing one of the principal motives which induced me to crave, and the
General Assembly to yield unto this Commission, was to have the like of these
offenses, when they did arise, removed and justice done by the Ministers
themselves, rather then to be brought before the Council, ye either proceed in
examining the complaint and do that which is right, or hold me excused, if I
take order with it by another form that will not please you so well. The
Commissioners having advised the Reasons of the Declinatour, and Protestation,
did find them all invalid and of no force, The declination and protestation
declared invalid.
and that they had warrant sufficient to proceed and minister justice in that
action, as well in respect of the general power contained in their Commission,
as of the particular commended to their care in the planting of the Church of
S. Andrews. So the complaint was admitted, and the 5 of July appointed at S.
Andrews for trying the same.

At the day the Secretary compeiring accompanied with Master Robert Mauld
Commissar of Saint Andrews and John Arnot Clerk to the Commissar (whom he
produced as assisting Witnesses to take away the Presbyteries exception) did
insist in his complaint. The Witnesses examined do verify the complaint.
Mr. Wallace being asked, if he had any thing to oppose against the Witnesses,
refused to answer in respect of his Declinatour; whereupon they were admitted,
and upon oath declared that they knew the accusation to be just, and that the
Secretary had not intended the same of any purpose to calumniate or slander the
said Mr. Robert, but only to be repaired to his credit and honor, as one who
had been greatly wronged by him. The Witnesses for probation being then called,
and Mr. Wallace inquired if he had any exception against them, refused, Mr.
Wallace his obstinacy.
as before, to answer. So they likewise were received, and being sworn,
deponed, that they heard the said Mr. Wallace utter the words complained of, in
his Sermon. Notthelesse the Commissioners for their better information did
think it meet to call to his Auditors of the University, who were of better
judgment, and could truly relate what they heard. The Masters of the new
College refusing to give any testimony in respect of the Presbyteries
Protestation at Falkland, all the rest affirmed what the Witnesses had deponed.
After which Mr. Wallace being again called, and desired to show what reason, or
warrant he had for uttering such speeches, refused still to make answer; nor
could any persuasion break his obstinacy, though he was earnestly labored by
Mr. Robert Rollock, and Mr. James Melvill apart; who did offer upon the
confession of the fault, that the process should cease.

The Commissioners seeing no way to eschew the pronouncing of sentence, A
visitation of the Church of S. Andrews.
in regard of his obstinacy, did yet take counsel to visit the Church; and
inquire both of his, and Mr. Blakes behavior in that Ministry, before they
went further. A Visitation for this effect being appointed the 11 of July, and
Mr. Blake summoned to the same day; the Elders and Deacons of the Church were
inquired touching the behavior of them both, and the verity of the accusations
laid against them, who all upon oath deponed, that the accusations were true,
and that Blake had spoken all that whereof he was convicted before the
Council; as also that the Secretaries complaint of Mr. Wallace was most just.
And being asked touching their behavior otherwise, they declared that both the
one and the other were given to factions, and that they did not carry
themselves with that indifferency which became Preachers.

This Declaration made clear way to the Commissioners for ending that business,
Sentence given for removing Mr. Blake and Mr. Wallace from the Ministry of S.
Andrews.
and providing S. Andrews with a more peaceable Ministry; whereupon sentence
was given that both the Ministers should be removed, and Mr. George Gladstaves
(a man sufficiently qualified, serving then at Arbirlot in Angus) translated
and placed in their room, till another helper might be found out to be joined
with him. This done, Master George Gladstaves admitted Minister of S. Andrews.
the Sunday following he was accepted of the people with a great applause, Mr.
Thomas Buchannan, Mr. James Nicolson, and Mr. James Melvill entering him to the
charge.

And because it concerned the peace of the Church no less to have the abuses
of the University reformed, the calling the Governors thereof, and inquiring
what order they kept; when he understood that against the accustomed form,
Abuses in the University reformed.
Mr. Andrew Melvill had continued Rector in a number of years together, he
commanded a new election to be made, and honoring the election with his own
presence in the Schools of S. Salvator, Mr. Robert Wilkie Principal of S.
Leonards was chosen Rector, and appointed to bear that charge, unto the
ordinary time of election: as also for preventing the like disorders, a Statute
was made, That none should be continued Rector above a year, nor admitted to
the said office, but after the space of three years. It was likewise declared,
That any Suppost having received the degree of a Master of Arts, might be
chosen Rector, he residing in the University during his office, or at least the
most part of his time.

In the new College whereof the said M. Andrew had the charge, In the new
College all things found out of order.
all things were found out of order; the rents ill husbanded, the professions
neglected, and in place of Divinity Lectures, Politic Questions of tentimes
agitated: as, Whether the election, or succession of Kings were the better form
of government? How far the Royal power extended? and if Kings might be
censured for abusing the same, and deposed by the Estates of the Kingdom? The
King to correct these abuses did prescrive to every Professor his subject of
teaching, appointing the first Master to read the Common places to the
Students, with the Law, and History of the Bible: the second to read the New
Testament; the third, the Prophets, with the Books of Ecclesiastes and
Canticles; and the fourth, the Hebrew Grammar, with the Psalms, the Proverbs,
and the Book of Job.

For the better husbanding of the Rents, as well in that as in the other
Colleges, it was ordained, That there should be a Council chosen to the
University, which should have power to elect an Oeconomus in every College for
uplifting the rents, A Council appointed for the University.
and take care to see all things rightly administrated. Of this Council were
named the Chancellar of the University, the Conservator of the privileges, the
Lord of Colluthie, Mr. David Lindesay, Mr. Robert Rollock, and Mr. Thomas
Buchannan, without whose consent, and subscriptions it should not be lawful to
set any Lease, or make other disposition whatsoever, of any part of the rents.

And lest they should be distracted by any other employment, The Doctors,
Professors, and Regents exempted for the Church-meetings.
it was concluded, That all the Doctors, Professors, and Regents, not being
Pastors in the Church, should be exempted from the keeping of Sessions,
Presbyteries, Synodicall or General Assemblies; and from all teaching in
Churches, and Congregations, exercises excepted; with a discharge to all, and
every one of them, to accept any Commission prejudicial to the said exemption,
under the pain of deprivation and rebellion, at the Conservators instance, the
one execution not prejudging the other. Yet that they should not be thought
excluded from the General Assembly, it was appointed, That the Masters and
Regents of the University should meet when any such occasion did offer, and
condescend upon some three persons, of whom one should be elected by the
foresaid Council to be present at the General Assembly for that year; which
person so chosen, should not for the space of three years thereafter be
employed in that Commission. These Articles being openly recited in presence of
his Majesty, and of the whole members of the University, were accepted by the
Masters, and Regents, with solemn promise of obedience.

This Summer there was a great business for the trial of Witches; A discovery
of Witches.
amongst others one Margaret Atkin being apprehended upon suspicion, and
threatened with torture, did confess her self guilty. Being examined touching
her associates in that trade, she named a few, and perceiving her delations
find credit, made offer to detect all of that sort, and to purge the Country
of them, so she might have her life granted: for the reason of her knowledge
she said, That they had a secret mark, all of that sort, in their eyes, whereby
she could surely tell, how soon she looked upon any whether they were Witches or
not; and in this she was so readily believed, that for the space of 3 or 4
months she was carried from town to town to make discoveries in that kind.
Many were brought in question by her delations* especially at Glasgow, where
diverse innocent women, through the credulity of the Minister M. John Cowper,
were condemned and put to death. In end she was found to be a mere deceiver
(for the same persons that the one day she had declared guilty, the next day
being presented in another habit, she cleansed) and sent back to Fife, where
first she was apprehended. At her trial she affirmed all to be false that she
had confessed, either of her self or others, A discharge of proceedings against
Witches, except in case of voluntary confession.
and persisted in this to her death: which made many forthink their too great
forwardness that way, and moved the King to recall the Commissions given out
against such persons, discharging all proceedings against them, except in case
of voluntary confession, till a solid order should be taken by the Estates,
touching the form that should be kept in their trial.

In the Borders at the same time great troubles were raised by the broken men
of Tindale and Rheadsdale, Troubles in the Borders.
who made incursions on the Scots side, and wasted all the Country of
Liddisdale. The Lord of Baclugh that had the keeping of those parts, to be
repaired of that wrong, made a road into England, and apprehending 36 of the
doers, put them all to death, and brought away a great spoil. Sir William Bows
being sent to complain of this, after much debating it was agreed, that for
keeping peace in the Borders, Hostages should be delivered of either side,
English men into Scotland, and as many Scots into England. But Baclugh failing
to deliver his in due time was commanded for satisfying the Queen, to enter
himself into England, as he did, remaining there from October to February next.

In the month of December a Parliament was held at Edinburgh for restoring of
the forfeited Lords to their lands and honors. A Parliament at Edinburgh.
Amongst the Articles presented to this meeting by the Commissioners of the
Church, one was, Articles presented in the name of the Church.
That the Ministers, as representing the Church, and third Estate of the
Kingdom, might be admitted to give voice in Parliament, according to the Acts
made in favors of the Church, and the liberty and freedom thereof. The King
was earnest to have the Article granted, and at last obtained an Act to be
made, whereby it was declared, That such Pastors and Ministers as his Majesty
should please to provide to the place, Voice in Parliament granted to such
Ministers as sh^u^d be provided to the places, as Bishops, Abbots, or other
Prelates.
title, and dignity of a Bishop, Abbot, or other Prelate, at any time should
have voice in Parliament, as freely as any other Ecclesiastical Prelate had at
any time bypast. And that all Bishoprics, then in his Majesty's hands, and
undisponed to any person, or which should happen to fall void thereafter,
should be only disponed to actual Preachers, and Ministers in the Church, or
to such other persons as should be found apt and qualified to use and exerce
the Office of a Preacher, or Minister, and who in their provisions to the said
Bishoprics should accept in and upon them, to be actual Pastors and
Ministers, and according thereto should practice and exerce the same.

As concerning the office of the said persons in the spiritual policy and
government of the Church, The office for the spiritual government remitted to
the Assembly.
the same was remitted to his Majesty to be advised, and agreed upon with the
General Assembly, at such time as his Highness should think expedient to treat
with them thereupon; without prejudice in the mean time of the jurisdiction and
discipline of the Church, established by Acts of Parliament, and permitted to
General and Provincial Assemblies, and other Presbyteries, and Sessions of
the Church.

This Act gave occasion to the indicting of a General Assembly, An. 1598.
which convened at Dundie in March next; where the King being present did show,
A General Assembly at Dundie.
That he had anticipated the time of the Assembly (for the appointment was at
Striveling this first Tuesday of May) that he might be resolved touching their
acceptance of the place in Parliament, with the form, manner, and number of
persons, that should be admitted to have voice; and thereupon desired them to
enter into a particular consideration of the whole points of the Act; and first
to reason whether it was lawful and expedient, that the Ministers as
representing the whole Church within the Realm, should have voice in Parliament
or not?

This Question being long debated, first in private, by some Brethren selected
to that purpose, Ministers might give voice in Parliament.
then in the hearing of the whole Assembly, it was concluded, That Ministers
might lawfully give voice in Parliament, and other public meetings of the
Estate, and that it was expedient to have some always of that number present,
to give voice in name of the Church.

A second Question being moved, touching the number of those that should have
voice, The number to be a^se many as of old in the Papisticall Church.
it was agreed, That so many should be appointed to give voice, as of old had
place in the Papisticall Church, to wit, 51 persons, or thereby.

Thirdly, The election of those that should give voice, to be made by the King
and Church.
touching the election of those that should have voice, it was resolved, That
the same did appertain partly to his Majesty, and partly to the Church. And
because time could not permit the discussing of the rest of the points, as de
modo eligendi, what rent those Ministers should have, whether they should
continue in that office ad vitam, or not; what their title should be, and the
cautions to preserve them from corruption, with other the like circumstances;
the Presbyteries were desired to consider the same thoroughly, Commission for
discussing the rest of the points.
and thereafter to meet in their Synods all upon one day, to wit, the first
Tuesday of June; and having reasoned upon these heads, to direct three of their
number to convene with his Majesty, (the advertisement being upon a month at
least) and with the Doctors of the Universties; namely Mr. Andrew Melvill, Mr.
John Iohnston, Mr. Robert Wilkie, Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. Robert Howy, Mr.
Patrick Sharp, and Mr. James Martin, at such time and place as his Majesty
should think most convenient; with power to them being so convened to treat,
reason and confer upon the said heads, and others appertaining thereto; and
in case of agreement, and uniformity of opinions to conclude the whole question
touching voice in Parliament; otherwise in case of discrepance, to remit the
conclusion to the next General Assembly.

The Commissioners proceedings in planting the Church of S. Andrews were at the
same time ratified; Ministers of Edinburgh permitted to preach, upon condition.
but the provision of Edinburgh, which they had likewise concluded, made
greater business. The King had been induced by the humble entreaty of Mr. David
Lindesay, Mr. Robert Rollock, and Mr. Patrick Galloway, to suffer the old
Ministers preach again in their places upon their faithful promises to observe
the Conditions following:

1 That they should not in Pulpit make any apology for themselves further then
to say, that they had satisfied his Majesty touching their intentions in the
day of the tumult, and that they condemned the raisers thereof, and all that
took Arms, or gave command, or allowance thereunto, praising the calm and
clement course his Majesty has taken in censuring the same.

2 That they should at no time thereafter, tax, quarrel, or reproach, directly
or indirectly, privately or publicly, any inhabitant of Edinburgh, that did
show themselves affectionate to his Majesty; and if any of them should happen
to fall in any offense, meriting the censure of the Church discipline, they
should in the trial, and censuring thereof use them indifferently, as if they
had never kithed contrary to the said Ministers.

3 That they should not in Pulpit speak otherwise then reverently of his
Majesty's Council, and their proceedings, and in their Sermons labor to
imprint in the peoples hearts a reverent conceit of his Majesty and his
actions, so far as in them lies; and when as they should hear any slanderous
or offensive reports of his Majesty, or of any of his Counselors, his or their
intentions, or proceedings, they should address them in all humility to his
Majesty, and with due reverence make him acquainted with the reports, receiving
his Majesty's own declaration therein, whereunto they should give credit, and
generally should conform themselves to the order set down in the late general
Assembly thereanent.

4 That they should never hereafter refuse to give account of any of their
speeches in Pulpit, or of their proceedings elsewhere, but when his Majesty
should require the same, they should plainly declare the truth of that they
should be asked, in all humbleness and simplicity, without claiming to the
general warrant of conscience not founded upon reason.

The Ministers upon these conditions being licenced to preach, Four others
named to be joined with the Edinburgh Min^sters.
and the Town going on in dividing themselves in Parishes, as they had
promised, a lite was presented of twelve persons, out of which number the
Commissioners of the Church were to elect four, besides the old Ministers, to
bear charge in that Ministry, having his Majesty's approbation. The four on
whom the choice fell, was Mr. Robert Rollock Principal of the College of
Edinburgh, Mr. John Hall Minister at Leth, Mr. Peter Hewat, Exception taken at
two of the number.
and Mr. George Robertson. Against the two last exception was taken because of
their youth, and that they were not men of that gravity which was required in
Ministers of such a place. Yet the Commissioners, after trial taken of their
qualification, proceeded, and decerned all the four to be admitted.

Hereof the old Ministers complained, The providing of the Commissioners in the
planting of Edinburgh allowed.
with whom the Synod of Lothian joined, who repaired in great numbers to the
Assembly, thinking to carry the matter by voices; but when after a long
contestation it came to be judged, the decree of the Commissioners was
approved, and a new Commission given to Mr. David Lindesay, Mr. Robert Pont,
Mr. Robert Rollock, Mr. George Gladstaves, Mr. Patrick Galloway, Mr. James
Nicolson, Mr. Thomas Buchannan, and Mr. John Duncanson, to place the Ministers
in their several parishes; or if any should refuse to accept, to depose them
from the function of the Ministrey, and plant the Church with such others as
they should think meet.

Mean while, Anact desining the number of Commissioners from Presbyteries to
Assemblies.
because of the number that came from Lothian, an Act was made, That no
Presbytery should thereafter send above two or three Ministers at most in
Commission to the Assembly, with one Baron of the bounds and one Commissioner
from every burgh, Edinburgh excepted, who in all public meetings were allowed
to have two.

About the end of the Assembly, His Majesty pleases to remit all offenses past
of the Ministers.
a motion was made for removing all offenses conceived by his Majesty against
any of the Ministers, and particularly against the Ministers of Edinburgh;
whereupon the King was pleased to declare, That for any offenses past he did
freely remit them, and should never at any time call the same to mind, Mr.
John Dividson protests against the conclusions of the Assembly.
in hope they would so behave themselves in time coming, as they should still
deserve his good opinion. And so did this meeting close with the great content
of all; Mr. John Davidson only a man given to contention, finding that things
went not to his mind, especially in the planting of Edinburgh, to the
Ministry whereof he was always aspiring, did protest in his own name, and in
the name of certain other brethren, That none of the conclusions taken in that
Assembly should be of any force, in regard the same was not a free Assembly,
but overawed by the King. The Moderator enquiring if any of the brethren would
adhere to this Protestation, none was found all condemning it and the uncivil
form he used in making the same; he himself, as his custom was when he made
any such trouble, fled away, and lurked a while till his peace was again made.

It was now thought that the planting of Edinburgh should receive no more
delay, Question moved for Mr. Robert Bruce who refused the imposition of hands.
yet a new impediment cast in, made no less ado then the former. Mr. Robert
Bruce had preached ordinarily in the Town some ten years, but had not received
Ordination to the Ministry, and being urged therewith, refused, pretending the
approbation of the general Assembly to be equivalent to any ordination. It was
replied, That the approbation he had of the Church, was a license only to
preach, but being now to receive an office, it concerned them to observe the
form prescribed by diverse Acts. But this not satisfying, he denied to yield a
jot to that, which might question his former calling. And abeit it was offered
to be declared at his entry. That the ordination they used was not to question
his former calling, but rather to allow, and confirm the same; he would not be
content, except the declaration was given him in writing. This also yielded
unto, a new difference arose among them upon the form of the declaration, the
Commissioners offering to declare the lawfulness of his calling, and that the
imposition of hands they were to use, was not given him as a new intrance to
the Ministry, but as one that was taken to be entered to the charge of a
particular flock; he requiring to have it expressly said, That they did
acknowledge him a lawful Pastor of Edinburgh, as being called by the general
Assembly thereto.

Ten days and more were spent in the setting down this form, A declaration made
for his satisfaction.
and after many alterations, at last they came to agree on this, That the
Commissioners did acknowledge his calling to be a Pastor in Edinburgh lawful,
and that the imposition of hands was not used as a ceremony of his ordination
to the Ministry, but of his ordination to a particular flock. The Declaration
thus formed, a day was appointed for his admission, and Mr. Robert Pont, A
tumult in the Church as his admission
Mr. Thomas Buchannan, and Mr. James Nicolson, chosen to perform the same. Mr.
Robert Pont having preached, and beginning to show what was the business they
met for; Mr. Robert Bruce arose, and stepping into the Pulpit, fell a
complaining of the strict forms wherewith the Commissioners had used him; which
the people hearing, such a tumult was raised, as to all appearance the
Ministry that was to use the imposition of hands had been in danger, if the
Commissioner Mr. John Nicolson a man well respected (being there as one of the
Elders, to testify the Churches consent to his admission) had not by his wise
and grave speeches reduced them to quietness. Always the business was put off
for that day.

The King advertised of this, Mr. Robert Bruce cited before the Commissioners
purges himself of the tumult.
was greatly offended, and commanded the Commissioners to cite Mr. Robert
Bruce, and censure him for the trouble he had made; he compeiring, excused
himself, laying the blame on the people, and being charged under pain of
deprivation to give obedience, and accept the charge after the form prescribed,
was upon the 9 of May, the day assigned for his acceptance, admitted by Mr.
David Lindesay, He is admitted and receives imposition of hands.
and Mr. Alexander Douglas with imposition of hands. Thus ended that business
which made more noise then was needful, and was judged to proceed rather of
wilfulness on his part, then of any good zeal.

The day appointed of the Synods drawing near the King sent William Melvill
Commendator of Tungland, and Sr. Patrick Murray, Commissioners directed to
Synod of Fife.
to attend the Assembly of Fife, where it was supposed some new stirs should be
made. The Commission given them was, not to suffer any of the Conclusions taken
in the last general Assembly to be drawn in question, and to see that in the
other heads left undecided, nothing should be concluded definitive. But they
found the Synod more peaceable then was expected, and all things carried therein
to the Kings mind, Mr. Thomas Buchannan, Mr. George Gladstaves, and Mr. John
Fairfoull being chosen Commissioners for meeting with these that should be sent
from the other Synods.

The report of this gave the King hopes of a good issue to the conference
intended; A meeting at Falkland for determining the vote of Parliament.
whereupon letters were sent desiring the Doctors of the Universities, and
Commissioners of the Synod to be at Falkland the 29 of July. There after along
deliberation, it was with an unanime consent agreed,

1 Touching the manner of his Election, who should have voice in Parliament,
that the Church should name for each Prelacy that was void, six of their
number, of whom the King should take one; or if his Majesty did not like any of
those six, that as many others should be recommended by the Church, of which
number he should accept one, without any more refusal.

2 That the nomination should be made by the general Assembly, with advice of
the Synods, and Presbyteries, who should present the general Assembly in
writing, the names of the persons as well without, as within the bounds of
their Jurisdiction: providing if there was any person within the bounds meet
and qualified, he should be preferred, caeteris paribus.

3 Concerning his rent, that the Churches being sufficiently planted, and no
prejudice done to Schools, Colleges, and Universities already erected, he
should be provided to all the rest of the Prelacy whereunto he is preferred.

4. The Cautions to preserve him should be these.

1. That he should not propone to Council, Caveats for eschewing of corruption.
Convention, or Parliament, in name of the Church, any thing without express
warrant, and direction from the Church, neither should he consent, nor keep
silence in the said Conventions if any thing was moved prejudicial to the
weal, and liberty thereof, under pain of deposition from his office.

2 Next he should be bound to give an account of his proceedings in the
discharge of his Commission to every general Assembly, and obtain their
ratification of the same; submitting himself to their judgment, without making
any appeal, under the pain of infamy, and excommunication.

3 He should content himself with that part of his Benefice which should be
given him for his living, and not hurt nor prejudice the rest of the Ministers
within his Benefice, planted or to be planted, nor any other Minister in the
Country whatsoever; and this clause to be inserted in his Provision.

4 He should not delapidate his Benefice in any sort, nor make any set, or
disposition thereof, without the special advice or consent of his Majesty, and
the general Assembly. And for the greater warrant should interdict himself,
and be content that inhibition be raised against him to that effect.

5 He should be bound to attend the congregation faithfully, at which he should
be appointed Minister, in all the points of a Pastor, and be subject to the
trial, and censure of his own Presbytery, or provincial Assembly, as any
other of the Ministers that bear no Commission.

6 In the administration of discipline, collation of benefices, visitation, and
other points of Ecclesiastical government, he should neither usurp, nor claim
to himself any more power or jurisdiction, then any of his brethren, except he
be employed, under pain of deprivation; and in case he do usurp any part of
the Ecclesiastical government, the Presbytery, Synod, or general Assembly
opposing and making impediment thereto, whatsoever he should do thereafter
should be null ipso facto, without any declaratour.

7 In Presbyteries, Provincial, and general Assemblies he should behave
himself in all things as one of the brethren, and be subject to their censure.

8 At his admission to the office of Commissionary he should swear and
subscrive all these and other points necessary, otherwise he should not be
admitted.

9 If it should happen him to be deposed from the Ministry by the Presbytery,
Synod or general Assembly, he should lose his place in Parliament, and the
Benefice be void ipso facto.

10 That he should be called Commissioner of such, or such a place, if so the
Parliament be induced by his Majesty to accept that title; otherwise the
general Assembly should consider and determine the same; as also how long he
should continue in office, whether ad vitam, except some offense make him
unworthy, or for a shorter space, at pleasure of the Church.

It was neither the Kings intention, His Majesty's purpose in giving way to
these conclusions.
nor the minds of the wiser sort, to have these Cautions stand in force, (for
to subject the decrees of Parliament to the Assembly, as in the second caution;
or to interdict Churchmen, as in the fourth, and serve Inhibitions upon them,
were things absurd) but to have matters peaceably ended, and the reformation of
the policy made without any noise, the King gave way to these conceits, knowing
that with time the utility of the Government, which he purposed to have
established, would appear, and trusting that they whom he should place in these
rooms, would by their care for the Church, and their wise and good behavior
purchase to themselves the Authority which appertained.

He had also matters of greater importance in hand, Ambassadors directed to the
Princes of Germany.
which made him desire to be settled in some sort, with the Church: from June
preceding he had directed an Embassage to the Princes of Germany, wherein David
Bishop of Aberdene and Sr. Peter Young his Elemosynar, men of good abilities
and learning, were employed. Their Commission was, to inform the Princes of his
right and title to the Crown of England, after the death of the Queen
Elizabeth, and to request their assistance, if he should stand in need thereof.
The Queen was then stricken in years, and diverse libells, and pamphlets
divulged against his title to that Crown, which made him careful to have his
friends rightly informed, and to understand what aid he might expect if
opposition should be made; Not that he minded (this they were willed to
declare) to wrong or offend the Queen in any sort, whom he loved, and honored
as his Mother; wishing her many and happy days, but only to strengthen himself
against injust pretenders; and if in the mean time they should be pleased by a
common Embassage to entreat the Queen to declare in her own time the right
successor, for preventing the plots and practices of enemies, he would take it
for a singular friendship at their hands.

It was a painful Embassage, The success of that Embassage.
and by them faithfully discharged; for taking their journey by Denmark, as
they were directed, and receiving letters commendatory from that King to the
Princes, they traveled to Udalrick Duke of Megleburgh, Maurice Lantsgrave of
Hesse, Frederick Duke of Saxony and administrator of the Electorate, Henry Duke
of Brunswick, John Adolph Duke of Gleswick, and Ioachim Marquess of
Brandenburgh, and having comunicated their message to them all severally
returned not before the end of the year. Of all the Princes they obtained an
answer in substance, which was, That albeit his Majesty's right was not unknown
unto them, they did esteem it an act of great wisdom in him, to make his
friends acquainted with the exceptions taken against his Title, that when
occasion required, nothing might be wanting that lay in their power. But to
move the Queen for declaring her successor, they held it dangerous, and feared
it should not so much promove the business, as offend her. Always they should
advise, and take counsel with their confederates and allies, and follow the
course which was most likely for his benefit. This was the sum of the answer
they returned.

The 24 of December the Queen was brought to bed of another daughter, The Queen
brought to bed of a daughter.
who was christened in the Chapel of Halirudhouse the 15 of April, by Mr.
David Lindesay Minister of Leth, and named Margaret. The Earl of Montross
(created Chancellor in January preceding) with the Lord Hamilton and Earl of
Huntley, Hamilton and Huntley created Marquesses.
assisted as witnesses. These last two were at the same time preferred to the
honor and dignity of Marquesses.

There died within the compass of this year diverse worthy men, Mr. John
Lindesay Secretary dies.
amongst whom Mr. John Lindesay of Batharres Secretary to the King, shall first
be named; a man honorably descended, of exquisite learning, and a sound
judgment, held worthy by all men of the place he had in the Senate, both for
his wisdom and integrity: he died of the Stone, wherewith he had been pained
many years.

Next to him Mr. David Carnegy of Colluthy, The Lord of Colluthy his death.
a wise, peaceable, and sober man, in good credit and estimation with the King,
and taken into his privy Council for his skill, and knowledge in civil
affairs.

And in the Church Mr. Thomas Buchannan Provost of Kirkhench and Minister of
Syres, a man learned, wise, and a strong defender of the Churches rights,
having attained to a good age, Mr. Thomas Buchannan his death.
he dyed of a bruise which he received of a fall from his horse.

David Ferguson Minister of Dunfermlin of the age of 65, David Ferguson his
death.
departed also this life the same year. A good preacher, wise, and of a jocund
and pleasant disposition, which made him well regarded both in Court and
Country.

But the death of Mr. Robert Rollock, The death of Mr. Robert Rollock most
lamented.
taken away in the 43 year of his age, and in the time when the Church had
greatest need of his service, was beyond all the rest lamented. This man was
born not far from Striveling, and trained up in letters under Mr. Thomas
Buchannan, who did then keep a famous School in that time. He passed his course
in Philosophy at S. Andrews, and no sooner received the degree of a Master in
Arts, then he was chosen Regent of the College of S. Salvator, where he had
studied. In the year 1583 he was removed to Edinburgh, and made Principal of a
College, which the Town had there erected; where by his Lectures of divinity
in the Schools, and his Sermons to the people (in both which he was assiduous)
he came to be greatly esteemed. But the 17 days tumult and troubles that
followed thereupon, withdrawing him against his mind to the keeping of
Assemblies, and other Commissions of the Church, he was thereby much weakened;
for he was of an infirm body, and grievously pained with the Stone, whereof at
last he died. His behavior in the time of his sickn^ss, and at his dying.
In his sickness being visited by his brethren of the Ministry, amongst other
pious exhortations, he did earnestly beseech them, to carry themselves more
dutifully toward the King, lamenting he should be so ill used by some of their
number: and gave them a most comfortable farewell. His torments were extreme,
yet was he not heard to use an impatient word; but was still calling on God,
with these and the like sayings, Have Lord Jesus, and tarry not, put in thy
hand and take this soul away to thy self. At other times, Go out silly life,
that the better life of God may enter in. Drawing near his end, he repeated a
part of the 6 Psalm, and framing a most pithy prayer out of the same, as one
exulting after victory, he cried aloud, Christ has taken my yoke to bear, and
now strengthened by his grace, I will follow: with which words he yielded up
his spirit. A rare example of holiness he was both in his life and death;
albeit now dead, still preaches by his learned works, which it is pity should
not be collected in one volume, and preserved to posterity. He deceased the
last of February, and had his corpse honorably interred in the burial place,
an innumerable multitude accompanying the same to the grave.

To return to the Estate, An. 1599.
the necessities of the King by forain Ambassages, and other extraordinary
employments daily increasing, Alteration of some officers of State.
he was forced to look the more narrowly to the administration of his rents;
for the ill managing whereof, the Lord of Wedderburne was put from his place,
and the office of Controllerie given to Sir David Murray, who was afterward
preferred to the Lordship of Scone. The Prior of Blantire who was Treasurer,
for that he had offended the King by his partial behavior in an action
betwixt Mr. Robert Bruce and the Ministers of Angus, was committed to the
Castle, and forced to resign his office, which was conferred upon the Earl of
Cassils by his Ladies procurement. The Earl of Cassills made Treasurer.
She was the widow of the Lord Thirlstan, and said to be wealthy, which induced
him to take her to wife, against the counsel of all his friends, who could not
away with the imparity of their age, he being a young Nobleman never matched to
any, and she a woman past childbirth. But the desire he had to keep his estate
made him take that course, and she loving to stay at Court and have her husband
a ruler of affairs, made offer to advance some moneys so as he might carry the
place, which was readily accepted. Yet was it not long before they did both
forthink the bargain, being pressed with a multitude of precepts for the laying
forth of money, and so were glad to quit the office, Lord Elphingston succeeded
Treasurer.
with the loss, as was said, of Forty thousand marks, which he did advance at
his entry. In his place was the Lord Elphingston chosen by the recommendation
of his brother, then Secretary.

Whilst these things were a doing in Court, Sir William Bows came Ambassador
from England, Sr. William Bows Ambassador from England.
upon some rumors that the King was declining to Popery, and had offered his
obedience to the Bishop of Rome by a letter, the copy whereof was brought by
the Master of Gray from Rome, and showed the Queen, of purpose to divide the
two Princes, and dissolve the amity which was amongst them.

The Queen, though she did take the letter to be feigned, and that the same was
devised to breed a jealousy between her and the King, thought meet to
advertise what was rumoured, and to advise him not to build upon the friendship
of Rome. The King did take the advertisement well, and made the Ambassador
very welcome, assuring him that they were false and feigned calumnies: neither
did the King think any other at that time. Such a letter indeed was sent to the
Pope, and the Kings hand surreptitiously gotten thereto, for which the
Secretary Mr. Elphingston, was some years after upon his own confession
convicted, as we shall hear.

Whilst this Ambassador remained in the Country, One Ashfield conveyed
privately to Berwick by two of the Ambassadors servants.
there fell out an accident which had almost wrought great trouble: an English
man called Ashfield, who had brought some hunting horses to the King, and
cunningly abused the English Warden, did make his abode at Court, and was there
well entertained. The Ambassador, whether desired by the Queen or the Warden,
it is uncertain, caused some of his servants keep company with the man, and
allure him one day to Leth, where having drunk liberally, he was by Coach,
instead of returning to Court, carried to Berwick. This being told the King, he
was greatly offended, and giving order to watch the Ambassadors lodging, (...)
to Berwick to bring back the man. The Governor prayed the King to have him
excused, for that the man being come within his charge, he could not dimit him
without the Queens knowledge.

The King receiving this answer, did challenge the Ambassador as not having
carried himself dutifully, and wronged both him and the Country; but he
denying the fact, affirmed the same to have been contrived by two of his
servants without his knowledge and direction. This none did believe, neither
did the King vouchsafe him any more countenance. Whereupon he parted in a great
discontent.

Soon after the King went to S. Andrews for a new visit of the Universitie, A
visitation of the University of S. Andrews.
where it was ordained, That there should be yearly upon the 3 of March, a Dean
of faculty of Theology elected by the Doctors, the Ministers resident within
the City; and the principal Masters of the Colleges: which Deane so chosen
should have the like privilege and jurisdiction upon the students and
professors of Theology, that the Deans of Philosophy had by the foundation
over the professors thereof: with express provision, that that he who was
elected Dean, should not till after three years space be received again into
the office.

Other conclusions were taken for distributing the Students of Theology in
Classes, Discourse of his Majesty's Title to the Crown of England.
and their yearly examination; but were ill observed.

At this time came forth sundry Discourses touching the succession of the Crown
of England, some oppugning, some maintaining the Kings title: amongst others
Mr. John Colvill taking upon him one of the opposite Treatises did publish a
recantation, wherein having confuted all the contrary reasons he professed,
that in malice in time of his exile he had penned the Treatise, which then out
of conscience he refuted. This was believed of many, and helped greatly to
discredit the adversary writings; yet was he not the Author of that which he
oppugned; only to merit favor at the Kings hands he did profess the work that
came forth without a name to be his: and indeed a more pithie and persuasive
Discourse was not penned all that time in that subject.

The same year did the King publish his Doron Basilicon upon this occasion; The
King publishes his Basilicon Doron by occasion of a libell.
Sir James Semple one of his Majesty's servants (whose hands was used in
transcribing that Treatise) upon an old familiarity with Mr. Andrew Melvill,
did give it him to read, who offending with some passages that touched the
Ministry and present discipline, took copies thereof and dispersed the same
amongst the Ministers; thereupon a Libell was formed, and cast in before the
Synod of St. Andrews, wherein the passages at which they excepted, being first
set down; it was asked, What Censure should be inflict upon him, that had given
such instructions to the Prince, (for that Treatise was directed to Prince
Henry) and if he could be thought well affected to religion, that had delivered
such precepts of Government? Sir Patrick Murray and Mr. James Nicolson being
present in the Synod, as Commissioners for the King, and apprehending the
libell to concern his Majesty, made diligent enquiry to find out the
presenters. The whole number pretending ignorance, the Commissioners commanded
the doors to be shut, and the Roll of the Ministers names to be called, who
being put to their oath one by one did purge themselves, yet was it tried the
very next day to be laid on the table by Mr. John Dikes Minister at Anstruther,
who being therefore cited before the Council was fugitive and denounced
Rebel. Mr. John Dikes fugitive for the libell.
The rumor by this occasion dispersed, that the King had left certain
directions to his son, prejudicial to the Church and Religion; he took purpose
to publish the work, which being come abroad, and carried to England, it cannot
be said how well the same was accepted, and what an admiration it raised in all
men's hearts of him, The book well received in England.
and of his piety and wisdom. Certain it is that all the Discourses that came
forth at that time (and those were not a few) for maintaining his right to the
Crown of England, prevailed nothing so much as did the Treatise, against which
such exceptions had been taken.

In the end of the year happened some new jarrs betwixt the King and the
Ministers of Edinburgh, A trouble for receiving some English Comedians.
because of a company of English Comedians whom the King had licensed to play
within the Burgh: The Ministers offending with the liberty given them, did
exclaim in their Sermons against Stageplayers, their unruliness and immodest
behavior; and in their Sessions made an Act prohibiting people to resort unto
their plays under pain of the Church censures; The King taking this to be a
discharge of his License called the Sessions before the Council, and ordained
them to annull their Act, and not to restrain the people from going to these
Comedies; which they promised, and accordingly performed; whereof publication
was made the day after, and all that pleased, permitted to repair unto the
same, to the great offense of the Ministers.

The next year which by public Ordinance was appointed to have the beginning
at the Calends of January, A general Assembly of the Church.
and from thenceforth so to continue (for before that time, the year with us
was reckoned from the 25 of March) there was an Assembly kept at Montrosse the
28 of March, where the King himself was present. Therein that great business of
the Churches voice in Parliament was determined; and first the conclusions
taken at Falkland in July 1598, were ratified. Then touching the continuance of
those that should be chosen to give voice for the Church, The voice in
Parliament determined.
it was after much debating concluded; That be who was admitted should yearly
render an account of his Commission to the general Assembly, and laying the
same down at their foot should be therein continued, or if his Majesty and the
Assembly did think fit to employ another, he should give place to him that was
appointed. Two points more were adjoined to the former; one was, Two Cavears
more added.
That they who had voice in Parliament, should not have place in the general
Assembly, unless they were authorized by a Commission from the Presbyters,
whereof they were members. The other caveat was, That crimen ambitus should be
a sufficient reason to deprive him both of his place and office. And now there
rested no more but to nominate persons to the Bishoprics that were void;
Aberdene and Argile had their own incumbents at the time, both actual
preachers; The state of Bishoprics at that time.
S. Andrews and Glasgow were in the hands of the Duke of Lennox; Murray
possessed by the Lord Spinie; Orkney, by the Earl of Orkney; Dunkeld, Birchen,
and Dumblane, had their own titulars, but these were not ordinary preachers;
Galloway and Isles were so dilapidated, as scarce they were remembered to have
been. Only in Rosse and Cathnes some provision was left, whereunto by consent
of the Church, Bishops appointed for Rosse and Cathnes.
Mr. David Lindesay and Mr. George Gladstaves were presented; the first to the
Bishopric of Rosse, the other to Cathnes, who nottheless continued still
serving in their Churches at Leth, and S. Andrews, for as yet they could not
find any settling in their Dioceses. Besides the conclusion taken in this
business, diverse other good Acts were concluded at that time, as may be seen in
the book of Records.

Some three weeks before this convention John Dury Minister at Montrosse
departed this life; An. 1600.
he was born at Machline a little village in the Country of Kill, and trained
up a while in letters in the Town of Air; John Dury Minister at Montrosse his
death, with a short description of his life.
after which he was sent to George Dury his Cousin, Abbot of Dunfermlin, and
placed by him among the Monks of that Abbey, where he lived three years, then
falling in some suspicion of that which they called Heresy, and delated
thereof to the Abbot, after trial taken he was condemned to be immured, that
is, to be shut up between two walls, till he died. Yet by the means his friends
made with the worthy Nobleman the Earl of Arran, he was delivered, and shortly
after the reformation admitted to the Ministry, in which he served first at
Hales near to Edinburgh, then at Leth and when the civil troubles ceased,
translated to Edinburgh, where he continued Minister the space of 10 years. A
man earnest and zealous in every thing he gave himself unto, but too credulous
(a fault incident to the best natures) and easily abused by those he trusted;
which bred him great trouble whilst he remained at Edinburgh. In Montrosse
where he was first confined, and whereof soon after he became Minister, he
lived well respected, and in great quietness: making it appear, that the many
contests and strifes he had in former times, proceeded not from his own
disposition, so much as from the suggestion of others. For all the sixteen
years he lived there, no man did carry himself with greater modesty, nor in a
more dutitifull obedience, and was therefore well beloved and esteemed by the
King. He wished earnestly to have lived unto the meeting of the Assembly, that
he might have declared his mind touching the matters then in hand; but when he
perceived his sickness increasing, and that he should not continue so long, he
entreated some brethren to visit him, to show the Assembly as from him, that
there was a necessity of restoring the ancient government of the Church,
because of the unruliness of young Ministers, that could not be advised by the
elder sort nor kept in order; and since both the estate of the Church did
require it, and that the King did labor to have the same received, he wished
them to make no trouble therefore, and to insist only with the King, that the
best Ministers and of greatest experience might be preferred to places. This as
he directed was reported to the Assembly, and of the greatest part well
received: for he was certainly a sound hearted man, and far from all
dissimulation, ever professing what he thought, and following the course he
thought most expedient for the Church. To the poor he was exceeding helpful,
compassionate of those that were in any distress, and merciful even when he
seemed most severe. He dyed the last of February in the 63 year of his age.

It was in August this year, The conspiracy of the Earl of Gowry.
that the conspiracy of Gowry fell forth; a conspiracy plotted by him alone,
and only communicated to M. Alexander his brother; two youths of great hope, at
whose hands no man could have expected such an attempt. Their father had been
taken away by form of justice in the 1584, whilst the King was yet Minor, and
forced he was unto it as unto many other things that agreed not with his mind.
The Kings kindness to his brethren and sister.
But the care he took of the Noblemans children and kindness wherewith he used
them, did show how much he disliked that proceeding; for he restored the eldest
to his fathers honor and living, his brother Alexander he made one of his
bedchamber; a sister of theirs he preferred to be chief maid about his Queen,
and had a purpose to advance the Earl himself to a principal office of the
Kingdom. Such and so great benefits might have endeared the most barbarous and
heard hearted. But benefits are no benefits to the malicious, and those that
are set for revenge. The plot contrived for entrapping the King.
The device was, to allure the King to the Earls house in Perth, and there to
kill him. The King was then remaining in Falkland, and one day early in the
morning (it was the fifth of August) as he was going to take his sport in the
Park, Alexander meets him, and tells that his brother had intercepted a man,
a Jesuit as he supposed, with a great quantity of gold, and that he kept the
man fast in his house at Perth, and sent him with the news, praying the King
to make have, for that he doubted not he should learn things worthy of his
travel. The King moving some questions touching the man's stature and habit,
and the place where he was taken, received no other answer, but that his
brother would satisfy all those things at his coming; which put him in a
suspicion that the Gentleman was distracted, for he observed in him some
perturbation; yet because of the instance he made he yielded to go, willing
him to ride back, and show that he would be with his brother before dinner.

After a short chase and a Buck killed the King made toward Perth, The King
goes to Perth.
accompanied with the Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Mar and a few Gentlemen
more, all in their hunting coats. By the way, the King did ask the Duke of
Lennox, if he had known Mr. Alexander (for the Duke had married his sister) at
any time troubled or distempered in his wits. The Duke answering that he had
never known any such thing in him; the King insisted no further. Being come to
the Town the Earl did meet him, Gowry meeting the King was much troubled.
and was noted by all the company to be in some trouble of mind, the very
imagination of the fact he went about, perplexing his thoughts. But he colored
all with the want of entertainment, saying, that he did not expect the King,
and that his dinner was not prepared. The King wishing him not to trouble
himself with those thoughts, because a little thing would content him; and for
the Noblemen a part of his dinner would suffice them, they discoursed of
hunting and other common matters till meat was dressed. Howsoon the King had
taken a little refreshment, Mr. Alexander did move the King to go with him.
and the Lords were placed at a table in another room, Mr. Alexander did round
in the Kings ear, that the time was fit whilst the Lords were at dinner, to
go and examine the stranger: at which word the King arose, and went up stairs,
Mr. Alexander going before him. The King did call Sir Thomas Areskin
(afterward Earl of Kelly) to follow him, but Mr. Alexander turning at the
door, after the King was entered, said that the King willed him to stay below,
whereupon Sir Thomas went back. Thus the door was shut, and Mr. Alexander
guiding him to an inner room, the King did perceive a man standing alone,
whereupon he asked if that was the man? nay said Mr. Alexander there is another
business in hand, Mr. Alexander professes what he was about.
and with that word covering his head, You remember, said he, how you used my
father, and now must you answer for it. Your father! answered the King; I was
not the cause of his death; it was done in my minority by form of Justice. But
is this your purpose, and have you trained me hither to murder me? Did you
learn this lesson of Mr. Robert Rollock your Master? or think you when you have
done your will to go unpunished? Mr. Alexander stricken with the speeches, and
the man who was placed there to assist him, trembled for fear, desired the King
to be quiet, and make no noise, for that he would go speak with his brother,
and pacify him; this said he went down a back way, as it seemed, to the Court
below.

Whether he did meet with his brother at that time or not, is unknown, but his
stay was short, and when he returned, he said to the King, There is no remedy,
you must die. Then making as though he would tie the Kings hands, they fell a
wrestling, and the King drawing him by force to a window in the corner that
looked toward the street, as he espied the Earl of Mar, cried, Help Earl of
Mar, help. The Kings voice heard, and is discerned.
The voice and words were discerned by all the Lords, and Gentlemen, who
thereupon ran to seek the King, by the way that went up; but the doors being
shut, there was no entry that way till the same was broke by force, which took
up a large time. Upon the first cry Sir Thomas Areskin suspecting treason did
flee upon Gowrie, and taking him by the gorge said, Sir Thomas Areskin
challenges Gowrie.
Thou art the traitor; but they were quickly sundered by his servants that
stood by. The first that came to the King was a Page called John Ramsey, who
falling upon a back passage by which the Traitors after the deed committed had
purposed to escape, found the King and Mr. Alexander struggling, the King
calling to him and bidding him strike the Traitor, John Ramsey does first
relieve the King.
he gave Mr. Alexander two or three wounds with his Dagger, and so parted him
from the King. The man who was placed there to assist Mr. Alexander, did steal
away secretly; and he himself perceiving that the treason was discovered made
down the stairs, where being encountered by Sir Thomas Areskin, and asked how the
King was, because he gave no direct answer, and only said, that he took God to
witness, that he was not in the fault, he thrust him through the body, and
killed him outright.

Sir Thomas was followed by Hugh Hereife Doctor of Medicine, and a Footboy
named Wilson, who seeing the King safe, were not a little joyed, and placing
him in a little room, The Kings servants prepare to defend.
and shutting the door, they prepared to defend the entry. Gowry accompanied
with three or four servants breaks presently into the chamber, and with his
two swords one in each hand, puts them all to their shift, and had undoubtedly
overthrown them, but that one of the company crying, You have killed the King
our Master, and will you also take our lives? Gowrie enters, and after a
little space is killed.
He became astonished and setting the points of his two swords to the earth, as
if he minded to cease from any more fight, he was instantly stricken by the
Page with a rapier which pierced the heart, so as he fell down dead. The
servants seeing him fall made away; only Master Thomas Cranston being sore
wounded, and not able to shift for himself was apprehended. In this fight Sir
Thomas Areskin and Doctor Hereife were both hurt, but nothing dangerously.

By this time the doors of the other passage being made open, The Lords come to
the King.
the Lords and a number with them entered into the room, who hearing what
happened went all to their knees, and the King himself conceiving a prayer,
gave thanks to God for his deliverance, and that the device of those wicked
brothers was turned upon their own heads. The danger that ensued was not much
less, for the people of the Town taking up arms did inviron the house, crying
to give them out their Provost, The danger by the people of the Town.
otherwise they should blow them all up with powder. The rage of the multitude
was great, (for they loved the Earl, as being their Provost, beyond all
measure) and with great difficulty were they kept back from using violence: at
last the Bailiffs and certain of the Citizens being admitted to enter, and
brought to the King, when they were informed of the truth of things, returned
and pacified the people. After which, the King took horse and returned to
Falkland, where he was welcomed (the rumor of the danger having prevented his
coming) with great acclamations of joy.

It was observed not without some wondering, that after Gowrie was killed there
issued no blood for a good space from his body, The Caracters found at the
Earls girdle.
till his girdle being loosed and taken from him, the same gushed from him in
abundance: this was supposed to be the effect of some Characters that he did
always carry in a little bag at his girdle, which being viewed, were found to be
certain spells of Necromancers, and added much to the infamy of his death.

A diligent search was made the days following for the man the King saw
standing in the room, and large rewards promised to those that should find him
out. Some servants of Gowrie executed.
In this search one of the Earls servants called Henry Younger, hiding himself
out of an idle fear among some growing corns, was killed, and for some days
was supposed to have been the man, till Andrew Henderson Chamberlain to Gowrie,
discovering himself to the Controller, did offer upon promise of his life, to
enter and show all that he knew in that business. An other of Gowries servants
surnamed Craigengelt was some 2 days after apprehended, and both he and M.
Tho: Cranston executed at Perth, though at their dying they declared that they
knew nothing of the Earls purpose, and had only followed him as being their
Master unto that room, where, if they had known the King to have been, they
would have stood for him against their Master and all others.

Henderson at his examination declared, Andrew Henderson his confession.
That the night preceding the attempt, the Earl had directed him to attend his
brother Mr. Alexander, and do what he commanded. That accordingly he
accompanied him the next morning to Falkland, and when they were returned being
commanded by Mr. Alexander to dress himself in armor, and go wait til he came
unto him in an upper room, he obeyed. But that he could not imagine any purpose
against the King, either in him or in the Earl, nor would have believed it
unless he had seen the same with his eyes. Being demanded, why he did not take
the Kings part when he did see them fall a wrestling, he excused himself by a
sudden fear that overtook him in the time; and indeed he looked ever after that
time as one half distracted. It was much marvelled that in so high an attempt
the Earl should have made choice of such a one: but the man was of a servile
spirit, and apt enough to do mischief; and many have conjectured that if the
treason had taken effect, it was in the Earls purpose to have made away both
his brother and him, that he might not be supposed to have had any knowledge
thereof. I remember my self that meeting with Mr. William Cowper then Minister
at Perth the third day after in Falkland, he showed me that not many days
before that accident visiting by occasion the Earl at his own house, he found
him reading a book entitled, De conjurationibus adversus Principes: and having
asked him what a book it was, he answered, That it was a Collection of the
Conspiracies made against Princes, which he said was foolishly contrived all of
them, and faulty either in one point or other; for he that goes about such a
business should not, said he, put any man on his counsel. And he not liking
such discourses, desired him to lay away such books, and read others of a
better subject. I verily think he was then studying how to go beyond all
Conspirators recorded in any History: but it pleased God, who gives salvation
to Kings, as the Psalm speaks, to infatuate his counsels, and by his
ensample to admonish all disloyal and traiterous subjects to beware of
attempting against their Sovereigns.

Advertisement sent the next day to the Council, The Ministers of Edinburgh
required by the Council to give thanks for his Majesty's deliverance.
which then remained at Edinburgh, the Ministers of the Town were called and
desired to convene their people, and give thanks unto God for his Majesty's
deliverance. They excusing themselves, as not being acquainted with the
particulars, nor how those things had fallen out; it was answered, that they
were only to signify, how the King had escaped a great danger, and to stir
up the people to thanksgiving. They replied, That nothing ought to be delivered
in pulpit but that whereof the truth was known, Their excuse, and refusing to
obey.
and that all which is uttered in that place should be spoken in faith. When by
no persuasion they could be moved to perform that duty, it was resolved that
the Council should go together to the Market-crosse, The Bishop of Rosse
gives thanks at the Market-cross.
and that the Bishop of Rosse should after a narration of the Kings danger, and
deliverance, conceive a public Thanksgiving: which was done, the multitude
applauding and expressing a great joy.

The Monday following, The King comes to Edinburgh.
the King came to Edinburgh, accompanied with diverse Noblemen and Barons, and
heard a Sermon preached at the Cross by Mr. Patrick Galloway, who choosed the
124 Psalm for his Theme, did take occasion to discourse of all the particulars
of that Conspiracy, and gave the people great satisfaction: for many doubted
that there had been any such Conspiracy, Master Patrick Galloway his preaching
at the Cross.
the condition of Princes being, as the Emperor Domitian said, herein
miserable, that even when Conspiracies made against their persons are
discovered, yet they are not credited, unless they be slain, The next day the
King in a solemn Council kept at Halirudhouse, to testify his thankfulness
for his deliverance, 1000 l, mortified to the poor at Scone.
and to perpetuate the memory thereof, did mortify for the entertainment of
some poor men the rent of 1000 pounds yearly to be taken of the readiest fruits
of the Abbacy of Scone, and ordained an honorable reward to be given to the
three Gentlemen that had been the instruments of his preservation and the cause
of the reward to be specified in their Patents.

After this, A solemn thanksgiving appointed for the Kings deliverance.
order was taken for a public and solemn Thanksgiving to be made in all the
Churches of the Kingdom, and the last Tuesday of September with the Sunday
following appointed for that exercise.

The Ministers of Edinburgh, who gave the refuse, were commanded to remove
themselves out of the Town within 48 hours, The Ministers of Edinburgh removed
from their places.
and inhibited to preach within his Majesty's Dominions under pain of death.
Mr. Walter Balcanquell, Mr. William Watson, and Mr. John Hall, three of that
number, compeiring at Striveling the 10 of September, Three of the number
acknowledging their fault, are pardoned.
and declaring, That they were thoroughly resolved of the truth of Gowries
Conspiracy, and willing to amend their former fault, were pardoned upon
condition, that before their return to Edinburgh they should in the Churches
appointed to them, publicly preach, and declare their persuasion of the truth
of that treason, craving God and his Majesty forgiveness for the question they
made thereof; and rebuking all such as continued in that doubtfulness. The
Churches designed to them were Tranent, Mussilburgh, and Dalkeith for Mr.
Walter Balcanquell, Dunbar and Dunf for Mr. William Watson, and for Mr. John
Hall, Dunfermlin, S. Andrews, and Perth.

Mr. James Balfour, Mr. James Balfoure remitted.
the day following, upon the like confession was remitted, and ordained to
publish his resolution in the Churches of Dundie, Montrosse, Aberbrothock, and
Brichen.

But Mr. Robert Bruce, taking a course by himself, and saying, He would
reverence his Majesty's reports of that accident, but could not say he was
persuaded of the truth of it, was banished the Kings Dominions, Master Robert
Bruce banished.
and went unto France.

The 15 of November a Parliament was held at Edinburgh, wherein sentence of
forfeiture was pronounced against Gowrie and Mr. Alexander his Brother, A
Parliament wherein Gowrie and his brother are forfeited.
their posterity disinherited, and in detestation of the paricide attempted,
the whole surname of Ruthven abolished. But this last was afterward dispensed
with, and such of that name as were known to be innocent, tolerated by the
Kings clemency to enjoy their surnames and titles as in former times. The
bodies of the two brothers being brought to the Parliament house were after
sentence given hanged upon a gibbet in the public street, and then dismembered,
their heads cut off, and affixed upon the top of the prison house. This done,
the Estates in acknowledgment of the favors and grace they all had received of
God, by the miraculous and extraordinary preservation of his Majesty from that
treasonable attempt, did ordain, The fifth of August to be kept yearly in
remembrance of his Majesty's delivery.
That in all times and ages to come the fifth of August should be solemnly kept
with prayers, preachings, and thanksgiving for that benefit, discharging all
work, labor, and other occupations upon the said day, which might distract the
people in any sort from those pious exercises.

Diverse other good and profitable Acts as well for the Church as Kingdom were
concluded in this Parliament, Acts concluded in this Parliament
as the Act decerning all Marriages contracted betwixt persons divorced for
adultery to be null, and the children begotten by such unlawful conjunction
incapable of succession to their parents inheritance. As also the Act made for
removing and extinguishing of deadly feuds, which the King had ever striven to
abolish, was in that time confirmed by the whole Estates.

Upon the close of the Parliament the King went to Dunfermlin to visit the
Queen, The King goes to Dunfermlin to visit the Queen.
who was brought to bed of a Son. The Christening was hastened because of the
weakness of the Child, and that his death was much feared. He was named
Charles, Prince Charles born at Dunfermlin.
and contrary to the expectation of most men grew unto years and strength, and
survived Prince Henry his elder brother, reigns happily this day over these
Kingdoms; which that he may long do, is the desire and wish of all good
subjects.

In the end of the year Mr. John Craig that had been Minister to the King, The
death of M. John Craig, with a description of his life.
but through age was compelled to quit the Charge, departed this life. This man
whilst he lived was held in great esteem, a great Divine and excellent
Preacher, of a grave behavior, sincere, inclining to no faction, and which
increased his reputation, living honestly, without oftentation or desire of
outward glory; many tossings and troubles he endured in his time, for being
left young and his Father killed at Flowdon, after that he had got an entrance
in Letters, and passed his course in Philosophy in S. Andrews, he went to
England and waited as Pedagogue on the Lord Dacres his children the space of
two years. Wars then arising betwixt the two Kingdoms, he returned home, and
became one of the Dominican Order; but had not lived long among them when upon
suspicion of heresy, he was put in prison. Being cleared of that imputation,
he went back again into England, and thinking by the Lord Dacres means to have
got a place in Cambridge; because that failed, he went to France, and from
thence to Rome. There he won such favor with Cardinal Pole, as by his
recommendation he was received among the Dominicans of Bononia, and by them
first appointed to instruct the Novices of the Cloister: afterward when they
perceived his diligence and dexterity in businesses, he was employed in all
their affairs throughout Italy, and sent in Commission to Chios, an Isle
situated in the Ionick sea, to redress things that were amiss amongst those
of their Order.

Therein he discharged himself so well, that at his return he was made Rector
of the School, and thereby had access to the Libraries, especially to that of
the Inquisition, where falling on the Institutions of John Calvin, he was taken
with a great liking thereof; and one day conferring with a reverend old man of
the Monastery, was by him confirmed in the opinion he had taken, but withal
warned in any case not to utter himself, or make his mind known, because the
times were perilous: yet he neglecting the counsel of the aged man, and
venting his opinions too freely, was delated of heresy, and being sent to
Rome, after examination imprisoned nine months, he lay there in great misery;
at the end whereof, being brought before the Judge of the Inquisition, and
giving a clear Confession of his Faith, he was condemned to be burnt the next
day, which was the 19 of August.

It happened the same night Pope Paul the fourth to depart this life, upon the
noise of whose death, the people came in a tumult to the place where his statue
in marble had been erected, and pulling it down, did for the space of three
days drag the same through the streets, and in the end threw it in the River
of Tiber. During the tumult all the prisons were broke open, the Prisoners set
free, and among those Mr. Craig had his liberty; as he sought to escape, for he
held it not safe to stay in the City, two things happened unto him, not
unworthy of relation; first, in the Suburbs, Accidents that befell M. Craig in
his flight.
as he was passing, he did meet a sort of loose men, whom they called Banditi;
one of the company taking him aside, demanded if he had been at any time in
Bononia? He answered, that he had been some time there. Do ye not then
remember, said he, that walking on a time in the fields with some young
Noblemen, there came unto you a poor maimed Soldier, entreating some relief?
Mr. Craig replying, that he did not well remember. But I do, said he, and I am
the man to whom ye showed kindness at that time; be not afraid of us, ye shall
incur no danger; and so conveying him through the Suburbs; and showing what
was his safest course, he gave him so much money as might make his charge to
Bononia; for he intended to go thither, trusting to find some kindness with
those of his acquaintance; yet at his coming he found them look strange, and
fearing to be of new trapped, he slipped away secretly, taking his course to
Millain.

By the way another accident befell him, A strange accident and singular
testimony of Gods care over him.
which I should scarce relate, so incredible it seems, if to many of good
place he himself had not often repeated it as a singular testimony of Gods care
of him. And this it was, when he had traveled some days declining the highways
out of fear, he came into a forest, a wild and desert place, and being sore
wearied lay down among some bushes on the side of a little brook to refresh
himself; lying there pensive and full of thoughts (for neither knew he in what
part he was, nor had he any means to bear him out the way, a dog comes fawning
with a purse in his teeth, and lays it down before him; he stricken with a
fear, rises up, and construing the same to proceed from Gods favorable
providence toward him, followed his way till he came to a little village,
where he met with some that were traveling to Vienne in Austria, and changing
his intended course went in their company thither.

Being there, He preaches to Maximilian the Emperor, but is forced to leave
those parts.
and professing himself to be one of the Dominican order, he was brought to
preach before Maximilian the second, who liking the man, and his manner of
teaching, would have retained him, if by letters from Pope Pius the third, he
had not been required to send him back to Rome, as one that was condemned for
heresy. The Emperor not liking to deliver him, and on the other part not
willing to fall out with the Pope, did quietly dimit him with letters of safe
conduct. So traveling through Germany he came to England, and being there
informed of the reformation begun at home, he returned into Scotland, and made
offer of his service to the Church, but his long dissuetude of the Country
language (which was not to be mervailed, considering that he had lived abroad
the space of 24 years) made him unusefull at first; now and then to the learned
sort he preached in Latin in the Magdalens Chapel at Edinburgh, and in the
year 1561 after he had recovered the language, He comes to Scotland and is
appointed Minister at Halirudhouse.
was appointed Minister at Halirudhouse. The next year he was taken to
Edinburgh, and served as Colleague with Mr. Knox the space of nine years; then
by the ordinance of the assembly he was translated to Montross, where he
continued two years, and upon the death of Adam Heriot was removed to Aberdene,
having the inspection of the Churches of Mar and Buchan committed to his
care; in the year 1579 he was called to be the Kings Minister, and served in
that charge till born down with the weight of years, he was forced to retire
himself; after which time, forbearing all public exercises he lived private at
home, comforting himself with the remembrance of the mercies of God, that he
had tasted in his life past, An. 1601.
and this year on the 12 of December without all pain dyed peaceably at
Edinburgh in the 88 year of his age.

In the beginning of the next year there happened a great stir in the Court
of England, A trouble in the Court of England.
which concerning the King in some sort I must needs touch: the Earl of Essex
who had been a long time in special favor with the Queen, and was then upon
some displeasure kept from the Court, not enduring to be thrust down (as he
complained) by his adversaries into a private life, did resolve to make his way
unto the Queen by force, to seize upon her person, and remove from her company
those he judged to be his adversaries. But the purpose failing, he was taken
himself and committed to the Tower. A little before he had written letters to
the King full of respect, informing that they who had the managing of all
affairs under the Queen, were inclining to the Infanta of Spain, and advising
him to send Ambassadors into England. and urge the declaration of his title of
succession. The King, though he could have wished his title to be declared, did
not think that time fitting for such propositions, yet upon the report of his
apprehension he resolved to employ some in Commission to the Queen. The Earl of
Mar sent Ambassador to England
And to this effect made choice of the Earl of Mar, joining with him the
Abbot of Kinlosse, who coming to the Court some days after the execution of
Essex, and having access to the Queen did congratulate her good success in
repressing that audacious attempt. This she took well, and was glad to hear so
much from them, because of the rumors which were then dispersed, That Essex
was made away for favoring the King of Scots title, and that if the
Ambassadors had come in time, they would have dealt for him. A good answer was
hereupon given to all their instructions, and whereas among other points of
their Commission, they were willed to seek an assignment of some portion of
land in recompense of the lands belonging to the Lady Lennox, the King being
her lawful heir; the Queen excusing herself touching the lands, was content to
add to the annuity formerly paid, the sum of 2000 pounds yearly, as long as
he kept fast, and held one course with her. Besides this satisfaction obtained
of the Queen, they did so work with the principal Noblemen and Counselors, as
they won them to be the Kings friends, and at their return gave his Majesty
assurance of a peaceable reception of that Crown after the decease of the
Queen, which was some two years after really performed.

Much about this time, Pope Clement sends his Breves to England for excluding
the King.
had Pope Clement the eight sent his Breves (as they call them) into England,
warning all the Clergy and laity that professed the Roman faith, not to admit
after the Queens death any man, how near soever in blood, to be king, unless he
should bind himself by oath, to promove the Catholic Roman Religion at his
power. And at the same time came Mr. John Hamilton and Mr. Edmond Hay Jesuits
into Scotland, two factious and working spirits, and therefore much suspected
by the King, the first especially, for that he was known to have been a chief
instrument of the seditions raised in the City of Paris in the time of the
league. A Proclamation against some Jesuits.
How soon the King understood of their repairing into the Country, a
Proclamation was given out inhibiting their resort under the pain of treason.
In this Proclamation to make them the more odious, they were compared to
Bothwell and Gowry, the King declaring that he would judge no otherwise of
their receptors, then of those that did treasonably pursue his own life. This
notwithstanding, they found lurking holes amongst the Papists in the North, and
kept the Country till after some years that Mr. John Hamilton was apprehended,
and carried to the Tower of London, where he died.

The Church of Edinburgh remained all this while destitute of a number of their
Ministers, An Assembly at Brunt-island.
the conditions prescribed unto them, when they were pardoned, not being
performed: of the four only Mr. John Hall having given obedience was licenced
to return to his charge; the other three, upon I know not what pretext,
deferred to make their declaration, as was appointed, and were thereupon in the
Assembly convened at Brunt-island the 12 of May, ordained to be transported
from the Ministry of Edinburgh, and placed in such parts of the Country, as
the Commissioners of the Country should think meet. This Assembly was called
by his Majesty's Proclamation, partly for taking order with the Church of
Edinburgh, partly for repressing the growth of Popery, which was then
increasing, and where it should have held at S. Andrews, was in regard of the
Kings indisposition brought to BruntIsland.

Mr. John Hall being elected to moderate the meeting, Mr. John Hall elected
Modederator.
did begin with a regrate of the general defection from the purity and
practice of true Religion, which he said, was so great, that it must of
necessity at last conclude either in Popery or Atheism, except a substantious
remedy were in time provided. And because the ill could not be well cured
unless the causes, and occasions thereof should be ripped up, he exhorts those
that were assembled, to consider seriously both of the cause of the defection,
and the remedies that were fittest to be applied.

After long conference, The defection in Religion complained of, and the causes
searched.
the causes were condescended to be, the wrath of God kindled against the land
for the unreverend estimation of the Gospel, and the sins in all estates, to
the dishonor of their profession; lack of care in the Ministry to discover
Apostates; too hasty admission of men unto the Ministry, Ministers framing
themselves to the humors of people; the desolation of the Churches of
Edinburgh; the advancing of men to places of credit, that were ill affected to
Religion; the education of his Majesty's children in the company of Papists;
the training up of Noblemens children under suspect Pedagogues; the decay of
Schools; and the not urging of the reconciled Lords to perform their conditions.

For remedy of the foresaid evils it was ordained, The remedy of the evils.
That a public humiliation should be kept throughout the realm, the last two
Sundays of June, with fasting and prayer, for appeasing the wrath of God
kindled against the land; that the Ministers of every Presbytery should after
the dissolving of the Assembly, take up the names of the Recusants within their
bounds, and send them to the Kings Ministers; that places of greatest need
should be furnished with learned and wise preachers, and in the mean time, till
that might take effect by a constant provision of Ministers to those places,
that the meetest for that purpose should be appointed to attend for a certain
time in the families of the reconciled Lords, for their better confirmation in
the truth. The rest of the remedies resolved all in Petitions to his Majesty,
for the planting of Churches, the not permitting of those who were under
process for Popery, to have access to Court, and a care to be taken of the good
education of the children of Noblemen. To all which the King gave favorable
answers, and for the removing of the Princess his daughter from the Lady
Levingston, which was earnestly entreated by the whole Assembly, his Majesty
did promise to bring her to his own house before the Term of Martinmas next.

Whilst matters were thus proceeding, Mr. John Davidson his letter to the
Assembly.
there was delivered a letter sent by Mr. John Davidson to the Assembly,
wherein as if he would awake his brethren fallen asleep, he began with a strong
cry, How long shall we fear or favor flesh and blood, and follow the counsel
and command thereof? Should our meetings be in the name of man? Are we not yet
to take up our selves, and to acknowledge our former errors, and feebleness in
the work of the Lord? And a little after, Is it time for us now, when so many
of our worthy brethren are thrust out of their callings without all order of
just proceeding, and Jesuits, Atheists and Papists are suffered, countenanced
and advanced to great rooms in the realm, for the bringing in of idolatry, and
captivity more then Babylonicall, with an high hand, and that in our chief
City: Is it time for us, I say, of the Ministry to be inveigled and
blindfolded with pretense of preferment of some small number of our brethren to
have voice in Parliament, and have titles of Prelacy? Shall we with Samson
sleep still on Dalilahs, knees, till she say, The Philistines be upon thee
Samson? Then scoffing at the Kings doings, he said, But Bonyton is executed, an
infamous thief in the highest degree: what is that to the cause of Religion,
whereof no question was moved? Is there no Papist, nor favourer of Papists in
Scotland but Bonyton? But the King is sound in Religion, what can the
adversaries do? Being sound, the danger were the less; but there is nothing
either in Church or King according to our calling etc. In postscript to the
same letter he wished them to be wary of determining any thing touching the
planting of Edinburgh, in respect of any promises against Papists, and to
remember that Melius and optabilius est bellum pace impia, and a deo
distrahente.

This letter laughed at by some did greatly offend the wiser sort, The letter
offended greatly the wiser sort.
who would have proceeded to censure the man as he had deserved, but that the
King interceded, willing to leave the punishment to him, and go on with their
own affairs, as they had begun. So the letter being cast by, the planting of
Edinburgh was next handled, and after some reasoning it was concluded, that the
three Ministers, Mr. Walter Balcanquell, A combustion touching the Ministers of
Edinburgh.
Mr. James Balfour, and Mr. William Watson should be transported and others
placed in their rooms. The care of this among other things was entrusted to
certain Commissioners deputed by the Assembly, who had power given them for all
matters that concerned the Church unto the next general meeting.

After this a proposition was made for a new translation o^ the Bible, A
Proposition was made for a new Translation of the Bible, and correcting the
Psalms.
and the correcting of the Psalms in meeter: his Majesty did urge it
earnestly, and with many reasons did persuade the undertaking of the work,
showing the necessity and the profit of it, and what a glory the performing
thereof should bring to this Church: speaking of the necessity, he did mention
sundry escapes in the common Translation, and made it seen that he was no less
conversant in the Scriptures, then they whose profession it was; and when he
came to speak of the Psalms, did recite whole verses of the same, showing both
the faults of the meeter and the discrepance from the text. It was the joy of
all that were present to hear it, and bred not little admiration in the whole
Assembly, who approving the motion did recommend the translation to such of the
brethren as were most skilled in the Languages, and revising of the Psalms
particularly to Mr. Robert Pont; but nothing was done in the one or the other;
yet did not the King let this his intention fall to the ground, but after his
happy coming to the Crown of England set the most learned Divines of that
Church awork for the Translation of the Bible; which with great pains, and the
singular profit of the Church they perfected. The revising of the Psalms he
made his own labor, and at such hours as he might spare from the public
cares, went through a number of them, commending the rest to a faithful and
learned servant, who has therein answered his Majesty's expectation.

The Act for restraining the liberty of Application in Exercises was of new
ratified, The liberty of Application restrained.
and an Ordinance made against the preaching of young men not admitted to the
Ministry, in the chief places of the Country; which done, and the next
Assembly being appointed to be held at S. Andrews the last Tuesday of July,
Anno 1602, the meeting dissolved.

Soon after, The Ministers of Edinburg^ received in favor.
the King, by the advice of the Commissioners of the Church, received in favor
the three Ministers of Edinburgh, that were ordained to be translated to other
places, and licensed them to return to their Charges. Mr. John Dikes also, who
had lurked all this time, having composed some Eucharistick Sonets (as he
called them) for his Majesty's preservation, was pardoned, and permitted to
return to his place. But Mr. John Davidson presuming to find the like favor,
and appearing in public without warrant, was taken and committed to the Castle
of Edinburgh, where he remained some months, till by the intercession of the
Kings Ministers he was also put to liberty.

In the State the Lord Maxwell began to make new troubles, New troubles by the
Lord Ma^well.
and notwithstanding, he was prohibited to repair within the bounds of
Nidisdale and Galloway, he went home without license, having contrived the
death of Sir James Iohnston then Warden; but the purpose failing, he made an
incursion upon Annandale, raising fire, and committing slaughter: whereupon,
great stirs were moved in these parts, which were not pacified till the
February after; at which time the King going in person to Dumfreis, made him
leave the Country, and put in Sureties for his remaining within the bounds of
Cluidsdale.

In July thereafter Lodowick Duke of Lennox was sent in an Embassage to France,
The Duke of Le^nox directed Ambassador to France.
rather for confirming the old amity and friendship, then for any business
else. There went with him Sir Thomas Ereskin, and Sir William Levingston of
Kilsithe, two of his Majesty's privy Council; Mr. John Spotswood then Parson
of Calder, was directed to attend him as his Chaplain or Preacher. The Duke
taking his journey by sea arrived at Deep, the 24 of that month, and upon the
10th day after entered into Paris, accompanied by James Archbishop of Glasgow,
and a great train of Scotishmen, who did meet him at S. Denis; he had presence
of the French King at S. Germans some seven leagues from Paris, and was very
kindly accepted. A few days after the King went to Fountayn-bleau, where the
Queen was to lie of Childe-birth. Thither the Duke did follow him, and was
entertained with hunting, and the like sports, unto the Queens delivery, which
fell out the 17 of September. The Queen of France lying of her first born.
Going then unto the Country to salute his mother Madam D' Aubigney, and other
his friends; whilst he was about these offices of kindness, the King went by
post to Callais upon some intelligence, as it was said, from England, that the
Queen was fallen sick; he himself gave out that the affairs of Flanders did
occasion his journey, for as then the Archduke was besieging Ostend. But
whatsoever the business was no man doubted but that he had an eye upon the
succession of England; and if he could have found a faction, would have foisted
in another Bastard of Normandy, which oftentimes in a merriment and gallantry
he spared not to utter.

The Duke after his return to Paris made no long stay, but taking his leave of
the French King, who was then come back from Callais, took journey toward
England, and came to London in the beginning of November: A Parliament was then
sitting at Westminster, (the last that Queen Elizabeth held) which with his
coming upon that instant gave many to think that he was come to urge a
Declaration of the Kings right of succession, and not a few they were, nor of
small note, that offered to assist, if he should move any such business: but he
told them, that neither had he any such Commission, nor would the King ever
agree to any thing that might breed a jealousy in the Queen. And his
Commission indeed was no other, but to salute the Queen in the Kings name, and
let her know the kind and filial affection he carried unto her, whereof he
should be willing to give proof at all occasions. And for that he was given to
understand, that the Irish Rebels had drawn in some Spanish forces into
Ireland to fortify themselves in their Rebellion, he would, if his aid should
be thought necessary, employ the same for their expulsion. The Queen giving the
King many thanks, said, That if those troubles continued, she would take his
help, and hire some of his High-landers and Isles men, but she trusted to hear
other news shortly, and not be vexed long with those strangers. As also it came
to pass, for the very next month, the Lord Montjoy her Deputy did in a
battle fought near Kinsale defeat the Irish utterly, and afterward forced the
Spaniards that had taken the Town, to render upon condition of their lives
saved, and that they might be transported again into their Country.

The Duke after three weeks stay being feasted by the Queen and entertained
with all complements of amity returned home, The Duke returns to Edinburgh.
and came to Edinburgh in the end of December; where having related his
proceedings in Council, they were all approved: The Lord Elphingston had in
his absence resigned the office of Treasury upon an offense, as was thought, he
conceived for adjoining some others unto him in the componing of Signators; and
now was Sir George Hume one of the Masters of the Quirie preferred to the
office. which he discharged by his Deputy, Sir John Arnot, both to his Majesty
and the Countries content.

The next summer the King having resolved to plant Lowland-men in the Isles,
An. 1602.
and transport the inhabitants into the main land, Certain undertakers conque^
the Isles.
where they might learn civility, made a beginning at the Isle of Lewis. The
undertakers were Patrick Abbot of Lendors, Colonel William Stewart, Captain
William Murray, Mr. John Lermouth, of Balcolmy, Mr. James Spence of wormeston,
Sir James Anstruther of that ilke, and James Forret of Fingaske: These
Gentlemen furnishing themselves with arms and shipping, and having conduced a
number of soldiers, took sea, and in the third or fourth day arrived in the
Lake of Sternoway within the same Isle. Murdoch Macklond base son to old
Macklond who carried himself as Lord of the Isle, made at the first some
resistance, but after a little conflict distrusting the people, for he had used
them with great tyranny, he fled and forsook the Isle, leaving the Indwellers
to the discretion of the Invaders: they how soon he was gone, did all submit
themselves, and accept such conditions as were offered by the undertakers.

Being thus peaceably possessed, the Lord of Balcolmy either sent by the rest
to signify their good success, and to make preparation against the Winter, or
for some private business of his own, took purpose to return home, and being
lanched alittle from the coast, and by reason of the calm forced to cast
anchor, was suddenly invaded by the said Murdach Macklowd, with a number of
Birlings, (so they call the little vessels those Isles men use) the ship
boarded, the mariners killed and himself made prisoner. The Lord of Balcomy
taken prisoner, and dies in Oikeney.
The Gentleman being detained some days and hourly threatened with death, was
afterward ransomed by one of his friends, and conveyed to Orkeney, where
contracting a fever he died. The rest of the Gentlemen, to repair this injury,
conduced Neill Macklowd, Neill betrayeth his brother Murdach.
brother to the said Murdach, to betray and deliver him in their hands, which
he performed shortly after, having by an ambush laid for his brother,
apprehended him, and some twelve more that were in his company. The twelve he
presently beheaded, Murdach he delivered to the Gentlemen, as he had promised,
who was afterward transported to S. Andrews, and there executed.

The undertakers thinking themselves now secured, The Lewis lost by the
undertakers security.
began to build, and made a partition of lands, letting the same to the
Country people, who did all swear fidelity to them; but whilst they expected
no trouble, Norman Macklowd son to old Macklowd, did on the sudden beset them,
put fire to their lodgings and force them to the Conditions following:

First, that they should purchase to them? remission from the King of all
crimes and offenses past.

Next, that they should resign to Norman all the right that they had acquired
of the Isle of Lewis.

And thirdly, that Sir James Spence with his son in law Thomas Monypenny of
Kinkell, should remain as pledges until the remission was brought unto him,
and such a surety given of the Isle, as he could devise.

This condescended unto, Sir James Anstruther departed with the whole company
that was left, (for many were killed before their yiedling) and for relief of
the pledges obtained of the King both the remission and security of the Isle
that was desired, which was sent to Norman by James Lermouth son to the Lord
of Darcie. By this mean were the pledges freed, and for that time the whole
enterprise defeated: some three years after, the same was of new attempted,
with what success we shall hear in the own place.

Master Robert Bruce, Mr. Rob^ Bruce licenced to return upon promise of
satisfaction.
who as we showed before, was exiled in France, obtained license to return in
the beginning of this Summer by the intercession of the Earl of Mar, whom he
had entreated to mediate his peace, upon promise at his return to satisfy the
King, and declare his resolution in that matter of Gowries. The King who never
showed himself difficile (especially to Ministers that professed penitencie for
their errors) gave warrant to recall him, and he appearing before the
Commissioners of the Church at Perth. the 25 of June where his Majesty was
present, acknowledged his error, professed his resolution touching the
guiltiness of those unhappy brothers, and promised if his Majesty should
license him to return to his place to declare the same publicly in the first
Sermon he should have to the people. Mr. Rob: Bruce his inconstancy.
The King doubting his performance (for he had often in other matters tried his
inconstancy) caused the same to be set down in writing upon the back of the
Letter he had sent to the Earl of Mar, and after he had subscribed the same,
made all the Commissioners that were present (eleven in number) to set their
hands thereto as Witnesses. This done, he was admitted to kisle his Majesty's
hand, and licenced to return to his place: but as the King had conjectured, so
it fell out, for coming to Edinburgh, where it was expected he should have done
what he had both promised and subscribed, he left the Town, pretending that his
Ministry should thereby be discredited, and he esteemed to preach by
injunction. A General Assembly in the Chapel of Halirudhouse.
The General Assembly of the Church meeting in November following, the King to
remove this pretext, after he had showed all the particulars of his proceeding
with Mr. Robert, and produced the Letter sent by him to the Earl of Mar,
together with his subscription in the meeting of Perth, desired the voices of
the Assembly, whether or not be ought to utter his resolution in pulpit as he
had promised? They all, not one gainsaying, declared, That he was bound both in
duty and conscience to fulfill his promise, so much the rather that by his
distrust and disobedience to the Counsels charge, he had confirmed
ill-disposed people in their suspicions. Yet this Ordinance did not content
him, and so delaying to give satisfaction, he was by the Commissioners of the
Church discharged from the Ministry of Edinburgh the year following.

In this Assembly Mr. Patrick Galloway being chosen to preside, Petitions to
his Majesty in name of the Church.
made a Speech to the King, wherein he showed, That the Church was oppugned by
two sorts of enemies, to wit, Papists and sacrilegious persons, and therefore
in the name of the whole Church entreated his Majesty, that as he had with
great travel and happy success made the principalls of the Popish profession
to conform themselves in outward obedience: so he would use his princely
authority toward the other sort, and compel them, if not to restore all, at
least to grant a competent allowance to Ministers forth of the tithes they
possessed. The King accepting the Petition graciously, said, That it should not
be well with the Church so long as Ministers were drawn from their Charges to
attend the yearly modification of stipends, and that he held it fittest once to
condescend upon a competent provision for every Church, and deal with those
that possessed the tithes to bestow a part thereof to the foresaid uses: and
seeing that business would require a longer time then they could well continue
together, that they should do well to make some overtures to those that had
the Commission for Stipends, promising for himself that he should stand for the
Church, and be an advocate for the Ministers.

After a long deliberation these overtures were proponed: First, that the
Ministers having stipends assigned to them forth of the tithes of the Churches
where they served, Overtures for provision of the Ministers.
a perpetual security should be made to the Takesmen, and a certainer gressome
condescended on for every chalder of victual which should be paid for nineteen
years lease; at the expiring whereof, another lease upon the like conditions
should be renewed for as many years, the principal Takesmen being obliged to
grant the like security for his Subtakesmen. 2. That the Prelacies should be
disponed to actual Ministers, the Churches annexed thereto being sufficiently
provided, and the tenth of the superplus paid to the King; or otherwise, that
all the great Benefices should be dissolved, the Prelate enjoying the
principal Church and temporal lands, and the Churches annexed disponed to
Ministers, both they and the Prelate paying a yearly duty to the King. And 3.
that all inferior Benefices should be provided to the Ministers serving the
Cure.

The first of these overtures the King held reasonable and most advantageous to
the Church, The overtures deferred to another time.
but the Assembly esteeming it dangerous to make tithes heretable, deferred to
give their consent, so as nothing at that time was concluded, and the overtures
remitted to a more deep consideration.

The Synod of Fife did after this present some grievances, complaining, That
the General Assemblies were not kept at the ordinary times, Grievances of the
Synod of Fife.
and both places and days altered, without the knowledge of Presbyters and
Synods. That Ministers were called before the Council in prima instantia, for
matters of doctrine and discipline. That the government of the Church continued
in the hands of a few Ministers under the name of a Commission, to the
prejudice of the liberty of the Church. That Doctors being an ordinary calling
in the Church were debarred from coming to Assemblies. That no trial was taken
concerning the observation of Caveats. That the Ministers of Edinburgh being
the principal watchtower of the Church, were not permitted to attend their
charge. That the land was polluted with the French Ambassadors mass, and
excommunicates suffered to abide in the Country. And lastly, that the letters
and practices of Papists were kept secret, and not communicated to the watchmen.

These complaints being known to proceed from the private discontents of such
as grieved to see the affairs of the Church carried by others then themselves,
An answer to the grievances.
were not much regarded, yet to show that they had no just cause to complain, a
particular answer was made to every one of them. And first it was said, That
the Assemblies both were, and should be kept, according to the Act of
Parliament. That Ministers should not be called before the Council but upon
just grounds. That Commissions given by the Assembly, and rightly discharged
were lawful. That Doctors authorized with a Commission from the University,
where they lived, were not denied a voice in Assemblies, and that if the
Caveats were not observed, they might instance the point, and have the person
after trial censured. To the rest of the heads his Majesty by himself made
this reply, That the French Ambassadors mass was private, and could not be
refused to him, considering that the Minister directed with his own
Ambassadors the year before was permitted to preach within the City of Paris;
And for the Ministers of Edinburgh they had received all the favor they
desired. As to him that lay back, it was his own fault, and no man's else: But
where, says he, it is craved, that the letters and practices of Papists should
be communicate to Ministers, as that were the ready way to procure the escape,
and no punishment of the practices, so the proponers would remember, that
secrets must be imparted at the Kings pleasure, and not otherwise.

Some other Acts were concluded in the same Assembly, Acts concluded in the
Assembly.
as That in memory of his Majesty's deliverance there should be Sermons in all
the Burghs every Tuesday, and the fifth of August solemnly kept as the
Parliament had prescribed in all the Churches of the Kingdom.

That Ministers should not refuse the Sacrament of Baptism to Infants, nor
delay the same upon whatsoever pretext, the same being required by the parents,
or others in their name: for as then, except at ordinary hours of preaching,
Ministers denied to baptize. And because they had taken a custom not to
celebrate marriage upon the Sunday, pretending that the day was profaned by
feasting, dancing, and the like, it was ordained, They should hereafter at the
parties desire celebrate the same, either on the sunday or week day. These
things concluded, and Commissioners chosen to attend the common affairs of the
Church, the Assembly dissolved, having appointed the next meeting at Aberdene
the last Tuesday of July, Anno 1604.

All this time were the enemies of our Religion, the Jesuits especially busied,
The business of Jesuits in England.
to stir up a party against the King, and his title to England. They had lost
all hope of gaining his affection, or obtaining any promise of toleration when
he should come to that Crown; and had found their writings and pamphlets for
the Infanta of Spain her right, to move few or none. Thereupon they fell to
treat of a marriage betwixt Lady Arbella and Robert Prince of Savoy: and that
not succeeding, to speak of a match betwixt her and a grandchilde of the Earl
of Hartfords, judging that their pretensions being conjoined, many would
befriend them to the excluding of the King of Scots; but the Queen who truly
favored his right though she would not openly profess so much, dashed all
those projects, and caused an eye to be kept upon that Lady and such as
resorted unto her.

About the same time the King had intelligence given him, The story of Francis
Mowbray and an Italian.
that one Francis Mowbray son to the Lord of Barnebowgall, who had lived a
while in the Infants Court at Bruxells, had undertaken to kill him. This brake
out first at London by an Italian, a fencer, whose name was Daniel; which
coming to the Queens ears, she commanded Sir Robert Cecill her Secretary to
call the persons (for they were both in the City) and examine them; the Italian
abode by his speeches, Mowbray denied, and offered to prove him a liar in
combat, which the other accepted. Both being sent unto Scotland, they were
tried first severally, then confronted before certain of the Council; the
Italian produced Witnesses, who verified all that he had deponed: whereupon
Mowbray was committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, where seeking to escape by
night at a window of the chamber, where he was detained, the sheets proving too
short by which he thought to descend, he fell from a great precipice, and was
found the next morning dead at the foot of the rock. The corpse was the same
day, being the last of January, presented to the Justice, and sentence of
forfeiture pronounced against him; his body hanged for a space upon the gibbet,
and afterward quartered, and affixed on the gates and most open places of the
Town. His friends (for he was well born, and a proper young Gentleman) gave out
that he had been strangled and his corpse thrown down at the window. But this
carried no appearance, and was believed of few.

The Queen of England in the winter being perceived to wax heavy and dull, The
Queen of England grows sick
and the rumor thereof dispersed (as there is nothing that can be worse
concealed then the sickness or death of a Prince) there was much business every
where, and she held for the most part dead. The French King had sent the summer
preceding two Ambassadors, A Conference betwixt the French Ambassador and
Secretari^ Cicill.
one to reside in England, and another in Scotland, under color of impeaching
the courses of Spain, but in effect to observe the strength and affection of
both people. He that was sent into England brought a Letter from the French
King to Secretary Cecill of infinite kindness; and breaking with him one day
upon the miseries of the Kingdom when it should please God to translate the
Queen, fell to speak of the loss he should sustain by the exchange, and the
case wherein he would be, if the Scottish King did succeed; which to his
apprehension, should be more hard and miserable then any others, being likely
to undergo the revenge of faults laid upon his father about matters concerning
the Kings mother, and other courses that he was esteemed to have run himself
since the death of his Father. The Secretary that was no child, knowing that
the Ambassador did but sound him, for making some other project, answered, That
this was the reward of unspotted duty, when Ministers did only regard the
service of their Sovereigns, without respect of their own particular; And that
for himself he should never grieve to endure trouble for so just a cause, the
same being to a man that valued his credit more then his security, a kind of
martyrdom: notwithstanding he supposed that things passed, would not be called
to mind, or if so were, and that he saw his case desperate, he should flee to
another City, and take the benefit of the Kings royal offer.

The Ambassador being so answered, made a fair retreat, saying, The King
advertised of this conference.
That in case the King of Scots did carry himself toward the King of France
with the respect which was due, he was not purposed to impeach his interest.
The Secretary replying, That it was a wise resolution his Master had taken. The
Ambassador ceased to tempt him any further in that business. Hereof the King
was advertised by Letters from the Secretary, who therein did assure him of his
true and honest service when occasion required; howbeit he would not, as some
others had done, needlessly hazard his fortune and reputation before the time.

It shall not be amiss to hear what was the Kings answer to the Secretary. His
Majesty's letter to the Secretary.
As I do heartily thank you (said he) for your plain and honest offer, so may
you assure your self, that it would do me no pleasure that you should hazard
either your fortune or reputation, since the loss of either of these would
make you the less vailable to me. No, I love not to feed upon such
fantastical humors, although I cannot let busybodies to live upon their own
imaginations. But for my part I hold it the office of a King as sitting on the
throne of God to imitate the primum mobile, and by his steady and ever constant
course to govern all the other changeable and uncertain motions of the
inferior planets. And I protest in Gods presence, that for your constant and
honest behavior in your Sovereigns service, I loved your virtues long before I
could be certain that you would deserve at my hand the love of your person;
wherefore go on, and serve her truly that reigns as you have done; for he
that is false to the present, will never be true to the future.

In another letter directed to the E. of Northumberland (that we may know the
wisdom and piety of the King) who had sent him advertisement of the Queens
weakness, A letter from the King to the Earl of Northumberland.
and advised him to make sure his title by apprehending possession in time, he
said, That man can neither be religious, nor just, that deals worse with his
neighbor then he would be dealt withal, and in a man of quality it can be no
wisdom to leap hedge and ditch, and adventure the breaking of his neck for
gathering forbidden fruit before it be ripe; when as by attending the due time,
he may be sure to find all the gates of the orchard open, and with free scope
enter, take and taste at liberty. Sure it were a great weakness and unworthiness
in me to come in as an Usurper with offense and scandal to the laws and
present estate of government, when I may in the right time claim the Crown as
nearest Heir to the Prince deceased, and possess with equity: should I out of
untimely ambition fall to break the long continued and faithfully preserved
amity, that by the proof of many kind offices has taken root among us, it
were an error inexcusable. And howbeit I do acknowledge your kind affection
in the offers you make of assistance, I must tell you freely, that no Prince
can presume of any subjects loyalty to himself, that has been unsound and
unfaithful to his own Sovereign: nor would I ever look to be secure in a
Kingdom so traitorously disposed. In end, he advised the Earl to forbear such
writing, and when he wrote (which he wished him to do rarely, An. 1603.
and not but upon great occasions) to beware of any thing that might justly
offend the Queen, The Queen of England her death.
lest by interception or other misadventure he might be disabled to serve him
another day.

This was the Kings resolution, which God so blessed, as it brought him within
a short time after, against the opinions and desires of many, to the quiet and
peaceable possession of his right and inheritance; for in the Spring the Queens
disease increasing (which was judged to be a melancholy incorrigible, and by
some conceived to proceed from a sorrow for Essex; others ascribed it to the
accepting of the Rebel Tyrone to peace) and all apprehending it to be deadly,
the hearts of people did so incline to the King, as a great many in that State
did write unto him, That all England was grown to be Scottish. The Queen her
self continuing constant in her affection, when she was asked a little before
her death by the Lord Keeper and Secretary (who were directed by the Council
to understand her will touching her Successor) answered, None but my Cosen,
the King of Scots. After which words, she spoke not much: only being desired by
the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom she would not suffer to go from her all that
time) to fix her thoughts upon God, she said, So I do, neither does my mind
wander from him: and then commending her soul to God in devout manner died most
patiently and willingly. A Queen imcomparable for wisdom and fidelity of
government; she departed this life the 24th of March, in the 70 year of her
age, and 44 of her Reign. The same day in the forenoon the King of Scots was
proclaimed King first at the Palace of whitehall, next at the Cross in
Cheapside within the City of London with an infinite applause of all sorts of
people.

The end of the sixth Book.
THE HISTORY of the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
The Contents.
The proceedings after his Majesty's going into England unto his death.

THE news of the Queens death were brought the third day after by Sir Robert
Carry, The King advised of the Queens death.
a son of the Lord Hunsdon; after whom Sir Charles Percy, brother to the Earl
of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset, son to the Earl of Worcester, were
directed from the Council of England with the Letter following.

RIght High, Right Excellent and mighty Prince, A letter from the Council and
Nobility of England to the King.
and our dread Sovereign Lord, as we cannot but confess unto your Majesty, that
the grief we have conceived by the loss of our late Sovereign Lady, whose soul
in your palace of Richmond passed from her earthly body to the joys of heaven,
betwixt two and three of the clock this morning, was nothing less then our
loyalty and love to her whilst she lived, being a Princess adorned with
virtues meet for Government, prosperous in the success of her affairs, and
under whose obedience we have lived in greater tranquillity these many years,
then commonly happens to Princes; so we must acknowledge that our sorrow is
extingushed by the impression we have of those heroical virtues of wisdom,
piety and magnanimity, which we know to be in your Majesty's person, to whose
right the lineall and lawful succession of all our late Sovereigns dominions
does justly and only appertain: wherein we presume to profess this much, as
well for the honor, which will thereby remain to our posterity, as for your
Majesty's security of a peaceable possession of your kingdoms, that we have
never found, either of those of the Nobility, or of any other of the Estates of
this realm, any divided humor about the receiving and acknowledging your
Majesty to be the only head that must give life to the present maimed body of
this kingdom, which is so happy, as with an universal consent to have
received one sole uniform and constant impression of bright blood, as next of
kin to our Sovereign deceased, and consequently by the Laws of this realm, true
and next heir to her kingdoms, and dominions; whereof we have made outward
demonstration by public Proclamation this very day a fore noon, first in the
City of Westminster, at your Majesty's palace gate at White Hall, and next at
the Cross of Cheap Side, within your Majesty's City of London, with an infinite
applause of your people, and with such solemnity as the shortness of time would
permit. Of all which we have thought it our duty immediately to advertise your
Majesty by these two Gentlemen, Sir Charles Percy brother to the Earl of
Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset Esquire son to the Earl of Worcester, of whom
we have made choice to be the bearers of our Letters, humbly beseeching your
Highness to accept the same as the first fruits and offering of our tender and
loyal affections toward you our gracious Sovereign, and to rest assured, that
the same shall be ever hereafter seconded with all faith, obedience and humble
service, which shall be in our power to perform, for maintaining that which we
have begun with the sacrifice of our lives, lands and goods, which we with all
our other means do here humbly present at your Majesty's feet: craving of your
Highness, that seeing hereby you may perceive in what estate we remain, as body
without a head, or rather without that spirit here amongst us, which from the
head might give vigor to every member to exercise the duty to it belonging,
thereby to keep the whole body from confusion, you will be pleased to enter
into consideration how soon and in what manner it shall seem best to your
Majesty's excellent wisdom, to inspire a new life into this languishing body,
the circumstances whereof are wholly to be left to your Majesty, holding it
enough for us humbly to acknowledge our selves your true subjects, ready to
obey all your commandments: assuing you with all, that as we have hereby as
many of us as have underwritten this letter, declared our recognition and
humble submission to your Maj^sties sovereign power and right, so we do know by
all good proofs, that the mind of the rest of the Nobility, and all others who
are absent, in their several qualities, places and charges, whom the time
permitted not without the prejudice of your affairs to assemble, so soon as we
were desirous this should be performed, are wholly and absolutely with us in
all zeal and duty for all things that shall be imposed upon them by your
royal will and pleasure.

Further we have thought meet and necessary to advertise your Highness, that
Sir Robert Carry this morning departed from hence toward your Majesty, not
only without the consent of any of us who were present at Richmond, at the
time of our late Sovereigns decease, but also contrary to such commandment as
we had power to lay upon him, and to all decency and good manners and respect,
which he ought to so many persons of our degree, whereby it may be, that your
Majesty hearing by a bare report only of the death of the late Queen, and not
of our care and diligence in establishment of your Majesty's right here, in
such manner as is above specified, may conceive doubts of other nature, then
(God be thanked) there is cause you should, which we would have clearly
prevented, if he had born so much respect to us, as to have stayed for a common
relation of our proceedings, and not thought it better to anticipate the same:
for we would have been loath that any person of quality should have gone from
hence, who should not with the report of her death, have been able to declare
the first effects of our assured loyalties.

And lastly it may please your Majesty to receive this advertisement, that of
late there was made ready by the commandment of the Queen our Mistress a good
fleet of eight or ten of her ships well manned, and furnished under the charge
of Sir Richard Lawson Knight, to have been employed upon the coast of Spain;
which employment by her decease is ceased for want of Commission to exercise
the saine, and now is kept together in the narrow Seas to prevent any sudden
attempt against the Low Countries; and that now there is nothing either of land
or sea, that is not yours, it may please your Majesty to signify your pleasure
concerning that Fleet, and whether you will have it or any part thereof resort
to your coast of Scotland, where it may serve you, either for the safe convoy
of your person to this realm, if there shall because to use it in this manner,
or to transport any of yours, whilst you come by land, or any other service.
In which point we humbly beseech you, to make known under whose charge it shall
beyour pleasure, the whole Fleet, or any part thereof shall come unto you. And
this being all that for the present does occur to be advertised to your
Majesty by us whose minds are occupied about the conservation of this your
realm in peace, as far forth, as by any power for your Majesty's service
only assumed the interruption thereof may be prevented, saving that we have
sent a Copy of the Proclamation made here to your Majesty's deputy of Ireland,
to be published in that kingdom, we will and with our humble prayers to
Almighty God, that we may be so happy, as speedily to enjoy the comfortable
presence of your Highness royal person amongst us, the only object of that
glory, and those felicities which in the earth we have proponed to our selves.
Written in your Majesty's City of London, the 24 of March 1603 at ten hours of
the clock at night.

This Letter was subscribed by
Robert Leigh Mayor John Canterbury Thomas Egerton Thomas Buckhurst Nottingham
Northumberland Gilbert Shrewsbury William Darby Edward Worcester Geo.
Cumberland R. Suffex Henry Lincoln Pembroke Clanrickard G. Hunsdon Tho. Howard
Richard London Robert Hartford John Norwich Morley Henry Cobham Thomas Laware
Gray Edward Cromwell R. Rich Lumley Chandois W. Compton W. Knowlles Edward
Wootton John Stanhop Raleigh John Fortescue and John Popham.
The King having imparted this letter to the Council, The contents of the
letter published.
it was thought meet, that the Contents thereof should be published, for
begetting a greater kindness betwixt the people and the two Kingdoms;
whereupon a Proclamation was made, showing That the Queen before her death
continuing in that loving affection, which she professed to his Majesty all the
course of her life, had declared him her only true heir and successor in the
imperial Crowns of England, France, and Ireland, and that the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, assisted by the Lord Mayor of London, and others of
the Gentry of good quality had upon the 24 of March last, proclaimed him their
only liege Lord and undoubted Sovereign, which being the most clear
demonstration that a people could give of their affection, and a sure pledge of
their future obedience, ought to move all true hearted subjects, to account of
them no otherwise then as their brethren and friends, and to forget and bury
all quarrels, and grounds of former dissensions; That therefore none should
pretend ignorance, nor carry themselves in any unkind sort toward the
inhabitants of England, his Majesty with the advice of the Lords of Council,
had ordained Proclamation to be made of the premises, assuring them that
should so apply themselves of his gracious favor when occasion presented, and
certifying such as did in the contrary, that they should incur his wrath, and
extreme displeasure.

This notwithstanding, The Borders make incursions upon the report of the
Queens death.
the word no sooner came of the Queens death, then the loose and broken men in
the borders assembling in companies, made incursions upon England, doing what
in them lay to divide the two Kingdoms, which the year following was severely
punished, the principals that were tried to have been partners in that
business, being all executed to the death.

The King in the mean time giving order for his journey did appoint the Queen
to follow him some twenty days after, The King gives order for his journey.
and for his children, ordained the Prince to remain at Striveling, the Duke of
Albany his brother to abide with the Lord Fyvie President of the Session, and
the Princess Elizabeth their sister, with Alexander Earl of Linlithgow. To the
Lords of Council an ample Commission was given for the administration of all
affairs, receiving resignations, hearing the accounts of the Exchequer,
continuing days of law, adjoining assessors to the justice, granting of
licenses to depart forth of the Realm, altering the place of their residence as
they should find it convenient, repressing the troubles of the Borders, and for
creating Lieutenants, one, or more upon occasions.

The persons he chused to attend him in the journey, The persons chused to
attend the King in his journey.
were the Duke of Lennox, the Earls of Mar, Murray, and Argile, the Lord
Hume, Sir George Hume Treasurer, Mr. James Elphingston Secretary, Sir David
Murray Comptroller, Sir Robert Ker of Cessord, with the ordinary Gentlemen of
the Chamber; and of the Clergy, David ^ishop of Rosse, Peter Bishop of Dunkeld,
Mr. Patrick Galloway, Mr. Andrew Lamb, Mr. John Spotswood, Mr. Gawen Hamilton,
and Mr. Alexander Forbes Ministers.

Things thus ordered, the King went the next morning to S. Giles to hear a
Sermon; He goes to S. Giles to hear sermon.
Mr. John Hall (whose course it was) preaching took occasion to remember the
great mercies of God toward his Majesty, reckoning the peaceable succession to
the Crown of England none of the least. This, he said, was Gods own proper
work, for who could else directed the hearts of so numerous a people with such
an unanime consent to follow the way of right? The King makes a speech to the
People which is followed with a great lamentation of the hearers.
Thereupon he did exhort his Majesty to thankfulness, to the maintenance of
Gods truth, and that he would send home some of those commendable orders, he
would find whither he was going.

The King accepting his exhortation in good part, did upon the end of the
Sermon make a speech to the people, which at the time were frequently convened,
and promising to have care of them, and their good, gave them a most loving and
kind farewell. This was followed with such a mourning and lamentation of all
sorts, as cannot be well expressed. For albeit they joyed not a little at first
to hear of that accession of honor to their King, yet considering they should
be deprived of his presence, and have no more a resident King among them, they
were grieved out of all measure. This affection of the people moved also the
King greatly: therefore when the Magistrates, Ministers, and others of the
better sort, came to receive his commandments, he spoke graciously unto them;
willing them not to be troubled with his departing, for that they should find
the fruits of his government as well afar off, as when he was near at hand;
and as his power was now increased, and made greater, so his love toward them
should not be a whit diminished.

In this sort did he part, The King comes to Berwick.
and beginning his journey on Wednesday the fourth of April, came the day to
Berwick, there he was welcomed with a most eloquent Sermon by Toby Matthew
Bishop of Durham (for he went first to the Church) which finished he was
conveyed to the Palace by the Governor and garrison, the munition playing from
the walls, and the Citizens with showts and acclamations testifying their
gladness. The ninth of that month he went to Newcastle, where he abode some
few days, and because multitudes of people from all quarters were daily coming
to see the King and offer their service, Order was taken, that no strangers
should have access granted, till the Chamberlain, or Master of the Guard was
acquainted with their business. At York he was met with the Counselors, The
Counselors meet him at York.
and from thence, by easy journeys, traveled to London; how his Majesty was
there received, and what other things happened in the time, I remit to the
English History, my purpose being only to relate the things passed in Scotland,
or had some reference to matters of that Church and Kingdom.

Being at Burleigh house near unto Stamford, the King was advertised of the
death of James Beaton Archbishop of Glasgow, The death of Mr. James Beaton
Archbishop of Glasgow.
who deceased at Paris in the same month. This man was descended of the house
of Balfoure in Fife, and consecrate. Bishop at Rome in the year 1552, and at
the time of reformation forsook the Country, out of the hatred he bare to
those that had hand in that work, and carried with him all the writs and
evidents of the Sea of Glasgow, with the vessels and ornaments of the
Cathedral Church, things of exceeding great worth: for besides those of
ordinary use, there belonged to that Church, the Image of our Savior in beaten
gold, and the portraits of the twelve Apostles in silver. The Queen returning
from France, did establish him Ambassador in these parts for her affairs:
under the government of the Regents he was forfeited, and deprived of his
living, which, as we showed before, was conferred upon Mr. James Boyd Trochrig,
and after him went through diverse hands, till the King at his majority did
restore him to his dignity, honor, and living, employing him likewise for his
Ambassador in France: a man honorably disposed, faithful to the Queen while
she lived, and to the King her son, a lover of his Country, and liberal
according to his means to all his Countrymen; in his last Will he bequeathed
all his means to pious uses, leaving as was said ten thousand Crowns for the
education of poor Scholars, being Scottish men born. The evidents, vessels, and
ornaments of the Sea of Glasgow he consigned in the hands of the Carthusians of
Paris, appointing the same to be redelivered, how soon Glasgow should become
Catholic, and this year being the 66 of his age departed peaceably this life.

The King having destinated Mr. John Spotswood for his successor, The Queen
falls sick at Striveling.
sent him back to attend the Queen in her journey, and serve her for
elemosynar; Soon after his coming her Majesty went to Striveling, of mind to
bring away the Prince her son, and carry him along with her self to England;
but being denied by the friends of the house of Mar she became so incensed,
as falling into a fever, she made a pitiful abortion.

Advertisement of this being sent unto the King, he caused the Earl of Mar to
return, and after him sending the Duke of Lennox, with a warrant to receive the
Prince, and deliver him to the Queen; he was brought unto her at Halirudhouse,
The Prince delivered to the Queen.
about the end of May: yet she not satisfied herewith complained bitterly of
the dishonor she had received, and by a letter written to the King, full of
passron and anger, which she gave her Elemosynar to carry, required a public
reparation, by the punishment of the Earl of Mar and his servants. The King
who knew the Earl himself to be blameless, and desired not to be troubled with
such business, especially at that time, returned this answer, That she should
do wisely to forget the grudges she carried to the Earl of Mar, and thank
God of the peaceable possession they had obtained of these Kingdoms, which
next unto God his goodness he ascribed to the last negotiation of the Earl of
Mar in England. This reported to the Queen (for the messenger was commanded
to speak so much) she in a great choler replied, That she rather would have
wished never see England, then to be in any sort beholden to him for the same.
Yet as she was a most mild Princess, and very careful to please the King in
every thing, at her coming to Windsor, which was about the end of June, she was
reconciled to the Earl of Mar, and he by Act of Council declared to have
done nothing in that accident at Striveling, that might touch her in honor.

At the same time was the Princess Elizabeth, who was brought along with the
Queen, taken from the Earl of Linlithgow, and given to the custody of the Lady
Harrington, the Earl his service in her education, being by Act of Council
approved.

All this Summer the sickness was reigning at London, The King and Queen
inaugurated at Westminster.
which made the Coronation to be deferred unto July, on the 27 day whereof, the
King and Queen were solemnly inaugurated in the Church of Westminster, John
Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury performing the Ceremonies. A conspiracy
detected aagainst the King.
There had been few days before a conspiracy detected against the King,
plotted by two Priests, the one called William Watson, the other William Gray,
and George Brook Esquire.

There joined with them upon some discontents, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray,
Sir Griffin Marcham, and Sir Walter Raleigh, this last had served the late
Queen a long time, as Captain of her guard, and being put from the place, and
the same bestowed upon Sir Thomas Areskin Lord Fenton in Scotland, he grudged
exceedingly. The treason being discovered, (which came by this occasion)
Raleigh parting with his sister at London had commended himself to her prayers,
saying, That he was going whence he thought not to return; which she did
interpret of some combat he had undertaken, and breaking the same to her
neighbors, the words were carred to Court, where they received another
construction) they were all apprehended, and committed to several Prisons.
Being brought to their trial in Winchester about the beginning of December,
they were found guilty, George Brook and two Priests executed.
and condemned to die, George Brook and the two Priests were executed as
Traitors, the rest while they expected nothing but death (for they were brought
all, one after another, to the place of execution, and their heads laid under
the axe to be cut off) were spared, and the execution of the sentence
pronounced, suspended.

The people that were assembled in great numbers, The Noblemen and others
spared.
hearing the Mandate read, which was published by the Sheriff, and was to this
effect, That his Majesty unwilling to have the beginning of his reign stained
with the blood of Noblemen, though convicted of a most heinous crime, was
pleased to extend his clemency toward them, and having spared the L. Cobham,
and Gray, because in the dispensing of mercy regard must be taken of inferiors,
had bestowed the same favor on the other two) did greatly extol his Majesty's
clemency, promising to themselves much happiness under his government, that
could so temper his justice and mercy. Cobham and Gray lifting up their hands
to heaven, did thank God, who had thus inclined his Majesty's heart, professing
they were unworthy of life, and that they should be ashamed ever to show their
faces amongst men, having wronged so good and gracious a King.

The next year began with a conference of the Clergy at Hampton Court, Ann.
1604.
diverse petitions had been exhibited to his Majesty for reformation of abuses
in the Church, The conference at Hampton Court.
whereupon he took purpose to call certain of the Bishops, Deans, and Doctors
together, and with them some of the most grave and modest among the
complainers. The Bishops were, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, Durham, Winchester, Worcester, S. David's, Chichester, Carlisle, and
Peterborough. The Deans of the Chapel, Christ's Church, Worcester,
Westminster, Paul's, Chester, Windsor, Dr. Field, and Dr. King: for the
petitioners Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Spark, Mr. Knewstubb, and Mr. Chatterton were
present.

These being called into the Privy Chamber, His Majesty's proposition at the
meeting.
the King spoke unto them to this effect, That following the ensample of all
Christian Princes, who in the Commencement of their reign do usually begin with
the establishment of the Church, he had now at his entrance to the Crown taken
course to assemble them, for settling an uniform order in the same, for
planting unity, removing dissensions, and reforming abuses, which (he said)
were naturally incident to all politic bodies. And yet that he should not be
mistaken, and his purpose in assembling them misconstrued, he declared, that
his meaning was not to make any innovation of the government established, which
he knew was approved of God, but to hear and examine the complaints that were
made, and remove the occasions thereof, whereof he willed the petitioners to
begin, and show what the things were that grieved them.

Doctor Reynolds with the other three, An. 1603.
falling upon their knees, after a short gratulatory preamble, Doctor Reynolds
speech in behalf of the Petitioners.
reduced the matters questioned to two heads, some he said concerned the
matters of the Church, and others the Government.

Touching the Doctrine that in the Book of Articles of religion, some things
were obscure, and some things defective, which they wished to be supplied, and
explained. Being desired to name the particulars, he condescended upon some
Articles, whereof after they had conferred a while, and he professed to have
received satisfaction, The particulars complained of.
the King said, That if these were the greatest matters that grieved them, such
importunity needed not, as was used to him, and that a more private course had
been better: Then falling to speak of the Government of the Church, the want
and scarcity of sufficient Ministers in every Parish was much complained of
with the subscription urged to the Communion book, the censures inflicted by
lay Chancellors, and other more points, which are to be seen in the Conference
imprinted: after some three hours debating, The meeting continued to 18 of
January.
they were commanded to meet again in the same place, the 18 of January, at
which time they should know his Majesty's pleasure in these matters.

At the day the Bishops, The effect of the meeting and his Majesty's
exhortation to the Clergy.
Deans, and Doctors of the Arches being first called, the Archbishop presented
certain notes of explanation of the Liturgy, which the King had commended to
the Bishops care, and thereafter his Majesty questioning them touching the
exercise of the high Commission, the Oath ex officio, the censure of
ex^cmmunication, and the matter of subscription; when as they had answered in
all these points to his Majesty's content, Doctor Reynolds and the others were
desired to come into the chamber, and the foresaid explanations read unto them,
wherewith they professed to be satisfied. The King upon this expressing a great
contentment with that which had passed among them, did seriously exhort them to
the preservation of unity, willing the Bishops to use their inferiors with all
lenity, and take the fairest ways for reclaiming those that were otherwise
minded, warning these others also to beware of obstinacy in their opinions, and
disobedience to the orders of the Church: Obedience, said he, and humility, are
the marks of good and honest men, such I believe you to be, but it fears me
that many of your sort are humorous, and too busy in the perverting of others.
The exceptions taken against the Communion book, as I perceive, are matters of
mere weakness, and they who are discreet will be gained with time, by gentle
persuasions, or if they be und street, better it is to remove them, then to
have the Church troubled with their contentions. For the Bishops I will answer,
that it is not their purpose presently and out of hand to enforce obedience,
but by fatherly admonitions and conferences to induce such as are disaffected.
But if any be of an opposite and turbulent spirit, I will have them enforced to
a conformity. Neither tell me, that the wearing of a surplice, or using the
Cross in Baptism will diminish the credit of Ministers that have formerly
dissallowed the same; for that is just the Scottish Argument, when any thing was
concluded, that sorted not with their humor, the only reason why they would
not obey, was, that it stood not with their credit to yield, having been so
long of a contrary opinion. I will none of that, but that a time be limited by
the Bishops of every Diocese to such, and they that will not yield whatsoever
they are, let them be removed; for we must not prefer the credit of a few
private men to the general peace of the Church.

Throughout all this conference in every point that was moved, or came to be
talked of, the King did show such knowledge, and readiness, as bred not a small
admiration in the hearers. The Chancellor of England his judgment of the King.
Chancellor Egerton wondering to see him so expedite and perfect in all sort
of Divinity, said, That he had often heard, and read, that Rex est mixta
persona cum Sacerdote; but that he saw never the truth of it until that day.
Let me add that which I was afterward told by Richard Bancroft Archbishop of
Canterbury (for Whitgift died the next month after the conference, one of the
great glories of the English Church) that when the Rolls were brought in, of
those that stood out and were deposed, which was some years after, they were
found to be forty nine in all England, The number deposed for disconformity.
when as the Ministers of that Kingdom are reckoned nine thousand and above:
such a noise will a few disturbers cause in any society, where they are
tolerated.

In the March thereafter, An. 1604.
a Parliament was kept in England, where the King after he had given thanks to
the State for the general applause they showed in receiving him to the place,
which God by birthright, A Parliament in England for the union.
and lineall descent had provided for him, did earnestly move the union of the
two Kingdoms, that as they were made one in the head, so among themselves they
might be inseparably conjoined, and all memory of bypast divisions
extinguished. A motion that took well at first, and seemed to be generally
desired of both Nations, but did not succeed as was wished. The Parliament
always at his Majesty's desire, and for a demonstration of their obedience did
nominate Thomas Ellesmore Lord Chancellor of England, Thomas Earl of Dorset
Thesaurer, The English Commissioners.
Charles Earl of Nottingham Lord high Admiral, Henry Earl of Southampton,
William Earl of Pembroke, Henry Earl of Northampton, Richard Bishop of London,
Toby Bishop of Durham, Anthony Bishop of St David's, Robert Lord Cecill
principal Secretary to his Majesty, Edward Lord Souch Lord President of Wales,
William Lord Monteagle, Ralph Lord Eure, Edmond Lord Sheffeild Lord President
of the Council of the North, Lords of the higher House: And Thomas Lord
Clinton, Robert Lord Buckhurst, Sir Francis Hastings knight, Sir John Stanhop
knight, Vice-chamberlain to the Kings Majesty, Sir George Carew knight,
Vice-chamberlain to the Queens Majesty, Sir John Herbert knight, second
Secretary to his Majesty, Sir Thomas Strickland knight, Sir Edward Stafford
knight, Sir Henry Nevill of Barkshire knight, Sir Richard Buckly knight, Sir
Henry Billingsly knight, Sir Daniell Dunne knight, Dean of the Arches, Sir
Edward Hobby knight, Sir John Savile knight, Sir Robert Wroth knight, Sir
Thomas Challoner knight, Sir Robert Mansell knight, Sir Thomas Ridgway knight,
Sir Thomas Holcraft knight, Sir Thomas Hasketh knight, his Majesty's Attorney
of the Court of Wards and Liveries, Sir Francis Bacon knight, Sir Lawrence
Cawfield knight, Sergeant at Law, Sir Henry Hubbard knight, Sergeant at Law,
Sir John Bennet knight, Doctor of the Laws, Sir Henry VVitherington, Sir Ralph
Gray, and Sir Thomas Lake knights, Robert Ashwith, Thomas James, and Henry
Chapman, Merchants, Knights, and Burgesses of the house of Commons: The power
given them by the Parliament.
Giving them, or any eight, or more of the said Lords of the higher house, and
any twenty of the said Knights, and Burgesses of the said house of Commons,
full power, liberty, and Commission to assemble and meet, at any time, or
times, before the next Session of Parliament, ^or treating and consulting with
certain selected Commissioners, to be nominated, and authorized by authority of
the Parliament of the realm of Scotland, of and concerning such an union of the
said realms of England and Scotland, and of and concerning such other matters,
causes, and things whatsoever as upon mature deliberation, and consideration
the greatest part of the said Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, being
assembled with the Commissioners to be nominated by the Parliament of Scotland,
shall in their wisdom think and deem convenient and necessary for the honor
of his Majesty, and the weal, and commmon good of both the said realms, during
his Majesty's life, and under all his progeny, and royal posterity for ever;
which Commissioners of both the said realms, shall according to the tenor of
their said Commissions, reduce their doings and proceedings into writings, or
instruments tripartite, every part to be subscribed, and sealed by them, to the
end, that one part thereof may in all humility be presented to his most
excellent Majesty, the second part to be offered to the consideration of the
next Session of Parliament for the realm of England, and the third to be
offered to the consideration of the next Parliament for the realm of Scotland,
that thereupon such further proceeding may be had, as by both the said
Parliaments may be thought fit, and necessary for the weal, and common good of
both the said realms.

A Parliament in Scotland for the same purpose was indicted to the tenth of
April, A Parliament in Scotland to that purpose.
and thereafter prorogated to the eleventh of July, at which time the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, assembled by virtue of his Majesty's Commission, did
ordain the persons following, they are to say, John Earl of Montrosse
Chancellor of Scotland, Francis Earl of Arroll high Constable of Scotland,
James Earl of Glencarn, Alexander Earl of Linlithgow, John Archbishop of
Glasgow, David Bishop of Rosse, George Bishop of Cathnes, Walter Prior of
Blantire, Patrick Lord Glammis, Alexander Lord Elphingston, Alexander Lord
Fyvie President of the Session of Scotland, Robert Lord Roxbrugh, James Lord
Abircorn, James Lord Balmerinoth Principal Secretary of Scotland, David Lord
of Scone, Sir James Scrimgeour of Dudop, The Scottish Commissioners.
knight; Sir John Cockburn of Ormston, knight; Sir John Hume of Couldenknowes,
knight; Sir David Carnegie of Kinnard, knight; Sir Robert Melvill elder of
Murdocarmie, knight; Sir Thomas Hamilton of Binnie, knight, Sir John Lermouth
of Balcony, knight; Sir Alexander Straton of Lawriston, knight; Sir John Sheen
of Curry-hill, knight; Mr. John Sharp of Howston, Lawyer; Mr. Thomas Craig
Lawyer; Henry Nisbit, George Bruce, Alexander Rutherford, and Mr. Alexander
Wedderburne, Merchants, or any twelve of them, to assemble and convene
themselves, after the ending of the present Session of Parliament, The power
granted h^em.
and before the next Session thereof, at such time and in such place as it
should please his Majesty's to appoint with certain selected Commissioners
nominated and authorized by the Parliament of England according to the tenor
of their Commissions in that behalf, to confer, treat, and consult upon a
perfect union of the realms of Scotland, and England, and concerning such other
matters, things, and causes whatsoever, tending to his Majesty's honor, and
contentment, and to the weal and tranquillity of both the Kingdoms, during his
Majesty's life, and his royal posterity for ever, as upon mature deliberation,
the greater part of the said Commissioners assembled as is aforesaid, with the
Commissioners authorized by the Parliament of England, shall in their wisdom
think most expedient and necessary, not derogating from any fundamental Laws,
ancient privileges, and rights, offices, dignities, and liberties of the
Kingdom. This last clause was added because of the narrative of the English
Act wherein it was said, That it was not his Majesty's mind to alter, or
innovate the fundamental laws, privileges and good customs of the Kingdom
of England, by the abolishing, or alteration whereof, it was impossible but
that a present confusion should fall upon the whole state and frame of that
Kingdom. In all other things the Statute in substance was the same with the
English.

Soon after this, the King resolving to have Westminster at London the place of
the meeting, Westminster appointed for the place of meetting.
letters were directed to the Noblemen and others nominated for Scotland,
willing them to address themselves to the journey, and to be ready to meet
with the other Commissioners the 20 of October; and lest any disorder should
fall out in the absence of the Chancellor and others of the Council, the Lord
Newbottle was appointed to attend, and reside in Council unto their return.

The day and place of meeting, was precisely observed by the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms, Articles of the union.
who after many days conferences agreed unto certain Articles to be presented
to his Majesty and to the Courts of Parliament of both Kingdoms, there to
receive such strength and approbation as in their wisdoms should seem
expedient: the Articles were as follows.

It is agreed by the Commissioners of England and Scotland to be mutually
proponed to the Parliament of both realms at the next Sessions; Hostile laws
extinguished.
That all hostile laws made and conceived expressly, either by England
against Scotland, or Scotland against England, shall in the next Sessions be
abrogated and utterly extinguished.

It is also agreed, that all Laws, The name of Borders abolished.
Customs, and Treaties of the Borders betwixt England and Scotland shall be
declared by a general Act to be abrogated and abolished, and that the subjects
on either part shall be governed by the Laws and statutes of the Kingdoms
where they dwell, and the name of the Borders extinguished.

And because by abolishing the Border Laws, Order for sentences not satisfied.
and Customs it may be doubted that the executions shall cease upon those
sentences that have heretofore been given by the opposite Officers of those
Borders, upon wrongs committed before the death of the late Queen of happy
memory; It is thought fit that in case the Commissioners or Officers to be
appointed by his Majesty before the time of the next Sessions of Parliament,
shall not procure sufficient redress of such filed Bills and Sentences; that
then the said Parliaments may be moved to take such order as to their wisdoms
shall seem convenient, for satisfaction of that which has been decerned by
some Officers; as also how disorders and insolences may be hereafter
repressed, and the country which was lately of the Borders kept in peace and
quietness in time to come. As likewise to prescribe some order, how the
pursuits of former wrongs, preceding the death of the late Queen and since the
last treatise of the Borders in the years 1596, and 1597. which have never as
yet been moved, may be continued and prosecuted to a definitive sentence.

And forasmuch as the next degree to the abolition of all memory of hostility
is the participation of mutual commodities and commerce; Participation of
Comm^dito be mutual.
It is agreed, first concerning importation of Merchandise into either realm
from foreign parts, that whereas certain commodities are wholly prohibited by
the several laws of both realms, to be brought into either of them by the
natives themselves or by any other, the said prohibitions shall now be made
mutual to both, and neither an English man bring into Scotland, nor a Scotch
man into England, any of these prohibited Wares and Commodities; Nevertheless
if the said Commodities be made in Scotland, it shall be lawful to bring them
out of Scotland to England, and so reciprocally of the Commodities made in
England and carried to Scotland.

Whereas a doubt has been conceived against the equal communication of trade
betwixt English and Scottish subjects in matter of importation, Inequality of
privileges to be be tried.
grounded upon some inequality of privileges, which the Scots are reported to
have in forain parts, and namely in France, above the English, whereby the
English might be prejudged; And that after a very deliberate consideration had
of the said supposed inequalities, both private and public examination of
diverse Merchants of either side touching all liberties, immunities,
privileges, imposts, and paiments on the part of the English, and on the part
of the Scottish, either at Bordeaux for their trade of wines, or in Normandy or
any other part of France for other Commodities; it appeared, that in the Trade
of Bordeaux there was, and is so little difference, in any advantage of
privileges or immunities, or in the imposts and paiments, all being reckoned
and well weighed on either side, as it could not justly hinder the
communication of trade: In the trade of Normandy likewise or any other parts of
France, the advantage that the Scottish subjects by their privilege is
acknowledged to have, is such, as without much difficulty may be reconciled and
reduced to an equality with the English by such means as is hereafter declared:
It is agreed that the Scottish men shall be free for the transporting of wine
from Bordeaux into England paying the same customs and duties that the English
men do pay, and the English men shall be likewise free for transporting of
wine or other commodities from Bordeaux into Scotland, paying the same Customs
and duties that the Scottish men do pay there.

And likewise for clearing and resolving the doubts touching the advantage that
the Scots are supposed to have above the English in buying and transporting the
commodities of Normandy, Importation to be free to both people.
and of other parts of the Kingdom of France, (excepting the buying of wine in
Bordeaux, which is already determined:) It is agreed, that there shall be sent
some meet and discreet persons into France two for either side, to take perfect
notice of any such advantage as either the English have above the Scots, or the
Scots above the English in the buying or transporting of any Commodities of
Normandy or any parts of France (excepting the wine of Bordeaux) and as the
said persons shall find the advantage to be, so for making the trade equal,
the custom shall be advanced to the King in England and Scotland. And for the
part of those that have the advantage and according to the proportion of the
said advantage, the advancement of the custom to continue no longer then the
privilege having such advantage, shall continue, and that generally for all
other Trade from any parts the English and Scottish, subjects each in others
Country shall have liberty of importation as freely as any of the native
subjects themselves having special Privilege.

Next concerning exportation; Exportation of Goods prohibited made unlawful to
both.
It is agreed, that all such goods as are prohibited and forbidden to English
men themselves to be transported forth of England to any foreign part, the same
shall be unlawful for any Scottish men or any other to transport to any foreign
Nation beyond sea, under the same penalties and forfeitures that the English
are subject unto: and reciprocally that forth of Scotland no English men shall
transport to any foreign part the Goods or Commodities that are prohibited in
Scotland to Scottish men themselves; Nevertheless such Goods, and Commodities,
and Merchandises as are licensed to English men to transport out of England to
any foreign part, the same may be likewise transported by Scottish men thither,
they certifying their going into foreign parts, and taking a Cocquet
accordingly, and paying the ordinary Custom that English men do pay
themselves at the exporting of such Wares: The like liberty to be for English
men in Scotland.

As for the Native Commodities which either of the Countries do yield and may
serve for the use and benefit of the other, Order for Native Commodities.
It is agreed that mutually there may be transported forth of England to
Scotland, and forth of Scotland to England, all such Wares, as are either of
the growth, or handiwork of either of the said realms, without payment of any
impost, custom, or exaction; and as freely in all respects, as any Wares may
be transported either in England, from part to part, or in Scotland from part
to part; excepting such particular sorts of Goods, and Merchandises, as are
hereafter mentioned; being restrained for the proper, and inward use of each
Country: And for that purpose it is declared, That both this communication of
benefit, and participation of the Native Commodities of the one Country with
the other, there shall be specially reserved, and excepted the sorts hereafter
specified; That is to say, Wool, Sheep, Sheepfell, Cattle, Leather, Hides, and
Linen yarn, which are specially restrained with^^ each Country, not to be
transported from the one to the other: Excepting also and reserving to the
Scottish men their trade of fishing within their Loches, Forthes, and Bays,
within land; and in the Seas, within fourteen miles of the Coasts of the Realm
of Scotland; where neither English men, nor any Strangers have used to fish:
And so reciprocally in the point of fishing, on the behalf of England. All
which exceptions, and restrictions are not to be understood, or mentioned in
any sort, for a mark or note of separation, or disunion, but only as matters of
policy and convenience for the several estate of each Country.

Furthermore it is agreed, Order for Customs.
that all foreign Wares to be transported forth of Scotland to England, or out
of England to Scotland by any of the Kings subjects of either Kingdoms, having
at their first entry once paid custom in either of the Kingdoms, shall not
pay outward custom therein afterward, save only inward custom at that Port
whereunto they shall be transported: But the owner of the Goods, or the Factor,
or Master of the ship, shall give bond not to transport the same into any
foreign part.

It is also agreed, Scots may be associated in English Companies.
that Scottish men shall not be debarred from being associates unto any English
company of Merchants as Merchant-venturers or others, upon such conditions as
any English man may be admited, and so reciprocally for English men in
Scotland.

It is nevertheless agreed by mutual consent and so to be understood, Order
for transportation.
that the mutual liberty aforesaid of Exportation and Trade in each part from
the one to the other, shall serve for the inward use only of either Realm; and
order taken for restraining and prohibiting the transportation of the said
Commodities into foreign parts, and for due punishment of those that shall
transgress in that behalf.

And for the better assurance and caution herein, It is agreed that every
Merchant so offending, shall forfeit his Goods; The Ships wherein the said
Goods shall be transported Consiscated; The Customers, Searchers, and other
Officers of the Custom whatsoever, in case of consent or knowledge on their
part, Punishment of such as shall transgress.
to lose their Offices and Goods, and their bodies to be imprisoned at his
Majesty's pleasure. Of which escheats and forfeitures, two parts shall
appertain to his Majesty, if the Customs be unfarmed, and the third to the
Informer: and if the Customs be farmed, one third of the forfeiture shall
belong to his Majesty, a third to the farmers of the Customs, and the other
third to the Informer. The trial of the offense to be summar in either
Country in the Exchequer Chamber by writ, sufficient witnesses, or oath of
party, or before the Justice by Jury, or Affise, and his Majesty's Officers in
either Country to convene with the Complainers that interest in the pursuit.

As also for the more surety that there shall be no transportation of such
Goods; Caution to be given by the owners and Masters of Ships.
It is agreed that at the shipping of all such Native Commodities there be
taken by the Customer of the Port where the Goods or Wares are embarked, a Bond
or Obligation subscribed by the Owner of the said Goods, and Master of the
Ship; by the Owner if he be present, and in case of his absence by the Master
of the Ship, and Factor or party that ladeth the same; which Bond shall contain
a sum of money answerable to the value of the Goods, with condition of
relieving the party obliged, and discharging him of the said Bond in case
return be made of a due certificate to the Custom where the Goods were laden,
from any part within England or Scotland: The Certificate to be subscribed, and
sealed by the Officers of the Customs of the part where the said Goods shall
arrive, and be unladened; or if there be no such Officers there, by the Chief
Magistrate, and Town Clerk of that Harbor or Town, under their hand and Seal.

It is further agreed touching the indifferent fraighting of Commodities either
in English or Scottish bottomes, Indifferency of fraighting.
that English men and Scottish men freight and laden their goods each in others
Sh^ps and bottoms indifferently, paying only English and Scottish custom,
notwithstanding any contrary laws or prohibitions. And that a proposition be
made to the Parliament of England for establi^ing some good orders for
upholding and maintaining the great fishing of England; as likewise that a
proposition be made to the Parliament of Scotland for the making of their
shipping more proportionable in burden to the shipping of England, the better
to serve for equality of trade, and a common defense for the whole Isle.

And because it is requisite that the mutual communication aforesaid be not
only extended to matter of commerce, Po^^nati declared free.
but to all other benefits and privileges of natural born subjects, it is
agreed that an Act be proponed to be passed in manner following: That all the
subjects of both realms born since the decease of the late Queen, and that
shall be born hereafter under the obedience of his Majesty and of his Royal
Progeny, are by the Common laws of both realms, and shall be for ever enabled
to obtain, succeed, inherit and possess all goods, lands and cattels, honors,
dignities, offices, liberties, privileges, and benefices Ecclesiastical or
Civil in Parliament and all other places of the kingdoms, and every one of
the same, in all respects and without any exception whatsoever, as fully and
amply as the subjects of either realm respectively might have done, or may do
in any sort within the kingdom where they are born.

Further whereas his Majesty out of his great judgment and providence has not
only professed in public and private speech to the Nobility, and Council of
both, but has also vouchsafed to be contented that for a more full
satisfaction and comfort of all his loving subjects, it may be comprised in the
said Act, that his Majesty means not to confer any office of the Crown, any
office of Judicature, place, voice, Exception for Offices of the Crown.
or office in Parl^ament of either kingdom upon the subjects of the other born
before the decease of the late Queen, until time and conversation have
increased and accomplished an union of the said kingdoms, as well in the
hearts of all the people and in the conformity of laws and policies in these
kingdoms, as in the knowledge and sufficiency of particular men, who being
untimely employed in such authorities could no way be able, much less
acceptable to discharge such duties belonging to them. It is therefore resolved
by us the Commissioners aforesaid not only in regard of our desires and
endeavors to further the speedy conclusion of this happy work intended, but
also as a testimony of our love and thankfulness for his gracious promise, on
whose sincerity and benignity we build our full assurance, even according to
the inward sense and feeling of our own loyal and hearty affections, to obey
and please him in all things worthy the subjects of so worthy a Sovereign, that
it shall be desired of both the Parliaments, to be enacted by their authority,
that all the subjects of both realms, born before the decease of the late
Queen, may be enabled and capable to acquire, purchase, inherit, succeed, use
and dispose of all lands, goods, inheritances, offices, honors, dignities,
liberties, privileges, immunities, benefices and preferments whatsoever, each
subject in either kingdom, with the same freedom and as lawfully and
peaceably as the very natural and born subjects of either realm, where the
said rights, estates or profits are established: notwithstanding whatsoever
law, statute, or former constitutions heretofore in force to the contrary other
^en to acquire, possess, succeed or inherit any office of the Crown, office of
Judicatory or any voice, place or office in Parliament, all which shall remain
free from being claimed, held or enjoyed by the subjects with the one kingdom
within the other, born before the decease of the late Queen, notwithstanding
any words, sense or interception of the Act, or any circumstance thereupon
depending, until there be such a perfect and full accomplishment of the union
as is desired mutually by both the realms. In all which points of reservation
either in recital of the words of his Majesty's sacred promise, or in any
clause or sentence before specified from enabling them to any of the aforesaid
places, or dignities; it has been and ever shall be so far from the thoughts
of any of us, Reservation of his Majesty's Prerogative.
to presume to alter or impair his Majesty's Prerogative royal (who
contrariwise do all with comfort and confidence depend herein upon the gracious
assurance which his Majesty is pleased to give in the declaration of his so
just and Princely care and favor to all his people) as for a further laying
open of our clear and dutiful intentions toward his Majesty in this and in
all things else which may concern his prerogative, we do also herein. profess
and declare that we think it fit there be inserted in the Act, to be proponed
and passed, in express terms a sufficient reservation of his Majesty's
Prerogative royal to denizate, enable and prefer to such offices, honors,
dignities and benefices whatsoever in both the said kingdoms and either of
them, as are heretofore excepted in the preceding reservation of all English
and Scottish subjects born before the decease of the late Queen, as freely,
soveraignly, and absolutely, as any of his Majesty's most noble progenitors or
predecessors Kings of England or Scotland, might have done at any time
heretofore, and to all other intents and purposes in as ample manner as no such
Act had ever been thought of or mentioned.

And for as much as the several jurisdictions and administrations of either
realm may be abused by malefactors, Remanding of malefactors.
by their own impunity, if they shall commit any offense in the one realm and
afterward remove their person and abode unto the other; It is agreed that
there may be some fit course advised of by the wisdoms of the Parliaments for
trial and proceeding against the persons of offenders remaining in the one
realm for and concerning the crimes and faults committed in the other realm.
And yet nevertheless that it may be lawful for the Justice of the realm where
the fact is committed, to remand the offender remaining in the other realm to
be answerable unto justice in the same realm where the fact was committed, and
that upon such remand made the offender shall be accordingly delivered, and all
further proceeding if any be in the other realm shall cease, so as it may be
done without prejudice to his Majesty or other Lords in their Escheats, and
forfeitures: with provision nevertheless, that this be not thought necessary to
be made for all criminal offenses, but in special cases only, as namely in
the cases of wilful murder, falsifying of moneys, and forging of Deeds,
Instruments, and writings, and such other like cases as upon further advice in
the said Parliaments may be thought fit to be added.

These were the Articles agreed upon, A scroll of the Articles presented to the
King.
which written in their several scrolls of Parchment were subscribed and
sealed at Westminster the sixth of December by the Commissioners of both
Parliaments, and one thereof presented the same evening to his Majesty by the
Earl of Salisbury, who in name of the whole number there present having showed
what pains they had taken in that business, and how after many conferences they
were grown to the resolution contained in that scroll, besought his Majesty to
accept graciously that which was done, and made offer of their best service in
perfecting that work as they should be employed.

The king professing a great content did specially thank them for reserving his
Prerogative, The Kings speech to the Commissioners
in the preferment of men to offices and honors, in either kingdom: for
inequality, said he, of liberties and privileges is not the way to effect the
union I desire; capacity of offices ought to be equal to both people; but the
moderation of that equality must be left to me, neither you to suspect that I
will offer any manner of grievance to either of the Countries, or do any thing
that may kindle emulation among them, considering the desire I have to see you
united in a fast and indissolveable amity. This said, he recommended the
prosecution of that business in the several Parliaments to their fidelity and
trust; wishing them to lay aside all jealousies, needless fears and other worse
passions in a matter that so nearly concerned the good and benefit of both
kingdoms.

Some months before the King had assumed by virtue of his Prerogative the
title of The King of great Britain, The title of great Britain assumed.
commanding the same to be used from thenceforth in all Proclamations, Missives
and Treaties, and the names of England and Scotland to be discontinued (except
in instruments of private parties, and where legality of process would not
admit the same:) this same in both kingdoms took ill, but his Majesty
esteeming those names whereby they had been called no better then names of
hostility, would needs have the ancient name of Britain received, and these of
Scotland and England abolished. In like manner he did prohibit the name of the
borders to be used, and ordained all places of strength in these parts (the
houses of Noblemen and Barons excepted) to be demolished, their Iron gates to
be turned into Plow Irons, and the inhabitants to betake themselves to labor
and the exercises of peace; for the same purpose he did break the Garrisons at
Barwick and Carlisle. And in memory of the union so happily begun made diverse
pieces of gold and silver to be coined, Pieces of gold and silver coined.
upon some whereof were engraven these inscriptions: Quae Deus conjunxit nemo
separet; and, Tueatur unita Deus. On others, Faciam eos in gentem unam; and,
Henricus rosas, Regna Iacobus.

During this conference the Lord Fivie President of the Session supplied the
place of the Scottish Chancellor, The Earl of Montrosse made Commissioner of
the kingdom
and was shortly after preferred to the same office by the Earl of Montross his
dismission, who in stead thereof was made Commissioner and deputy of Scotland
during life; Secretary Elphingston was chosen President of the Session, and all
affairs trusted by his Majesty to the Chancellor and him; with a special
direction that they should be assisting to the Church, The Lord Fi^^ received
Chancellor.
and maintain those whom his Majesty had preferred in the places of Bishops in
the same. How they answered the trust committed to them in this particular, we
shall hear.

But leaving the matter of State let us now see how things went at that time in
the Church. An. 1605.
The general Assembly that should have kept at Aberdene in July 1604, The
general Assembly continued.
was continued because of the union to the same month in the year following.
The King being informed of a great preparation that the Ministers made for
keeping that meeting, and that they intended to call in question all the
conclusions taken in former Assemblies for the Episcopal government, directed
the Commissioners of the Church to desert the Diet, and make no indiction of
another till he should be advertised. They accordingly did intimate his
Majesty's pleasure to all the Presbyters, and therewith as they were desired
declare that his Majesty did purpose to call a number of the Bishops and
disaffected Ministers to court; and for preventing such disorderly meeting,
hear the differences that were among them debated in his own person.

The greater part resolved to obey; nine Presbyteries only of Fifty (so many
there are reckoned in the whole kingdom) sent their Commissioners to keep the
meeting. The chief leaders of this stir was Mr. John Forbes Minister of Awford,
A number convene notwithstanding the discharge.
and Mr. John Welsh Minister at Air. These two having encouragement given them
in private by some principally in the State, used all means to bring the
Ministers together, and were in expectation of a frequetassembly; yet when the
day appointed came, there convened thirteen only, and after some two or three
days seven or eight more.

The names of the Ministers that convened were Mr. Charles Farum Minister of
Fraserburgh, The names of them convened.
Mr. Robert Youngson Minister at Clat, Mr. James Mill Minister at lnnervry, Mr.
Alexander Straughen Minister at Creich, Mr. David Robertson Minister at
Feterangus, Mr. Robert Rid Minister at Mr. James Irwyn Minister at Towch, Mr.
John Monro Subdean at Rosse, Mr. William Forbes Minister at Rinbethock, Mr.
William Davidson Minister at Ruthven, Mr. Thomas Abernethy Minister at Hawick,
Mr. James Gray Minister at L^wdon, Mr. Nathaniel Ingly Minister at Cragy, Mr.
James Rosse and Mr. Archbold Blackburn Minister at Aberdene, John Rosse
Minister at Blare, Mr. John Sharp Minister at Kilmeny, Mr. Andrew Duncan
Minister at Cruill, Mr. Robert Dury Minister at Anstruther, with the said Mr.
John Forbes and Mr. John Welsh. Sir. Alexander Straiton of Lowreston,
Commissioner for his Majesty in Church affairs, upon a rumor he heard of a
meeting to be kept, left any imputation of negligence should be laid on him,
The Kings Commissioner discharges the meeting.
prevented the same. And by letters he had obtained from the secret Council
caused discharge the Assembly at the market Cross of Aberdene: they
nevertheless convened the next day, which being reported to the Commissioner,
he went to the place and in his Majesty's name commanded to dissolve. They
replying, That they were warranted by the laws of the Country, and that they
could not betray the liberties of the Church by giving way to such unlawful
prohibitions. He showed them that the liberty granted for keeping Assemblies
could not annull his Majesty's power, nor denude him of his Prerogative in the
continuing or discharging these meetings, when he should find cause: For even
the Parliament which is the highest Court of the kingdom, said he, is disposed
as the King thinks meet, at his pleasure it is called, prorogued, dismissed
and deserted, as he judges most convenient. And you will not I trust equal
your Assemblies to the Parliament of the three Estates. Besides, you are not a
number, you want the ordinary Clark; neither is the Moderator of the last
Assembly present, and can do nothing orderly. After a little debating they
request him to remove till they should del berate among themselves what were
best for them to do, but he was no sooner gone but then they choose Mr. Ihon
Forbes Moderator, and that done continued the Assembly to the last day of
September, The Ministers denounced and cited by the council for their
disobedience.
thinking by this means to preserve their liberty.

Lowreston finding himself in this abused, caused to execute the letters and
denounced them Rebels. And left they should make a new business in September
complained to the Council of the disobedience given to their charge: order was
taken hereupon to summon them before the Council, and a beginning made with
the two Leaders of the rest, Mr. Forbes and Mr. Welsh, being charged to a
certain day of the same month. They appeared and standing to the defense of
that which they had done were committed to the Castle of Blackness; direction
was likewise given for citing the rest to the third of October. Some confess
their fault and are pardoned


At the day all appeared, and being charged for disobeying his Majesty's letter
thirteen of the number acknowledging their offense, and protesting that what
they did was not out of disobedience, Others maintain their meeting and are
Committed
entreated the Lords to intercede with his Majesty for their Pardon: the rest
taking contrary course, and maintaining their proceedings were Committed to
several prisoners; their names were, Mr. Charles Farum, Mr. John Monro, Mr.
James Irwyn, Mr. William Forbes, Mr. Nathaniell Inglis, Mr. Andrew Duncan, Mr.
James Gray, and Mr. John Sharp: Some of these being sent to Dunbarton, others
to Blackness, and some to the Castle of Down; the others that had confessed
their offense were dimitted and suffered to return to their charges.

These proceedings of the Council were openly condemned by diverse preachers;
The proceeding of the Council condemned by the Ministry.
and to make them more odious, it was every where given out that the
suppressing of Assemblies and present discipline with the introduction of the
rites of England, were the matters intended to be established, whereupon the
declaration following was by his Majesty's command published.

Whereas we have ever since it pleased God to establish us in the imperial
Crown of great Britain equally regarded the good of both kingdoms, His
Majesty's Declaration touching some rumors dispersed.
now happily united in our royal person in one Monarchy, ever minding to
maintain and continue the good and laudable customs and laws, whereby each of
them has been these many ages so worthily governed, nevertheless some
malicious spirits, enemies to common tranquillity, have labored to possess
the minds of our well affected subjects with an opinion that we do presently
intend a change of the authorized discipline of the Church, and by a sudden
and unseasonable laying on of the rites, ceremonies and whole Ecclesiastical
order established in this part of our kingdom of Britain, to overturn the
former government received in these parts; which none of our good subjects we
trust will be so credulous to believe, knowing how careful we have been to
maintain both Religion and Justice, and to reform the evils that did in any
sort prejudice the integrity of either of the two, whereby justice has
attained under our government to a greater perfection and splendour then in any
of our predecessors times, and many abuses and corruptions in the discipline of
the Church amended that otherwise might have brought the purity of Religion in
extreme danger; neither of which was done by our sovereign and absolute
authority (although we enjoy the same as freely as any King or Monarch of the
world) but as the disease of the civil body ever was cured by the advice of
our three Estates, so were the defects of the Church by the help and counsel
of those that had greatest interest therein.

And however in rule of policy we cannot but judge it convenient, The King his
resolution in making no sudden change in the Church policy.
that two estates so miserably disjoined should be drawn to as great conformity
in all things, as the good of both may permit; and that no Monarchy either in
Civil or Ecclesiastical policy has yet obtained to that perfection, that it
needs no reformation, or that infinite occasions may not arise, whereupon wise
Princes will foresee for the benefit of their estates just cause of alteration;
yet are we, and ever have been resolved not to make any sudden and hasty
change in the government of that part of our kingdom either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, but with grave advise and consent of our Estates, and the
wisest and best sort of them whom it most properly concerns, much less to
trouble them with an unnecessary alteration of indifferent and ceremonial
matters, and to do it upon such foreseen advantages and prevention of confusion
and evil to come, as the greatest enemies to peace and obedience to Princes
shall not obtrude any inconvenient to the contrary. And as by Gods holy
assistance we have drawn that part of our kingdom out of infinite troubles,
factions and barbarities reducing the utmost borders and confines thereof to
Gods obedience and acknowledging of our laws, (a condition never heard of since
this Isle was first inhabited) so by the same divine providence and our
fatherly care over the whole Island, we intend to transmit the same in good
order, happy quietness and flourishing policy to the posterity wherewith God
has blessed us, and after them to the worlds end: Like as for the more
verification of his own honorable intention, and to stop the mouths of those
unquiet spirits, raisers of that false scandal of alteration, we have
appointed a general Assembly to be holden at Dundie the last Tuesday of July,
whereat we expect a reparation of these disorders in as far as belongs to
their censure, and to be freed in time coming of all such calumnies. Given at
our Honor of Hampton Court the 26 of September 1605, and in the third year of
our reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

The Copies of this Declaration were sent to the Ministers remaining in ward,
that they might see the vanity of these rumors, and be induced to acknowledge
their offense; but they still continuing in their obstinacy, and showing no
tokens of penitency, were again called before the Council the 24th of October
to receive their censure for the disobedience of his Majesty's commandments.
At which time being enquired what they had to say for themselves, and how they
could excuse the contempt of his Majesty's directions; after some speeches
tending to justify their doings, they presented a write, a Declaration formed
in this sort:

Please your Lordships, the approbation or disallowance of a General Assembly
has been, The form of their Declinatour.
and should be a matter spiritual, and always cognosced and judged by the
Church as Judges, competent within this Realm: and seeing we are called before
your Lordships to hear and see it found and declared, that we have
contemptuously and seditiously convened and assembled our selves in a General
Assembly at Aberdene the first Tuesday of July ^ast, and the said Assembly to
be declared unlawful, as at more length is contained in the summons executed
against us; We in consideration of the premises and other reasons to be given
by us, have just cause to decline your Lordships judgment as no ways competent
in the cause above specified, and by these presents we simpliciter decline the
same, seeing we are most willing to submit our selves to a trial of a General
Assembly that is only the Judge competent. Subscribed with our hands the 24th
of October, 1605.

The subscribers were, Mr. John Forbes, Mr. John Welsh, Mr. John Monro, Mr.
Andrew Duncan, Mr. Alexander Straghan, Mr. James Greg, Mr. William Forbes, Mr.
Nathaniel English, Mr. Charles Farum, Mr. James Irwyn, Mr. John Sharp, Mr.
Robert Dury, Mr. John Rosse, and Mr. Robert Youngson.

The last of these was one that had acknowledged his offense and craved pardon,
yet at this Diet compeired with these others, professing, The Assembly declared
unlawful.
That he was troubled in conscience for the confession he had made, and that he
would now take part with the brethren, who stood to the defense of the good
cause, as he termed it. The Council repelling the Declinatour, declared the
Assembly to have been unlawful, and those that met in the same contrary to his
Majesty's command punishable. But because they had added to their former fault,
the crime of Treason, it was thought meet to defer the Censure till the King
should be acquainted therewith, and his pleasure known.

No sooner was his Majesty advertised of the Declinatour, Some of the Ministers
pursued criminally.
then direction was sent to the Council for proceeding against them according
to the laws: whereupon the six that were imprisoned in Blackness, (that is to
say) Mr. John Forbes, Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Andrew Duncan, Mr. John Sharp, Mr.
Robert Dury, and Mr. Alexander Straghan, were upon the tenth of January
thereafter brought to the Town of Linlithgow, and presented upon Pannell before
the Justice, who was assisted by a number of Noblemen and others of the Privy
Council.

The Indictment made, The Indictment.
which was grounded upon the Statute of Parliament holden in May 1584. touching
his Majesty's Royal Power over all Estates, and the presumptuous fact
committed by them in declining the judgment of the Council; Certain of their
brethren did supplicate the Justice for license to confer with them apart,
that they might persuade them to an humble submission and acknowledgment of
their offense. This obtained, they were most earnestly dealt with (as well by
their Brethren as by the Advocates that came to plead for them) to relinquish
their wilfulness, and not to exasperate the King by standing to the defense of
their Declinatour; but no persuasions could avail. So returning to the Bar
they were desired to answer, and show a reason (if any they had) why the matter
should not pass the trial of a Jury. The Advocates that stayed with them (for
the two principalls refused to plead because of their obstinacy) excepting
against the Indictment, Exception proponed by the Advocates.
said that the Statute 1592. Whereby it was declared, That the Act made against
declining of the Counsels judgment should not derogate any thing from the
privileges which God had given to the spiritual office-bearers in the Church
concerning heads of Religion in matters of heresy, collation and deprivation
of Ministers, or any such essential censures, having warrant of the word of
God; and that thereupon inferred that their meeting at the time libelled in
Aberdene being an essential censure warranted by Gods word, they might
lawfully have declined the Counsels judgment from taking cognition therein.

It was answered by his Majesty's Advocate, The Reply to the Exception*
That the exception was naught, because the keeping of an Assembly at a certain
time and place, and the appointing of another contrary to his Majesty's
direction and the charge of the Council, was neither a head of Religion, nor
matter of heresy, nor excommunication, nor an essential censure, and so being
no ways comprehended under that limitation, their declining of the Council
when as they were called to answer for the keeping of that Conventicle in the
Town of Aberdene, must of necessity come under the generality of the Stat^te
1584, and bring them under the punishment of Treason.

The matter after some dispute being put to trial of an Assise, The Ministers
found guilty of Treason.
all the six were found guilty of Treason, and returned to their several
prisons till his Majesty's pleasure concerning their punishment should be
certified; what this was, in the story of the next year shall be declared. Mean
while a Proclamation went out, discharging all the subjects of what rank, A
Proclamation that none should oppose the decision of the Justice.
place, calling, function, or condition soever, either in public or private,
to call in question his Majesty's authority Royal, or the lawfulness of the
proceeding against the said Ministers, or to make any other construction of the
Statute concerning the declining of his Majesty's and the Counsels judgment,
then made in that decision of the Justice; with certification of those that
contravened, that they should be called and severely punished as seditious
persons and wilful contemners of his Majesty's most just and lawful
government.

Before these stirs in the Church a Convention of the Estates was kept the
sixth of June at Edinburgh, A Convention of Estates.
where a Letter was presented by his Majesty to the Estates full of affection.
His Majesty's Letter directed to the Estates.
The Letter was to this effect, That his Majesty's love being nothing
diminished through his absence toward that his native and ancient Kingdom, he
did wish them to contend in a laudable emulation who should live most
virtuously, and be most obedient to the laws; That the Nobility should give
assistance to the execution of justice, and be in all things a good ensample to
their inferiors: The Barons should set themselves to procure the good of the
Kingdom: And the Burgesses apply their minds to the increase of trade,
especially the trade of fishing, which had been long neglected, and to the
working of cloth that had made their neighbor Country so famous. To them all
be recommended the rooting forth of barbarity, the planting of Colonies in the
Isles, and peopling the same with civil and industrious persons, assuring them
that they so behaving themselves, their liberty should be as dear to him as
either his life or estate.

This was the substance of the Letter, The Acts passed in the Convention.
which the Chancellor having resumed, and thereunto added many persuasions for
the following of those wholesome and profitable counsels, the Estates did
express a great forwardness that way, and after a long deliberation
condescended upon diverse good Acts, which if they had been all carefully put in
practice, as they were wisely devised, the Kingdom had long before this time
tried the benefit thereof. Amongst other directions, the removing of the
barbarous fewds was recommended to the Council, whereof they were desired to
make a Roll and urge the parties to reconcile, and if they refused, then to
assure them to the peace, and commit them to ward till the same was secured.
And whereas the custom had been to cause parties assure one another, the King
did prohibit the same as a thing dishonorable and arguing too great
presumption in the subject, seeing the Law should be to every man a sufficient
assurance. The Council reverencing his Majesty's direction, did ordain that
course from thenceforth to be observed, and all assurances to be taken for the
peace thereafter, and not of one party to another: Beginning being made with
the Lord Maxwell, and the Lord of Iohnston, they were moved to join hands and
reconcile in presence of the Council.

This Summer the enterprise of the Jews was again set on foot by Robert
Lummisdale of Ardrie and Sir George Hay of Netherliffe, to whom some of the
first undertakers had made over their right. In August they took journey
thither, and by the assistance of Mackey Mackenzie and Donold Gorum forced the
Inhabitants to remove forth of the Isle, and give surety not to return.

Ardrie and his Copartners thinking all made sure, and that there was no more
danger, returned South about Martinmas, leaving some Companies to maintain
their possession, which they made good all that Winter, though now and then
they were assaulted by the Isles-men. In the Spring Ardrie went back taking
with him fresh provision, and fell to build and manure the lands. But this
continued not long, for moneys failing, the workmen went away, and the
Companies diminishing daily, the Natives having associated a number of
Isles-men made a new invasion about the end of harvest, and by continual
incursions so outwearied the new possessors, as they gave over the enterprise,
and were contented for a little sum of money to make away their rights to the
Lord of Mackenzie. This turned to the ruin of diverse of the undertakers, who
were exhausted in means before they took the enterprise in hand, and had not
the power which was required in a business of that importance.

In the end of the year a horrible Conspiracy was detected against the King,
The history of the Powder Treason.
and the whole body of the State of England; the names of the Conspirators were
Robert Catesby, Thomas Percy, Thomas VVinter, John Wright, and Guido Faulks,
English men all, and Papists by profession. These five meeting together and
consulting by what mean they might best relieve the Catholic Cause, (so they
spoke) Thomas Percy proponed the killing of the King, and at his own peril
made offer to perform the same. Catesby, who had another plot in his head,
answered, That they would not hazard him so, and that albeit it should succeed,
the case of the Catholic cause would be no better, the Prince and Duke of
York being left alive; yea if both these were cast away, yet the Counselors,
Nobility, Judges, Knights, and a great many others addicted to Religion, would
be remaining who should be able enough to restore the estate, and cross all
their purposes: That therefore he had bethought himself of a better and more
safe way, which was at one time, and with one blow to cut off all their
enemies. This he said was by blowing up the Parliament house with gunpowder at
the time when the King and Estates were assembled. The Jesuits approve of the
enterprise.
The advice pleased them all; but first it was thought meet to ask the opinion
of their ghostly Fathers, and be informed of the lawfulness of the fact; as of
Henry Garnet, Oswould Tesmond alias Greenwall, and John Gerard Jesuits, who
being consulted commended the enterprise, assuring them they might go on with a
good conscience and perform the deed, seeing they were Heretics, and persons
ipso jure excommunicated against whom they were set.

This resolution satisfying their consciences, The Conspirers swear secrecy.
for their greater security they took an Oath of Secrecy, swearing each to
other by the sacred Trinity and the blessed Sacrament they were at that time to
receive, that neither directly nor indirectly, by word or circumstances they
should discover the purpose they had taken to any whomsoever, nor should desert
from performing the same without license of their associates. This Oath was
given upon a Primer in the presence of Gerard the Jesuit, and having heard
Mass and received the Sacrament, Thomas Percy was appointed to hire a house
nigh adjoining to the Parliament for the more safe and secret working of the
mine.

This being obtained, A Cellar hired for the mine.
yet with difficulty enough, they entered to work, and after diverse
intermissions because of proroguing the Parliament, when they had brought the
mine to the midst of the wall, they found the opportunity of a Cellar under the
Parliament house to be let, and leaving the mine, for that the wall was hard to
be dug through, they hired the cellar, and put in it 36 barrels of powder, a
number of billets, faggots, and a great quantity of coals, wherewith they
covered the barrels. They had called in Christopher Wright, Robert Winter, John
Grant, and Thomas Bates, Catesby's servant, and communicated the matter to
them. This last was troubled at first with the cruelty of the plot, and had
forsaken them if he had not been confirmed and encouraged by Tesmond the Jesuit
to go with the rest. After these Ambrose Rockwood and Robert Keys were made of
the Council, all taking the Oath of Secrecy, and receiving the sacrament upon
the same: And because the charge in buying powder, billets, and hiring of
houses had been a burden heavy for Thomas Percy, it was thought meet to bring
in some mo; whereupon Sir Edward Digby and Francis Tresham were assumed.

All things being now as they judged made sure, A deliberation for the Kings
children.
they began to think what course was fittest to take after the deed was
performed. The first doubt was made touching the Prince and surprise of his
person, or if he should accompany his Father to the Parliament, how they might
seize upon the Duke of York his brother. But this Piercy undertook to do by
reason of his acquaintance in the house, into which he could enter without
suspicion, and how soon the blow was given carry him away by the help of such
as he should have in a readiness to assist. Of the Lady Elizabeth they made
small question, for that she was kept in the Country by the Lady Harrington
near to Ashby, Catesby's dwelling house.

The next doubt they proponed, Contribution for the enterprise.
where they should have money and horses: and for this Digby made offer of
fifteen hundred pounds English, Tresham two hundred, and Piercy promised to
bring all he could gather of Northumberland Rents, which he thought would
extend to four thousand pounds, and to provide ten horses for his part. Neither
doubted they but having the Heir apparent in their hands they should find
means sufficient.

A third question they made, Catholics to be stopped from coming to the
Parliament.
what Lords they should save from going to the Parliament: which they agreed to
be as many Catholics as conveniently they might.

Fourthly, No forain Princes to be acquainted therewith.
it was moved among them what forain Princes they should acquaint with the
purpose, and whose aid they should seek. Concerning which it was agreed that
none of them should be made privy to the plot; fearing they could not enjoin
secrecy to Princes, and for aid after the deed performed there would be time
enough to entreat the same either of Spain, or France, or the Country of
Flanders.

Lastly, because they saw no way to assure the Duke of York his person,
Intention to proclaim Lady Elizabeth Queen.
(for Piercy his undertaking they held unsure) they resolved to serve their
turn with the Lady Elizabeth, and to proclaim her Queen: to which purpose they
had a Proclamation formed, wherein no mention was made of altering Religion
because they had no forces sufficient, and till they might make good their
party, they would not avow the deed to be theirs, but lay it so far as they
could upon the Puritans.

Now there remained nothing, The Conspiracy detected.
all dangers being foreseen, and every thing provided, but the last act of the
intended tragedy to be performed, when as that which was so secretly hatched
came to be discovered after a wonderful manner: The Lord Monteagle son and
heir to the Lord Morley, being in his lodging at seven of the clock at night,
had a Letter given him by one of his footmen, who received the same upon the
street from a person unknown, with a charge to put it in his Masters hand. The
tenor whereof was as follows:

My Lord,
OUt of the love I bear to some of your friends, The Letter sent to the Ld
Mounteagle.
I have a care of your preservation; therefore would I advise you as you tender
your life to devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this
Parliament: for God and man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this
time. Think not slightly of this advertisement, but retire your self into your
Country, where you may expect the event in safety: for though there be no
appearance of any stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow in this
Parliament, and shall not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be
contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm: for the danger
is passed as soon as you have burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you
the grace to make good use of it, in whose holy protection I commit you.


It was some ten days only before the Parliament that Monteagle received this
Letter; The secrecy of so many very strange.
and but twelve hours before the meeting of the Estates that the Plot was found
out. Where it is a sort of wonder to think that so many being made privy to
the conspiracy, the same should not have burst out one way or other in so long
a time: For it was the eleventh of December 1604, when they began to work at
the mine, and so the space of a year and more the conspiracy went concealed.
Some advertisements were sent to the King and diverse of his Majesty's Council
from beyond sea, That the Papists were preparing to present a Petition for
toleration of Religion at the meeting of the Parliament, which should be so
well backed as the King would be loath to refuse it. But these advertisements
were contemned, and thought to be invented for putting the King in fear.

Yea, and the Nobleman when he received the Letter, not knowing what
construction to make of it, doubted much that it had been a device to scare him
from attending the Parliament; notthelesse out of his care of the Kings
preservation he resolved to communicate the same with the Earl of Salisbury his
Majesty's principal Secretary; and going the same night to Whitehall delivered
the Letter to him. The Secretary acquainting the Chamberlain, Admiral, and
some others of the Council therewith, and examining every line thereof,
resolved to show the same to the King at his return, (for he was then at
hunting at Royston) and not to search further in the matter till they should
hear what was his judgment.

The King returning to London the Thursday after, which was Alhallowes evening,
the Letter was showed him the next day in the afternoon, who having read the
same once or twice, said, That it was not to be contemned, and that the style
seemed more quick and pithy then is used in libells, pasquills and the like.
The Secretary perceiving the King to apprehend the matter more deeply then he
expected told him, that the letter seemed to be written by a fool, or mad man,
and pointing at the passage, the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the
letter; said, that the warning was to little purpose if the burning of the
letter might make the danger eschewed.

But the King willing him to consider the former sentence, wherein it was said
that they should receive a terrible blow at the Parliament, and not see who did
hurt them, and when he should join that with the other, he should find it to
be sudden danger, as by blowing up by Powder, that was thereby meant.
Therefore willed all the rooms in the Parliament house to be searched both
above and below, to prevent the danger if any there was.

This belonging to the Chamberlain his office, he was desired to make the
search, and for staying the idle rumors to delay his going to Monday in the
afternoon the day before the first Session of Parliament. At which time the
Chamberlain taking with him the Lord Mounteagle, who was careful to see what
the warning given would prove, went and viewed all the rooms, where he
perceived in the vault under the upper house great store of fagots, billets and
coals, and asking the keeper of the guardrobe named Whinyard, to what use he
had put those low Cellars (for they appertained to him) he answered, that
Thomas Percy had hired the house and Cellar, and the billets and the coals were
the Gentleman's provision for winter. The Chamberlain casting his eye aside, and
espying a fellow in the corner of the vault, asked who he was, and received
answer that he was Percies man who kept the house for his Master.

Thus having looked upon all things in a careless manner as it appeared, he
returned to the King, and made report of that he had seen: which increased his
Majesty's first apprehension, and thereupon was order given for turning up
those billets and coals even to the bottom; if nothing should be found, it was
devised, that Whinyard should pretend the stealing of some of the Kings stuff
which he had in his keeping, and that made the color of search. Sir Thomas
Knevet Gentleman of his Majesty's privy Chamber and Justice of Peace within
Westminster being appointed for this business, went thither with some few in
company about midnight, and finding a man standing without doors in his
clothes and boots, caused him to be apprehended. This was Guido Faulks, whose
hand should have fired the train, and gave himself out for Percies man.
Thereafter entering into the house he made the coals and billets to be turned
up, under which they found 36 barrells of Powder more and less. Then turning to
the fellow they had apprehended and questioning him touching the Powder, he did
instantly confess, swearing, That if he had been within the house when they
took him, he should have blown them up with the house and all.

Sir Thomas taking the man a long went immediately to the place, and showed the
Chamberlain and Secretary how he had sped; they making themselves ready and
warning the Counselors that lay within the Palace, went all together to his
Majesty's Bed chamber. The King awake, the Chamberlain not able to conceal his
joy, cried aloud, that the Treason was discovered, and the traitor in hands.
The command was given to command the Council to examine the Prisoner touching
his partakers, he nothing dejected nor moved a whit with so honorable a
presence did boldly avow the fact, repenting only that he had failed in the
execution, and saying, The devil envying the success of so good a work had
discovered the same. All that day nothing could be drawn from him touching his
accomplices, taking all the blame upon himself, and professing he had done it for
Religion and Conscience sake. Speaking of the King he denied him to be his
Sovereign, or anointed of God, in regard he was an heretic, and that it was no
sin to cut him off. This was his behavior at first, but being conveyed to
the Tower and the Rack presented, he laid open the whole matter of conspiracy,
and confessed the truth. There were in the City at that time Catesby, Percy,
Tho: Winter, Francis Tresham, and the younger Wright, who hearing that all was
disclosed made away to the Country appointing to meet the next morning at
Dunchurch in Warwickshire Digbyes lodging. John Grant, with some Recusants
that he had associated to himself, had broke up the same night a stable of
Bourch a Rider of great horses, and carried away seven or eight belonging to
certain Noblemen of the Country; for he did think the conspiracy had taken
effect, and was preparing to surprise the Lady Elizabeth, whose residence was
not far from the place. But within a few hours Catesby, Percy, and the others
that were fled from London bringing assurance that all was failed, they
resolved upon a public rebellion, and pretending the quarrel of Religion
labored to draw some companies together, yet when they had gathered all their
forces they did not exceed fourscore in all.

Sir Fulk Grevill Lieutenant deputy of Warwickshire hearing of the riot that
Grant had committed, and apprehending it to be the beginning of a Rebellion
sent to advertise the Towns about, and warned them to be on their gaurd. The
Sheriffs of the County convening the people likewise in arms pursued them
from shire to shire. Sir Richard Walch the Sheriff of Worcestershire having
tried where they had taken harbor, sent a Trumpet and Messenger to command
them to render unto him in his Majesty's name, promising to intercede for their
lives. But they hearing their fault to be unpardonable returned answer, that he
had need of better assistants then the numbers that accompanied him before he
could either command or compel them. The Sheriff provoked by their arrogant
answer prepared to assail the house. And they making defense it happened that a
spark of fire falling among some powder, which they were drying, did kindle and
blew up the same, wherewith their hands, faces and sides were sore scorched and
burnt, as they lost courage, and opening the gate exposed themselves to the
peoples fury. Catesby, Percy, and Tho. Winter joining backs and resolving
rather to dye then to be taken, the two first were killed with one shot, the
other after some wounds made prisoner, the two Wrights were killed, Rockwood,
Grant, Digby, and Bates were taken, Tresham had stayed at London, and changing
his lodging thought to lurk till he he should find occasion to escape by sea,
but was in end found out. So were Robert Winter and one Littleton, and all of
them committed to the Tower of London.

Being examined Thomas Winter ingenuously confessed all, setting down the
particulars under his hand, and acknowledging the offense to be greater then
could be forgotten. Digby excused the crime by the despair they were driven
unto, having hopes given them at the Kings first coming to the Crown that the
Catholics should have the exercise of their Religion permitted, which being
denied they had taken these wicked courses. Tresham in his confession named
Garnet the Jesuit as privy to the conspiracy: but afterward by his wives
instigation did deny it, affirming that he had wronged him, and not seen him
once these sixteen years. Yet Garnet being apprehended some months after
confessed that they met diverse times within the last half year. Tresham dyed in
the prison, the rest were put to the trial of a Jury, and condemned; Digby,
Grant, Robert Winter, and Thomas Bates, were executed at the western gate of S.
Paul's in the end of January; Thomas VVinter, Ambrose Rockwood, Robert Keys and
Guido Faulks who had wrought at the mine, suffered in like sort in the Court
near the Parliament house.

This was the end of that conspiracy, the like whereof in no man's memory has
been heard. We have heard of Kings treacherously killed, of practices against
Estates and Commonwealths; but such a Monster of conspiracies (as Thuan calls
it) no Country nor age did ever produce. The King, Queen, with their posterity,
the Nobility, Clergy, Judges, Barons, Knights, Gentry and in a manner the whole
kingdom to be in one moment all destroyed, was a wickedness beyond all
expression, but blessed be God, this monster which was long in breeding, in the
very birth was choked and smothered.

The King giving meeting of the Parliament the same day that the conspiracy was
discovered, made a long speech to the Estates, wherein having aggravated the
danger by many circumstances, and greatly magnified the mercies of God in the
discovery, when he came to the trial and punishment, was observed to keep a
marvelous temper in his discourse, wishing no innocent person either forain or
domestic should receive blame or harm thereby: For however said he, the blind
superstition of their errors in religion has been the only motive of this
desperate attempt, it must not be thought that all who profess the Roman
Religion are guilty of the same: for as it is true (I keep his Majesty's own
words) that no other sect of Heretic (not excepting Turk, Jew, or Pagan, nay
not those of Calecut that adore the Devil) did ever maintain by the grounds of
their religion, that it was lawful and meritorious to murder Princes or
people for the quarrel of religion; Yet it is as true on the other side, that
many honest men blinded peradventure with some opinions of Popery, as if they
be not sound in questions of Real presence, the number of the Sacraments, and
some such school questions, do either not know, or not believe at least, all
the true grounds of Popery, which is indeed the Mystery of iniquity, and
therefore do we justly confess that many Papists, especially our forefathers,
laying their only trust upon Christ and his merits, may be saved, detesting in
that point and thinking that cruelty of Puritanes worthy of fire that will
admit no salvation to any Papists. And so concluding that part of his
discourse, said, As upon the one part many honest men seduced with some errors
of Popery, may yet remain good and faithful subjects, so upon the other part
none of those that truly know and believe the whole grounds of Popery, can
prove either good Christians or faithful subjects. The speech is to be seen
amongst his Majesty's works, and is worthy the reading for wise directions
given in that business.

The news of this conspiracy were speedily advertised to the Council of
Scotland, and a command given for a public thanksgiving in all the Churches
for his Majesty's deliverance, but the cause was left to every man's conjecture
(albeit the advertisement did bear expressly, that the contrivers were Papists,
and their only quarrel Religion) This being told, to the King, and that one
of the Privy Counselors had said, that the conspiracy proceeded of a mere
discontent the people had conceived at his Majesty's Government, he was
mightily offended, and from that forth held his affection to his service
continually suspected.

Information was made at the same time, An. 1606.
that some of the Ministers imprisoned at Blackness did blame the Chancellor
for their meeting at Aberdene, offering that they had warrant from him to meet,
and his promise that they should incur no danger for the same. The King to
understand the truth thereof directed his servant Sir William Irwyn to inquire
at the imprisoned Ministers, what dealing they had with the Chancellor in that
business: their answer was, That a little before their meeting at Aberdene Mr.
John Forbes, and Mr. John Welsh had sought his advice touching their convening
and that he asking them what they intended to do; they answered, that fearing
the establishment of Bishops they were to do their best for withstanding the
same. And that he to encourage them did promise all the assistance he could
give that way: which they took to be an allowance of their meeting. A letter
hereupon was directed to certain of the Council to call the Ministers, and if
they stood to their saying to hear what the Chancellor would answer. They
maintaining that which they had said, and the Chancellor called to his Answer
affirmed that he was entreated by them to oppose the restitution of Bishops
temporalities, which then was in working, promising that he should not be
questioned for his Religion, which they understood to be Popish. This denied by
the Ministers they fell in a sharp contest; which continued some space
withwords not seemly on either part. The Ministers for clearing his approbation
of their Assembly, did further allege that he had uttered so much to Mr.
Walter Balcanquell and Mr. James Balfour Ministers at Edinburgh, who being
examined touching their knowledge, Mr. Walter Balcanquel Balcanquell did
affirm, That the Chancellor in private to himself had commended them for
maintaining the liberty of the Church, which was not a little prejudiced as he
said by the continuation of Assemblies from year to year. The same he was said
to have spoken to Mr. James Balfour, but he excused himself by forgetfulness,
saying he did not remember any such speeches. This report made to the King, he
said, That none of the two deserved credit, and that he saw the Ministers would
betray Religion rather then submit themselves to government: And that the
Chancellor would betray the King for the malice he carried to the Bishops.

By this contest always the Chancellor was made more tractable in the
restitution of Bishops temporalities, which he had strongly resisted unto that
time; And in the Parliament kept at Perth, in the beginning of July showed a
great desire to promote the same. This Parliament had been indicted to keep at
Edinburgh in June preceding, and the Earl of Dunbar employed to see all matters
carried therein to his Majesty's mind. The Chancellor (whether out of
emulation to show his greatness, or that he feared some affront by the Earl of
Dunbar) went on the streets accompanied with the Burgesses in great numbers,
who otherwise then was their custom did walk with their swords. Dunbar taking
this in ill part, yet dissembling his offense caused adjourn the Parliament to
the first of July, and therewith presented a warrant for removing the same to
the Town of Perth, which coming unlooked for, made the Burgesses forthink their
doing.

At Perth it happened the very first day the Lord Seaton and Alexander his
brother to encounter the Earl of Glencarn in the Bridgegate, where drawing
their weapons against others a great tumult was raised, which continued a
certain space and disturbed the Council, that as then was sitting: the Lord
Seaton being tried to have invaded the other, which he did for revenge of his
uncles slaughter, he was cited before the Council for troubling the
Parliament; but leaving the town he went home, and for his not appearing was
denounced Rebel. It was held an ominous beginning, and gave many to think that
matters would not succeed well, but the Earl of Dunbar did so wisely and with
so great care prevent every thing that was like to breed trouble, as all things
were carried from that time forth in a most peaceable sort.

There were attending in the town abundance of Ministers laboring all they
could secretly to make some perturbation. The Earl calling them to his lodging
did rebuke them sharply, saying, That it seemed strange to him, that they who
had so often petitioned to have the Act of annexation dissolved should go about
to hinder the same, now when the King was to do it in part, specially
considering there was nothing to be moved in prejudice of their discipline. And
that for removing the differences that were amongst them in that point, his
Majesty had resolved, as they knew by the letters some of them had received, to
call the most learned and discreet of both sides before himself, and have
matters composed so far as might be to their content. More fitting, he said, it
were for you to whom his Majesty has addressed his letters, to have been
preparing your selves for the journey. And I should advise you for your own
good, and the peace of the Church, not to write to the King any more, but
rather study by your peaceable behavior to procure favor to your brethren
that are in trouble. With these speeches he did quiet them, and so the
Parliament went on, and after some few days ended in great peace.

In this Parliament diverse good constitutions were made, but the two principal
were the Acts of his Majesty's Prerogative; and the Act entitled, The
restitution of the estate of Bishops, which title gives many to mistake the
truth of things, and think that before this time the estate of Bishops was
overthrown and cast down, whereas the same was never so much as intended. Only
by this Act the temporalities of Bishoprics, which by the Act of Annexation
were made to belong to the Crown, were restored in regard it was seen, that the
Bishops were disabled to attend their service in the Church and State by the
want thereof.

Soon after the Parliament dissolved such of the Clergy as his Majesty called
to Court went together, of the one side went the Archbishops of S. Andrews and
Glasgow, the Bishops of Orkney, Galloway, and Mr. James Nicolson who was
destinate Bishop of Dunkeld, on the other part were Mr. Andrew Melvill, Mr.
James Melvill, Mr. James Balfour, and Mr. William Watson, Mr. William Scot, Mr.
John Carmichall, and Mr. Adam Colt. All these arriving at London about the
beginning of Sept. had warning given them to attend the 20th of that month at
Hampton Court.

The King had appointed some of the Bishops of England to attend during the
conference, and preach by course upon the subjects presented to them. Dr.
Barlow Bishop of Lincoln began, taking for his text the 28 verse of the 20
chap. of the Acts, whereby he took occasion to prove out of the Scriptures and
Fathers the supremacy of Bishops above Presbyters; and to show the
inconveniences of Parity in the Church; with the confusion arising from the
same. Dr. Buckridge Bishop of Rochester took for his text the Precept of the
Apostle, Omnis animaetc. Romans 13. 1. where falling to speak of the Kings
supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, he did handle that point both soundly and
learnedly to the satisfaction of all the hearers: only it grieved the Scots
Ministers, to hear the Pope and Presbytery so often equalled in their
opposition to sovereign Princes. Dr. Andrews Bishop of Chichester followed, who
choosed for his text the first verses of the 10 chapter of Numbers, confirming
thirdly the power of Kings in Convocating Synods and Counsels. The fourth was
Dr. King Bishop of London, he took for his theme the 11 verse of the 8 chapter
of Canticles, and thereupon discoursing of the Office of Presbyters did prove
lay Elders to have no place nor office in the Church, and the late device to be
without all warrant of Precept or example, either in Scripture or in Antiquity.
This course his Majesty took as conceiving that some of the Ministers should be
moved by force of reason to quit their opinions, and give place to the truth;
but that seldom happens where the mind is prepossessed with prejudice
either against person or matter.

The first audience was at Hampton the 22 of September; at which besides the
Bishops and Ministers from Scotland, were present the Earls of Dunbarre,
Argile, Glencarne, Sir Thomas Hamilton Advocate, and Sir Alexander Straiton: Of
the English Dr. Montague Dean of the Charpell was only admitted to stay: There
the King declaring the purpose for which he had called them, spoke a few words
to this effect: That having left the Church of Scotland in peace at his parting
forth of it, he did now hear of great disturbances in the same; whereof he
desired to understand the true cause, and to have their advice, how the same
might best be removed. This being, said he, the errand in general for which I
have called you, I should be glad to hear your opinions touching that meeting
at Aberdene, where an handful of Ministers in contempt of my authority, and
against the discharge given them did assemble; and though they were neither a
sufficient number, nor the accustomed order kept, they would take upon them to
call it a general Assembly, and have since proudly maintained it by declining
my Council and such other means as they pleased to use. The rather I would
hear your minds, because I am informed that diverse Ministers do justify that
meeting, and in their public preachings commend these brethren as persons
distressed, which in effect is to proclaim me a tyrant and Persecutor.

Mr. James Melvill answering first, Mr. James Melvills answer in name of the
rest.
said, that there was no such discharge given to those Ministers that met at
Aberdene, as was alleged, adjuring, Sir Alexander Straiton who was said to
have given the charge, to declare in his Majesty's presence how that matter was
carried. As to the absence of Moderator and Clerk, he said, that none of these
were essential parts of an Assembly, and that the Moderator absenting himself
of purpose and the Clerk refusing to serve, the brethren convened might
lawfully create others in their places, so as the Ministers having warrant to
convene from the word of God, and from his Majesty's laws, as also coming
thither by direction of their Presbyteries, he could not in his conscience
condemn them.

Well then, His Majesty proponeth three questions to them.
said the King, I shall desire you to answer me three things, that I will ask:
First, if it be lawful to pray publicly for persons convicted by the lawful
Judge as persons being in distress, and aflicted? 2 Whether I may not being a
Christian King, by my authority royal, convocate and prorogue, and desert for
just and necessary causes known to myself any Assemblies or meetings within my
Dominions? 3 Whether or not may I by my authority-call, and convene before me
and my Council, whatsoever person, or persons, Civil, or Ecclesiastial, for
whatsoever offenses committed by them in whatsoever place within my Dominions,
and if I may not take cognition of the offense, and give sontence therein? And
further, whether or not are all my subjects being cited to answer before me and
my Council, obliged to compeir and acknowledge me or them for judges in these
offenses?

Mr. James answering, A time is desired by them and granted.
said that the questions were weighty, and craved a great deliberation;
wherefore he would humbly entreat his Majesty to grant them a time to confer
and advise together, that they might all give one direct answer. This desire
granted, they were commanded to advise and meet together that night, and be
ready to answer the next day. The second audience.
At this meeting the Earls of Salisbury and Northampton with diverse of the
English Clergy were present. The Ministers desiring to have the meeting more
private, requested the Earl of Dumbarre to move the King therein, and that none
but Scotsmen should be present; fearing (as they said) that some unseemly words
might escape them. But this was denied, and they warned to speak with that
respect which became subjects. It was believed that the King should have begun
with the questions proponed in the former meeting, The Bishops judgment of the
meeting at Aberdene.
but his Majesty taking another course, required them to declare one by one,
their judgments touching Aberdene Assembly. The Bishops (being first asked) did
all condemn the meeting as turbulent, factious, and unlawful.

Mr. Andrew Melvill then being enquired made answer, Mr. Addrew Melvills answer
touching the same.
That he could not condemn the Assembly, being a private man; that he came into
England upon his Majesty's letter, without any Commission from the Church of
Scotland, and though he had Commission in dicta causa, and not hearing what
they could say for themselves, he could not give his judgment; Sentence he
said was given against them in a justice Court; how justly, he did remit that
to the great Judge; but for himself he would say as our Savior did in another
case, Quis me constituit judicem?

Mr. James Balfoure being next asked, Mr. James Balfour his answer.
Did pray his Majesty not to press him with any answer, for that he knew
nothing would be well taken, that proceeded from his mouth, and that Mr. Andrew
had answered his mind sufficiently.

Mr. James Melvill, Mr. Melvill his answer.
without giving a direct answer, began to tell, That since^ his coming to
London he had received diverse letters, and with them a Petition, that should
have been presented to the late Parliament in behalf of the warded Ministers,
which he was desired to offer unto his Majesty, and as he thought, the Petition
would make all their minds known.

The King taking the Petition and falling to read the same, willed the Advocate
to go on and receive the answer of the rest. And as the Advocate was
questioning Mr. William Scot and urging him with a distinct answer (for he used
many circumlocutions, Mr. William Scot his answer interrupted by Mr. Andrew
Melvill.
according to the custom) Mr. Andrew Melvill in a great passion said, That he
followed the instructions of Mr. John Hamilton his uncle, who had poisoned the
North with his Papistry, and that he was now become (...) Northampton asking
what he meant by that speech? the King said, he calls him, the mickle Devil:
and then foulding up the Petition, said, I see you are all set for maintaining
that base Conventicle of Aberdene? But what answers have you to give to the
questions I moved? It was answered, that they had conferred together, and
finding them to concern the whole Church, they would not by their particular
voices prejudge the same. But you will not I trust, said the King, call my
authority in question, and subject the determination of the same to your
Assemblies. This they said was far from their thoughts, but if his Majesty
should be pleased to set down in writing what he required, they should labor
to give him satisfaction.

Thus were they dismissed for that time, The Ministers called before the
Scottish Council.
and being the next day called before the Scottish Council (for after this
they were no more admitted to his Majesty's presence) they were enquired,
whether they had in their public prayers prayed for the warded Ministers, as
persons afflicted, and sufferers for Gods cause? Some of them confessed that
they had prayed for them, as persons in trouble, and distress: others, that
they had commended them to God, but remembered not in what words.

The 20 of October, they were again brought before the Scots Council, and had
the three questions delivered to them in writing; which they were command^to
answer severally: They are discharged to return into Scotland.
mean while they were discharged to return into Scotland without his Majesty's
license, and prohibited to come toward the Queen and Princes Court. The
Bishops and others of the Clergy that assisted them, were permitted to return.

The conference breaking up in this sort, and matters made worse rather then
better, The Kings pleasure touching the warded Ministers.
his Majesty's pleasure concerning the warded Ministers, which to this time had
been delayed, was signified by two several letters to the Council and
Justice. The letter to the Justice was as follows; Whereas in our Justice
Court holden at Linlithgow the 10 of January last, Mr. John Forbes Minister of
Awford; Mr. John Welsh Minister at Air; Mr. Robert Dury Minister at
Anstruther; Mr. Andrew Duncan Minister at Crail; Mr. Alexander Straghan
Minister at Crech; and Mr. John Sharp Minister at Kilmeny, were convicted of
the crime of Treason for their contemptuous and treasonable declining the
judgment of us and the Lords our secret Council; by a Declinatour subscribed
with their hands and presented in judgment before the said Lords; and that the
pronunciation of the doom was upon grave and weighty respects continued till
our pleasure was declared; We now considering the great insolency committed by
them, and how dangerous the example of such a fact may prove if it should go^
unpunished, specially since we of our accustomed lenity have given to these
declared Traitors more then sufficient time to have acknowledged their
offense, and made suit for our pardon; and that yet nothing has appeared in
them but an obdured obstinacy, without any token of resipiscence: albeit the
greatness of the offense in men of their function, whose actions should be
patterns of duty and obedience to others, has demerited most justly the
extremity of punishment appointed by law: yet according to our wonted clemency,
being willing to dispense with the rigor of law at this time, The letter to
the Justice prescriving the form of the sentence.
and not to inflict the punishment of death upon them; Our will and pleasure is
that you affix a Justice Court at Linlithgow, or any other place our Council
shall appoint, the 23 of October, and then cause doom of punishment forth of
our Dominions, during their natural lives to be pronounced against the said
Traitors: After which you shall return them to their wards, there to remain
for the space of a month, till they have made their preparations to depart;
before the expiring whereof, if they do not depart wind and weather serving,
or being departed shall return unto our Dominions without our license, the
ordinary death usually inflicted upon Traitors, shall be executed upon them.
And because this our clemency extended toward these above named may perhaps
move others to think, that for trespasses of this quality no greater rigor
will hereafter be used; to remove all such conceits, and that notice may be
taken of our full determination in the like case; you shall in open Court make
intimation to all our lieges, That if any hereafter shall offend in such an
high trespass, they shall be punished with all severity and the death due unto
Traitors be inflicted upon them with all rigor, the example of this our
present lenity not withstanding: And that it is our will you cause to be
recorded in your books of Adjournall, and publication made thereof at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other places needful.

By the letter directed to the Council, Mr. Charles Farum was ordained to be
confined in the Isle of Bute; A Letter from his Majesty to the Council.
Mr. John Monroe in Kintire; Mr. Robert Yongson in the Isle of Arran; Mr. James
Irwin in Orkney; Mr. William Forbes in Yeteland; Mr. James Gray in Cathnes; Mr.
Nathaniel Inglis in Southerland; and Mr. John Rosse in Lewis.

The Justice as he was commanded, did keep his Court at Linlithgow, and
pronounced the sentence and doom in the manner prescribed; The sentence
pronounced by the Justice.
Messengers were also directed to charge the other Ministers to enter into the
parts appointed for their confining, and not to exceed the same without
license, under pain of death. After which a Proclamation was made inhibiting
all Ministers to recommend either in their sermons, or prayers, the persons so
sentenced.

And lest the Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and others of their faction should
presume of any oversight to be given to them because of these proceedings
against the seditious Ministers, A Proclamation against Jesuits.
they were in like sort commanded by Proclamation to depart forth of the
Realm, and all the subjects inhibited to resset or entertain them, under the
pain of his Majesty's displeasure.

Mr. Andrew Melvill that would not be idle, Mr. Andrew Melvill committed to the
Tower.
and was still speaking against the Orders of the English Church, having
dispersed some bitter and scornful verses against the Rites used in his
Majesty's Chapel, which was brought to the King by one of the Chaplains, was
called before the Council of England, and charged with the injuring of the
State and Church: where in stead of acknowledging his offense, he behaved
himself insolently; and more like a mad man, then Divine; for which he was
committed in the Tower of London. There he remained three years and more, and
afterward upon the Duke of Bulloign his request, was sent to Sedan, where he
lived in no great respect, and contracting the Gout lay almost bedfast to his
death.

Whilst I am writing this, The Observation of the Writer.
there comes to my mind the hard and uncharitable dealing that he and his
faction used toward Patrick sometimes Archbishop of St. Andrews, who not
content to have persecuted that worthy man in his life, made him a long time
after his death the subject of their sermons; interpreting the miseries
whereunto he was brought, to be the judgment of God inflicted upon him for
withstanding their courses of discipline. If now one should take the like
liberty, and say, That God to whom the Bishop at his dying did commend his
cause, had taken a revenge of him, who was the chief instrument of his trouble;
it might be as probably spoken, and with some more likelihood then that which
they blasted forth against the dead Bishop. But away with such rash and bold
conceits, the love of God either to causes or persons is not to be measured by
these external and outward accidents.

But leaving this, the King being very desirous to have the Church quieted, An
Assembly indicted at Linlithgow.
and a solid and constant Order established for preventing the like offenses,
did call a general Assembly to meet at Linlithgow the 10 of December; and for
the better ordering of business, directed the Earl of Dunbarre to attend the
meeting. At the day many convened both Ministers and others. Of Ministers there
were reckoned one hundred thirty six: of Noblemen, Barons, and others, thirty
and three. Mr. James Nicolson elected to preside; the Earl of Dunbarre
presented a letter from his Majesty to this effect; His Majesty's letter to the
Assembly.
That it was not unknown what pains he had taken whilst he lived amongst them,
as well to root out Popery as to settle a good and perfect Order in the Church;
and that notwithstanding of his care bestowed that way, he had been continually
vexed by the jealousies of some perverse Ministers, who traducing his best
actions gave out amongst the people, that all he went about, was to thrall the
liberty of the Gospel. Neither content thus to have wronged him, they had in
his absence factiously banded themselves against such of their brethren as had
given their concurrence to the furtherance of his Majesty's just intentions,
upon the knowledge whereof he did lately call the most calm and moderate, as
he esteemed, of both sides unto his Court, thinking to have pacified matters
and removed the divisions arisen in the Church; but matters not succeeding as
he wished, he had taken purpose to convene them for setting down such rules as
he hoped should prevent the like troubles in after times, which he had
entrusted to his Commissioner the Earl of Dunbarre: willing them to consider
what was most fitting for the peace of the Church, and to apply themselves to
the obedience of his directions as they did expect his favor.

After the reading of the letter the overture was presented, conceived in this
form. An overture sent from his Majesty to the Assembly.
That his Majesty apprehending the greatest causes of the misgovernment of
Church affairs to be, that the same are often, and almost ordinarily committed
to such as for lack of wisdom and experience are no way able to keep things in
a good frame; for remedying this inconvenient, thinks meet, that presently
there be nominated in every Presbytery one of the most grave, godly, and of
greatest authority, and experience, to have the care of the Presbytery where
he remains, till the present jarres and fire of dissension which is among the
Ministry, and daily increases to the hinderance of the Gospel, be quenched
and taken away; and the Noblemen professing Papistry within the Kingdom be
either reduced to the profession of the truth, or then repressed by justice and
a due execution of the laws; and for encouragement of the said Moderators, and
the enabling them to the attendance of the Church affairs, his Majesty is
graciously pleased to allow every of them one hundred pounds Scots or two
hundred marks according to the quality of their Charge: but where the Bishops
are resident, his Majesty will have them to moderate and preside in these
meetings. As likewise because it often falls out that matters cannot be
decided in Presbyteries, by reason of the difficulties that arise, and that the
Custom is to remit the decision thereof to the Synod of the Diocie; It is his
Majesty's advice that the moderation of these Assemblies be committed to the
Bishops, who shall be burdened with the delation of Papists, and solicitation
of justice against those that will not be brought to obedience, in respect his
Majesty has bestowed on them places and means to bear out the charges and
burdens of difficill and dangerous actions, which other Ministers cannot so
well sustain, and undergo.

This overture seeming to import a great alteration in the discipline was not
well accepted of diverse; Some brethren deputed undergo to consider the
overture.
but his Majesty's Commissioner having declared that it was so far from the
Kings purpose to make any change in the present Discipline, as he did not long
for any thing more then to have it rightly settled and all these eyelists
removed which had given him so just occasion of discontent; they desired a time
to deliberate, and that a number of the most wise and learned might be selected
to confer thereupon, and report their opinions to the Assembly.

The brethren named in this conference, having debated every point at length,
The overture embraced with some cautions.
and considered the inconveniences that might arise by the change, especially
the usurpation that was feared, these constant Moderators should make upon
their brethren, resolved that the overture proponed was not to be refused; so
as certain cautions were added which were condescended to in manner following.
First, Cautions for the constant Moderators.
That the Moderators of Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies should not
presume to do any thing of themselves without the advice and consent of their
brethren. 2 That they should use no further jurisdiction nor power then
Moderators have been in use of, by the constitutions of the Church. 3 If it
should happen the Moderatours to be absent at any time from these meetings, it
should be in the power of Synods and Presbyteries to nominate another for
moderating in their absence. 4 When the place of a Moderatour in any
Presbytery should be void, the election of one to succeed should be made by
the whole Synod with consent of his Majesty's Commissioner. 5 If any of the
Moderatours should depart this life betwixt Assemblies, it should be lawful to
the Presbyteries to nominate one of the most grave and worthy of their number
for the place, unto the meeting of the next Synod. 6 That the Moderatours of
the Presbyteries should be subject to the trial and censure of the Synod; and
in case they usurped any further power over the brethren, then is given them by
the Assembly; the same should be a cause of deprivation from their Office of
Moderation, and they deprived thereof by the said Synods. 7 In like manner the
Moderatour of the Provincial Assembly should be tried and censured by the
general Assembly, and in case he was found remiss, or to have usurped any
further power then the simple place of a Moderatour he should be deprived
therefore by the general Assembly. 8 That the Moderatours of every Presbytery
and Synod with their Scribes should be astricted to be present at the general
Assembly, and be reputed members thereof, by bringing with them the Registers
of the Acts and proceedings in their meetings to be seen, that so their
diligence and fidelity in their Charges might be known. 9 That it should be
lawful to each Presbytery to send two or three Commissioners to the general
Assembly, by and besides the Moderatour and Scribe, if they should think it
convenient. 10 That the Moderatour of the general Assembly should be chosen by
the voices of the whole Assembly, lites being first made and proponed, as in
times passed. 11 That in the Synods where there is not a Bishop actually
resident, the like lite should be made of the Moderatours of the Presbyteries
within these bounds, and one of them elected to moderate the same Assembly, so
as his Majesty's Commissioners give their advice thereunto. And lastly, That
the Rolls of Moderatours in every Presbytery should be examined, to see if
there was any other of the number fit to use the said office, and that they
whom this present. Assembly should nominate, to accept the said Moderation upon
them without making any shift or excuse.


These cautions being read in the full Assembly were approved of all, The
cautions and overture approved.
and the overture thereafter put to voices was allowed, and the same enacted as
a conclusion of the whole Assembly, four only of the whole number disassenting;
other four refusing to vote because they had no commission, as they pretended,
from their Presbyteries, and two answering, Non liquet. This conclusion taken,
the rolls of Ptesbyteries were called, and none found more sufficient then they
who did presently moderate these meetings; whereupon an Ordinance was made,
that they should continue in their Charges, and not be altered unless the
Synod did make another choice.

This business ended, A complaint of the Papists and their ininsolencie.
a great complaint was made of the insolency of Papists, chiefly in the North
parts, and of the superstitions used at the burialls of the Lord Ogilvy, and
Lord of Gight, who had deceased a few months before. The Marquis of Huntley
being also returned lately from Court, had given out that he brought a Warrant
from his Majesty to stay all Ecclesiastical proceedings against him, his Lady
and family: by which reports those of the Roman profession were not a little
encouraged, and were become open contemners of the Censures of the Church.

These complaints being greatly taken to heart by the whole Assembly, it was
concluded that a Petition should be preferred to his Majesty in all their
names, Petition from the Assembly to his Majesty.
for confining the Marquis of Huntley, the Earls of Angus and Arroll, with
their Ladies, in some Cities and Towns where they might by the hearing of the
Word, and conference with learned men be reduced from their errors, at least
kept from doing harm, and from the perverting of others. To present this
Petition and the Act of constant Moderators, choice was made of Mr. James Law
Bishop of Orkney, and he dispatched to Court; which done, the Assembly brake up
and dissolved with the good satisfaction of all.

Nor was it long before the Kings answer returned in these particulars, His
Majesty's answer.
and first concerning the Marquis of Huntley, his Majesty declared, That he had
obtained no Warrant for impeding the Church discipline, neither against
himself, or any of his family; and that only (because he affirmed that he had
kept all the injunctions prescrived, except that he had not communicated) the
Council was desired after trial of his obedience in the rest of the
particulars enjoined, to command the Presbyteries of the North to stay their
proceedings against him for his not communicating, concerning which point he
had certified the Marquis, that howsoever some space was granted to him for his
better resolution, if he did persist in his errors, and would not be reclaimed,
he would make no other reckoning of him then of one that studied to make
himself the head of a faction, and rather root him out, An. 1607.
then nourish him in his follies by a preposterous toleration.

As to the confining of him, and the other Noblemen in the Cities and places
set down in the Assemblies Petition, His Majesty's pleasure touching the Popish
Noblemen.
his Majesty did think it too rigorous, unless they were tried to have
committed some offense deserving the same. Wherefore he would have them called
before the Council, the Bishop of the Diocie, Moderator of the Presbytery, and
the Minister of the Parish being present, and enquired concerning their
behavior, and whether they did resort or not ordinarily to Sermon; wherein if
they should be tried to have transgressed, his pleasure was they should be
confined within so many miles compass, as are distant betwixt the houses of
their residence, and the City, wherein it was desired they should be confined
to the end they may repair to their houses, when the necessity of their
business requires, and at other times resort to the City or Town designed for
their instruction, where they should be tied to stay ten days together, and
during their stay hear Sermons, admit conference, and forbear the company of
Jesuits, Seminary Priests and others of that profession. And if it should
happen them to have any business in Council or Session, that license should be
granted unto them for repairing thither during a certain a certain space,
providing they did resort to the Church, and gave no scandal by their
behavior.

For the superstitious rites used at the burial of the Lord Ogilvy and Gight,
his Majesty's pleasure was, that their sons should be called before the
Council and committed, but no sentence should be given till the whole
circumstances were tried and notified to him.

As touching the conclusion taken for the constant Moderators, Direction to the
Council for constant Moderators.
his Majesty did thank them for their travels; but whereas they were of opinion
that the Act should be universally received, ( for so much the Assembly had
written) he said, that he knew them too well to expect any such thing at their
hands. Their conscientious zeal to maintain parity, and a desire to keep all
things in a continual constant volubility, he said was such as they would
never agree to a settled form of government. Besides, he knew that diverse of
these who were nominated to the places of Moderation, would refuse to accept
the same, lest they should be thought to affect superiority above their
brethren: That therefore he would have the Council to look to that business,
and direct Charges as well for those that were nominated to accept the
moderation, as to the Ministers of every Presbytery to acknowledge them that
were nominated.

The event justified his Majesty's opinion, for all the next year there was no
matter that troubled the Council as that of the constant Moderator. The Synod
of Perth discharged.
The Synod of Perth convening in March thereafter, did in direct opposition of
the Act concluded at Linlithgow inhibit all the Presbyteries within their
bounds to acknowledge the conclusion taken in that meeting, and discharged Mr.
Alexander Lindesay Parson of Simmedose, who was nominated by the Assembly
Moderator of Perth, to exercise the said office under pain of the Censure of
the Church. The Synod being cited before the Council for this presumption, was
discharged to meet thereafter, and the Presbyteries within the bounds commanded
under pain of Rebellion to accept their Moderators.

In Fife the resistance was no less; The Synod of Fife discharged.
for the Synod being continued twice, first from April to June, then from June
to September, meeting at that time in Dysert, and pressed by the Lords,
Lindesay Scone, and Halirudhouse, Commissioners from the Council, to accept
the Archbishop of S. Andrews for their Moderator, did obstinately refuse, and
dissolved without doing any thing; hereupon was that Synod likewise discharged,
and all the Burghs inhibited to receive them, if perhaps they should reassemble
after the Commissioners were gone. The Presbyteries of Mers were also very
troublesome, and the Council so vexed with complaints of that kind, as not a
day passed without some one or other. But all this opposition proved vain, and
they in end forced to obey, did find by experience this settled course much
better then their circular elections.

A Commission came in this mean time for planting some learned and worthy
person in the place of Mr. Andrew Melvill at S. Andrews. A Provest placed in
the new College of S. Andrews.
The Commission was directed to the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, the Bishops of
Dunkeld, Rosse, and Birchen, the Lord Balmerinoch, the Advocate, the Lord of
Balcomy, and Commissar of S. Andrews; who meeting in the new College the 16 of
June, after the reading of his Majesty's Letter (whereby it was declared, That
the said Mr. Andrew being judged by the Council of England to have trespassed
in the highest sort against his Majesty, and for the same committed to the
Tower till he should receive his just punishment, was no more to return to that
charge) they according to the power given them, did proceed and make choice of
Mr. Robert Howy to be Provost of the said College, ordaining him to be
invested in the said office with all the immunities and privileges accustomed,
which was accordingly performed in the July thereafter, and he entered to his
Charge the 27 of that month.

It remained that some course should be taken with the Ministers that were
stayed at London, The Ministers permitted to return from London.
as it was once purposed, were to be provided with some Livings in England; but
that Church not liking to entertain such guests, they were all permitted to
return home upon their promise to live obedient and peaceable. M. James Melvill
was only retained, who lived a while confined at Newcastle, was after some
months licensed to come to Berwick, where he deceased. A man of good learning,
sober and modest, but so addicted to the courses of Mr. Andrew Melvill his
Uncle, as by following him he lost the Kings favor, which once he enjoyed in a
good measure, and so made himself, and his labors unprofitable to the Church.

Now let us see what happened in the Kingdom during this time: Alexander Lord
Spynie killed.
The King was ever seriously commending to the Council the removing of the
barbarous fewds wherewith he had been so greatly troubled, diverse whereof by
their travells were this year agreed, yet new occasions daily arising they were
kept in a continual business. David Lindesay younger of Edyell seeking to
revenge the slaughter of his Uncle Mr. Walter Lindesay whom David Master of
Crawford had killed, as he lay in wait of the said Master (who was then by the
decease of his Father succeeded in the Earldome) through a pitiful mistake did
invade Alexander Lord Spynie, and killed him in stead of the other. The
Noblemans death was much regrated for the many good parts he had, and the hopes
his friends conceived that he should have raised again that noble and ancient
house of Crawford to the former splendour and dignity, all which perished with
him: he that was in place and escaped the peril being a base unworthy
prodigal, and the undoer of all, that by the virtue of his Ancestors had been
long kept together.

Another business no less troublesome did also then happen betwixt the Earl of
Morton and the Lord Maxwell for holding of Courts in Eskdale, Trouble betwixt
the Earl of Morton and Lord Maxwell.
unto which both did pretend right. The preparation on both sides was great,
and like to have caused much unquietness, if the same had not been carefully
prevented; both parties being charged by the Council to dissolve their forces,
and not to come toward the bounds: the Earl of Morton obeyed, Maxwell
contemning the charge went on, and by a cartell did appeal Morton to the
combat: whereupon he was committed in the Castle of Edinburgh, Maxwell
committed makes an escape.
and after some two months stay made an escape. No sooner found he himself at
liberty, then he fell a plotting the Lord of Iohnstons murder, which he
wrought in a most treacherous manner; he pretending to use his friendship in
obtaining his Majesty's pardon, employed Sir Robert Maxwell of Orchardtowne,
whose Sister Iohnston had married, to draw on a meeting betwixt them, as he
did; at a little hill called Achmanhill they did bring each of them one servant
only as was agreed, the said Sir Robert being present as a friend to both. At
meeting after they had courteously saluted one another, and conferred a little
space very friendly, the two servants going aside, the one called Charles
Maxwell a Brother of Kirkhouse, the other William Iohnston of Lockerby, Charles
falls in quarrelling, The Lord of Iohnston most treacherously killed by
Maxwell.
the other shoots a pistol at him, the Lord of Iohnston making to part
them, the Lord Maxwell shoots him in the back with two bullets; whereupon he
falls, and for a while keeping off the Lord Maxwell who made to strike him
with his sword, expired in the place; it was the 6th of April in the year 1608,
that this happened. An. 1608.
The fact was detested by all honest men, and the Gentleman's misfortune sore
lamented, for he was a man full of wisdom and courage, and every way well
inclined, and to have been by his too much confidence in this sort
treacherously cut off, was a thing most pitiful. Maxwell ashamed of that he
had done, forsook the Country, and had his estate forfeited; some years after
stealing quietly into the Kingdom he was apprehended in the Country of
Cathnes, and beheaded at Edinburgh the 21 of May, 1613.

The purpose of civilizing the Isles was this year again renewed, The Earl of
Argile made Lieutenant of the Isles
and a long Treaty kept with the Marquis of Huntley thereupon, but he breaking
off by reason of the small duty he did offer for the North Isles, the Earl of
Argile was made Lieutenant thereof for the space of six months, in which time
it was hoped that some good should be wrought, and the people reduced to good
manners; yet nothing was done to any purpose, the great men of those parts
studying only the increase of their own grandeur, and striving whose command
should be greatest.

In the Parliament of England that held in November preceding, A Parliament in
Scotland for the union.
the matter of union received many crossings, and of all the Articles
condescended among the Commissioners, only that was enacted which concerns
the abolishing of hostile laws. The King grieved at this exceedingly, and
conceiving that the work should more easily be effected, if a beginning was
made in Scotland; did call a Parliament in August, which was kept by Lodowick
Duke of Lennox, as Commissioner for his Majesty, the Earl of Montrose being
then deceased. The Estates to satisfy the Kings desire did allow all the
Articles concluded in the Treaty, with a provision, That the same should be in
like manner ratified by the Parliament of England, Provisions for the union.
otherwise the conclusions taken should not have the strength of a law. It was
also declared, that if the union should happen to take effect, the Kingdom
notwithstanding should remain an absolute and free Monarchy, and the
fundamental laws receive no alteration. But the Parliament of England either
disliking the union, as fearing some prejudice by it to their Estate, or upon
some other hidden cause, did touch no more the business, and so that good work
tending to the advantage of both Kingdoms was left and quite deserted.

In the Church a new trouble was moved by the revolt that Huntley and the two
Earls of Angus and Arroll made; An Assembly in Linlithgow for restraining
Papists.
diverse especially in the North parts falling away by their example. This being
represented to the King, he gave order for calling an Assembly, which convened
at Linlithgow in the end of July. Therein the Earls of Dunbar, Winton, and
Lothian sat Commissioners for the King. The Bishop of Orkney elected to
preside, having showed the occasion of the present meeting to be the growth and
increase of Papists in all the quarters of the Kingdom, it was thought meet to
take up the names of those that made open profession of Popery, and likewise of
those that were suspected to favor the course, that their number and forces
being known the remedies might be the better advised and provided.

The number was found to very great, The Marquis of Huntley excommunicated.
chiefly in the North, and the Marquis of Huntley delated by all as the only
cause of the defection in those bounds: he being cited to appear before the
Assembly under the pain of excommunication, and neither compeiring nor sending
any excuse, was ordained to be excommunicated, and the sentence accordingly
pronounced in the hearing of the whole Assembly. This was appointed to be
intimated in all the Churches, and no absolution given upon whatsoever offers
in regard of his manifold apostasies without the advice of the general Church:
The like course was concluded to be kept with Angus, Arroll, and the Lord
Semple, how soon the processes intended against them were brought to an end.

This done, The causes of the defection partly in the Church.
the Assembly began to rip up the causes of the defection more narrowly, which
they found to proceed from the Ministers in a part, their negligence in
teaching, and catechizing of people, the too sudden admission of young men
into the Ministry, and the distraction of minds among those that are
admitted; for remedy whereof it was ordained as follows:

First, The remedies of the same.
that they should apply themselves to the exercise of their function with
greater diligence then they were accustomed, and take a special care of young
children to see them instructed in the Belief, the Lords prayer, and ten
Commandments, whereof they should examine every child at the age of six
years, and yearly enquire of their profiting and increase in knowledge.

2 That some longer time should be prescrived for the admission of men to the
Ministry, and the exceptions contained in the Act of the age of Ministers to
be admitted reserved to the cognition of the General Assembly.

3 That they use a greater diligence in the processing of Papists, and that
none out of corrupt favor should grant them any oversight under the pain of
deposition.

4 That all who carried office in the Church, should be careful to eschew
offenses, and endeavor to keep love and peace among themselves.

5 And for the present distractions in the Church, seeing the same did arise
partly from a diversity of opinions touching the external government of the
Church, and partly from divided affections, the last of these two being the
most dangerous, as not suffering the brethren to unite themselves against the
common enemy; they were all in the fear of God exhorted to lay down whatsoever
grudge or rancour they had conceived, and to be reconciled in heart and
affection one to another: Which all that were present did faithfully promise by
the holding up their hands.

But the fault not being in the Ministers alone, The cause of the defection
proceeding from others.
and seen to proceed from other causes also; as from the oversight of Jesuits
and Priests, and their entertainment in the Country; the preferment of men to
public offices that were suspected in Religion; the favor showed to Papists
by them in places of chief authority; Masie Priests admitted without his
Majesty's warrant, and no security taken for their not returning; Licenses
granted to Noblemens sons for going abroad, and their education trusted to men
of contrary profession; advocation to the Council of matters properly
belonging to the Ecclesiastical Judicatories; and the lack of Preachers in
many parts of the land; It was concluded that certain Petitions should be
formed and presented to his Majesty by some selected Commissioners for
remedying these evils, which were formed in this manner:

First, Supplication to his Majesty for redress of these evils.
that an humble supplication should be made by the whole Assembly, entreating
his Majesty not to permit any Papist, or suspected of Popery to bear charge in
Council, Session, or in any Burgh or City, and where his Majesty did know any
such to occupy these places, humbly to crave that order might be taken for
their removing.

2 That the laws made against Papists should receive execution and no favor be
granted unto them by the Officers of State, with a prohibition to the Council
to meddle in affairs Ecclesiastical, or to discharge the processes led by
Ministers against Papists and others contemners of Church discipline.

3 That Papists abjuring their Religion in hope of preferment to Offices of
State, Petitions to his Majesty for repressing Popery.
should not be admitted thereto till they had given five years probation at
least.

4 That the sons of Noblemen professing Popery should be committed to the
custody of such of their friends as are sound in Religion.

5 That a Commission should be granted to every Bishop within his Dioces, and
to such well affected Noblemen, Barons and Gentlemen, as the Commissioners of
the Assembly should nominate, for apprehending of Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
excommunicated Papists, and traffiquers against Religion.

6 That the Searchers of ships should seize upon all Books that are brought
unto the Country, and present them to the Ministers of the Town where the
ships shall happen to arrive.

7 That excommunicate Papists be put in close prison, and none have access
unto them but such as are known to be of sound Religion.

8 That the Deputies of excommunicates be not suffered to enjoy any office
under them, and that some others be appointed by his Majesty to serve in their
places.

9 Finally, that his Majesty should be humbly entreated to plant the unprovided
Churches, especially the Churches of the Chapel Royal, with competent
Stipends.

The Commissioners chosen to present these Petitions were, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, the Earl of VVigton, the Lord Kilsith, Mr. William Couper Minister at
Perth, and James Nisbit Burgess of Edinburgh, together with the Petitions they
received a Letter from the Assembly conceived in these terms:

HAving convened in this General Assembly by your Majesty's favorable license
and permission, and shadowed under your Majesty's wings with the presence of
your Majesty's Commissioners, we did set our selves principally to consider the
cause of the late growth of Papists among us, and found by an universal
complaint, the chief cause to be this, that where the Church in these parts was
accustomed to be nourished by your Majesty's fatherly affection as the most
kind parent of piety and Religion, we have been left in the hands of unkind
stepfathers, who esteeming us an uncouth birth to them have entreated us
hardly, and cherished our adversaries by all means they could, as your
Majesty's highness will perceive more clearly by the overtures for remedy,
which in all humble submission we present to your Majesty by these honorable
Commissioners and brethren, humbly entreating your Majesty to take compassion
upon us, your Majesty's loving children in this land, that we may be taken out
of the hands of these who are more ready to deliver the heads of the Kings sons
to Jehu, if the time were answerable to their wishes, then to nourish and bring
them up to perfection.

There is no cause, Sir, why the Apostates who have lately grown up in this
land should be feared, whatever they be in estate or number; for with them are
the golden Calves, which God will destroy; with them is Dagon, whose second
fall shall be worse then the first; but with your Majesty is the Lord your God
to fight for you, and under your standard are the best of the Nobility, the
greatest number of Barons, and all your Majesty's Burgesses, unspotted in
Religion, and resolute all of them for Gods honor, and your Majesty's
preservation to spend their goods and lives and whatever is due to them: We
also your Majesty's humble servants the Bishops and Ministers of the Gospel in
this land, now reconciled to others with a most hearty affection, by your
Majesty's only means and the careful labors of your Majesty's trusty
Counselor, and our very good Lord the Earl of Dunbar, are for out parts most
ready to all service in our callings to stir up your Majesty's subjects by
the word that God has put in our mouths, to the performing of that obedience
which God and nature does oblige them unto, and by Gods grace shall go before
them in all good e^sample. These things we leave to be delivered by our
Commissioners, whom we beseech your Majesty to hear graciously, and after some
favorable consideration of our case, and present suits, to give such answer as
in your Highness wisdom shall be thought fittest. And now with our humble
thanks to your Majesty for the liberty granted to meet in this Assembly, and
our most hearty prayers to God Almighty for your Highness long life and
prosperous reign, we rest.

This letter was subscribed by the Earls of Crawford, Glencarne and Kinghorne,
the Lords Lindesay, Baclugh, Salton, London, Torphichen, Blantire, Scone,
Halirudhouse, and a great number of the Clergy and Barons.

The Chancellor hearing of the Assemblies proceedings, and supposing himself to
be specially aimed at in all that business (wherein he was not mistaken) moved
the Secretary to take journey to Court, for obviating these courses so far as
he might. But he at his coming did meet with a business that concerned himself
more nearly, for about the same time Cardinal Bellarmin^ had published an
Answer to the Kings Apology, The Secretaries journey to Court.
and therein charged him with inconstancy, objecting a Letter that he had sent
to Clement the eighth whilst he lived in Scotland, in which he had recommended
to his Holiness the Bishop of Vaison for obtaining the dignity of a Cardinal,
that so he might be the more able to advance his affairs in the Court of Rome.
The Treatise coming to the Kings hands, and he falling upon that passage did
presently conceive that he had been abused by his Secretary, Which he remembered
had moved on a time for such a letter, and thereupon began to think that among
the letters sent to the Dukes of Savoy and Florence, at the time another might
have been shuffled in to the Pope, and his hand surreptitiously got thereunto.

The King lay then at Royston, He is charged for writing a letter to the Pope,
and stealing his Majesty's hand thereto.
and the Secretary coming thither, he inquired if any such letter had been sent
to the Pope at any time. The Secretary apprehending no danger; and thinking
that his policy in procuring the Popes favor to the King should not be ill
interpreted confessed, that such a letter he had written by his Majesty's own
knowledge. But perceiving the King to wax angry he fell on his knees and
entreated mercy, seeing that which he had done was out of a good mind, and
desire to purchase the Popes favor, which might at the time have advanced his
title to England.

The King then putting him in mind of the challenge made by the late Queen in
the year 1599, for writing the same letter, and how being at that time
questioned thereupon, he had not only denied his own knowledge thereof, but
likewise moved Sir Edward Drummond, who carried the letter to the Pope to come
into Scotland and abjure the same; he answered, That he did not think the
matter would be brought again in hearing, and that fearing his Majesty's
offense, he had denied the letter, and had moved his Cousin Sir Edward to do
the like; but now that he saw, that which he had done in the politic course
turned to the Kings reproach, with many tears he besought his Majesty to pardon
his fault, and not to undo him who was own creature, and willing to suffer what
he thought meet for repairing the offense. The King replying that the fault was
greater then he apprehended, and that it could not be so easily passed,
enjoined him to go to London, and keep his chamber till he returned thither.

After some eight days the King returned to White Hall, The Secretary charged
with the fault before the Council.
where the Secretary was brought before the Council, and charged with the
fault; which the Lords did aggravate in such manner, as they made the same to
be the ground of all the conspiracies devised against the King since his coming
into England, especially of the Powder Treason. For the Papists, said they,
finding themselves disappointed of the hopes which that letter did give them,
had taken the desperate course which they followed, to the endangering of his
Majesty's person, posterity, and whole estates.

The Secretary having heard their discourses, His answer tothe Lords of the
Council.
kneeled to the ground, and fetching a deep sigh, spoke to this effect. Curas
leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent, My Lords, I cannot speak nor find words to
express the grief I have conceived for the offense committed by me against my
gracious Sovereign; for on the one side, when I call to mind his Majesty's
favors bestowed upon me, having raised me out of the dust, to a fortune, (far
exceeding my merit) and on the other side, I look to my foul fault in abusing
his Majesty's trust, bringing thereby such an imputation upon his innocence as
will hardly be taken away, but with the forlorn child to say, Pecavi in coelum
and terram: my offense is great, I confess, nor am I worthy to be reckoned any
longer among his Majesty's subjects, or servants; his Majesty's rare piety,
singular wisdom, and unspotted sincerity in all his actions, whereof I had so
long experience, might have taught me, that when he refused to have any dealing
with the Pope, the event of the course I took, could not be good; but I unhappy
man would needs follow the way which to me seemed best, and whereof I find now
the smart. If no other thing can liberate his Majesty of this imputation,
caused by my folly, let neither my life, nor estate, nor credit be spared, but
as I have all by his Majesty's favor, so let all go even to the last drop of
my blood before any reproach for my offense be brought upon his Majesty.

Then rising up he said, It shall not be necessary to remit my trial to
Scotland, which I hear your Honors do intend, for I do simply submit my self
to his Majesty's will, and had much rather not live then lie any longer under
his Majesty's displeasure. Therefore my humble suit to your honors is, that in
consideration of my miserable estate, and ignominious confession you would be
pleased to move his Majesty for accepting me in will, and that without delay
whatsoever may be done for reparation of his honor, may be performed,
whereunto most willingly I submit my self.

The Chancellor Sir Thomas Egerton without taking any notice of these last
words declared, that his Majesty's pleasure was to remit the trial of his
offense to the Judges in Scotland, Chancellor Egerton, pronounces sentence
against him. Sprot his execution.
and that he should be conveyed thither as a Prisoner, the Sheriffs attending
him from shire to shire, till he was delivered in Scotland; in the mean time he
did pronounce him deprived of all places, honors dignities, and every thing
else that he possessed in England.

Whether or not, I should mention the arraignment and execution of George Sprot
notary in Eymouth, who suffered at Edinburgh in the August preceding, I am
doubtful his confession though voluntary, and constant, carrying small
probability. This man had deponed, that he knew Robert Logan of Restalrig, who
was dead two years before, to have been privy to Gowries conspiracy, and that
he understood so much by a letter that fell in his hand written by Restalrig to
Gowry, bearing that he would take part with him in the revenge of his fathers
death, and that his best course should be to bring the King by sea to
Fascastle, where he might be safely kept, till advertisement came from those
with whom the Earl kept intelligence. It seemed a very fiction and to be a mere
invention of the man's own brain; for neither did he show the letter, nor could
any wise man think, that Gowry, who went about that treason so secretly, would
have communicated the matter with such a man, as this Restalrig was known to
be: as ever it was, the man remained constant in his confession, and at his
dying when he was to be cast off the ladder (for he was hanged in the public
street of Edinburgh) promised to give the beholders a sign for confirming them
in the truth of what he had spoken, which also he performed by clapping his
hands three several times, after he was cast off by the executioner.

To return to the Commissioners of the Assembly, The Commissioners of the
Assembly have audience.
they had presence of the King in Hampton Court the 10 of September, where the
Archbishop of Glasgow having declared the occasion of their coming, did present
the Assemblies letter together with their Petitions; His Majesty's answer.
The King having read both the one and other said, That the difference between
the lawful and unlawful meetings might be perceived by the fruits arising
from both, for as that unlawful conventicle at Aberdene had caused a schism in
the Church, and given the enemies of Religion a great advantage, so in this
Assembly they had not only joined in love among themselves, which is the main
point of religion, but also had taken a solid course for the repressing of
Popery, and superstition: that he did allow all their Petitions, and would give
order for a Convention which should ratify the conclusions of the Assembly;
assuring them, that the Church keeping that course, should never lack his
Patrociny and Protection.

Letters were immediately directed to publish his Majesty's acceptance of the
Assemblies proceedings, A convention at Edinburgh.
and the Council joined to commit the Marquess of Huntley in the Castle of
Striveling, the Earl of Angus in the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Earl of
Arroll in Dumbritton. A convention was likewise indicted at Edinburgh the sixth
of December, which was afterward prorogued to the 27 of January; The Archbishop
of Glasgow was in the mean time sent home to inform the Council concerning
Balmerinoch his business, and how these matters had been carried in England.

This report made, An. 1609.
The Chancellor, who had been much ruled by the Secretary, was greatly afraid,
The Chancellor admitted Counselor of England.
as suspecting the next assault should have been made upon him self. But the
King who knew his disposition, and expected that the Chancellor would carry
himself more advisedly, especially in the matters of the Church, the Secretary
being gone, did have the Earl of Dunbar home with a warrant to receive the
Chancellor in the number of the Counselors of England, and therewith appointed
him Commissioner with Dunbar in the Convention of Estates; all which was done
to make it seem, that his credit was no way diminished with his Majesty.

In this convention diverse Acts were made in favors of the Church, Acts made
for Religion.
As first that Noblemen sending their sons forth of the Country should direct
them to places where the reformed Religion was professed, at least where the
same was not restrained by the Inquisition, and that the Pedagogues sent to
attend them, should be chosen by the Bishop of the Dioces, wherein if they
should happen to transgress, the Nobleman being an Earl should incur the pain
of four thousand pounds; if he was a Lord, five thousand Marks; and if a Baron,
three thousand Marks.

And if their sons should happen to decline from the true Religion, that their
Parents should withdraw all entertainment from them, and find surety to that
effect.

That the Bishop of the Dioces should give up to the Treasurer, Controller,
Collector and their deputies, the names of all persons excommunicated for
Religion, to the end they might be known; and that no confirmations,
resignations, nor infestiments should be granted to any contained in that Roll.

That the Director of the Chancery should give forth no briefes, directories,
precepts of returns, nor precept upon comprisement, till they produced the
Bishops Testificate of their absolution, and obedience; and that it should be
lawful to Superiors, and Lords of Regalities to refuse the entry of all such
to their lands by precepts of Clare constat, or any other way.

Lastly, that persons excommunicated for not conforming themselves to the
Religion presently professed, should neither in their own names, nor covertly
in name of any other enjoy their lands, or rents, but that the same should be
intrometted with and uplifted to his Majesty's use.

These were the Acts concluded touching Religion, Acts made against ravishing
of women.
for the punishment of rapes, which was grown as then too common, his Majesty
by a special letter did recommend to the Estates some overtures for
restraining such violences. As if any widow, woman or maid should be forced,
and abused against her will, the crime should be capital, and not purged by the
subsequent consent of the woman.

In like manner if any woman should be taken away, albeit no further injury was
done, and she relieved, either by her friends or by the Magistrate, or by what
so ever means, the only violence intended should be punished by death in
regard the party had indevoured to do his worst.

And for those that did entice any woman to go away without their parents or
tutors consent, that they should be secluded from any part of the goods or
lands belonging to the woman so enticed. Some other Acts for the public good
of the kingdom were passed at the same time, neither was it remembered that in
any one convention so much good of a long time was done as in this.

In the beginning of February the Secretary was brought to Edinburgh and
delivered to the Magistrates, who received him at the neither port, and
conveyed him as a Prisoner to the lodging that was appointed. The Secretaries
trial at S. Andrews;
A great gazing there was of people, which troubled him not a little as he
showed by his countenance. The next day he was delivered to the Lord Scone, who
with a guard of horse did convey him to the prison of Falkland; there he
remained to the 10 of March, and was at that time taken to S. Andrews to abide
his trial: with the Justice there sat as Assessors the Earls of Dunbar,
Montross and Lothian, the Lord Privy seal and Clerk Register.

His indictment was to this effect, His indictment
That in the year 1598 by the instigation of his Cousin Sir Edward Drummond a
professed Papist he had stolen and surreptitiously purchased his Majesty's hand
to a letter written by the said Sir Edward, and directed to Pope Clement the
eighth in favor of the Bishop of Vaison for the said Bishops preferment to the
dignity of a Cardinal. And that notwithstanding the many denialls the King
gave him in that business he had treasonably conspired with the said Sir Edward
to deceive and abuse his Majesty, shuffling in a letter among others that were
to be signed, and filling it up after it was signed, with the styles and titles
usually given to the Pope, and sealed the letter with his Majesty's fignet, the
keeping whereof was entrusted to him by virtue of his office, and in so doing
had mostundutifully and treasonably behaved himself, to the indangering of his
Majesty's Honor, Life, Crown, and Estate, and to the subversion of true
Religion, and the whole professors thereof.

Upon the reading of the indictment he was enquired if he would use any friends
or advocates to speak in his defense, as the order of the Court did allow him:
his answer was, That he stood never in so great need of a Proloquutor, the
matter concerning his life, estate and all that he possessed in this world; yet
he had choosed to keep silence, and not employ either friends or advocates, the
offense he had committed being such as could admit no defense; The Secretary
his speech and answer to the indictment.
for howsoever he conceived that the keeping of intelligence with the Pope,
might advance his Majesty's succession to the Crown of England, yet knowing as
he did his Majesty's resolution never to use any crooked course, but to rest
upon Gods providence and his own right, it did not become him to have meddled in
a matter of that importance. Therefore did he entreat all gentlemen and others
that were present to bear witness of his confession, and the true remorse he
had for the offense committed, which he esteemed so great, as neither his
lands, nor life, may not twenty thousand lives such as his could repair: His
protestation of two things.
only two things he asked liberty to protest; one was that he never intended
to work an alteration of Religion, or a toleration of the contrary, the thing
he had done being a mere worldly course, whereby he judged some good might have
been wrought at the time. Next he protested that neither the love of gain, nor
hope of commodity had led him on, that having never received nor expected
benefit from any Prince living (his Master the King only excepted) but an
opinion he foolishly conceited that he might that way promote his Masters
right. In end he said, that he would not make the Judges any more business,
that he had confessed the truth, and as he wished God to be merciful to his
soul in that great day, his Majesty was most falsely and wrongfully charged
with the writing of that letter to the Pope, and that he never could move him
to consent thereto.

The Jury was then called, The Jury sworn.
and the persons following sworn in face of Court, David Earl of Crawford,
George Earl Marshall, John Earl Wigton, Patrick Earl of Kingborne, John Earl of
Tillibarden, Alban L. Cathcart, John L. Salton, David L. Scone, Alexander L
Garlies, William Master of Tillibarden, Sir James Douglas of Dr^mlanrick, Sir
Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, Sir William Levingston of Kilsith, Sir John Houston
of the Ilke, and Sir Patrick Home of Polwart. These going apart returned after
a short space into the Court, and by the mouth of the Earl of Marshall
pronounced James Lord Balmerinoch guilty of treasonable, surreptitious,
fraudulent, and false stealing of his Majesty's hand to the letter specified in
the indictment, without his Majesty's knowledge and contrary to his will
declared. As also of the treasonable affixing of his Majesty's signet to the
said letter; and of assisting known and professed Papists in their treasonable
courses to the danger of Religion, the overthrow of the true professors
thereof, and drawing of his Majesty's life, estate and right of succession to
the Crown of England, in most extreme peril; besides the bringing of most
false and scandalous imputations upon his Majesty as well in Religion as
honor; and of art and part of the whole treasonable crimes contained in the
said indictment.

The King being advertised of his conviction (for he had commanded before any
doom should be pronounced) by a warrant directed to the Justice he was brought
again to Edinburgh, The doom pronounced against Balmerinoch.
and in a Justice Court kept the first of April, decerned to be taken to the
place of execution, and there to have his head cut off, his lands, heritages,
Lordships, Baronies, taks, steadings, rooms, possessions, offices, benefices,
corns, cattle etc. forfeited and escheated to his Majesty's use, as being
convicted of the foresaid treasonable crimes. His life upon the Queens
intercession was spared, and he returned to his prison in Falkland, where he
abode some months, being thereafter licensed to go unto his house in
Balmerinoch, he dyed as was thought of grief and sorrow. A man of abilities
sufficient for the places he enjoyed in Session and Council; but one that made
small conscience of his doings, and measured all things according to the gain
he made by them: The possessions he acquired of the Church kept him still an
enemy unto it, for he feared a restitution should be made of those livings, if
ever the Clergy did attain unto credit. Not long before he fell in his trouble
the King had employed him to deal with the Lords of Session, among whom he
carried a great sway, for restoring the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the
Bishops; but he taking ways that he thought should not have been perceived, to
disappoint the errand, drew upon himself the Kings displeasure, and fared
nothing the better because of his miscarriage in that business, when this
occasion was offered. It is not for those that serve Princes, and are trusted
by them in the greatest affairs, to deal deceitfully with their Masters, for
seldom have any taken that course and have not in the end found the smart
thereof.

A Parliament was this year kept at Edinburgh the 24 of June, A Parliament at
Edingburgh.
the Earl Marshall being Commissioner for the King, wherein the Acts concluded
in the preceding convention were ratified, the jurisdiction of Commissaries
restored to the Church, the Justices of peace commanded to be settled in every
shire, and a Statute made for the Apparel of Judges, Magistrates, and
Churchmen, which were all remitted to his Majesty's appointment. Patterns
accordingly were sent from London not long after for the apparel of the Lords
of Sessions, the Justice, other inferior Judges, for Advocates, Lawyers,
Commissars and all that lived by practice of law, and command given to every
one whom the Statutes concerned, to provide themselves of the habits prescribed
within a certain space under the pain of Rebellion. Such was the Kings care to
have those who were in public charge held in due respect, and dignosced
whither soever they came.

The King by his Letters was now daily urging the Bishops to take upon them the
administration of all Church affairs; An. 1610.
and they unwilling to make any change without the knowledge and approbation of
the Ministers, An Assembly at Glasgow.
an assembly to this effect was appointed to hold at Glasgow the 6 of June. The
Earl of Dunbar, Sir John Preston President of the Session, and Sir Alexander
Hay Secretary (which two had succeeded to Balmerinoch his places being
Commissioners for the King) the Archbishop of Glasgow was elected to preside.
There a Proposition was made by the Commissioners of certain point of
Discipline, which his Majesty craved to be determined, That all things might be
done thereafter orderly in the Church, and with that consent and harmony which
was fitting among preachers. Some three days being spent in reasoning, at last
the conclusions following were enacted.

1 The Assembly did acknowledge the indiction of all such general Assemblies
of the Church to belong to his Majesty by the prerogative of his Crown, and all
convocations in that kind without his license to be merely unlawful,
condemning the conventicle of Aberdene made in the year 1605, as having no
warrant from his Majesty and contrary to the prohibition he had given.

2 That Synods should be kept in every Dioces twice in the year, viz. in
April, and October, and be moderated by the Archbishop or Bishop of the
Dioces, or where the Dioceses are so large, as all the Ministers cannot
conveniently assemble at one place, that there be one or more had, and in the
Bishops absence, the place of Moderation supplied by the most worthy Minister
having charge in the bounds, such as the Archbishop or Bishop shall appoint.

3 That no sentence of excommunication, or absolution from the same be
pronounced against or in favor of any person, without the knowledge and
approbation of the Bishop of the Dioces, who must be answerable unto God and
his Majesty, for the formal and unpartiall proceeding thereof. And the process
being found formal, that the sentence be pronounced at the Bishops direction
by the Minister of the Parish where the offender has his dwelling, and the
process did first begin.

4 That all presentations in time coming be directed to the Archbishop or
Bishop of the Dioces, within which the Benefice that is void lies with power,
to the Archbishop or Bishop to dispone or confer the Benefices that are void
within the Dioces after the lapse, Iure devoluto.

5 That in the deposition of Ministers upon any occasion the Bishop do
associate to himself some of the Ministers within the bounds where the
delinquent serves, and after just trial of the fact, and merit of it
pronounce the sentence of deprivation. The like order to be observed in the
suspension of Ministers from the exercise of their function.

6 That every Minister at his admission swear obedience to his Majesty and to
his Ordinary according to the form agreed upon Anno 1571.

7 The visitations of the Dioces be made by the Bishop himself, and if the
bounds be greater then he can well undertake, by such a worthy man of the
Minsterie within the Diocese as he shall choose to visit in his place. And
whatsoever Minister without just cause or lawful excuse shall absent himself
from the visitation or Diocesan assembly, be suspended from his Office and
Benefice; and if he do not amend, deprived.

8 That the convention of Ministers for exercise be moderated by the Bishop
being present, and in his absence by any Minister that he shall nominate in his
Synod.

9 And last it was ordained, that no Minister should speak against any of the
foresaid conclusions in public, nor dispute the question of equality or
inequality of Ministry, as tending only to the intertainment of Schism in the
Church, and violation of the peace thereof.

These conclusions taken it was complained in behalf of the Moderators of
Presbyteries, who had served since the year 1606. That notwithstanding of
their promise made at their accepting of the Charge, they had received no
payment at all of the stipend allowed: Which the Earl of Dunbarre excused by
his absence forth of the Country, affirming, That unto that time there was
never any motion made thereof to him, and that before the dissolving of that
Assembly he should cause satisfaction to be given to them for the time past;
declaring withal, That seeing order was taken for the moderation of
Presbyteries in time coming, his Majesty's Thesaurer should not be any further
burdened with that payment. The moderators paid of the stipend promised.
The Ministers therein remiting themselves to his Majesty's good pleasure gave
his Lordship thanks for that he had offered; which he did also see performed,
some five thousand pounds Scots being distributed by the Thesaurers servants
among those that had borne the charge; certain of the discontented sort did
interpret it to be a sort of corruption, giving out, That this was done for
obtaining the Ministers voices; Howbeit the debt was known to be just, and that
no motion was made of that business before the foresaid conclusions were
enacted.

In the Assembly a Supplication was presented in the names of the Marquess of
Huntly and the two Earls of Angus and Arroll for their absolution, A
supplication in name of the Popish Lords.
and a Commission given to that effect, upon their satisfaction, they
subscriving the confession of faith and swearing to continue in the profession
of the Religion presently established. The Marquess of Huntly was at that time
confined in Styiveling, and to him were the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishops
of Cathnes and Orkney directed. They found him not unwilling to subscrive the
confession of Faith and make satisfaction for his Apostasy, but in regard of
his many relapses did not judge it fitting to absolve him; wheresore they gave
order that he should confer with Mr. Patrick Sympson the Minister of the
Town, a learned and moderate man, Huntly freed of his confining.
that so he might subscrive with knowledge and resolution not to fall back. In
the December following, having professed himself resolute in all points, he was
liberated from his confinement at Striveling, and licensed to go home to
Strathbogy.

With the Earl of Arroll the difficulty was greater; The Earl of Arroll
troubled for his simulation.
for when in a public meeting of the Council within the Castle of Edinburgh,
he had professed his conformity in every point of Religion and made offer to
subscrive, the very night after he fell in such a trouble of mind, as he went
near to have killed himself. Early in the morning the Archbishop of Glasgow
being called, he confessed his disinclination with many tears, and beseeching
them that were present to bear witness of his remorse, was hardly brought to
any settling all that day. The Nobleman was of a tender heart, and of all that I
have known that most conscientious in his prosession, and thereupon to his
dying was used by the Church with greater lenity then were others of that sect.

The Earl of Angus who lived confined at Glasgow took another course, The Earl
of Angus goes to Paris.
and upon license obtained from his Majesty, went to France, where he might
enjoy the exercise of his Religion with liberty, and dyed at Paris in a
voluntary banishment some years after.

Shortly after the Assembly dissolved, the Archbishop of Glasgow was called to
Court, The Archbishop of Glasgow called to Court.
and commanded to bring with him two others such as he thought fit. The
Archbishop taking with him the Bishops of Brichen and Galloway came to Court in
the midst of September. At their first audience the King declared what the
business was for which he had called them, speaking to this purpose, That he
had to his great charge recovered the Bishoprics forth of the hands of those
that possessed them, and bestowed the same upon such as he hoped should prove
worthy of their places; but since he could not make them Bishops, nor could
they assume that honor to themselves, and that in Scotland there was not a
sufficient number to enter charge by consecration, he had called them to
England, The business proponed by his Majesty.
that being consecrated themselves they might at their return give Ordination
to those at home, and so the adversaries mouths be stopped, who said that he
did take upon him to create Bishops, and bestow spiritual offices, which he
never did nor would he presume to do, acknowledging that authority to belong
to Christ alone, and those he had authorized with his power.

The Archbishop answering in the name of the rest, That they were willing to
obey his Majesty's desire, The Archbishop his answer.
and only feared that the Church of Scotland, because of old usurpations, might
take this for a sort of subjection to the Church of England.The King said, That
he had provided sufficiently against that, for neither should the Archbishop of
Canterbury, nor York, who were the only pretenders, have hand in the business,
but Consecration should be used by the Bishops of London, Ely, and Bathe. The
Scots Bishops thanking his Majesty for the care he had of their Church, and
professing their willingness to obey what he would command, the 21 of October
was appointed to be the time, and the Chapel of London house the place of
Consecration.

A question in the mean time was moved by Dr. Andrews Bishop of Ely touching
the consecration of the Scottish Bishops, The consecration questioned
who, as he said, must first be ordained Presbyters, as having received no
Ordination from a Bishop. The Archbishop of Canterbury Dr. Bancroft who was by,
maintained That thereof there was no necessity, seeing where Bishops could not
be had, the Ordination given by the Presbyters must be esteemed lawful;
otherwise that it might be doubted, if there were any lawful vocation in most
of the reformed Churches. This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely
acquiesced, and at the day, and in the place appointed the three Scottish
Bishops were consecrated.

At the same time did the King institute a High Commission in Scotland for the
ordering of Causes Ecclesiastical, and therewith sent to the Clergy the
directions following. The High Commissioners appointed
1 That every particular matter should not be brought at first before the high
Commission, nor any thing moved unto itexcept the same was appealed unto, or
complained by one of the Bishops, Directions for the High Commissioners and
other matters Ecclesiastical.
as a thing that could not be rectified in their Dioces; or then some enorme
offense in the trial whereof the Bishops should be found too remiss. 2 That
every Archbishop and Bishop should make his residence at the Cathedral Church
of his Dioces, and labor so far as they could and were able to repair the
same. 3 That all Archbishops and Bishops be careful in visitation of their
Dioces, and every third year at least, take inspection of the Ministers,
Readers, and others serving cure within their bounds. 4 That every Archbishop
visit his Province every seven years at least. 5 Whereas there be in sundry
Dioceses some Churches belonging to other Bishops, that care be taken to
exchange the Churches one with another that all the Dioceses may lie contigue,
if possibly the same may be performed. As likewise in regard some Dioceses are
too large, and others have a small number of Churches, Scarce deserving the
title of a Dioces; that a course be taken for enlarging the same in a
reasonable proportion, by uniting the nearest Churches of the greater Dioces
thereto. 6 That the convention of Ministers for the exercise of Doctrine exceed
not the number of ten or twelve at most, An. 1601.
and over them a Moderator placed by the ordina^y of the Dioces where the said
Conventions are licensed, Directions for matters Ecclesiastical.
with power to call before them all scandalous persons within that Precinct,
and censure and correct offenders according to the Canons of the Church: yet
are not these Moderators to proceed in any case either to excommunication, or
suspension, without the allowance of the Ordinary. And if it shall be tried
that these Ministers do usurp any further power then is permitted, or carry
themselves unquietly either in teaching or otherwise, at these meetings, in
that case the Bishop shall discharge the meeting, and censure the offenders
according to the quality of their fault. 7 Considering that laick Elders have
neither warrant in the Word, nor example of the Primitive Church and that
northeless it is expedient that some be appointed to assist the Minister in
repairing the fabric of the Church, providing elements to the holy Communion,
and collecting the contributions for the poor, with other necessary services,
the Minister is to make choice of the most wise and discreet persons in the
Parish to that effect, and present their names to the Ordinary that his
approbation may be had thereto. 8 That the Ministers of the Parish be
authorized to call before them and his associates so allowed, all public and
notorious offenders, and enjoin the satisfaction according to the Canons of the
Church; or if they be obstinate and contumacious, declare their names to the
Bishop, that order may be taken with them. 9 That no Minister be admitted
without an exact trial preceding, and imposition of hands used in their
Ordination by the Bishop and two or three Ministers whom he shall call to
assist the action; and to the end an uniform order may be kept in the admission
of Ministers, that a form thereof may be imprinted and precisely followed of
every Bishop. 10 That the election of Bishops shall in time coming be made
according to the conference Anno 1571. and whilst the Bishopric remains
void, the Deane of the Chapter be Vicarius in omnibus ad Episcopatum
perinentibus, and have the custody of the Living and Rents, till the same be of
new provided. 11 That the Deane of every Chapter convene thereof once at least
in the year, and take order that nothing pass except they be Capitulariter
congregati; and that a Register be made of every thing done by the Archbishop
or Bishop in the administration of the Rents and safely in the Chapter house.
12 That when it shall be thought expedient to call a general Assembly, a
supplication be put up to his Majesty for license to convene, and that the said
Assembly consist of Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons and such of the Ministry as
shall be selected by the rest. 13 And because there has been a general abuse
in that Church, that youths having passed their course in Philosophy before
they have attained to the years of discretion, or received lawful Ordination by
imposition of hands, do engyre themselves to preach; that a strict order be
taken for restraining all such persons, and none permitted but those that
received Orders to preach ordinarily and in public.


These directions being exhibited to the Bishops and some principalls of the
Clergy convened with them at Edinburgh in February next, were approved of all;
The Clergy does approve the directions.
and at the same time was the High Commission published, to the great
discontent of those that ruled the estate; for that they took it to be a
restraint of their authority in matters ecclesiastical, nor did they like to
see Clergy men invested with such authority.

The King no less careful to have all things ordered rightly in the Estate,
did prescrive the number, Orders for the Council.
attendants, and manner of proceeding which the Council should keep in their
meetings. As that the number should not exceed thirty and seven at least be
present in every meeting: An. 1611.
that at their admission they should take the Oath of allegiance and swear
fidelity and secrecy in matters to be communicated unto them. That they should
convene twice in the week; once every Tuesday for matters of State, and once on
the Thursday for actions. That none should be permitted to stay with in the
Council house, but the Lords and Clerks of the Council, nor any solicitations
be made within the house, but that all should take their places at their coming
in, and none stand on foot, unless they be to answer for themselves, and in
that case to rise and stand at the head of the table. That four days absence
of any Counselor in the time of sitting without license from the rest, should
infer the loss of their place. That if any of the number were denounced
Rebel, or did not at least once in the year communicate, they should be
likewise excluded. That wheresoever they remained or happened to come, if they
should be informed of any trouble like to arise betwixt parties, they should
charge them to keep the peace, and if they refused, they should command them to
enter in Ward, the disobedience whereof should be punished as if the whole
Council were disobeyed. Lastly, to keep their persons and places in the
greater respect, they were commanded in the streets either to ride with foot
clothes or in coaches, but not be seen walking on foot.

With these directions a command was given to inhibit by Proclamation any
persons to bear quarrel to another, A Proclamation against bearing of quarrel.
with intention of private revenge, requiring those that should happen to be in
any sort injured to complain to the ordinary Judge, within the space of forty
days after the injury committed, and insist for justice; wherein if they should
fail, and yet be perceived to carry a grudge toward him by whom they were
injured, they should be called before the Council, and if they refused to
reconcile, be punished as despisers of the royal authority, and violators of
the public peace.

In the Isles of Orkney and Yetland at this time were great oppressions by the
Earl thereof, The troubles of Orkney.
for which he was committed in the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Bishop of
Orkney employed by the Council to examine the particular complaints. This
Nobleman having undone his estate by riot and prodigality did seek by unlawful
shifts to repair the same, making Acts in his Courts and exacting penalties for
the breach thereof, The Earl of Orkney committed and his Acts of Court
discharged.
as if any man was tried to have concealed any thing that might infer a
pecuniary mulct, and bring profit to the Earl, his lands and goods were
declared confiscated; or if any person did sue for justice before any other
Judge, then his deputies his goods were escheated, or if they went forth of the
Isle without his license, or his deputies, upon whatsoever occasion, they
should forfeit their movables; and, which of all his acts was most inhumane,
he had ordained that if any man was tried to supply or give relief unto ships
or any vessels distressed by tempest, the same should be punished in his
person, and fined at the Earl his pleasure. These Acts produced by the
Complainers, and confessed by the Earl himself, were by the Council decerned
unlawful, and the execution thereof in all times thereafter prohibited.

The Clangregore a barbarous and theevish race of people, that could by no
means be repressed nor reclaimed from their roberies, The Clangregore to be
rooted out.
were at the same time ordained to be rooted forth, and the service committed
to the Earl of Argile; who made some beginning, and presented certain of the
principalls to justice; but the neglect of their children, and their exhibition
as was appointed, made them in after times no less troublesome to the Country
then before.

In the end of the year the Earl of Dunbarre departed his life at whitehall, a
man of deep wit, The deuh of the Earl of Dunbarre.
few words, and in his Majesty's service no less faithful then fortunate; The
most difficile affairs he compassed without any noise, and never returned when
he was employed, without the work performed that he was sent to do. His death
made a great change in our Estate. Sir Robert Ker a son of Farnherst, who had
served the King long in the quality of a Page, and was then grown powerful in
Court, carrying all things by his credit. Somerset his rising.
At first the Thesaurers Office which was in the person of Dunbar, whilst he
lived, was trusted to certain Commissioners, but after a little space the same
was bestowed upon the said Sir Robert, and he preferred to be Earl of Somerset.
The guard that Sir William Cranston a Gentleman of great worth did command, and
wherewith he had performed diverse notable services in the Borders, was taken
from him, and given to Sir Robert Ker of Ancram Somersets cousin. Advocate made
first Clerk Register, afterward Secretary.
Sir Gedeon Murray his Uncle by the Mother made Deputy in the Office of
Thesaury; and Sir Thomas Hamilton his Majesty's Advocate who had married his
sister, placed first in the office of Register, and afterward made Secretary,
all which was ascribed to Somerset his credit. Yet these things were not ill
taken, the last excepted, for Sir William Cranston being content to resign his
place, the King in remembrance of his good service did prefer him to be a
Lord of Parliament: Sir Gedeon his abilities for the services he was trusted
with, were known to all; and for the Advocate, his sufficiency was undoubted,
only the manner of his coming to be Register was not so well interpreted. Sir
John Skeen had enjoyed the place a good many years, and being grown in age and
infirm, thinking to get his son provided to his office, had sent him to Court
with a dimission of the place, but with a charge not to use it, unless he found
the King willing to admit him; yet he abused by some politic wits, made a
resignation of the Office, accepting an ordinary place among the Lords of
Session. The office upon his resignation was presently disponed to the
Advocate: which grieved the Father beyond all measure. And the case indeed was
pitiful, and much regrated by all honest men, for he had been a man much
employed and honored with diverse legations, which he discharged with good
credit, and now in age to be circumvented in this sort, by the simplicity or
folly of his son, 'twas held lamentable. Sir John Skeen dies of grief.
The King being informed of the abuse by the old man's complaint, was very
careful to satisfy him and to have the son reconciled to his father, which
after some travel was brought to pass: yet so exceeding was the old man's
discontent, as within a few days he deceased. The office of Register was
shortly after enterchanged with the Secretary Sir Alexander Hay, and he made
keeper of the Rolls, the Lord Binning Secretary, and Sir William Oliphant
received to be his Majesty's Advocate.

In the beginning of the next year there happened diverse unhappy quarrels
betwixt the Scots and English. at Court, An. 1612
which was like to have produced very bad effects: The Lord Samqhar executed in
England
and nothing worse taken then the slaughter of an English Fencer, by the Lord
Sanqhars instigation, who for an injury alleged, did hire one called Carleill
to kill the Fencer: this fact committed in the City of London, and so near to
the Kings Court, caused such a heart-burning among the people, as it was not
far from breaking forth into a general commotion. But his Majesty preventing
the danger, made Sanqhar to be arrested, and brought to his trial, where being
convicted he was hanged publicly at the Palace-gate of Westminster. This act
of justice gave the English a great content, nor was the death of the Nobleman
much regrated by his own Country people, for he had lived all his time
dissolutely and falling in familiarity with a base Curtesan at Paris, had by
her a son, to whom he entailed his lands, intending to defraud the heir. But
the King taking the matter into his own cognition, did by compromise adjudge
the succession to the just inheritour, appointing a little portion to the base
son, who in a short time made away the same prodigally.

Not long before his Majesty being informed of a course kept by the Church in
excommunicating persons that were fugitives for capital crimes, sent to the
Bishops and Clergy a Letter of this tenor:

The Ecclesiastical Censure of Excommunication, which should be inflicted upon
such as having committed any scandalous offense, are contemners of the
admonitions of the Church, Excommunication of persons for criminal and
capital cases if they become fugitive.
is, as we have been informed, so far absued against the first institution,
that we cannot sufficiently mervail of the proceeding said to be commonly used
among you; namely, that persons fugitive for capital crimes being cited before
Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, although it be known that they dare not compeir
for fear of their life, are sentenced as persons contumacious, whereas the fear
they stand in ought in reason to excuse their absence, since they cannot be
judged contemners of the Church, who upon just terrors are kept back from
giving their personal appearance. In a late Treatise the Venetian Padre Paulo
did learnedly confute the sentence pronounced by the present Pope against him
for his not appearing to answer in the cause of heresy, only upon the just
fear be pretended, and had his appeal justified by all indifferent men, from
the Popes sentence as abusive; your proceedings for the manner is no other, and
by the learned Divines in these parts resembled to the Moscovites form, who
if he be offended with any person, commands him to send his head unto him:
just so your citations are in the foresaid case, which is to will the offenders
come in and be hanged, which were they never so penitent is not to be thought
they will do; for they will rather fall under your censure then hazard
themselves in the hands of the justice. This being the ready way to bring the
Censures of the Church in contempt, Our pleasure is, that hereafter there be no
such form of proceeding used among you. Notwithstanding if it shall happen such
offenders to obtain our pardon, and that the fear they stand in of their life
be removed, we mean not but that they should be called before the Church, and
Censures used against such of those that are impenitent. Hereof persuading our
selves that you will have care and not give way to the abuse in time coming, We
bid you farewell.

Upon the receipt of this Letter, The Clergy agree to reform this point.
the Bishops convening with certain of the Clergy to advise what course was
fittest to be held in these cases, a long reasoning was kept, some maintaining,
That the form practiced by the Church was not to be changed, they having tried
the good thereof, and that people were terrified by this means from falling
into these odious crimes. Others reasoned, That the principal end of all
Church censures, especially of Excommunication, was the reclaiming of
offenders, and the bringing of them to the acknowledgment of their sin, and
that where the principal use had no place, that other secondary ends ought not
to be respected; and so in case of Fugitives, what could any Censure avail to
their reclaiming, they not being in place to answer, or to receive any
admonition? yea and might it not fall that by proceeding against men in such
case, men truly sorrowful for their sin should be sentenced, and so the
persons bound by the Church, whom God has loosed; They did therefore judge it
more safe in these cases to advertise people of the hainousness of the fact
committed, warning them to make their own profit thereof, and to forbear all
proceeding against the fugitive person till his condition should be made known.
This turned to be the resolution of the whole number, and thereupon direction
was given to the Ministers not to intend or follow any process against
fugitives in time coming.

This year the Earl of Eglington departed this life, The death of the earl of
Eglington, and the disposition of his living to his Cousin.
who having no child nor heir male to succeed, made a disposition of his lands
and honors to Sir Alexander Seaton his Cousin germane, with a proviso, That he
and his children should take the name and use the arms of the house of
Montgomery. The king, who was always most tender in the conveyance of honors,
being informed of the disposition made by the deceased Earl, did by a Letter
written to the Council witness his displeasure at such alienations; showing
that howsoever he could not stay Noblemen to dispose of their lands, he being
the fountain of all honor within his Kingdoms, would not permit the same to be
sold or alienated without his consent: and thereupon did inhibit the said Sir
Alexander to use the title of Lord or Earl, notwithstanding the disposition
made to him. Some two years after his Majesty was pleased to bestow the honor
upon him, and so was he received into the place and honor formerly belonging
to the house of Eglington.

In the month of october a Parliament was kept at Edinburgh, A Parliament in
Scotland.
the Chancellor being Commissioner for the King, wherein the conclusions taken
in the Assembly at Glasgow were ratified, and all Acts and constitutions,
especially the Act made in the Parliament 1592, rescinded and annulled, in so
far, as they, or any of them, or any part of the same were derogatory to the
Articles there concluded.

In this Parliament a subsidy was urged, A subsidy granted.
and a great contest made for the quantity, which was required in a more large
measure then in former times, because of his Majesty's affairs, especially for
the marriage of Lady Elizabeth with the Palsgrave, who in the same month
arrived in England. The poverty of the Country, with a fear that what was then
granted, should be made a Precedent for after times, was pretended by those
that withstood the motion, albeit the true cause was known to be the dislike
that the Popish faction had of the Match, which by all means they labored to
cross: nor was any more busy then the Lord Burleigh to impede the subsidy, he
being a little before come from Court, did affirm that the King in a private
speech with him touching the same, had said, That he required no more then was
granted in the Parliament 1606, and thereby made the opposition greater then
otherwise it would have been; yet in the end after long debating it was
concluded, that the supply should be more liberal in regard of the present
occasion, then at any time before.

The King upon advertisement of the Lord Burleighs business gave order to
remove him from the Council, and to inhibit him from coming any more at Court:
The Ld Burleigh removed from Council.
which he apprehending to be the Lord Scones doing, and that he had informed
against him, took so ill, as he did send him a challenge, and appeal him to the
combat. Hereupon he was committed in the Castle of Edinburgh, where he remained
some two months; thereafter upon the acknowledgment of his offense, and being
reconciled with the Lord Scone, he was put to liberty.

In Court at this time was great rejoicing, and the marriage of the Lady
Elizabeth with Prince Palatine daily expected, An. 1613.
when on the sudden all was turned to mourning by the death of Prince Henry,
The death of Prince Henry.
who departed this life at S. James, in the beginning of November. A Prince of
excellent virtues, and all the perfections that can be wished for in youth. He
died at the age of 18 years, and 8 months, greatly lamented both at home and
abroad. The Council esteeming it their duty to express their doleance for that
accident, made choice of the Chancellor and the Archbishop of Glasgow for that
business. But the King having received an hard information of the Chancellors
carriage in the late Parliament, sent his servant William Shaw to discharge him
from coming to Court, who encountering him at Morpet, caused him to return. The
Archbishop who was no further advanced then Berwick accompanied the Chancellor
to Edinburgh, and after a short stay there, as he was willed went to his
journey again toward Court, whither he came a little before Christmas. The
marriage of the Lady Elizabeth with the Palgrave. The King acquireth the lands
of Orkney.
The Nuptials in regard of the Princes death were put off to the February
following, at which time, the sorrow being a little worn out, the same were
performed with great solemnity.

It was showed before concerning the oppressions of the people of Orkney, that
the Acts made by the Earl in his Courts were judged unlawful, and he
discharged to put the same thereafter in execution. Notthelesse going on in his
wonted course, he sent his base son called Robert into the Country, in show to
uplift his rents and duties, but in effect to try and punish the
transgressors of these Acts: whereupon new complaints being preferred to the
Council, the King was advised to make purchase of Sir John Arnots right to
whom the Earl had impignorated his estate, as being the only means to relieve
that distressed people from his oppressions; the bargain shortly was made, and
the King possessed in the lands, Sir James Stewart Captain James his son
being made Chamberlain and the Sheriff of the Country. The Earl himself was
transported from Edinburgh to the Castle of Dunbarton, and had allowed to him
six shillings eight pence sterling a day for his entertainment, where he had
not long remained, when as he received advertisement, that the Castles of
Kirkwall, Birsay, and other his Houses in these Isles were all rendered to the
Sheriff. This put him in a great passion, and many ways he essayed to make an
escape, but finding no possibility he sent his base son who was lately
returned, with an express command to take back the houses and expulse the
Deputy Mr. John Finlason, whom the Chamberlain had left there.

The young man at his coming to Orkney being assisted with some loose people
made his first assault upon Birsay, expulsing Bernard Stewart The Keeper,
Rebellion in Orkney.
and placing a Garrison therein of some thirty persons. The Deputy hearing what
was done, went speedily thither, charging them in his Majesty's name to render;
but they despising the charge, and he not able to force them, he went from
thence to Kirkwall; the Rebels following at his heels compelled him in like
sort to render the Castle of Kirkwall in which he had entered.

Upon report of this Rebellion, Commission was given to the Earl of Cathnes as
Lieutenant for the King in those bounds, The Earl of Cathnes employed to
suppress the Rebels.
to recover the Castles and pacify the Country; which he carefully performed.
At his first landing a company of people to the number of five hundred, who
were brought together more out of fear of the Rebels, then of any desire to
withstand, made a countenance to resist, but how soon they perceived the Earls
resolution to pursue, they gave back, their leaders flying to the Castle which
they meant to defend. This they made good some five weeks or more till the
Canon having beaten down a great part of the walls, Persons executed for the
Rebellion.
they were forced to yield themselves at discretion. The persons taken in the
Castle were Robert Stewart the Earl's base son, Archibald Murray, Andrew
Martin, Alexander Legate, and Thomas King, servants to the Earl. These were all
transported to Edinburgh, and being convicted by a Jury, were hanged on a
gibbet at the Mercat-crosse. In this siege the Lieutenant lost four men only;
namely, William Irwin son to William Irwin of Saba, James Richardson, Andrew
Adamson, and William Robinson, who were killed all by shots from the Castle;
many were wounded and hurt, but thereof recovered.

Toward the end of the year Mr. David Lindesay Bishop of Rosse departed this
life in a great age, The death of the Bishop of Rosse.
having attained to fourscore two or three years: a man nobly descended, and a
Brother of the house of Edzell. Soon after the Reformation, returning from his
travells abroad, he applied himself to the function of the Ministry, and
entering the charge at Leth, continued therein to his death; of a peaceable
nature, and greatly favored of the King, to whom he performed diverse good
services, especially in the troubles he had with the Church; a man universally
beloved and well esteemed of by all wise men. His corpse were interred at Leth
by his own direction, as desiring to rest with that people, on whom he had
taken great pains in his life.

The Earl of Orkney being brought the October preceding from Dumbarton to
Edinburgh was in February next put to trial, The Earl of Orkney put to trial.
where together with the Justice there sat as Assessors the Earl of Dunfermlin
Chancellor, the Lord Bining Secretary, the President Sir John Preston, Sir
Gideon Murray Thesaurer Deputy, Sir Richard Cockburne of Clackinton Lord privy
Seal, Sir John Cockburne of Ormeston Justice Clerk, Sir Alexander Hay Clerk
Register, Sir William Levingston of Kilsith and Sir Alexander Drummond of
Medop, Senators of the College of Justice.

The substance of the Indictment was, An. 1614
That he had caused his base son to surprise the Castle of Kirkwall with the
steeple of the Church, The Earl of Orkney his indictment.
the place called the Yards, and house of Birsay; that he had incited the
people to Rebellion, and detained the said Castles and Houses treasonably after
he was charged to deliver the same. His Prolocutors were Mr. Alexander King,
Mr. Thomas Nicolson, and Mr. Alexander Forbes Lawyers, all of good esteem; the
chief defense they used was a denial of the libell: the Advocate producing the
confession of his base son and those that were executed with him, together with
some missive Letters written by one John Sharp at his direction for the
detaining of the Castle of Kirkwall, and a Charter of certain lands gifted by
him to Pat: Halcro for assisting the Rebels, the Justice remitted the verity of
the Indictment to the Assise.

The persons chosen thereupon was James Earl of Glencarn, George Earl of
Winton, The persons named for the Jury.
John Earl of Perth, Robert Earl of Lothian, William Earl of Tillibarden, David
Lord Scone, William Lord Sanqhar, John Lord Harries, James Lord Torphichen,
Hugh Lord Semple, William Lord Killmaers, John Grant of French^e, Sir Patrick
Hepburne of Waughton, Robert Arnot of Farny, and Sir Henry Lindesay of
Kinfawnes, who sworn and received according to the custom, went apart by
themselves for a certain space, and returning unto the Court, by the mouth of
their Chancellor (the Earl of Glencarne) declared him guilty of the foresaid
Rebellion, and of the whole points contained in the Indictment. The Justice
thereupon gave sentence that he should be taken to the Market cross, The
sentence pronounced.
and there beheaded, and all his goods and lands confiscated.

The Earl taking the sentence impatiently, some Preachers were desired to
confer with him, and to dispose his mind toward death; but they finding him
irresolute, entreated for a delay of the execution; which was granted to the
sixth of February, at which time he was brought unto the scaffold, The
execution of the Earl of Orkney.
guarded by the Magistrates of the City, and in the sight of many people
beheaded. This was the end of Patrick Earl of Orkney, son to Robert Stewart one
of King James the fifth his base sons; Robert was at first provided to the
Abbacy of Halir^dhouse; which he enjoyed diverse years: After the forfeiture of
Hepburne Earl Bothwell and the obtaining of these Isles, he exchanged the
Abbacy with the Bishopric of Orkney, and so became sole Lord of the Country;
Patrick succeeding to an elder brother who died young, by his too much resort
to Court and profuse spending did involve himself in great debts, and seeking
to repair his estate by the indirect courses he touched, fell into these
incoveniencies which you have heard, and may serve for a warning to all great
personages not to oppress nor play the Tyrants over the meaner sort of people.

About the end of the year John Ogilvy a Jesuit was apprehended at Glasgow.
John Ogilvy a Jesuit apprehended.
He was lately come from Grats, where the Jesuits have a College. by the
command (as he said) of his superiors, to do some service in these parts.
The^e were found with him three little books containing certain directions for
receiving confessions: a warrant to dispense with them that possessed any Church
livings, conceived in this form, Quoad dispensationem de bonis Ecclesiasticis,
poter is dispensare ut rctimeant que possident, dummodo in usus pios aliquid
impendant, pro judicio confessarii dispe^santis; with some Relics and a tu^t
of S. Ignatius hair, the founder of their Order, which he seemed to have in
great regard.

Upon advertisement given to his Majesty, His examinamination by certain
Commissioners.
a Commission was sent to the Secretary the Lord Kilsith, the Thesaurer Deputy,
and Advocate for his examination and trial. Being presented before them, and
enquired when he came into Scotland, what his business was, and where he had
resorted? To the first he answered, That he came in the June preccding; to the
second, that his errand was to save souls; but to the third he denied to give
any answer at all, saying, that he would not utter any thing that might work
prejudice to others: nor could he be induced either by persuasion or threatening
to detect the persons with whom he had resorted. The Commissioners offending at
his obstinacy, and meaning to extort a confession from him, advised to keep him
some nights from sleep; and this indeed wrought somewhat with him, so as he
began to discover certain particulars, but how soon he was permitted to take
any rest, he denied all, and was as obstinate in denying as at first.

His Majesty being certified that without torture nothing would be drawn from
him, A direction from his Majesty touching their proceeding with him.
made answer, That he would not have those forms used with men of his
profession; and if nothing could be found, but that he was a Jesuit and had
said Mass, they should banish him the Country and inhib^t him to return
without license, under pain of death. B^t if it should appear that he had been
a practiser for the stirring up of subjects to Rebellion, or did maintain the
Popes transcendent power over Kings, and refus^d to take the Oath of
Allegiance, they should leave him to the course of law and justice; mean while
his pleasure was, that the questions following should be moved unto him, and
his answers there to required:

1 Whether the Pope be Judge, Certain Questions moved to the Jesuit.
and has power in spiritualibus in over his Majesty, and whether that power
will reach over his Majesty in tempor alibus if it be in ordine ad spiritualia;
as Bellarmine affirms.

2 Whether the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings (especially such as are
not of his Church) as his Majesty?

3 Whether the Pope has power to depose Kings by him excommunicated, and in
particular, whether he has power to depose the Kings Majesty;

4 Whether it be no murder to slay his Majesty being so excommunicated and
deposed by the Pope?

5 Whether the Pope has power to assoile subjects from the oath of their born
and native allegiance to his Majesty;

These Questions were sent enclosed in a Letter to the Archbishop of Glasgow,
who assuming to himself the Provost of the City, the Principal of the
College, and one of the Ministers as Witnesses, did in their hearing read the
Questions, and receive his Answer, which he gave under his hand, as follows:

I acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be Judge unto his Majesty, His Answer to the
Questions.
and to have power over him in spiritualibus, and over all Christian Kings. But
where it is asked, whether that power will reach over him in temporalibus? I am
not obliged to declare my opinion therein, except to him that is Judge in
Controversies of Religion, to wit, the Pope; or one having authority from him.

For the second point, I think that the Pope has power to excommunicate the
King: and where it is said, that the King is not of the Popes Church; I answer,
that all who are baptized are under the Popes power.

To the third where it is asked, if the Pope has power to depose the King being
excommunicate? I say that I am not tied to declare my mind except to him that
is Judge in controversies of Religion.

To the fourth and fifth, I answer, ut supra.

Being reasoned with a long time, His Answer sent to his Majesty.
and the danger exponed, wherein he did cast himself, by maintaining such
treasonable opinions, he answered, That he would not change his mind for any
danger that could befall him, and speaking of the Oath of Allegiance, that it
was a damnable Oath, and treason against God to swear it. Some days being
allowed him to bethink himself better of these points. When as no advice could
prevail, and answers were sent to his Majesty subscribed by himself, and
therewith a testification of such as were present at the giving thereof.

Hereupon the Council was commanded to pass a Commission to the Provost and
Bailiffs of Glasgow for putting him to a trial; Commission for the Jesuits
trial.
there were assisting James Marquis of Hamilton, Robert Earl of Lothian,
William Lord Sanqhar, John Lord Fleming, and Robert Lord Boyd. Some days
before he was brought to the Bar, it was told him, That he was not to be
charged with saying of Mass, nor anything that concerned his profession, but
only with the Answers made to the Questions proponed, which if he should
recall, there being yet place to repentance, the trial should be suspended
till his Majesty were of new advertised. His reply was, That he did so little
mind to recall any thing he had spoken, as when he should be brought to his
answer he should put a bonnet on it. And this indeed he performed, for when he
was placed on pannell, and the Indictment read, which was grounded all upon the
Acts of Parliament made against those that declined his Majesty's authority, or
maintained any other Jurisdiction within the Realm, and upon answer made to the
above-written demands, subscribed with his hand, he brake forth in these
speeches:

Under protestation that I do no way acknowledge this judgment, The Jesuits
defense at his indictment.
nor receive you that are named in that Commission for my Judges, I deny any
point laid against me to be treason; for if it were treason, it would be such
in all places, and all Kingdoms, which you know not to be so. As to your Acts
of Parliament, they were made by a number of partial men, and of matters not
subject to their forum or judicatory, for which I will not give a rotten fig.
And where I am said to be an enemy to the Kings authority, I know not what
authority he has but what he received from his predecessors, who acknowledged
the Pope of Rome his jurisdiction. If the King will be to me as his
predecessors were to mine, I will obey and acknowledge him for my King, but if
he do otherwise and play the runnagate from God, as he and you all do, I will
not acknowledge him more then this old hat. At these words being interrupted,
and commanded to speak more reverently of his Majesty, he said, That he should
take the advertisement, and not offend, but the judgment he would not
acknowledge. And for the reverence I do you, to stand uncovered; I let you
know it is ad redemptionem vexationis, not ad agnitionem Iudicii.

The persons cited upon the Jury being then called, The exception proponed by
the Jesuit.
and he desired to show, The exception proponed by the Jesuit.
if he would except against them, said, That he had but one exception against
them all, which was, that either they were enemies to his cause, or friends: if
enemies, they could not sit upon his trial; and if friends, they ought to
assist him at the Bar. Only he should wish the Gentlemen to consider well what
they did, and that he could not be judged by them. That whatsoever he suffered
was by way of injury and not of judgment; and that he was accused of treason
but had not committed any offense, nor could he beg mercy. And proceeding in
this strain, I am, said he, a subject as free as the King is a King; I came by
commandment of my Superior into this kingdom, and if I were even now forth of
it, I would return, neither do I repent any thing but that I have not been so
busy as I should, in that which you call perverting of subjects. I am accused
for declining the Kings authority, and will do it still in matter of Religion,
for with such matters he has nothing to do: and this which I say, the best of
your Ministers do maintain, and if they be wise will continue of the same mind:
some questions were moved to me which I refused to answer, because the
proferers were not Judges in controversies of Religion, and therefore I trust
you cannot infer any thing against me. But I hope, said the Archbishop, you
will not make this a controversy of Religion, Whether the King b^ing deposed
by the Pope may be lawfully killed? To this he replied, It is a question among
the Doctors of the Church; many hold the affirmative not improbably; but as
that point is not yet determined; so if it shall be concluded, I will give my
life in defense of it, and to call it unlawful, I will not, though I should
save my life by saying it.

His speeches, The Jesuit convicted and executed.
the more liberty was given him, growing the more intolerable the Jurors were
willed to go apart; who quickly returning, declared by the mouth of their
Chancellor Sir George Elphingston, that they found him guilty of all the
treasonable crimes contained in the indictment. Whereupon doom was pronounced,
and the same day in the afternoon he was hanged in the public street of
Glasgow. He was, as it seemed, well instructed in that Iesuitical doctrine of
deposing and dethroning Kings, and like enough to have played another
Ravilliack, if he had not been intercepted: which was the rather believed, that
in lamenting his mishap to one that he esteemed his friend, he did say, That
nothing grieved him so much, as that he should be apprehended in that time; for
if he had lived unto Whitsunday at liberty, he should have done that which all
the Bishops and Ministers of Scotland and England should never have helped; and
to have done it he would willingly have been drawn in pieces with horses, and
not cared what torments he had endured But this did not burst forth till after
his death.

Mr. James Moffet, another of the same Society, Moffet another jesuit licenced
to depart.
being apprehended near about the same time, took a safer course; for having
condemned Ogilvies positions he was suffered to depart the Country the King
professing, as he ever did, That he would never hang a Priest for his Religion;
only these Polypragmatick Papists, that were set upon sedition and to move
disturbance in Countries, he could not away with.

The next spring Mr. George Gladstaves Archbishop of S. Andrews departed this
lite: An. 1615.
a man of good learning, The Archbishop of S. Andrews his death.
ready utterance, and great invention; but of an easy nature, and induced by
those he trusted, to do many things hurtful to the Sea, especially in leasing
the titles of his Benefice for many ages to come, esteeming (which is the error
of many Churchmen) that by this mean he should purchase the love and friendship
of men, whereas there is no sure friendship but that which is joined with
respect; and to the preserving of this nothing conduces more then a wise and
prudent administration of the Church rents, wherewith they are entrusted. He
left behind him in writing a declaration of his judgment touching matters
then controverted in the Church, professing, that he had accepted the
Episcopal function upon good warrant, and that his conscience did never accuse
him for anything done that way: this he did to obviate the rumors which he
foresaw would be dispersed after his death, either of his recantation, or of
some trouble of spirit that he was cast into; (for these are the usual
practices of the Puritan sect) whereas he ended his days most piously and to
the great comfort of all the beholders. His corpse was interred in the South
east Isle of the Parish Church, and the funeral preached by Mr. William
Cowper, Bishop of Galloway, who was lately before preferred upon the decease of
Mr. Gawin Hamilton Bishop of that Sea; a man for courage, true kindness and
zeal to the Church never enough commended.

S. Andrews falling thus void, Bishops translated by this occasion.
diverse translations were made in the Church, as of the Archbishop of Glasgow
to S. Andrews, the Bishop of Orkney to Glasgow, the Bishop of Dumblane to
Orkney, in whose place succeeds Mr. Adam Ballendene Recto^ of Falkirk.

In the end of this year there was at Court a great business for trying the
murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, The History of Somersets fall.
who had dyed in the Tower some two years before. The occasion and secret
contriving of the murder, with the strangeness of the discovery, and his
Majesty's impartial proceeding in the trial, deserve all to be remembered. The
occasion was, Overburies free and friendly counsels to the Earl of Somerset
for diverting him from the marriage he intended with Lady Francis Howard, who
by a sentence of nullity was freed from the Earl of Essex her husband: Sir Tho:
Overburie his free advice to Somerset.
Often had he dissuaded Somerset, presuming upon the familiarity that he
vouchsafed him, to forbear that Ladies company, and one night more freely, for
that he saw Somerset going on in the Match, came unto him, and spoke to this
effect; My Lord I perceive you are proceeding in this match which I have often
dissuaded as your true servant, and friend, I now advise you not to marry that
woman: for if you do, you shall ruin your honor, and your self; adding, that
if he went on in that business, he should do well to look to his standing. The
Earl taking his free speech more impatiently because he had touched the Lady
(with whom he was bewitched) in her honor, replied in passion, that his legs
were strong enough to bear him up, and that he should make him repent those
speeches. Thus he parted in anger at that time.

Overbury interpreting this to be a sudden passion only, Overbury committed to
the Tower.
and not thinking that their long continuing friendship would break off by this
occasion, continued in his wonted attendance, neither did the Earl wholly
abandon him; howbeit having discovered to the Lady Overbury his counsel and
the words he had uttered to her prejudice, she never ceased to inflame him
against the Gentleman, and by all means sought to practice his overthrow. It
falling out that Overbury was about this time to be employed in an Embassage to
^ussia, the Earl whose counsel he asked advised him not to embrace the service,
but to make some fair excuse. This advice he followed, taking the same to
proceed of kindness, and for his refuse was committed to the Tower.

The Lady now had him where she wished, Overbury poisoned and dies.
and meaning to dispatch him by poison, wrought so with the Lieutenant Sir
Iervis Elways as he did admit one Richard Weston upon her recommendation to be
Overburies keeper, by whom the very evening after he was committed a yellow
poison was ministered unto him in a broth at supper, which provoked such extreme
vomits and purging as it was looked he should not recover. But neither this, nor
the other poisons that were continually put in his meats, serving to dispatch
him, Mistress Turner the preparer of all, procured an Apothecaries boy to give
him a poisoned glyster, which brought him to his end. Overbury thus dead, was
presently buried, and because of the blanes and blisters that appeared in his
body after his death, a report was dispersed that he dyed of the French Pox;
which few believed, and still the rumor went according to the truth, that he
was made away by poison. The greatness of the procurers kept all hidden for a
time, but God who never suffers such vile acts to go unpunished, did bring
the same to light after a miraculous manner.

It happenned the Earl of Shrewsbury in conference with a Counselor of Estate
to recommend the Lieutenant of the Tower to his favor as a man of good parts,
The murder discovered and laid open.
and one that desired to be known to him. The Counselor answering, that he
took it for a favor from the Lieutenant that he should desire his friendship,
added withal, that there lay upon him an heavy imputation of Overburies death,
whereof he wished the Gentleman to clear himself. This related to the
Lieutenant, he was stricken a little with it, and said, That to his knowledge
some attempts were made against Overbury, but that the same took no effect;
which being told to the King, he willed the Counselor to move the Lieuten^nt
to set down in writing, what he knew of that matter, as he also did; thereupon
certain of the Council were appointed to examine and find out the truth. From
Weston somewhat was found, whereupon he was made prisoner; An. 1616.
Turner and Franklin the preparers of the poison being examined, confessed
every thing, and then all breaking forth the Earl of Somerset with his Lady and
the Lieutenant were Committed.

Weston at his first arraignment stood mute, yet was induced afterward to put
himself to the trial of the Country, and being found guilty was hanged at
Tyburne. Mistress Turner and James Franklin were in like sort executed. The
Lieutenant who had winked at their doings was judged accessory to the crime,
and condemned to death, which he suffered, expressing a great penitency and
assurance of mercy at the hands of God.

In the May following the Earl and his Lady were brought to their trial,
Somerset and his Lady brought to trial.
which by their friends they labored earnestly to eschew, but the King would
not be entreated for the love he had to maintain justice. The Judge by
Commission was Thomas Lord Ellesmore, Chancellor of England, and Lord High
Stewart for that time; his assistants were* Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice
of England; Sir Henry Hubbart, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir
Laurence Tanfield, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; Judge Althared, one of
the Barons of the Exchequer; Judge Crook, Judge Dodderidge, and Judge Haughton,
Judges of the Kings Bench, and Judge Nicols one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas.

The Peers by whom they were tried was the Earl of Worcester Lord Privy Seal,
The persons of the Jury.
the Earl of Pmebroke Chamberlain, the Earls of Rutland, Sussex, Montgomery,
and Hartford; the Viscount Lisle, the Lord Souch, Warden of the Cinque Ports,
the Lord Willowby of Eresby, the Lord Dacres, the Lord Monteagle, the Lord
Wtentworth, the Lord Rich, the Lord willowby of Parham, the Lord Hansdon, the
Lord Russell, the Lord Compton, the Lord Norris, the Lord Gerard, the Lord
Cavendish, and the Lord Dormer.

With the Lady there was not much ado, for she with many tears confessing the
fact desired mercy. The Earl who was the next day presented before the Judges
made some defenses, but the confessions of those that were executed, and a
letter he had sent to his Majesty did so clearly convincehim of being accessory
to the crime at least, The Earl and his Lady convicted and sentenced.
that they were both sentenced to be taken to the Tower of London, and from
thence to the place of execution and hanged till they were dead. It was a foul
and hateful fact on the Earls part especially, who did betray his friend for
satisfying the appetite of a revengefull woman, yet by his Majesty's clemency
the lives of both were afterward spared.

A new business was about the same time made by the Marquis of Huntly, some
eight years before he had been excommunicated, The Marquis of Huntly called
before the Commissioners.
and giving hopes from time to time of his reconcilement, did not only
frustrate the same, but breaking out in open insolences, had caused his
officers discharge his Tenants from hearing the Sermons of some Ministers, with
whom he made show to offend. Being for this called before the high Commission,
He is Committed.
he was committed in the Castle of Edinburgh, and had not remained there two or
three days, when upon the Chancellors warrant he was put to liberty. He is
released by the Chancellor.
The Bishops that were in Town complaining to himself of that he had done, were
disdainfully answered, That he might enlarge without their advice any that were
imprisoned by the high Commission; and when it was told that the Church would
take this ill, said, that he cared not what their Church thought of him:
whereupon the Ministers made great exclamations in the pulpits as against one
that abused his place and power.

Complaints hereupon were sent from all hands to the King. The Bishops complain
to his Majesty.
The Bishops complained of the Chancellor his usurping upon the Commission,
and to this effect directed Alexander Bishop of Cathnes to Court. The
Chancellor complained of the turbulency of the Ministers, and the liberty they
took to censure the public actions of Statesmen in their Sermons. The Marquis
upon a suit he made before his imprisonment, had obtained license to come unto
Court, and had taken his journey thither. But the King upon the Clergies
complaint, A Command to the Marquis to return to his ward.
sent Mr. Patrick Hamilton, then waiting as Secretary deputy at Court, to
command the Marquis to return and enter himself in the Castle of Edinburgh, for
satisfying the high Commission; withal he carried a letter to the Council
sharply rebuking them for releasing the Marquis, he being warded by the Lords
of the Commission.

The Gentleman meeting the Marquis at Huntingdon, within a days journey to
London, The Marquis permitted to come to Court
did use his message, who entreated him to go back, and show the King that he
was come to give his Majesty satisfaction in every thing he would enjoin, and
to beseech his Majesty since he was so far on his journey, not to deny him
his presence. The offer of satisfaction pleased the King very well, and
permitting him to come forward to Court, directed him to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with whom he offered to communicate. His excommunication standing
in the way, and it being contrary to the Canons, that one excommunicated by the
Church, should without their consent who had so sentenced him, be absolved in
another, it was a while doubted what course they should take. The King on the
one side was desirous to win him home, and on the other loath to infringe the
Order of the Church, yet inclining to have the Marquis absolved, it was thought
that the Bishop of Cathnes his consent in the name of the Clergy of Scotland,
was a warrant sufficient. Thus the Bishop consenting, the absolution was given
him in the Chapel of Lambeth by the Archbishop of Canterbury in this form.

Whereas the purpose and intendment of the whole Church of Christ is to win men
unto God, The form of the absolution.
and frame their souls for heaven, and that there is such an agreement and
correspondency betwixt the Churches of Scotland and England, that what the
Bishops and Pastors in the one, without any earthly or wordly respect, shall
accomplish to satisfy the Christian and charitable end, and desire of the
other, cannot be distasteful to either. I therefore finding your earnest
entreaty to be loosed from the bond of excommunication, wherewith you stand
bound in the Church of Scotland, and well considering the reason and cause of
that censure, as also considering your desire on this present day to
communicate here with us, for the better effecting of this work of
participation of the holy Sacrament of Christ our Savior his blessed body and
blood; do absolve you from the said excommunication, in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. And beseech the Almighty God, that you
may be so directed by the holy Spirit, that you may continue in the truth of
his Gospel unto your lives end, and then be made partaker of his everlasting
kingdom.

How soon it was known that the Marquis was absolved by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, His Majesty's letter to the Bishops for justifying the absolution.
there were great exceptions taken by the Church, and the same interpreted to
be a sort of usurpation: whereof the King being advertised, in a long letter
written to the Archbishop of S. Andrews, he did justify the doing by these
reasons; First, that in absolving the Marquis nothing was intended to the
prejudice of the Church of Scotland, but what was done was out of a Christian
necessity, it being needful that the Marquis should be absolved before he was
admitted to the participation of the holy Sacrament. Secondly, he willed the
Church to consider that his absolution at home was only deferred upon the
scruple he made of the Presence of our Savior in the Sacrament, and that upon
his confession swearing and subscriving the other points of Religion they
themselves had suspended his excommunication the lawful^nesse whereof he would
not dispute but remit the same to the Canonists, yet the suspension standing,
it was not much from an absolution. Thirdly, that the absolution given him in
England did necessarily imply an acknowledgement of the authority of the Church
of Scotland, whereas if the Archbishop of Canterbury had received him to the
holy Communion and not first absolved him, being excommunicated by the Church
of Scotland, the contempt and neglect had been a great deal greater. Fourthly,
that the Marquis being come into England, and make offer to perform whatsoever
should be required of him, it was more fit to take him in that disposition then
to have delayed it unto his return into Scotland. For these reasons, he said,
and especially because all that was done, was with a due acknowledgement, and
reservation of the power and independent authority of the Church of Scotland;
which the Archbishop of Canterbury had by his own hand testified it was his
pleasure, that upon the Marquis his return a full form of absolution should be
given him, or a ratification made of that which was done in England; so as
neither the Archbishop of Canterbury his doing should be disapproved, as
unlawful; nor the same so approved, as it might seem that the Church of
Scotland was inferior in any sort to that of England; and that the Archbishops
Letter written to that effect, should be put in record, and kept as a
perpetual monument for ages to come.

This Letter directed to the Archbishop of S. Andrews, I have thought here meet
to be inserted.

Salutem in Christo.
Because I understand that a General Assembly is shortly to be held at
Aberdene, The Archbishop of Canterbury's excuse for the absolution.
I cannot but esteem it an office of brotherly love to yield you an account of
that great action, which lately befell us here with the Marquis of Huntley. So
it was then, that upon the coming up of the said Marquis, his Majesty sharply
entreating him for not giving satisfaction to the Church of Scotland, and for a
time restraining him from his Royal presence, the Marquis resolving to give
his Majesty contentment, did voluntarily proffer to communicate when and
wheresoever his Highness should be pleased; whereupon his Majesty being pleased
to make known that offer to me, it was held fit to strike the iron whilst it
was hot, and that his great work should be accomplished before his Majesty's
going to progress; whereunto a good opportunity was offered by the
consecration of the Bishop of Chester, which was to be in my Chapel of
Lambeth the seventh of this month, at which time a solemn communion was there
to be celebrated.

The only pause was, that the Marquis being excommunicated by the Church of
Scotland, there was in appearance some difficulty how he might be absolved in
the Church of England; wherewith his Majesty being acquainted, who wished that
it should not be deferred, we grew to this peaceable resolution, which I doubt
not your Lordship and the rest of our brethren there will interpret to the
best: for first, what was to be performed might be adventured upon, as we
esteemed, out of a brotherly correspondency and unity of affection, and not
only of any authority; for we well know, that as the Kingdom of Scotland is a
free and absolute Monarchy, so the Church of Scotland is entire in it self, and
independent upon any other Church. Secondly, we find by the advice of diverse
Doctors of the Civil law, and men best experienced in things of this nature,
that the course of Ecclesiastical proceedings would fairly permit that we
might receive to our communion a man excommunicated in another Church, if the
said person do declare that he had a purpose hereafter for some time to reside
among us, which the Lord Marquis did openly profess that he intended, and I
know his Majesty does desire it; and for my part I rest satisfied, that it can
bring no prejudice, but rather contentment unto you, and to that Kingdom.
Thirdly, it pleased God the night before the celebration of the sacrament, to
send in our brother the Bishop of Cathnes, with whom I taking counsel, his
Lordship resolved me, that it was my best way to absolve the Lord Marquis, and
assured me that it would be well taken by the Bishops and Pastors of the Church
of Scotland. I leave the report of this to my Lord Cathnes himself, who was an
eyewitness with what reverence the Marquis did participate of that holy
sacrament. For all other circumstances, I doubt not but you shall be certified
of them from his Majesty, whose gracious and princely desire is, that this
bruised reed should not be broken, but that so great a personage; (whose
example may do much good) should be cherished and comforted in his coming
forward to God: which I for my part do hope, and firmly believe, that you all
will endeavor according to the wisdom and prudence which Almighty God has
given unto you. And thus as your Lordship has ever been desirous that I should
give you the best assistance I could with his Majesty for the reducing or
restraining this Nobleman, so you see I have done it with the best discretion I
could, which I doubt not but all our brethren with you will take as proceeding
from my desire to serve God, and his Majesty, and the whole Church of Scotland.
I send you herewith the form which I used in absolving the Lord Marquess in the
presence of the Lord Primate of Ireland, the Lord Bishop of London and diverse
others. And so beseeching the blessing of God upon you all, that in your
Assembly with unity of spirit you may proceed, to the honor of Christ and to
the beating down of Antichrist and Popery, I leave you to the Almighty.

From my house at Croyden, July 23. 1616.

This letter being showed to the Clergy and others that were offended with the
absolution of the Marquess, The Archbishops letter gives some content.
gave them content, yet was it resolved that the Marquess (who then was
returned from Court) should present a supplication to the general Assembly
which was to meet at Aberdene the 13 of August, acknowledging his offense, An
Assembly at Aberdene.
not despising the admonitions of the Church, and promising to continue in the
profession of the truth, and make his children to be educated in the same, and
that upon his supplication he should be new absolved according to the form used
in the Church of Scotland. This was very solemnly performed the first day of
the Assembly, The Marquess of new absolved.
the earl of Montrose being then Commissioner for his Majesty.

In the Assembly it was ordained, Acts concluded in the Assembly.
That for as much as his Majesty had by Proclamation recalled such as were gone
forth of the Country to be educated in the Colleges of Jesuits, or other
Popish Universities, within the space of a year upon pain to be declared
incapable of succession either to goods or lands; a trial and exact search
should be made of all those that were sent or gone into forain parts within
these last ten years, and that every Minister should send a particular note
unto his Ordinary of those within his Parish that were gone to follow their
studies in places abroad, with their age, profession and families whereunto
they appertained, to the end they may be known, and the dangers prevented
wherewith their corrupt education did threaten the Church.

It was likewise enacted, That no man should be permitted to practice or
profess any Physic, unless he had first satisfied the Bishop of the Dioces
touching his religion. That a Liturgy or book of Common prayer should be
formed for the use of the Church; That the Acts of the general Assemblies
should be collected and put in form, to serve for Canons to the Church in their
Ministration of discipline; That children should be carefully catechized, and
confirmed by the Bishops, or in their absence by such as were employed in the
visitation of Churches; That Grammar Schools should be established in all
Parishes where the same might be conveniently done; And that a Register should
be kept of baptismes, marriages and burialls by the Minister of every Parish.

These Acts being put in form, Commissioners directed to the King from the
Assembly.
were ordained to be presented to his Majesty by the Archbishop of Glasgow, and
Bishop of Rosse, who were sent from the Assembly to entreat his Majesty's
confirmation of the thing concluded.

By the answer returned, with them, his Majesty's good liking of all that had
proceeded in the Assembly, His Majesty's answer returned.
was understood; only against the Act of confirming young children by Bishops,
he excepted, saying, it was a mere hotch potch, and not so clear as was
requisite; and therefore directed the same to be reformed; and among the Canons
of the Church the Articles following to be inserted.

First, Articles craved to be incerted among the Canons.
That for the more reverend receiving of the holy Communion the same should be
celebrated to the people thereafter kneeling, and not sitting, as had been the
custom since the reformation of Religion.

2 If any good Christian visited with sickness, which was taken to be deadly,
should desire to receive the Communion at home in his house, the same should
not be denied to him, lawful warning being given to the Minister the night
before; and three or four of good Religion and conversation, being present to
communicate with the sick person; who must provide for a convenient place and
all things necessary for the reverent administration of the blessed Sacrament.

3 That the Sacrament of Baptism should not be longer deferred then the next
Sunday after the child is born, unless some great and reasonable cause declared
and approved by the Minister, do require the same. And that in the case of
necessity tried and known to the Minister it should be lawful to administrate
Baptism in private houses, the same being always ministered after the form it
would have been in the congregation and public declaration thereof made the
next Sunday in the Church, to the end the child might be known to have been
received into the flock of Christ's fold.

4 Seeing the inestimable benefits received from God by our Lord Jesus Christ
his birth, passion, resurrection, ascension, and sending down of the Holy
Ghost, have been commendably remembered at certain particular days and times by
the whole Church of the World, every Minister from thenceforth should keep a
commemoration of the said benefits upon these days, and make choice of several
and pertinent texts of Scripture, and frame their doctrines and exhortations
thereto, rebuking all superstitious observation and licentious profaning of the
said times.

5 The Act of confirmation of Children his Majesty desired to be reformed in
this manner. Seeing the confirmation of Children is for the good education of
youth most necessary being reduced to the Primitive integrity, It is thought
good that the Minister in every Parish shall catechize all young children of
eight years of age, and see that they have knowledge, and be able to rehearse
the Lords prayer, the Belief, and ten Commandments, with answers to the
questions of the small Catechism used in the Church, and that the Bishops in
their visitations shall cause the Children be presented before them, and bless
them with prayer for the increase of Grace, and continuance of God his heavenly
gifts with them.

The difficulty of admitting these Articles being represented in an humble
letter to his Majesty by the Archbishop of S. Andrews, Reasons why the Articles
could not be inserted among the Canons.
and a reason given why the same could not be inserted with the Canons, as
having at no time been mentioned to the Church, nor proponed in any of their
meetings, he was pleased to forbear the pressing of the same for that time,
thinking at his coming into Scotland, which he intended the next Summer, to
satisfy such as were scrupulous, and to obtain the Churches consent.

Shortly after a letter was sent to the Council, To assure them of the Kings
resolution to visit the Kingdom, A Proclamation touching the Kings purpose to
visit the Country.
which he said did proceed of a longing he had to see the place of his
breeding, a Salmon-like instinct (as he was pleased to call it) and because he
knew that evil disposed persons would disperse rumors, as if he came to make
alterations in the civil and ecclesiastical Estate, he commanded Proclamation
to be made for certifying the subjects of the contrary. It was true, he said,
that he desired to do some good at his coming; and to have abuses reformed
both in the Church and Commonwealth; yet foreseing the impediments that his
good intentions would meet with, and regarding the love of his people no less
then their benefit, he would be loath to give them any discontent, and
therefore willed all his good subjects to lay aside their jealousies, and
accommodate themselves in the best sort they could for his receiving, and the
entertainment of the Noblemen of England who were to accompany him in the
journey.

The Earl of Mar was at that time made Thesaurer, The Earl of Mar made
Thesaurer.
and Sir Gedeon Murray continued in his depu^ation. A motion had been made a
little before, for appointing a Commissioner or Deputy in the Kingdom, which
was hearkened unto by the King as that which would ease him of many vexations,
and in his absence maintain a face of court, and breed a great respect among
the people; and so far was that purpose advanced, as both the King had made
offer of the place to the Earl of Mar, and he yielded to accept the same: but
this breaking out and coming to the Chancellors knowledge, whether that he
desired not to have any in place above himself, or as he pretended wishing the
Noblemans good, he diverted him from accepting that charge, and brought him to
embrace the office of Thesaurer as the most profitable, and that which should
bring with it a less envy. Sir Gedeon had the intromission withal, as when
Somerset was in place and did provide things so carefully and with such
foresight, as when the King came he found nothing lacking that was required for
a Royal and Princely entertainment.

Among other directions sent from the King, A direction for repairing the
Chapel.
one was for repairing of the Chapel, and some English carpenters employed,
who brought with them the portraits of the Apostles to be set in the Pews or
Stalls; as they were proceeding in their work, a foolish and idle rumor went,
that Images were to be set up in the Chapel: and as people are given to speak
the worst, it was current among them, that the Organs came first, now the
Images, The Bishops entreat the stay of some carved pictures upon fear of
offense.
and ere long they should have the Mass. The Bishop of Galloway then Dean of
the Chapel moved with these speeches, did pen a letter to the King,
entreating his Majesty for the offense that was taken to stay the affixing of
these portraits. To this letter he procured the subscriptions of the Archbishop
of S. Andrews, the Bishops of Aberdene and Berchin and diverse of the Ministers
of Edinburgh.

The answer returned by the King was full of anger, Ann. 1617.
objecting ignorance unto them that could not distinguish betwixt pictures
intended for ornament and decoration, His Majesty's answer.
and images erected for worship and adoration; and resembling them to the
Constable of Castile, who being sent to swear the peace concluded with Spain,
when he understood the business was to be performed in the Chapel, where some
anthems were to be sung, desired that whatsoever was sung, Gods name might not
be used in it, and that being forborne he was content they should sing what they
listed: just so, said the King, you can endure Lions, Dragons, and Devils to
be figured in your Churches, but will not allow the like place to the
Patriarchs and Apostles. His Majesty always gave order for some other form and
staying the erecting of these portraits; which in the same letter he said, was
not done for ease of their hearts, or confirming them in their error, but
because the work could not be done so quickly in that kind as was first
appointed. This letter was of the date at Whitehall, the 13 of March 1617.

The King was much labored to defer his journey to the next year, The King
refutech to defer his journey as he was desired.
when as he should find things better prepared, but he refusing to hearken to
any such motion, made the greater haste, and in the beginning of May came to
Berwick, where he was met with diverse of the Council, and by their advice the
Parliament which had been indicted to the 17 of May prorogued to the 13 of
June. All this time intervened, A Parliament in Scotland.
the King spent in a progress through the Country, making^ his entry in the
special Burghs after a most Royal manner, and welcomed with all the
expressions of joy that could be devised.

At the day appointed the Estates were frequently assembled, His Majesty's
speech to the Estates.
where his Majesty made a long speech for the establishing Religion and
Justice, neither of which, he said, could be looked for so long as a regard was
not had to the Ministers of both. For Religion he complained, That
notwithstanding of the long profession of the truth, numbers of Churches
remained unplanted, and of those that were planted few or none had any
competent maintenance: for this he wished some course to be taken, and certain
Commissioners to be chosen for appointing to every Church a perpetual local
stipend, such as might suffice to entertain a Minister and make him able to
attend on his charge of justice. He discoursed long remembering the pains he had
taken as well when he lived among them, as since his going into England, and
how he had placed Justices and Constables (a most ladable kind of government)
for the preserving of peace, and the keeping of the laws in due regard; which
he understood, as he said, to be much neglected, partly in default of some that
were named to those places, and held it a scorn to be employed in such a
charge, and partly by the opposition which the Lords and great men of the
Country made unto them, and to their settling: but he would have both the one
and other to know that as it was a place of no small honor to be a Minister of
the Kings Justice in the service of the Common wealth; so he did esteem none to
deserve better at his hands then they who gave countenance thereto; as on the
other part whosoever should show themselves hinderers thereof, should be
accounted with him enemies to his Crown, and the quiet of the Kingdom. In end
he said, that he had long striven to have the barbarities of the Country which
they knew to be too many removed and extinct, and in place thereof Civility and
Justice established, and that he would still endeavor to do his best that way,
till he might say of Scotland as one of the Emperors said of Rome, Inveni
lateritiam, relinquo marmoream.

The King having closed and the Lords gone apart to choose those that should be
upon the Articles, A Trouble in choosing the Lords of the Articles.
the humors of some discontented Lords begun to kithe; for whosoever were by
the King recommended as fit persons, were passed by as men suspected, and
others named who stood worse affected to his Majesty's service. Another
question they made for admitting the Officers of State, refusing to admit any
but the Chancellor, Thesaurer, and Clerk of the Rolls. This being long and
sharply debated, was in end agreed by the admission of the whole number.

Among these Articles proponed, Article concerning his Majesty's prerogative in
ca^ses Ecclesiastical.
the first was, of his Majesty's authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
concerning which it was desired to be enacted, That whatsoever conclusion was
taken by his Majesty with advice of the Archbishops and Bishops in matters of
external policy, the same should have the power and strength of an
Ecclesiastical law. The Bishops interceding did humbly entreat that the
Article might be better considered, for that in making of Ecclesiastical laws,
the advice and consent of Presbyters was also required. The King replying, That
he was not against the taking of Ministers their advice, and that a competent
number of the most grave and learned among them should be called to assist the
Bishops; but to have matters ruled as they have been in your General
Assemblies, I will never agree: for the Bishops must rule the Ministers, and
the King rule both, in matters indifferent and not repugnant to the Word of
God. So the Article passed in this form, That whatsoever his Majesty should
determine in the external government of the Church, with the advice of the
Archbishops, Bishops, and a competent number of the Ministry, should have the
strength of a law.

This coming to the Ministers ears, A stir among the Ministers because of the
Article.
they began to stir as if the whole Rites and Ceremonies of England were to
be brought upon them without their consents; whereupon the Ministers that were
in Town were called together, and warned to be quiet, for that such a general
Act did not lay upon them any bond; and if any particular was urged, the same
should be communicated to them, and nothing concluded without their consents.
It was further told them, that there would not be wanting informations enough
to stir them up unto unquietness, but they should do well not to irritate
his Majesty, whom they knew to be a gracious Prince, and one that would hear
reason, and give way to the same. This they did all promise; yet upon the
suggestion of some discontented people, the very next day Mr. William
Struthers, one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, did unhappily break out in his
Sermon upon these matters, condemning the Rites received in the Church of
England, and praying God to save Scotland from the same. This reported to the
King by some of the English Doctors that were his hearers, he became greatly
incensed: But the Ministers not contented with this, did the same day in the
afternoon tumultuously convene, and form a Protestation, in the words following:

Most gracious and dread Sovereign, The Ministers Protestation.
most honorable Lords and remanent Commissioners of this present Parliament;
We the Ministers of Christ's evangel, being here convened from all the parts of
this your Majesty's Kingdom, do in all reverence and submission entreat your
Majesty's and honors patient and favorable hearing of this our reasonable and
humble supplication; And first it will please your Highness and honorable
Estates presently convened to be informed, that we are here a number of the
Ministry out of all the parts of the Kingdom, and that the Bishops have
protested to a great many of us since our coming that nothing should be agreed
nor consented unto by them in this present Parliament, in matters concerning
the discipline and order of the Church, without our knowledge and advice,
affirming that neither we nor they have any power to consent to any novation,
or smallest change of the order established, without the advice of the General
Assembly; whereupon we resting in security, have received a sudden report of an
Article to pass for a law in the Parliament, decerning and declaring that your
Majesty with the advice of the Archbishops, and Bishops, and such a competent
number of the Ministry as your Majesty out of your wisdom should think
expedient, shall in all time coming have full power to advise and conclude all
matters of decency, and which any way may concern the policy of the Church: And
that such conclusions shall have the strength and power of laws
Ecclesiastical; wherein it will please your Majesty and honorable Estates to
hear our own just griefs, and to consider our reasonable desires, and not to
put us your Majesty's humble subjects to that poor and simple part of
protestation. Which if remedy be not provided, we shall be forced to use for
the freedom of our Church and discharge of our consciences.

We then first plead our reformation, and that the purity of our Church in
doctrine, ministration of the sacraments, discipline and all convenient order
with the best reformed Churches in Europe, has been acknowledged rather as a
pattern to be followed of others, then that we should seek our reformation from
those that never attained to that perfection, which we by the mercy of God this
long time past have enjoyed under your Highness protection.

Next, we plead the liberty of our Church, which by the laws of your Majesty's
Kingdom and diverse Acts of Parliament, is established with power of public
meetings and annual Assemblies, and allowance to make Canons and
constitutions, such as may serve for the comely order thereof, all which by
this conclusion that is intended will be utterly overthrown.

Thirdly, we plead for the peace and tranquillity of our Church, that being
nearest the Divine and Apostolical institution has lived without schism, and
rent in the self; and by introduction of any novelty against order, may be
miserably divided, and so our peace broken.

Fourthly, we have been at diverse times sufficiently secured from all
suspicions of innovation, and specially by your Majesty's Letter, sent down
this last Winter, to take away all fear of any alteration which might arise
upon your Majesty's lovingly intended journey; which Letter by your Majesty's
special will and direction of your Highness Council, was intimated in
pulpits; as also by that Proclamation given out the 26 of September 1616, when
rumors of an intended conformity with the Church of England were dispersed:
whereby your Majesty sufficiently avoided all such suspicion, and settled the
hearts of honest men in a confidence that no such thing should be attempted.

These, and many other reasons have moved us in all reverence by this our
humble supplication to entreat, your Highness, and honorable Estates, not to
suffer the aforenamed Article, or any other prejudicial to our former
liberties, to pass at this time, to the grief of this poor Church; that the
universal hope of thousands in this land, who rejoiced at your Majesty's happy
arrival, be not turned into mourning; wherein as we we are earnest supplicants
to God, to incline your Majesty's heart this way, as the most expedient for the
honor of God, and well of your subjects, so if we shall be frustrated of this
our reasonable desire, then do we in all humility, (with that dutiful
acknowledgment of our loyalty to your Majesty, as becomes) protest for our
selves and all our brethren that shall adhere to this our Protestation, that as
we are free of the same, so must we be forced rather to incur the censure of
your Majesty's law, then to admit or obtemper any imposition that shall not
flow from the Church orderly convened, or others having power from the same.

This Protestation was subscribed by Mr. Archibald Sympson Minister at
Dalkeith, The subscrivers of the Protestation.
in name of the brethren and supplicants. In another paper, the Ministers who
were present set down their names each of them with his own hand, for a
testimony of their concurrence, which was committed to the said Mr. Archibald
in custody. But as it falls out in things unadvisedly done, and in the heat
of humor, the principalls in that business quickly forthinking that which they
had done, came the next morning early to the Archbishop of S. Andrews,
entreating him to stop the presenting thereof, which he showed he might easily
do by taking the same from Mr. Peter Hewet, in whose hand it was given to
present.

This man being one of the Ministers of Edinburgh had lately before been
preferred to the Abbacy of Crossragwell, and having thereby a place in the
Parliament house, Mr. Peter Hewet undertakes the presenting of the Protestation.
was held the most fitting to present the Protestation, which he willingly
undertook; for he loved ever to be meddling, and was always set to make
trouble. The Parliament was that day to close, and the Archbishop knowing how
ill the King would take their doing, went the more timely to the Palace, where
meeting with the Abbot, he asked him concerning the Protestation, desiring to
see it; and having perused a few lines began to rebuke him for taking in hand
such a business; he making some excuse, and saying, it was a Protestation only
which could not offend, put forth his hand to take back the paper; but the
Archbishop holding it fast, the Protestation was near rent betwixt them. It
happened one of the Grooms (called John Levingston) to see them at strife, for
they had met in the private gallery, near to his Majesty's chamber, who showing
the King what he had seen; his Majesty came forth being as yet undressed, and
asked what the matter was? The Archbishop answered, That a number of Ministers
having framed a Protestation against the Article of his Majesty's Prerogative,
had given it to the man that he had made Abbot to present, and that he had
undertaken to do the same, for which he had been chiding him, it being an
undutifull part in him without signifying the matter to his Ordinary to take
such a business in hand.

The man falling upon his knees, and trembling, said, That he supposed the
Protestation would never offend his Majesty, and that he had promised to
present the same in Parliament; but now that it appeared to him otherwise, he
would no more meddle therewith.

The King taking the Protestation, and perceiving it subscribed by one only
Minister, inquired who these others were that convened. The Abbot answered,
that they had all signed a paper besides, which the subscriver kept by him for
his warrant. Then the King commanding the Bishop to keep the Protestation, went
to prepare himself for the meeting, and suspecting that some other might come
and protest against the Article, commanded the Register Sir George Hay (who
upon the death of Sir Alexander Hay had been preferred to the office the year
before) to pass by that Article as a thing no way necessary, The Clerk of
Register commanded to pass by the Article of Prerogative.
the prerogative of his Crown bearing him to more then was declared by it. Thus
when the hour of meeting came, the Register, as he was commanded, laying by
that Article, caused read the others that were concluded, as the custom is,
and the same being assented to by the Estates, were ratified by his Majesty.
Thereafter the King in a most grave speech having commended the execution of
the laws made to the Judges and other inferior Magistrates, gave the Estates a
most kind and loving farewell.

The same night the Bishops had warning given them to meet his Majesty at S.
Andrews the tenth of July, The Bishops warned to meet at S. Andrews.
whither he minded to call the principal Ministers also, that they might know
his mind before he went away. The Diet held as was appointed, and there
assembled with the Bishops, the Ministers of chief account to the number of
thirty six, who being convened in the Chapel of the Castle, the King did speak
to them to this purpose.

What and how great my care has been for this Church as well before as since
my going into England, His Majesty's speech at the meeting.
is so well known to you all, as I neither need, nor do I mean to speak much
of it, lest any should think I am seeking thanks for that I have done. It
suffices me, that God knows my intention is, and ever was to have his true
worship maintained, and a decent and comely order established in the Church.
But of you I must complain, and of your causless jealousies, even when my
meaning toward you is best. Before my coming home to visit this Kingdom, being
advertised that in your last Assembly an Act was made for gathering the Acts of
the Church, and putting them in form, I desired a few Articles to be inserted;
one was for the yearly comemoration of our Savior his greatest blessings
bestowed upon mankind, as his Nativity, (...), Resurrection, Ascension, and
the descent of the holy Spirit. Another for the private use of both Sacraments,
in urgent and necessary cases. A third for the reverent administration of his
holy Supper. And a fourth for Catechizing and Confirming young Children by
Bishops. It was answered, that these particulars had not been moved in any of
the Church Assemblies, and so could not be inserted with the rest; which excuse
I admitted, and was not minded to press them any more till you after advice
did give consent thereto; yet when in the late Parliament I desired my
prerogative to be declared in the making of the Ecclesiastical laws, certain
of your number did mutinously assemble themselves, and form a Protestation to
cross my just desires. But I will pass that among many other wrongs I have
received at your hands: the errand for which I have now called you, is, to hear
what your scruples are in these points, and the reasons, if any you have, why
the same ought not to be admitted. I mean not to do any thing against reason;
and on the other part my demands being just and religious, you must not think
that I will be refused or resisted. It is a power innated and a special
prerogative which we that are Christian Kings have, to order and dispose of
external things in the policy of the Church, as we by advice of our Bishops
shall find most fitting; and for your approving or disapproving, deceive not
your selves, I will never regard it, unless you bring me a reason which I
cannot answer.

The Ministers at these words falling on their knees did beseech his Majesty to
think of them as his most humble and obedient subjects, The Ministers promise
obedience upon permission of a general Assembly.
and to permit them to confer a little space among themselves that they might
return with an uniforme answer. This granted, they went to the parish Church,
and after some two hours returned, making petition for a general Assembly,
wherein these Articles being proponed might be with a common consent received.
The King asking what assurance he might have of their consenting; they
answered, that they found no reason to the contrary, and knew the Assembly
would yield to any reasonable thing demanded by his Majesty. But if it fall out
otherwise, said the King, and that the Articles be refused, my difficulty shall
be greater, and when I shall use my authority in establishing them, they shall
call me a tyrant and persecutor. All crying that none could be so mad as to
speak so: Yet experience, says the King, tells me it may be so; therefore
unless I be made sure, I will not give way to an Assembly. Mr. Patrick Galloway
saying, that the Bishop of S. Andrews should answer for them: the Bishop
refused, for that he had been deceived by them, they having against their
promise in the time of Parliament taken the course which they did. Then said
Mr. Patrick. If your Majesty will trust me, I will assure for the Ministers.
The King replying that he would trust him; it was condescended that an Assembly
should be called for that end at S. Andrews the 25. of November next.

Mr. Archibald Sympson the subscriber of the Protestation had been called to
the meeting, Mr. Ar^hibald Sympson and Mr. David Catherwood committed.
but falling sick by the way, he excused himself by a letter, and therein was
very earnest to have the brethren oppose the Articles which he called tricas
Anglicanas, using some other disdainful words. The letter being showed to the
King he asked for the bearer. This was Mr. David Catherwood, who carrying
himself unreverently, and breaking forth into speeches not becoming a subject,
was committed in the Town house of S. Andrews, and afterward banished the
kingdom. Sympson for his letter was warded in the Castle of Edinburgh, where
he remained unto December following.

The King after this taking his Journey to London by the west parts, The King
departs toward London.
was all the way through Scotland royally entertained, and at Dumfreis had a
farewell Sermon preached by the Bishop of Galloway, which made the hearers
burst out in many tears.

When the diet of the Assembly came, An assembly at S. Andrews.
the Earl of Hadington, and Viscount of Stormont were sent thither, as
Commissioners from his Majesty; the Archbishop made the exhortation, wherein
having deduced the Story of the Church from the time of reformation, he showed
that the greatest hinderance the Church received, proceeded from the Ministers
themselves, who for the pleasure of ill disposed people spared not to provoke
his Majesty to just anger: exhorting them for the glory of God, the honor of
the Gospel and their own good, to take another course, and prefer the favor
of their King, under whom they enjoyed so many blessings, to the vain applause
of factious persons.

It seemed at first, that matters should have gone well; for the first two
days there was much calmness, and the reasoning very formal and free, but
then upon a motion to delay the conclusion to another Assembly, The Assembly
inclines to a delay.
that the Ministers might have time to inform the people of the equity of the
Articles, the greater part went that way, and all almost cried for a delay.

His Majesty's Commissioners declaring that the King would take in ill part the
delay, The Commissioners obtain a grant of private Communion.
and that nothing should be done considering the promises they had made, if a
general Assembly should be granted to receive the whole Articles, a fashion
was made to a condescending to private Communion, and the Ministers ordained to
give the elements in the ministration of the holy Supper out of their own hands
to the people: which two acts with a letter of excuse for the continuance of
the rest, were sent to his Majesty; how the same was excepted, may appear by
the answer that came a few days after, which was this.

We have received your letter, The King offended with the Assemblies
proceedings writes to the two Archbishops.
and thereby understand what your proceedings have been in that Assembly of S.
Andrews; concerning which we will have you know, that we are come to that age,
as we will not be content to be fed with broth, as one of your Coat was wont
to speak, and think this your doing a disgrace no less then the protestation
it self. Wherefore it is our pleasure, and we command you as you will avoid our
highest displeasure, the one of you by your Deputy in S. Andrews and by your
self in Edinburgh, and the other of you in Glasgow, keep Christmas day
precisely, your selves preaching, and choosing your Texts according to the time.
And likewise that ye discharge all modification of Stipends for this year to
any Minister whatsoever, such excepted as have testified their affection to our
service at this time by furthering at their power the acceptance of the
Articles proposed, and in the premises willing you not to fail we bid you
farewell. Newmarket the 6 of December. 1616.

In a postscript to the same letter it was said, So many Bishops as you can get
warned in time to preach at their Seas on Christmas day, urge them to it. Thus
much in haste for this time, after two or three days ye shall hear further
from us. With his Majesty's own hand after all was written; Since your Scottish
Church has so far contemned my Clemency, they shall now find what it is to
draw the anger of a King upon them.

This letter was directed to the Archbishops of S. Andrews and Glasgow, Another
letter to the Archbishop of S. Andrews.
the other which follows to S. Andrews him alone.

After we had commanded the dispatch of our other letter, we received an
extract concluded (we know not how) in your Assembly, and subscribed by the
Clerk thereof. The one concerning private Communion, and the other concerning
the form to be used at the receiving of the holy Sacrament; both so hedged and
conceived in so ridiculous a manner, as besides that of the whole Articles
proponed, these two were the least necessary to have been urged, and hastened.
The scornful condition and form of their grant makes us justly wish that they
had been refused with the rest: for in the first concerning the Communion
allowed to sick persons, besides the number required to receive with such
patients, and a necessity tying them upon oath to declare that they truly
think not to recover, but to dye of that disease, they are yet further hedged
in with a necessity to receive the Sacrament (in case foresaid to be ministered
unto them) in a convenient room; which what it imports we cannot guess,
seeing no room can be so convenient for a sick man (sworn to dye) as his bed,
and that it were injurious and inhumane from thence in any case to transport
him, were the room never so neat and handsome, to which they should carry him.

And as to that other Act ordaining the Minister himself to give the Elements
in the celebration out of his own hand to every one of the Communicants; and
that he may perform this the more commodiously, by the advice of the
Magistrates and honest men of his Session, to prepare a Table, at which the
same may be conveniently ministered; Truly in this we must say that the
Ministers ease and commodious sitting on his tail, has been more looked to,
then that kne eling, which for reverence we directly required to be enjoined to
the receivers of so divine a Sacrament; neither can we conceive what should be
meant by that Table, unless they mean to make a round Table (as did the Jews)
to sit and receive it. In conclusion, seeing either we and this Church here
must be held Idolatrous in this point of kneeling, or they reputed rebellions
knaves in refusing the same, and that the two foresaid Acts are conceived so
scornfully, and so far from our meaning; it is our pleasure that the same be
altogether suppressed, and that no effect follow thereupon. So we bid you
farewell. Newmarket the 11 of December. 1617.

These letters were accompanied with another to the Council for inhibiting the
payment of Stipends to any of the rebellious Ministers refusers of the said
Articles either in Burgh or Landwart, Letters to the Council for inhibiting
the payment of Stipends.
till they show their conformity, and that the same was testified by the
subscriptions of the Primate or ordinary Bishop. Which letters being showed to
the Ministers of Edinburgh and others that happened to repair to that City for
augmentation of stipends, did cast them into a great fear, and repenting their
wilfulness, as they had reason, became requesters to the Archbishop of S.
Andrews to preach as he was commanded on Christmas day at Edinburgh, trusting
his Majesty should be mitigated by his obedience, and intercession for the
rest. Neither did he fail to use his best means for diverting the King from
these rigorous courses, and after a little time (so loath was his Majesty to
exerce any rigor against Ministers) obtained a warrant for staying the
execution of the former letters, till their behavior should be tried in the
particular Synods, and their disposition for accepting the Articles.

Mr. Archibald Sympson, Mr. Archibald Sympson put to liberty.
who all this while remained prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, hearing that
the King was so greatly displeased, did supplicate the Lords of his Majesty's
Commission (by whose command he was committed) for liberty, promising not to
fall again in the like errors and professing a great sorrow for his meddling
with the Protestation, as likewise for writing that letter wherein he had taxed
the Church of England. Being brought before the Commission, after he had set
his hand to his supplication, he was permitted to return to his charge at
Dalkeith. His inconstancy and change.
Yet ere many days passed, finding the countenances of the holy brethren cast
down upon him, he dispersed an Apologetick (as he entitled it) wherein making
a gloss upon every word of his confession he concluded, that whatsoever
weakness or frailty had befallen him, he hoped to be like Peter, qui ore
negavit, and cord confessus est, and never to betray the Lords cause with
Judas. This I have remembered by the way, to make the humors of these men seen,
and the small regard they take of saying, and gainsaying, when it makes for
their purpose.

But to proceed; the Bishops upon advertisement given them convened at
Edinburgh the 29 of January, and considering the hurt that the Church might
receive, if the Commission granted in Parliament for provision of Ministers
(which was to expire at Lambmas next) should take no effect, did by a common
letter entreat his Majesty for a warrant to proceed in that Commission, giving
hopes that in their Synods they should induce the Ministers to obey.

The answer returned in February next, A warrant to proceed with the Commission
of Stipends.
was to this effect. That howbeit his Majesty did interpret well their doings,
as intended to the good of his service, yet considering the obstinate
resistance of the Ministers to all his just and religious desires, he could not
expect any thing from them in their meetings, but a further expression of their
former misbehaviour. Nottheless as he had once already, upon the Archbishop of
S. Andrews his entreaty, suspended the execution of his last directions, so at
their requests he was pleased that the Commissioners for Stipends should meet
and go on with the providing of Churches, they in the mean time in their own
persons, and in their own Cathedralls observing the festivities that should
intervene between and the Synods, and ministering the holy Communion with the
reverence required, at the feast of Easter next. Thus were matters pacified for
that time, and the Commission for augmentation of Stipends by the warrant of
this letter put in practice.

Most of the next summer was spent in that work, but with greater detriment
then benefit to the Church; for what augmentation soever was granted, the same
was recompensed to the givers by prorogation of their former leases for numbers
of years, and thereby the Church more damnified then bettered.

In the Synods all things were carried with reasonable quietness, A general
Assembly indicted at Perth.
so as upon the Bishops humble requests license was granted for meeting in a
general Assembly, and the same indicted at Perth the 25 of August. The Lords
Hadington, Carnegy and Scone were Commissioners in this Assembly for the King,
who upon the end of the Sermon, presented his Majesty's Letter conceived as
follows.

We were once fully resolved never in our time to have called any more
Assemblies here for ordering things concerning the policy of the Church, His
Majesty's Letter to the Assembly.
by reason of the disgrace offered unto us in that late meeting of S. Andrews,
wherein our just and godly desires were not only neglected, but some of the
Articles concluded in that scornful manner, as we wish they had been refused
with the rest: yet at this time we have suffered our selves to be entreated by
you our Bishops for a new Convocation, and have called you together who are now
convened, for the self same business which then was urged, hoping assuredly
that you will have some better regard to our desires, and not permit the unruly
and ignorant multitude, after their wonted custom, to oversway the better and
more judicious sort in evil, which we have gone about with much pains to have
had amended in these Assemblies, and for that purpose, according to Gods
ordinance and the constant practice of all well governed Churches, we have
placed you that are Bishops and overseers of the rest in the chiefest rooms.
You plead much we perceive to have things done by consent of Ministers, and
tell us often, that what concerns the Church in general, should be concluded
by the advice of the whole: neither do we altogether dislike your opinion, for
the greater is your consent, the better are we contented. But we will not have
you to think, that matters proponed by us of the nature whereof these Articles
are, may not without such a general consent be enjoined by our authority.

This were a misknowing of your places, and withal a disclaiming of that
innate power which we have by our calling from God, whereby we have place to
dispose of things external in the Church, as we shall think them to be
convenient and profitable for advancing true religion among our subjects.
Wherefore let it be your care by all manner of wise and discreet persuasions to
induce them to an obedient yielding to these things, as in duty both to God and
us they are bound; and do not think we will be satisfied with delays,
mitigations and other we know not what shifts have been proponed; for we will
not be content with any thing, but a simple and direct acceptance of these
Articles in the form sent by us unto you a long time past, considering both the
lawfulness and undeniable convenience of them, for the better furtherance of
piety and Religion, the establishing whereof it had rather have becomed you to
beg of us, then that we should have needed thus to urge the practice of them
upon you.

These matters indeed concern you of the Ecclesiastical charge chiefly;
neither would we have called Noblemen, Barons and others of our good subjects
to the determination of them, but that we understand the offense of people that
have been so much objected, wherein you must bear with us to say, that no
Kingdom does breed, or has at this time more loving, dutiful, and obedient
subjects then we have in that our native kingdom of Scotland; and so if any
disposition has appeared to the contrary in any of them, we hold the same to
have proceeded from among you, albeit of all sorts of men ye are they, that
both of duty were bound, and by particular benefits obliged to have continued
your selves, and confirmed others by sound doctrine and exemplary life in a
reverent obedience to our commandments. What and how many abuses were offered
us by diverse of the Ministry there before our happy coming to the Crown of
England, we can hardly forget, and yet like not much to remember, neither think
we that any Prince living should have kept himself from falling in utter
dislike with the profession it self, An. 1618.
considering the many provocations that were given unto us: but the love of God
and his truth still upheld us, and will by his grace so do unto the end of our
life, our patience always in forgetting and forgiving of many faults of that
sort, and constant maintaining of true Religion against the adversaries (by
whose hateful practices we live in greater peril then you all or any of you)
should have produced better effect among you, then continual resistance of our
best purposes, we wish that we be no more provoked, nor the truth of God which
you teach and profess, any longer slandered, by such as under the cloak of
seeming holiness walk disorderly amongst you, shaking hands as it were and
joining in this their disobedience to Magistracy, with the upholders of Popery.
In sum, our hearty desire is, that at this time you make the world see by
your proceedings what a dutiful respect you bear to us your Sovereign Prince
and natural King and Lord, that as we in love and care are never wanting to
you, so ye in an humble submission to our so just demands be not found
inferior to others our subjects in any of our kingdoms: and that the care and
zeal of the good of Gods Church, and of the advancing of piety and truth, does
chiefly incite us to the following of these matters, God is our witness; the
which that it may be before your eyes, and that according to your callings you
may strive in your particular places, and in this general meeting to do these
things which may best serve to the promoving of the Gospel of Christ, even our
prayers are earnest to God for you, requiring you in this and other things to
credit the bearer hereof our servant and Chaplain the Dean of Winchester, whom
we have expressly sent thither, that he may bring unto us a certain relation of
the particular carriages of all matters and of the happy event of your meeting,
which by Gods blessing (who is the God of order, peace and truth) we do
assuredly expect, unto whose gracious direction we commend you now and for
ever.

Given at Theobalds the 10 of July 1616.

The Letter being read once and again, The five Artiticles concluded.
as the custom is with letters of such importance, the Archbishop of S.
Andrews resumed shortly the heads thereof, advising them as he had done in his
exhortation, to consider the inconveniences they should draw upon the Church
by the refusal of the Articles. After which the rolls being called, certain of
the most wise and discreet Ministers, were set apart to confer upon the
Articles. How matters proceeded in the said Assembly, you may learn by the
Defense afterward published, in answer to a lying and seditious pamphlet that
came forth in print against the conclusions there taken. To our story it shall
suffice that after long reasoning, first in the conference, and then in the
full Assembly, the Articles were concluded in this form.

1 Seeing we are commanded by God himself, Article for kneeling.
that when we come to worship him, we fall down and kneel before the Lord our
maker, and considering with all that there is no part of divine worship more
heavenly and spiritual, then is the holy receiving of the blessed body and
blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, like as the most humble and
reverent gesture of our body in our meditation and the lifting up of our hearts
best becomes so divine and sacred an action; therefore notwithstanding that
our Church has used since the reformation of Religion to celebrate the holy
communion to the people sitting, by reason of the great abuse of kneeling used
in the Idolatrous worship of the Sacrament by the Papists; yet seeing all
memory of by past superstitions is past, in reverence of God and in due regard
of so divine a Mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are
made partakers of; the Assembly thinks good, that the blessed Sacrament be
celebrated hereafter meekly and reverently upon their knees.

2 If any good Christian visited with long sickness and known to the Pastor,
Private Communion.
by reason of his present infirmity be unable to resort to the Church for
receiving the holy communion, or being sick, shall declare to the Pastor upon
his conscience that he thinks his sickness to be deadly, and shall earnestly
desire to receive the same in his house, the Minister shall not deny him so
great a comfort, lawful warning being given to him the night before, and that
there be three or four of good Religion, and conversation, free of all lawful
impediments, present with the sick person to communicate with him, who must
also provide a convenient place in his house, and all things necessary for the
reverent administration thereof according to the order prescri^ed in the Church.

3 Item, Private Biptisme.
The Minister shall often admonish the people that they defer not the
Baptism of Infants any longer then the next Lords day after the child be born,
unless upon a great and reasonable cause declared to the Minister and by him
approved, the same be continued. As also they shall warn them that without
great cause they procure not their children to be baptized at home in their
houses, but when great need shall compel them to baptize in private houses (in
which case the Minister shall not refuse to do it, upon the knowledge of the
great need, and being timely required thereto) then Baptism shall be
administered after the same form as it should have been in the congregation: and
the Minister shall the next Lords day after any such private baptism declare
in the Church that the infant was so baptized, and therefore ought to be
received as one of the true flock of Christ's fold.

4 For as much as one of the special means for staying the increase of Popery,
Confirmation of Children*
and settling of true Religion in the hearts of people is, that a special care
be taken of young children, their education, and how they are catechized, which
in time of the Primitive Church most carefully was attended as being most
profitable to cause young children in their tender years drink in the knowledge
of God and his Religion, but is now altogether neglected, in respect of the
great abuse and errors, which crept into the Popish Church by making thereof a
Sacrament of Confirmation; therefore that all superstitions built thereupon may
be rescinded, and that the matter it self being most necessary for the
Education of youth, may be reduced to the Primitive integrity, it is thought
good that the Minister in every parish should catechize all young children of
eight years of age; and see that they have the knowledge, and be able to make
rehearsal of the Lords Prayer, Belief and ten Commandments, with answers to
the Questions of the small Catechism used in our Church: and that every Bishop
in his visitation shall censure the Minister, who shall be found remiss
therein; and the said Bishops shall cause the said children to be presented
before them, and bless them with prayer for the increas of their knowledge, and
the continuance of Gods heavenly graces with every one of them.

5 As we abhor the superstitious observation of Festival days by the Papists,
Observation of Festivities.
and detest all licentious and profane abuses thereof, by the common sort of
prof^ssors; so we think that the inestimable benefits received from God by our
Lord Jesus Christ, his birth, passion, resurrection, ascension, and sending
down of the holy Ghost was commendably, and godly remembered at certain
particular days and times by the whole Church of the world, and may also be
now: therefore the Assembly admits that every Minister shall upon these days
have the commemoration of the foresaid inestimable benefits, and make choice of
several and pertinent texts of Scripture, and frame their doctrine and
exhortation thereto; and rebuke all superstitious observation and licentious
profanation thereof.

These Articles concluded, The Articles ordained to be intimated in all
Churches.
order was given to intimate the same in all the parish Churches, and the
Ministers enjoined to inform their people of the lawfulness thereof, and exhort
them to obedience. But this being neglected of the greater part, was not the
least cause of the distractions that ensued, especially in the Church of
Edinburgh, where the people being still fostered in an opinion that their
Ministers would not go from their former practice, when they saw them give
obedience withdrew themselves in great numbers, and ran to seek the Communion
from other Ministers they knew to be refractary. His Majesty always upon
advertisement that the Articles were concluded, caused publish the same at the
Market Cross of the principal burghs, commanding the subjects to obey and
conform themselves under the pain of his Highness displeasure.

At the same time the King being informed that the Earl of Argile (who the
summer preceding had obtained license upon a pretext of some infirmity to go
unto the Spadan Wells) was revolted from the Religion, The Earl of Argile
falls from his profession.
and that he entertained some secret practice with old Mackrannald for
disturbing the Country, did recall his license, and ordained him to be cited
upon threescore days to appear before the Council. He not appearing at the
time appointed was denounced Rebel, and process of forfeiture intended
against; him whether he was perverted by his English Lady who was Popish, or
that to gain the favor of Spain he did change his religion, is doubtful, but
thereby he lost his Majesty's favor (who could never endure an apostate
Papist) and undid his own reputation. Some ten years after he made means for
his peace, and was permitted to return unto England.

In the month of November a Comet or blazing star of more then ordinary
bigness, A Comet or blasing Star.
shined many nights together. It was held to portend great calamities, and was
interpreted by diverse to have foreshewed the troubles that shortly after arose
in Germany; But as every one is ready to make his own construction of such
things, Queen Anne dies.
some with us did take it to foretell the death of our noble Queen Anne, who
deceased some months after, to the great regrate of all honest subjects; a
courteous and humane Princess, and one in whom there was much goodness.

It was in this year that the Synod in Dordrecht in Holland was gathered for
repressing the Arminians, Ann. 1619.
and thither did the troublers of our Church (thinking to procure their
approbation) direct a relation of the Government of the Scottish Church. The
Synod of Dordrecht said to have condemned the five articles of Perth.
But the Synod declining all questions of discipline, held themselves to the
points of doctrine controverted, and having condemned the five articles wherein
the Arminians dissented from the reformed Churches, the acts of Perth Assembly
being also five in number, it was given out among the vulgar sort, that they
had condemned the Synod of Perth, and for a time was the people entertained by
some Ministers in those conceits. The relation was confuted a little after, and
the falsehood thereof discovered; yet they ceased not by their Libells and
Pamphlets, to injure the most worthy men, and among others the Bishop of
Galloway, whom they vexed so with their Papers, The Bishop of Galloway dies.
as he taking the business more to heart then was needful, fell in a sickness
whereof he deceased in the beginning of the same year. An excellent and ready
Preacher he was, and a singular good man, but one that affected too much the
applause of the popular. The good opinion of the people is to be desired, if it
may be had lawfully; but when it cannot be obtained (as who is he that can
please all men, and at all times?) the testimony of a well informed conscience
should suffice. Mala opinio been parta delectat, said Seneca, An ill opinion
well purchased, (that is, for sustaining a good cause, or keeping a straight
course) should work us joy and delight, not grieve us at all.

Upon the death of Mr. William Cowper, The Bishop of Brichen translated to
Galloway.
Mr. Andrew Lamb was translated to Galloway, to whom succeeded in Brichen Mr.
David Lindsay, then Minister at Dundy. At Edinburgh between the Magistrates and
Ministers a great strife and discontent was raised, because of the Peoples
straying from their Churches, at which the Magistrates were thought to connive.
A distraction betwixt the Ministers and Magistrates of Edinburgh.
Their usurpation besides in Church affairs, especially the intending of a
Clerk upon the Church Session, did minister no small cause of offense. The
matter was brought before the King, where in behalf of the Ministers it was
said, That they were unkindly used for the obedience given to the Acts of Perth
Assembly; the Magistrates by their Commissioner did on the other side inform,
That the Ministers were the cause of the peoples disobedience, some of them
having directly preached against the Acts of Perth, and all of them affirmed
that these Acts were concluded against their hearts.

His Majesty remitting the trial of these complaints to his Secretary and to
the Archbishops of S. Andrews and Glasgow, The disorder pacified.
when as they had examined the same, it appeared that both the one and the
other were in fault, and that the mistakings among them were not the least
cause of the disorders in that Church, whereupon they were admonished to lay
aside their grudges and to keep one course for the retaining the people in the
obedience of God and his Majesty. Four other Ministers planted at Edinburgh.
The Magistrates and Council were likewise commanded, as the King had given
direction, to provide four other Ministers, besides those that were in present
service, and perfect the division of the Town in Parishes, which had been often
promised. And so shortly after this, were Mr. William Forbes Minister at
Aberdene, Mr. John Guthry Minister at Perth, Mr. John Maxwell Minister at
Murchlack, and Mr. Alexander Thomson Minister at Cambuslang translated from
their several Churches and placed Ministers at Edinburgh.

The next year beginning the year 1620 the wars of Bohem^a growing hot, An.
1620.
and the Palatinate invaded, the King took in mind the defense of his daughter
and grandchildren in their Patrimony, A contribution required for defense of
the Palatinate.
and because a supply of money was required to such a business, the Council
was desired to travel with the Noblemen the Members of Session, and the Town
of Edinburgh for a voluntary contribution, knowing that others by their example
would be drawn thereto. The Noblemen meeting to this effect the 24 of November
expressed a great forwardness to satisfy his Majesty's desire, yet fearing
that all the contributions when they were brought together should prove
unworthy, advised the Council rather to call a Parliament and impose upon the
subjects by way of Tax a reasonable proportion according to the wealth and
substance that every man had. This being signified to the King he refused to
have any supply by Tax, for he considered that the collection would require a
time, and a burden should that way be cast upon the Commons, and poor
laborers of the ground, which would make an outcrying among the people:
therefore he desired as before, that Noblemen, and those others he had named in
his first letter, should be urged to show their liberality.

A new meeting for this business being kept in January there after, Ann. 1621.
diverse overtures were made for giving his Majesty content; A Parliament
desired by the estates.
The Noblemen that were present made offer to give a benevolent according to
their abilities; and diverse of their rank being minors, and others abroad in
their travells, they saw not who would undertake for them. The Town of
Edinburgh being pressed with an answer excused themselves as being one Burgh
only, and lacking the concurrence of the rest, without which any supply they
could make would be of little worth. The Advocates, Clerks, and other members
of the Session gave in effect the like answer, so as they were forced to turn
unto the first overture for a Parliament. And for that the difficulties of the
contribution could not so well be expressed by letter, it was thought meet that
one of the Council should be sent to inform his Majesty of the reasons, and
necessity they had to call a Parliament. This employment being laid upon the
Archbishop of S. Andrews he took journey about the end of the same month, and
obtained after a little insisting his Majesty's warrant for a Parliament; thus
was it indicted to keep at Edinburgh the first of June, and prorogued to the 23
of July thereafter.

In this mean time it happened that Sir Gedeon Murray Thesaurer deputy being
then at Court, Sir Gideon Murray his death.
an information was made against him for abusing his office to the Kings
prejudice. The informer was James Stuart styled the Lord Ochiltry, who out of
malice carried to the Gentleman for the strictness which he had used in calling
him to an account for the duties of Orkney, made offer to justify the
accusation; and by the assistance of some of better credit then himself,
prevailed so far, that the matter was remitted to the trial of certain
Counselors at home; the Gentleman being of a great spirit, and taking
impatiently that his fidelity, whereof he had given so great proof, should be
called in question upon the information of a malicious enemy, by the way as he
returned from Court, did contract such a deep melancholy as neither counsel,
nor comfort could reclaim him, so far was he overgone that no advice given by
friends, nor offer of their assistance, nor the company and counsel of any
whomsoever could reduce him to his wonted estate; And so after he came to
Edinburgh within a few days departed this life. It was not doubted, if he
should have patiently attended the trial, but he had been cleared, and the
accusation proved a mere calumny; nor was it thought that the King did trust
the information, but only desired to have the honesty of his servant appear,
yet such was his weakness (courage I cannot call it) as giving scope to his
passions of anger and grief, he suffered himself to be therewith oppressed. By
his death the King did lose a good servant as ever he had in that charge; and
did sore forethink that he should have given ear to such delations. But of that
pestilent sort some will never be wanting in the Courts of Princes, and happy
is the King that can rid himself of liars in that kind. The Gentleman always
dyed happily, and had his corpse interred in the Church of Halyrudhouse.

The time of Parliament drawing near, the Marquess of Hamilton was employed as
Commissioner for keeping the same; at his first coming having understood the
business that some turbulent Ministers were making to impede the ratification
of the Acts of Perth Assembly, The Marquis of Hamilton keeps the Parliament.
he caused discharge all the Ministers out of the Town, the ordinary Preachers
excepted, and two of the number that would not be made quiet, he sent prisoners
to Dumbarton: all that time he did carry himself, and the matters committed to
his trust with such wisdom and foresight, as within a few days he brought them
all to the end which he wished, without any open contradiction. Matters
concluded in Parliament.
The subsidy desired was granted, the Acts of Perth Assembly ratified, and
diverse constitutions for the profit and good of the Country, as in the Acts
imprinted may be seen. At the closing of the Parliament, which was the fourth
of August, such abundance of rain, with such thunderings and lightnings did
fall, as the Noblemen and others of the Estates were compelled to leave their
horses, and betake them to their Coaches, which the factious sort did interpret
to be a visible sign of Gods anger for ratifying the Acts of Perth: others in
derision of their folly, said, that it was to be taken for an approbation from
heaven, likening the same to the thunderings and lightnings at the giving of
the law to Moses.

This was the last Parliament of King James in this Kingdom, The King
receives great content by the things concluded.
and that wherein he received greatest content: for the Puritan faction had
boasted that the Acts of Perth should never pass in a law (so confident they
were of their favorers in the Parliament house) and now that they failed in
their hopes, he trusted they would become more wise. But the King no less
careful to have the Acts obeyed then he was to have them pass in a law, did
commend the same by two several letters to the Bishops and Lords of the
Council.

To the Bishops he said, A Letter from his Majesty to the Bishops.
That as they had to do with two sorts of enemies, Papists, and Puritans; so
they should go forward in Action, both against the one and the other: That
Papistry was a disease of the mind, and Puritanisme of the brain, and the
antidote of both a grave, settled and well ordered Church in the obedience of
God and their King; whereof he willed them to be careful, and to use all means
for reducing those that either of simplicity, or wilfulness did err.

In his letter directed to the Council, A Letter from his Majesty to the
Council.
he put them in mind of that he had written in his Basilicon dor^n, That he
would have reformation begin at his own elbow, which he esteemed the Privy
Council and Session with their members to be, as having their places and
promotions by him. Therefore commanded them and every one of that number to
conform themselves to the obedience of the orders of the Church now established
by law; which he trusted they would readily do, otherwise if any Counselor or
Sessioner should refuse, and make difficulty, he did assure them that if within
14 days before Christmas they did not resolve to conform themselves, they
should lose their places in his service; And if any Advocate or Clerk should
not at that time obey, they should be suspended from the exercises of their
offices, and the fees and casualities thereunto belonging, unto such time as
they gave obedience. In the same letter he willed the Council to take order,
That none should bear office in any Burgh, nor be chosen Sheriff, Deputy, or
Clerk, but such as did conform themselves in all points to the said orders.
This letter was of the date, At the Honor of Hampton the 29 of September 1621.

By this may the Reader judge of that which has been commonly affirmed, The
Marquis of Hamilton wronged by a false rumor.
That the Nobleman who was Commissioner, should have promised at the passing of
the Acts, that none should be pressed with the obedience of them, but all left
to their own pleasures. That his Majesty gave no such warrant it appears by the
foresaid Letters, and that the Nobleman would go an inch from that he was
trusted with, none that knew will believe. The truth is, that in most
persuasive words (and with that majesty which became the place he represented)
he did require them all to acquiesce, and willingly obey the conclusions taken,
and not to draw upon themselves by their disobedience his Majesty's anger,
assuring them in that case, that his Majesty should not in his days press any
more change, or alteration in matters of that kind without their own consents.
And this was all the Nobleman spoke, as diverse yet living may remember.

In the beginning of the next year the Chancellor died at his house of Pinky
near to M^silburgh in a good age, An. 1622.
and with the regrate of many; for he exerced his place with great moderation,
The Chancellor Sea^on dies.
and to the contentment of all honest men: he was ever inclining to the Roman
faith, as being educated at Rome in his younger years, but very observant of
good order, and one that hated lying and dissimulation, and above all things,
studied to maintain peace and quietness. Sir George Hay Clerk of Register being
then at Court was preferred to the place, and by his dismission Mr. John
Hamilton brother to the Earl of Hadington, made Keeper of the Register.

About this time upon advertisements sent from England of the enlargement of
certain Priests and Papists that were there imprisoned, Rumors dispersed of
Tolerations intended.
a rumor was dispersed, that the King was inclining to a toleration of Popery,
and would grant liberty of conscience. This rumor was increased by occasion of
certain directions sent from the King to the Bishops of England, for reforming
certain abuses crept into the Church, whereby the Preachers and Lecturers were
commanded on Sundaies and Holy Days in the afternoon to teach the Catechism
only, or then some text taken out of the Creed, the ten Commandments, or Lords
Prayer; and in their preaching to abstain from handling the deep points of
Predestination, Reprobation, Election, the universality, efficacy,
resistibility, or irresistibility of Grace, leaving these themes as fitter for
the Schools then for simple auditors: as likewise not to presume in any Lecture
or Sermon to limit and bound by way of positive doctrine, the power,
prerogative, jurisdiction, authority or duty of sovereign Princes, or to meddle
with matters of State, having reference betwixt Princes and people, otherwise
then they were instructed and presidented in the Homily of Obedience, and
others of that sort, set forth by public authority. These directions were
interpreted to be a discharge of preaching, at least a confining of Preachers
to certain points of doctrine, which they called a limiting of the Spirit of
God, and as people will ever be judging and censuring public actions, every
one made the construction whereunto their humors did lead them.

The better and wiser sort, The judgment of the wise^ sort.
who considered the present estate of things, gave a far other judgment
thereof; for as then the King was treating with the French King for peace to
the Protestants in France, and with the King of Spain for withdrawing his
forces from the Palatinate, at which time it was no way fitting that he should
be executing the rigor of his laws against Papists at home, while he did
labor for peace to them of the Religion abroad; the most likely way to obtain
what he did seek of these Princes, being a moderation of the severity of laws
against Priests and Papists, at least for a time. And as to the directions
given to the Preachers, the same they judged both necessary and profitable,
considering the indiscretion of diverse of that sort, who to make ostentation of
their learning, or to gain the applause of the popular, would be meddling with
controversies they scarce understood, and with matters exceeding the capacities
of people.

The King offending with these rumors which he heard were dispersed in both
Kingdoms, His Majesty's speech in a Parliament held at that time in England.
took occasion in a Parliament assembled about that time in England to speak to
them and say: I understand that I am blamed for not executing the laws made
against Papists, but ye should know that a King and his laws are not unfitly
compared to a rider and his horse, the spur is sometime to be used, but not
always; the bridle is sometimes to be held in, at other times to be let loose,
as the rider finds cause: just so a King is not at all times to put in
execution the rigor of his laws, but he must for a time, and upon just grounds
dispense with the same, as I protest to have done in the present case, and to
have connived only for a time upon just cause, howbeit not known to all. If any
man for the favor showed to a Priest or Papist, will judge me to be inclining
that way, he wrongs me exceedingly. My words, and writings, and actions have
sufficiently demonstrated what my resolution is in all matters of Religion.

Some mo words to this purpose he uttered in that meeting, An. 1623.
but in a Letter directed to the Council of Scotland, His Majesty's directions
to the Council of Scotland.
he was somewhat more rough, finding fault with those that presumed to censure
his proceedings, and commanding them to take an exact trial of such as had
broken out into any such insolences either in word or deed, and to punish them
severely according to the laws. This was not well published, when the news of
the Princes journey to Spain made all good men amazed: for hearing that he was
gone accompanied only with the Duke of Buckingham, and another servant, the
fear of inconveniences that might befall his person, did mightily trouble them.
But it pleased God both in his going and returning safely to conduct and
protect him. The occasion and success of that journey, I shall shortly relate.

A match had been treating of a long time betwixt the Prince and a Daughter of
Spain, The Princes journey to Spain, and the occasion thereof.
which received many hindrances both at home and in that Court; but it being
thought that the delays made in these parts, would be easily removed, by the
presence of the Prince himself, whereof great hopes were given by Gundamar the
Spanish Ambassador, the King gave way to the journey, as hoping by this mean
to have the Palatinate freed from the vexations of war, and a general peace
established throughout Christendom. Thus the Prince accompanied in manner
aforesaid, departly secretly from Court, and landing at Callais, went through
France undiscovered, and after a few days came safely to the Court of Spain.

At his coming he was kindly received and welcomed with diverse courtly
Complements, The Princes entertainment in Spain.
but found a greater strangeness then he expected; for although he was still
kept in hope of the Match, yet he was not permitted to visit the Lady, but upon
condition to speak in such and such terms, and no otherwise. Afterward they
began to move him touching his Religion, desiring he should confer with some
Divines, for that he could not have the Infanta to wife, unless he was
converted, and became a Roman Catholic. The Prince replying, That he would not
change his Religion for such a worldly respect, nor would he enter in
conference with any Divines to that purpose, for if they did not prevail with
him, it would breed a greater discontent; It was then told him, that he must
attend till a dispensation was procured from Rome, and that in the mean time be
should be entertained as a Prince, but not as a Suitor.

This Dispensation being returned, The Letter of Pope G^gory the 15 to the
Prince.
which had in it a condition, that the King of Spain should take oath to obtain
the King of Britains consent unto certain demands concerning Religion, there
was a letter therewith sent from Pope Gregory the 15th to the Prince, wherein
after many fair and plausible words, he said, that as Pope Gregory was the
first that induced the people of England to submit themselves to the Sea
Apostolic, so he bearing the same name, and being his equal in the height of
dignity, though inferior to him in virtue and holiness, desired nothing more
then to follow his pattern, and promove the health and happiness of that
Kingdom: the rather because his peregrination at that time had given such
hopes of an happy success; for since he was arrived in Spain and at the Court
of the Catholic King, with a desire to join in marriage with the house of
Austria (which intention he greatly commended) he could not believe that he did
really desire the Match, and in heart abhor the Catholic Religion, and seek
to ruin the holy See of Rome. Then falling to a prayer, he besought God the
Father of lights to advance him (the most fair flower of the Christian world,
and the only hope of Great Britain) to that noble inheritance which his
illustrious progenitors had gained by the defense of the Apostolic authority,
and the suppression of the monsters of all heresies. Toward the end of the
Letter willing him to call to mind the ancient times, and make his prayers to
his ancestors, that they would vouchsafe to teach him the way by which they
went to heaven, he asked how he could with patience hear the heretics call them
damned, whom the Catholic faith does testify to reign in heaven, and to dwell
exalted above all the Princes of the earth. In end returning to his
supplications, he said, that the Catholic Church Roman stretching forth her
arms to embrace him with all affection as her most desired son, he could not
perform any thing of greater comfort to the Nations of Christendom then to
bring again the profession of that most noble Island to the Prince of the
Apostles, whereof he could not despair, his hopes being set on God, in whose
hands are the hearts of Kings, etc.

This Letter given at Rome in the Palace of S. Peter the 20 of April 1623, and
in the third year of his Apostolate, was delivered to the Prince about the
midst of May, The success of the Match intended with Spai^.
which he received courteously, thanking the Pope for his good affection.
Thereafter understanding that the Dispensation was granted, he pressed the
performance of the Marriage, but was answered, That the Conditions must first
be fulfilled, and the Articles concerning the Infanta her liberty of profession
when she came into England and the education of her Children, if God should
grant her any by him, drawn up in form. These Articles being advised by a
Commission of Divines, were sent into England, and shortly after returned,
signed with his Majesty's hand, and approved by the Council. And now it was
thought there should be no more delays used, but other excuses were forged, as
that it was not fitting the Infanta should go to England before the business of
the Parliament was settled, and that these Articles must be sent to Rome, and
allowed by the Pope. The Prince perceiving that there was nothing really
intended on the King of Spain his part, and that the Treaty was only
entertained till the King of Spain had reduced Germany in his power, resolved
to be gone, and declaring the necessity he had to return, did leave a Proxy in
the hands of the Earl of Bristoll (the Ambassador legier) for espousing the
Infanta, how soon the Articles returned from Rome. So the King of Spain having
conveyed the Prince a little way toward the sea, they parted in most loving
terms, and in hope the Match should take effect. But the Prince being after
that informed of a conclusion laid, That if the Match should be further
pressed, the Infanta to eschew the same should presently enter into the house
of los Discalceatos(a Monastery of barefooted Nuns) after he was parted, sent
and commanded Bristoll not to make use of the proxy till he should advertise.

The Prince having for his convoy home, The Prince returns to England.
eleven of the Kings ships, and some Merchants, arrived at Portsmouth the 5 of
October with his whole retinue, and went the next day to Royston where the King
lay. The joy was exceeding great of all sorts of people, and public thanks
given to God throughout all the Churches of both the Kingdoms for his safe
return. Soon after when the King perceived by the report, that neither was the
Match truly meant, nor the Palatinate like to be restored, he directed the Earl
of Bristoll to insist for the restitution, and if he was put off with delays
to take his leave and come home; which also he did. Thus was the marriage which
had been long treated of quite dissolved, the King saying, That he would never
marry his Son with a Portion of his only Sistes tears.

The year following the Ministers of Edinburgh were greatly vexed by a sort of
mutinous people, An. 1624.
who separating themselves from the public Assemblies kept private
Conventicles, A trouble in Edinburgh raised against the Minis^es.
and went so far as to oppose publicly the order established for receiving the
holy Communion. The leader of those was William Rigge elected one of the
Bailiffs for that year. This man puffed up with a conceit of his own abilities
did dream of no less, then the overturning of the Church orders, and reforming
of the Ministry in such things as he held to be amiss: hereupon in a meeting
ordinarily kept before the celebration of the holy Sacrament, he did publicly
challenge Doctor William Forbes, who was afterward preferred to the Bishopric
of Edinburgh for diverse points of doctrine, delivered by him in his Sermons,
and when as he refused to be judged by him and the Laics that assisted, the
said Baliffe did openly threaten them all, that unless they returned to the
old form of ministering the holy Communion, the whole people should forsake
them. Herein he was assisteed by John Hamilton an Apothecary, John Dickson,
William Thomson, John Meene, and some other base companions, who being called
before the Council were charged to leave the Town, and the Bailiffe William
Rigge, deprived of his Bailiwick and declared incapable of any public office
in time coming.

This trouble gave occasion of settling the state of that Church in a better
case then in former times, the Ministers being ordained to reside in their own
Parishes, and have allowed to them a sufficient maintenance; the popular
election of Ministers, when as places by any occasion fell void, discharged,
and the presentation appointed to be made by the Provost, Bailiffs, and
Council; the Sessions to be choosed yearly by the Magistrates and Ministers
for the particular Parishes, who should convene every year, some ten days
after the election of the Magistrates, for that business; the meeting before
the Communion wherein the Ministers were accustomed to be censured by the
people, simply prohibited: with diverse other particulars serving to the orderly
ministration of all things in the Church.

The 16 of February, Lodovick Duke of Richmond and L^nnox deceased, to the
great regrate of all that knew him; The death of Lodovick Duke of Richmond and
Lennox.
a Nobleman of excellent parts, whose very aspect and countenance did promise
much good. He was thrice married, first to a Sister of the Earl of Gowry, by
whom he had no children; his second Wife was a Sister of the Lord London, by
whom he had a daughter and son that died both young. In his third and last
marriage with the Countess of Hartford, he found more content then in both the
other, but lived with her only some few years, being taken away in the 48 year
of his age. His brother a noble Gentleman succeeded, but did not survive him
long, for he died the next year, leaving a hopeful succession of children
behind him.

The next year in the month of March, An. 1625.
James Marquis of Hamilton deceased also; The death of James Marquis of
Hamilton.
a Nobleman of rare gifts, and fitted for the greatest affairs, which he showed
at his deputation to the Parliament 1621, and at other diverse occasions: his
death was the more grievously taken, that it was thought it was procured by
poison, whereof the monstrous swellings in his face and body before his death
gave great appearance: his corpse brought to Scotland by sea was interred at
Hamilton with his predecessors.

These two deaths affected the King exceedingly, The King much affected with
these deaths, contracts a fever and dies.
and when it was told him that the Marquis was dead, he said, If the branches
be thus cut down, the stock cannot continue long; which saying proved too true,
for shortly after he fell into the fever that the Physicians call
Hemitritaeam, a dangerous fever to those that are grown in years, and thereof
died at Theobalds the 27 of March being Sunday about twelve of the clock in the
forenoon. The Thursday preceding his death, he desired the blessed Sacrament to
be ministered unto him, which he received with great devotion, professing to the
Prince his son, and those that stood by, that he had received a singular
comfort thereby* wishing all men to do the like when they were visited in that
sort. From that time to the hour of his death, he was still almost praying, and
some one sentence or other of piety ever in his mouth. As he drew near to his
end, the prayer usually said at the hour of death being ended, having repeated
once or twice these words, Veni Domine Jesus, he gave up the ghost without any
pangs, as are commonly seen in persons that are dying. He was the Solomon of
this age, admired for his wise government, and for his knowledge of all manner
of learning; for his wisdom, moderation, love of justice, for his patience and
piety, (which shined above all his other virtues, and is witnessed in the
learned works he left to posterity) his name shall never be forgotten, but
remain in honor so long as the world indureth. We that have had the honor and
happiness many times to hear him discourse of the most weighty matters, as well
of Policy as Divinity, now that he is gone, must comfort our selves with the
remembrance of these excellencies, and reckon it not the least part of our
happiness to have lived in his days.

Many doleful Epitaphs in all Languages were composed to express the sorrow
conceived by his death. This following penned by a learned Divine in our vulgar
language, did affect me so as I thought good to subjoin it.

ALL, who have eyes, awake and weep,
For he whose waking wrought our sleep,
Is fallen asleep himself, An Epitaph upon King JAMES his death, written by the
Reverend Divine, Dr. Morley C. C. C. Oxon.
and never
Shall wake again, till waked for ever:
Deaths iron handhath closed those Eyes
Which were at once three Kingdoms spies,
Both to foresee, and to prevent
Dangers as soon as they were meant.
That Head whose working brain alone
Wrought all men's quiet but its own,
Now lies at rest. O let him have,
The peace he lent us, in his grave.
If that no Naboth all his Reign,
Was for his fruitful vineyard slain;
If no Vriah lost his life
Because he had too fair a wife;
Then let no Shimei's curses wound
His honor, or profane his ground.
Let no black-mouthed, no rank-breath'd cur,
Peaceful JAMES his Ashes stir.
Princes are Gods; o do not then,
Rake in their graves to prove them men.
For two and twenty years long care;
For providing such an Heir,
Who to the peace we had before
May add twice two and twenty more;
For his days travels, and nights watches;
For his crazed sleep, stolen by snatches;
For two fair Kingdoms joined in one;
For all he did, or meant to have done,
Do this for him, write on his dust,
JAMES the Peaceful, and the Just.
The End.
A brief Table, directing to the Principal Matter of this HISTORY.
A
St. Andrews: made an University by the Bishop of the place procuring it, Page
57 Made an Archiepiscopal See, 58 Aidanus, in Northumberland, within seven
days after his first arrival, converteth and baptizeth 15000, 14 Augustine:
The King of Northumberland with an army and by instigation as was supposed, of
Augustine the Monk, slays 1200 Monks that refused to receive the Rites of
Rome, 12 Alcuinus born in Scotland, 22
B
BIshop. The ancient manner of a Bishop in Scotland, 4 Anciently in Scotland
all the moveable goods of any Bishop belonged to the King, and were seized for
his use, 55 An English Army put to flight by a Bishop, 99 A Bishop went on foot
through the whole Kingdom, preaching the Gospel wheresoever he came, 108 The
ancient variance between the Scots and Holland reconciled by a Bishop, 105 The
difference between James III. of Scotland, and Lewis XI. of France, reconciled
principally by the prudence of a Bishop, ibid. A Bishop barbarously maimed by
an Earl in the Kings absence, and the Justice done upon him for it, 40 and 110
A very pious Bishop lived to the age of 185 years, 112 John Dury a reformed
Minister at his death gives advice to the Assembly of the Church to restore
the Episcopal government, 457 Bishops restored in the Church, and to their
temporalities in Scotland, 496 Cautions, whereby the Episcopal power was
moderated in Scotland, 501 Scottish Bishops came to England for consecration,
514 Colman a Scottish Bishop disswadeth by his great authority the Nobility of
Scotland from deposing their King, 19 Buchannan: by his verses he incenseth the
Franciscans, 67 His death, 525 Benefices, the temporality of them annexed to
the Crown, 365 Bothwell, in open Rebellion is encouraged by the English
Ambassadors, 402 The King would have it inserted into the Acts of the Church,
that Ministers shall make public declaration in the Church the Sunday
following, after they have baptized any privately: first refused, 529 After
passed by the Church, 539
C
CArdinals: by the Popes Law, the place^s are to be ruinated where Cardinals
are slain, 88 Charles (after King of Great Britain) born, 461 His Journey to
Spain, 544 His return 545 A Letter to him from Gregory XV. then being Suitor in
the Spanish Court, 544 Church. A form of Church-policy presented to the
Convention of Estates at Edinburgh, drawn up by Knox, 152 The Church and Regent
cross one the others proceedings, 271 A model of Church-policy presented to the
Parliament at Striveling, 289 The Church appoints a Fast on the same day that
the King appoints a Feast for the entertainment of the French Ambassador,
with a design to cross the King, 322 The Assembly of the Church protest against
the Kings judging in Causes Ecclesiastical: the Council of State reject the
Protestation, 318 Contentions between the King and Church, 319 They allow not
the Council authority to judge of Treason spoken by them in the Pulpit, 330 The
Ministers yield more to the desires of the basest people, then to reasonable
Propositions of the King, 394 They provide a Chaplain of their own interest for
Bothwell endeavoring Rebellion, 402 They refuse to submit their doctrine to the
trial of the King and Council, 420 They style the Queen of England (Elizabeth)
an Atheist in their Sermons, 419, 422 One of them affi^med in his Sermon, that
it is lawful for subjects to take arms against their King, 430 They solicit
the Lord Hamilton and people to take arms, 431 Articles proposed in the form of
Question by the King concerning affairs of the Church, 435 The bosom of the
Church, ought always to be open to Penitents, 437 The Assembly vote that it is
lawful for Ministers to sit in Parliament, 449 Some of them refuse to give
thanks in their Churches for the Kings deliverance from the attempts of Gowrie,
460 Catholics are dispensed from Rome to profess or swear against their
religion, so as in mind they continued firm. 308 Covenant is taken by the
Ministers obliging them to a better discharge of their duty, 416 A Scottish
prisoner rescued out of the Castle of Carlisle by a strange attempt, 414 A
strange event at a Council held in Wiltsh: 27 The Charity of a certain man
saved his life, 462 Conference: at Hampton Court, 478 Another Conference there
between Scottish Bishops and Ministers of the Presbytery, 497
D
DRuids: what they were, 3 Are expelled by Cratilinth, 3 The Diocese of Dunkeld
divided into two Bishoprics, 98 The Synod of Dort in Holland, 540 Did not
ratify the Acts of Perth, ibid.
E
A Controversy between six Competitors for the Crown of Scotland referred to
the arbitration of Edward I of England, 48 England: the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland united upon the intended marriage of Edward VI. being
about five years old, and Mary daughter of Scotland being about one year old,
72 That Contract broken by Scotland, 73 The King of Scots with many of his
Nobles swear subjection to Edward I. of England at Newcastle, 49 The King of
Scots and the Parliament of Scotland convened at Berwick, do homage to the King
of England, ibid. The King of England refuses to stand to the Popes judgment,
50 The Earls and Barons of Scotland in a Parliament at S. Andrews, swear
obedience the third time to the King of England, ib. The Scottish Lords of the
Congregation have aid from England, 140 The Articles of Contract between
England and Scotland, 142 Scottish Bishops come to England to be consecrated,
514 Easter: The ancient manner of observing it in Scotland, not the same with
that of the Roman, 15 But agrees with the Jews, 13 Augustine the Monk
endeavors to persuade the Saxons in Britain to observe Easter according to
the Roman account, but they refuse, 12 A dispute held in England in Yorkshire
concerning the computation of Easter, between a Scottishman a Bishop, and the
abettors of the Roman Church, 15 A Member of the Scottish Church
excommunicated, is absolved by the Archbishop of Canterbury with the content of
the Church of Scotland, 527 The trial of the Earl of Somerset, 525 The Earl of
Essex his death, and the cause, 463 Edinburgh Castle surrendered by the Queens
party, 271 The Town having maintained tumults against the King, submit
themselves, 432 Elizabeth Queen of England is styled an Atheist, by the
Ministers of Scotland in their sermons, 419, and 423 The marriage of the Lady
Elizabeth with the Palsgrave, 19 Excommunication of persons of capital crimes,
if they are fugitives, forbidden, 517 A Member of the Scottish Church
excommunicated, is absolved by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the content of
the Scottish Ministers, 527
F
FAst: one fasteth forty days, without any the least kind of food, another
time thirty days, 69 Francis II of France husband to Mary Stewart Queen of
Scots d^eth, 69
H
PRince Henry baptized, 406 His death, 510 The death of James Marquess of
Hamilton, 546
I
IReland: Patrick a Scot converteth that Nation, 8 Ignorance: Some Priests so
ignorant, as that they thought the New Testament written by Luther, 76 James
VI. born, 196 Baptized according to the rites of the Roman Church, 197 His
Father attempted by poison, ibid. His Father murdered by Bothwell, 200 Crowned
in the Church of Striveling being thirteen months old, Some Lords rebel
against him at Edinb: 287 He is offended at some proceedings of the Church, and
does not favor them much, 308 Surprised by a combination of Nobles, and
sequestered from the Duke of Lennox, 321 Temporiseth with the Church, 322 He
appoints a feast for the entertainment of the French Ambassador; the
Ministers, to cross him, on the same day appoint a fast, 322 A promise made in
time of restraint, he judges not obliging, 327 He gives clear testimony of
the care of the Church, 347 A letter written by Walsingham to persuade the King
to pass by the revenge of his Mothers death, 359 An offer made by an English
Ambassador (and accordingly done) to bring a Declaration signed by all the
Judges in England, to show that the sentence against his Mother did not
invalidate his right, 365 Married to the King of Denmarks daughter, 377 Goes
in person to Norway, 377 Gives directions for government in his absence, 378
Brings his Queen to Scotland, 380 Bothwells plot to surprise him, discovered
and prevented, 386 He is surprised by Bothwell, 394 He writes an Epitaph on
the death of his Chancellor, 411 His just complaint against the petulancy of
Churchmen, 419 Publishes his (...), 455 Gowry's conspiracy against him, 457 A
letter written to him from the Council and Nobility of England, 473 Crowned at
Westminster, 478 He would never hang Priests of the Roman profession only for
their Religion, 523 He foretells his own death, therefore not likely to be
poisoned, 546 He died of an Hemitritaea, a disease very dangerous for the aged,
546 A Witch had not power to kill him, 383
K
KIngs, John Knox his opinion concerning deposing them for ill-government, 137
Reasons why they are not to be punished by their Subjects, ibid. The Scots
cannot resolve to arraign their Queen, 214 The Assembly of the Church protest
against the Kings judging in Causes Ecclesiastical; the Council of State reject
their Protestation, 318 A Minister of Scotland affirms in his Sermon, that it
is lawful for Subjects to take arms against their King, 430 Rebellion of the
Subjects, if they succeed not, advance the Sovereignty, 432 Conspiracies
against Princes not thought true, unless they are slain, 460 Colman a Scottish
Bishop disswadeth the Nobility of Scotland from deposing their King, 19 Knox:
his death, 266 Proved, that he was not the Author of the book published in his
name, under the title of the History of Scotland, 267 A form of Church policy
drawn up by him, 152.
L
LAws. Malcolm repealeth that wicked Law of Eugenius III* which appointed the
first night of the new married woman to belong to the Lord of the ground, 29
Lollards: Articles of Religion taught by them, 61 The Earl of Lennox,
Grandfather to James VI, and Regent, slain in fight, 256 The Lord Aubigny, Earl
and after Duke of Lennox, embraces the Protestant faith, 308 He dies in the
Protestant Religion, 324
M
JOhn Mayor, Hector Boeth, Gilbert Crab, William Gregory, learned men, lived in
Scotland, A. D. 1539. 68 The Earl of Murray Regent of Scotland, murdered, 233
Earl of Mar Regent of Scotland dies a natural death, 264 The Earl of Morton
then Regent, his covetousness and sacrilege, 271 Executed upon suspicion, that
he consented to the murder of the Father of James VI, 314 Rabanus Maurus born
in Scotland, 22
O
OAths. The Catholics are dispensed from Rome to profess or swear against
their Religion, so as in mind they continued firm, and labored secretly in
promoting the Roman faith, 308 Ordination. One Bruce being to be made Minister
of a Parish in Edinburgh, refuses Ordination, 451 Had preached many years
before without Ordination, ibid. Ordination by Presbyters in case of necessity,
that it is lawful, 514 The death of Sir Thomas Overbury, 514
P
PRiests called Culdees, and why, 4 Pope: his league not suffered to enter into
Scotland, 43 The Clergy will acknowledge no Statute imposed upon them by the
Legate, 45 A Collection demanded by the Pope denied, and the Legate not
permitted to enter the Realm, ibid. VRbane IV. ordained that every Bishop, and
Abbat elect of Scotland, should travail to Rome for consecration, 46 A Council
held at Lions by the Pope, the Acts thereof, ibid. The King of Scotland
refuses to stand to the Popes judgment, 50 One thousand two hundred Monks
refuse to receive the rites of Rome, and are all slain, 12 Prayer: A great
question arose among the Churchmen, whether the Pater noster were to be said to
the Saints, or God only. Protestants: the Queen Regent Dowager of James V.
dies in the faith of Protestants, 146 The Queen of England contriveth a
counterleague against the Holy league made in France for the extirpation of
Protestants, 389 The Articles of that League, 349 Election of Ministers by the
People discharged by authority in Scotland, 545 The same Portent interpreted to
contrary significations, 542 Presbyters: excluded from intermedling with the
making of Ecclesiastical laws in Scotland, 531 Ordination by them in case of
necessity is lawful, 514 The marriage of the Palsgrave with the Lady
Elizabeth, 519 The history of the Powder Treason, 491 This conspiracy carried
on in secrecy a whole year, 492
R
ROme: one thousand two hundred Monks refuse to receive the rites of the Roman
Church, and are all slain, 12 A plo^to reintroduce the Roman religion, 390 The
Scottish Preachers that lived in the Province of York, chose rather to forsake
their Benefices, then admit the rites of Rome, 18 Reformation: the first
proposals made, 119 First artempted at Perth, 121 The death of Lodowick Duke of
Richmond, 546
S
SCotland converted before Pope Victor, 2 Patrick a Scot converted Ireland, 8
The Universities of Pavia and Paris founded by Scottish men, 22 Scotus the
Schoolman, Claudius Clemens, Rabanus Maurus, Flaccus Albinus al. Alcuinus, born
in Scotland, 22 Invaded and subdued by Edward I. of England, 49 The King of
Scotland refuses to stand to the Popes arbitration concerning his incursions
upon England, and the title that the King of England had to Scotland, 52 Edward
III of England promises by Charter to release the Scots from all duties of
subjection and homage, 53 Diverse prodigies in Scotland, 94 The Articles of
contract between England and Scotland, 142 English Ambassadors sent to mediate
a peace in Scotland, 146 A Scottish prisoner rescued out of the Castle of
Carlisle by a strange attempt, 414 The Archbishop of Canterbury in a Letter
acknowledges the independent Jurisdiction of the Church of Scotland, 527 The
King of Northumberland obtains of the King of Scots the assistance of some
learned Bishops, 13 Scottish Bishops preach the Christian faith, and convert
many in England, 15 Pope Sixtus IV. gives sentence in favor of the Church of
Scotland, that the Scots should have a Primate of their own, 58 Celius
Sedulius: proved that he was a native of Scotland and not of Ireland, 8 John D.
Scotus: proved that he was born in Scotland, and not in England. 55 Subjects:
rebellion of the Subjects, if it succeed not, advance the Sovereignty, 432 The
history of the Spanish Armada, 370 Schism, in the Presbytery of S. Andrews,
386 A great one in the Sea of Rome, 56 Mary Stewart: sent into France, 90
Returns into Scotland, 178 Queen Elizabeth acknowledges her to be next heir
to the crown of England, 180 But refuses to declare it openly, 181 She
marries Henry son to the Earl of Lennox 191 Discontents arise between them,
193 She puts her husbands name after her own, ibid. Married to Bothwell
after the manner of the reformed Church, 203 Surrendereth her self to the
Lords, and is received and kept as a Prisoner, 207 The Scots cannot resolve to
arraigne her, 214 She escapes out of prison, 215 Her army overcome at Glasgow,
216 She seeks refuge in England, 217 Loses her expectation, ibid.
Consultations in England about putting her to death, 350 The Queen of England
signeth a warrant for her execution, 355 The circumstances of her death, 356
King James her son interposeth for her exemption from trial, 351 He offers
pledges of the chief of his nobility to be given for his mothers faithfulness
toward the Queen of England, 352 The King commands the Ministers to make
public intercession in their Prayers for his Mother, and they refuse, 354 The
Queen of England takes cognizance by her Commissioners of the dealing of the
Regent of Scotland toward the Queen Mother of Scotland, 219 Queen Elizabeth in
her Patent to the Commissioners, is so much a friend to the right and cause of
Mary, that she gives not the title of Regent to the Earl of Murray, 219
T
TEmplars. The dissolution of them, 51 They were condemned, and suffered unjust
torments, partly for their great riches, partly for their freedom of taxing
the vices of the Court of Rome, ibid.
U
UNion. The Articles of Union between both Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
481 They are not passed in the English Parliament, 505 Objections made against
the Ceremony of Unction in the solemnity of Coronation, answered, 381
W
WItches: Agnes Sampson a Witch apprehended, 383 Her familiar Spirit had no
power to kill the King, ibid.
Y
YEar: The account thereof changed from March to January in Scotland, 456
THE KINGS Of SCOTLAND, From the first Plantation of Christian Religion there,
mentioned in this History.
DOnald I. Converted and Baptized, Page 2 Ethodius 3 Cratilinth ibid.
Fincormachus 4 Eugenius ibid. Hergustus ibid. Ethodius, alias Echadius 5 Erthus
ibid. Fergus ibid. Eugenius II. (Greem Regent) 6 Congallus II. 9 Kinnatellus
ibid. Aidanus 10 Eugenius IV. 14 Donald IV: ibid. Ferqhard 18 Eugenius VI.
ibid. Eugenius VII. ibid. Achaius ( An. D. 800.) 23 Alpin ibid. Kenneth 24
Constantine II. 25 Gregory the Great 26 Constantine III. ibid. Kenneth III. 27
Malcolm II. 28 Duncan I. ibid. Mackbeth ( an Usuper) ibid. Malcolm III. 29
Edgar 31, 32 Alexander the Fierce ibid. David ibid. and 36 Malcolm IV. 36
William 37 Alexander II. 42 Alexander III. 44 John Baliol 48 Robert Bruce 52
David Bruce 55 Edward Baliol ibid. Robert Stewart ibid. James I. 57 James II.
ibid. James III. 58 James IV. 61 Duke of Albany Regent of Scotland 62 James V.
70 Earl of Arran Governor during the minority of Mary Stewart, 71 He resigneth
the Regency to the Queen Mother 92 Mary Stewart Queen, takes into her hands
the Government 178 She resigneth the Government, 211 James VI. Crowned ibid.
Earl of Murray Regent 212 Earl of Lennox, Grandfather to the young King, chosen
Regent, 241 John Earl of Mar Regent 258 Earl of Moreton Regent, 267 The King
himself accepts of the Government, 280
Bishops that lived in Scotland or the adjacent Isles, before the distribution
of the Kingdom into DIOCESES.
AMphibalus Bishop in the Isle of Man 4 Regulus 5 Ninian 6 Palladius 7
Hildebert 8 Columba 9 Servanus 11 Colman 15 Adamannus, or Adamnamus, 18, 19
Wiro and Plechelmus consecrat^d at Rome, by Pope Honorius, 19 Bonifacius an
Italian 20 Mocharius, Glacianus and Gervadius 23
Archbishops and Bishops of the Sea of S. Andrews.
1 Adrian 25 2 Kellach 26 3 Malisius ibid. 4 Kellach II 26 5 Malmore 26 6
Malisius II 26 7 Alwinus 26 8 Muldwin 26 9 Tuthaldus 26 10 Fothadus 27 11
Gregorius 28 12 Turgot 30 13 Godricus 32 14 E^dmerus ( a Monk of Canterbury) 33
15 Robert Prior of Scone 34 16 Arnold, Abbot of Kelso, 36 17 Richard ibid. 18
Hugo ( by the Kings mandate) 39 John Scot ( by the Pope in opposition to the
King) ibid. 19 Roger ( son to the Earl of Leicester) succeeds Hugo 41 20
William Malvoisin, a Frenchman ibid. 21 David Benham 43 22 Abel 44 23 Gamelinus
45 24 William Wishart 46 25 William Fraser 47 26 William Lamberton 51 27 James
Bane 55 The Sea vacant nine years, ib. 28 William Landells 55 29 Stephen ibid.
30 Walter Traill ibid. 31 Thomas Steward, son of Robert II chosen, but refuses
it. The Sea vacant during his life 56 32 Henry Wardlaw ibid. 33 James Kennedy
ibid. 34 Patrick Graham, first Archbishop of S. Andrews 58 35 William Shevez 59
36 James Stewart 61 37 Alexander Steward ibid. 38 Andrew Forman 62 39 James
Beaton ibid. 40 Beaton, Nephew of the former Archbishop and Cardinal 67, and
69 41 The base brother of the Earl of Arran Governor of Scotland made
Archbishop 84 42 John Douglas 261 43 Patrick Adamson 276 44 George Gladstaves
523 45 John Spotswood 524
Bishops of Dunkeld,
1 Gregorius 98 2 Richard 3 Cormacus 4 Walter de Bidden 5 John Scot 6 Richard
Provand 99 7 John Leicester 8 Hugo de Sigillo 9 Matthew 10 Gilbert 11 Galfrid
Liverance 12 Richard 13 Richard of Innerkithing 14 Robert Sutevile 15 Matthew
16 William Sinclare 17 Duncan 18 Michael of Monimusk 100 19 John Peblis 20
Robert Carden 21 Donald Machnachtan 22 James Kennedy 23 Alexander Lawder 24
James Bruce 25 John Ralston 26 Thomas Lawder 27 James Levingston 28 George
Brown 29 Gawan Douglas 30 George Creighton 31 Robert Creighton 32 James Paton
Bishops of Aberdene.
1 Beanus 101 2 Donortius 3 Cormachus 4 Nectanus 5 Edward 6 Matthew. Kinninmouth
102 7 John 8 Adam 9 Gilbert Striveling 10 Radolph 11 Peter Ramsay 12 Richard
Pottock 13 Hugh Benham 14 Henry Cheyn 15 Alexander Kinninmouth 16 William Deyn
103 17 John Raith 18 Alexander Kinninmouth 19 Adam Cunningham 20 Gilbert
Grindaw 104 1 Henrey Leighton 22 Ingram Lindesay 3 Thomas Spence 24 Robert
Blaicaster 105 25 William Elphingston 6 Alexander Gordon 106 27 Gawan Dumbar 28
William Stewart 29 William Gordon 107 30 David Cunningham 406
Bishops of Murray.
1 William 107 2 Simon 3 Richard 4 Bricius 5 Andrew 6 Simon 7 Archibald 8 David
Murray 9 John Pilmore 10 Alexander Bar 11 William Spinie 12 John Innes 13
Henry Lichton 14 Columba Dumbar 15 John Winchester 16 James Stewart 17 David
Stewart 18 William Telloch 108 19 Andrew Stewart 20 Andrew Forman 21 James
Hepburn 22 Robert Shaw 23 Alexander Stewart 24 Patrick Hepburn
Bishops of Brichen.
1 Edwardus. al. Vrwardus 108 2 Turpinus 3 Rodolphus 4 Hugo 5 Gregorius 6
Albinus 7 William Dean of Brichen, 108 8 John 9 Adam 10 Patrick 11 Steven 12
Walter Forrester 13 John 14 George Shoreswood 15 John 16 William Meldrum 17
John Hepburn 18... Sinclare 19 Andrew Lamb 549 20 David Lindesay ibid.
Bishops of Dumblane.
1 Jonathan 108 2 Simon 109 3 Abraham 4 Gulielmus de Bosco 5 Osbert 6 Clemens 7
Robert 8 Alpin 9 Nicolaus 10 Maurice 11 William 12 Walter Cambuslang 13 Finlaw
al. Dormoch 14 William Stephen 15 Michael Ochiltrie. 16 Robert Lawder 17 John
Hepburn 109 18 James Chisholme 19 William Chisholme 20 Andrew Ghram 261 21 Adam
Ballendene 524
Bishops of Rosse.
1 Gregorius 109 2 Reynaldus 110 3 Andrew Murray 4 Robert 5 Matthew 6 Thomas
Dundy 7 Roger 8 Alexander 9 Thomas Vrwhart 10 Alexander Kilbuines 11 William
Bulloch 12 Thomas Tullich 13 Henry Cockburn 14 James Woodman 15 Thomas Hay 16
John Guthry 17 John Fraser 18 Robert Cockburn 19 William Elphingston 20 James
Hay 21 Robert Carncrosse 22 David Panter 23 Henry Sinclare 110 24 John Lesley
15 David Lindesay 442
Bishops of Cathnes.
1 Darrus 110 2 Andrew 3 John 4 Adam 111 5 Gilbert Murrary, son to the Lord of
Duffus 6 William 7 Walter 8 Archibald 9 Andrew 10 Ferqhard 11 David 12 Thomas
Fingask 13 Alexander 14 Malcolm 15 Robert Strackbock 16 John Innes 17 William
Mudie This See was vacant 24 years, Adam Gordon governed it in that interval.
18 Andrew Stewart 19 Robert Stewart, brother to Matthew Earl of Lennox 20
George Gladstaves 456
Bishops of Orkney.
1 William 112 2 William Tulloch 3 Andrew 4 Edward 5 Robert Reid 6 James Law
502
Archbishops and Bishops of Glasgow.
1 Kentigern al. S. Mungo 2 John Achaian 3 John 113 4 Herbert 5 Angelramus 6
Ioceline 7 Eugenius 8 Hugo 9 William Malvoisin ( after translated to S.
Andrews) 10 Florentius ( son to the Count of Holland) 11 Walter 12 William
Babington 13 John de Chyan 14 Nicol: Moffet 15 William Wishart ( after
translated to S. Andrews) 16 Robert Wishart 17 John Lindesay 114 18 Stephen
Dundy 19 John Wishart 20 William Rae 21 Walter Wardlaw made Cardinal 114 22
Matthew Glendouning 23 William Lawder 24 John Cameron 25 James Bruce 26 William
Turnbull al. David 27 Andrew Moorhead 28 John Lang 29 George Carmighal 30
Robert Blacader, first Archbishop of Glasgow, 60 and 114 31 James Beaton, after
translated to S. Andrews 114 32 Gawan Dumbar 33 James Beaton 115 34 James Boyd
261 35 Robert Montgomery 316 36 William Areskin a Layman 364 James Beaton
restored to this See ibid. and 477 37 John Spotswood, 477 and 481
Bishops of Galloway
1 S. Ninnian 115 2 Plechelmus al. Pectelmus 3 Frithwoldus 4 Pethumus 5
Ethelbert 6 Baldulphus 7 John 8 Thomas Spence, after translated to Aberdene 9
David 10 Alexander 11 Henry 12 George 13... Gordon 115 14 Gawin Hamilton 524 15
William Cowper 523 16 Andrew Lamb 540
Bishops of Argyle.
1 John Scot 115 2 Evaldus al. Harold 3 William 4 William 5 David 6 Finlaw 7
George Lord of Balcomie
Bishops of the Isles.
1 Amphibalus, first Bishop of Man, where was the Seat proper to the Isles, 116
2 Machilla The Sea of Man translated to Ilcomkell, after which 3 Onacus 4
Mauricius.
IT may concern the ease of the Reader to observe, that care was taken so
strictly to follow the Authors own Copy, that it was not thought fit to change
those words of the Scottish Idiome, which sometime the Reader will meet with in
this History: Most of them are of Latin origination, and therefore will not be
matter of difficulty to very many. And lest for want of caution any should be
inclinable to condemn the Printers care, it was thought necessary to prepossess
him with this advertisement: The rest that have escaped his diligence, the
present Table of Errata will represent to be objects of his care, to amend; and
of his Charity, to pardon. page Line Read 1 17, 18 matter. Wh -- time, 12 12
Trithemius 21 43 her self 28 11 Bighan 30 4 Normandy 16 Hungary 35 2 Sautrey 36
42 Iedburgh 40 4 possessed of S. Andr. 13 defray 46 41 general 47 2 Teviotdale
8 Lermonth, ita 71. 11. and 72. 25. and 96. 33. 49 43 Kingorn 50 57 fallen 53 5
Duncanus 15 Campbell 54 14 rather Wooddale 57 19 Canon 62 11 Crowns 62 23 to
his 38 Ferm 75 33 Kinfawns 77 29 Lord 78 22 Longnedry 82 50 repair 83 7 and 29
Normand, ita 84. 1. and 87. 1. 87 1 rites 88 25 Balfour 89 13 return with 36
Dumbriton 94 19 forsan (...) 119 51 except 163 1 three 180 51 me? -- course,
197 32 Charles James 258 45 choosing 338 14 not be 368 12 contumacy 433 55 killed
by James

In the Margent, p. 83. l. 5. r. Pinkie. p. 8. l. 5. t. Baron, p. 289. l. 18,
21. for shows r. flows.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
lvie-lane, LONDON.
And of some formerly Printed at Oxford.
Books written by H. Hammond D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of Henry Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4o. 3. Dissertationes
quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Iura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitale
adstruuntur, contra sentenliam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico
Hammond. in 4o. 4. A Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 12o. 5. Of
Schism. A D^fence of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of the
Romanists, in 13o. 6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to Practice, by H.
Hammond D. D. in 12o. 7. An Answer to the Animadversions on the Dissertations
touching Ignatius Epistles and the Episcopacy in them asserted, subscribed by
John Owen servant of Jesus Christ, in 40. 8. A Vindication of the Dissertations
concerining Episcopacy from the Exceptions offered against them by the London
Ministers in their Ius Divinum ministerii Evangelici in 4o. 9. A Reply to the
Cathol. Gent: Answer to the most material part of the Book of Schism,
together with an Account of H. T. His Appendix to his Manual of Controversies
etc. 4o.
The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Ier: Tailor. D. D.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; Together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness, and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o. 3. The History
of the Life and Death of the Ever-bl^ssed Jesus Christ, 2d Edit. in fol. 4. The
Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o. 5. An Apology for authorized and Set-forms of
Liturgy; in 4o. 6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon
all Believers, in 4o. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12o. 8. The
Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12o. 9. A Short Catechism for institution
of young persons in the Christian Religion, in 12o. 10. A Short Institution of
Grammar composed for Young Scholars, in 8o. 11. The Real Presence and
Spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved against the Doct. ine of
Transubstantiation, in 8o. 12. A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days
of the week, together with a Short Method of Peace and Holiness. Certamen
Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the late Lord
Marquess of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together with a
Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o. The Psalter of
David, with Titles and Collects according to the m^tter of each Psalm, by the
Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12o the 5. Edition with Additionals. Boanerges
and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and ^fflicted souls, in
several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12o. The life of Faith in Dead
Times, by CBr. Hudson Preacher at Putney, in 12o. The Guide unto True
Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, dir^cting a man to
the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 12o. Six excellent Sermons upon
several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Vicar of Hoxne, in 4o. The Dipper
dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by Daniel
Featly D. D. in 4o. Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon
old Records, by Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o. Philosophical Elements, concerning
Government and Civil society: by Thomas Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o An Essay
upon Statius, or the five first books of Publ. Papinius Statius his Thebais, by
Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S. Edmonds-bury, in 80. Nomenclatura Brevis
Anglo-Latino-Graeca in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8o.
Etymologicum Parvum in usum Scholae publica Westmonasterieusis opera and studio
Francisci Gregorii, in 8o. Grammatices Graecae Enchtridion in usum Scholae
Collegialis Wigornae, in 8o. A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir Geo: Strode
Knight, in 12o. The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by R. Gove
Preacher of Henton S. George in Somersetshire, in 8o. The Communicants Guide,
directing the younger sort which have never yet received, and the elder and
ignorant sort, which have hitherto received unworthily, how they may receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper with comfort by R. Gove, in 8o. A
Contemplation of Heaven with an Exercise of Love, and a Descant on the Prayer
in the Garden by a Catholic Gent. in 12o. A Full Answer to a Declaration of
the House of Commons concerning no more addresses to the King, printed at
Oxford 1648, in 4o. The Royallists Defense, Printed at Oxford, 1648, in 4o.
Mercurius Rusticus, or the Conntreymans complaint, Printed at Oxford 1648, in
8o. A Relation of the Conference between Will: Laud Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Mr. Fisher the Jesuit by command of K. James, fol. Church Lands
not to be sold, 1647. in 8o. The Countreymans Catechism or the Churches plea
for Tithes by R. Boreman, B. D. in 4o. The Regal Apology Printed at Oxford in
4o. A Fair Warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline by Bishop Bramhall,
in 4o. Sacrosancta Regia Majestas in 4o. Printed at Oxford, and written by the
Archbishop of Tuum. The Christians Directory in 12o. The Royal slave a Play in
4o acted at Christ Church in Oxford. Devotion digested into several Discourses
and Meditations upon the Lords most holy Prayer: Together with additional
Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The
Creatures, The souls pantings after God, The Mercies of God, The souls
complaint of its absence from God; by Peter Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in
Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o. Of the Division between the English and
Romish Church upon Reformation, by Hen: Fern D. D. in 12o the 2. Edition with
many Additionals. Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by
John White M. A. in 8o. The Exemplary lives and Memorable Acts of 9 the most
worthy women of the world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood,
in 4o. The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of promises out of the Word of God,
in 12o. Iudicium Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Foedere,
Iuramento Negativo etc. in 8o. Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and
Resolution to some of the late Controversaries of our times by Jasper Mayn, D.
D. in 4o. New. Ianna Linguarum Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum
seminarium, Auctore Cl. Viro I. A. Comenio, in 12o. A Treatise concerning
Divine providence, very seasonable for all ages, by Tho. Morton Bishop of
Duresme, in 8o. Observations upon Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, with some
Observations upon Sir Walte. Raleighs History of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in
12o. Fifty Sermons preached by that learned and reverend Divine John Done, in
fol. Wits-Common-Wealth, in 12o. The Banquet of Jests new and old in 12o.
Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8o. Quarles Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o.
Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles. Amesii antisynodalia, in 12o.
Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by John Tombs in 12o. New. Dr.
Stuart's Answer to Fountains Letter, in 4o. A Tract of Fortifications, with 22
brass cuts, in 4o. Dr. Griffiths Sermon preached at S. Paul's, in 4o. Blessed
birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o. A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical,
in 4o. An Account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation,
by Edward Boughen D. D. in 4o. An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England
touching Witches, written by the Author of the Observations upon Mr. Hobbs
Leviathan, in 4o. New. Episcopacy-and Presbytery considered, by Hen. Fern. D.
D. in 4o. A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before his Majesty, by Hen.
Fern D. D. in 4o. The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright, in 4o.
An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o. A Treatise of
self-denial, in 4o. by a concealed Author. The holy Life and Death of the late
Vi-countesse Falkland in 12o Certain Considerations of present Concernment:
Touching the Reformed Church of England, by H Fern, in 12o. New. Englands
Faithful Reprover and Monitour, in 12o. by Io. Allington.
Newly published,
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons: by John Allington, B. D. in
12o. The Quakers wild questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel,
and many sacred Acts and Offices of Religion, with brief Answers thereunto:
Together with a Discourse of the holy Spirit his workings and impressions on
the souls of men, by R. Sherlock, B. D. in 8o. White Salt, or a sober
correction of a mad world: By John Sherman, B. D. a discontinuer, in 12o. The
Marching of the Magistrates Authority, and the Christians true liberty in
matters of Religion. By William Lyford B. D. and late Minister of Sherborn in
Dors. in 4o.

