THE Spiritual Warfare: A SERMON PREACHED In the Parish Church of St. Michael
Crookedlane in LONDON, on the 30 of March, being a Fast day,

BY Mr. JOHN SPENCER, Sometime Groom to a Nobleman.

2 TIMOTHY, 2. 3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642.

Mr. SPENCERS SERMON
2 TIMOTHY, 2. 3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.
YOu shall find, that in the three first Verses of this Chapter I have read
unto you, the Apostle labors to exhort Timothy to three particular duties;
The first is, That he would be strong in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ:
The second is, That whatever God had communicated to him, he would make known
to faithful men that might be able to teach also: The third is in the Text
read unto you* That he would endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.

In the Text you have an Exhortation, with the quanty of the Exhortation; The
Exhortation, to endure hardness: The quality of the Exhortation, as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ.

Beloved, there is in the Text three things considerable: The first is this,
That the very best of Gods people must look for afflictions; if Timothy, if
Paul, if David, they must not look to be free from afflictions; Thou therefore
endure hardness, etc. The second thing in the Verse, is this, That it is the
mind and will of our God, that his people should mildely and patiently bear
afflictions, Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier, etc. The third
and last is this, (which we shall chiefly insist upon) That all Gods people are
Christ's soldiers.

For the prosecution of the Point, we shall first prove it to you. Secondly, we
shall show you who they must encounter with. Thirdly, what the weapons are
which they are to use. Fourthly, how they are to fight, that they may overcome.
Fifthly and lastly, we shall make Use and Application.

For the proof of the Point, I say, That all Gods people are Christ's soldiers;
that they are so, cast your eyes on Ephesians. 6. 13. and other particular verses,
Paul exhorts them to put on the whole armor of God, that they may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

Beloved, surely God intends his people should fight, (as you shall hear by and
by) therefore to prepare them to the battle, the Lord would have them with all
speed to put on their armor and be ready; well, the weapons they must put on,
must be Gods weapons, yea and all Gods weapons; Put on the whole armor of God.
Rev. 12. 7. There was a great battle in heaven, Michael and his angels fought
against the Dragon and his angels.

Beloved, I hope you do not think that there is any tumults and wars in in
heaven, no; but this is the meaning, the Church of God upon earth is still
fighting against the devil and his angels; Here you must look for fights if
ever you would come to heaven. So, in 2 Timothy 4. 7. says Paul, I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
life. So, 1 Cor. 15. 32. he tells us, He fought with beasts at Ephesus, he was a
soldier all his days, so soon as ever he came to be enlightened, he took up
the weapons of Jesus Christ, and was resolved to dye in his cause.

So we come to the next particular, who they be that Gods people should fight
withal; they must not be idle and lazy, for they are soldiers.

First, they are to encounter with God; 2. with themselves; 3. with the world;
4. with all wicked men; and 5. with the devil himself.

Beloved, you see here is enemies as well as friends to fight withal, and all
these you must overcome, or else you shall never enter into the kingdom of God.
First of all, you must encounter with God himself, and that for three things;
first, for the making good of all his promises; secondly, you must encounter
with God for his gracious presence; and thirdly, for the gracious discovery of
himself in the face of his Son.

First, you must encounter with God for the making good of all his promises.
Beloved, the Lord has made rich and glorious promises in his Word; that is, a
garden full of sweet and rich flowers; he has made particular promises to you
in particular, to his Church in general; you are to wrestle with God for the
making good of all his promises, and not to give over your suit till he has
made Jerusalem a praise in the whole earth. The Lord has told you, Romans 6. Sin
shall not have dominion over you. Ezekiel. 11. 19. That he will put a new spirit
within his people, and pour out floods of waters upon the the thirsty grounds.
He has said, Rev. 18. 21. that Babylon shall fall; and told us, The day shall
come, when the Moon shall shine as the Sun, seven times brighter in its glory.
You are Gods soldiers, and must encounter with Jesus Christ, for the making of
these promises. You must be Gods Remembrancers, put God in mind, and say, Lord
thou have made such a promise, that my heart which is dark, shall be
enlightened; my eyes which are shut up, shall be opened; and that thou will
pluck down the proud enemies from their seats, and set up the humble and meek,
Lord when will thou perform them?

Secondly, you must encounter with God for his gracious presence. Beloved,
Moses knew well enough what the presence of God was, therefore desired, Exodus
23. If the presence of God went not along with him, that he might not go. Thus
must you encounter with God, when you come before him in such a day as this,
you must say, Lord, what shall I do with this hard heart, this ignorant, this
unbeleeving heart of mine; Lord, if thou should pluck away my wife, my
husband, my child, my friend, I shall not know what to do; but Lord, however
thou dealest with me, vouchsafe me thy gracious presence: Happily I may live
friendlesse, hopeless, be cast into darkness, where I shall see no light;
Lord, let me have thy presence where ever I go; if he goes not with you for to
preach, to pray, to hear, what will ye do? He is the light of your eyes, the
joy of your souls, the strength of your hearts. Thus must you encounter with
God for his gracious presence.

Thirdly, you must encounter with the Lord for the glorious discovery of
himself in the face to his Son, Ephesians. 3. 14. This was that Paul bowed his knee
for, that the Lord would reveal to his people the glorious mysteries of Jesus
Christ. Thus must you importune the God of heaven for the glorious discovery of
himself in the face of his Son.

Secondly, you are to encounter with your selves; 1. You must encounter with
all your own righteousness* 2. with all your own unworthines; 3. with all your
parts and abilities; and 4. with all your sins, if any of these prevail, they
take away your lives, and you are undone for ever.

First, you must encounter with your own righteousness; Every man has a
righteousness of his own, which he thinks shall lead him to heaven; he is
ready to say, whoever perishes, he shall be saved, for he fasts and prays, and
sighs and groans: Paul boasted of this, but when he comes to be a soldier of
Jesus Christ, Philip. 3. 8. he counts all then as loss and dung; he would have
nothing to do with it.

Beloved, you must not look to be saved by your own righteousness, not
according to our own works, but of his free grace has he saved us. If you
should come to heaven gates with your bundle of prayers and tears, and sighs
and groans, yet you should not have entrance, never look to come thither for
the sake of these. This you must encounter with, and overcome, if you would be
a soldier of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, you must encounter with your own unworthiness; I may say of this,
as was said of Saul and David, 1 Samuel 18. 7. the former has killed his ten
thousands, and this his thousands. Take heed of conceits of your own
unworthines, this may keep you out of heaven as well as the former.

If once you begin to think you have out-sinned Gods love, and that there is no
pardon and remission for you, then will you grow into despair, and be ready to
say, Lord there is mercy for others, but none for me; forgiveness for others,
but none for me; repentance for others, but none for me; and then you will grow
negligent, you will not care for holy duties. Why should I hear, read, pray any
more? God will accept of nothing that I can do: Oh take heed, you must
encounter with your own unworthiness.

Thirdly, you must encounter with your own gifts and abilities: How many
thousand souls are undone by those gifts and parts the Lord bestows upon
them? God many times gives a man'a gift, not for himself, but for others; now
he thinks, it may be, that the Lord bestowed this gift upon him for the good of
his own particular person, when it is only for the benefit of others. Take
heed of high thoughts, I am sure God has not dealt with all as he has with
me: This is that which will sink your soul to the bottomless pit of hell;
therefore labor to encounter with your own unworthiness.

Fourthly and lastly, (which is the main) you must encounter with all your
sins. Here is a hard heart, it must be broken, or else it will break thee all
to pieces: Here is an unbeleeving, an ignorant heart that sees no glory, no
excellency in Jesus Christ; this ignorant heart must be enlightened: Here is a
defiled heart which must be purged and washed in the blood of the Lord Jesus.
If you would but look into your own hearts, there you should find abundance of
work to do: surely thou would not then say as some, I cannot tell how to
spend my time. Is not there a proud heart to be humbled, a dark soul to be
enlightened, is there no spots to be gotten out? Look well about you. Beloved,
you will find you had no time indeed, though you had many score of years given
you to purge your souls from that dross, filth, and corruption which lies
upon them.

Thirdly, you are to encounter with the world, and there are four things in it,
which destroys three parts of the men of it; the pleasures, the profits, the
honors, the afflictions of it; these stand in the way as so many armed men: If
the pleasures catch thee not, it is a thousand to one but the riches does; if
the riches does not, it is a thousand to one but the honors does; if the
honors does not, it is a thousand to one but afflictions do: of these I could
give you diverse instances. What a long time did Demas walk with Paul? yet at
length he forsakes him, turns to the world, either to the pleasures, or
riches, or honors of it; so of Ammon and Haman; therefore look to it, that the
pleasures and profits of the world withdraw you not. Know this for certain,
that the Lord has condemned the world already, and you may expect the
execution of it every day. The day is coming, when you shall have new heavens,
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; you shall enjoy things in another
way then now you do, therefore set not your hearts upon things below, for all
these must decay.

Fourthly, you are to encounter with all the enemies of God; and know this,
that the enemies of God are very subtle, they are mighty in strength, there is
multitudes of them, they are not poor ones, but rich ones, they are not in low,
but in high places, yet you must encounter with them all, and if they get the
upper hand, you are gone for ever, but if you get the day, then are ye thrice
happy. You may see in Rev. 12. the dragon and his angels makes war with the
Church of God, they put out all their strength and policy against Christ, his
ordinances, his people.

There is Gods honor and glory at stake, which you must vindicate, you must
have the ordinances in their glory, whatever it may cost you. Happily you must
lose your estates, your lives, your liberties, before you enjoy them, yet you
must hold on still conquering, and to conquer. Now beloved, you will find it a
hard piece of work to encounter with these enemies of God, for his ordinances,
Sacraments, Sabbaths, etc. if they get the upper hand, you lose your selves,
and are not the soldiers of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly and lastly, (because we would hasten to that which more particularly
concerns us) we must encounter with the devil himself, 1 Pet. 5. 8. He goes
about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Three things
considerable there; 1. his diligence; 2. his power and strength; 3. his
cruelty, He goes about; where can you be, but he will be with you, to trouble
you with variety of temptations? There is his diligence. Then he roareth like a
Lion, there is his strength; he would fain make you his pray. Seeking whom he
may devour; there is his malice and cruelty, he desires nothing but your
blood. These are the enemies you are to encounter withal. I shall come now in
the next place to show you the weapons you must use in this spiritual warfare.

The first weapon is a holy and godly life, Ephesians. 6. This is the weapon that
all the Saints of God have used in all their combats, in all their fights.
David, in Psalm. 119. O Lord save me, for I have kept thy precepts: I cleave to
thy statutes, confound me not. Beloved, you must have a holy and godly life, if
ever you think to encounter with God, your selves, or the world. Beloved, if
any of you were to encounter with enemies, what kind of soldiers would you
take with you, the lame, the blind, the deaf? Beloved, you must be purged and
cleansed, no such kind of creatures, if ever you think to get the victory; for
if you appaar in Gods sight and presence, with a polluted guilty conscience,
these sins will undo you. Therefore in the first place, if even you think to
encounter with your enemies, and do service for God, get a holy life. The
second weapon must be all your glorious experiences; you must say, Lord, I have
been in six troubles, yea in seven, yet thou have delivered me; I have known
when I have sat alone, had all my bones broken, the arrows of wrath drinking
up my spirit; I have known when I have lain upon my sick bed, been at the point
of death, encompassed round about with enemies; yet then God did preserve and
defend me, why thou art the same God still.

You must go further, you must bring in all the glorious experiments you have
had of Gods designs for his Church: Tell the Lord you knew when the Church was
helpless, and hopeless, and friendlesse: when Moses would not go down to
deliver the people, nor Hester go in to the King; nay further, you must tell
him you knew the Church in a most lamentable condition, the enemies pursued
them, and was even at their heels, the red Sea before them, Mountains on the
sides of them, yet then the Lord saved his people.

You must tell the Lord what he has done for England at such a time, how near
we were to destruction, what dangers compassed us round about, and how by a
mighty hand and outstretched arm he rescued us: Let this be the second weapon
you take up to fight against your enemies.

Thirdly, the third weapon is Faith; this weapon where ever God has put it in
any hand, has done glorious things for the Church of God: If thou can but
get this weapon into thy hand and heart, it will cause thee to live comfortably
in the worst times thou can meet withal, and make thee say with the Prophet,
Heb. 3. Though the fig tree should not blossom, nor no fruit be left in the
vine, though the labor of the Olive should fail, and the fields not yield
their increase, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my
salvation. Faith will cause thy soul to rejoice in the worst days: Faith will
enable thee to see Gods love the same in every condition, Faith will comfort
thee in all thy straites, make thee see God the Son when thou art sick, as when
thou art well; when thou art rich, as when thou art poor; when thou art in the
dungeon, as when thou art at liberty. Faith will cause thee to lay hold on that
which God has promised, as if it were already performed. Abraham desired to
see my day, he saw it, and was glad, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. He that
comes to me must believe; if he have not: this weapon, he will do nothing at
all. Daniel he understood by reading books, that the end of the Captivity now
was at hand, which he verily believed; therefore in his chapter 9. ver. 19. he
says, O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do* defer not for thy
own name sake, O my God. See what outcries he uses to God for the making good
of his promises: Even so must you lift up your voices as Trumpets, and say,
Lord hear, Lord hearken, Lord defer not, pluck down thy enemies, destroy
Antichrist, and set up thy Son.

Thus did Jacob, the Lord bid him go out of his country, and afterward bid him
return to his country and kindred again, and he would deal well with him, Genesis
31. 9. His brother Esau comes against him with four hundred men, there was
little hope of life. He then begins to encounter with God, and tells him, Lord
thou have blessed me, and I hope thou will deliver me from the hand of Esau;
and so he overcame the Angel which wrestled with him, and would not let him
depart without a blessing.

The next weapon that you must take up must be the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. Put on this caote of mayle, and the swords point of your enemies cannot
enter; get this upon you, and you need not to fear though ten thousands
encompasse you round about. David having this coat of male, the righteousness
of Christ upon him, boldy encountered with all his enemies, and got the day.

In the last place, you must have the spirit of prayer, this beloved has done
wonderful things with God, to overcome him, with the enemies, to overcome
them, with the Devils, to overcome them; this is that which caused the prison
doors to fly open, and all the chains which Peter was bound withal to be
unloosed, Act. 12. This spirit of prayer will draw your hearts into the bosom
of Jesus Christ; this spirit of prayer will unlocke the door of heaven, and let
you in, this spirit of prayer will cause the God of heaven to hearken what you
say, and give you audience; this spirit of prayer will do wonderful things,
what, says the Lord, I have heard the cries of my people, and am come down to
deliver them.

This spirit of prayer will cause thy stony heart to break in pieces, thy
ignorant heart to be enlightened, free, and deliver thee from all troubles
within or without; these are the weapons you must use.

The next thing is to show you how you must fight, a man may have abundance of
strength, be well weaponed, yet if he have not skill may lose his life;
therefore I will tell you how to fight if you look to overcome, first you must
fight with them, not as they are your enemies and strike at you, but as they
are Gods enemies and strike at God; men are too ready to appear in their own
cause, they will be revenged of such and such men, but how few will stand up in
Gods cause? you must make war against them, as they fight against God, his
glory, his ordinances, his worship, his Saints. This consideration you must
have, when you make war with your enemies, that they are Gods enemies, and
fight against God. As thus; The soul begins to see the glory of Christ in
his ordinances to be eclipsed; all the Saints of God, their lives and liberties
lie at the stake, if I rise not up, and encounter, all will be gone if I should
hold my peace, the very stones in the street would cry out against me: that is
the first.

Secondly, thou art to fight with full resolution, never to give over whilst
one of thy enemies is left alive. Beloved, many men seem to be somebody, at
first they gird their weapons about them courageously, they are very busy in
the work of God, for an hour, or a day or two: beseech the Lord to enlighten
their blind eyes, to break their hard hearts, to purge their impure souls; but
alas presently they leave off, they have gotten something, therefore look no
further.

Know a little leake will drown a whole ship, a little fire burn a whole house,
a little sin destroy the soul; one corruption, if thou have not a care, will
open the door and let in abundance, never give over until thou see the life
and blood of all thy sins run out before thee.

Thirdly, you must reckon upon losing something in this fight; no soldier that
goes forth to encounter with his enemies is sure to save his life, happily thy
name may be lost, thy credit and estimation amongst the men of the world, thy
trading, thy liberty, and may be, thy life too; well, it matters not, thou
can never bestow it upon a better friend, nor in a better service than that
of Christ: therefore resolve to lose something, if ever thou look to be a
soldier of Jesus Christ. Did you ever read in the Book of God that any of his
soldiers returned from the battle, but one time or other they lost something?
Many times they have lost their lives, their friends, their liberties, their
estates; And he that is not willing to lose all that he has for Jesus Christ,
is none of his soldier.

In the next place you must be sure to fight with patience, happily thou have
been interceding at heaven gates many years, that the Lord would discover
himself to thee in his Son, show thee the way wherein thou should walk; it
may be thou have bin there a long time, for a poor wife, for a poor husband,
for a poor child, for a poor servant, and yet the Lord has not answered thee:
what though? yet still resolve with David, to hearken what the Lord will say;
for surely he will do it: Lord I have called upon thee to avenge thy self
upon thine adversaries. Set up thy Gospel amongst us, I have often cried to
thee for heartbreaking, but thou delayest to answer the desires of my soul;
well* wait still, though I now lie under a hard heart, the light of thy
countenance is taken away from me, I shall at length see surely the Lord will
do this for me.

Now we come to the Uses for want of time, I shall name but three. First, an
use of Instruction; secondly, an use of Examination; and thirdly, an use of
Excitation.

First, an use of Instruction, it teaches us these things; first of all,
beloved, that it is not so easy a thing to go to heaven, as men suppose, if
you are Christ's soldiers, you must encounter with God, with your selves, with
the world, with wicked men, and with the Devil himself, yet a day will serve
one man's turn, an hour another man's, if they can but say, Lord have mercy
upon us, that will let them into heaven. Surely such do not consider that they
are soldiers, and to fight with so many enemies. (Beloved) the Lord tells us,
The righteous shall scarce be saved, where then shall the wicked appear? If
after all their wrestlings they can scarce get into heaven, what think you of
them that have spent no day in performance of holy duties; could you but come
to the closet doors of the people of God, and see how early they are up, and
how late they go to bed, sure then you would be persuaded that it was not so
easy a thing to go to heaven.

Secondly, it teaches us who is likeliest to do the best service for God in
evil times, if you should see your selves compassed round about with enemies,
before you, behind you, who do you think was likeliest to do you good, a
company of lame men, blind men, are these fit to do you service? Beloved,
there is none fit to do God service, but these soldiers of Christ, that have
armor of proof upon them, these are they that will do the greatest exploits
for God; there was a poor man in the City, and he by his wisdom delivered it.
Hence we may give a guess, what will become of all the enemies of England,
Germany had but a few, Ireland but a few praying people, but the Lord has
thousand of thousands here amongst us, soldiers expert in war, that know how
to encounter with God. That is the reason, that though we are beset with so
many troubles, yet they all fly before the face of Gods people, for they are
soldiers.

Thirdly, it teaches us whom to prize and love most, the soldiers of Jesus
Christ: If you had a thing in your Cabinets, which, if sick, could make you
well, if hungry, could feed you, etc. how would you prize this? Happily thou
have a believing wife, a believing child, a believing servant; though thy
house were beset round about with enemies, this man might deliver thee: when
you are in Taverns, drinking, carousing, swearing, committing many
abominations, this man is earnestly praying to God for thy conversion, it may
be, the wife for the husband, the husband for the wife, the father weeping for
the child, the child for the father, the master for the servant, the servant
for the master: These you should most of all prize and love.

A second Use shall be a Use of Examination; and Beloved, here may we take up a
sad complaint over England, surely if we made a search into every Parish and
family, we should find abundance of enemies, and I am afraid, but few fighting
soldiers for Jesus Christ. I will show you who they be that are not Christ's
soldiers, that you may weep over them, happily you may find them in the
Congregation where you come, in the houses where you dwell, in the bed where
you lie. Lament over the sad estate of such poor souls. First, they that know
not Christ, are not his soldiers; no man will bind himself Apprentice to
another, unless he knows him: you cannot be soldiers, unless you know your
captain Christ Jesus, and I am afraid there is but few knows him. In the world
there is a kind of a Relative knowledge, as one that has never been in Spain,
by reading of Books may tell you of the situation of the place, how many
streets there be in it, and where there is such and such a Noblemans house; so
that you would verily believe they had dwelt and lived there. So many there be
that can talk excellently of God, have such admirable gifts and parts, that you
would think, if there were a godly man in the Town, he was one; when alas he
has gotten nothing else but a Relative knowledge all this while. First of all,
they that know Christ, will fully depend upon him; Do thou say thou know
Jesus Christ, what is the reason then there is such amazements and troubles
seize on thy spirit? If thou know Christ, thou know him to be wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; thou will know him to be a God
that makes good all his promises. What is the reason of those blasphemous
thoughts which men have? They think there is no mercy in heaven for them.
What, will thou be saved by thy own righteousness? Then thou art no servant of
Jesus Christ. You must know, Jesus Christ is inlightning grace, Jesus Christ is
quickening grace, Jesus Christ is comforting grace, Jesus Christ is edifying
grace.

And then again, if you know Jesus Christ, you will live upon him; Is it all
the glory of Jesus Christ you live upon? Is it his power, wisdom and goodness
you live upon, try your selves. I have no righteousness, says the poor soul,
but Christ has righteousness; I have no power to make war with my lusts, but
Christ has power.

Thirdly, they that refuse to do the works of Jesus Christ, make excuses; these
for present are not the soldiers of Jesus Christ: Abraham had never done such
things for the Lord as he did, if he had done so, Genesis 22. God bid him arise,
and go into the land of Moriah, and take with him his son Isaac, to offer him
there for a burnt-offering. He might have made excuses, This is my only son,
the son of the promises, I am old, and my wife past childe-bearing; but
presently he goes to sacrifice his son. So Christ, when he was to go from his
Disciples, he tells them, Mat. 16. 21. He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many
things of the Elders and chief Priests, and be killed, and be raised again the
third day. Verse. 23. Master, says Peter, save thy self. Get thee behind me
Satan, says Christ. Thus must you do: happily a husband, a wife, a child, a
friend may come and persuade thee to save thy honor, to save thy estate, thy
wealth, thy life; you must say to them, Get thee behind me Satan. So Paul,
when he was to go up to Jerusalem, they told him he must be bound there; Oh,
says Paul, why do you weep and break my heart? I am not only ready to be
bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord. Happily you may have
your wife weep, and desire you not to go in such a course, for it will be the
way to beggar you; you must say, I am ready to lose my estate, my liberty, yea,
my life for Jesus Christ: That is the first particular.

Secondly, they are not the soldiers of Jesus Christ that take up weapons of
rebellion, and fight against him: You must either be the servants of Christ, or
not be the servants of Christ, the soldiers of Christ, or not the soldiers of
Christ. Now such as take up weapons and fight against God and his people,
cannot be soldiers of Jesus Christ. Why, you say you do not fight against Gods
people and his ordinances? Why, what do thou fight against then? O take heed
you deceive not your own souls. What is the reason thou can lay such a
drunkard, such a whore-master in thy bosom, and so slightest the people of
God? In this, one day now Christ begins to appear, you see what oppositions
there are in the world, people cannot endure the ways of holiness, but if no
beauty shined out in the ordinance, they would like well of it. Consider that
such as these are no soldiers of Jesus Christ, that fight against his
ordinance, his people, whatever they pretend.

The next Use is an use of Excitation (though there was more things in the
other use, which for want of time I have omitted) there is two branches in it;
we shall speak a word or two to those that are Gods soldiers, and then again to
them that have not as yet entered into this spiritual warfare. First for them
that are Christ's soldiers, let me entreat you to prepare for a battle, for a
skirmish, which you will surely meet withal. Beloved, there is a day of death a
coming, this will certainly come, a day of affliction a coming, this will
certainly come; you cannot, if you have the spirit of discerning, but see and
perceive there is a cloud gathered together as big as a man's hand, how quickly
it may cover the heavens none knows. The Lord has told you, in the last
days there shall be terrible times, Michael that great Prince shall stand up,
and there shall be such times as never was before. Beloved, do you not already
perceive the very drops of blood begin to fall? Do you not daily hear of the
cruel malice of the enemies of God? When you think the storm is blown over,
and never a cloud left in the heavens, every man may sit under his own Vine,
and his own Fig Tree, and none to make him afraid; presently you perceive what
hellish plots and designs are intended to draw a curtain before the light, and
take it away again. Therefore, Beloved, let me entreat you to consider of these
few things. Know this, you must fight or lose your lives, there is a necessity
of it; you are to encounter with God, with your selves, with the world, with
your enemies, and with the Devil himself; if you overcome not all these, you
lose your lives. This very consideration, will put life and strength into the
greatest coward, if he sees there is no way to escape, then he will gather up
his spirits about him. Beloved, I beseech you to consider it: Do you not
perceive how we are hemmed round about with enemies spiritual and temporal?
have you not enemies in your own hearts? you do not know what they may do if
opportunity be put into their hands, the husband may betray the wife, the
father may betray the son, the servant that eats his meat at his masters
table may destroy him. The Lord tells us, that a man's enemies should be those
of his own house. Do you not perceive how you are set about with enemies? there
is a proud heart to be humbled, a stubborn will to be subdued, disordered
affections to be rectified, all these seek to let out the life of your souls.
Let this move you to take into your selves the righteousness of Christ, the
spirit of prayer, the shield of faith, a holy and godly life to encounter with
the desperate enemies of God.

Secondly, consider this, who will accompany you in this glorious fight? if you
were to go to encounter with God alone, with your own hearts, with the world,
with the enemies of God, with the devil alone; truly then little hope: But
consider who leads you forth, you have God, you have Christ, you have the
Spirit, you have the promises, you have the Angels, you have the prayers of all
the Saints on your sides. O then beloved, let this encourage you to go to God
for all you want or stand in need of, this may put life in you. What says
David, Psalm. 118. 11, 12. Mine enemies compassed me round about like Bees, but
in the name of God will I destroy them. Consider when thou art going forth to
make war against temporal, against spiritual enemies; thou go forth with
a glorious company in the name, in the wisdom of thy God; thou go forth
with the help of all Angels: Think ye not (says Christ) that I could speak to
my Father, and he could send me more than twelve Legions of Angels. So may a
poor man say, it is not because their wants power in heaven, if God will
hecan deliver me, thus you must consider who accompanies you in this glorious
fight.

Thirdly, to provoke you further, consider whose battle it is you fight; this
is that which puts life into a soldier; you that have money, estates, parts,
and gifts, liberties and the like, you may come and lay out all here to your
great advantage. Jesus Christ seems now to set up his glorious standard, and
make a Proclamation, Who will be on my side, who? O I beseech you, flock to
Jesus Christ: you that have the gift of prayer, run in with that, you that have
honors run in with them, you that have riches run in with them, see if they
will do any good. Let that I beseech you stir you up to the work of the Lord.
Nay again, consider what a glorious opportunity you have, a man might have
lived when he could not have told what to have done: that would have appeared
famous in the world for Jesus Christ. Now God calls upon you, mercy calls
upon you* to send in your aid and help, to fight in this great quarrel, to
fight with fasting, with prayer, with tears, sighs, and groans; God now
likewise calls for the outward as well as the inward man's estate, he calls
for spiritual and temporal things.

Again consider, the Lord has made choice of you, you only that are his
people, to fight these combats. God could have destroyed his enemies himself,
if not, he could have called to his Angels to have helped him; but the Lord
has made choice of you, he will not overthrow his enemies without his people,
set up the Gospel without his people; you must tell him of what he said long
ago, that Babylon shall fall: Consider this, that the Lord has chosen you out
before many others. And then again, consider what you get in this battle, is
for your selves; let this pluck up your spirits. If a Captain should come to
his soldiers, and tell them, if you take the Town, all shall be yours; would
not this put life in the soldiers? God comes in, and says, Be of good
comfort, my sons and daughters, all you win shall be for your selves; I have no
need of these and these things; those that have mourned with him, shall rejoice
with him. God says, he will pluck down his enemies, and set up his people; and
tells us, when it is so, his people shall rejoice.

And then lastly consider, you shall be rewarded, though you do not overcome;
the Lord will one day bring in his account, and show thee how many days thou
have spent for him, how many bitter complaints thou have put up before him; and
will as certainly reward thee for it, as if thou had the benefit of it
already. This should encourage you to go on, though you should never live to
see the accomplishment of what God has promised, you shall be rewarded, as if
you did overcome. But in the next place, a word or two to those that for
present are not the soldiers of Jesus Christ. I beseech you hearken, you will
find it a sad thing, that you are not the soldiers of Jesus Christ; surely it
had been better for you, that you never had a being, then to be a Rebel from
birth to death to Christ.

First, consider, if thou be not Christ's, thou must of necessity be the devils
soldier. Oh that men and women would but sit down alone, and seriously
consider, whose servant am I, whose work do I, of whom do I take pay? Beloved,
I beseech you consider it, you cannot serve two Masters; The Lord Christ
speaks to them that said they had Abraham to their father, you are of your
father the devil, for his works you do. If we are the servants of Jesus Christ,
we will fight in the cause of Jesus Christ, think upon it, what a sad thing it
is to be a soldier of the devil.

Secondly, consider who it is you fight against, if you be soldiers of the
devil, you fight against Jesus Christ; and what a sad thing will it be, when God
shall bring in a Bill of Indictment against you, the Saints a Bill of
Indictment against thee, thy husband, thy wife, thy children? Lord here is one
that fought against me all my days, did what lay in his power to take away my
life and liberty; it were thousand times better thy hand should rot off, then
that thou should do any thing against the Lord; what will he say to thee,
such a time thou livedst when such and such a thing to my dishonor was put out
against me, and here is thy hand to it. It were a thousand times better for
thee, that thy tongue should fall out of thy mouth, then that ever thou
(...)dest be known to speak a word against Christ and his cause; take heed
that thou be not found a fighter against God. Happily the wife may bring in
sad bill of Indictment against the husband, that he strive not only to keep
himself, but her out of heaven, to keep her from the places where she might
edify: it will be a sad thing to thy soul, that thou will neither go to
heaven, nor suffer others; this Christ took notice of in the Scribes and
Pharisees, that had the key of knowledge, and would not enter themselves, nor
suffer those that would, to enter, Luke 11. 52.

Thirdly, consider what thou must have for thy work, thou that wilt not be
broken off from thy profaning of Gods day, poluting his ordinances, what do
think thou shall have? Jesus Christ has a rich reward for those that serve
him, and so likewise for those that serve him not. But Beloved, them riches
will make thy heart bleed to think of. My friends, if you should come and look
upon your tender hearted wife, and see her upon the Rack, but all about the
place rejoicing, it would make your hearts ache within; you shall come to
heaven, and see happily a poor wife, a poor husband, a poor child pulled one
joint from another, God laughing, and all the Saints, and Angels laughing at
it. Beloved, this will be an unspeakable torment to you; the terror of
Almighty God will be upon those that fight against God. In the last place, I
beseech you be exhorted to lay down your weapons: Thou have been a fighter
against God this forty or fifty years; O now be persuaded to lay down these
weapons. O my people (says God, Micah 6. 4.) what have I done to you? wherein
have I wearied thee, testify against me? So says God to many a man, What have
I done to thee, that thou departest from me, and keep company with such
vile wretches. Thus Jesus Christ also, O why will you dye O house of Israel?
turn unto me, my blood shall make you clean. So the Spirit says, Come; and the
Church of the living God says, Come; the Ambassadors of Christ woo and
beseech you to come in: Never more be seen with a weapon against Christ. These
are glorious days that are a coming for the people of God, but woe be to that
man that Jesus Christ shall find persecuting his Church: O the wretched estate
of such a creature. But to conclude, what though thou can not but confess
that thou have been a fighter against God all thy days; if now thou will come
in and lay down thy weapons, thou shall have as kind entertainment of God, as
those that have been his this forty years, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob shall not
be more beloved of God, than thou shall be. This often troubles a poor child,
when it has done that which is contrary to the parents will, it will not come
in their sight, it is afraid of the frowns of the father. O fear not, the
more polluted thou art, the more will the Lord weep over thee, he runs to meet
a prodigal child, you do not know what feasts the Lord will make in heaven at
your conversion; you shall see your name written in the book of life. Me
thinks this should move you to come in and close with the Lord Jesus: do not
conceive that you shall not find entertainment, for you shall be as welcome as
any: Nay, and let me tell you, the Lord will have a thousand times more glory
by you, than by the civil man. Happily you have a neighbor that has never bin
known to swear an oath, to tell a lie, the Lord will have twice more glory by
you, than by such a one, if he should come in. Consider also what good thou
may do to poor enemies, Paul intimates so much, I knew a man in Christ about
14. years ago, he will not name you who he is for fear of vainglory, yet he
tells you by and by, I Paul a persecutor. O beloved, how will Gods people be
encouraged, yea, the enemies of God, when they shall see such a vile persecutor
as Paul to come in to Jesus Christ: Such a one as Mary Magdalen to come in to
Christ, this must needs be a mighty encouragement. But to conclude all, if thou
do not come and presently lay down thy weapons, the time will be past, And as
the tree falls, so it lies, the night comes when man cannot work.
Therefore I beseech you lay down the weapons of your religion, defer not I
beseech you, say not I will do it to morrow, the next day, or the third day, no
do it presently; do not say I will do it when I come home, but now whilst you
sit in your pews resolve to lay down your weapons, and come to Jesus Christ.
Many more instructions might have bin delivered, but the time has prevented.

FINIS.

