THE CARMENS REMONSTRANCE, OR A Reply to the false and scurrilous Papers of the
WOODMONGERS, by them put out against the CARREMEN: IN A Way of opposing them in
getting of their Charter, and Vindication of the Carmens intentions against the
Scandal of the VVOODMONGERS.

Directed to the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER GARLAND Esquire, and the rest of
the Committee of Parliament Who heard the business between the Woodmongers and
the Carmen.

And likewise to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London.

By STEPHEN SPRATT Solicitor for the Carremen.

Printed at London by G. Dawson 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Alexander Garland, Esquire; And the rest of the
Committee appointed by Parliament for hearing the controversy between the
Carmen and Woodmongers of London, etc.
And to the Right Honorable, the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen of the City
of LONDON, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, unto you from God the Father,
and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IN this following Treatise you will partly find the contest between the
Carmen of LONDON, etc. and the Woodmongers of the same, etc. I am confident,
that you of the Committee above mentioned, are very sensible of the
willingness, and great care of this (our happy, blessed, and worthy renowned
Parliament, in giving such speedy ear to the cries of the poor Carmen, and how
quickly they were pleased to read their Petition when it was first presented;
for which the Carmen have a treble duty upon them toward the Parliament: And
your care in meeting at the Committee, as soon as the Petition was refarred, to
examine the matter on both sides, was so much, that the Carmen, their poor
Wives and Children, are ever bound to be thankful, and to honor and serve you
for ever. I doubt not but you are sensible of the great oppressions the Carmen
lay under, by their being governed by the Woodmongers: And I believe your
Honors were well satisfied with the proof of the same.

And I doubt not but you the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of LONDON do
very well know what wrong the Woodmongers have done the Carmen. And no doubt
but you would have relieved them to the utmost of your power, had the Carmen
come with their petition. But I advised them, that nothing could perfectly and
perpetually relieve them from their oppressions, but to be severed from the
Woodmongers company, and to be incorporate in one Body by themselves, by
Charter under the great Seal of England, which you had no power to grant: and
therefore they petitioned the Parlirment, in whose power it is to grant the
same. The matter has been fully heard, and received many debates: The
Woodmongers have been heard at large what they could say, and Mr. Recorder was
heard what he could say on behalf of the City, as he can well report to you.
Mr. Recorder can report to you what horrible and unjust things were proved
against the Woodmongers in point of measure of coals, and how the good people
of the City are cheated, although the Woodmongers in a scandalous paper
delivered lately to the members of Parliament, did basely scandalize and
calumniate the Committee, saying, they would not hear them vindicate
themselves. Truly you may very well believe that those who so openly and
impudenrly will scandalize a Committee of Parliament, will very easily abuse
the Carmen, who they have made their slanes so long time. But it is well known
that the Woodmongers were heard, and heard again, three days one after
another, and had nothing to say; but all their desire was to delay time, and to
weary out the Carmen, as the Committee very well knows. And now they as much
endeavor to retard the Committee from making their Report to the House: And
all is, because they would weary out the Carmen, and continue their usurped
authority over them, and to get as many Rent-dayes past as they can: to get in
the Car-rents, that so they may go to Law with the Carmen with their own
money, and most they have now to say is by way of prediction, how the Carmen
will abuse the City, and abuse Merchants, etc. when I know to the contrary:
For the Carmen have from time to time in their meetings declared against the
rudeness of some of their Apprentices and Journey-men, and are resolved
whenever the Government is put into their hands, to remedy any abuse
whatsoever, which the Woodmongers never took care to do.

Now there is nothing wanting but the report to be made, and the Act passed: I
beg for Gods sake, and Justice sake, that you the Committee will be pleased to
hasten the same; and that you the Lord Major, and Aldermen of London, will
become Advocates to the Parliament, on behalf of the poor Car-men, by
declaring your willingness in petitioning to the Parliament, that they will be
pleased speedily to grant the Car-mens desires, before they be utterly ruined
by the Woodmongers, that there may be no more leading into catpivitie, nor no
complaining in your streets.

And he, who is bound in duty to pray for your health and prosperity, will
ever remain,

Your humble, and faithful Servant, STEPHEN SPRAT.

The CARMENS Reply to the WOODMONGERS Answer to the CARMENS Petition, which the
Woodmongers call, A Scandalous Paper, etc.
TThe Woodmongers say, The Carmen proved not any one Article against them
before the Committee, as a Corporation: Nor that they did not err from the
Government put into their Hands. But that which the Carmen supposed to be
proved, was deceit against some particular men in their measure of Coals;
which did much take with the Committee: And being out of the Verge of their
reference, those particular men were not suffered to answer any thing in their
own vindication.

Reply. That all the Articles exhibited by the Carmen, were proved against the
Woodmongers, which was the ground of the resolution of the Committee, viz. That
the Carmen should be severed from the Company of Woodmongers, and be a
Corporation by themselves distinct from the Woodmongers.

Reply. That a Corporation is invisible, titular, or nominall, and so cannot
err: But the members of a Corporation may err, and so did the members of the
Company of Woodmongers, as it was proved before the Committee; and the capital
errors were these, viz.

The taking away of the Estates of poor men, widows, and children, (to wit)
Car-roomes, which they purchased with their money at dear rates. The taking
away of which Rooms, has been the cause of the starving to death many poor
fatherless children, etc.

Reply. That they have and do err from the government put into their hands,
for that their Charter does not give them power to take away any Car-roomes
from any man, who has, or ever did purchase the same; nor from the widows or
children of any Carman, nor to abuse the City with false measures.

The Woodmongers say, That a Car-room is nothing but a Brand, or License set on
the side of a Cart, to know the number limited, being 400.

Reply. They say true in that, and thereby the Carmen know their Right: And if
any others should set up Carts, and mark them with that Brand, or mark, then
the Carmen do know themselves to be wronged, and their labor to be taken from
them. And if any Carres be set on work with the Mark or Brand on the side of
it, and do exceed the number of four hundred; then the City is abused, and
the Carmen robbed of their labor: But the Woodmongers did, and do still allow
above forty Carts to work more then the number of four hundred with the Mark
or Brand on the side thereof, etc. And by allowing of these Carts above the
number of four hundred, they get at least three hundred pounds a year: but
the Lord knows what they do with the money; and what is become of the Stock
of the Hall, no man but themselves can tell, albeit their books testify that
the Revennue of their Company is 800. pound per annum, and all raised out of
the poor Carmens labor: and the Hospital go unpaid their Rent, at Midsummer
last 250. pounds in arreare, which the Carmen would scorn to suffer, were they
but once incorporate by themselves.

II. The Woodmongers say in their Answer, That Carlicences, or Car-roomes, and
Carmen, were time out of mind, in the rule and disposition of the City, who
did from time to time, set down orders for their Government, and the Cities
quiet: And the Carmen themselves petitioned to be under the Woodmongers
government, and to be incorporate with them, by reason they were not capable to
govern themselves; and the ordering of them was by Act of Common Council,
commiitted to the Woodmongers, who did condioion with the City to pay to
Christ's Hospital By what authority.
150. l. per annum for their poores relief.

Reply. The Carmen do not endeavor to be from under the Rule of the City,
but to be from under the rule of the Company of Woodmongers, and to be under
the Rule, prescription, and protection of the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen
(were they but incorporate by themselves, as other Companeis are) and to pay to
the City the hundred and fifty pounds per annum more faithfully then the
Woodmongers have done. And to stand to, and abide such Orders and by Laws (for
their good government and just dealings with Merchants and others of the City)
as by consent of the Judges of the Land, and consent of the Lord Major and
Court of Aldermen they shall make.

Reply. And whereas the Woodmongers in their answer say, That the Carmen did
petition to be incorperate with them. Whether this be true, or false, it is no
great matter, (but the Carmen say, It is false) and that the Woodmongers did
only use the Carmens name in their Petition (without their consents) to King
James in the first year of his Reign, merely to set a grace upon their
Petition, to procure their Charter, or else they had never gotten it. But
suppose the Carmen did petition to be under the Woodmongers Government, yet not
so under them as never to come to be Masters, nor bear rule in the Company; as
now the Woodmongers deny to suffer them: neither can it be thought, that the
Carmen ever intended so to loose their Birthrights, as to serve a Prentiship
in London for a Freedom (as they have done) and never to bear rule in their
Company, but, to live as slaves to the Woodmongers. Besides, it is very
probable, that the Woodmongers in those days were honest men: And therefore
the Carmen might well petition to be incorporate with them; both Parties at
that time being but a small body; but now the multitude both of Carmen and
Woodmongers arising to a great body; and the Woodmongers still incroaching and
intrenching upon the Carmens privilege. They may, and do see more reason to
petition to be seavered from the Woodmongers, then ever they did to be joined
with them; and therefore the Woodmongers allegation in that, is vain and
foolish.

Again, The Woodmongers say, The Carmen were not capable to govern themselves.
For reply to that, Whether this be a scandal to the Carmen in those days, is
not worth disputing. But if they were not capable in those days to govern
themselves; yet that is no argument that the Carmen of these days are not
capable to govern themselves, for few of these were Carmen in those days.
Besides, in these later ages all men grow wiser and wiser, and so do the
Carmen. Yet further for reply, Why the Carmen should not be as capable of
Government as the Woodmongers are, let the World judge? Or why the Carmen were
not so able to govern when they were incorporate, first, let Reason speak?
What were the Woodmongers in those days, when the Corporation was granted? A
few poor petty fellows, that bought Coals and Wood, and sold them again, and
were so few in number, whilst they lived merely by honesty, that in the third
year of King James, when their Charter was granted, they were forced to take
out ten men out of the Company of Farriers to make them a Company. Now let
Reason speak, Why may not a Carman be as capable of Government as a Farrier?
Now the world may see what brave Blades these Woodmongers were, that make such
brags of their excellency in Government. Cast your eyes a little upon the
Woodmongers of these times, and behold what Gallant Race, or Stock they come
on. Some of them made Canvis Slops for Seamen, some are Brewers, and some were
Cobblers, etc, And when they were so near cracked they could hardly hold
together, then for lucre of the Car-roomes, which they knew they should have
power to take from poor Men, Widows, and fatherless Children, (their Rooms
being worth 50, or 60. pounds apeice,) they turned their Copies and came to be
Woodmongers. Now let Reason be the Judge once more, Why may not the honest
Carmen of these times be as capable of Government as a Slop-maker, a Brewer, or
a Cobbler? etc

One word by way of Argument: Why not the Carmen to be a Company incorporate by
their selves, as well as the Woodmongers, Porters, Watermen, and
Tankard-bearers, etc. Are these people so able to govern above the Car-men? O
but the reason why the Wood-mongers do so much oppose the Car-men, in getting
of their Charter, is because of the Car-roomes, O the sweet Car-roomes; four
hundred of them (says the Woodmongers) that paid unto us 17s. 4d. per annum,
and 1s. 6d. quartridge, and 20s. every turn over, and 20s. a piece admittance,
besides 20s. upon every Car-roome, taxed by us, when, and as often as we
please, besides 3s. per week for so many as we pleased to seal above the
number of four hundred, out of which we have feasted our Bellies with many a
fat Capon, and with other good cheer, whilst many of the poor Widows of our
Company, and fatherless children has perished for want of bread, whose
Car-roomes we used to take away at our pleasure. (Oh) these naughty Car-men
will be divided from us, and then our Glory will lie amongst our Coals: O when
the Car-roomes be gone, what shall we do for a Hall-Stock to give and lend one
to another; to go down the River, and forestall the Market, and to keep up
the combination amongst us, to the intolerable abuse of the City and parts
adjacent, in keeping up the price of Coals. O come, lets Bussle, and persuade
the Parliament Men to keep up our Interest, though it be never so much to
their dishonor. Now the reasons are discovered why the Wood-mongers do keep
such a bussling, to keep the Car-men from getting a Charter: But the Carmen do
know, and believe, that this Honorable Parliament, for whom they have so often
ventured their lives, (and never fought against, as the Woodmongers have done)
will do them Justice, and Relieve them from their oppressions, in despite of
all gainsayers.

III. The Wood-mongers say, the Car-mens desires in making Car-licenses
hereditary, to be bought and sold, is uncustomary, illegal, and against
equity, to the ruin of thousand Families of poor Carmen, for present and
future, that are never able to purchase a Car-roome at those dear rates which
then will be, the said Car-roomes always having been, and now are given as
Favors to Deserving, Honest That's none of the Woodmongers.
Car-men, that served their Apprenticeships, That's more than the Master of the
Wood-mongers ever did.
and dismissed from dishonest and unruly men, as President A good President, for
a Freeman of London to loose his calling at the pleasure of a Woodmonger.
for above a hundred years.

For Reply: First, the Car-roomes, which the Woodmongers call Car-licenses,
are, and ought to be a Chattel, and to descend to the Executor, or
Administrator, when a Car-man dies: (the Reasons;) First, because of the set
number, they must be four hundred, and no more, says the Law of the City:
Now these four hundred Car-roomes, being formerly settled upon four hundred
Carmen, by purchase, or descent, are their proper Goods; for it is supposed
there be 1000 Car-men, yet the number of 400 carts must not be exceeded. So
then no Car-man can set up a cart, unless he has a Car-roome, and cannot have
a Room, unless he buy it of some other Car-man, and it must be of the
foresaid number, this is one Reason why it is a Chattell; it may properly be
called a Chattell annexed to a Free Hold, because it has no determination, but
goes to the Heirs, the Executor, Administrator, or Assigns, as the Testator
please.

Secondly, in regard of the Rent, the City is the Lord of the Fee, or chief
Lord of the Car-roomes, and the Car-men are Tennants, and pay a quit Rent, that
is, one hundred and fifty pounds a year.

Thirdly: The Woodmongers say it is uncustomary. For Reply, it was, and is a
custom older than the Woodmongers Charter, as has been already proved, and the
Woodmongeas do very well know, that their Hall-bookes do manifest, that
Car-roomes were commonly bought and sold between man and man, as ordinary as
any other commodity; yea, the Woodmongers well know, that Car-roomes were
pawned and mortgaged for money, and accounted as good security as any Land, and
this does appear by their own Books, from 1605. which was the time their
Charter was granted, till 1623. which was about the time the Wood-mongers
procured that wicked monopolizing Decree in Star Chamber, by which the
Woodmongers has since acted, leaving all rules given them in their Charter,
and sets up this Decree for a Law, and keeps much stir to have it maintained
so, though to the ruin of men, women, and children, for time past, present,
and to come.

Again, their Hall-books show that these Car-roomes were sold, pawned, and
morgaged, to the knowledge of the company, and by their consent, so that if the
company had then power to take them away, then their knowledge and consent to
the selling, pawning, or morgaging of them, might have been a fine way to
cheat men of their money. This is another Argument to prove the Car-roomes
hereditary, and proper goods and chattell, and lawful to be bought and sold.

Another Rerson is, that the Car-roomes has ever been appraised as part of the
goods of the deceased, and inventoried and filed in the Orphans court London,
as it has been already proved by the Records of that Court before the
Committee of Parliament: Surely the Lord Major, and Court of Aldermen, would
never have suffered car-roomes to have been filed in that Court, as the goods
and chattels of the deceased, if they had not intended (they being the
Landlords of the said Rooms) they should have been goods and chattels. The
Woodmongers themselves has lately sold car-roomes for fifty pounds a piece:
And this is another Reason why car-roomes should be taken and deemed as a
chattell. etc. at the disposing of the Testator.

Reply: It is the most (e) equallest thing in the world, Woodmongers against
Equity. Woodmonger
that every man should possess that which he does purchase, or what descends
to him of right.

To the ruin of thousands of Families of the poor Carmen, for present and
future.

Reply: There is not thousands of Families of Carmen; but they are a great
body, and therefore the more fit to be a Corporation.

But the Woodmongers, by this part of their answer, would seem to rob Peter to
pay Paul; they would have the 400 Car-roomes in their disposing, because they
would give them to deserving, honest men, who have served their
Apprenticeships. So then, those who purchased their Rooms forty years since,
and served their Apprenticeships to, must be at the pleasure of the
Woodmongers, whether they shall work at their trade yea or no; but they would
take these Rooms, and give them one to another, and to their servants and
friends, at their pleasure, upon pretext they were deserving, honest Carmen,
and they would have all those, whom they judge to be undeserving, to loose
their Livelihood, a very fine pretense.

That the Carmen must serve seven yeates Apprenticeship in LONDON for a
Freedom, and not work at his Trade without the favor of the Woodmongers, or
till they will judge them to be deserving honest men; no doubt but the Lord
Major and Court of Aldermen will look to this: For they are the Fathers of
every Freeman, and ought to take care that every Freeman, who has a Trade to
work on, may work quietly without molestation, or putting from his Trade by
any Company, or else what is a Freedom worth, or to what end does any man
serve an Apprent iceship?

Again, the Carmen were in a sad condition, if they should not enjoy their
room but by favor of the Woodmongers, and till they did judge them deserving,
they would be foully mistaken, as they were in the year 1647. when the ever
honored and renowned Army (under the command of that valiant and excellent
piece of Virtue, the Lord Fairfax) came marching toward London for defense of
the Parliament, the Woodmongers sent about to the Carmen, commanding their
horses to help to draw out the Gunnes to the Works, to charge the Army, and
keep them out of the City, and because they refused, the Woodmongers threatened
to cut out their Car-roomes.

Now you may see how well the Woodmongers would bestow the Car-roomes, if they
had the disposal of them. This was no abetting of the treasonable engagement.
These men are fit to be Governors, are they not? that upon every opportunity
will be ready to cut the Parliaments throats. Who do you think they would give
the Car-roomes to? Surely to such as themselves are, they should be accounted
the deserving honest men, and not such as the Carmen, who now do become
petitioners for a Charter, who have been all of them active for the Parliament,
and most of them out in their service, and ventured their lives. And those
Carmen whom the Woodmongers say are the major part, are none but a parcel of
malignants that hold with them, to whom they would give the Car-roomes. And now
in this time of Dispute they go cunningly to work, and seal Carts by night
to these malignant party, because they should take the Wood-mongers parts
against the Carmen in gaining their Charter.

The Woodmongers say likewise, That the Carmens desires are very unprofitable
for the public in making of fuel dear, and the pricet of all sorts of
carriages treble to what they were wont.

Reply. This is the Woodmongers fiction, not their meaning; for then they would
have given some Reason for it: But it is very unprofitable for the Woodmongers:
For if the Carmen have the Government of all the Carts, and the carriage of all
the coals and wood, as they ought to have, and the keeping of meaters sacks to
serve the City, then the Woodmongers would lose their ungodly gain, and their
opportunity to cheat both poor and Rich, with their short measure, and little
sacks, as has been at large proved before the Committee already, some, nay
most of them want 6. bushels in a chaldron, which they ought to have; and
therefore it were good for the City to look after this.

The Woodmongers say, It is dangerous for Merchants, if the Carmen be not under
some Governors then themselves, in the safety of their goods committed to
their trust.

Reply. Here the Woodmongers would make the Merchants their friends, and make
the World believe that they are the cause of the Carmens preserving of
Merchants goods, when in truth it is no such matter. If the Carmen take a load
of Wines, or any other Commodity whatsoever, and if it be miscarried by him, or
his neglect, the Company of Woodmongers are not, nor never were enjoined to
make it good to the Merchant, but it lies upon the Carmans score, and therefore
this is a vain flash put out by the Woodmongers, to make the people believe a
lie.

The Woodmongers say, Very unpeaceable the Carmen are to the people that pass
the streets.

Reply. The Town Carmen who now petition the Parliament for a Charter, are not
the Parties unpeaceable in the streets, but the Woodmongers own Carmen, who
drive their Carts with Coals, are them, who commonly make any disturbance in
the streets, to the great danger of the people that travail to and fro.

The Woodmongers say, The Carmens desires are against their birthright, in
denying them to carry their own goods, with their own Carts and Servants.

Reply. It is not against their birthright, because it is according to the
Charter of LONDON, for that by the Charter and by the Law of the Land, no man
may use two Trades. And farther, if the Woodmongers keep Carts and Servants to
carry out their own goods, then the Ironmonger, Fish-monger, Costermonger, etc.
may keep Servants and Carts to fetch their goods from the water side; and the
Merchants may keep Carts to fetch and carry their goods, and then what will be
become of the Carmen, who being many in number, and have served their
Apprentiships for that Trade only, and have no other way to live upon. Again,
it is destructive to all Companies in LONDON, and to all Charters of Companies,
for the Woodmongers to keep Carts to carry out their own goods. By the same
reason the Drapers may keep Cloathworkers in their house to dress their own
Cloth, then that Trade is spoiled; the Silk men, Servants to thraw their own
Silk, the Apothecary give his own Physic, and so bring all distinct Trades to
one, and so destroy all Government.

Now; let all men consider of what necessity it is to divide the Car-men from
the Woodmongers, and give them a Charter by themselves, for the good of the
Public, and for the good of the poor men and their wives and children after
them, that when they dye, the Woodmongers may not Roman-like, take away both
their Room and their company, and leave their wives and children to perish in
the streets, as many have done heretofore.

Postscript.
THe Woodmongers foolishly in a paper, at the foot of the paper say, that
Captain Oxford, their Solicitor, did offer Mr. Sprat, the Solicitor for the
Car-men, that the Woodmongers would consent to a disjunction from the Carmen,
so that none may be compelled to go from them, that are willing to stay with
them; and that the Car-men pay a proportion of their debts, contracted for the
use of the Parliament, and otherwise.

Reply: The Woodmongers do well know, that the Committee did so order, that
the Carmen should pay a proportion of such debts as the Company did contract to
lend to the Parliament, but not otherwise; and the Car-men are willing, and
offered to meet the Master and Wardens three times to come to account with
them, but they refuse to meet, to give any account; for in truth the Car-men
have paid their share of those debts long since, and the Company keep the
money, and let the debts go unpaid. Now to answer all other proposals at the
foot of the said paper, is but to answer etc. according to his folly; but this
will be a proper desire, that the Woodmongers do consent to the Car-mens
desires, and appear gratis in the Lord Majors Court at Guild Hall, to answer a
suit in Equity, for the Revenue of the Company for this forty years, and so
let the Law decide the account, and there let the account be given, and never
trouble the Parliament about that, and let them quietly restore to the right
owners, to wit, poor widows and children, and others, the fourscore and
eight Car-roomes which they have takn away, by pretext of their decree in Star
Chamber, and let them pay so much money back to the poor people, as the Rooms
has been worth since the taking of them, and then they will do like men of
conscience and honesty, or else let them appear gratis to so many suites at
common Law, to be brought upon the Statute made the 21 year of King James
against Monopolies, and then out of doubt, they will be glad to cut scores with
the Car-men, as to the matter of Account.

FINIS.

