A SERMON PREACHED before the King and Queen, At WHITEHAL, On Good Friday,
1690. By the Lord Bishop of ROCHESTER, Dean of WESTMINSTER.

Published by Their Majesty's Command.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones. M. DC. XC.

1 St. Peter, Chap. 2. Part of 21st, and 22d Verses. Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps, Who did no Sin.
THE Subject of our Devout Meditations on this Blessed Day, is our dear
Redeemer's Passion; and the last most bitter part of it, his humbling Philip.
2. 8.
himself so, as to become Obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross; and
the Preaching of this Cross, though (as St. Paul tells us) To them that Perish
it is 1 Cor. 1. 18.
Foolishness, yet he also assures us, to as many as are Saved, it is the Power
of God.

Now that none of Us should be found in the number of those, who Perish by
foolishly despising the Doctrine of a Crucified Savior, but rather that we may
all be wise to Salvation, by meekly adoring this Power of God, and the wondrous
Depths of Divine Love in it, and by rightly applying the unspeakable Fruits of
it to our selves, our Church has taken all imaginable care to represent it to
us in the most serious and efficacious manner, and to fix it firmly on our
Minds and Consciences, by frequent and affectionate Repetitions of all its
Parts and Aggravations.

So that if we shall reflect on the whole Annual Circle of our Public
Devotions, 'twere easy to observe, that our Savior's Sufferings are therein
oftener reiterated, and more in proportion, insisted on, than perhaps any other
Article of our pure and undefiled Religion: Our Church in this, as in all
things else, exactly following the Blessed Pattern of the first, and purest
Ages, as they did the Gospel of Christ; which seems to dispense, and measure
out to us, the benefits of all Spiritual Truths, even of his Glorious
Resurrection it self, only according as we shall lay hold on the Merits of, and
be conformable to his Death. For so, (among many other Scriptures to the like
purpose) we read, That if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
Death; if so, and upon no other terms, then we shall be also planted Romans 6. 5.
in the likeness of his Resurrection.

Wherefore in order to this, and to introduce, as at this time, the Passion of
Christ with the greater Solemnity, well did the Church Ordain, That the certain
Period of our Regular Abstinence, and Repentance every Year, should immediately
go before this particular Season; wisely judging, the severest Mortifications
of our selves, to be the best Preparations for our meeting worthily our Lord
dying, and rising again for us; and that some more than ordinary Method of
Zealous Piety, and Stricter Retirement from the World, was necessary to fit us
duly for a Time, and Commemoration so Sacred.

Nay farther yet, When the very Day of his dying did nearer approach, to show
what ought to be the chief Matter of our Private Contemplations, as well as
Public Worship, during the whole Week preceding, (which has been therefore
remarkably honored with the Venerable Name of The Holy Week,) has not our
Excellent Liturgy, Day by Day, without Intermission, with a Succession of
Divine Offices, the like not enjoined us in any other Week of the Year,
continually repeated and inculcated on our Memories this one charming Truth,
That our Lord, our Love, was Crucified? So that scarce any thing else has all
this while sounded in our Ears, in these Holy Places, but some one or other
step of our Savior's sad, and dolorous passage to the Field of Blood; till now
at length we are brought thither, and to the very Day, when He cried out, It is
St. John 19. 30.
finished, and gave up the Ghost.

We having been so lately conducted through this wholesome course of Severities
and Contritions, all teaching us to Die to Sin, as our Lord Died now for our
Sins; I cannot but believe, that what had been else the proper Business of the
Preacher on this Day, is already in great part here done to my Hands; that You
are all come hither tenderly affected with a deep Sense, and melting Remorse,
for what Christ suffered, as at this time in our stead.

And if, by GOD's Grace, Your Hearts are thus already touched from above, then
all that is left for me to do, will be only to assist You, not so much in
raising, as in directing to the best Uses, Your Devout Affections already
raised: To consult together with You, in the Fear of GOD, how all this Grief,
and Sorrow, which so deservedly possesses Your Souls, may become a true
Christian Grief, and Godly Sorrow; How by Degrees we may advance it into
Spiritual Gratitude, Hope, Love, Zeal, and Full Assurance of Faith; and at last
into Joys unspeakable, and full of Glory: Which, as sure as God is true, will
come to pass in the event, if we shall make his precious Death and Passion, not
only the steady Object of our Belief and Admiration in those parts of it,
wherein we cannot imitate Him; but also of our unwearied Imitation, and
constant Practice in those Things, wherein he left behind him an Example, for
us to follow his Steps.

So you see it is, that my Text instructs us, in the only saving way of
Contemplating our dear Lord's Sufferings; that we should consider them not only
in themselves, and their Cruel and Lamentable Circumstances, but in their
Gracious Ends, Influences and Powers: As Christ was the Person Suffering; as he
suffered so much, and as he suffered for us: For us, as an unvaluable Randsom
to atone GOD's Justice, that we may rely on it; For us, as an unblameable
Original of Meekness, Holiness, Charity, and Resignation to the Will of GOD,
that we may Copy after it.

In these few Words therefore, we behold our LORD's Passion displayed to our
View, in its brightest Glory, its condescending Humility, its most obliging
Endearments, and its principal Uses.

First, Its Glory, in that it was Christ who suffered; Jesus the Christ, the
Christ of God, St. Matt. 16. 20.
who is Lord of all things, the Lord and Giver St. Luke 9. 10.
of Life: That the same Person, who was Anointed a King to Govern the whole
World, and Ordained a Prophet to Teach (...), should be also Consecrated a
Priest to ^acrifice for it, Himself being the Oblation.

That is the Second, and was the Low^ness of His Humility; which is here styled
His Suffering: Expressing, in one word His patient enduring all that Misery,
and Torment, which not only the Malice o^ wicked Men, or the Rage of Hell
disappointed by Him, but the Wrath of GOD provoked, could inflict on Him, not
in the least on His own Account, but only for our sakes.

Which next follows, and is the most endearing part of all, that He suffered
for us; the Creator for the Creatures; the Just for the Unjust; the Judge for
the Criminals: 1 St. Pet. 3. 18.
Yet for us, loaded with all this Weight of our Guilt, and with all these just
Causes of His Prejudice, he suffered, for our Justification, for our Salvation;
but in the mean time, and in order to that, for our Example!

And lastly, The Excellency of the Example, he has left us to follow, is
specified in such an eminent Instance, that He did no Sin, as would indeed make
us utterly to despair of ever following it, were it not for his Grace
strengthening us, his Mercy forgiving us, and his Spirit supporting us: All
which he has faithfully promised, and no Guile was ever found in his Mouth.
Chap. 2. verse. 22.


The first Particular in my Text, wherein the Grace of our LORD's Passion is
magnified, is, that the Person now suffering was the Christ of God.

I need not here stay to enumerate distinctly the many High Prerogatives, and
Glorious Appellations, which are heaped on this great Person, as he was the
Christ, throughout the Holy Scriptures; whereof He was the Alpha, and Omega,
the Beginning, Rev. 1. 8.
and the Ending; first the Mystery, then the Manifestation; that to the Jewish
Church under the Law; this to the whole World under the Gospel.

It may suffice, that all over this inspired Book, He is amply declared to be,
what the Author to the Hebrews has Divinely contracted into few words; The Son
of God; The only begotten of God; The Heir of all Things; The Lord of Glory;
The very Brightness of his Fathers Glory; The express Image of his Person, full
of Grace and Truth, by whom He made the Worlds, upholding all Hebr. 1.
Things by the Word of his Power: All unconceivably splendid, and triumphant
Attributes; and all these directly tending to, and chiefly exercised in, our
Pardon, and Peace. For so it presently follows, that when by himself he had
purged Verse. 3.
our Sins, then, and not till then, He sat down on the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High.

This then was the Christ, appointed before all Time, coming in the fullness of
Time, sent from the Bosom of his Heavenly Father, by his Death to raise us from
the Death of Sin; whereof our first, and Temporal Death, was the fatal
Consequence; and our second Eternal Death, had been else the irreparable
Punishment.

A Design this was of Pity and Compassion, whose Height, Depth, Length and
Breadth, were so Incomprehensible, that nothing less could be sufficient, than
an Infinite Wisdom to contrive it, and Power to effect it, and Love to accept
of it.

By this one Adorable Counsel, Heaven and Earth, that were themselves so vastly
distant, and whose distance our Sins had widened so much more, were to be
joined, and for ever Reconciled: Mercy and Truth were to meet together,
Righteousness and Peace to kiss each other: There Psalm 85. 10.
was to be an Atonement on the one part, a Forgiveness on the other:
Satisfaction was to be made by the Free Sufferings of a Man; Salvation to be
bestowed by the Free Grace of GOD. Wherefore both Natures, the Human, and the
Divine, were to be United in one Christ.

And since GOD was pleased to dignifie our Mortal Condition, so highly, by this
near Conjunction, he made our Nature in his Christ, as Glorious, and Perfect,
as it was capable to be.

The Preparations for his Appearance, the Signs that foretold him, the Wonders
that made way for him, his Personal Perfections, his Teaching, his Actions, his
Sufferings, did all exceed all Measures of Human Greatness or Benignity.

So Sacred was his Authority, that all other True Divine Teachers, from the
beginning of the World to his Birth, though they had gone before him in the
Flesh, yet received their Power, and Commission from him by the Spirit.
Whatever Wonders they wrought, whatever Truths they taught, all was done, and
spoken with relation to him, and in subservience to his Religion.

We know, that not only he himself, but even his Types, Forerunners, and
Shadows, had many of them, the Privilege of working Miracles, the Gift of
altering the common Course of Nature, and controuling the settled Laws of the
Creation, as they pleased. The Prophets had it: Moses had it above all others.
Yet they all had it only with dependence on him, and by a Title derived from
him; as they were his Figures, Ministers, and Substitutes; to prepare, and
enable the World, by Degrees, to receive this Great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the Flesh; This last, and universal Declaration 1 Timothy 3. 16.
of Life, and Immortality brought 2 Timothy 1. 10.
to Light in the Gospel by Him, the Messiah.

I know that Messiah comes, who is called Christ; and when he is come, he will
teach us all things, said the Samaritan Woman in St. John the 4th, and Verse.
25. And in the same Chapter said many of the Samaritans, Now we have heard him
our selves, we know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World,
Verse. 42. And the same St. John, who loved him most, and therefore probably
knew him best, (for the greatest Love of GOD is the best way to the greatest
Knowledge of him.) The Messiah, (says he) is, being interpreted, St. John 1. 41.
the Christ: The very Messiah, whom the Jewish Nation, all the Wise, Devout and
Inspired part of it; all the time it was a True Church, so earnestly expected,
and desired; as he was to be afterward also the Desire of all Nations.

They long before beheld him, though but darkly, in the Visions and Intimations
to their Fathers, the Characters and Inspirations of their Prophets, the Veils
of their Ceremonies and Sacrifices, the Ornaments of their Temple, the Office
of their High Priests; which were all, as the Law it self was, only Shadows of
good things to come, whereof He was the Body; they Colos. 2. 17.
had all a borrowed Meaning, and Mystical Hebr. 10. 1.
End; they were all fixed on the Great Messiah; by Him they were Illustrated;
and in Him alone they were all Consummated.

By the United Expectation of the Jews all along, according to the Prophet
Daniel's Prediction, and no doubt by a right Tradition, antienter than that,
their Messiah was to appear after the Captivity, and before the Destruction of
their Temple and Nation. They themselves, just then, when Christ came, did
instantly, and every Moment, expect his coming. All their Circumstances agreed
in that time: All their Descriptions concentered in his Person: All their
Prophecies than gave over; the End of them all being in him once obtained. And
that People has since had no more visible Communion with GOD, which had so much
before.

The Scepter was not to depart from Judah, Genesis 49. 10.
nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, till Shiloh should come: The Scepter
just then did depart from Judah: Their Temple was shortly after destroyed; and
their Nation irrecoverably hitherto scattered. Wherefore, this our Christ must
Infallibly have been the same with their Shiloh, their Messiah. He, Unto whom
the gather ing of the People was to be; He, toward Verse. 10.
whom all the Ancient Ages of GOD's Church before him, did look forward, and
upon whom all the Ages of it since, have looked back: The former Times to
foretell him; the later Times to reveal him; both to Believe in, and to be Saved
by him alone; for which end, and with respect to him, all the Miseries and Joys
of Eternity it self, are provided, and accordingly, shall be dispensed, to
punish those that Reject him, to reward those that Obey him.

These, and whatever other such, magnificent Expressions of Excellency, the
Holy Scriptures have attributed to our Lord, as he is the Christ; as they are
all on the one side, so many evident Testimonies of his Eternal Power and
Godhead; so on the other, they ought to be esteemed as so many Mavelous
Degrees, and astonishing Amplifications of the Merciful Condescension of his
Sufferings, which is my next particular. This very Christ suffered.

If any shall now inquire, from what Period of Time we may justly date the
Beginning of his Passion; without all Question, his Sufferings took their Rise
from the very first Moment of his Assuming our Flesh: Since for the Eternal Son
of GOD only to become Man, was infinitely to suffer: That He, who was in the
Form of GOD, and thought it no Philip. 2. 6, 7.
Robbery, but his inviolable Right, to be equal with GOD, should be made of no
Reputation, and take on him the Form of a Servant, and be made in the Likeness
of Man.

He was made in the Likeness of Man. Was not that an inexpressible Debasement
of the Glories of his Divinity? But, as if that were not Obscurity, and
Degradation enough, to that is added, his stooping down to the low, and abject
Form of a Servant. The great GOD of Heaven, who is otherwise No Accepter, or
Respecter of Persons among Men, Acts 10. 34. Gal. 2. 6.
nor does he prefer the highest before the lowest, upon any inequality of our
Conditions here below; yet, when he himself was to put on our Humanity, he then
became, as it were, an Accepter of Persons on the other side, and chose to
appear in the vilest, and most despicable State among the Children of Men;
which is, that of a Servant, and the being made of no Reputation.

Thus, with his very taking our Nature, did his Sufferings begin; and thence
were continued through all the humble Circumstances of his Birth, and Kindred,
and Conversation; through a Life of Poverty, Simplicity, and Self-Denial; and
as the Evangelical Prophet describes him, As a Man of Sorrows, acquainted with
Grief; despised Isai. 53. 3.
and rejected of Men: Till he came at length to that, which still deserves
Emphatically to be called, His Passion; when he was also smitten of God, and
afflicted, to Verse. 4.
his dreadful Conflict with GOD, and himself in the Garden, and his Sweating
Drops of Blood there; to the Buffetings, the Revilings, the Scourges, the
Spittings, the contradiction of Sinners he endured: The Hebr. 12. 3.
Cruel Insolency of his Enemies; the fierce Rage of the Superstitious Jews; the
Tyrannous Scorn of the Romans; the Theives Crucified with him; the Murderer
preferred before him; the Gall and Vinegar given him to Drink; the Nails in his
Hands; the Spear in his Side; the very August Name of King, objected to him in
Contempt; the Painful and Shameful Crown of Thorns put on his Head, with
Ignominious Mockery: And, at last, that inutterable Torment darted into his
very Soul immediately from GOD himself, which compelled him for a time, almost
to Despair, and to sink under its Weight. Surae we are, it made him cry out, My
God, St. Matt. 27. 46.
my God, why have thou forsaken me?

In that black and dismal Moment of his expiring on the Cross, what
insupportable Suffering must his have been, which could even appear to stagger
such a Faith, and eclipse his Assurance of the Presence and Love of his
heavenly Father!

How many Deaths, and extreme Agonies of Death must he then have felt! When, as
the Prophet Isaiah says, The Lord laid on him the Iniquity of us all: And Isai.
53. 6.
as St. Peter here expresses it, He his own 1 St. Pet. 2. 24.
self bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree? And not only ours, but the
Sins of the whole World; since St. Paul has also taught us in his own Person,
that every Sinner, as such, carries no less a Load about with him, than a whole
Body of Death!

Certainly the bare mention of our Lord's thus suffering, though so plainly
related, could not but convince any indifferent, Romans 7. 24.
and unconcerned Person passing by, that never any Sorrow was like his Sorrow.
But there is still something more behind, that methinks should never permit any
of the Sons and Daughters of Men to pass it by as indifferent, and unconcerned:
And that is the third part of my Text, He suffered all this for us.

For us he suffered. For himself he could Romans 6. 23.
not die. Death is the Wages of Sin; and the sting of Death is Sin. Death could
1 Cor. 15. 56.
have no Dominion over him on that account: He did no Sin. But if any of us
shall say so of our selves, The Truth is not in us. Wherefore for us, or which
is all one, for our Sins, in our place, he suffered.

All Sin must be acknowledged to be a breach of the Wise, Holy, and Upright Law
of GOD: And for every breach of such a Law, a severe Punishment is due, unless
some fitting Expiation be made. And that He only could have performed. Could
any other Creatures for us? Alas! all their value bears no proportion to such a
Forfeiture. However, such as they are, we had no right to use them to that
purpose, since GOD alone, not we, had the Propriety in them before. Nor could
we our selves have made an Equitable Satisfaction. Alas! Were it not for this
Redeemer, we had wanted an Atonement not only for our Iniquities, but for our
best Righteousness.

Wherefore seeing neither we our selves, nor any other for us, could contribute
any just Price toward our Redemption; to whom could we have recourse? Whither
should we flee for Refuge, but to that one GOD, and one 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between GOD and Man, the Man Christ Jesus? Flee to him we did not
neither: Nor could we first; rather he sought us out, found, overtook us
fleeing from him. In that deplorable Condition the Good Samaritan had
Compassion on St. Luke 10. 33.
us, weltring in our Blood, in our Sins that required his Blood; To bind up our
Wounds, and heal our Bruises, and love us Hos. 14. 4.
freely: Freely it must have been, or not at all.

Thus for us, encompassed with innumerable Frailties and Corruptions;
contaminated with so many Pollutions of Original and Actual Sins; blackened
with so many repeated Ingratitudes toward Heaven: For us, sinful Men. Men!
sinful Dust and Ashes; Worms and no Men; Psalm. 22. 6.
(for so the Scripture accounts of every Sinner; condemns him to have lost the
very common Privilege of being a Man; which at best is no great Matter to boast
of, as Man has made himself: For Man does but walk in a vain Shadow, whereas
Psalm. 39.
Sin makes him worse than a Shadow; worse than the very Beasts that perish; and
of Beasts the most contemptible, even a Worm of the Earth:) However, for us, in
this dejected and depraved Condition, Christ undertook, Christ suffered: Not
only became our Intercessor, our Pledge, our Ransom, our Surety; but our
Propitiatory Offering, our Bloody Sacrifice; to atone for us, by undergoing
himself the Divine Vengeance.

What shall we say then? If our Lord's Suffering in this terrible manner, was
able to shake the whole Frame of the Visible World, as it did; if it could
disorder the very Inanimate and Insensible Parts of it, though they were
altogether Innocent of its Guilt: If it could rend the Veil of the Temple, and
split the Rocks, and darken the Sun, and overspread the Face of the Earth with
thick Darkness, and open the Graves, and make Dead Bodies arise, and walk
abroad: What powerful Effect then? And, What irresistible Influence should all
this have upon us? Who, in as much as we are all Sinners, had but too great a
share in being the Causes of his thus Suffering.

What passionate Relentings, What vehement Desires, What fervent Longings
should the Remembrance of all this excite in our Souls toward him? What 2 Cor.
7. 11.
Carefulness; yea, What clearing of our selves; yea, What Indignation; yea,
What Fear; yea, What Zeal; yea, What Revenge, against Sin and Iniquity, that
occasioned all This? What Resolutions of better Obedience, What Vigilance, What
Prayers, What Tears, What Vows for the future should it Solemnly engage us in,
against those our Transgressions, which cost him so Dear, no less than his
Immaculate Blood, and weighed down for a Time, his Righteous Soul into Hell?

Thus Christ Suffered for us, to pay an Inestimable Price for our Demerits; and
by his own Merits, to make us Sinners acceptable in the Sight of God, who is of
Hab. 1. 13.
purer Eyes, than to behold Iniquity.

But, may we now safely conclude from hence, That the whole design of our
Redemption, was absolutely finished between God, and Him, and Us, merely by his
Suffering for us? Yes, entirely, as to the Meritorious part of it, though we
should all beware of Negligence, or Presumption, on that Account: For there
still remains enough to be done on our part.

His share was in Truth, All in All, and All in every Part. It was completely
to purchase Salvation for us. But then must begin, and then only can begin, our
share, which is still, To Work out that Salvation. So that although, all our
Working can only proceed on the sure Foundation of his Purchase: Yet withal, it
must indispensably proceed thereupon. And let us not be deceived; if, as we are
told, even our best Working in this Life, cannot be without some Fear and
Trembling, What Phil. 2. 12.
will our not Working at all be?

Consider I beseech you, The Free Grace of our LORD's Redeeming Mankind by his
Blood, The Blood of the New Heb. 10. 29. 13. 20.
and Everlasting Covenant, as large and diffusive as it is, yet can be of no
Consequence to us in Particular, but to aggravate our Condemnation for
neglecting it, unless we not only Accept and Apprehend it by Faith, but Embrace
and Cherish it with a Living Faith. And then Faith only lives in an Evangelical
Sense, not only when it Breaths and Professes, but when it Moves and Works,
then it most Lives, when it Operates Vigorously in a Conscientious Obedience to
his Precepts, and a Diligent and Dutiful Conformity to his Example: Which is
the Reason, my Text assigns, of our LORD's Suffering for us, that he might
leave us an Example, and we should follow his Steps.

We know there are some, that call themselves Christians, who rejecting the
great Fundamental Doctrine of our LORD's Suffering for us, as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice, allow no other End of his Coming, and Living, and Dying in the
Flesh, but that he might show us the way to Heaven, by his Teaching, and
Example.

I need not, in this Audience, labor to confute this; or to prove Christ's
having been a Real Sacrifice, and the only sufficient Atonement for Sin, by
himself once offered: Since in the whole Tenor Heb. 9. 28.
of the Gospel, especially in St* Paul's Epistles, and that to the Hebrews*
this Truth seems to be so perspicuously confirmed. Only let me add, his being
offered to GOD, as our Sacrifice, was a thing so Necessary, that without it, in
Vain had He been proposed to us, as our Example: Both these great Intentions of
his Suffering, being so inseparably Mixed and United, that wherever they shall
be found divided, neither o^ them can be Effectual. Christ could never have
been to us a Pattern of Holiness, such as we could have had the least hope to
follow, had He not also been a Propitiation for our Sins. And that Propitiation
will prevail with the Righteous Judge of all the World, only for such as, in
some Degree, or other, sincerely* Practice after his Pattern.

Upon no less, nor any other Conditions, has He undertaken to cleanse and
rescue us from the Guilt and Slavery of our Sins, but only, as we shall strive
to exercise that Capacity, which He has also obtained for us, of following the
Steps of his Graces.

It must be Confessed, without his Righteousness imputed to us, we can never be
Justified in the Sight of God. And his Righteousness is never imputed to any,
but only those, by whom either, in Deed, or in Will, it is Imitated. I say, not
only in Deed, but in Will, because our Gracious GOD, who works in us both to
Will, and to Do of his Good Pleasure, is sometimes pleased, To accept the Will
for the Deed: Phil. 2. 13.
But never so, as thereby to give us any Encouragement to come short of, or to
omit the Deed.

I say then again, our Blessed LORD can never be a comfortable Example, but
only to those, for whom He was a Sacrifice. And He never suffered effectually
for any as a Sacrifice, but such, as unfeignedly desire, and endeavor, to make
Him their Example.

This being granted, that it highly concerns every one that calls on the Name
of Christ, not only to trust in Him as our Redeemer, but to follow His Steps as
our Example. It will next be very well worth our while to examine carefully,
where we may find an accurate Copy of that Example: In what Holy ground we are
to search, for the Genuine Marks of those Heavenly Steps we are to tread in.

For that, the Greek Word in my Text, which is translated Example, may suggest
to us a certain Rule of Direction in this whole Matter: The Word is (...), that
is, such a Type, Prescript, and Original Draught, as is left us in Writing,
whence we may transcribe it into our Lives.

So that you see, St. Peter was not content to leave us a mere uncertain
hearsay, changeable, traditionary Doctrine of our Lord's Example; but such a
One, as being at first taken as near the Life as could be, was then written
down, once for all finished, and once delivered to the Saints, St. Jude v. 3.
as indeed every part of it is demonstrably to be shown in the Holy Word of
GOD, which is our fixed Standard of all Truth and Goodness, and next to Christ
and His Spirit, our only Infallible Guide of Faith and Manners.

This, says our Apostle, is the Example. He has left us, for you to follow:
Consigned it first into our Trust, and our Recording, who were Eyewitnesses of
all, by us to be faithfully transmitted down to you, the Saints of all Ages to
come. An Example most Holy, and most Worthy, both of our and your Imitation, in
that He did no Sin.

So my Text proceeds to make out the Perfection of His Example. But here, alas!
we must stop, when He took on Himself our other Infirmities; yet, Sin was
excepted. He was a spotless Example to us of Holiness: But such as we can never
be to one another. 'Twere Blasphemy in us to imagine, that we can ever be
Exempt from Sin in any Degree of Equality with him: Well were it for us, if we
might be so, in some Degree of Resemblance to Him.

And let us not Despair, for that we may be, if we shall do what we are here
advised, and what, through His Grace we may do: If we shall still have him in
our View, and Write, and Speak, and Live after the perfect Copy of so great a
Master; and steadfastly follow his Steps, though it be only, as his Friends and
Acquaintance followed him to the Cross, afar off. However, if we shall keep his
Luke 23. 49.
Example unmoveably before our Eyes, and perpetually strive to Walk answerably
to it; then, whatever we shall Do, or Speak, or Think well, though very
imperfectly, he will accept; and, where through Human Weakness, we shall fail,
he, out of the inexhaustible Riches of his own Mercy, will supply all the Good
that is wanting, and pardon all the Ill that remains.

An Example seems to be some visible Image, or sensible Pattern of something
extraordinary in its kind; so exhibited to common Observation, that others may
direct their practice by it, and learn to excel in the same kind.

And great is the force of Examples: Great on both Sides; either in leading us
to Good, or seducing us to Evil.

By common Experience, Examples are found to have far greater Influence on the
Minds and Actions of Men, than the most Excellent Precepts singly delivered.

Examples have a Natural, Living, and vigorous Efficacy, by Secret and Familiar
Charms, they are generally wont to insinuate much farther, than the best
Commands, or Entreaties, or Encouragements by themselves can reach.

Whilst the Wisest Laws can only prescribe and require Obedience, by threatening
Punishments, or promising Rewards, good Examples do more softly affect the
Passions, and captivate the Imagination, and gently frame the Will to
themselves: Convincing Men's Understandings, that the Good ought to be done by
the bright luster attending all Goodness, when brought into Example; and also
proving to our very Eyes and Senses, that it has been done by others, and
therefore may be done by us, if it be not our own fault; and showing the
easiest Method, and most graceful Manner of doing it.

Since therefore in all things relating to Practice, Examples have so prevalent
an Authority, much more than any other way of Teaching; let me seriously
Recommend to you all, the following this most. Consummate Pattern of our Lord,
and the being made like to him, above all other Examples: A Duty so Incumbent
on all Christians, that our very first Initiation into his Faith, our Baptism
obliges us to it, as the distinguishing Badge and Character of our Holy
Profession.

And let me assure you, Great, Happy, and Illustrious, would soon be the
Benefits of such an imitating Christianity: Such as shall Teach us, in the
first place, most studiously to imitate Christ himself; and next him, his
Disciples, Apostles, and first Companions, To be followers of them, according
to St. Paul's Rule, concerning himself, as they were of Christ.

This would undoubtedly make us Disciples of Christ, according to his own
Heart, who has declared himself to be not only the Truth, but the Way, St. John
146.
the Truth, and the Life.

This would speedily take off our Minds from eager Disputes, and fierce
Emulations; and employ them about plain and unquestionable Truths and Duties.
This would quickly abate much of the vehement and tumultuous Spirit of Zeal,
but increase the temperate Heat, and useful Fire of it. This would soon allay
and sweeten all that Sharpness, Sowerness, and Peevishness of Conscience, which
so generally prevails, and change it into a Conscience void of Offense toward
God and Man. This would incline Men rather to be innocent, and holy themselves,
by constant looking toward Him, who was so, than to find fault curiously, or
to object subtily against others: Rather to be industrious in doing well, as He
did, than to be critical in blaming what others do amiss.

This, in short, is the best way to restore the Primitive Power of the Gospel,
by restoring the Primitive Method of its wonderful Rise, Increase and Progress.
This, in stead of making all Practice evaporate in Speculation, would more
profitably reduce Speculation into Practice. This would bring Religion more
into public View and Notice, and by consequence more into Credit and Fashion.
And whereas nothing can be a greater Scandal to any Church, than for the
Members of it to be Rigid in their Censures of others, and yet loose in their
own Examples; This would make the Loveliness of our Examples to correspond
with, and even to adorn the Beauty of our Churches Doctrines and Precepts.

Give me leave to urge this yet farther, with a special regard to You of this
Place. For You thus indefatigably to Copy after this Blessed Example of our
Lord Christ, were the certain means for You to prove the greatest Blessings to
the whole Nation wherein You live; that is, to become Good, as well as Great
Examples to it: You I mean, many of whom GOD has placed in so high a rank of
Dignity and Honor in this World, that whither You will or no, whatever You do,
Your Practice cannot but be a powerful Example to others.

Wherefore, in the Name of GOD, let us all raise up our Thoughts, and make our
Imitation Aspire and Ascend toward Him, who is the Author and Finisher Heb.
12. 2.
of our Faith; who has Ascended on High, and has led Captivity Captive, and has
received Gifts for Men; yea, for the Psalm. 68. 18.
Rebellious also; That the Lord God might not only teach us by his Doctrine,
but dwell among us by his Example.

To this End, we all have, or may have in our Hands this Blessed Book of the
New Testament of his Blood. Here only is to be found, St. Peter's (...), the
incorrupt Original, and native Comeliness of his Holy Life and Death. Hence only
let us take it, as from a pure and unmixt Fountain. Let us often revolve in our
Minds, and Imprint deeply this unerring Idea of him on our Hearts. Let us
incessantly Compare, Measure, Judge of, and Correct all our Thoughts, Words and
Actions, according to the Exactness of this Model.

As we should always Adore, and Worship all his inimitable Praises and
Perfections; so let us also imitate all his imitable Graces. Let us most
imitate those of them, that are most fitted to our peculiar Conditions. So let
us imitate them altogether, that our Zeal for some of them may not make us
averse from any of the rest.

So let us observe his Mortifications, as not to neglect his Charity. Nor let
our Love of his Communicative Goodness exclude our Observance of his severer
Institutions. Rather let us carefully mingle them all in our practice, as he
did in his. As he did, let us harmoniously join the good Duties of Society with
those of Retirement; the private Devotions of Solitude with the Distributive
Virtues of Conversation.

Thus, in every Step of his irreprovable Life and Death, we shall not fail to
meet with something excellent, and most proper for us to trace out, and
delineate in every Step of ours. When we find him in the Stable, or the Manger,
have we not his great Humility? When in the Throngs, and Assemblies of the
City, his Mild, Charitable, and Blameless Behavior to set before our Eyes?
When among Publicans and Sinners, his gentle Gravity, and winning Authority in
reproving Wickedness and Licentiousness: When with the Scribes and Pharisees,
his avowed contempt of proud Singularity, and censorious Hypocrisy: When in
the Temple, his fervent Zeal: When in his Journeys by Sea or Land, his going
about doing good: When alone in the Wilderness, his unaffected Sanctity, and
meek Severity: Every where we have his Innocence, his Temperance, his Modesty,
his Affability, his Justice, his Mercy and Universal Beneficence.

But, as this Day most requires, since we have now seen him in his Agony in the
Garden; in the Judgment-Hall Accused and Condemned; and thenceforth brought as
a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as Isaiah 53. 7.
a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so opening not his Mouth; so meekly,
either bearing the Cross himself, or Crucified on it: When he was Reviled,
Reviling not 1 St. Pet. 2. 23.
again; When he Suffered, Threatening not; but committing himself to him that
judges Righteously: And since (according to the Words immediately foregoing my
Text) This is acceptable to God; for even hereunto were Verse. 20, 21.
we called: Now particularly let us learn to imitate his Patience, Equanimity,
and Long-Suffering; his forgiving Injuries, and loving Enemies; His Blessing
them that Cursed him; His Praying for them who Despitefully used him, and
Persecuted him; and lastly, his entire Obedience to the Will of Heaven,
expressed in that most admirable Word of Submission, amidst such ineffable
Tortures, Not as I will, but as Thou will.

And if we shall thus follow his Gracious Steps to Mount Calvery, we shall also
shortly follow him to Mount Olivet: If we shall thus be Partakers of his Death,
by dying to Sin, we shall also be Partakers Verse. 24.
of his Resurrection, by living to Righteousness here, to Glory hereafter;
Which I beseech Almighty GOD to Grant us all. Amen.

FINIS.

