THE HISTORY of GENEVA

POST TENEBRAS LUX

blazon or coat of arms I. Sturt sc:


LONDON Printed for Bernard White. M.DC.LXXXVII.

THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA, From its First Foundation to this
present Time.

Faithfully Collected from several MANUSCRIPTS of Jacobus Gothofredus, Monsieur
Chorier, and Others.

BY ISAAC SPON, Doctor of Physic, and one of the Fellows of the College of
LIONS.

LICENSED,

Dec. 14. 1685. TO. L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON, Printed for Bernard White. M DC LXXXVII.

PREFACE.
THE City of Geneva being one of the most Considerable of the Protestant party,
we may easily believe there is none but will desire to know its History; some,
that they may understand the State of that City with which they are linked in
Religion; others, that they may not be ignorant of the strength and policy of a
State which they consider as an enemy. Hitherto we have had but scattered
fragments, as in the History of Savoy or Switzerland, and in the Book called
the Cavaleer Savoyard, and in the Genevoise Citizen; and indeed in these
Historical Relations there is so much of sharpness and passion, that a man
shall scarce know when to credit any thing.

This I have endeavored to avoid to the utmost of my power, though it be very
difficult when it concerns the Religion of People and the pretensions of
Princes, to keep such a just moderation as shall provoke neither Party: Yet I
am apt to think I have done as much in this matter as could be expected. For as
to the main of this History, if all people shall not find satisfaction, I shall
look upon this only as a misfortune usually attending such sort of Writings,
and not as an effect of my passion: seeing I have followed as much as in me lay
the Counsel given of old to an Historian, not to be of any Country or Party
whilst the Pen was in his hand. It is true, I wanted several things requisite
to a business of this nature, but on the other side I know full well, there is
no one could acquit himself better in this affair than my self: seeing that a
Genevoise would be sure to be suspected, and a stranger could not be so well
informed of those things which I have known, and procure those Memoires and
Manuscripts which I have by me, for which both the Public and my self are
obliged not a little to M^^^sieur Chorier the French Kings Historian and
Advocate in the Parliament of Dauphine, who long since has been urgent with me
to follow this design: and had it not been for him, I should not so much as
have thought of it. Certainly no one could have better performed this, than my
Noble Friend; for having Written so Excellent an History of Dauphine, with
which our Libraries are adorned; this here would have been but an easy task to
him, would he have undertaken it, and his affairs had permitted him. The
Manuscripts with which he has furnished me, are three Volumes in Quarto* taken
out of the Library of the deceased Monsieur James Godefroy (Jacobus
Gothofredus) famous for his Commentary on the Theodosian Codex: they plainly
appear to he Written with his own hand, and I do not believe there is any other
Copy to be found of them: (precious Remains) of the Closet of this great Man;
and which ought to be rankt immediately after the famous Commentaries
aforementioned. And being made Counselor and Syndick of Geneva, his want of
leisure, and other reasons of State withheld him from publishing his Memoires
as he had designed. I have had moreover of Monsieur Chorier another Manuscript,
of which I know not the Author. I have likewise made use of some Chronological
Manuscripts of one Roset which are in every bodies hands: not to reckon other
Collections, viz. of the Acts and Alliances with Switzerland and Geneva, and
the Printed Books as many as I could find, such as Paradins Historical
Chronicle of Savoy, the History of Savoy, the Genevois Citizen, and Pictet's
Harangue, the Sieur de Jussie's Book entitled the Leven of Calvinism, More's
Harangues, Spanheim's and several others. These are the Materials from whence I
have taken my History; which I have more need to abridge than amplify, lest I
should exceed the bounds of a particular History, by introducing a thousand
accidents which have happened in the neighboring Countries, or even in all
Europe. I have added also of my own at the end of this History, those ancient
Inscriptions which are to be seen at Geneva, and those of S. Peter's Chanons,
with all possible exactness, and expect only this fruit of my labor, that
(...) satisfying my own inclinations, I shall also gratify the curious, though
I cannot please the Critics, who love to try their Wits, and value not a Book
unless its periods are labored and smoothed to the utmost exactness, and
wholly freed from imperfections, not considering that excellent saying of
Aristotle, that the faults of them who begin a Work, do rather claim indulgence
than animadversion.

The Approbation of Monsieur de Mezeray, Historiographer of France, and one of
the French Kings Council.
I Read this Manuscript four Months since, and find it to be an Excellent
History, and License it to be Printed.

Signed MEZERAY.

THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA.
BOOK I.
Containing the History of GENEVA before the Coming of our Savior.
ALTHOUGH I undertake the History of a very mean State, considering its small
Extent and Compass, and the little Noise which it has made in the World, yet
my design to publish it, cannot be justly blamed, seeing God himself is no less
admirable in the small works of Nature, than in the great, where the matter is
fashioned by his hands: neither is he less wonderful in the Government of small
States, than great Kingdoms; as a Pilot shows no less skill in resisting with a
little Bark a Tempestuous Sea, than in preserving a great Ship in the midst of
a Storm.

You must not expect here magnificent descriptions of Glorious Actions,
Eloquent Harangues of Famous Generals, or Battles fought by infinite numbers of
Soldiers; but instead of this, at every turn, some Miracle of Providence, some
Historical or Political passage worth your consideration: In this Scene will
appear Actors, who, although they are not arrayed in the glistering Attare of
Princes, nor speak big, as Kings of the Earth on the spacious Theaters of their
Dominions; yet do they not fail to act that part they have taken upon them, and
to set before us excellent instructions, which are so much the more profitable,
as they are every man's concern: for every man is either a Soldier, or Citizen
of his Country. There you will see examples of all kinds of Virtues and Vices;
which will not be useless, if you mind not so much him that speaks, as what
he says, whether it be to the purpose.

For my part, I shall not be so solicitous after smoothness in my style, as
after truth in my relations; and shall endeavor that no passion shall make me
unworthy the name of an Historian, who ought chiefly to be a Secretary to
Truth, and not to Falsehood or Flattery. He who writes to show his Eloquence,
publishes rather his own History, than that of the States or Persons, whom he
pretends to write of: and it often happens, that such a one climbs upon the
Scaffold of his Vanity, that he may make himself the more ridiculous, and have
the greater fall. Truth has no need of Varnish, or any affected dress, to make
it lovely; and provided it be not unseasonably, or carelessly exposed, its
beauty which it borrows from none but it self, can never want hearty admirers.

But before I enter upon the description of this History of Geneva, Ancient
names of Geneva.
it will be expected I should say something concerning its Name. Geneva is the
most ancient it ever had; and the same we meet with in Caesar's Commentaries. A
late Author has mistook, in saying it has been called Geneua: Volateran.
neither do I know upon what grounds he affirms Genes to be a Colony of the
Genevoises; seeing Genes is a very ancient City, and bore that name in
Hannibal's time; Livy relating 'twas taken by ^^go, Hamilcar his Son. Genabum
as some Moderns have called Geneva, is the name of Orleans. That of Gebenna, by
which Geneva has been known for several Ages, began to be in use about
Charlemain's time: for so we find it in that Emperors Life written by Aimoin
the Monk in the Chronicles of the Abbey of Rheginon, and thus used by almost all
Authors and Public Acts for above eight hundred years down to 1536.

Notwithstanding there be some who would make us believe, that Lucan meant
Geneva under the name of Gevenna in these Verses; Qua Rhod^nus raptum velocibus
undis
In Mare fert Ararim, Marlian Paradin.
qua montibus ardua summis,
Gens habitat can^ pendentes rupe Gebennas.
Where Araris with Rhodanus now meet
Runs joined into the Sea, the Men whose Seat
Is on Gebenna Mount covered with Snow.
But there he speaks not of a City, but of the Mountains of Cevennes, which
C^sar means by the same word. I shall likewise make it appear in the sequel of
this Discourse, that it has never been called Colonia Equestris. The
Genevoises restored it to its ancient name in the year 1536. taking away that
of Gebenna, which the rudeness of former Ages had given it. In his Opuscula.
The Learned Scaliger has observed, that Geneva must be sounded the second
syllable short; and at this day in the Language of the Country it is pronounced
Zeneva.

Geneva is a City of great Antiquity; Munster calls it Mirae vetustatis Vrbem.
and were we not so informed by Authors, the Beauty and Commodiousness of its
Situation would incline us to believe it: for it is seated on a rising ground,
Situation of Geneva.
washed on one side by the Lake Leman and the Rhosne, which thence takes its
course; bordered with fruitful Plains and Mountains. Hence we may imagine, a
place so commodious, as well for necessity as delight, has drawn thither
Inhabitants at the same time the Country began to be cultivated. But Cities
and Persons have the same fate: The more any Family is anciently Noble, the
more difficult a matter it is to produce its Titles. Antiquity is as a dark
Night, whose obscurity cannot be dissipated, and in which a man can do nothing
but search about to no purpose. How many Fables do we find mixed with the
Original of Troy, Rome or Carthage? And if this has happened to such
flourishing States, what can be expected from mean ones, whose mishap having
been to have no Author to be the Guardian or Depositary of their History, they
have therefore lain in obscurity. Julius Caesar is the first who mentions
Geneva, yet there is no doubt, but it was then a City under Government, and a
place of strength, which kept one of the passages out of Gaul into Italy and
Germany: For it was undoubtedly the Interest of the Allobroges, or Inhabitants
of Gallia Transalpina, being neighbors to the Helvetians and Latobriges, a
people of Gallia Belgica, who held Switzerland and the Country of Vaud at that
time, to have a Fort, which should shelter them from the Incursions of this
warlike people, and might serve as a place of Traffic and Correspondence.

The Allobroges, Antiquity of Geneva.
whose chief City was Geneva, held a great part of the Alps and low Country
betwixt Rhosne and the Mountains. They were a valiant people, and had gained
great reputation by their courage; neither were they inferior to the rest of
the Gauls in Riches. Stephen de Byzance and Livy, who cannot be suspected of
flattery, give them these Elogies. Geneva then was a great while before
Caesar's time: And as well his silence, as other Authors, inclines us to
believe, that its Original was unknown. All that the Moderns have asserted
concerning this matter, is founded on an uncertain Author, and on a
Chronological Manuscript of the Country of Vaud, being about four hundred
years since it was written, as we may judge by the time which ends the
History. The Author of the Genevoise Citizen relates, that it was kept in his
time in the Castle of Chillon on the Lake; and there is now one there to be
seen, which perhaps is the same with that in the City of Orb in the Country
of Vaud. The little Book Printed at Lions in 1614. Entitled A Chronology of
the Country of Vaud, is an Epitome of it; and it is out of one or the other of
these, that the Manuscripts of the History of Geneva have taken out several
particulars relating to that City, which are not to be met with elsewhere.

Although to speak ingenuously, this Chronicle appears to be nothing else but a
slight exercise of some half-witted Scribler of former times, and therefore
deserves not much to be credited: howsoever, I shall here offer what he asserts
concerning the Foundation of Geneva, leaving the Reader to his own liberty to
judge and believe if he pleases that in these fabulous relations there is some
truth. See here then what he says.

In the year of the Worlds Creation 2729. and 1073. years after the Flood, the
great Hercules coming into Spain to go over into Italy, he passed near the Lake
which has been since called Leman, where seeing so fine a Country inhabited,
he left there one part of his Army which was sick, under the Command of
Arpentinus. This Captain liking the Country, built on the side of the Lake, a
City which he called Arpentras or Arpentrine, which was seated higher than
where lies now Lausanne (and in effect there yet may be seen some marks of a
City) this was founded in the year of the Worlds Creation 2730. and fifty three
years before the destruction of Troy.

Arpentinus was succeeded by his Son Rigo: after the destruction of Troy, when
Francus, Aeneas, Antenor, with many more, came to inhabit other Countries;
about which time Lemannus Paris's Son arrived in those parts with his Trojans,
driving out Rigo from Arpentras; and being in full possession, called the Lake
after his own Name, Leman. This Lemannus having reigned a considerable time,
was at length drove out from Arpentras by his own Subjects who rebelled against
him, and killed one of his Sons: whereupon he in revenge, having taken again
the City, demolished it; and seeking a new place whereon to build another, he
came to the end of the Lake, whence issues forth the Rhosne; and finding a
little Hill of (Genevriers, or) Shrubs, he lays there the foundations of a
City, which he called for this reason, Genevra or Genebra. This was in the year
of the Worlds Creation 2833. and fifty years after the destruction of Troy, and
three hundred seventy nine years before the Building of Rome, and eleven
hundred and thirty years before the Birth of our Savior. After Lemannus (who
dyed whilst they were building Geneva) his Son Eructonius reigned eight and
twenty years, leaving three Sons who divided the Kingdom betwixt them, viz.
Sequanus, Allobrox and Helvetius.

This Chronicle likewise makes mention of several other Kings of these
Countries, as Milius, Ergogus, Tigurus, Epantalus, Aviticus, Carphas and his
three Sons Conodus, Gavotus and Equester, Caturigus, Flenans, Arulus,
Centronius, Benevits, Algurus Ciricus and Oblius, who built a Fortress at
Geneva in the Isle of Rhosne. These names readily offer themselves for the
finding out the Founders of Cities, and the Etymology of the names of
Provinces: which gives us plainly to understand, that this is a History devised
at pleasure, seeing there are many of these Latin words, although that Tongue
was not known till some Ages after. Sequanus (says the Chronicle) gave his
name to the County of Burgundy, from whence the people were called Sequaeni:
Allobrox gave his name to the Country of the Allobroges; Equester to the
Country of Vaud, where was Colonia Equestris; Ergogus to that of Ergau;
Helvetius to that of Helvetia; Aventica, Helvetius his Concubine, to Avanche;
Centronius, to the Centrons, who are them of Tarantoise; Arulus, to Arles;
Gavotus, to Gavots; Benevits, to the City of the same name; and in short,
Ciricus, to St. Cierg^e.

Now that which I find the worst contrived in all this account, Derivation of
the word Geneva.
is the Etymology of the word Geneva, which it derives from Genevres, (or
Jumper Shrubs) with which this little Hill on which the City was built was
overspread; as if the Latin or French Tongue were spoken four Ages before Rome
was built; for the word Genevre comes from the Latin Juniperus: So it is also
with the word Equestris, which was never heard of in the Country of Vaud till
Caesur's time, as we shall have occasion to mention hereafter.

Not that this great Antiquity of eight and twenty Ages need be suspected,
seeing there are Cities, as that of Athens, ancienter by five hundred years:
But we are never obliged to believe without proof; neither do we find Homer to
mention Lemannus Paris his Son, although it may well be expected, he should say
something of him, to inform us of the posterity of that Hero in his Poem. It Is
certainly a very idle humor of some people, who would needs persuade the
World, their Ancestors were sprung from the Ashes of Troy, and were no less
than Founders of Cities; as if Troy had been sufficient to people all the
World, after it self had been ruined.

Be it how it will concerning these eleven Ages before the coming of our
Savior, we read of no considerable matters or Warlike feats performed by the
Genevoises during that time, but what we have from this Chronicle: They laid
waste the City of Benevits, which stood distant from that place where now
stands Nyons, because it would Lord it over the neighboring Countries, and
exact Tribute. It adds, that this Oblius dyed without Children, and left all
these Countries to the disposal of their own people, who by this means became
free and under no Monarchy.

The Genevoises had the advantage of the Lake and the Rhosne, The Genevoises
formidable to the Romans.
which served them instead of Ditches, and the Alps which sheltered them as
Ramparts. They separated them especially from the Romans, whose neighborhood
was chiefly to be feared, and against whom they have signalized their Valor
with the rest of the Allobrogeses, who extended their Borders as far as Isere.
The Air of the Mountains which they breathed, and the ignorance of carnal
delights, which renders us soft and effeminate, made them Warlike and Dreadful
to their Neighbors. The Romans have tried them sufficiently in their Wars
against them. The first proof which they gave of their Courage, was under the
Consul Marcus Fulvius, in the year six hundred twenty eight from the Building
of Rome, and one hundred twenty five years before the Birth of our Savior.
125. years before the Birth of our Savior.
The Auvergnats and them of Rouergue were joined with the Allobroges. The
Romans bragged they had defeated them, though it is certain the Consul obtained
not the Triumph; which is a sufficient proof, that the loss on the Gauls side
was not great; and in effect the War broke out again three years after, and the
Allobroges raised greater Forces. 122. years before our Savior.
They fought the Romans near Orange, not far from the place where the Sorgue
discharges it self into the Rhosne: the Romans got the Victory by a Stratagem,
after they had for a long time vigorously disputed it. They had brought with
them Elephants, which they had caused to march against the Allobroges,
believing the Gauls, having never seen them, would be affrighted, as it indeed
fell out; their Horses being startled, set a running, after the same manner as
it had happened heretofore to the Romans themselves, when Pyrrhus, who first
brought them into Italy, fought against them so bloody a Battle, in which they
were overthrown: the Gauls lost in this Conflict twenty thousand men, and
Bituitus King of Auvergne one of their chiefest Captains was taken Prisoner,
and led away in Triumph by the Consul Domitius Ahenobarbus, to whom the care of
this War was committed. Notwithstanding this overthrow, the Allobroges who had
been overcome rather by their Enemies Craft, Paul. Orose.
than through their own want of Courage, took again the Field the year
following with their Confederates, and advanced as far as Isere, offering the
Romans Battle. The Consul Fabius Maximus who was General, lost his Quartan Ague
in the heat of the fight, and accompanied with his usual good fortune, obtained
a signal Victory. Twenty six thousand Gauls were cut in pieces, and the Consul
obtained the glorious Title of Allobrogick, and the great Triumph at his return
to Rome. There might have been seen not many years since in the Village of
Versoy, about a League distant from Geneva, an old Marble Stone, on which was
engraven the Elogy of the Conqueror of the Allobroges.

Caesar has observed in the Conference which he had with Arioviste, that after
this Victory, the Romans generously forgave the Auvergnats and them of
Rouergue, not exacting of them any Tribute, nor so much as reducing them into a
Province. From whence, it is likely, that the Allobroges, who were their Allies
in this War, were no worse used: and that the Romans considering them rather as
Friends than Vassals, did let them live after their own manner, and protected
them against the insultings of their neighbors.

For not long after, 108. years before the Birth of our Savior.
the Tigurits, who are they of the Canton of Zurich, had made themselves
formidable, and ceased not to molest them, the Romans sent their Consul Lucius
Cassius to repel the Tigurins into their own Country; The Genevoises
protected by the Romans against the Switzers.
but he himself was defeated and slain near Geneva. Lucius Piso his Lieutenant
General and Father-in-law to Caesar, had the same fortune; and from that time
the Tigurins having joined with the Teutons, Cimbres and Ambrons, made dreadful
havoc in Gaul, and often beat the Romans, till such time as they were subdued
by the Consul Marius, who having slain great multitudes of them, 102. years
before the Birth of our Savior.
forced the rest to return into their own Country; by which means he secured
the Allobroges, who lay most in danger by their incursions.

About forty years after the Allobroges took up Arms again against the Romans,
60. years before our Savior.
wasting Gaul Narbonnoise: the Senate sent the Praetor Pomptinus, who caused
Vence to be besieged (a considerable City of the Voconces) by Manlius Ventinus;
but he was forced to raise his Siege and depart after he had wasted the
Country. Catugnatus who commanded the Allobroges, came to help the Voconces,
and falls into an Ambuscade laid for him by Ventinus. Pomptinus marches toward
the Country of the Allobroges, and after some skirmishes with Catugnatus, he
subdues them, who remained from that time faithful to the Romans.

Two years after, 58. years before our Savior, Helvetians invade the Gauls.
the Helvetians thinking themselves pent up in their own Country, invaded the
Gauls, burning their Towns and Villages with an Army of ninety two thousand
men, besides old people and children, which in all were about three hundred
sixty eight thousand souls. They first began with the Allobroges, pretending
only to pass thorough their Country, but were timely prevented by Julius
Caesar, who was then Proconsul of Gaul; who, as soon as he had notice given
him, raised Soldiers and came to Geneva, where he makes all necessary
preparation to stop this Torrent. There was in this City a Bridge to pass over
into the Country of the Helvetians. Caesar caused it to be broken down to
hinder the Enemies from coming into the Country of the Allobroges and the rest
of the Gauls.

The Helvetians having heard that Caesar was come, sent Ambassadors to him at
Geneva, showing him they had no design upon any of the Countries belonging to
the Romans, intending only to pass thorough them. Caesar remembering how they
had used Lucius Casstus and Lucius Piso his Father-in-law, There are some marks
of this to be seen near Gingin about a league from Nyons, and four leagues from
Geneva.
thought it not convenient to grant their request. Howsoever, that he might be
better provided, he desires time to deliberate, and that they would return to
him some few days after: In the mean time he gathers what Forces he could, and
passing the Rhosne, he employes his Army in the making a Wall sixteen foot
high, and about twenty thousand foot in length, with a Ditch of the same extent.

The day which he had appointed them being come, he absolutely refuses their
request: and this was the beginning of that bloody War described by Caesar
himself in his Commentaries, but which belongs not to our subject. Julius
Caesar's name yet retained in diverse Families at Geneva.


There are yet some Remains of this great Prince (who by degrees made himself
absolute Lord of the Roman Republic) in the Names of diverse of the Families of
the Julius's at Geneva, which may be seen there in several ancient
Inscriptions. There are mentioned one Cajus Julius Caesar Longinus a Freeman
of this Emperor, and Quintus Julius Sergius, Julius Macrinus, and Julius
Brocchus an Aedile and one of the Duumviri, as also Julius Marcianus, Julius
Capito, Julia Vera, and Titus Julius Valerianus, Overseer of the Public
Buildings. Although perhaps not one of these were nearly related to him; yet
this shows at least, that he had brought many Romans with him thither,
especially them of his own Family, of which he himself was at that time the
greatest.

We must not here omit one Historical passage, of which ancient Authors have
taken no notice; which is, that after the overthrow of the Swedes, and spoil of
the whole Country of Vaud, which was then comprehended under the name of Pagus
Vrbigenus, to whom the City of Orb gave that name: these parts were extremely
depopulated; A Roman Colony sent to Geneva.
which caused Julius Caesar to send a Colony thither, either to furnish the
Country again with Inhabitants, or else to withstand the Helvetians, in case
they should again set upon the Gauls. Now the greatest strength of this Colony
lying in their Cavalry, they were hence called Colonia Equestris, or Civitas
Equestrium, the Colony or Commonalty of the Equestres, as we find it in the
four ancient Inscriptions which are at Geneva; and in a fifth Julia Equestris;
which is an evident proof, that Julius Caesar had founded it. Deseruere cavo
tentoria fixa Lemanno.
For when the Civil War broke out between him and Pompey, he sent for the
Troops which quartered near the Lake Leman, Lucan.
to assist him.

Geneva kept firm thenceforward to the Emperors who succeeded Julius Caesar;
and the Stones which are yet to be seen there engraven in honor of several
Emperors, witness as much. Some there are which are dedicated to Augustus,
others to Trajan, Antoninus, Marc. Aurelius and Trebonian, which we shall
recite at the end of this History. There is also mention of several Roman
Magistrates who administered Justice after the same manner as in other Colonies.
There were likewise Sextumviri, who were six men established since Augustus's
Reign; also Duumviri to determine Cases of Equity, and Surveyors of Public
Buildings; Prelates and Pagan Priests, and every thing else which the Religion
and Custom of the Romans were wont to bring into conquered Contreys. There were
also to be seen on these ancient Marble Stones several kind of Vows engraven to
Jupiter, Mars and Apollo, whom they worshipped before the coming of the Romans,
after the manner of the other Gauls, under the name of Tamaris, Theautate and
Belenus. The little Rock in the Lake served instead of an Altar, which was
dedicated to Neptune God of the Watery Element: And it is from his name, that the
Rock called Neiton has been derived. There Is to be seen on the biggest (for
there are two near one another) a hollow place which has been cut to kindle
therein the fire for Sacrifices; and it is not long since some Fishermen found
at the foot of it two small Hatchets and a Brass Knife, which is the same which
they called then Securis and Secespita, to cut the throats of those Beasts they
sacrificed.

To finish what may be said of Geneva in the time of Heathenism, it is certain
that in Marc. Geneva burnt in Marc. Aurelius his time.
Aurelius's Reign the City was wholly burnt, he having taken upon him the care
to have it built anew. Others say, this was done under Heliogabalus, who
likewise was called Marc. Aurelius. There are some, who attribute its
rebuilding to Aurelian: Neither is it to be doubted, but that nearness of Names
has occasioned this confusion in History. There Is yet to be seen at Geneva an
Inscription of Marc. Aurelius, which gives some credit to our first conjecture;
for Heliogabalus reigned so little a while, and behaved himself so unworthily
and cruelly, that this alone is sufficient to carry us off from believing he
had the least thought to become Benefactor to a City, for which he had not any
kindness.

The Annual Manuscripts of Geneve which are not very old, 274. years before our
Savior.
and the Author called the Citizen relate, that when Aurelian had conquered
Tetricus, Geneva rebuilt.
he rebuilt Geneva and Orleans; to which he gave the name of Aureliana; but
after his death the former of these Cities took again its name of Geneva. But
all this is uncertain; being not founded on the testimony of any ancient
Author. Sabellicus is perhaps the first who has brought it to light in these
last Ages: Sunt qui Gebennas in Allobrogibus ab eo conditas expeditione illa
Gallica dicant.
There are some, says he, who assert, that Geneva was then built by Aurelian
during the War with the Gauls, he means rebuilt: It Is added likewise, that
this Emperor granted to Geneva several neighboring Lordships, Fairs and
Privileges, which made it famous, and occasioned its being called Emporium
Allobrogum. But of all the Gifts the Romans bestowed on them, I find none more
remarkable or advantageous, than that of a Roman Lord named Lucius Julius
Brocchus, which I read in a neat Inscription which Mr. Godefrey caused to be
brought into his House from the Channon's Street: In my opinion it is the
curiousest Monument of Antiquity to be seen in this City; and which deserves to
be kept as the greatest treasure, See the Inscriptions.
in the Common Hall. Guichenon mentions it in his History of Savoy, but
carelessly according to his manner.

The Situation of Geneva in former times, Situation of Geneva.
and before the coming of our Savior, and in the following Ages, was as we
shall describe it: Its Walls reached no higher than the height of the little
Hill on which S. Peter's and other Streets are built: they were triangular,
after the same manner as the City. The Gate of the Castle above the Borough de
Four, which was one of the Gates of the City, made one point of this Triangle.
The second Corner was where has since been built the Bishop's Palace: and the
third was on the highest part of the City, near the Buildings which were called
heretofore Boyaus Tower. Turris Botuli.
So that the circuit of the Walls, was from the Gates of the Castle, and
reached behind S. Peter's Church, very near the foundations; and so went
thorough Perron's Street, where it is likely there was a Gate to come down to
the Lake; from thence it reached the length of the Channon's Gardens, where
there still remain some marks in the ruins: and going through the Pelisserie,
they extend to that place which they call the City corner; where may yet be
seen the ruins of a Gate: from whence it appears, that the Wall was as high as
that Hill which reached to the Castle Gate, and was of the same height with
those Houses at this day to be seen where the large Palace stood: And in effect
the ancient Buildings in that part of the City, have Walls in thickness equal
to most Cities. There might likewise probably be a Gate on the Walk leading to
the large Palace. The Castle Gate was so called, because through it was the
ready way to the Castle of Gaillard, the usual Dwelling House of the Earls of
Geneva. The Borough of Four in ancient times was only the Suburbs; which in the
Language of Savoy, were called Borg de Feur, which is to say, an Outward
Borough: from whence has remained to it the Name of Bourg de Four. The low
Streets which are now called Les Rivieres, because they were near the Bank of
the Lake, and the adjacent parts of S. Magdalene, and the lowest places of the
City, were not then, as now, in the Heart of the Town; and the Buildings
afterward raised, were always heretofore accounted but as Suburbs. Since that
time, the City has enlarged it self; and there is still to be seen near
Longemale a great Arch, called the Ivory Arch; not that the Gate was Ivory, as
some have imagined; but because it was the Gate which led to Yvoire, which is a
Borough three Leagues distant from Geneva on the Lakes Bank on the side of
Chablais. The Suburb of S. Victor, which was on the same side with de Rive, was
demolished in the time of the Wars with Savoy, and Fortifications raised in its
stead.

THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA.
BOOK II.
From the Birth of our Savior to the Year 1536.
THE time when first Geneva received the Christian Faith has been hitherto no
less uncertain, Geneva first received the Christian Faith.
than the Original of that City. Observe here what the ancient Chronological
Manuscripts written sixscore years since do tell us: Whilst the people of
Geneva (say they) were wholly addicted to Heathenish Superstitions, our Savior
desirous of their Conversion, sent thither first Nazarius S. Peter's Disciple,
who converted amongst others, a young man a Genevois named Celsus; who was
baptized and sealed with his Blood the testimony of the Gospel, having suffered
Martyrdom a while after together with Nazarius. It Is thought they were buried
in S. Gervais; for which reason the next Street joining to the Church has
taken its name, from their bodies being interred there. The Manuscripts, and
after them the Author called the Citizen do add, That the Christian Faith newly
planted, was watered by the industry of Paracodus, or Paradocus, one of our
Saviors Seventy Disciples, who came over into Gaul with Denis the Areopgite;
that having together founded the Church of Geneva, Denis went to Paris, and
Paradocus tarried at Geneva. This is the tradition of former Ages, in which
there appears nothing of solidity. These Chronologists seem plainly to have
taken this Story of Nazarius and Celsus out of the Golden Legend, which relates
these two Saints came to a City of the Gauls called Gemellus, and were there
Martyred and Buried at Milan.

I cannot well understand how they should take Gemellus for Geneva: this is
certain, that S. Nazare has been heretofore the Patron of the City of Autun,
where there is yet a Church which is dedicated to him and S. Celse; it is
called by the name of S. Nazaire. There was to be seen an ancient Coin which
confirms it; seeing we read on one side of it S. Nazarius, and on the other
Hedua Civitas, which is the City of Autun: Amongst Monsieur de Peiresk's Papers.
The Learned Monsieur Petau was of this mind, thinking the resemblance between
Nazare and Lazare, had caused them of Autun in time to receive S. Lazarus for
their Patron; whom they would make us believe, dyed in their City soon after
his arrival in Provence: all which has no other foundation, but an uncertain
tradition.

Concerning Denis and Paracodus, 194. years after our Savior.
observe what is said of them; in the year of our Redemption 194. according to
Baronius, Victor Bishop of Rome wrote to Didier Bishop of Vienna touching the
Celebration of the Feast of Easter: This Didier was succeeded by Denis, who was
followed by Paracodus, 198.
to whom Victor wrote to the same effect. So that here is already a great
mistake, to believe that Denis and Paracodus first planted the Christian Faith
at Geneva: for seeing they were both Bishops of Vienna, then chief City of the
Allobroges, it is hence most likely, they sent some to Geneva to preach the
Gospel, it lying in their Circuit: But that which gives greater confirmation,
is what has been found written in an old Manuscript Parchment Bible in the
Library at Geneva, viz. Genevensis Ecclesia a discipulis Apostolorum Paracodo
ac Dionysio fundata Viennensibus Episcopis: that is to say, 194.
Paracodus and Denis Bishops of Vienna, who have founded the Church at Geneva,
were called the Apostles Disciples, because they taught the same Doctrine. So
that Paracodus could not be one of the Seventy Disciples, seeing he lived
toward the end of the second Century. Likewise some would make him
Contemporary with S. Irenaeus who was Bishop of Lions, and suffered Martyrdom
under the Emperor Severus, about the end of the same Age, before which time
the Gospel had made but small progress in Gaul, as we may read in Gregory of
Tours.

At the end of this forementioned Manuscript Bible there is a list of the
names of Bishops of Geneva, Sundry Bishops of Geneva.
which is now almost worn out, with these three Verses toward the end of it.

Hos mensae Christi constat libamine pasci,
Vascula terra Dei proprio de sanguine facti,
In templo Domini prisca de Gente notati.
The first we meet with in this Catalogue of Bishops, In the third and fourth
Century.
is Diogenus, the next Domnus, whom they of S. Martha call Dominius, and so in
order Salvianus, Cassianus, Eleutherius, Theolastus, Fraternicus, Pallascus,
all which flourished about the third and fourth Century; but we know nothing
more of them than their names.

The fourth Century was lamentable to several Countries, by the Invasions of
those Nations which began to tear the Roman Empire. Geneva cruelly suffered, so
that in a Council held at Turin in the year 397. 397.
there was care taken for its reparation: And from that time increasing in
Authority, it presided over the neighboring Countries, even to the Alps; it
being agreed in this Council, that the Bishops of Metropolitan Cities should be
acknowledged Primates of their respective Provinces: 426.
so that the Primate of Geneva had under him the Chablaises and Genevoises.
About the beginning of the next Century after the death of Theodosius, the
Vandals overran the Gauls, one part of them settling themselves in the Country
of Vaud, to which it is thought they gave the name. 440.
They built likewise several Borroughs, which occasioned their being called
Bourguignons, at which time there was one Isaac, called by others Isarius
Bishop of Geneva, whom S. Euchere mentions in the Life of S. Maurice.

These Bourguignons established a Kingdom amongst them, 466.
whose first King was Gundicaire or Gonderic; who dying, divided his Realm
between his four Sons. Gondebaud had Vienna; Chilperic, Lions; Godesigile,
Geneva; and Gotmar, Besancon. Sidonius Apollinaris, who lived in those times,
gave them the name of Tetrarchs.

These Brethren being at variance, Chilperic and Gotmar drove Gondebaud from
his Territories; but he having vanquished them, returns; in which conflict
Gotmar was slain, courageously defending himself. Chilperic who was taken
Prisoner was beheaded, and his Wife thrown into the Rhosne; But some years
after Clouis King of France, having espoused Clotilde Chilperic's Daughter,
that he might be revenged on Gondebaud for his cruelty, proclaims War against
him. Godesigile, to whose share Geneva had fallen, joined with Clouis against
his Brother Gondebaud, who being vanquished, was forced to receive Laws from
the Conqueror. He therefore renders himself Tributary to Clouis, and left
Vienna to Godesigile: but Gondebaud re-took Vienna, and the wretched Godesigile
was slain in a Church by the Sword. Clouis moved at this barbarous action,
drove out Gondebaud, and gave his Son Sigismond the Kingdom. 'Twas this
Sigismond who founded on the Alps S. Maurice's Monastery, which foundation was
subscribed by Maximus Bishop of Geneva. This same Emperor caused to assemble
the Council called Ponense, Paunense or Epaunense, 517.
as Mr. Chorier has very well observed in his History of Dauphine and after
him, the Abbot in his Epitome of Councils, at Ponas near Vienna in Dauphine.
Maximus was also at this Council: His Successor Pappulus was present at that of
Orleans. After him, 549.
the Manuscript Bible before mentioned, recites Gregorius, Nicetius, Rusticus,
Patricius, Hugo the First, Andreas, Graecus and Domitianus, whom they of S.
Martha call Donatianus. There is an Inscription in S. Victor relating to this
Council, which is this, Haec acta sunt Episcopo Genevensi Domitiano; These
things were done when Domitian was Bishop of Geneva. 'Twas also in his time the
Body of S. Victor was transported from Soleurre to Geneva. 570.
Salonius his Successor was present at the Council of Lions and Paris. 573.
There has been a Bishop of Geneva of the same name in the last Age: The
Bishop of Geneva writ himself Salonius Episcopus Genavensis.

After him succeeded Cariatho one of the Domestics of King Gontran of
Burgundy. This King increased the Church Revenues, and was the Founder of S.
Peter's Cathedral. Monsieur Morus the Author of an Harangue, Entitled, De
duobus Genevae Miraculis, proves by some passages out of Avitus's Homilies,
that it was he who consecrated that Church, there being there before a Temple
dedicated to Apollo: But the building was intermitted till the year 990 at
which time the Emperor Othon caused it to be continued, and Conradus finished
it in the year 1024. But I doubt whether we ought to credit those Chronological
Manuscrips, which relate, that under the Reign of Gontran, a certain City named
Taurodinum, was overthrown into the Rhosne by an Earthquake; whose course being
stopped, there followed such a great Inundation, that it ran over the Walls of
Geneva. But there is not so much as any single Geographer who mentions this
City. Monsieur la Mothe le Vayer relates the matter after a different manner,
and more likely to be true. Marius, says he, Bishop of Laufare, reports in his
Chronicle, that the Hill which he calls Tauretunensem in Valay, fell so
suddenly on a Castle and neighboring Buroughs, President Fauchel mentions it.
that it overwhelmed all the Inhabitants, being followed with such an
Inundation of Water, as very much damnified the City of Geneva. Appellinus,
whom some call Abelenus, succeeded Cariatho: The Legend of S. Columban Abbot of
Lussienx mentions him, he lived till the year 613. 613.


The French King Clotairius the Second drove out the Burgundians from the
Country of the Allobroges, 620.
and settled Magistrates at Geneva. Theodorick second Son to the French King
builds several Churches in Geneva.
Dagobert his Son succeeded him, and Theodoric second Son to Dagobert, built
several Churches, according to the relation of Volfangus Lazius; whose words
are these, Theodoricus secundus ultimus Merovingiorum in Burgundia, qui cum ex
Brunchilde uxore nihil procreasset, multa pro fulcienda sancta religione apud
Gebennam fundavit. Theodorick the Second was the last King of the Franks in
Burgundy, who having no Children by his Wife Brunchilde, erected several
Churches and Religious Houses in Geneva.

Soon after the death of Dagobert, 650.
Pappolus the Second, whom some call Paulus, and the Centuriators of
Magdebourg, Papulus Genuensis, was present at the Council of Chalons. The Book
called the Citizene, tells us, there was one remained at Geneva, to reconcile
the people of the Country of Vavx with them of New Castle in the year 726. 726.
who was succeeded by Robertus, Aridanus, Epoaldus, Albo, Huportunus,
Eucherius, Gilabertus, whom they of S. Martha call Gubertus, Renembertus,
Leutherius and Galbertus, who held that Seat sixteen years, and whom some call
Postbertus.

Toward the end of the eighth Century, 773.
Charlemain came to Geneva, Rhegino, Abbot Genuam Civitatem veniens Synodum
tenuit, and Charlemain comes to Geneva and sets up there his own Statue.
where he called a Council of War about his passing into Italy, against Didier
King of the Lombards: He confirmed the Liberties and Privileges of Geneva,
both in Church and State; and caused to be set up on the great Gate of S. Peter
his own Statue of Marble, and under it an Imperial Eagle with two heads: the
Eagle remains yet to be seen. Some say it was Conradus the Second who caused it
to be carved and set up, when he had finished the Church. 816.
The following Bishops were Valternus, who held the Seat six and thirty years,
Apradus the First, whom some call Artaldus or Cataldus, About the year 860.
Domitianus the Second: Boso held the Bishopric but seventeen Months: after
him Ansegisus, half of whose Epitaph is yet to be seen in a Marble Stone, taken
out of the ruins of S. Victor's Church. The Chronological Manuscripts of
Geneva inform us, he was the same who was Archbishop of Sens: but they of S.
Martha affirm the contrary, saying he was buried in the Church of Sens, where
his Epitaph is yet to be seen. They call the aforementioned Bishop of Geneva
Anseguinus, contrary to the Manuscripts and Marble Inscriptions which we shall
produce at the end of the Book. The Centuriatours of Magdebourg term Ansegisus
only Archbishop of Sens; saying, that he was declared Primate of Gaul in the
year 876. 876.
The Author called the Citizen, tells us, the Bishop of Geneva dyed in the year
840. but then there would be too great an Interregnum between him and his
Successor Optandus, who was not Consecrated before the year 881. His mistake
lies in taking Ansegisus, who has written a Summary of Charlemain, and was but
an Abbot, for him; resemblance of names oftentimes occasioning confusion in
History.

The Allobroges having been for a long time under Emperors after the death of
the Kings of Burgundy (which were) Transiurane Gundicaire and his Successors,
they fell again under the power of the new Kingdom of Burgundy, of which Boson
of Vienna was the first King; who sometimes took upon him the Title of King of
Burgundy, otherwhiles that of Vienna; after the same manner as his Successors
Lewis, Hugo, Rodolphus I. Conradus and Rodolphus II. with whom ended this
Kingdom in the year 1032.

The Geneva Manuscripts in this particular are full of fabulous relations,
mentioning one Boson the Second, who, in fighting against the Genevoises, was
slain; whereas there has been but one of that name. This State of Burgundy,
says Monsieur Chorior in his History of Dauphiny, after the death of Rodolphus
the Second called the Sluggard, fell into a confused Anarchy; the Prelates
making themselves Masters in the Cities of their Residency, and Earls in their
Jurisdictions. The German Emperors not being able to hinder their Usurpations,
were forced to agree with them, and gave them in trust, what they saw was
impossible to get out of their hands: and from hence has happened, (to apply
this more particularly to Geneva) the Original of those Differences and Feuds
betwixt the Bishops and Earls of that City.

During the ninth and tenth Ages, after Ansegisus the Bishops of Geneva were
Optandus or Apradus II. consecrated by Pope John the VIII. as we gather by the
Letters of this Pope to the Genevoises, after whom succeeded Bernardus,
Riculphus, Fraudo, 879.
Aldagundus or Aldagandus I. Aymo I. Girardus I. Hugo II. who joined S. Victors
Monastery at Geneva to the Church of Clugny by the consent of Rodolphus King of
Burgundy, 930.
and his Brother Burchard Archbishop of Lions, 1050.
Conradus, Aldagundus the Second, Bernardus the Second, and Frederick, who was
present at the Dedication of the Church called S. Stevens of Besancon by the
Popes order, who was Leo the Ninth. Frederick was Bishop according to the
account of them of S. Martha thirty seven years, and according to the Annals of
Geneva fifty years. Borsadus who succeeded him, exercised the Episcopal
Government but five years.

This is the Epitome of the eleven first Ages since the coming of our Savior,
and is in a manner all we can learn of them: Now the reason of this is, because
the City has been several times burnt, as in the years 1291, 1321, 1334, 1430.

The following Ages will yield us more matter, 1050.
through the ambition of three Lords, Three Lords lay claim to Geneva.
who would become Masters of Geneva: Which three, were the Bishop, the Earl of
Genevois, and the Earl of Savoy, who have several times brought it near to
destruction: But this their striving who should become Masters of it, has been
a means to continue its Privileges and Liberties as an Imperial City, which
the Magistracy claims time out of mind, as well by the death of Oblius, who
left his Countries free; as also by the privilege of a Roman Colony under the
first Emperors, and by a Confirmation from Charlemain. For they tell us, the
Kings of Burgundy were Usurpers. It belongs not to me to decide the contrary
Pretensions of these three above mentioned Lords: Guichenon and other Authors,
call the Earls of Genevois, Earls of Geneva; which is contrary to several
ancient Titles of these Earls, which name them Comites Gebennesii, and not
Gebennenses; for it is well known that Gebennesium is Genevois, which is
separate from the Jurisdiction of Geneva. But it is very likely some have taken
upon them this Title, as may be seen on an ancient Coin of an Earl, who lived
about the year 1370. who called himself Petrus Comes Gebennensis, which the
Bishops have resented ill, especially John Lewis of Savoy.

The first Wars wherein Geneva was concerned, happened since the twelfth
Century, upon occasion of Wido Bishop of Geneva's Grant to his Brother Ame.
1120.
They were both Sons to an Earl of Genevois, whose posterity for above five
hundred years had possessed this Lordship. The Bishops would have these Earls
to be but only as Bailiffs in Genevois; but Wido, to strengthen his Family,
gave his Brother in this Investiture, besides his Paternal Inheritance, several
Villages and Castles belonging to the Diocese of Geneva, as Bonmont and
Hautecombe, and what Temporal Offices he had in the City, making him his
Rent-Gatherer or Bailiff.

Wido or Guido who was Bishop fifty years, and had been present at the Council
of Tournus in the year 1117. dying in 1120. the same year Humbert of Gramont
was chose in his place, who would not consent to the Grant bestowed on Ame Earl
of Genevois by his Brother, saying, He could not consent to the Churches wrong:
So that the quarrel increasing betwixt the Earl and Bishop, the Council
endeavored to make them friends: but their obstinacy hindering, the Archbishop
of Vienna, Disagreement between the Earl of Genevois, and Bishop of Geneva.
Metropolitan of the Province, and Apostolical Legate, being deputed for that
purpose, united them. The chief Articles were as follows; First, That the
Bishop should have the Administration of Justice and Lordship in the City, the
Coining of Money and Confiscations of Estates, as likewise the Fines of those
who had dwelt a year and a day at Geneva: That the Earl should not build any
Fort without the Bishops consent: That he should have a Vidame or Lieutenant
for Secular Affairs: That he should moreover do Homage to the Bishop, not
respecting any one but the Emperor before him; and several other Articles
touching Toll, 1124.
Forfeitures and Fines. This Treaty was carried on at Seyssell in the year 1124.

After the death of Humbert of Gramont, Ar dutius a Lords Son of Foucigny was
elected Bishop of Geneva. Bernard who was then Abbot of Clervaux, and who was
afterward Canonized, lived in his time, and wrote two Letters to him, which
were very remarkable, in these terms, calling him Ardutius.

To Ardutius Elect Bishop of Geneva. Bernard. Epist. 27.

BEing persuaded your Election comes from God, The first Letter.
seeing you have been chosen by such an unanimous consent of both Clergy and
Laity, we therefore congratulate you for the Grace bestowed on you. I will not
flatter you, saying God has recompensed your merits; for you ought rather to
think, it is not in consideration of your Righteousness, but his Mercy. If you
look upon it otherwise, (which God forbid) your rise will be your fall. If you
acknowledge his Grace, take heed lest you have received it in vain. Be holy in
your Life and Office; and if Holiness of Life did not precede your Election, at
least let it follow it. Then we shall acknowledge God has prevented you by his
Grace; and we hope you will increase and grow in it. We rejoice that you have
been established as a faithful and prudent Servant over your Lords household,
that you may be one day possessed (as a Son) of all your Fathers Inheritance.
Otherwise if you mind more the making your self Great than Good, you may rather
expect to be punished, than rewarded. But we wish and desire of God this may
never happen; being ready to assist you according to our small power, in every
thing which is meet and reasonable.


To Ardutius.
CHarity has inspired me with the boldness to tell you the Seat (dear Brother)
which you have lately obtained, Second Letter.
requires a man of great merit, which we are sorry to find wanting in you; or
at least, not to have preceded your Election, as was sitting. In truth, your
passed conversation has not been like that of one who was to take upon him the
Episcopal charge. But how! Cannot God from these stones raise up Children to
Abraham? Is not God able to make those virtuous actions which should have
preceded, to follow afterward? Which we shall hear with joy, if it so happens:
This sudden change from the hand of God, will be more acceptable and
surprising, than if it had preceded by the merits of a passed life. We shall
acknowledge it is the work of the Lord, and a work worth our admiration. So S.
Paul from a Persecutor, became the Doctor of the Gentiles: and S. Matthew taken
from being a Publican, to be an Apostle; and S. Ambrose from the Court, to the
Dignity of a Bishop. Nay, we have known some Seculars enter upon this Charge to
the Churches great advantage. In short, it has often happened, that where Sin
has abounded, Grace also has super abounded: You then, dear Brother, being
animtated by these examples, gird up the loins of your mind; amend your Life
and Studies; call your self to an account at night for what you have done amiss
in the day; endeavor to imitate S. Paul, in being an honor to your Office;
You will bring honor to it by Gravity in your Ma^ners, and Deliberation in
your Counsels, and Justice in your Actions: these are the chief ornaments of a
Bishop. S. Bernard recommends to the Bishop the Religiouses of the two
Monasteries in his Diocese.
Do all things by deliberate, counsel: Take only advice of virtuous people: Let
such have the management of your affairs, who may (...) be (...) of your holy
conversation. And in so doing, you will procure a good esteem. We recommend to
your Charity our poor Brethren near you, namely, them of Bonmont and
Hautecombe; by which means, you may give us proofs of your love toward us and
your neighbors.


THE Bishop Ardutius, as well as his Predecessor, had enough to do to withstand
the Earl of Genevois; who being a Secular Prince, would not acknowledge any
dependence on the Bishop and Chapter of Geneva, possessing himself of several
Lands and Jurisdictions belonging to them; so that Ardutius was forced to have
recourse to the Emperor Frederick Barberossa, who procured him the Popes Bull
for confirmation of all his Rights.

Some time after this, 1153.
he made an agreement with Ame Earl of Genevois, to the same effect as his
Predecessor had done before him; and in the year following, mention being made
of the Earls Office or Duty, it was expressed in these terms, Comes fidelis
Advocatus sub Episcopo esse debet; the Earl ought to be the Bishops faithful
Steward. Which was further confirmed by a Bull from Pope Adrian the Third given
at Lateran. 1157.
But the same Emperor who had made such a Grant to Ardutius, gave to the Duke
of Zeringuen the Sovereignty over three Cities; namely, Syon, Lausane and
Geneva. Ame the Second the deceased Earl Ame's Son, who departed this life in
the year 1162^ 1162.
having insinuated himself into this Dukes favor, had obtained of him the
Sovereignty of Geneva; at which Ardutius being alarmed, goes directly to the
Emperor, who was then at Besancon, to whom he represents the Churches Rights;
and so prevailed on the Emperor, that he repealed this Donation by two express
Declarations, as granted by surprise. Which Declarations may be seen at large
in the Book called the Citizen. This Bishop appeared mighty zealous for the
Rights of the Church; but in truth, he designed chiefly thereby his own private
interest. The Emperor remitting the sole Authority and Rule to the Bishop,
thought to preserve the Town under a good Pastor; and by this means, to keep
off Strangers from all pretensions to it. The Bishops of Geneva's claim of
Sovereignty over Geneva.
Whilst in the mean time, on these Privileges and Concessions, these Bishops
have strengthened their claims of Sovereignty over this City; which, say they,
the Citizens have consented to without contradiction, which they would never
have suffered, had it been against their minds. To which they of these last
Ages, who will not acknowledge their Sovereignty, have answered in the Book
called the Citizen, and in their Chronological Manuscripts, (...)
that the Bishops have never had any other right to Geneva, but as Governors
of the Chruch, to which belonged the City and suburbs, according to an ancient
Decree recited by the Author of the Citizen, Notorium quod Ecclesia Gebennensis
domina est and princeps unica in solidum civitatis and suburbii Gebennensis. It
is well known, that the Church of Geneva is the only Dady and Princess of the
City and Suburbs of Geneva. That the Bishop himself when chosen, was sworn to
maintain the Privileges and Liberties of Geneva; that the great confidence
they had put in their Bishops, was the cause why they took no more notice of
the encroachments on their Liberties; that the Emperor could neither grant to
the Duke of Zeringuen, nor to Bishops, the Sovereignty of an Imperial City as
theirs was, without the suffrage of the whole Empire: That even when the
Bishops were in most credit, it then appeared, that the right of Sovereignty
was in the people: That the Bishop was chief after the same manner as the Dukes
of Venice and Geno^a, for all public Acts and Declarations ran in the names of
the Bishop, his Vidame (or Steward) the Syndicks and other good Men of the
City. The Bishop was chosen by the Laity as well as Clergy. His Chapter
consisted of thirty two Chanons of S. Peter's Church, the greatest part of which
were Civilians; he had moreover for Assistants in Secular matters, four
Syndicks, twenty Counselors at Law, and one Treasurer, who were all chosen by
the people: To these twenty five were added thirty five more, to advise with,
upon any important occurrence; and from hence they have risen to the present
number of two hundred, and have at length extended to the ta king in one out of
every chief Family in the City. The Bishop was obliged to confirm whatsoever
passed. They have farther affirmed, that the Syndicks had power to coin Money,
and the care and charge of the Town without the Bishops intermedling, the
Jurisdiction and Imprisonment in the Night, and Sovereign Judgment in matters
of Life and Death, provided the Prisoners were not Ecclesiastics. That in
Cases which called for Mercy, the Bishop had power of pardoning, but rather by
his Episcopal and Ecclesiastical Authority than Secular; that in business of
great concernment he could do nothing without the people; that the Commonalty
and Syndicks should make what Alliances they pleased, without the Bishop
intermedling: As in the year 1285. with Ame Earl of Savoy; and in the year
1515. with Fribourg; with Bern in the year 1526. That the City Revenues should
be divided amongst them, and that the Syndicks should have one third, and that
in short, Charles V. writing to Geneva in 1530. directed not his Letters to the
Bishop but to the Syndicks, Council and Commonalty of the City, and treating
with it as an Imperial City, in these terms; Honorabilibus nostris and imperii
sacri fidelibus dilectis nostris Syndi^is, Consulibus ac Civibus Civitatis
Imperiali^ nostrae Gebennensis: And in other Letters written in French, the
same year: To out trusty and well beloved Syndicks, Citizens and Inhabitaents
of our Imperial City of Geneva. But to return to our History.

Ardutius having held the Episcop^l, 1185.
See fifty years, left Nantelinus his Successor, who had the same difference
with William Son of Ame Earl of Genevois. Neither could it be arbitrated by the
interposition of the Archbishop of Vienna; so that this Bishop was forced to
enter into a League with Thomas I. Dated
Third Earl of Maurienne and Savoy: 1211.
Which Earl set forth a Declaration, wherein he asserted, That he had not the
least design on the Privileges and Liberties of Geneva, neither would he
accept of that City if offered him. The Bishop invested him with several Lands
and Castles about Geneva, which the Earl of Genevois pretended to belong to
him. And these were the Motives of the War between the Earl of Maurienne and
the Earl of Genevois, who had drawn to his side the Lords of Focigny, of Gez,
and the Dauphin of Vienna. The Earl of Genevois came by the worst, and was
constrained to yield (after the death of Nantelinus) 1219.
to the Arbitrament of the Archbishop of Vienna and Aim de Granson then Bishop
of Geneva. But between Nantelinus and this last mentioned Bishop, the List of
Bishops place Bernard Chabert, who succeeded him about the year 1206. and
became Archbishop of Ambrun, in the year 1212. They of S. Martha, make Humbert
II. to succeed him, whom we find not in the Annals of Geneva, but in stead of
him, Lewis of S. Claude, and after him Peter of Sessons.

Arm de Granson, 1220.
who held the Episcopal Seat forty years, built the Fort of Peney, Fort of
Peney built by Aim of Granson.
two Leagues distant from Geneva upon the Rhosne. That of La Bastie, which is
but a Cannon shot distant from the Town, was built the year before by Gerard of
Terny, who did Homage to the Bishop and Church of Geneva.

Monsieur Lewis Moreri, who made the Historical and Geographical Dictionary,
observed when he was at Geneva, in the Arms belonging to the Bishopric,
something, as he thought, more particularly relating to the Family of the
Grandison's; whence he inferred, That Fort was built by that Bishop, and that
he was of the Family of the Grandison's in Comte. But he found, after he had
more narrowly viewed them, that these were not the Arms of the Family of the
Grandeson's, which bore a party par pale in Silver, and azure banded with Gules
charged with three Shells in Sable, for the Scutcheon of these was not party
par-paled, neither were there three Shells in them, as Monsieur Moreri
imagined, but three Dolphins, which was the Arms of John Bishop of R^chetaille,
as we shall show in its place.

Henry or Hubric Prior of the Chartreuse de Ports in Bugey, Bishop of Geneva
quits his Bishopric.
who was chosen after him, governed that Church seven years, and had some small
difference with the Lord of Gez, called Simon of Joinville concerning several
Villages which he held of the Bishopric; but this being composed, 1261.
some years after there arose the same variance between him and the Lord of
Terny, 1266.
which was ended after the same manner: 1268.
At length this Prelate being sorry he had left his former manner of life,
quitted his Bishopric, and betaking himself again to the same Profession, dyed
a Chartreu^ Monk, in the year 1275. Aim of Menthonay succeeded him, and after
him Robert of Geneva, 1282.
Channon of Vienna, Son of William Earl of Genevois, but he enjoyed it but two
years.

In the mean time here had passed some acts of Hostilty between the Earls of
Savoy and of Genevoi^. The first of these, who was Ame IV. came to Geneva, 1285.
where with threatenings he demanded they should pay him the charges of the War,
which he had been at against the Earl of Genevois, upon the Cities account.
William of Constant, who was then Bishop, would have him be satisfied with what
he had already gotten without the City, fearing to give him footing within:
Articles of agreement between the Earl of Savoy and Bishop of Geneva.
He also proposed an agreement to be made with the Earl of Genevois, but that
party which was for Savoy carried it. They granted him what the Earl of
Genevois possessed carried fore in the City, and were willing he should use the
City as a place of retreat, to defend his neighboring States. In this
reciprocal Alliance, he promised on his part, to defend them at his cost. That
he would not conclude any Peace without their consents: And that there should
be a free commerce betwin his Courtrys and the City. Which Treaty was observed
whilst he and his two Sons Edward and Ame the Great lived. 1290.
The Bishop seeing the greatest part on the Earls side, was forced to agree,
and confirm it: So that at this Treaty it was concluded, That the Earl of Savoy
should become Earl of Genevois. But the name of Earl being hateful to the City,
he was content with only that of Vidame, which signifies the same with
Vice-Dominus, he had also a Bailiff, who was called in the Language of that
Country Chatelatn du Vidomne. But he acknowledged his dependence,
notwithstanding, on the Bishop and Church of Geneva, who granted him this
during their pleasure. But in process of time, the Princes of Savoy increasing
in power, scorned to be acknowledged by a Word importing Subjection, wherefore
they gave their Bailiff this Title of Vidame.

Six years after Humbert Dauphin of Viennois, 1291.
who was one of the Earl of Genevois's Confederates, Humbert Dauphin of
Viennois assaults the City of Geneva.
set upon the Town, whilst the Earl of Savoy was fortifying it, that he might
make him quit so advantageous a Post. B^atrix of Savoy, Mother-in-law to this
Dauphin, assisted him with a considerable number of Soldiers, which she had
caused to be raised in Focigny. He would have secretly surprised the City on
Sunday after the Ascension; but he could not carry it so sliely, but his design
was discovered. Notwithstanding which, he fell on the Suburbs, and burnt a
great part of them, and encamped before the City, intending to besiege it and
win it by Assault. The Earl of Savoy was not in the City, and the good Bishop,
William of Constance, knowing not which way to turn himself in this affair,
writ to the Dauphin very submissive Letters, entreating him to desist from his
purpose; but all his submissions and Tears were ineffectual: For the Dauphin
attacked the City with all his Force, and had near won it, had not the Citizens
defended themselves most gallantly, and forced him to raise his Siege; but in
requital he pillaged the Castles of Thy and Sala, belonging to the Bishop, and
placed therein Garrisons. The Bishop finding himself not able to encounter him
with Secular Weapons, 1291.
makes use of the Spiritual Sword, and Excommunicates him and his
Mother-in-law. About the twenty seventh of October, in the same year, and a
Month after, he aggravated his Excommunication. The Earl of Savoy having taken
the Field to repel the Duke, marched to L'Ecluse and the Castle of Lay, which
places were very advantageous to him.

William of Constance being dead, 1303.
one called Martin succeeded him, who held that Seat but a very small time, and
had for Successor Aim du quart, William of Constance dies.
who had been Chanon and Chanter of the Church at Lions. He found himself
likewise to be in the same troubles as his Predecessors, occasioned by the
differences betwixt the Earl of Savoy and Genevois, and inclining sometimes to
one side, and sometimes to the other, he caused himself to be suspected by both
parties. Ame Earl of Genevois built the Castle of Gaillard, 1304.
a League distant from Geneva; from whence he made inroads into Savoy:
Nevertheless, he paid Homage to the Church for several Lands, and made an
Alliance with the Bishop and Commonalty of Geneva. This Bishop made a
remarkable Decree, to wit, That they should begin the year from Christmas, and
not as heretofore from Easter. 1306.
And in the year following, he made a Declaration, by consent of the Earl of
Savoy, touching the Office of the Vidame or Steward.

The enmity continued betwixt the two Earls. Ame III. Son of Ame the II. Earl
of Genevois, would drive away Edward, who was then Earl of Savoy, and hinder
his settling himself in Geneva, where he continually strengthened himself. Fain
would he have gotten the other out, that he might come in; and joining with the
Dauphin Hugues, 1307.
he deals with the Governor of the Castle of Entremont, who was the Earl of
Savoy's Vassal, and so far prevails with him as to obtain liberty to put in
there a Garrison from the Dauphin. Whereupon the Earl, to whom this place was
of importance, leaves Geneva, to take, if possible, this Castle again: But
whilst he was busied about this Siege, Earl of Genevois treats with the City.
the Earl of Genevois accompanied with the Dauphin, Lord of Focigny, came to
the Bridge of Arve, where he desired to speak with some Chanons and Citizens
who inclined to his side: He shows them they could promise to themselves no
advantage, in driving him away, and receiving in his stead the Earl of Savoy,
who had deserted them in their necessities, that he could if he pleased, enter
by force, and put all to Fire and Sword, were he not withheld by the fear of
God, the respect which he had for S. Peter, who was Patron of the City, and the
kindness which he had for them, who took his part in it. That he had more right
than his Enemy, and that if they would not receive him as a Friend, he would
treat them as Enemies. The Deputies finding his request reasonable, made an
alliance with him, under which they also comprehended the Dauphin, mutually
promising to defend one another, and maintain the Privileges of the City. But
when it came to have the peoples consent, they of the Faction of Savoy would by
no means hear of it, so that one half of the Town took up Arms against the
other. The Captain of the Castle in the Isle was for the Earl of Savoy, and he
of the Borough of Four for the Earl of Genevois. Each of which parties betook
themselves to these two Captains. The first of these puts in a Garrison into S
Peter's and under the Piazzas; whilst the others introduce the Earl of Genevois
and Dauphin into the City by the Iv^ry-Gate, called then by the name of Porta
aquaria, with both his Horse and Foot. 1307.
Notwithstanding all which, the Faction of Savoy prepares to encounter them,
animated by Widon, Tavel, Guiges of S. Apre, Vincent, Frombert and Perissodin
of Bourdignin, who were principal Men amongst them. Earl of Genevois defeated.
The Earl of Genevois was routed, one hundred thirty and two being left dead
upon the place. The Conquerors lay hold on the chief of the contrary Faction,
causing Jacquemet and Peter Bosselets to be hanged, and confiscated the Goods
of several others of their accomplices.

In the Month of August these two Lords return, and having been repelled, they
plunder the adjacent parts of the City, and demolished the Castle of Ville le
Grand, which belonged to the Bishop.

The year following was remarkable for several Jars between Lewis of Savoy,
1308.
Lord of Vaux, and the Bishop of Geneva: The first of these had caused Money to
be coined in Nion, which was within the Diocese of Geneva, which the Bishop
would not suffer: But referring the Case to Arbitrators, it was declared, That
the said Lord might coin Money of mixed Metal, of a different Stamp from Geneva,
even within the Liberties of the City, provided he did Homage for this, to the
Bishop and Church of Geneva, a fourth part of the Profits whereof should go to
the Bishop. Earl of Genevois dies.
This happened about the beginning of April, and in the following Month dyed
Ame Earl of Genevois, Son of William II. and was interred at Montagny, after a
long War with the Earl of Savoy for the recovery of his right.

Neither ought the year 1309. 1309.
to be forgotten, being remarkable for the wrangling of the people with the
Bishop, The Bishop and City disagree.
for the Citizens having made open complaint against him, pretending he had
usurped over them, he therefore cites them to appear before the Metropolitan of
Vienna; and they notstanding to his decision, he excommunicates them, and by
this means made them condescend to his will. The people were assembled by the
found of a Trumpet and ringing of the great Bell, together with the Bishop and
Clergy in the Church of S. Gervais, where the Bishop was acknowledged Lord and
Prince, with all Jurisdiction and mixed Empire, and that the Syndicks should not
do any thing to the prejudice of his Authority: Being moreover ordered to
satisfy for the damages which came by the aggressions of the Citizens, since
the War with the Earl of Genevois; and farther, to build Halls at Molard, a two
thirds of the profits of which should come to the Bishop, and the other to the
Citizens, The Bishop of Geneva's Authority over the City considered.
for reparation of the City Gates. And this was like a clap of Thunder to the
liberty which Geneva has, and does yet pretend to. Reminding one day a
Genevoise of this, he answered me; That this Passage made rather for their
Liberties than against them: For says he, The complaint of the people was a
certain token of the Usurpation of this Prelate, and that Excommunication
showed very well the violence they suffered; that what was forced was invalid,
and might justly be repealed. That the Burgundians had after the same manner
usurped over their City, which had not therefore lost its Right. But we may
observe, that it was not only the Bishops of Geneva, who had possessed
themselves of the Temporalities of their Diocese, according to Monsieur Chorier
in his History of Dauphine, where he tells us: The Prelates alone were the
obstacle to the ambition of the Dauphins, respect to their Authority carried
it. Frederick I. had given the Citys of Gap, Valence, Grenoble and Die, and
that of S. Paul, three Castles to be held by Homage to their Bishops, with all
the Rights of the Regale. In the Letters Patents of these Concessions, he gives
them the Titles of Princes, which was an honor common to all Bishops: But
nevertheless their Successors have established pretensions to false and
imaginary Principalities. Howsoever the case was, this Aim du Quart enjoyed
not long the effect of his Excommunication, 1310.
nor the Grant of Henry the Eighth, who gave him the Assessment of a Denier on
every Bushel of Corn, and two on every Gallon of Wine which was transported out
of the Town, in consideration of those great services he had received from him.
This Privilege was given him from his Camp before Bresse, the third year of
his Reign on the first of October. 1311.


Peter of Focigny Provost of the Chapter of S. Peter, 1312.
was chosen in his place the Thursday after Easter; A new Bishop chosen.
and the year following William the Third, 1313.
Son of Ame Earl of Genevois did him Homage for his Earldom, for his Commission
of Terny, Balleyson, Remilley in Albany, Monfalcon, Les Eschelles, and for all
that he held in the Courts of Arve and Rhosne, the Marches of Thonon, and
Dependances on the Castle of Chatillon, save the Fidelity due to the Emperor;
whereupon he fortifies Gaillard on the Arve and places there a Garrison, which
might serve for a place of retreat to his Soldiers returning from their
Inroads into Savoy. On the other side, the Earl of Savoy caused the Castle of
Malvaz on the Marches of Gex to be rebuilt: 1317.
But two years after they were both demolished upon the occasion of a Murder.
1319.
Edward of Savoy, Son of Earl Ame, did likewise homage to the Bishop Peter of
Focigny; and they promised mutual assistance. But this hindered them not from
demolishing some time after the Castle of Genevois in Focigny belonging to the
Bishop: 1320.
on the other side, William Earl of Genevois enraged against the City, cut down
the Vines on the side of S. Victor; and Edward in requital, took the Castle of
Seyssel, almost at the same time, that the said William dyed: after whom
succeeded his Son, who continued his hostility against Geneva, coming
oftentimes with them of Focigny, plundering the Countrey-houses about the City.

The eighteenth of March in the year following, 1321.
a great Fire happened at Geneva; A great Fire at Geneva.
all the Lakes side burnt down, as likewise the New Street called De la
Riviere, which from that time was named La Rotisserie. The Book called the
Citizen, mentions another fire, which happened in the year 1330. but he is
mistaken by a whole Age, as we shall make apparent in its place.

This year 1330. 1330.
was remarkable, by a Battle fought under the Castle of Monthouz, A Battle
fought between the Earls of Genevois and Savoy.
between the Earls of Genevois and Savoy; two thousand men lay dead on the
place, but he Earl of Savoy kept the Field. The Chanons of S. Peter made their
advantage of it, by an Anniversary which was established to pray for the souls
of the slain; and the Prebend of that day was of seven Florins value to every
one of them. Hugues of Genevois took the Castle of Ville le grand, part of
which he demolished; the Earl Ame of Savoy, and Lewis of Savoy pursued him, but
he had already made his retreat, and they reduced the Castle to its first state.

The City had never been well settled since the last Conflagration, which was
also followed by another greater than the former: For on the fourth of
September being Sunday, 1334.
there was two thirds of the City burnt down, together with the Cloister and
Chanons houses, and Bishops Court, and S. Magdalens quarter, the whole Church
and Parish of S. Germains, with the Bells, Relics and Vestments belonging to
the said Church: there perished eighty persons besides.

Peter of Focigny being dead, 1342.
was succeeded by Alamand of S. Joire, after he had governed one and thirty
years.

In the same year dyed Ame the Fifth Earl of Savoy, The Earl of Savoy dycs.
who left his Son Ame the Sixth his Heir, who since was the Earl of Verd,
because at a Tilting in Chamberey, he and his company were attired in Green;
and being very young when his Father dyed, he had for Governors, Lewis of
Savoy Sieur of Vaux his great Uncle, Vassal of the Church of Geneva, and Ame
Earl of Genevois his Godfather.

He did Homage to Alamand in the Castle of Clermond, 1346.
upon condition this should not hinder the Rights of the Church of Geneva;
forasmuch as the said Earl could not by reason of some urgent affairs, be
present at the said Church or Cloister, according to the manner of his
Predecessors.

The Earl of Savoy likewise promised great matters, 1356.
and charged his Vidame or Bailiff, and all his Officers at Geneva, to observe
the agreement made by him, and to suffer the Citizens to enjoy their full
Privileges. 1365.
But in the same year he requested of the Emperor Charles the Fourth, Gerard
Tavel, Rodelphus de Postella, Peronnnet of S. Germain, Perret Copounay,
Syndicks.
the Vicaridge of the Empire in that Country, and obtained his desire: so that
strengthened with this Title, and with that of Vidame or Steward, he laid claim
to the Temporalties of Geneva, as Ame the First Earl of Savoy had done before
him.

The good Bishop Alamand being deceased, William of Marcossay obtained this
Dignity; and a while after the Emperor Charles the Fourth came over to Geneva:
1366.
The new Prelate and Syndicks by order from the great Council, Charles the
fourth comes to Geneva.
humbly besought him to revoke the Grant of the Vicaridge given to the Earl of
Verd: neither had they any difficulty to obtain their suit. For the Emperor,
by a Decree in Council, declared he meant not that the Vicaridge given to the
Earl of Verd, should extend it self to the Temporalties of the Church, and
particularly of Geneva: whereupon he issues out an Order, like unto that made
by Frederick: but he Earl of Verd refusing to obey it, he was suspended by the
Emperor, till he quitted his claim, after the same manner as it had heretofore
happened to Earl Ame, in the time of Nantelinus the Bishop. This Emperor made
two Deeds of Revocation the first at Francfort on the 10. of Sept. 1366. and
the other in the same City, on the fourth day of the aforesaid Month. In the
first he annulls and makes void the Vicaridge granted by error to the Earl Ame
of Savoy, by consent of the Princes of the Empire, and restores them to their
ancient Liberties. The second was in the nature of a Mandate to the Archbishops
and Officers of the Empire, to publish it in all parts, to the end the said
Earl might not pretend ignorance. In the year following there was a third
Declaration made at Hertingfeld, 1367.
in which he expressly revokes the Vicaridge heretofore granted at the
importunate suit of his dear Cousin Ame Earl of Savoy, making for ever void all
Power, Jurisdiction and Right, which either he or his Successors might claim on
Geneva or its Dependencies, qualifying the said City with the Title of Noble
Member of the Empire. Finally, upon the Contumacy of the said Earl, there was
issued forth a fourth Decree given at Prague the fifteenth of February, to
strengthen this Revocation, under penalty of one thousand Marks of Gold, the
one half forfeited to the Treasury, and the other part to others.

Yet the Earl restored not what he possessed to the Church of Geneva; 1371.
whereupon the Bishop of Marcossay applys himself to Pope Gregory the eleventh,
whose Seat was then at Avignon, into whose hands they both resigned the
difference, promising to stand to his decision. The Pope enjoined the Earl to
relinquish whatsoever he had belonging to the Church, and to deliver to the
Bishop the Imperial Letters relating to the Vicaridge; continuing to him the
right the said Earl had to the Vidomnat or Stewardship, and to the Castle of
the Isle, which he did by an Act made at Thonon; restoring to the Bishop and
Church of Geneva, whatsoever he had taken from them, promising inviolably to
observe the said agreement. This was Published on All Saints day, in S. Peter's
Church: so that William having settled the Church in peace, died and was buried
in S. Peter's, on the left hand of the Quire; having presided eleven years. John
of Murel or Morellis succeeded him, and was made a Cardinal by the Antipope
Clement the Seventh. John of Morellis chosen Bishop.
After him Ademarus Fabry, a Domic^^ Friar was Elected, and only ruled three
years: The Author of the Book called the Citizen, ranketh him thirty five years
before; but it is certain then Alamand of S. Joire held that seat; and they of
S. Martha, 1385.
cite the Acts of the Consistory of the Vatican, of the 17. July, 1385. And
moreover a Bull of the Antipope Clement the Eighth, of the 21. of August in the
same year, which make it plain, that he lived much about that time.

He published an Act to confirm the Liberties and Privileges of the City, 1387.
directed to Jaquement of the Hospital, and James Ramus, promising for himself
and successors, truly to observe it. This was Printed since the year, 1507. And
contains several Articles, some of which are not worth our notice; the chief of
them are, That all Processes brought before the Vidame or Steward; Privileges
of the City.
shall not be transacted in Writing, but by word of mouth in the Mother Tongue.
That Criminal Cases should be Tried by the Syndicks chosen by the Citizens.
That no one should be put to the Rack by them. That it should be lawful to none
but Citizens to sell Wine. That the care of Watching the Town, should be
committed to none but Citizens: And that niether the Bishop, or any other
deputed by him, should exercise any Authority after Sunsetting. That the
Citizens Burgesses, and Freemen of the City, might choose every Year Syndicks
or Recorders for the Town;^ to whom the Commonalty should give full Power and
Authority.

In the mean time the Earls of Savoy, 1389.
that they might get footing by degrees in the City, and procure the peoples
favor; sometimes applied themselves to the Bishop, The Earl of Savoy endeavors
to insinuate himself into the City.
otherwhiles to the Syndicks; and sometimes to both together, that they and
their Court might be admitted to sojourn there; prefixing commonly a certain
time, which, when expired, they desired a prolongation of it; declaring they
had no design on the City by these permissions. Sometimes also, they would
require leave to do justice on their Subjects; who now and then were found in
the City during their abode. There is to be seen a dozen of these Acts and
Concessions, since the Year, 1391.
1390. to 1513. The Earl made moreover an Authentic Act, dated the 26. of
April, 1391. By which he Declared that also what concerned the exercising of
Authority by Lewis of Cossonney, and his Council resident at Geneva by the
Concession of the Bishop and City: He did not mean this should derogate from
their Power and Privileges; nor by this Deed, they had obtained to assume any
power or advantage over the said City. Made at Geneva the said Year, in the
presence of Cossonney, R. of Chalens, G. Marchandy, Galey of Very, and signed
with the Seal of the abovementioned Earl.

William of Lornay, The Earl of Genevois charged with Felony.
chosen after Ademarus, presided twenty years. This Bishop Cited by his
Chancellor Humbert of Villars, the Earl of Genevois and Lord of Terny, upon
case of Felony; for which he was declared an Outlaw, 1398.
and his Lands forfeited to the Church. It was thought the Bishop could not be
judge in his own Cause, but it being not his, but the Churches interest; the
sentence was held valid.

About the end of the Fourth Century, 1400.
the Emperor Wencestaus, made a declaration to the same effect as Charles the
Fourth, The Citys privileges confirmed.
touching the Revocation of the Earls Grant, and farther confirmed the Cities
privileges in such terms, that no Emperors or Kings of the Romans should at
any time violate them; which was done at Prague, the 22. of June, 1400.

Humbert of Villars Earl of Genevois dying without male issue in the month of
March, The death of Humbert.
1400. le^t his Countries to Odo of Villars his Uncle, 1401.
who after hehad held them a year, agreed with Ame the Eighth, who laid claim
to them; and so ended the quarrel between the two Earls. Nevertheless Blanch,
Humbert's daughter, 1402.
laid claim to the succession, and appeared before the Bishop by proxy,
requiring possession of Remilly, promising him to do homage for it. She was
answered that the said Lands were fallen to the Church. 1404.
That moreover Ame the Eighth Earl of Savoy, terming himself also Earl of
Genevois, had already requested this investiture, and promised homage for all
the Lands of the said Earldom: so that they could proceed no farther till she
had agreed with the above mentioned Earl, which done, she should be gratified
in any thing reasonable, as it appears by an Authentic Act of the 13 of March.

Ame the Eighth got the better in this contest, Ame does homage.
and did homage in the Church of S. Peter, before the great Altar according to
Custom, and because the Lordship of Terny was judged lapsed to the Bishop and
Church of Geneva, the said Bishop and Chapter willing to gratify the Earl,
gave it to Girard of Terny, on condition he should hold it from Ame the Eighth;
and the said Ame should pay homage for it to the Bishop and Church of Geneva.

William of Lornay dying, John of Bertrandis chosen Bishop of Geneva.
John of Bertrandis was chosen in his stead, who was Doctor in the Laws, and
Chanon of S. Peter's; he was sworn on the great Altar, and promised the Chapter,
and four Syndicks deputed by the Commonalty, Jan. 10.
to maintain the liberties and privileges of it; 1409.
which was confirmed also at the same time by the Emperor Sigismond against the
Earldom of Savoy's Vicar General; Allemand Willlet.
showing him likewise how unreasonable he was in requiring homage of the
Bishopric and Citys of Lausane, will. de Worey, John de Eonnet, Mermet de
Vuflans.
Geneva, and Valay, of whom none was due, that the said dignity was revoked by
Charles the fourth his father; wherefore he admonisht him to desist from such a
demand, not troubling any more the said Cities, Syndicks.
which belonged only to the Empire.

The Bishop of Bertrandis was present at the Council of Constance, 1414.
where John Huss was burnt, The Bishop a favourer of John Huss.
and had some place of eminency there; for he was a Cardinal, and very learned,
being suspected to lean toward Huss his Opinions. From Constance, he went into
Spain to the Antipope Benoist, and passing over to Monpellier he obtained of
the French King Charles the Seventh, that the Genevoises should not be molested
by his Subjects, under pretense of the difference betwixt them and the Earl of
Savoy; setting before him, that they not being subject to that Earl, they
therefore ought not to be dealt with as Savoyards.

The year following he accompanied the Emperor Sigismond to Geneva, 1415.
in honor of whom there was made for three days together solemn processions.
The Bishop builds Halls.
The said Prelate built new Halls, to the Charge of which the Syndicks offered
to contribute, provided they might have a third part of their Revenue. Some say
that he also founded the Chapel of the Maccabees joining to S. Peter's Church;
but it was more likely, John of Brognier, as we shall make it appear afterward
who was also Cardinal of Ostie. John of Bertranais became at length Archbishop
of Tarentaise, having been nine years Bishop of Geneva.

It was this Emperor Sigismond who erected Savoy into a Dukedom, 1417.
and created the Earl Ame the Eighth, The Earls of Savoy created Dukes.
Duke at Monluel. About a year after he came to Geneva with Pope Martin the
Fifth, in company of Fifteen Cardinals: He had his Lodgings at the Cordeliers
de Rive, and sometimes after presented his request to Pope Martin, to obtain
the Sovereignty of Geneva, pretending it was the Churches Interest in general.
1420.
This was granted him, provided he could get the Bishops consent; whereupon he
addresseth himself to John of Pierrecize the present Bishop, promising him, if
he gave his consent, such a Reward as he should never have occasion to repent
of his kindness: The Bishop replied, he was newly entered in that Office, and
not being as yet sufficiently acquainted with it, he referred the matter to the
Clergy and people, of whom notwithstanding he would ask advice. He caused the
people then to assemble in S. Peter's Cloister on the last of February, the
Bishop opens to them the Dukes suit; and first produces the Request presented
to the Pope for that purpose, which contained what follows. The Duke of Savoy
writes to the Pope.
That at Geneva, and the adjacent places, there were several Gentlemen of
considerable Estates, who protected them, who had been guilty of crimes in the
City, and thereby escaped unpunished; the Bishop wanting power to make himself
obeyed, if the Duke of Savoy did not interpose; which is the reason they could
not live peaceably in the said Town, for which cause the supplicant would
willingly give the Bishop a recompense far exceeding this Lordship in value:
And for as much (added he) as it is impossible, holy Father, to prevent these
dissentions, That it would therefore please your Holiness, to inform your self
of the truth of the matter; so that the Temporal jurisdiction may be
transferred to your devoted Son Ame Duke of Savoy, who passionately desires to
remove these scandals; preferring above all things, the exercise of Justice,
and public Peace. Which request was passed by Pope Martin on the 28. of March,
1419. And at the end of it was written; So let it be, if expedient and pleasing
to the Bishops of Grenoble, Maeon, and the Abbot of S. Sulpice of the Order of
Cistern Monks in the Diocese of Belay. He set before them likewise, how the
Duke not content with this, had required a Commissioner to execute the
Commission which he had withstood; and in fine he had made him an offer of
exchange, whereupon he desired their opinion, and whether he should continue
his Oppositions with the assistance of the Church and City alone. The Citizens
and Syndicks having heard the forementioned business, and having withdrawn to
consider on it, unanimously made answer in the name of the Commonalty by
Hudriol Heremite a Citizen; that seeing for near four hundred years the City
and dependances had been under the power of the Church, under which they and
their predecessors had received gentle usage, and been governed in peace; it
seemed to them, neither profitable nor honorable for the Church and Prelate;
but rather dangerous and of bad consequence to the State and Commonalty, to
think of any Translation or Alienation; and although that in times past, there
have been greater occasion for it, than at present; seeing there were
Territories and Lordships contiguous to Geneva, such as of the Earl of Vaux,
Lord of Statigny; and the Lord of Gex, brother of the Earl of Genevois, and
several others then living, who disturbed the peace and quiet of the Prelate.
But now all the said Lordships being ended, and reduced under one single
Prince; the Duke of Savoy, who exercises Justice in his own Dominions, and
keeps a good correspondence with them his Neighbors. They would never permit
any alteration, but would remain both they and their successors, under the
Government of the Church and Prelate; Requiring him therefore according to his
duty, and Pastoral charge in pursuit of the Oath which he had taken at his
entrance; well and faithfully to govern the Church, and keep its Rights as he
had hitherto done; promising for their parts, to afford him any requisite aid
and assistance against any who should molest him. The Bishop and Citizens make
a contract.
The Bishop thereupon, makes an accord with the Citizens and Syndicks, never to
suffer any alteration or change in the State, without the express consent of
the Syndicks and Citizens: Which he solemnly vowed, to observe according to the
usual Ceremony at his first entrance, with his hand upon his breast; and the
Syndicks and Counsel took their Oath on the four Evangelists. This Treaty is
entitled in Latin, A Transaction between the Reverend father John Patriarch,
and Minister of the Bishopric of Geneva on the one part; and the Citizens,
Burgesses, and Commonalty of Geneva on the other, against the endeavors and
suit of Duke Ame to Pope Martyn. At the bottom of which are written the most
part of the Names, and Sirnames of them who were present at the said Council
general, who represented the Commonalty; being in all to the number of 727.
There being likewise the four Syndicks, Aim Sallanche a Lawyer, Peter
Gaillard, Nicod of Vigier, and John of Jussy. After whom some of the principal
Chanons set their hands, Namely, John and Ame of Arenthon, Anselm of Chesnay,
Chanon of S. Peter's; Rodolphus of Porta, and John of S. Thomas, Divinity
Professors; Bartholmew Lombard Dr. of Laws, Aim Maillet, Raymond of Orsieres,
Henry of Barmes Lawyers; Mounsieur Authony Dr. of Physic, Peter Roset,
Pancasel de la Rive, Aymonet Fabry, Nicolas of New Castle, Mermet Lulin,
Jaquemet Gautier, John de la Roche, James Revilliod, Henry Chevalier, John of
Boloz, Girard Milliet. In short, the said Act was signed by four Notaries,
Fulsend of Bruille, John of Vaud, Nicholas Chevrier, and Anthony Fontanelle; in
the year and month aforesaid.

All persons who were interessed in the City, 1420.
were very well satisfied at this days work; The Emperor declares Geneva an
Imperial City.
and they had new cause to rejoice some months after, by a declaration from the
Emperor Sigismond which contained that Geneva was an Imperial City; terming it,
Nobile Imperit Membrum; wherein are mentioned at large the priviledes of
Geneva, which he declares he would take into his protection; strictly charging
all Princes, Barons, Captains, and all other Officers of what quality soever;
and especially Ame Duke of Savoy, not to molest in any sort the said Patriarch,
and Bishop of the Church of Geneva; unless they would incur the indignation of
the sacred Empire; given at the Monastery of the Royal Court near Prague the
sixth of June, 1421. 1421.
Signed Michael Chanon of Prague.

It is likely it was this Prelate who built the Bishops Palace, John of
^ierrescize, the founder the Bishops Palace.
his Arms standing on the outside of it; which is a Band charged with three
Dolphins. For Frison, in his Book entitled Gallia Purpurata, blazons the Arms
of this Bishop, with Gules on a golden bar, charged with three Dolphins in
azure; moreover in these Arms there is behind the shield an Archbishops Cross,
which cannot agree with Ame of Gransons, as we have already mentioned, seeing
he never was an Archbishop; whereas John of Pierre-scize, has been Archbishop
of Besancon and Rouen.

After John of Pierre-scize, whom others call John of Rochetaille; there was
chosen in his place John of Brievecuisse, or of Courtecuisse, Confessor to the
French King Charles the sixth, and Bishop of Paris, who was Bishop of Geneva
but one year; he was of the Country of Normandy, and had left Paris because he
had opposed the K. of Englands interest; there has been one of this same
family Bishop of Grenoble. This last Bishop of Geneva was succeeded by John of
Brognier, who was born in a mean Village near Annecy, called Brogny; where when
a Boy, he kept Swine: A Cardinal passing by, took a likeing to him and carried
him with him to Avignon; where he brought him up to Learning. It is reported
before he went thither, he came to Geneva, to buy a pair of Shoes at the
Taconnerie, which is the street wherein is sold Leather and Shoes; for Tacon
in the ancient Language of the Savoyards, The prediction of a Shooemaker
concerning John of Brognier.
signified Leather: but he having not money enough to pay for them, the
Shoemaker observing his perplexity; said to him, Go go, friend, you shall pay
me when you come to be a Cardinal: which proved a kind of a Prophecy, for being
one, he called to mind this man, and requited him with the Office of Steward of
his Household. He was called Cardinal of Ostie; and it is for this reason, that
John of Bertrandis having had the same Title, it was thought it was he who
built the Chapel joining to the Maccabees; which at present is called the
Philosophy School: for it is certain, it was John of Brognier who founded it;
seeing there is yet seen a little Hog carved on the outside of it, which he
caused to be set up for a memorial of his profession; and in several parts of
his Arms, which are a Cross doubly traversed, covered with a Cardinals Cap. The
same Arms are in a Chapel at Brogny, which he likewise founded, as Mounsieur
Morery has observed passing through this Village; he lies buried in the
Chapel of Geneva, 1426.
and had for his successor Francis of Mies, Priest of S. Marcel, his Nephew or
Sisters son; some name him Francis of Savoy, Severt would have him called,
though I know not with what reason, John of Chalan, which is the name of a
Noble Family in the Country of Vaud.

In the Year 1430. there happened a great Fire at Geneva; which 1430.
the Book, A great fire in Geneva.
called the Citizen, affirms to have happened in the Year 1330. telling us, he
had it out of a Manuscript belonging to the Library at Geneva: several others
have mentioned it after him; for most Authors in this particular are like
sheep, who when one has leaped into a ditch, they all follow without observing
whether their leader has been mistaken. Three great Fires happening in thirteen
years seemed improbable, which caused a friend of mine to go and inform himself
by the Original from whence this has been taken. It is a Manuscript in
Parchment, Entitled, the Dial of Wisdom, written in the year 1417. but at the
bottom of it was written some years after, an account of the Fire which happened
in the year 1430. on the 21. of April. These are the very words which though
barbarous, yet are authentic as having been written about the same time.

Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo tregesimo die vicesima prima mensis
Aprilis, quae fuit dies veneris, fuit integraliter combusta Ecclesia sancti
Petri Gebenn. excepta turri a part lacus, que permansit illesa. Ipsa siquidem
die igne ruit seu cecidit altum The Steeple called the Spire.
campanule vocatum Avullieta, in quo fundita fuerunt duo cimbala communia: in
turri vero a part Of the Townhouse or Borough of Four.
curie seu Burgiforis, fuerunt fundita, licet non totaliter, duo magna and
grossa cimbala. Ipsa siquidem die ibidem succubuit Campanule Orologii existens
in summitate turris anterioris prope crucem lapideam, supra fores ipsius
Ecclesiae, fuitque ibi destructum grossum, magnum and optimum Orologii
cimbal^m. Ipsa etiam die fuit incendio eodem combusta Ecclesia Marie
Magdalenes, and multe domus alie, quas nolo Here.
ibi ponere: cepitque ignis pessima hora in quadam grangia prope ripam lacus
fortissimo borea tum regnante, sita circa domum Petri Curtillieti, aliter
Pecolati: consumavit predictum incendium cursum in predicta Ecclesia sancti
Petri, nec ultra transivit.

This Fire was so great, that it burnt entirely S. Peter's Church, except the
Tower on the side of the Lake, and it melted down the Clock and Bells; that end
of the Town which is called S. Magdalens, was likewise destroyed by it, the
fire having begun in a Farm near the Lake, the wind lying Northward carried it
into the very heart of the Town; and this was without question the same
conflagration of which Bogge Florentin relates himself to have been an
eyewitness. The time answers exactly, Lib. de mis^rid conditionis humanae.
for he says, it was during Martin the fifths Popedom, and he died but in 1431.
for his nocturno quoque igne is without doubt the same in meaning with the
Manuscript, Nocturno quoque igne in urbe Gebenna tempore Martini Quinti summi
Pontificis plurimae egregiae que domus exustae sunt. Ipsi conspeximus rem visu
miseram and fletu dig^am. Hujus ignis calamitas multos everti^ bonis.
cepitque ignis pessima hora.

During the Regency of Francis of Mies, 1432.
the Duke of Savoy, Ame the Eighth, aged fifty six years, took a resolution to
retire from the world that he might the more freely serve God, and turns Hermit
at Ripaille near Thonon; he resigned to his eldest son Lewis, 1435.
the Dukedom of Savoy; The Duke of Savoy turns Hermit.
and to Philip his youngest son, the Earldom of Genevois. He would not
howsoever let go the Revenues, left they should grow extravagant; he therefore
caused his son Lewis to dwell at Thonon with small attendance, and he being a
Hermit, besure spent little; so that he gathered vast sums of money which helped
him to the Popedom, having been elected by the Council of Basle, in requital of
Pope Eugene his obstinacy.

The report of his holiness of life, 1439.
together with the Duke of Milan his son-in-laws diligence, did not a little
contribute to his advancement. He was named Felix the fifth, and was Crowned at
Basle by the Archbishop of Arles; but by the opposition of Pope Eugene, who was
then upheld by the Princes of Germany and Italy, it was some considerable time
before he was acknowledged Pope, unless it were in Switzerland, Savoy and the
neighboring Countries, for he had not yet arrived at Rome. After Eugenes death,
those Cardinals who had been faithful to him, would not yet acknowledge Felix;
they therefore made Nocolas the fifth Pope, so that Felix's Authority was very
much lessened, insomuch that he was scarcely acknowledged Pope in his own
Country; although he was at great expense to keep up his Authority, 1444.
having stripped Francis of Mies of the greatest part of his Revenues, after
whose death he makes himself Administrator of the Bishopric of Geneva and
Lausane. He resided sometimes in one City, and sometime in the other; but
oftener at Lusane, where he built the Convent of Cordeliers. During his Popedom
and Administration of these two Bishoprics, he dispatched several Letters and
Bulls, dated from Geneva and Lusane; which are all collected into six great
Volumes kept in the Library of Geneva. Felix the fifth desirous to maintain his
Authority against Nicolas the fifth, solicited very much his son-in-law
Galeazzo Duke of Milan to help him to the utmost of his power; but he did but
laughed at him, saying, he has given me a wife without a portion, and I have
given him a Popedom without a Revenue. For Ame had promised him much, but had
given him nothing, he would also keep himself in favor with the Emperor
Frederick III. who had consented to his Election. It was this Emperor who when
he was at Geneva, caused to be painted on the top of the Arch at the entrance
of S. Peter's Court, the Imperial Eagle plumed with sable in a golden Scutcheon.
The Clergy had received him in procession, and had made solemn prayers for him
during three days together, as the golden Writ of Frederick II. imported; Pope
Felix hoping to draw him to his side, offered him his daughter with 200000.
Crowns of gold for her portion, which the Emperor refused, and advised him
further to lay down his pretense to the Papal dignity; which he did in the year
1449. 1449.
and for a recompense was sent Legate into France, and Cardinal of S. Sabine.
Whilst he enjoined the Bishopric of Geneva, which was since the year 1444. to
the year 1451. he had a Patriarch who served as a Vicar in Geneva; for there is
to be seen in the sixth year of his Popedom a transaction between John of
Grolee, Prior of S. Victor, Administrator for Felix in the Bishopric of Geneva
on one part, and between the Syndicks on the other; and Richard of Terny Lord
also of Terny, and the Lord of Montchenu on the contrary part; by which it is
agreed that the said Administrator, Syndicks and Commonalty might make ditches
and trenches at Vernets, to turn the Arve from its usual passage, the whole
Course of this River belonging to them, and that the said Lord of Montchenu
should quit, upon consideration of a certain sum of money, all the right which
he could pretend to the said Vernets; there is likewise to be seen the names of
Francis of Savoy, 1445.
and of one Ame of Monfalcon, during the Popedom of Felix the fifth.

It is observable the house of Savoy, Duke Lewis quits his claims to Geneva.
although then sufficiently powerful, did not disturb Geneva by pretensions of
dominion over it; for Duke Lewis, Felix's son, made certain contracts wherein
he quits all claim to the Sovereignty of that City and places adjacent, 16. May.
peaceably resigning them to the Church and Commonalty: And Felix the fifth,
1446.
although enjoying the Popedom and Bishopric of Geneva, declared by an
Express; but that his dear sons, the Syndicks, Citizens, Burgesses and
Commonalty of Geneva, having been by him requested to send him some Companies
of Soldiers to the assistance of the City of Lausane, 1448.
where he then made his residence, having no obligation thereto; they had sent
him upon special favor a Company of 600. men, which have been very serviceable
to him; and forasmuch as this may be made an instance of the Cities subjection
hereafter, he therefore being desirous to obviate whatsoever may be
disadvantagious to it, attested with Apostolical authority, in truth and
certain knowledge, affirms, that this assistance has not proceeded from any
acknowledgement of servitude, but merely out of a filial and kind liberality,
without any president or ancient custom; and that the said Citizens, Syndicks,
Burgesses and their Successors, are no ways obliged to such things, unless it
come from their own free will, leaving them in their ancient liberty. Two years
after he was assisted by them against the Fribourgers, 1450.
under the Conduct of Captain Burdignin, who was then principal Syndick. Felix
dies.
Felix died soon-after at Lausane, and was interred at Ripaille. It is reported
he had lying under his head in his Tomb instead of a Pillow, 1451.
an old Parchment Bible, at the end of which were found these words touching
Geneva. The City of Geneva situated between the Mountains; of small extent, and
encompassed about with Sand: Its people are ever desirous of Novelty.
Geneva Civitas situata inter montes, Arenosa, parva, gentes semper petentes
aliqua nova. There was chosen in his stead, Peter of Savoy his young son of
eight years of age, having left Thomas Cyprian Archbishop of Tarantaise, his
Administrator, and Vicar of his Bishopric. But this young Bishop died in
Piemont seven years and eight months after his election, and there succeeded
him in the said Bishopric, John Lewis of Savoy his youngest brother, last son
of Duke Lewis; he was as yet very young, his father had designed him for some
Ecclesiastical promotion; but his inclination lay not that way, for he wore
always the garb of a Soldier and was much esteemed for his skill in Warlike
affairs, defending Geneva from all oppression of its neighbors: none daring to
violate his Authority, nor touch the liberties of the people. He had a brother
called Janus, who was Earl of Genevois, and who took on him the title of Earl
of Geneva; but he made him resign his Title and pretensions. He had another
brother named Philip, The Story of Philip.
commonly called Philip without Lands, who, troubled that his father should
leave him without any provision made for him, believing his mother was the
cause of it, endeavored to set his father against her, accusing her to him, as
having some Gallants on whom she bestowed her riches. He was seldom seen with
his father, 1460.
who lay for the most part at Thonon sick of the Gout. This young man grew so
insolent, that at length he killed the Master of his Mothers household, whilst
he was hearing Mass, and caused his fathers Chancellor to be seized on, and
carried away to Morges; where by false accusations, he procured his being
drowned in the lake: which disorders continuing, the Duke thought himself not
safe in his own Country, and desired his son John Lewis Bishop of Geneva, and
the Syndicks and Council to receive him into their City, as in a place of
surety; which having obtained of them, he came and had lodgings in the Convent
of Gray Friars of Rive, his Court being likewise at Geneva; he lived some time
in peace, only disturbed with the pain of the Gout.

His Duchess Anne of Chypre, being she had an opportunity of concealing her
treasure, whether she feared some disgrace might befall her, or whether she was
willing to gratify some friends, She caused several large Cheeses to be
bought, the inside of which she made to be taken out, that she might put
therein several pieces of gold, and lading them on mules sent them into her own
Country; of which her son Philip being informed, and having learned through
what parts they were to pass, he got before them near Fribourg, and caused the
men to unload, and took away with him their carriage; he paid with one part of
this booty those he had taken with him for his assistance, and secretly conveys
himself to Nions; whence he sent to Geneva some of his company to treat with
the young men of his acquaintance, and with the Syndicks and others, desiring
them to let him enter by night, which he obtained; and had no sooner entered,
but he went directly to Rive to his fathers lodgings without the least stop,
and having knocked at the door, one of the servants came and asked who was
there; he answers, I am Philip of Savoy, who would speak with my father upon
business of concernment; the servant returning to his Master with this answer;
Open, says he, let what will happen. Philip then being entered, salutes his
father, saying, good morrow father; his father replies, God grant thee unhappy
days and years too; what Devil brings thee hither at this time? to whom Philip
modestly answered, Sir, it is not the Devil, but God almighty who occasions my
coming here for your good; for I come to give you notice, you are robbed, and
you do not know of it: Here is Madam my Mother who will leave us nothing; so
that if you do not take care, she will leave not only your Children the
poorest Princes in Christendom after your death, but even your self whilst
living; in saying which he showed and gave him all the Treasure, save that
which he had spent, which (added he) if you will suffer, I will not, but will
punish these Thieves, wheresoever I find them. At the same time he began to
look under the Bed, if there were any of the Country of Cyprus; for he mortally
hated them, especially since this trick of his Mothers, for he imagined they
were the inventors of it. From thence he makes search in every chamber; but as
it happened, they having gotten notice of his coming, had timely saved themselves
in several houses in the Town where Philip durst not attempt to look for them,
fearing to raise a tumult amongst the people, which occasioned his return
without doing any hurt. The Duke his father enraged at this, desired the people
to assemble in the Church where he was lodged; which they did, and he made his
complaints: but the Syndicks dared not to appear; the people excused
themselves, and laid the blame on the Syndicks whom they sent for. The two
first of them were found innocent, the third saved himself and departed the
City; and the fourth, who had hid himself in the lowest rooms of the Convent of
Rive, A Syndick hanged.
was convicted, confessing his intrigue with Philip, and was immediately hanged.

This having not yet appeased the Duke, he leaves Geneva, and goes to his
Son-in-law Lewis the Eleventh at Lions; with whom having treated concerning
certain places of Dauphine, which he had held ever since the Resignation of the
last Dauphin Humbert, The affairs removed from Geneva.
he remitted the Titles of the affairs of Geneva to the King, of which he had
possessed himself, to be revenged of the Genevoises, the Bishop his Son having
given him the Records. So that the King transferred them to Bourges in Berry,
and from thence to Lions, where they are kept at present; and all Merchants
passing through his Countries were forbid to go to Geneva, 1463.
but to France; and moreover the Duke obtained of the King, that his son should
be apprehended and kept in prison till he grew wiser. The Genevoises did all
they could to have their affairs restored, having gotten the chief Citizens of
Ligues, to be their intercessors to the King, and at that same time humbly
besought Philips enlargement. The King having heard their request, consented to
it, provided they would obey the Duke as their Prince; to which they would not
agree.

This Duke died a while after, 1465.
and his son Ame the ninth, succeeded him; who set effectually on the
establishment of the affairs again in Geneva, as being indeed his interest, but
in vain; whereupon he granted leave to the Merchants of Geneva to bring in, and
carry out through his Dominions for ever, 1466.
all Merchandises; which shows, say the Genevoises, that he accounted them as
Strangers and not as Subjects.

There was held the year following an assembly of Masters and Workmen in the
art of Coining at Bourg, 1467.
in Bress; where John Chabot, otherwise Porter, was chosen chief intendant on
that work. There came thither from Geneva, Aymard, Faury, and Ame Blondel, with
twenty seven of their workmen. We read in the Records of those times, 1469.
of one Philip de Compois, Vicar General of the Bishopric; and after him
Anthony of Malvenda, 1473.
who were sworn to keep the Liberties and Privileges of the Town; the same did
one, called Claude of Spain.

Ame the ninth being dead in 1472. the last of March, left his Wife Yoland his
Childrens guardian, who was Sister to King Lewis the 11. and the King had
espoused the deceased Duke her Husbands sister; yet all Ame's Brethren had
greater kindness for the Burgundians than French.

The Duke of Burgundy having been defeated by the Switzers in the famous Battle
of Morat, retreated to Gex; the Duchess of Savoy who was then at Geneva, The
Duke of Burgundy conveys the Duchess of Savoy into Burgundy.
gave him a visit with her children, after some discourse, took leave to return
again in her Chai^; but the Duke fearing she should take part with his enemies,
bethought himself, and commanded one of his Captains to follow her, and carry
her into Burgundy; whose design was perceived by a Gentleman of Piedmont,
Master of the Dutchesses household, who endeavored to save her, but all he
could do was only to hide the young Duke in a heap of Corn, charging him to
lie quiet. Whilst this was doing, Malcomanda being come up to them, commands
the Duchess to turn her Horse, and follow the Duke of Burgundy. She made some
resistance; and it is reported this Captain who was a rough fellow, gave her a
box on the Ear, and conveyed her to S. Claude, where he kept her four months
prisoner, and was from thence carried to Rouvre; where she remained for a while
longer. In the mean time the Duke of Burgundy being vexed he had mist of the
young Duke, commanded some Troops of his Lombards to forage the Country about
Geneva; whereupon the Bishop caused all the Lombards in the Town to the number
of two hundred to be hanged and drowned for a requital. The Switzers after the
overthrow of the Duke prosecuted their victory, and fell the second time upon
the Country of Vaux; neither spared they them of Geneva, because the Bishop
John Lewis, had made War with the Valeysans their Allies; but the Deputies of
the Town with the Savoyards, went out to meet them, desiring them to desist;
that if there were any misunderstanding betwixt them, it might be easily
rectified at some appointed meeting, which was agreed to be held at Fribourg,
where it was determined, the Switzers should restore whatsoever they had taken
from the Duchy of Savoy, upon consideration of a certain sum of money, and some
places which they should still keep in their hands. So that they of Geneva were
forced to pay 2800. Crowns of gold as a reimbursment to the Switzers, for their
expenses in the War. But the City being impoverished by reason of the removal
of the Fairs, could not suddenly raise this money, desiring the Switzers to
allow them time for payment; The Switzers mu^iny for want of their pay.
to which the Chief of them consented, but the Soldiers mutinied; saying, they
would have their pay, let it come from whence it would; accusing them who had
the management of affairs, that they had already received the money and spent
it, whilst they must undergo all the hardship of War. The common Soldiers then
thus mutinying had private Cabals, wherein it was agreed to fetch their pay by
main force. They therefore to the number of seven hundred of them, on the first
day of Lent came to Zug; marching along the Road with flying colors without
their Superiors leave, and in their march met with others who joined with them
with intention to plunder Geneva. So that being come to Fribourg, they found
they were two thousand; but the Ambassadors from Ligue interposing appeased
them, upon condition the Genevoises should pay both use and principal, which
amounted to near six thousand Florins of gold, and give Hostages for the more
certain performance of it, to which they were forced to give their consent;
only obtaining some small time, 1476.
which being expired, they were as much put to it as before to raise the money,
being forced to borrow of the Citizens their Rings and Jewels, and to melt
their Chalices and Crosses and to lay great Taxes on the people.

The Bishop John Lewis sensible of the miseries of War* 1477.
endeavors a perpetual* The Bishop John Lewis makes an alliance with the
Switzers.
Alliance with the Switzers, to which they consented; but the people were so
stupid as to slight the benefit procured them by the Bishop; which he
perceiving, was contented to let it be only in his name and during his life, by
which means he secured himself from his enemies abroad, but not from his own
Domestics. He had two Favorites, the first of which was Prothonotary, and of
the Family of Terny, whose name was Pommieres, Governor of Renel in Piedmont;
and the other a Gentleman of the house of Chissy. These two Favorites being
jealous one of another as to their Masters favor, could never agree, so that
Pommieres not able to brook his Rival, betakes himself to the French Court,
where he discovers himself to the King; telling him as a great secret that his
brother-in-law the Bishop of Geneva, and the whole State of Savoy at Chissy's
solicitation were about taking the Duke of Burgundy's part. The King liking
this advertisement, recompenses him with the Bishopric of Viviers. De
Pommieres not content with this, would carry it on further, and would have
Chissy seized and brought to the King, that he might be made to discover all
the Bishops intrigues. He came then to Geneva with three or four of his
brethren, and staid there about fifteen days, pretending their journey was only
to see their friends, and recreate themselves awhile. In the mean time there
came several into the City to help his undertaking, and to lay hold on Chissy;
they being advertised where he lay with the Bishop, as Pommieres himself was
accustomed to do when he was in favor, 3. January.
they ventured to take him in the very Bishopric. 1477.
For though the Bishop had guards as is usual with great persons, yet he minded
not whether they kept strict watch, but permitted them to go about the Town at
their pleasure; so that they served only for show. In the morning as soon as
ever the gates were opened, Pommieres and his company made a shift to get
entrance into the Chamber, where the Bishop and Chissy lodged; the latter of
which they made rise, and drew him out of the room in his shirt into the street
where their horses were ready; they set him on one, his hands being pinioned,
and carried him thus out in his shirt through the gate of Rive, the Bishop not
daring to utter a word; but the youngest of Pommieres brothers was wholly taken
up in the entertaining some Ladies whilst his brethren were getting away. The
noise of this rape being spread over the Town, they were immediately all up in
arms; which the young Pommieres perceiving too late, he sets spurrs to his
Horse thinking to pass through the gate of Rive, as they did before him; but
finding it shut, he turns his horse thinking to get through Corraterie, but it
was too late, for they had began already to fasten it; he endeavored
nevertheless to get out, but as he was under the wicket, they let fall the
Portcullices, which lighting on his horses crupper struck him to the ground; so
that he was taken, and led to the Bishop, who put him into the hands of
Chissy's relations, 1479.
to keep him till the other should be restored, as they were forced to do a
while after. The Bishop John Lewis kills the Bishop of Viviers.
The Bishop John Lewis was resolved not to pass by this affront, but to be
revenged; whereupon he caused the Bishop of Viviers to be watched; notice being
given him, that on a Sunday he had appointed to treat some Ladies in Piedmont;
he thereupon takes horse with about forty more, and arrives at Piedmont where
De Pommieres was, enters without opposition, for little did they think of him,
and finding him at Table, immediately killed him and some of his companions.

In the same year there was a great scarcity of provision, so that a Bushel of
Corn was valued at fourteen shillings; which was likewise followed by so great
a mortality, The said Bishops Character.
that 7000. died in the City. The Bishop John Lewis went the year following to
Turin, and died also a while after of a Pestilential fever. 1481.
This Bishop was a younger brother, of a courageous and undaunted spirit, a
lover of War, but unfortunate, yet of a free and generous temper, amorous, and
revengeful against those who had affronted him; but on the other side very
ready to forgive, when there was occasion, as he made it appear by this
instance; for being in love with a Millers wife, and the husband finding him in
the Chamber with her, could not refrain from thrashing him soundly, till he had
left him near dead on the floor; yet John Lewis passed it by, and gave him the
Clothes he wore when he beat him.

After his death, there rose a great contest between the People, Pope, and
Chapter, 1482.
concerning the choice of a Successor. The people would have Francis of Savoy
Archbishop of Aux, The disagreement of the Genevoises in the choice of their
Bishop.
brother to the deceased, and the Chapter would have Vrbain of Chivron; but the
Pope not liking either of their choices, gave the Bishopric to the Cardinal of
S. Clements his nephew, called Dominique of la Rovere. This Cardinal thinking
it a hard matter to settle himself in this Bishopric against the will of both
People and Chanons; he therefore makes an exchange with John of Compois Bishop
of Turin. 1484.
But Chivron who was chosen by the Chanons not willing to resign his pretended
right, thereupon arose a great strife; but at length this last carried it, and
enjoyed it for some time. Vrbain of Chivron in requital resigns his right to
Francis of Savoy whom the people approved of, who entered by force with his
brother Philip Lord of Bresse. Compois having heard of his coming, 1485.
got away in the night, so that on the 25 of July, Francis and Philip made
their entrance into the Town, and put therein a Garrison; a while after came
their Nephew Duke Charles, who was highly honored and treated by them; for
they spent at one entertainment above four hundred Crowns, which was a great
deal of money in those days.

On the other hand Compois goes to Rome to make his complaint to Pope Sixtus,
who judged he had right to the Bishopric from which he had been unjustly
thrown out; which Francis not yielding, the Pope excommunicated the Town, which
lasted three months; but at length Chivron having gotten to be Archbishop of
Tarantaise, by Francis of Savoy's means, all was pacified; for Compois had
given him the next presentation to this Archbishopric, whereupon he resigned
the right which he had to the Bishopric of Geneva to Francis, who being sworn,
took upon him only the title of Administrator or Protector of the Church of
Geneva.

Duke Charles the second of that name, 1487.
Duke of Savoy, son of Charles the first, and Godson to Ame the ninth;
advertised by his Uncle the Bishop of Geneva of some Acts and Decrees set forth
by his Council held at Chambery, to the Church of Geneva's prejudice; he
therefore repeals and makes void the said Acts, strictly charging his Officers
to forbear proceeding thereupon, which was given at Pignerol the 14. of
December, 1489.
1489.

These Letters were delivered to the Council of the Earl John of Genevois, 1490.
Uncle by the Fathers side to the said Charles. 13 March The Duke desires leave
to remain for some time at Geneva.
The Earl dispatched Letters of Credence, promising more care for the time to
come. The Duke likewise sent to the Council of Geneva, entreating them to let
him remain there some time, as his Predecessors had done before him.

The Bishop being dead at Turin, 3 October.
the Chapter chose Charles of Seyssel, who enjoyed the Bishopric for some
time: but Anthony Champion President of Turin and Chancellor of Savoy, Two
Bishops chosen to succeed in Geneva, who are therefore at variance.
who had been married, and was then Bishop of Mont-Devis in Piemont, obtained
of the Pope the Bishopric of Geneva, and Charles of Seyssel having been chosen
in due form and manner, would not give him place; whereupon there arose a great
strife and Lawsuit betwixt them; so far, that Champion having gotten a Decree
from the Metropolitan of Vienna against Seyssel, and assisted by the Lord of
Bresse, came resolved to obtain his right, either by fair means or foul. There
were several small skirmishes on both sides on the Bridge of Chancy, where some
remained on the place, 1491.
and Seyssel was forced to yield to the strongest.

Duke Charles the Second being dead, there started up in Foucigny one John Gay
of Megiva, 1492.
who raised the Peasants into a Mutiny against the Nobility who oppressed them;
setting before them the hope of Liberty, John Gay causes the Peasants to take
up Arms against the Nobility.
and the example of the Cantons of Switzerland, with whom and the City of
Geneva they might make a League. These Peasants to the number of sixscore, wore
Red Coats, who set upon the Gentry of the Country without any exception: but
the Lord of Bresse having gotten them of Berne and Fribourg, to send to them
Deputies; they drew to Geneva the chief promoters of these Tumults, and with
fair promises softened them, and sent them home; but being scattered, they were
laid hold on and hanged.

Bishop Champion after the usual Oath called a Synod, 1493.
in which the Decrees and Constitutions of the Bishops were reviewed and
amended; which were Printed in the same year, under the Title of Constitutions
of the Synod of the Bishopric of Geneva.

He dyed two years after, 1495.
having held the Seat but four years. Philip of Savoy being but seven years of
age, Son of the Lord of Bresse, was chosen in his stead, at the suit of Blanch
Mary of Montferrat, Widow of Charles the First. Pope Alexander the Sixth, who
confirmed his Election, assigned Aym^ of Monfalcon Bishop of Lausane, and the
Bishop of Nice* to be his Guardians: which Philip was Bishop under four Dukes
of Savoy, Charles his Uncle, Philip his Father, and Philbert and Charles his
Brethren. As he increased in years, he grew more fit to be a Soldier than a
Churchman, as his Uncle Lewis before him. 'Twas commonly said of him, that he
was more fitting to be made a Duke than his Brother. Whilst he was young and
his Father alive, he was forced to wear an Ecclesiastical Garb; but after his
death Charles then being Duke, and very familiar with him, he threw it off, but
not the Revenue.

Return we now to the Government of Philbert. 1498.
This Duke came to Geneva with his Bastard Brother Rene. The Duke of Savoy
comes to Geneva.
They were so greatly pleased with the City, that they desired leave of the
Bishop and Council to keep Courts of Justice in it only for their own Subjects,
which was granted them for some time. Philbert giving himself over to pleasure,
Rene the Dukes bastard brother endeavors to make him Sovereign over Geneva.
left the management of his affairs to Rene, a fierce and imperious young man,
and who watched all opportunities to make his brother Master of Geneva, that he
might be revenged on the Syndicks who had refused to let him have some Writings
wherein the City were concerned; his first attempt was the imprisoning of a
Genevois, called Peter Levrier, by virtue of Letters Decretory from the Duke.
The Lieutenant of Gex, had laid hold on him near the Townhouse, from whence he
carried him to the Castle of the Isle which was the Dukes abode; whereupon the
Attorny-General and Syndicks made their complaints to Rene, showing him that
such an imprisonment was wholly unlawful, forasmuch as that jurisdiction and
power belonged only to the Bishop, his Vicar or Steward, or other secular
Officers; so that not being able to suffer such an action, they desired the
Lieutenant should bring back the Prisoner to the place from whence he had taken
him, 1498.
upon which there was an Act made in favor of the Bishop, 24. of May.
Church and Syndicks. These last returned him the same measure, for being
informed that a Savoyard called Thomas Papuli, had coined brass money in the
City, having given notice to Rene of the power and jurisdiction of the Church
and City; they sentenced the malefactor to have his right hand cut off before
his own door, and from thence to be led to Champel where he was beheaded, and
his body to hang on the gallows, and his hands and head to be set up in the
place called the Liberties. 1499.


A marriage was resolved upon between the Duke of Savoy, 12. of June.
and Yoland of Savoy his Cousin German, the better to strengthen him in his
Countries, but she died before the marriage could be consummated; and was buried
in the Chapel situated at the Cordeliers of Rive. 1500.


Rene who had the sole management of affairs entrusted him by his brother,
endeavored to strengthen his Authority and make him absolute in Geneva; Eyria
accused by Rene.
both public and particulars had every day some new oppression laid upon them,
although he received from both more respect than he deserved, for he had every
day Presents made him in hopes they might at length win him by kindness, and
keep him from enterprizing any thing against them, by which means he received
more profit than the whole revenue of that City amounted to; 1601.
all which could not make him desist from his violences. For remembering there
was a gentleman called Eyria, who in the time of the deceased Duke had been in
great credit, and whom he could not then injure, he was resolved now together
with his whole family. He therefore accuses him to have designed to poison the
Duke, by a perfumed Apple, and for a confirmation of this produces two
witnesses who make Oath, they heard him together with a Physician at Lions
contriving how they should effect it; the Duke being easy to be wrought on,
believed it, whereupon it was resolved that they should surprise the Physician:
they sent therefore to Monl^el the Provost of the Dukes household, who desired
the Physician by his man, to visit him; the poor Physician who mistrusted
nothing, as being innocent, came to him without delay; where instead of a
Patient, he finds a Provost, who seized on him, 1501.
and carried him away bound hand and foot to Geneva, where he was thrown into
the Prison of the Island, and Judged by the Provost. At which the Syndicks and
people were exceedingly moved, and complained to the Duke; showing him this was
an infringement of their Liberties and Jurisdiction, which the Duke himself was
sworn to observe; yet did not Rene forbear to pass on putting him to the Rack
and made him confess, and accuse whom he pleased; which done, he caused him to
be beheaded, and set up his Quarters in the Liberties notwithstanding the
Citizens opposition. Afterward he seized on Eyria, and most of his kindred and
friends, whom he had caused to be accused by the Physician, and would have
dealt after the same manner with them; but several Persons of Quality having
interposed, their sentence was deferred, and Rene began to grow odious to the
people.

The Duke after his affianced Ladies death, espoused Margaret, Maximilian's
daughter, who was first betrothed to the young King Charles of France, but
being repudiated by him, and married afterward to the King of Castile; after
his decease she was married to this Duke Philbert. They made their public
entrance together into Geneva, which put the Town to great charge, in Plays,
Masquerades, and other divertisements. This drew insensibly the Youth into
debaucheries, and the Duke being young himself, and a great lover of these
pleasures; it is no wonder if these pomps and divertisements were as so many
charms to lay asleep the Genevoises.

Eyria escaping out of Prison at Chilon flies to Berne, and makes his complaint
to the Council there against Rene; beseeching them to shelter him under their
protection, and to show to the Duke his brothers oppressions; which they did,
so that he began to lessen his affection toward him. A Preacher declaims
against Rene.
There was at that time a Preacher belonging to the Dukes Court of the Order of
Dechausser, or bare-legged, called Frater Mulet; who set before him one day in
his Sermons, The poverty and misery of his Subjects; exhorting him to help them
thenceforward, in driving away the Thieves from about him, the real
blood-suckers of the People. He compared the Duke to a great purse full of
little purses filled with money, the biggest of which was empty; meaning thereby
them who enriched themselves at the Dukes cost, and advising that all the
little purses should be emptied into the great. The Duke and those present,
perceived very plainly that he designed the Bastard by these words, who was the
greatest of those Tyrants that robbed the people; Rene begins to grow, the
fourth of March, out of favor with the Duke his brother.
and indeed his credit from that time diminisht, as well for what had past in
the Pulpit, as his great pride; for he had ordinarily a greater attendance than
his Master. The Duke beginning to slight him, his followers likewise deserted
him; this abated a little his pride, and fearing he should be shamefully sent
away, he thought it was better handsomely to ask leave, than to stay till it
was granted him without asking. He came then one day to the Duke to whom he
held this discourse: My Lord, I have ever been, and am still your most humble
Servant and Subject, and moreover your poor Bastard brother; for your deceased
father acknowledged me as such. I have served you hitherto with that zeal and
devotion as might be expected from a servant and brother; so that if my service
has not been such as you deserve, yet has it been to the best of my power;
but for as much as I perceive of late that my service has not been acceptable
to you, therefore I am not willing to trouble you any longer; wherefore I
beseech you to suffer me to retire into my own house, notwithstanding which you
shall find me most ready to obey you as often as you shall please to command
me. To whom the Earl thus answered, Bastard, you say you have truly and
faithfully served me; be it so, yet am I glad you ask leave to be gone, and I
will have you depart not only from the Court, but likewise out of my Dominions
in three days upon pain of death. The wretched Rene finding his brother so
angry departed weeping attended only by his Domestics, and made what haste he
could to be gone; of which the Syndicks having notice, notwithstanding his
oppressions, came to take leave of him, offering him their service. He went
into France to King Lewis the Eleventh, whom he endeavored to exasperate
against the Savoyards. 1502.
At the same time Duke Philbert and Margaret his Duchess departed for
Chambery, being informed by the President of Divonne, and Amblard Goyet
Deputies of the Town, that they had no right to that City. The Duchess then
perceiving Geneva belonged not to the Duke; she built not there a Church and
Monastery as she intended, but at Brou, near the Borough in Bresse.

After Rene's departure, Eyria was called home, and entertained in the Princes
Service; and thus Geneva was freed from a great deal of trouble and vexation by
Rene, and the Dukes departure: but instead of this it had worser sorrows; A
malefactor dies under the torments he suffered to make him confess his crime.
for besides the plague which raged violently in the City, there happened another
sad accident: the Syndicks kept in Prison one called Cotton, sufficiently
convicted of a crime deserving no less than death; but it being customary not
to pronounce sentence, before the Prisoner confessed his crime, he was
therefore put upon the Rack; but whatsoever torment he suffered, he would not
make any acknowledgement. At length a certain Person of the Country of Piedmont
informed them, that the way of his Country was in such like cases to put a
napkin with water in it down the throat of the malefactor to his stomach, and
then at one jerk they pulled it out again. The Syndicks would needs try this
fellows experiment, which was immediately followed by the death of the
Malefactor, which put the Council and City into a great fear, le^t their
enemies should lay hold on this occasion to trouble them, as indeed it
happened; for some belonging to the Duke, and who had the same kindness for the
City as Rene, represented this mishap to the Duke with the greatest
aggravations imaginable, adding, they deserved to have their privileges taken
away from them, and that moreover he might justly do it, seeing the City by
right belonged to him; the Duke harkening to them, Commanded his chief Attorney
to undertake the business; the Syndicks sent Bonna and Levreri their Deputies,
who showed the Duke it neither belonged to him or his Council to take
cognizance of that affair. The Duke not much moved by this tart reply, tells
them it should be put to Arbitration. He for his part chooses some of his
Counselors, who with the rest of the Arbitrators were sworn to be impartial,
and judge according to Right. The Titles of both parties were diligently
enquired into, but they of Geneva got the better; the Arbitrators declaring by
joint consent, that he had no right or title to the said Town; which having
said, he plainly declared himself in these words: I have been given to
understand otherwise, but seeing it is as you say, I vow to God, and S. Peter,
to contest no farther; and touching this particular cause I confess and
acknowledge it belongs to the Bishop my brother to take cognizance of it, and
not to me; so that I refer the whole matter to him when he shall be of age to
judge of it. After this manner all was pacified.

The plague which continued at Geneva, A Famine in Geneva.
was attended with a great want of rain, which brought along with it a scarcity
of provision; which forced the Country people (who dared not before approach
the Town) to come into it, whether moved by devotion or urged by want; for they
came in procession from all parts to our Lady of Grace, to desire of her Rain,
but they could not obtain it; and the scarcity continuing the next year
following, a bushel of Corn which was worth before but two shillings, was now
valued at a Crown, the Crown going but for three shillings and two pence, so
that the poor Peasants were forced to live on herbs and roots, which sometimes
they had not patience to dress.

One Le Mortel a famous Thief made himself much talked of in those times,
Mortel a famous Thief.
it was known by all what trade he followed, the people about the Town securing
their goods in the City for fear of him; 1504.
where likewise it was no sooner night, but the Masters called to their men to
keep fast their doors for fear of Mortel, which afterward became a proverb;
but all their care did not avail them, for he broke in every where, especially
where they were most cautious of him; he seemed to be not so much sollicitous
after the money, as how he should do his work dexterously, for he took but small
sums only to spend with his Comrades; whether he did his work by slight of
hand, or by charms it is uncertain, yet it is reported of him that he so
enchanted the people, that they lost all ability of speaking or resisting. The
first thing he did when he came in, was to take the Keys even from under the
Master of the houses pillow although awake; he opened the Cup board, Sellar
door, lighted a Candle, laid the Cloth, eat and drank, no body hindering him.
The next morning after this he usually went to the Tavern with his companions,
the Vintners received him gladly, for besides his being a good Customer to
them, he never defrauded them of any thing; when he wanted money, he would bid
his Host to seek in the Corner of such a Chamber, which perhaps no body had
entered a long time, where they were sure to find their due to a farthing.

Every body wondered he was not punished by the Magistrates: he was indeed
several times imprisoned; but the Syndicks dared not act contrary to their Laws
and Customs, which were to condemn no man without his own Confession; for when
he suffered the Rack, he was more firm and constant in denying the truth, than
a Martyr could be in confessing it; whether this came through want of the sense
of pain, or that he was so stout as to despise it, so that he valued the Rack
no more than a fillip; for when he was stretched upon it, he would pretend to
have been exceedingly tortured, and would desire them to take him off,
promising to confess the fact; but when he was questioned about it he would
answer, Well, what would you have me say? repeating their words after them, and
desiring them to give him the other stroke for the sake of the Ladies. He died
not such a death as he deserved, though dreadful enough, for he was seized with
the Plague so vehemently as that it took away his speech; his Mother who
attended him in his sickness fearing he should escape it, and come one day to
be hanged, put him into a Coffin, and caused him to be buried alive.

Duke Philbert died in the flower of his age of a cold gotten in hunting, 10.
of S^pt.
and being a good and virtuous Prince, 1504.
he was much lamented; by Geneva especially, Duke Philbert dies.
who met not with the same good qualities in Charles the second his successor.
It was four years before he came to Geneva, though he had often promised it,
which put the City to a needless charge in their preparations for him, whilst
in the mean time his Officers frequently violated the peoples Rights and
Privileges. The Duke had daily complaints made of this, but he did not regard
it.

Monaton Secretary to the Bishops Chancellor having been dispatched to Ancy,
1505.
(where the Duke then kept his Court) to obtain Letters in favor of the City
as to the maintaining of its Privileges, 6. of June.
brought others exceeding his Commission. There were sent other Deputies to
annul what the former had done, and were commanded to carry the President of
Divonne a present, who then governed, to the value of one hundred Crowns.

Duke Charles being at difference with them of Valey, required help from
Geneva, who sent him two hundred men under the Command of Captain Burdignin.
The Duke not contented with this, sent for six piece of Ordnance which was
fairly denied him, being answered, that those few they had were only sufficient
for the guard of the Town; upon which Rollet Nicholas who held a correspondence
with the Duke, 22. of April.
sent him an account of those who had chiefly opposed his request, 1506.
who were Peter Faccon, Levrery, de Font, Hurich, and some others whom the
Duke vowed to destroy. The three first of these warned of this withdrew to
Fribourg, where they purchased the freedom of that City, only paying a Crown
every year, by which means they might live safely at Geneva, under the
protection of this Canton, and so avoid the Dukes displeasure who would not
enter the Town, nor swear to maintain its privileges, till Levrery was
delivered into his hands. The Prothonotary of Aux who was since Bishop,
succeeding Amblard Goyet, Abbot of Filly, in the charge of the Bishops
Chancellor, cast Levrery into Prison; but his friends giving notice thereof
immediately to Fribourg: that City sent their Deputies with all speed to
procure his release, and from that time the Duke ceased his violences on
Geneva, fearing the Confederates; yet his Officers brought in diverse
innovations contrary to the Cities Privileges, 27. of July.
for which cause Levrery was sent to complain to the Bishop who was then in
Piedmont, 1507.
and Anthony Pecolat to the Duke, who having after long expectation now
resolved to come to Geneva, 1508.
6. of April.
they presented him with two little barrels of Silver, The Duke and Duchess of
Savoy come to Geneva.
and the Duchess his mother with a Vermilion Cup gilt with Gold, weighing nine
ounces. At length he comes, having first taken an Oath to observe the
Privileges and Liberties of the Town, and made farther declaration wherein he
acknowledged he had no power or jurisdiction in Geneva in these following
Terms. For as much as our well beloved the Syndicks and Council of the City of
Geneva, at our request have permitted us to keep our Court in the Hall over
against the Statehouse, during our residence; we therefore attest and
acknowledge this concession not to have proceeded from any sense of duty or
acknowledgment of right from the Syndicks and Council, but purely out of good
will; which we do not design shall extend to the prejudice of the Liberties of
the said City. After this he soon returned to Anecy.

Philip of Savoy Bishop of Geneva, 1510.
not liking the Ecclesiastical State, having presided fifteen years, gave his
place to Charles of Seyssel brother to the Baron of Aix, who had been chosen
seventeen years before, but driven out by Champion. Philip was by his brother
made Earl of Genevois, and afterward betook himself to King Francis the first,
who gave him the Dukedom of Nemours, marrying Charlotte of the house of
Longueville in the year 1528. he died at Marseilles, and was buried at Anecy.

Charles of Seyssel was of a sweet and pleasant temper, but unlearned and
imprudent. November.
He made a journey to Strasburg at the Cities charge, 1510.
to request of Maximilian King of the Romans a Confirmation of the Cities
Liberties, Authorized by an Edict made by the Emperor Frederick Barberousse, by
which it appeared the City was free, and exempt from some certain dues which
were claimed at that time from her.

It was in the year following, 1511.
that the Walls about the Suburbs of S. Gervais were finished; The Walls of S.
Ge^vais finished.
for the necessary expenses of which there was an Excise laid on Wine and Money
raised by way of loan. The Duke likewise gave his assistance, 18. March.
but they procured a Writing under his hand that he sent workmen to advance the
work, not as a Prince who had right to the Town, but only out of kindness as a
neighbor; but his after-carriage answered not these his declarations. He was a
Mediator of the Peace made betwixt the King of France, and the Confederate
Switzers; 1511.
which induced him to believe his credit was so great with the King, The Duke
endeavors to re-establish Fairs in Geneva.
that with the joint solicitation of the Confederate Switzers, he should be
able to procure the establishment of the Fairs in Geneva, from which he
promised himself a double advantage. First, for that he should have Toll paid
him for the goods brought through his Country. And Secondly, get footing in
Geneva, and by degrees subject it to himself. He got then the Confederates to
insert this Article in their Treaty, and to send at the same time Deputies to
Geneva, promising them again their Fairs, if they would agree to these
following Articles.

First, Articles of agreement betwixt the Duke and City.
That the City and Bishop should appoint an Officer to keep account of the
profit of each Fair, one third part of which should be given to the Duke,
Bishop, and City.

Secondly, That the City should once a year make a Present to the Duke.

Thirdly, That the warding the Gates should belong to the Duke, during the time
of the Fairs.

Fourthly, That the Duke should have henceforward Fines paid for every new
building, both in City and Suburbs.

All which was proposed to the Consideration of a general Council assembled the
twenty second of July, 1512.
and was as generally rejected; the Duke gave not over his pursuit for this,
but tried other ways, which were likewise to as little purpose; the meeting
held at Baden no more answered his expectation than the former.

Corn being very dear in this year, Francis Mallet his liberality.
Francis Mallet Governor of Berne, and Dean of the Chapel of the Maccabees, a
native of Chambery, lent to the Lords of the City his Plate, which they caused
to be Coined to buy Corn, which was given to the poor, and for a requital was
made a Citizen gratis.

In this year there was an insurrection of the people against the Vidame or
Steward Aim Consilii; the occasion of it was this, There were two Prisons in
Geneva, and to each of them a Jailer; one was only for the Clergy and was
called the Bishopric, the other for Laymen in the Isle of Rhosne, of which the
Vidame was Governor having under him a Jailer; who having been excommunicated
for a certain sum of money which he owed, and not obeying, the sentence was
aggravated, and the Creditor would constrain him by the Bishops Authority; the
Bishops Treasurer went to the Isle to take him, and carried him to the
Bishopric, giving him in Charge to the Jailer of that Prison; the Vidame
supposing the Bishops Officers had not any such power on the Dukedom, demanded
his Prisoner of the Bishops Jailer, which he refused, excusing himself in as
much as he dared not do it without his masters consent. The Vidame enraged at
his denial, caused his Sergeant to seize on him, and carry him to the Prison of
the Isle, which coming to the Treasurers ear, he ran about the City crying out
like a mad man, help, help, Gentlemen, against the Vidame, who imprisons our
Princes Officers for doing their duty: The Vidame imprisoned.
the people thereupon tumultuously gather about the Vidame's house, and would
break open the doors, but some in Authority coming in the mean time, the Vidame
surrendered himself to them, and so there followed no other mischief, he was
carried to the Bishops Prison; but at length this breach was made up, and the
Prisoners on both sides released* notwithstanding the Duke when he heard of
this was not satisfied* but came from Chambery to Geneva with the Bishop,
desiring to have these mutinous persons (as he called them) punished; but the
Bishop having made full inquiry into the business, found that the Vidame was in
the wrong; which he showed the Duke, but he was not thereat satisfied, for that
which was reason to the Bishop, was not the same to the Duke. The former of
these thought they which had laid hold on the Vidame had reason to maintain his
Authority, as being their Prince: and the Duke on the other side believed they
had proceeded contrary to equity, forasmuch as he esteemed himself Prince of
Geneva, he would therefore have the Bishop put to death the Authors of this
Sedition, whom he thought were those who had obtained the freedom of Fribourg,
for he would not do it by his own Authority, lest he should provoke this
Canton; and the Bishop not consenting, he was so enraged against him, as to
tell him he had made him Bishop, but he would deprive him of that dignity, and
make him the poorest Priest in his Diocese; but the Bishop dying at Moirane,
some time after his return from our Lady of Puy, 1513.
saved him that labor. Geneva much lamented his loss, having been ever a
maintainer of the Privileges both of Church and State. The Pope and Duke
having heard of the Bishops decease, were both concerned in the choice of a
Successor.

The Pope would dispose of it as he had done heretofore, but the Clergy and
Laity of Geneva, would not lose their right in this affair; whereupon they
betake themselves to their Arms, and shut the City Gates, assembling in S.
Peter's Church to choose their Bishop; they could not pitch upon a fitter person
that Ame of Gingins Abbot of Beamont, Ame of Gingins chosen Bishop of Geneva.
and they were induced to such a choice by these following considerations. He
was a Chanon, and of a noble and ancient family, and moreover allied and
beloved by the Confederates, who held at that time a good correspondency with
Pope Julius the second; he was also very zealous for the Liberties and
Privileges of both Church and State, and of a very comely personage, whose
only fault was, that he was too great a lover of the female Sex. The Chapter
then having chosen him by the peoples consent, dispatched a Messenger to the
Confederate Cantons, desiring their commendatory Letters to the Pope to obtain
his Confirmation, which being obtained, the Envoy sets forward to Rome, all at
this good Bishops charge: but the Lords of Savoy were not all this while
asleep, for John of Savoy Prothonotary of A^x, whom we have heretofore
mentioned, got the start of him, who is the same whom the Author of the Book,
called Christian Gaul, terms John Francis of Savoy, and whom Severt takes for
the Bishop John Lewis.

John of Savoy was born at Angers, John of Savoy obtains the Bishopric of
Geneva.
being son to a poor woman of the said Town, who could not be lavish of that
which she never had, although free enough of her body; she lived in the same
condition, when the Bishop of Geneva, Francis of Savoy, was Archbishop of Aux
and Angers. This woman was kind to this Prelate as she had been formerly to
several others, she had a Child by him which he was loath to own, whom his
Relations brought up in the Court of Savoy. The Duke seeing this young man as
he grew in years, to become neither amiable in body nor mind, only gave him
some lean Benefices, which he held till Charles of Serssel Bishop of Geneva
died; upon which he determined to procure that place for him, that he might use
him as a fit instrument to obtain the temporal jurisdiction of Geneva, when he
should have advanced him to that dignity, as having neither courage nor conduct
enough to oppose his design. It is reported before his instalment, he took an
Oath to resign him the jurisdiction which he desired. The Duke at the same
time, to give less suspicion to the Syndicks, requested them to grant him leave
to keep his Court in the Town, July.
that he might administer Justice to his Subjects whilst he should stay there;
1513.
giving them a declaration in which he attests this Concession to have
proceeded merely from good will, and not from any obligation, neither did he
intend by it any invasion of their Liberties.

Pope Julius not penetrating into this intrigue, gave the Bishopric at the
Dukes solicitation, to John of Savoy, whom the City was obliged to accept to
avoid the thunderings of the Vatican. 31. of August.
He made his entrance in as great pomp as the rest, 1513.
although with less welcome; yet howsoever they dissembled it the best they
could, and made their excuse for opposing his reception.

The Bishop likewise disguising his designs, answered them with a great deal of
mildness, (for he would not spur his horse before he was well seated in the
Saddle;) farther, when he had taken the usual Oath, to testify he had forgotten
all, he bestowed Offices and Pensions to those who had been his greatest
opponents, amongst others to Berthelier, whom he made Bailiff of Penny even
against his will, and to the Abbot of Beaumont for a reimbursment of the charge
of his Election on the day of his entrance, he produced the Dukes and
Confederate Cantons Patents for to bring the Fairs from Lions to Geneva, with
the safe conduct for traders who should come there, which were published, yet
were they kept at Lions, so that this appeared plainly to be but an amusement:
on All Saints-day having read his first Episcopal Mass with great solemnity, he
bestowed largesses on the people, where that of Pardons was not the least.

Toward the end of the year the Syndicks and Counselors being met in the
Common Hall, 1513.
where certain persons of Berne and Fribourg entered into the Council, 29. of
Novem.
who had followed Monsieur de Villenefve President of Dijon, and the most
Christian Kings Ambassador to the Switzers, requiring he should be stopped at
Geneva, making protestation if they should let him escape, of the resentment of
the Confederate Cantons. The Council knew not what to resolve touching this
matter, foreseeing that if they should detain the Ambassador, they should incur
the Kings displeasure; and if they should let him go free, they would disoblige
the Switzers; so that not knowing what course to take, The French Ambassador
confined.
it was advised to have recourse to the Bishop upon this affair; but he being
absent, it was concluded he should have guards set over him in the name of the
City, Bishop, and Vidame; and for greater security he should be lodged in the
Bishopric, that the City gates should be kept shut, and a sufficient guard set
to hinder violence either from one side or other, and in short that a Messenger
should be sent to the Bishop to know his pleasure; but before they could
receive his answer, Deputies arise at Geneva from Bern and Fribourg; requiring
that the President should be delivered to them. On the other hand the King of
France, the Duke of Angoulesme, and the Duke of Bourbon writ to the City to
release him; in this strait the Bishop was sent to, who ordered this answer to
be given the Deputies, that the Bishop being a Churchman, he could not
surrender the President, for should he be put to death, he should be guilty of
an irregularity, and degraded from his Episcopal dignity, and the City deprived
of its Pastor; and if the Syndicks should do it in their own names, it would
prejudice their Liberties and Privileges, which made them Judges in Criminal
causes without appeal to any person; and that in granting the Confederate
Cantons request, they would acknowledge them their superiors, by which means
they would be esteemed betrayers of the peoples Liberty, adding withal they
would do the King wrong, who perhaps might one day give them cause to repent
it; so that the Confederates Deputies should be desired to forbear their
request. That yet if they could convict the President of that which they
accused him, they should soon have justice done them, rather out of respect to
the divine Law than any other consideration. Which answer was delivered them by
the Syndick Levrier, but the Deputies replied, that the business was a matter
of that nature as could not be ended by ordinary course of Law, instantly
urging them again to deliver the President into their hands, which if they
would not, their Superiors should highly resent it. To which it was answered,
that they for their parts would not deliver him to them, but if they would take
him, they would not resist them. They were contented with this shift, and went
to the Bishopric to take him by force, they carried him bound hand and foot to
Fribourg, and from thence to Berne, where he underwent the Rack, and afterward
was released upon an agreement.

The year following died John Ame of Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor, 1514.
and secular Abbot of the Abbys of Pignerol and Payerne, December.
to whom succeeded by resignation his Nephew Francis Bonnivard. He had ordered
in his Will, that five great Culverines should be broken in pieces after his
death, which he had caused to be made to serve him in his Wars against the
Baron of Viry, Five Culveri^s left by the Prior of S. Victor to Geneva.
and that one half of the metal should make Bells for S. Victors Church; the
Syndicks desired his Executors to let them have these pieces of Artillery, and
they would give them the same quantity of metal to make Bells; which they
refused, alleging the intention of the Testator was to have them employed in
the service of God and his Church, for an amends of the evil he had done,
having made them with the Churches Treasure; but the Syndicks to take away this
their scruple, brought to them a Divine, who proved that in doing what they
requested, they would do God and the Church greater service than in that manner
the Testator had enjoined, because the Bells should be made howsoever, and
those pieces of Ordnance would serve to defend the Town which was the Churches
Land, whereupon they were granted them.

Pope Leo's Brother having espoused the Duke of Savo^'s Sister, he thereupon
entreats the Pope to confirm the Concession which the Bishop had made him of
his Rights over Geneva, 1515.
which he granted him; but it was opposed by the Conclave of Cardinals,
affirming the Prelate had not power to renounce his Temporal Jurisdiction,
neither could the Pope confirm such a renunciation, unless the Subjects had
conspired against their Prelate, and that he had not strength sufficient to
chastise them, so that this design could not take effect.

The Duke remaining in Piedmont, and the Bishop of Geneva in his Abbey of
Pignerol which fell to him by the decease of Bonnivard, he abode there with
small attendance, taking money from all hands to pay the Pope and Duke the
first fruits of his benefice, and the charge he had been at in the Court of
Rome at his Election; a certain person beseeching him one day to be favorable
to a friend of his Condemned to pay a Fine; he answered that he could not remit
it, for as for his part he had nothing but a Crosiers Staff and a Mitre, the
Duke of Savoy having the Bishopric and Abbey: and in effect the Duke had
appointed one to receive the Revenue of the Abbey, allowing him only enough to
maintain him; he would have done the same with the Bishopric, had not the
Bishop hindered him by returning to Geneva, where he was no sooner arrived, but
he quarrelled with a certain person named Pasquet, who was accused of Usury;
but this was contrary to the Laws of Geneva, which forbad Citizens should be
brought in trouble for this reason; There was great formalities upon this point
between the Bishop and Citizens, who could not obtain the Prisoners
deliverance. His relations found out an expedient, which was, that having
married his Daughter to a Citizen of Berne, his Son-in-law came with letters in
his behalf from his Superiors, and managed so well his Father-in-laws cause,
that he was delivered for small charge.

The Bishop John of Savoy conceived a mortal hatred against a Lawyer called
Claudi^s Vandel, Vandol imprisoned.
because he had pleaded a Cause against one of his Servants, whereupon he
imprisons him upon a false accusation, being esteemed a very honest Man; the
Syndicks and Counsel desired that the Informations should be put into their
hands to proceed thereupon, as Judges in criminal Cases; on the other side the
Bishop and Vidame would have it brought under their cognizance, and fearing a
sedition, they would have conveyed him privately out of the Town, that they
might deal with him as they thought fit. But Vandel had four Sons, one of which
named Thomas, Curate of S. Morges, knew how to use a Sword, as well as a
Prayer Book. Robert was of his Fathers calling, who with the other two having
notice of the design, resolved to rescue their Father; but they lost their aim
by mistaking the time, but the next morning they failed not to discover to the
people what was become of him; the people enraged at this action, set upon the
Bishops Pensioners, telling them, they loved their Money better than the Cities
Liberties. The Council being Assembled, the people made their Complaints to
them, that the Privileges of the City were violated, and that the Bishops
Pensions occasioned it; the Pensioners informed of the business, presented
themselves, bringing with them the Letters of their pension, which they tore
before the Council, protesting they were not so much the Bishops servants,
Popular tumults.
as to forget their Obligations to the City, desiring nothing more than to
manifest their zeal for the public interest, for which they were willing to
sacrifice both their lives and fortunes. The people flocked from all parts,
John Bernard ran to the Steeple to Ring the great Bell, and Convocate the
general Council, which was then of as dangerous consequence as to fire the
Beacon in the Valley, which was a signal of some great emotion; Bernard finding
the Steeple door shut would have broke it open, had not he been withheld by
much entreaty.

The Syndicks went to the Bishop, beseeching him not to anger the people, whose
rage was ever to be feared; but to preserve their Liberties according to the
Oath taken at his entrance, delivering to them his Prisoner. The Bishop being
alarmed at these Tumults, would not be obstinate but released Vandel, and
desisted from prosecuting him. He bore notwithstanding a deadly hatred against
Bernard in his mind for his forwardness, and not daring to meddle with him in
Geneva, he watched him one day when he was gone out of the City upon some
occasion; where some persons planted by him for that purpose seized on him, and
led him away bound to Jussy where he determined to punish him; yet he released
him at the request of the Earl of Genevois, and some Ladies, the Earl being
then in the City, only making him to ask him forgiveness.

The Bishop and his Steward could not enrich themselves in Geneva, seeing the
City had so little kindness for them; but their Covetousness set them on the
poor Priests of the Diocese, which rendered this Prelate extreme odious; his
person could not be acceptable to them, and his mind was as ill shaped as his
body, so that he became the subject of every man's raillery. One John Pecolat a
pleasant fellow and boon companion, dining one day with the Bishop of
Maurienne, Chantre and Chanon of Geneva, incompany likewise of the Abbot of
Beaumont, who discoursing of some unjust dealing which he had received from the
Bishop John of Savoy; Pecolat jokes on the Bishop.
Pecolat bids him not be troubled, for says he, non videbit dies Petri, he will
never live to S. Peter' s days, as is commonly said of all Popes, meaning he
was taken with an incurable distemper, to wit the French Pox, and so by
consequence he could not live long; which words were taken notice of by two
spies who made report of them to the Bishop, interpreting them, as if he had a
design to take away his life, which he either believed or pretended he did,
that he might make this serviceable to his purpose, which was to bring the City
into subjection.

He dissembled his resentment the best he could in expectation of a fit
opportunity, which at length thus offers it self after the Duke had been a
while at Lions, to visit the Queen his Niece; he sent to the Bishop to come to
him, which he did, commanding his Caterer to provide Fish-pyes to eat as they
traveled; the Caterer to save charges had bought stale fish, one of which pyes
being brought to the Table, the Bishop either not having a stomach, or
disliking the fish, would eat none of it; it therefore fell to the servants
share, who eat it up every bit; now there was not one who had eaten of it, but
either died or fell dangerous ill. The Bishop glad of this occasion, although
sorry for his servants loss, caused his Vidame to draw up an accusation
privately against Pecolat, who was not a man of that temper to throw water on
this fire; yet they proceeded no farther in it, being hindered by more urgent
affairs which the Duke had then beyond the Mountains.

This Prince willing to try the Syndicks affections toward him, desired them
to send him three pieces of the Cannon left by Bonnivard; which being refused
him, he thereupon conceived a deadly hatred against the City, which was
fomented by one of his Courtiers called Claudius of Seyssel, who had been
Professor of the Civil Law at Turin, and since Master of the Requests under the
French King Lewis the twelfth, afterward Bishop of Marseilles, and lastly
Archbishop of Turin. He Counseled the Duke not to suffer two Bishoprics in
the heart of his Countries, to wit, Geneva and Lausane.

The City was frequently disturbed by disagreements among themselves. There was
no small strife once amongst them upon a very silly occasion, about a Mules
skin. The Bishop had an Officer called Claudius Grossi, who was at variance
with a young man of the City, who was related to his wife, Grossi's Mule
hamstringed.
named Andrew Malvenda, his father came of a Noble Family at Valence in Spain.
This young man aforementioned having one day hamstringed Grossi his Mule in the
Stable, spread a report, it was the Children of the houses Master who had done
it; and not content with this, he gets ten or twelve young men of the Town, of
which Berthelier was one, and took along with them a fool called little John,
with whom they walked about the City all night, making him bawl out at every
turning, O yes, if any person wants a skin of the grossest beast in all the
Town, they may be furnished at a very reasonable rate, alluding to the name of
Grossi; whereat he makes his complaint to the Vidame and Episcopal Council,
telling them that they were not content in putting this trick upon him who was
in Office, but they must needs expose it in raillery throughout the Town. The
Council ordered the Vidame to search into the matter, which having done, he
found Berthelier whom he mortally hated to be one of the Crew; he would have
apprehended them, but fearing they would be too strong for him, he requires the
Syndicks and Council to assist him, which they did, but the young men hearing
of it hid themselves. They were publicly summoned to appear in the Castle of
the Isle, on forfeiture of a hundred Florins a piece, which turned to their
advantage; for it being contrary to the custom of the City to lay any greater
Fine than a Crown, unless in case of Felony or such like; they complained by
their Attorney, that they observed not the Statutes in their particular, this
not being a Orime: their complaint was brought before the Episcopal Council,
where it was declared they might defend themselves being at liberty, pede non
ligato: they came forth therefore from the places where they had hid
themselves, and came and followed their suit; in the mean time the Duke and
Bishop being informed of the matter, came to Geneva with the Archbishop of
Turin, who advised them not to be too hasty in taking vengeance; that this was
not sufficient to make the Cardinals consent to the taking away their
Temporalities, but this might serve to continue the disunion amongst the
people. The Bishop sends for the persons accused, and particularly those whom
he knew were not against him, to whom he makes a remonstrance by the Archbishop
of Turin, showing them they had committed an action, for which they might be
justly punished, having affronted the Bishop and his Lieutenant; yet their
Pastor was more inclinable to mercy than justice, having respect to their
youth; and would therefore pardon all but the Authors, whom he said were
Berthelier and his Confederates, desiring them not to take part with him: which
having heard, they thanked him, and promised him they would submit to what he
had enjoined them, being glad they had thus escaped.

The Duke returned to Chambery, from whence he sent his Brother the Earl of
Genevois, to Geneva. He makes a hunting match, and the place appointed to meet
in was at Wache. The Bishop, the Abbot of Beaumont, and several other persons
of quality accompanied him, whom he liberally treated; consulting privately
with the Bishop about what they were suddenly to enterprise. The Bishop
withdrew to a seat he had in Focigny called Thy, accompanied with some
gentlemen belonging to the Earl, whom he sent to the Village of Presinge, where
were two Genevoises, Claudius Servant, and John Pecolat, whom having
apprehended, they brought them to the Bishop, who committed them to Prison; but
he soon released the first of these, which caused it to be suspected that the
said Servant had betrayed his companion, which made him odious to the people.
Pecolat was questioned about the Fish pyes, and the words he had spoken, non
videbis dies Petri, Pecolat put upon the Rack.
it being laid to his charge that he and his companions (whom they charged him
to discover) had a design to poison the Bishop, he was Racked three times
without confessing any thing; at length the Bishop caused him to be hanged up
by the arms all the time he was at Dinner, his servants blaming him for his
folly, in suffering himself to be thus tormented rather than confess the truth;
telling him, Servant had confessed the whole matter, and named particular
persons, amongst others the Bishop of Maurienne, and the Abbot of Beaumont,
whom his accomplices would make their Bishop, after they had dispatched John of
Savoy; and entertaining him with these words, they made him say what they
pleased, not being able any longer to endure the torments.

After this the Bishop chiefly desired to get Berthelier into his power,
Berthelier sought after by the Bishop.
but he kept in the City and stood upon his guard, and at length got away,
being attired like a Herald of Fribourg, where he went in company of some
Merchants of that Canton; the Bishop and Vidame hearing of his escape, summoned
him publicly to appear and answer to his Accusation. He addresseth himself to
the Council of Fribourg, complaining to them of the unjust dealings he met with
at Geneva, adding moreover that all this had happened to him for no other reason,
but because he had been a Citizen of Fribourg; that they would entreat the
Council of Geneva to inform the Duke and Bishop, that if they would send any
one to Fribourg to impeach him, he would render himself Prisoner, or if he
could obtain of them a safe conduct to make his defense at Geneva before the
Syndicks his lawful Judges he would there make his appearance, provided they of
Fribourg would depute some person to be present at the hearing of the Trial:
the Fribourgers granted his request, and sent an Express to the Princes,
lodging Berthelier in the mean time who was but poor, in the Hospital. The
Messenger found the Princes at Geneva, who had purposely come there in
expectation of meeting with Berthelier. They returned answer, that they would
gratify them of Fribourg in any reasonable request, but as to the sending one
to prosecute Berthelier, they could in no wise consent to that. That if he
would have Justice done he must come to Geneva, where he should not fail of it,
provided no stranger assisted at the Trial, it being contrary to the Cities
privileges, which assert the Syndicks to be the only Judges in criminal Cases,
not suffering any others to assist at the Judgment but their own Council.

In the mean time the Duke resolves upon a journey to the Cantons for some
reasons of State, particularly about the difference which was not only at
Geneva betwixt the Bishop and the Citizens thereof, but likewise betwixt the
Citizens of Lausane and their Prelate. The Bishop of Geneva had the Duke on his
side, and the Genevoises, the Confederate Cantons; on the contrary, the Bishop
of Lausane had the Cantons for him, and the people the Duke of Savoy for them.
He went first to Fribourg about Bertheliers business, fearing they might decide
the business in his favor; from whence he went to Berne to confirm the ancient
Alliances, and to add some new Articles. He had passed through Lausane in his
way to Switzerland, and had offered his mediation to them of that City, which
they accepted; but he deferred it till his return, after which he gave his
judgment, which was far from contenting both parties as he had promised
himself; for there was neither of them but was very much dissatisfied: for
instead of calling himself an arbitrary Judge, he terms himself a natural
Judge, as if he had been their Prince and Sovereign; at which both the Bishop
and People were so offended that they agreed without him, and began to seek an
Alliance with the Cantons.

After this the Duke returned to Geneva, 1517.
where he awhile about Pecolat and Berthelier's business, although his
occasions required his presence in Piedmont; and it having been showed him at
Fribourg, that the Bishop of Geneva had acted contrary to their privileges in
imprisoning Pecolat out of the City; he therefore caused him to be brought
back, and to be imprisoned in the Bishops name in the Isle, causing him to be
examined again by the Syndicks; he retracted his former confession being before
them as having been extorted. The Duke and Bishop would have him again be put
on the Rack, but the Syndicks refused it without greater evidence: the Princes
proposed the matter to the consideration of several foreign Lawyers, as well as
to their own Council, to show they were not carried away by passion; but these
differed in their judgment: for the Civilians being led by their Masters the
Bishops interest, condemned him, and on the contrary the others acquitted him.
The Syndicks whose Province it was to pronounce judgment, knew not what to
resolve of, temporizing as much as possible to justify these two Lords desire
of revenge: the Duke and Bishop hastening this business to a conclusion, started
a matter which they were not aware of, viz. That the Prisoner was a Clerk, and
by consequence a Subject of the Ecclesiastical Court, and belonged not to the
Syndicks jurisdiction. They transported him then out of the Prison of the Isle
to that of the Bishopric, where they were resolved not to spare him, but being
sick, he was visited by the Physicians, to see whether he was able to endure
the Rack; they differed in their opinions, but they who affirmed he was able to
endure it, were soonest believed; but because at Thy, he was observed to be
very constant in enduring the Torment, and being suspected to have some Magical
charm in his beard, which rendered him insensible, he therefore had a Barber
sent him to shave him close, for his beard was very long. Pecolat in this
extremity ruminated in his mind how to keep himself from being overcome by
these torments, Pecolat cuts out his own tongue.
which he saw were making ready for him, the Barber having washed his chin,
turned aside to empty his Basin, carelessly laying down his Razor near him,
which Pecolat snatching up, cut out a great part of his tongue; the Barber
seeing him bleeding in the mouth, wholly astonished called up the guards and
Jailer, notice being sent to the Princes of this, they took care to preserve
him for greater sorrows; being recovered, they would have him again to the
Rack, and because he could not speak, they would therefore have him write; but
the Episcopal Council could never agree, and particularly the Judge of the
Clergies excesses, whose office was to pronounce sentence, being the Syndick
Levrer^'s son, whom the Duke hated as much as his Father, whose head he at
length caused to be cut off. This Judge told his Friends in private, what a
dreadful thing it was to let this poor Man be so long misused, that for his
part he would never give his consent that he should be again put on the Rack;
and that were it not out of respect to the Princes, he would have long since
acquitted him; and to procure his Release they must have recourse to the
Archbishop of Vienna, Metropolitan of Geneva. His counsel was followed, and an
Order was obtained from Vienna, by which the Advocate of the Treasury was cited
to give an account of the detaining of Pecolat, and forbidding him and all
other Episcopal Officers, yea the Bishop himself, to touch the Prisoners person.

Which Order being brought, there was no Body found who durst publish it,
although the Duke and Bishop were not at Geneva; the bringers of these Acts
were cudgelled for their pains: One Bonnivard, Governor of S. Victor, was so
bold as to carry it to the Bishop; this Victor was a young Man more daring than
wise, a Citizen of the confederate Cities, of good Kindred as well in Savoy as
Piedmont, so that he valued neither Duke nor Bishop, but hated the later, and
favored Pecolat, and was very zealous for his Countries Liberty. He took then
a Sergeant along with him, and as the Bishop came from parting with the Duke,
he delivered to him the Archbishop of Vienna's Order. The Bishop being galled
at it, complained to the Duke; the Duke sent for Bonnivard, and told him the
Bishops Complaints. To which he boldly answered, My Lord, it is true, That the
Bishop of Geneva detains one of my Servants, and has put him on the Rack; and
I have protected him in acknowledgement of his Services; but what I have done
is justifiable by Law, having not suffered my self to be carried away by
Passion; neither do I think you can take it ill that I have executed the
Metropolitan's Order; you who are a Prince, and a lover of Justice, and who
would not hinder Right though your own Interest lay at Stake. The Duke
pretended to be satisfied, and parted the next Morning for Piedmont; having
first caused Pecolat to be removed into the Castle of Penay.

We read in the Chronicles of Geneva, That in this Year, before the Dukes
departure, the Bishop John of Savoy lying sick of the Gout, and hearing a noise
in the Street, asked what was the matter? His Nurse answered him, 'Twas a Thief
who was led to be Hanged; whom (added she) if you will pardon (my Lord) he will
all his life time pray for your Health; Whereupon he sent him his Pardon.
December.
We find likewise an Act made this Year, in which the Vidame is termed the
Bishops Officer, although the Duke pretended he was his; for usually those who
bore this Office were of Savoy.

The Bishop about this time set out for Piedmont; and after his departure, the
term allowed the Advocate of the Treasury being ended wherein he was to appear
at Vienna, he stirred not, lest he should do any thing to his Masters
dishonor. 1518.
Whereupon he was again cited: and at the third time this Clause was inserted,
That if he did not appear, the Prisoner should be released, upon Penalty of
Excommunication. And not appearing, there lacked only the Excommunication to be
taken out; which being effected, it was set up in the Night over the Church
doors. Three Days before Easter (in those times they did the same for simple
Debts) the Chanons and Priests coming to say Mass, found this bar forbidding
them to go farther. Geneva Excommunicated.
The People being informed of the Matter, began to murmur, and lastly to gather
in Tumults, exclaiming against them who were the Promoters of this
Excommunication. The Clergy and dependant Officers, who made up a considerable
Party, seeing themselves deprived of the Sacraments, joined to the People, and
all together set a crying, To the Rhosne, to the Rhosne with those Villains and
wicked Officers, who hinder us from Receiving our Lord.

The Syndicks ran to appease them, seeking the Episcopal Officers, beseeching
them to release Pecolat, otherwise they would be exposed to the Popular rage.
They being affrighted at this, wrote to the Lieutenant of Penay to release him
speedily; but the People not trusting to them, joined with the Messenger to see
Pecolat released; which fell out well for him, for immediately after came
Letters from Rome, which made void the Metropolitan of Vienna's Censures, and
forbad the Prisoners enlargement. Messengers were sent to hinder the first
Order; but the People valued not the Popes Letters, bringing Pecolat along with
them, whom they lodged at the Gray-Friers, as in a fit place for shelter, where
he remained a long time before he could speak, by reason of the mutilation of
his Tongue, but at length he recovered his Speech, at the intercession of a
Saint to whom he was more particularly devoted, (if we may believe his own
relation.)

Whilst they were soliciting his deliverance, Berthelier proposes an Alliance
to the Fribourgers.
Berthelier did the same at Fribourg, to be recalled from his Exile: and
moreover negotiated an Alliance between the Cities of Geneva and Fribourg,
discoursing several of both Cities about it, showing them the advantage which
would accrue thereby; and not only to them, but to all the other Cantons, as
well for the free Transportation of all Merchandises, as also to make use of
Geneva as a Fortress against their Neighbors, especially against the Duke of
Savoy, he being always to be suspected, notwithstanding his pretenses to the
contrary, being not able to forget their Forraging his Country in the Wars he
had with the Duke of Burgundy, they having at that time a part of it in their
possession; that by means of this Alliance the Duke would be frustrated in his
Design of Sovereignty over Geneva; which Discourses fell not to the ground, for
they were taken into consideration by the Council; who sent to him, telling
him, They would procure his Safe Conduct; which having obtained, Febr. 24.
he should endeavor to effect this Alliance. They obtained then of the Duke
and Bishop a Safe conduct for Berthelier to make his Defense at Geneva. He
presented himself to the Episcopal Council, and afterward to that of the City,
requiring his Accusers to appear and declare what they had against him, and he
would endeavor by Gods assistance to clear himself, and make it appear that he
was an honest Man. This happened awhile before Pecolat was released. The Vidame,
who had formerly prosecuted him, was cited, and made his appearance before the
Syndicks, with the Solicitor Navis, who produced several Articles against
Berthelier, March 4.
containing all the extravagancies and debaucheries of his youth; which indeed
were not a few; and his frequenting Seditious Meetings, amongst whom he was
ever the chief. He excused himself touching this Article, alleging they were
Persons who maintained the Liberties of the City against Usurpers; that he
associated with them in nothing but this their just design. Then they accused
him as having conspired to take away the Bishops life; which they grounded upon
the Confession of Pecolat, and one called Carmentrant. Berthelier justified
himself in this particular, alleging that Pecolat had been illegally
Imprisoned, and that this Confession had been extorted by the Rack, which he
had suffered on simple conjectures: And as to what concerned the other charge,
it was evident 'twas but a trick devised by his Adversaries, Carmentrant having
been hired by the Bishop (whose Pensionary and Domestic he was) for this
purpose. The Vidame not having sufficient matter against Berthelier, sent every
day an account of his proceedings to the Princes who were in Piedmont; who
fearing the Syndicks would clear him, desired them to admit some of their Party
to assist at his Trial: But the Fribourgers having understood it, wrote to the
Duke how greatly they were surprised at his intention, seeing both himself and
Bishop had but lately declared, That the Customs and Rights of Geneva would not
suffer any to be Judges in Crimianl Cases but themselves. The Princes
perceiving that they were disappointed in this contrivance, offered Berthelier
and his Accomplices their Pardon, if they would request it; which had been
proffered him before at Fribourg. To which he returned the same Answer as
before, That having not been guilty of any Offense, he had no need of Pardon;
wherefore he intended to stand by the decision of Justice. The Princes
considering his Trial would end in their dishonor, would have Judgment
suspended, forbidding them on great penalties to proceed therein, till they
should either come or send; which the Syndicks did to avoid the displeasure of
these two Lords, whom they rather feared than loved.

In the mean time Berthelier began again privately to carry on the Alliance
with Fribourg, gaining as many Citizens on his side as he could: But the Duke
had several Favorites at Geneva, amongst whom was the Syndick Monthion, who
bore a great sway both amongst the Council and People. Moreover one part of the
City being Savoyards by their Original, and being accustomed to have the Duke
for their Master, preferred his Dominion before the Alliance with the Switzers,
valuing their profit more than their Liberty. Two young Men of Geneva coming to
Thurin in expectation of some employ, were immediately laid hold on by the
Provost and carried away to Pignerol, before the Bishop of Geneva, who was the
Abbot of that place. They were accused for being Berthelier's Accomplices,
although one of them was his Enemy, and Son of Navis the Vidame's Attorney; the
other was John Viterman or Blanchet. They met at first with gentle usage, to
make them accuse those who were the objects of the Dukes and Bishops hatred.
But they answering, They knew nothing of that matter, were again sent back to
Prison. In the mean time Bonnivard of S. Victor, whom we have already
mentioned, passing through Turin in his Journey to Rome, recommended their
cause to a Lawyer his Friend, and wrote to them a Letter before he parted,
which he sent to the Jailer to deliver it to them; who conveyed it to the
Bishop; who upon the receipt thereof was exceedingly enraged against Victor, who
had already occasioned Pecolat's Release, he therefore caused them to be kept
close Prisoners, and put them on the Rack. The great Torments they underwent
made them confess the pretended Conspiracy of Pecolat, and to bring in Victor
as a party. At the same time the Bishop sent this Deposition to the Syndicks,
and withal, that if they would not believe it, they should send two Persons to
hear their Confession; but not giving credit to the matter, they sent no Body.
This forced Confession declared that Victor, with two other Persons in custody,
had determined to poison him; which if they could not effect, they would after
this manner one Evening come a Mumming to his House, and raising a quarrel, he
should be stabbed in the tumult; by which means Victor might succeed him. Which
plainly appeared to be ill contrived, seeing Victor was not so familiar with
the Bishop as to give him such kind of divertisement, being rather his
professed Enemy: and farther, the Bishopric was not so easily obtained, seeing
the Abbot of Beaumont elected by the Clergy at the Peoples request, could not
obtain the Papal Confirmation, who certainly would never have gratified an
Assassin.

These two poor Creatures then were by beheaded by the Dukes Authority, Two
young Men beheaded
having publicly retracted their Confession, and asked Almighty God
forgiveness for their other sins. The Provost hastened their Execution to
silence them. Their Bodies being quartered, Three of them were sent into
several parts of Piedmont, and the Fourth part parboiled with the Heads to be
sent to Geneva. Victor returning awhile after from Rome passed through Turin,
where the Bishop had given order to have him apprehended; of which having
notice, and having many Friends, he walked near eight days about the City to
affront the Bishop; at the end of which he choused his Spies, pretending to
stay there longer, but took Post one fair Morning for Geneva; whither within a
short time were brought the Heads and Quarters of the Two forementioned young
Men in Two Barrels, marked with the Arms of the Earl of Genevois the Dukes
Brother: they who brought them lodged that Night on this side the Bridge of
Arve, and the next Morning early they set them up on a Walnut-tree, with a
White Cross and this Inscription: These are the Traitors of Geneva. The first
who saw them ran to carry the News about the Town; a great part of which came
to behold them. This was a sad Spectacle, especially to the Father and Mother
of Navis. The Father was still the Vidame's Solicitor against Berthelier, and
saw himself so ill requited for his Services. The good Citizens were grieved,
but durst not show their indignation, contenting themselves only with the
Renovation of the Propositions made them by the Burgers of Fribourg.

The Council of the City, Deputies sent to the Duke.
as likewise that of the Bishop, being met together to consult of the means to
appease the Princes, whose displeasure they feared, deputed the Vidame Aim
Consilii, Michael Nergaz, and Francis Talichet, all three of the Dukes Faction,
to show the Prince in all Humility, that the City was very much amazed that
they had thus used Two of their Citizens, and that the generality of the City
had given them no occasion of offense, but if any particular Person had, they
might have had him punished at Geneva: and therefore desired them to declare
who had offended them, and if they were in fault they should be obliged to a
speedy reparation. They departed then to find the Duke, who openly gave them
but slender welcome, but privately consulted with them as Friends, treating
them with the greatest respect. He sent them to Pignerol toward the Bishop,
who gave them as kind entertainment; at length he made a Speech to them in
public to this effect: That he was very sensible there were several good
People at Geneva, from whom they had received faithful Service, and which they
should be ready at all times to acknowledge; but that there were also several
Mutinous and Seditious Persons, guilty of the highest Crimes, even of
Conspiring the Death of their Prince, of whose number were these two who had
been made Examples: that there were some in the Town, who to avoid the
punishment due to their Crimes, endeavored to persuade the People to make an
Alliance with Fribourg; which would not only tend to the Princes disadvantage,
but to the City's it self, which would lose by this means the Customs which
were paid for the Carriage of Merchandises into Fribourg. That if the Cities
did embrance this offer, they would certainly most severely punish the Authors
of it; in which if the body if the Town would assist them, they should respect
them for good and faithful Subjects: adding, they desired that the Principals,
who were Berthelier and Ten or Twelve others, should be punished with the
greatest severity.

The Deputies, who had themselves dictated this Answer, desired it should be
committed to Writing, being directed to the Council. To which the Princes
consented, Deputies present the Dukes Letter to the Council.
on condition they would not deliver it to them till they were sworn to execute
what it contained. They at their return offered it to the lesser Council; the
greatest part of which liked not the condition, saying, There might be perhaps
something which respected the public Interest, and therefore they could
resolve of nothing without the general Council, which was assembled the next
Morning, where the Deputies appearing, related they had no other Answer than
that which was contained in the Letter, and that they had in charge not to open
it but upon the forementioned condition. The People would not agree to the
Proposal touching the Oath, but determined to send back again the Letter whence
it came. Nergaz then tells them, Gentlemen, say he, The Duke of Savoy has
declared, That if his Letter be not read, and the Contents observed, no
Genevoise shall enjoy his Possessions in safety. The People enraged at this
cried to the Deputies, Have you staid five or six weeks on the other side the
Mounts, making your selves merry at our cost to bring us this news? To the
Rhosne, to the Rhosne, with such Traitors; and it wanted but little but they
had been sacrificed to the popular fury, but for fear of the Princes the
Council appeased them: they returned the Letter to the Deputies, after they had
severely reproached them with it, bidding them do what they would with it, for
it should not be read on the condition offered.

This advanced not a little the design of the Alliance with Fribourg, it being
the only private and public discourse of the Town, Besancon Hugues together
with some others make an Alliwith the Fribourgers.
but all would not consent to it; so that Besancon Huges one of the Syndicks,
and several of the Council approved of it, and had several meetings about it
with those who were men of courage and resolution. They concluded that if a
general Alliance could not be effected, there should be a particular one made
in behalf of those who had subscribed to the number of three hundred, with
charge to the Deputies, to confer abut it with those Fribourgers on whom
Berthelier had prevailed, which was done not without opposition from them who
were Pensioners to the Duke, for he had such as well in Fribourg as Geneva. The
Deputies had this answer both from the great and lesser Councils: that if the
City, or at least the greatest part of it would make such a contract, it should
be accepted on reasonable terms, provided no foreign claim hindered them,
especially that of the Duke of Savoy; for if Geneva was subject to him, this
could not be done without violating the Alliance with him; they then would be
ready to consent to this Alliance or Burgership, and from that time would
protect them as their own Citizens. The Deputies returned with an Express from
Fribourg, to make relation of their negotiation; some accepted it, others
refused it; so that this heated them one against another, notwithstanding the
remonstrances made them by the Deputy of Fribourg. There were continually seen
Assemblies of both parties, which day and night circuiting about the Town, made
songs of one another, with mutual gibes and reproaches.

Those on the Dukes side termed them who had accepted the Burgership Eignots,
Eignots or Huguenots whence derive^^
meaning Eidgnossen: which they counted not injurious but rather honorable,
this being a Dutch word signifying Allied by an Oath, it being the same the
first Switzers made use of when they mutually assisted one another against the
Tyrannical usurpations of the gentrv of their Country, and from hence has
sprung the word Huguenots, of which there has been such different and
ridiculous Etymologies: for some affirm that this term Huguenot came from the
two first words which were delivered in an Harangue of some deputed Switzers to
the French King, beginning thus, Huc nos venimus. Others imagine it is derived
from a certain Gate called Hugon, in I know not what City, near the which Gate
they held the first Synod; the learned Monsieur Peteau, found out another
original derivation, as I have read in the Memoires of M. de Pieresk. He tells
us then that at Tours or Amboise, where as is pretended this name first began
to be used, the people have a tradition of I know not what kind of spirit who
ran in the night about the streets, whom they called Friar Bourru, and
afterward King Hugues Ghost. It is well known the Protestants at first went
only to hear Sermons by night, not daring to assemble in the day, and for that
reason were called Huguenots, which is as much as to say Spirits; people who
appeared only in the night like King Hugue's Ghost: but the true Etymology is
that which we have already given; they who understand not the Dutch Language
differently pronounce it. The Boys of the Town ran about the streets hollowing,
Long live the Eignots. The note of distinction was a Cross marked on their
Doublet. They called the Dukes party Mammelusses by the name of those Soldiers
who were the Soudan of Egypt's slaves, who having been Christians had renounced
their Christianity, and abjured the liberty of their Country to join with
Tyrants; designing by this name to accuse them of the Dukes faction of the same
baseness, and from hence has sprung the Original of these factions which
lasted several years. These Eidgnots assembled in the night, took upon them to
watch the City, and feasted one another.

Which the Princes understanding sent Ambassadors to Fribourg to make their
complaints, The Princes complain against the Burgership.
saying, they perverted their Subjects contrary to the ancient Alliances, in
admitting them Citizens, entreating the Magistrates to desist; to which they
answered, that they had not done any thing to the prejudice of their former
agreements with them in treating with Geneva, for as to what concerned the
Bishop, they had no Alliance with him, and consequently might contract with the
Citizens, who although they acknowledged him their Prince, yet did not that
hinder them from being free and at their own disposal, he having accepted them
upon this, and not any other condition; yet would they do him no wrong, for if
he could prove them of Geneva to be others than what they termed themselves,
the Alliance should be void; that they were so far from diminishing his
Ecclesiastical Authority, that they were rather on the contrary for maintaining
of it to the utmost of their power, and as to the Duke of Savoy, they would
make a reserve in what concerned his Rights in the Treaty, and that if he could
make it appear the City was subject to him, they would proceed no farther. And
lastly, if both of them had found themselves aggrieved, they were content to
stand to the judgment which should be given, and not to act contrary to their
Alliance.

The Deputies from Savoy not satisfied with this came to Geneva, where by
flattery and threatenings they required there should be no farther contracting
of Burgership, and after all their endeavors perceiving they could not obtain
their design, they complained against the Fribourgers in the general Assembly
of the Consedrate Cantons, declaring the wrong which was done the Duke of Savoy
in admitting them of Geneva into the Burgership of their City, seeing they were
his subjects; which was contrary to former Treaties: for supposing the
Genevoises were not his subjects, yet were they comprehended under the title of
Hindersassen, which is as much as to say, inhabitants of their own Country,
which the Treaties of Alliance forbad to change into Burgership. The Deputies
of Geneva answered that their City had never been subject to the Duke or any of
his Predecessors; that by this word Hindersassen, was not so much meant a City
surrounded by his Countries, as strangers settled in his Dominions; that it was
rather the Duke who dwelt with them, seeing the Country he held about Geneva
had heretofore belonged to the Bishop, of whom the Dukes held it, for the
confirmation of which they produced their Titles. These contests and
proceedings held a long time before the War broke out.

The Abbot of Beaumont, and Francis Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor, young
Citizens, were zealous for the liberty of their Country; they together with
several others sent to Fribourg, to request the privilege of Burgership; which
was granted them upon condition the general Council of Geneva consented to it,
which was sworn to by the greater number of suffrages which carried it.

In the mean time the Duke and Bishop united in their interest, May 7.
gave Commission dated at Montcallier, to the Sieur de Salleneufve, a man
expert in business, to be their temporal Deputy in Geneva, but the Citizens
refused him, alleging it to be a new and unheard of thing to send them a
Governor, seeing they never had any before but their Bishop.

Berthelier had still solicited for a definitive judgment of his Case, 1519.
Feb. 24.
which had been suspended by the Bishops command; Berthelier acquitted by the
City.
but after the Alliance made with Fribourg, he was no more feared, the City
declaring she would reassume her liberty; and that it belonged to the Syndicks,
and not to the Bishop, to try Berthelier. He was judged in the presence of the
Vidame, and a definitive sentence pronounced in these Terms. That as to what
concerned the Crime of High Treason, having examined the proofs, they were
found invalid, and therefore they acquitted him; declaring him innocent of this
crime: but touching the excesses he had committed, such as Assaults and
Batteries; they had Fined him according to the tenor of the Statute in that
case provided.

Some days after Duke Charles the third, fearing lest the Prosecutions which he
had began against the Genevoises before the Cantons, should turn to his
prejudice, and that instead of acknowledging him for their Prince, The Duke
raises an Army.
they should pretend he was their Vassal, he determined to deal with them after
a more violent manner. He raised then secretly an Army beyond the mountains,
that the Fribourgers might take no notice of it, and the better to conceal his
design he sent the President Lambert to the Cantons, desiring the business
might be friendlily ended. The Genevoises having gotten intimation of the
design, dispatched Besancon Hugues, and John Malbuisson to Fribourg; but
Lambert entertained the Fribourgers with such fair speeches, that they knew not
whom to credit; he endeavored also to persuade Besancon Huges who was his
kinsman, that his Master had no ill intention; which caused Hugues to be
suspected of corrupt dealings. In the mean time the Duke had gathered an Army
of six or seven thousand men at S. Julien, before the Fribourgers could be
persuaded to believe any such thing.

He sent immediately an Herald to the Syndicks called Chablais, An Herald sent
to Geneva.
who required that the Council should be assembled, which being done, he was
introduced. He had on his left arm, a Coat of Arms, and a wand in his right
hand, and entered after this manner without discovering himself, or so much as
saluting the Council, he was requested to seat himself by the Syndicks, and
make known his Message, which he thrice refused; but at length he sat down not
by the Syndicks, but in a seat above them, and spoke to them as follows: Let it
not seem strange to you, O ye Lords, Syndicks and Council of Geneva, if I would
not sit down at your command, and that I do it now of my own accord, for this
is the reason; I am come here from the part of my most dread Prince, yours and
my Lord and Master, the Duke of Savoy, whom it belongs not to you to bid sit
down, but to him to sit where and when he shall think fitting, above you, as
your Sovereign Prince and Lord, and as representing his Person I have done. So
from my seat I make known to you my Message, which is, That he bids and
commands you to make ready his Lodgings in the State-house, with that
splendour and magnificence which becomes a Prince of his quality; likewise that
you furnish him and his company with victuals, which are about ten thousand
footmen, besides horse: for he designs to come in this equipage to do Justice:
Which spoken, he was desired to withdraw, till they had consulted on the answer
to be returned him, which he did, and awhile after he was recalled, and answer
made him in these words.

We are equally surprised, Seigneur Chablais, at what you say and do: when we
offered you a seat, you refused it, and after your refusal have taken it of
your own accord, saying, you did it as representing the person of Monsieur the
Duke of Savoy your Prince and ours: That he is your Prince we believe, but not
ours; for although we reckon our selves his humble servants, yet are we not his
Subjects or Vassals, nor do we understand upon what ground it is pretended:
yea, we are willing to believe that he is a more dutiful Son to his mother our
holy Church, to whom we have submitted our selves, than to usurp her
jurisdiction; so that it belongs neither to him, nor to you representing him,
to sit where you do. As to that part of your Message whereby you command us to
prepare his Lodgins in the Townhouse, and not only Lodging for him, but for
ten thousand foot, besides horsemen, adding that he will come hither to do
Justice: truly we understand not the meaning of it, for he did not use to lodge
in the Townhouse, much less with such a kind of attendance; and if his coming
be as you say to do Justice, there is no need of so great multitude. For it
belongs not to him to do it here, but to the Bishop, Syndicks and Council,
according to the Customs and Privileges which he has sworn to observe; and if
there be any one amongst us who has done him or any person else any wrong, we
are ready to do him all the right he can desire; but our Kitchen is not large
enough to entertain all his Company, yet if be pleases to come with his usual
train, nay were there five hundred men more than ordinary, he should as
heretofore be welcome, and choose what Lodgings best please him, except our
Townhouse, which we cannot spare; he shall be entertained if not according to
his merit, yet according to the best of his power.

Which Discourse ended, the Herald replied, Gentlemen, you will not then great
my Lord his request, nor obey his commands. No, said they. Whereupon he put on
his Coat of Arms, and told them from himself, I declare you to be Rebels to
your Prince with fire and sword, and for a proof of this, I throw before you
this Wand, let him that dares take it up. Which saying, he threw it in the
middle of the Hall, and went his way. He had no sooner departed, but twelve
Gentlemen booted and spurred, who came on the same errand, entered into the
Council Chamber, and spoke thus to them, Syndicks and Council of Geneva,
resolve to obey my Lord, otherwise you will have cause to repent. Which they
had no sooner said but they set spurrs to their horses and departed.

The Syndicks and Council showed to the people what had happened, at which they
were much amazed; yet the greatest part considering, either they must be slaves
or lose their lives, generously chose the latter, resolving to sell their lives
at a dear rate. The Syndicks commanded them to Arm themselves, constraining the
Dukes faction to do the like; the Gates were shut, the Chains extended, and
Sentinels placed. The Duke having received his answer by the Herald, drew near
to Geneva, coming to Gaillard with all his Army, which increased by the
addition of those of Chablais and Focigny; he blocked up the passages lest any
thing should be carried in or out of the City.

Yet the Genevoises ventured to send a Messenger to Fribourg to give them
notice of their condition; but he was taken at Versoy, and led to Gex, where he
under went the Strappado, to make him give an account of the state Geneva. A
Merchant named Marmet returning out of Germany had the same usage.

The Bishops Officers and Chanons would needs make trial what they could do to
keep off this tempest which threatened the Town, saying, The Fribourgers send an
Herald to the Duke.
they would go to the Duke to try whether they could appease him. The Gates
were opened then, and they were accompanied with several Citizens of the Duke
factions. In the mean time the Fribourgers finding the passages to Geneva
blocked up, presumed they understood the Dukes design, and therefore sent in
have to him Frederick Marty with an Herald, to know his pretensions; for if he
injured Geneva either in general or particular, they would resent it. Marty
arrived at Geneva, and was much astonished to find affairs in such a posture,
his coming bringing along with it small consolation, they having more need of
Soldiers than Deputies. He comforted them the best he could, departing
immediately to expose his charge to the Duke. A Deputy from Zurich who was
going into France, The Dukes answer to the Deputies.
accompanied him; and both addressed themselves to the Duke, who was then at
Gallard upon the point of terminating the business with the Chanons. He at
first entertained them but slightly, and gave Marty some contemptible terms; at
length by the advice of his Council, he answered that he had determined to
enter into Geneva, not to injure the Town or any particular person of it; but
to assist it to the utmost of his power: that having been informed of their
dissentions, he very much feared their ruin, in whose destruction, his Country
must bear a part: for this cause he designed to come into the City to make them
agree by fair means, or otherwise by force: that his Cannon lay ready against
the City in case of resistance; which indeed was false, he having not one piece
throughout his whole Army bigger than an ordinary Musket; and that they would
do well to persuade the Syndicks to come to a parley with him, that so they
might appease these quarrels without further tumult, and for this purpose there
should be no act of hostility offered during that night. The Deputy returned to
Geneva with this answer, which he imparted by his Herald whom he sent post to
Fribourg to his Masters, sending after him a footman, to the end that if one
failed, the other might pass. In the mean time they promised themselves
security for that night upon Marty's mediation with the Duke, but the Earl of
Genevois the Dukes brother, marched up as far as S. Anthony's Gate, which
alarmed the City, and a lighted Torch was seen on the Pinnacle of the Steeple
which some of the Dukes party had set there for a Signal. All the Citizens put
themselves in Arms, but they were so little experienced in Martial affairs,
that every one forsook the place he was posted in, to run where the alarm was
given, as if they enemy could enter no where else.

Whilst these things were doing, there was heard three dreadful claps of
Thunder, the last of which fell on the Dukes house at Gaillard, and was so
extraordinary, that it astonished both parties, who attributed to it some bad
presage.

The Genevoises consulted with the Deputy of Fribourg, whether they should give
the Duke entrance, to which he answered, The Duke your Enemy is with his Army
and Artillery at your Gates, and my Superiors your friends will not see you
wronged; but I know not whether they can come timely enough: at the hearing of
which they all threw down their Arms, as if the City had been already taken.
The Syndicks with the Deputy went the next morning to the Duke at Gaillard, and
agreed he should enter into Geneva with his Train, and five hundred men for his
Guard, promising to hurt no body: which being concluded, all the Gates were
opened, and the Chains taken down; the Duke declaring there should enter with
him but five hundred men, The Duke enters with his Army into Geneva.
and that he would make no long stay there. But the Earl his brother entered
first through S. Anthony's Gate, armed from head to foot well mounted, and
after him several Companies of Foot; he caused the Gate to be thrown down, that
the Duke might pass over it as in triumph. The Duke entered likewise armed at
all points, but his head; his Page James de Vatteville, who was afterward made
Avoyer of Berne, March 6.
carried his headpiece.

The Prior of S. Victor not trusting to the Dukes promise, got immediately out
of the City, but at Vaud he fell into the hands of two false friends Francis
Champion, Sieur of Vanbrun, whom he trusted as a brother; and a Monk named
Brisset, Abbot of Montheron, who carried him to Eschallans, which was subject
to the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg, and delivered him to the Duke, who
caused him to be transported to Gex, Victor imprisoned.
and from thence to Grolee, where he kept him two years prisoner.

The Duke then being entered Geneva, brought in not only those he mentioned, but
his whole Army. The Earl of Genevois took up his quarters in the Townhouse,
and at two of the Clock in the night he commanded them to deliver him the Keys
of the Gates, their Artillery and other Ammunition; in this Consternation he
was refused nothing. He quartered his men in this manner, Montrotier with his
Company of Focigny at S. Gervais; them of the Country of Vaud, from S. Ledger as
far as our Lady of Grace. Monsieur de Coudrees Troop, which was raised at
Chablais, at our Lady Du Pont, as far as Molard. Them of Savoy and Genevois lay
in the suburb of Four, and the Nobility from the Molard to the Rive. These
Soldiers being ill disciplined committed a thousand insolences in the City,
being not content to drink the Wine without paying for it, but set it a running
about the Cellars, cut the Beds and scattered the feathers in the air: and yet
were bu^neer cowards; for to try them the Earl caused a false alarm to be
given, which made these paltry Rascals hide themselves up and down in holes.
Montrotier caused the Chain posts to be taken up, and to be carried to the
Dukes quarters, who to complete the Citizens mortification, caused to be
proclaimed in the chief parts of the City, the next morning after his arrival,
Our Sovereign Lord the Duke of Savoy, gives notice that no person of ye shall
dare to bear any Arms either offensive or defensive under pain of undergoing
the Strapado; and further let what will happen, no person shall dare to appear
in the streets, or put his head out of the window, because my Lord will do
Justice.

They who were not in favor kept themselves close; some there were who would
needs brave it, and wear their Swords contrary to the Dukes order, but were
forced to undergo the penalty, there being no remedy but patience. The Deputies
from Geneva at the same time were urgent with the Fribourgers to assist them;
The Fribourgers send assistance to Geneva.
they granted them one company, which was very inconsiderable in respect of
their need: but the flower of the youth of Fribourg, having listed themselves
for this expedition, their number increased where ever they passed, some of the
Dukes Subjects joining themselves to them; so that they immediately grew to the
number of six or seven thousand men, making themselves other colors, and
advanced as far as Geneva, without doing any other hurt than victualling on
free cost. Being come into the Country of Vaud, they apprehended the Governor
the Sieur of Lulins, and having notice that the Duke was in Geneva, they bad
him send his Master word, that whatsoever hurt should be done their fellow
Citizens, should be returned them again. They carried him along with them, and
entered in Morges without the least resistance, the inhabitants of which were
fled, and had traversed the Lake. They encamped there, and Lulins advertised
his Highness what had passed; this was on the day after this Proclamation had
been made. The Duke judging he must change his note, caused it to be published
that no Genevois should be molested either in his person or estate upon pain of
death and sent Maylian Captain of the horse to keep the passage of Nyons. He
likewise sent for the Deputy of Fribourg, The Dukes Proclamation.
and told him, The Deputies answer to the Duke.
saying, Mr. Deputy, I desire you would endeavor to pacisie matters; The
Deputies answer to the Duke.
you see I have not injured anybody, and give you my word not to do it
hereafter. Go you with my Deputies to the Camp, and let them safely return. The
Deputy who remembered the entertainment the Duke gave him at Gaillard, answered
him, Sir, do you believe such a man as I can do this? and continuing his jargon
of Fribourg, Alas Sir, says he, would you have me go to my Lords and Superiors
to carry your Message, pray employ your own servants to carry your jokes, for
my part I will not do it, you have not kept your promise with men or my
Superiors, no more will you now. In short he refused.

The Duke seeing this, left him, yet sent his Deputies, who in a short time
arrived at Morges, and demanded of the Captains wherefore they came in a
hostile manner into the Dukes Country; to which they returned the same answer,
why they had entered Geneva, their confederate City, in Arms. Which when the
Duke had heard, he commanded his Deputies to go to the other Cantons, to
entreat them to send to the Fribourgers to retire.

The Duke Army all the while lay upon the Genevoises, and that of Fribourg at
Morges, and in the rest of the Country of Vaud, which was subject to the Duke.
'Twas in the time of Lent: and because all Provision was scarce but Herrings,
some termed this Campaign, The War of Herrings.

The Duke assembled at Genevat he General Council, and demanded two things:
First that they should renounce the Bourgership of Fribourg, and f^nd into the
Camp as from the body of the Town, to assure them that neither the Duke, nor
any of his Men, had committed any outrage, to occasion their coming in so
Hostile a manner. That Hogues and Malbuisson had not been sent by them as
public Deputies, but that they went of their own Authority without the
Councils leave. All which was granted him, because they dared not do otherwise,
and they sent whom he was pleased to nominate. But when they came to Morges,
the Fribourgers and the other Cantons gave no credit to them, because the
former Deputies had showed them the contrary. Articles between the Duke and
Fribourgers.
Yet the business was so thoroughly prosecuted, that an agreement was concluded
on these following conditions: First, Because the Fribourgers required 15000
Crowns to defray their Expenses in coming, they should have 4000 paid them in
hand, and should return without hurting the Country, only Victualling as they
passed on free cost. Secondly, That the Duke on his part should draw out his
Army from Geneva, without damnifying the City either in general or particular,
leaving it in full possession of its former privileges; and concerning other
differences, they should be decided as heretofore. The difficulty lay in
providing the 4000 Crowns, for the Duke would not pay them nor the Genevoises:
but the Prince having called the General Council, they were forced to engage
for the payment of 2000 of them, and for the other half the Earl of Genevoise
delivered his Plate to the Fribourgers, upon condition the Genevoises would
redeem it the next S. James's and S. Christopher's day. So the two Armies
withdrew, but the Duke staid behind at Geneva, till the Plague, which swept
away several of the People, obliged him to retire to Thonon; and immediately
after Hugues and Malbuisson returned to Geneva, The Duke sends for Hugues and
Malbuisson.
believing themselves secure; yet the Duke sent for them to Thonon, by the
Vidame Consilii, whom that he might the more easily persuade to go along with
him, he brought them a Letter of Safe conduct. They knowing the Dukes temper,
would not carry his Letter with them, but left it with Hugues's Wife, enjoining
her, if she heard they were detained, to send it speedily to Fribourg. They
went then with the Vidame, who believed he had them safe enough, and that they
might easily be dispatched when their Letter of Safe Conduct was taken away
from them. They had scarcely gotten half a mile from the City, but he asked
them whether they had it not about them? They answered him, they had not; at
which the Vidame falling into a passion replied, Wretches, as you are,
wherefore have you set out then? How dare ye appear without it before my Lord,
who ye know is enraged against you? and if any mishap should befall you, you
would not receieve more hurt than I should dishonor. Return and fetch it then,
otherwise I will not go along with you. Truly, Mr. Vidame (replied they) we can
go no where to fetch it, but at Fribourg where we have sent it as soon as we
received it, to the end if your Lord should misuse us, he should have in
requital at least some trouble for violating his Faith. But if you are for
returning to Geneva, with all our hearts, for we had rather be with our Wives
and Children than to go turn Courtiers. To which the Vidame replied, Well if it
be so, we had as good continue our journey; my Lord has passed his word, which
is of more value than a Letter. They kept on then their way, and being arrived
at Thonon, the first word the Duke gave them was, Whether they had the Letter
of Safe Conduct? but was vexed when he heard them answer no. He committed them
to the keeping of the Provost of his Household, forbidding them to be suffered
to speak to any body but in presence of the Guards. The Provost led them to his
House, sounding them about the secret concerns of the Town, where in the way
they were followed by the clamors of the rabble, who cried out they should be
thrown into the River.

The Duke seeing all his endeavors could not obtain from them their Safe
conduct, dismissed them, having first made them swear on the Altar of S.
Hippolyte, Patron of the place, not to think any more on the Burgership of
Fribourg, nor to do any thing against his Authority, nor to concern themselves
in affairs of the State, without his consent: and moreover made them to do him
great submissions. A while after he sent to the Council of Geneva, that they
should borrow money in Switzerland to redeem his Brothers Plate. The City sent
in effect Secretary Porral, who had been a Syndick, and gave him Monathon for
his guide, with the City Seal, to sign the Obligation. But passing through the
Country of Vaud, this Secretary was taken and carried to Thonon, and being
examined where the Letters lay relating to the Burgership of Fribourg, the
Secretary through fear revealed it; upon which the Duke sent immediately to
Geneva, to demand them. Answer was returned him, They dared not enter in the
Townhouse, because a Servant-maid had lately died of the Plague there. But
being not satisfied with this answer, he reiterated his demand, that
notwithstanding he would have them, so that they were forced to obey him. This
done he released Porral, and suffered him to continue on his Journey with
Monathon. They met with money upon interest at Berne and Lucerne to redeem the
Earls Plate.

In May there was a general meeting of the Cantons at Zurich, 1519.
where the Duke and Deputies of Geneva promised to stand by their decision; May.
which was as follow: That the Duke henceforward should not attempt any thing
against the Bishop and Cities Jurisdiction. That the Burgership of Fribourg and
Geneva should be suspended, neither party making any use of it; and that the
Fribourgers should rest satisfied with the 4000 Crowns received for their
assistance, for they claimed more. This second Peace was thus concluded betwixt
the Duke and two Cities, and lasted Six years with much ado. The Eidgnots and
Mammelusses began to be reconciled, and feasted one another, making Alliances
by Marriage, and forgetting ancient differeces.

The Duke considering Berthelier as a person who ever withstood his Interest in
Geneva, August.
resolved to leave no means untried to be rid of him: but being desirous not to
appear in it himself, he would therefore make use of the Bishops name, who was
wholly at his service. Berthelier apprehended, by the Duke.
To which end he sent several of his Subjects from Focigny to Geneva, who
joining with the Mammelusses, lodged at the Eidgnots, and made almost as much
disorder as the Army had done heretofore. All which had no other end but to
take Berthelier. He was sensible of it, every one giving him warning; yet he
valued it not, declaring he was so far from fearing Death, as he rather desired
it, as a Haven of rest after all his troubles. He had a Garden out of Town,
where he went every day to walk, carrying along with him a Squirrel in his
Bosom, with which he was wont to recreate himself. Three days after the arrival
of them of Forigny, the Vidame Consilii, with his attendants, had gotten before
him in expectation of his coming. Berthelier saw him making toward him, and
not being at all daunted at it, kept on his way. The Vidame laid hold on him in
the Bishops name, according as he was ordered, and took away his Sword.
Berthelier boldly bid him keep it well; for said he, You shall give an account
of it. He was carried to the Isle, no body interposing, and had Guards assigned
him: whereas he to show how little he was concerned, commonly diverted himself
with his Squirrel. They advised him to beg my Lords pardon. What Lord? said he.
The Duke of Savoy, replied they, our Prince and yours. He is not my Prince,
answered he, and if he were, I would not ask Pardon, being innocent. It
belongs to Malefactors to beg Pardon, not to honest Men. You must die then,
said they to him several times; but he, without answering them, wrote on the
Prison-wall: Non moriar, sed vivam and narrabo opera Domini. That is, I shall
not die, but live and declare the Works of the Lord.

The first day of his Imprisonment there were sent to examine him, not the
Syndicks, but a Provost made in haste, who had been heretofore a Tooth drawer,
called John des Bois; (An honest Man would not have accepted a Commission of
that nature.) who gave him notice, that he was commanded by the Prince to
examine him, and to require his Oath. Berthelier boldly replied, When the
Syndicks, who are my Judges, shall question me, I will answer them, but not
thee, who have nothing to do in the matter. The Provost summoned him to deliver
his answer the next Morning, and sent Post to the Princes to advertize them of
the proceedings. The next Morning the said Provost, accompanied with them of
Focigny, marched in Battle-array, carrying along with them a Confessor and an
Executioner, to the Prison, wherein was Berthelier, where his company drew up
the Bridge. The Provost commanded him again to make his answer. Whereto he
replied, He would not. The Provost added, Then I command you on penalty of
losing your head; and Berthelier answering as before, he pronounced this
Sentence against him: Seeing then, Philbert Berthelier, that is in this, so in
other matters, thou have always showed thy self rebellious against mine and thy
dread Sovereign, having been guilty of the Crime of High Treason, and several
other matters worthy of death, according to the Tenor of thy Indictment and
Accusation: We therefore Sentence thee to have thy Head cut off, and thy Body
to be hanged on the Gibbet of Champel, and thy Head to be set upon a Spike, and
fastened upon a Gallows near the River of Arve. Which Sentence thus pronounced,
August 5.
he offered him the Confessor, with whom he had not much discourse. Afterward
he was delivered to the Executioner, who led him out of the Castle, in a place
betwixt the Tower and Bridge; where, having made a short Prayer, he would have
made a Speech to the Citizens before he died; but the Provost would not suffer
him, bidding the Executioner, Dispatch, and do his Office. The Hangman caused
him to kneel down, which Berthelier having done, Berthelier Executed.
he cried out, Ah! Gentlemen of Geneva; which he had scarcely said before his
Head dropped on the Ground. which done, the Executioner put his Body in a
Hearse, on which he got up, holding in his Hand Berthelier's Head, and crying
out to the People, Behold the Head of the Traitor Berthelier, take all of you
example by him. Besides the Soldiers, who were strangers, there were some of
the Town who followed the Hearse, and made a mock at their own evils: but good
People kept within doors. The Head was set up near the Heads of Navis and
Viterman, and some years after it was taken down and buried in Holy Ground by
some Soldiers from Fribourg who passed by that way. There have been some, who
considering the Heroical constancy of Berthelier, and the tyranny of his
Judges, have given him this Epitaph: Quid mihi mors nocuit? virtus post fata
virescit.
Nec cruce, nec saevigladio perit illa Tyranni.
How can death hurt? since virtue death survives,
And Tyranny of Gibbets, Swords, or Knives.
His death affrighted them of Geneva, who did not then dare to deny the Duke
and Bishop any thing; but it enraged the Fribourgers, who had a great desire to
revenge it. Yet they thought it not convenient to raise an Army every time the
Duke gave them cause of offense, they made their complaints to the Cantons, and
demanded their Pay due to them for the former Levies, and that he should give
them satisfaction for Berthelier's death. The Duke acquitted himself from this
Article, laying the blame on the Bishop, assuring them he did it unknown to
him; and as to the payment, he denied that he was obliged to it, seeing the War
had been unjust, referring them to the Genevoises, and demanding on his side
reparation for the Damages done in his Country of Vaud. This set the Genevoises
in an uproar, and the Princes took the advantage of their Dissentions to ruin
the Eidgnots party, and bring their own in credit. They required the Council to
be assembled, and caused Eustache Chappuis the Bishops Chancellor, who was
afterward sent Deputy into England, to show the people that the Election of
Syndicks for that year had not been duly made, by the violence of some, who
preferred their own private interest before the public, and who had brought
into the general Council persons excluded by the Statutes and ancient Customs,
it belonging to none to sit there but those who were of principal Families:
that they did this to have persons of their own Faction, which tended to
nothing but to foment Rebellion: that the people for this effect had made an
Alliance with Fribourg, which had put the Bishop their Prince upon calling in
the Duke of Savoy his Cousin to his assistance, who had spared neither his
estate nor his person to hinder such a bad effect, which would not only fall on
his Countries, but likewise the City it self, as has been found already by
experience; seeing the Fribourgers demanded yet great sums of money, which
could not be raised without impovershing the City. The Duke endeavored to
hinder them from paying the money, and withal showed them there could be no good
correspondence between him and them, whilst they were governed by the Authors
of this Alliance; and concluded, desiring the people to declare the said
Syndicks not duly elected, and to put others less suspected in their places.

The people desirous of Peace, Syndicks put by their Office.
and that the money should be paid, easily embraced this proposal. The Syndicks
were discharged of their Office, after a declaration made to show this,
dismission proceeded from no other cause but only for want of a due Election,
which done they laid down their staves, and others were chosen in their places;
they substituted likewise some Counselors, who were best acceptable to the
Princes; Preter Versonex, Peter Monthyon, Peter de Fernex junior, Will. Daguet.
especially them who were for breaking off with Fribourg: They caused the
general Council to retract that Alliance, and deputed Richardet, and Goulaz, as
from the Syndicks, to meet the Cantons assembled at Zurich with this
instruction: First, that they should excuse the Duke touching the execution of
Berthelier, and acquaint them it was done against his knowledge, the Bishop
having punished him according to his deserts, as a Seditious person, and as one
guilty of the crime of High Treason, the term likewise of his Safe Conduct
being expired. Secondly, concerning the payment to be made to them of Fribourg;
they should require it of them who called them, who were since put out of their
Office, as Authors of these disturbances. Thirdly, that they should be urgent
with the Fribourgers to renounce the Burgership contracted with Geneva.

The Assembly being sat, the Deputies from Fribourg made their complaints, and
were answered by them of Geneva and Savoy, according to the instructions given
them. Fribourgers demand satisfaction for Bertheliers death.
The Fribourgers replied, that whosoever had put Berthelier to death had done
unjustly, seeing he had been cleared by a definitive sentence of the Syndicks,
who were his lawful judges, and he who had pronounced sentence against him
being but a pitiful Tooth-drawer; and that the Princes had broken their
promise, which they made them before they left Morges, that they would
introduce no innovations till this difference was accommodated; that they had
reason to desire a re-imbursement of their charges, they having taken up Arms
on just grounds, it being to help their fellow Citizens, received into their
alliance according to Law, the Duke nor Bishop having no power to hinder them.
They likewise maintained that the former Deputies were persons of worth,
neither would they acknowledge these latter, whom the people say they have
chosen by constraint. There were some replies made by both parties, but the
Cantons decreed it after the same manner and form as at Morges, to which they
were forced to yield, and agree with Savoy. The Duke ever since he had married
Beatrix the Infanta of Portugal, kept his Court at Geneva, and desirous to
leave a man of Authority for his Lieutenant, he displaced Consilii, and put the
Sieur Salaigne in his room, who was of the family of the Beauforts.

In the Year following, 1520.
before the Election of the Syndicks, on the twelfth day the Chanons were
accustomed with other Ecclesiastics to choose one of the Chapter King by a bean
with great expense: now it happened to fall to Marcossay's share who was
Governor of Pillounay, and being of the Country of Focigny, Marcossay's lot to
be King.
he had brought along with him as King several of his Countrymen for his Guard;
at which the Townsmen who bore them ill will were displeased, and specially one
Matthew of Confignon, Sieur of Marglie, who having been heretofore wounded by
one of Bonne whose name was Goudard, resolved then to be revenged; and being
accompanied with about a dozen resolute fellows, slid through the press, and
singled out his man, who bore the Standard, ran him through the back for want
of armor, and having left him dead on the place, made his escape out of the
Town through the Halbards. The Duke and Bishop laid this Murder to the Charge
of the Eidgnots though guiltless, but they who had done it returned two years
after into the City, having obtained their pardon through Confignon's means.

The Bishop John of Savoy lived not long after these troubles, 1522.
he died in the Abbey of Pignerol, before he could arrive to S. Peter's years,
John of Savoy dies of the Pox.
that is to say, before he had finished the twenty fifth year of his Office
according to Pecolat's prediction; it was thought he was poisoned, search
having been made accordingly: but a scandalous Chronicle relates he died of the
Venereal distemper, which brought him into the Gout, which was accompanied
moreover with filthy Ulcers, that left him nothing but skin and bones. It is
reported likewise that after his decease, his body was found to weigh not above
twenty eight pound: before his death he resigned his Benefices to Peter of
Baume, who was of the family of the Earls of Montevel in Bresse; Regent of the
Abbey of Sure, and St. Claude, who declared his Predecessor died with great
remorse, especially for the disturbances he had occasioned in Geneva, which he
intended to bring wholly under the Dukes subjection.

Soon after him died Consilii, who a while before had been discharged of his
Office of Vidame. His death was as tragical as his life infamous, his house was
the rendezvous of all debauched persons, his wife serving as a Bawd, by which
trade she got wherewithal to keep house. De Sardet one of the two hundred
Gentlemen belonging to the Court of France, and of the Family of the Vitry's,
frequented there with a hundred others more: he lodged in the house whilst his
money lasted, but having consumed it all in feasting and extravagant
entertainments, Consilii pretending to be jealous of him, thought by that means
to get rid of him; but the Gentleman enraged at his baseness, their quarrel
proceeded so far that Sardet's Valet meeting one day Consilii in the open
street, accosted him with these words, ' S Death* Mr. Whoreson, You have made
my Master beat me, and therefore now I will be revenged of you for it; which
said, he struck him into the belly with his knife, Consilii stabbed.
and fled out of the City. Consilii was carried home, and died immediately upon
it. The good Gentlewoman his Wife counterfeited great sorrow, and pretended to
be very much incensed for awhile against Sardet, but he made his excuses to
her, and the better to make his peace with her they were married together.
Sardet died some time after, and she becoming a widow the second time, made use
of that little beauty she had left her, to draw young men to her house, till
Old Age finishing his spoils on her, had wiped out all her charms, and she
ended the rest of her days in an Hospital.

On the twelfth of April in the year following Peter of Baume, 1523.
having been chosen Bishop, Peter of Baume chosen Bishop.
made his entrance, and took the Oath given him by the Syndicks on the Bridge
of Arve; the people made great preparations for his reception, but he would
have them reserved for the Duchess who was shortly to come there, as indeed
she did awhile after with the Duke, Preparations made for the entertainment of
the Duchess
and were magnificently received. The Youth of the City were sumptuously
apparelled in Damask Silk, and in Velvet, and Cloth of Silver, armed each of
them with a Half-Pike. But the comeliest sight was a Company of Amazons, who
were Women richly attired; their Petticoats trussed up to their knees, carrying
a Dart in their right hands; and in their left a Buckler or Shield gilded with
silver after the manner of the ancient she-Warriers. They were led by a Spanish
Dame, the wife of Francis of S. Michael Sieur of Avoully, who was to complement
the Duchess in her own Language. They bore in their Colors the Effigies of a
large handsome Woman the Daughter of an Apothecary called great James, who could
flourish a Colors with the most expert Ensign.

The Duchess had desired for her welcome to have her lodgings in the
Townhouse, but it was denied her. A rich Merchant offered her his own house,
which was more stately and convenient than it, but she would not accept of it.
Their entrance was after this manner: The Duchess was carried from the Bridge
of Arve in a triumphant Chariot drawn by four Horses, which were covered with
cloth of gold, set with precious stones, which dazzled the sight of the
beholders. The Duke her Husband followed mounted on a Mule together with the
Abbot of Beaumont, and one of his Gentlemen, all three clothed after the same
fashion with gray Clokes and Caps to pull over their necks. The Duchess having
passed over the Bridge was met by these Amazons, whose Captain presented her
with a Spanish Sonnet full of Elogies, high Encomiums and offers of the Towns
service; but she was so far from thanking them, that she would not so much as
cast her eyes toward them. Afterward she was met by the young men, who
received as little respect from her as the former; at which the Citizens were
displeased; saying they paid her not these respects out of any sense of duty,
but only to testify their affection to her as friends. Whereas on the contrary
the Duchess who was a Portugais showed she esteemed them not only as Subjects,
but as Slaves, after the Portugais fashion. There were some who were of opinion
that they should do well to pull down the Theaters and Scaffolds erected for
their divertisement; seeing she seemed to take no delight in what they did for
her; saying further, It were better to employ the money spent on these
entertainments in fortifying the Town, and keeping them out, than in drawing of
them in: After which sort they wounded themselves with their own weapons.

Yet they continued to feast them, being attended by the whole City with all
the signs of mirth and jollity. The Dutchesses reservedness was excused by
some, saying, che eran los costumbres de Portugal, that it was the Portugal
fashion. Yet she did make the Ladies a sumptuous Feast, attended with Balls and
Masquerades and Farces, so that since Philberts time the City had seen no such
divertisements. There was likewise a Turney kept, in which the Townsmen showed
themselves as expert as the Courtiers: in short this year was spent in devising
how to make the Duke and Duchess welcome, furnishing both them and their train
with provision and household stuff, as well for delight as necessity. It may be
truly affirmed, that they were better obeyed and served at Geneva on courtesy,
than they would have been at Chambery by obligation.

The year following, 1524.
the Duchess was delivered of a Son who was baptized at Geneva. He was named
Charles, and died awhile after in Spain, before his father could make him as he
had vainly promised Prince of Geneva; the Duchess passionately desiring she
might enjoy with this son the Sovereignty of that City: for she used to say in
her own Language, che era muouch buona posada, that it was a very good place to
make an Inn of.

About this time the Emperor and King of France were at variance, Emperor and
King of France at variance.
and would each of them fain draw the Duke over to their side but he kept
himself Neuter, being the Emperors Brother-in-law and Vassal, and the King of
France his Uncle. The differences between Luther and the Pope began to break
out about this time. The Duke making use of this juncture of affairs to fish,
as we say, in troubled waters, and wholly to subdue Geneva to himself. The
Walls and Ramparts were no ways amended; and the Bishop although well
affectioned to the liberties of the Town, and the privileges of the Church,
yet might easily be prevailed on, being very amorously inclined, and addicted
to those pleasures which soften the severest minds, and stifle the most
commendable virtues; having moreover several considerable Benefices in the
Dukes dominions, of which he might be deprived if he opposed the Duke. Moreover
the Youth of the City were so effeminated by Courtly delights, that they were
more desirous of a License for their Debaucheries than passionate for the
Liberties of the City.

The Vidame Salaigne being deceased, the Duke had put Verneau in his stead, who
was caused according to ancient Custom to swear to be true to the Bishop; but
the Duke pretended, it was to him or his he ought to do it; the Bishop made
some small opposition, and appeased the Duke the best he could. The Duke to
pluck this thorn out of his foot, found out a means to send the Bishop into
Piedmont in the Emperors service, which he dared not refuse as belonging to the
Emperor. He left his brother S. Sorlin at Geneva to govern in his absence, who
being likewise addicted to his pleasures, left the management of all affairs to
the Episcopal Council. It was consulted one day whether the Vidame his appeal
should be carried to the Dukes Council or not; the greatest part of the
Counselors were his Subjects born, and leaned to the affirmative; Levrery
alone, Judge of excesses, son of the other Levrery whom we have aforementioned,
maintained, the Duke had no Authority in Geneva, and that the Appeal should be
brought before the Bishop: of which the Duke having notice by his Favorites,
he sent for the Episcopal Council, who all went except Levrery. Levrery sent
for by the Duke.
He made several complaints, and used some threats toward them, but they laid
all the blame on Levrery, whom he commanded to bring along with them, promising
he should have no ill usage; who coming into his presence, the Duke spoke thus
very huffingly, There are some among you who say, I am not Lord of Geneva, and
no body answering, he added, it is one Levrery, is it not? will not he be here?
Levrery presenting himself, it was I my Lord, said he, but when I said this, it
was in Council, for which I am not to be questioned. Get you gone, said the
Duke, and make it appear by good sufficient proofs in three days time,
otherwise look to your self. Levrery departed the more troubled, by how much
the more he saw it difficult to produce the City Writings, seeing they were in
the hands of those who were affectioned to the Duke; so that his friends could
not better advise him than to get out of the way: but he would not take their
advice, choosing rather, as he said, to die in maintaining S. Peter's Authority,
and the Cities privileges, as Berthelier had done before him. He remained in
the City beyond the time prefixed by the Duke, coming and going as before,
which the more enraged his Highness, who believed he did it out of contempt: he
caused him then to be laid hold on by his Bailiff and some Gentlemen as he
walked out of S. Peter's Gate: they brought him to the Duke, who coming out of
his Palace, was going to our Lady of Grace's Church to hear Mass, to the end he
might be near the Bridge of Arve, and speedily retire into his own Countries in
case the people should attempt his rescue; but there was no danger of that, for
they were afraid of making the matter rather worse than better, should they
have appeared in his behalf. S. Sorlin had withdrawn himself to Remilly, that
he might avoid the obligation of defending Levrery. The Prisoner clothed as he
was in a Velvet Jacket, was set upon a sorry horse, as if he were some rascally
fellow, with his hands tied behind him, and his legs fastened under the horses
belly, and was led in this equipage to Bonne, accompanied with a crew, who
ceased not all the way to injure him; but especially one Francis Noel, (who to
ennoble himself would be called Mr. de Bellegard, by the name of a certain
Farm.) This person although formerly he had been his great companion, yet was
more severe upon him than any of the rest; but his baseness was well requited,
having broken his leg before he came to Bonne, where they delivered Levrery to
the Bailiff, after they had searched him.

The next Morning the Ladies who had honored the Duchess at her entrance into
Geneva, came to entreat her to pacify the Dukes anger against poor Levrery: but
in vain; for he had already sent the Provost of his Household, the Confessor and
Executioner to Bonne. Where they were no sooner arrived, but the Provost
according to his Instructions caused him to be put on the Rack, and required
him to confess his Accomplices. He answered, he had none; at which the Provost
resting satisfied, without further discourse, Sentenced him to be beheaded;
which was executed the same Night by Torch-light, Levrery put to death.
after he had confessed himself to his Ghostly Father, and that he had written
on the Prison wall the same words as Berthelier had done before him. It is said
when the Executioner led him to the place of Execution in the Castle, he spoke
aloud as he went these words: God give me grace to die, for S. Peter' s
Authority, and my Countries Liberty. This business astonished the Citizens, who
complained of their Pastors forsaking them: and in this general consternation
the Duke might easily have made himself Master of the City: but by good hap, he
withdrew to Thonon, and from thence to Piedmont, where Francis the First being
taken before Pavie, he left his side and came over to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth.

In this Year Claudius Richardet, 1525.
one of the Syndicks of the Eidgnots Party, declared in Council, That the City
had been at great charge in entertaining the Duke, the Revenues thereof being
exhausted they knew not after what manner, and that it was fitting Boulet the
Treasurer should be called to an account for it. Who being one of the Faction
of the Mammelusses, and enraged at the matter, Claudius Richardet breaks his
Staff on the Treasurers Head.
cried out in a passion, What must we still be governed by these Eidgnots? The
Syndick taking now his turn to be angry, broke his Syndical Staff on the others
Head. Boulet thereupon makes his complaint to the Dukes Council at Chambery,
who granted him a Writ to cite them of Geneva to make their appearance. He set
it up at the Bridge of Arve. The Syndicks regarded it not* saying, That neither
the Duke nor his Council had any authority over them. But they were condemned
for their contempt; and in pursuit of this, their Estates which lay in Savoy
were confiscated. The Genevoises sent their Deputies to the Duke and Bishop,
desiring them to maintain, according to their Oaths, the Liberties of the City.
But the Duke made them no satisfaction. The Bishop pretended to be troubled at
it; although it may be judged he was very well pleased, as we may believe by
what follows: For having gotten 300 Crowns of the Genevoises to carry their
Appeal to Rome, he stirred not in the business. Some private Persons designing
to do it secretly, the Duke hindered them, and made them fly into Germany.

And not content with this, he sent Judge Bartalais and the Vidame Hugues of
Rogemont to Geneva, to the end the Genevoises should renounce this Appeal, and
remit the Recognisance of criminal Cases to himself. Which Article was
delivered to the General Council, and the chief Syndick Nergaz passed it,
saying, That matter brought no great advantage to the City: Bonier another of
the Syndicks strongly opposed it, saying, He would never consent to it, and
called them Traitors who would. But he remained not long in this mind, for a
while after he took part with the Duke.

Upon this refusal the Vidame, by the Dukes order, designed to weaken the
Eidgnots Faction in apprehending some of the chief of them, Eidgnots Faction
endeavored to be weakened.
who were Besancon Hugues, Peter and Claudius Baud, Amy Gerard the Treasurer,
Francis Rosset Inn-holder at the Blacks-head, John Lulin Innkeeper at the
Bear, Peter of Toy, alias Poulain, and one Chabot. Which two last intending to
save themselves by flying to Fribourg, fell at Versoy into an Ambuscade laid by
their Enemies. Poulain being well mounted made his escape, but Chabot was
carried to Gex. Notice was given to the rest to stand upon their Guard. Williet
the Bailiff of Gex intending to apprehend Hugues, who was his Gossip, came and
lay at his House at Chatelaine; but he being informed of his design, was too
cunning for him: for having received him the Night before with the greatest
outward expression of joy, he made his escape the next Night with some Friends,
and took the Bailiffs Horse along with him. They were pursued by the Provost
and his Men, and by his Highness's Guards, but they could not overtake them,
having gotten already to Fribourg, where they made their complaints of the
Dukes violences, beseeching the Lords either to continue the Alliance, or to
make another. They had fair promises made them; after which they went and
Addressed themselves to the States of Zurich, who notwithstanding the troubles
which began at that time about Religion, gave ear to them, and dispatched two
Deputies to the Duke at Anecy. The Duke at their suit granted a Release to the
Prisoners, and a Safe conduct to the Eidgnots, who had withdrawn themselves
into Switzerland. Yet they would not accept of it, seeing it contained some
dangerous points: wherefore they were more urgent to make an Alliance with the
confederate Cantons; which was promised should be effected by them of Berne and
Fribourg, when they should have leisure to consider more narrowly of the
Articles of that Treaty.

In the mean time the Duke being arrived at Geneva, The Duke desires to be
acknowledged Sovereign over the City of Geneva.
caused a General Council to be assembled in S. Peter's Cloister, a place
designed for that purpose, where he assisted in Person, sitting in his Chair,
his Chancellor behind him, and his Guards round about him, for fear of any
Popular Tumult; which Council has been since called, The Council of Halbards.
The Chancellor, Gabriel de Land, demanded of the People, as from the Duke,
that in consideration of the pains and trouble his Predecessors had underwent
to maintain their State, they should therefore acknowledge him Sovereign
Protector of the City, and that they should disown the Fugitives and
Burgership, which they were contracting with the Switzers. Which Proposals
amazed the People, and yet they granted him nothing; he therefore seeing his
endeavors fruitless, returned to Piedmont. August.
Yet he came there again a while after, and began to speak more gently to the
Syndicks, assuring them he had expressly commanded that the Estates belonging to
the City should be restored; adding moreover, that he would not in the least
manner derogate from the Liberties and Privileges thereof; for which they
thanked him.

The Vidame and Judge Barralis presented themselves before the Council, October.
showing them as Friends to the City, who desired nothing more than its Repose
and Establishment, That seeing the Duke was Vicar of the Empire, and Sovereign
in all his Country, he might also be acknowledged Sovereign in Geneva, without
any prejudice to the Bishop or City; by which means he would watch over it for
its preservation: and that moreover it would be a difficult matter to hinder
him, if he were minded, to take by force this Sovereignty upon him: that they
might easily perceive the Bishop would not help them in their necessities: that
the Duke was a mild and generous Prince, who would defend and maintain them
against any who should oppose them. Upon which it was answered, They would
deliberate on the matter, and confer with the Episcopal and General Council,
and with M. of Geneva. In the mean time the Vidame and Barralis plied the
Counselors so fast with good words, or threats, that the greatest part of them
told the Syndicks, If ye will acknowledge him, we will likewise. But they held
firm, and troubled themselves no more about it.

Twelve days after came the Deputies from Fribourg and Soleurre, who showed the
Council, That if they should be any more troubled about their Privileges,
Council divided.
their Superiors would take them into their Protection. The Council were very
much divided, and those who took part with the Duke oftentimes carried it from
the rest, as they did then; for the answer given the Deputies was this, That
they who had made their complaints to them, did it without the consent of the
Town, and so they were dismissed with this answer. They wrote to the Cantons of
Berne at the same time; as also to Fribourg, Soleurre and Lucerne, that they
should not give heed to all complaints made them, without the consent of the
City. The Fribourgers wrote back again, desiring to see the Cities Charter;
which was refused them, saying, They had no cause to complain against the Duke
of Savoy.

On the 10th of December the Duke caused another Council to be held, 1525.
of whom he demanded three things by his Chancellor: December.
First, That nothing should be done against his authority nor the Bishops.
Secondly, That the Syndicks should be chosen according to the manner used six
years ago. And Thirdly, That they should renounce all Foreign Alliance; which
was promised and publicly proclaimed: but this being not gotten by common
consent, on the 22 d of the same Month, Bandieres appears before the Council.
appeared before the Council John Bandieres, accompanied with the Children of
those who had withdrawn themselves into Switzerlamd, together with Secretary
Vandelli, and above 200 others who presented a Writing to this effect: That
they and their Party owned and acknowledged the Fugitives in Switzerland to
have done a good office, both to the Bishop and City, in endeavoring an
Alliance with the confederate Cantons, protesting against the injury done them
in their disowning of them, saying, They desired no answer, but only Letters
testimonial from the City Secretary; which the Council would not agree to. On
the same day a Letter was directed to the Bishop then at Pignerol* to come and
set the Affairs of the City in order, which several of the Citizens had
deserted: and the Fugitives sent for their Wives and Children.

The Bishop upon notice of this news returned, 1526.
and was received by the whole City with great joy. Feb. 1.
Two days after he sent for the Syndicks, to know how they had carried
themselves; who having given him an account of all the Traverses they had met
with, The Bishop returns to Geneva.
he said unto them, Neither have I been exempt from the like troubles, for the
Duke told me once in his Brothers presence, That he intended to have the
Sovereignty of Geneva: but resolving with my self to maintain the Rights and
Privileges of my Church, even to death, I made him this answer, That being
Peter of Baume, I was his humble Servant and Subject; but as being Bishop of
Geneva, I was not his Subject, and that he had no Right to the City. He
moreover showed them it would be very necessary the deliberations in Council
should be carried on more privately, and that in business of consequence they
should make use of little Balls, as they do at Venice.

Eight days after new Syndicks were chosen. Feb. 8.
The Fribourgers and Bernoises were very glad that John Philippe', Philippe
chosen chief Syndick.
one of the chief of the Eidgnots, was chosen Principal Syndick: whereupon they
who were fled to Fribourg, to procure the Alliance of that State and of Berne,
Feb. 21.
returned to Geneva. They informed the Council, by Besancon Hugues, of what
they had done concerning the Burgership, effected with such great labor, and
so many obstacles from the Duke; which Alliance was agreed to, provided it
should last 25 years, or rather for ever, if it pleased both Parties, it being
to be renewed and confirmed every Five years. Alliance made with Berne.
The Articles were these: viz. That the Three Cities of Berne, Fribourg and
Geneva, should be faithful one to another; that if one should be invaded, the
others should assist it to the utmost of their power. 1526.
Three days after the General Council was assembled, at the ringing of the
great Bell, Feb. 25.
where there were not above Five or Six Persons who would not consent to this
Alliance: The Bishop being present protested against every thing which might
prejudice his Authority in this affair.

The Chapter of the Cathedral were startled at the matter, Feb. 27.
the Chanons and Clergy desiring to know of the Syndicks, whether they might
repute themselves safe in the City? It was answered, They had no cause to fear,
for if the Chanon of Lutry had received any ill usage, it was because he
refused to deliver the Keys of the Church, when they would have assembled the
last Council.

Eight Deputies parted from Geneva to swear to the Agreement, and Eight others
from Berne and Fribourg arrived to do the same at Geneva; they were met by the
Syndicks out of Town, and saluted with all the Cannon.

The next Morning the Oath was taken in presence of the General Council, 1526.
the People crying out, March 12.
Thus would we have it, thus would we have it; in a good hour were they born,
who have procured us so great good. At Night the Deputies were entertained and
treated with Plays and Bonfires at Molard, in token of joy; after which they
returned, carrying with them the Copy of the Oath sealed.

Not long after the City had advice, by an Express from Berne, that Monsieur de
Lulin had addressed himself to the Duke in a Council held at Lucerne, Mar. 14.
to cause the Burgership to be revoked; and the same did Nergaz, Mar. 28.
Servant, and Forty other Mammelusses. The business was referred to be
transacted at Berne, in a Council there, where appeared the Deputies of Geneva,
Hugues, and du Molard. The conclusion was, That the three Cities would by no
means revoke their Alliance, April 7.
and that if the Duke would not rest satisfied, he should have the Letters of
the Alliance, which he had made with Berne and Fribourg, returned him.

The Eidgnots, who were at that time the most powerful, ill resented this
appearance of the Mammelusses, who were forced to leave the Town by an emotion
of the People. They withdrew to the Dukes Dominions. Mammelusses's Conspiracy.
A while after they sent to know whether they might return? Answer was made
them, They might, if they could prove themselves honest Men. But they dared not
venture. At length, upon inquiry, it was found, That they, together with the
Vidame, had conspired to seize on the chief Eidgnots, and to cut off their
Heads. Peter Gruet, the Bishops Vicar, was suspected to be of the Dukes Party:
whereupon he was deposed, and the Abbot of Beaumont put in his place. The 42
Mammelusses were summoned by sound of Trumpet to make their appearance; but not
one of them obeying this order, they were condemned for their contumacy, and
their Estates forfeited; which produced a long Lawsuit before the Confederates.
The Vidame, upon information given him that he was accused of a Conspiracy,
left the City, substituting his Bailiff Dulcis in his room. Neither did he
remain long in power; for the People would suffer no more pleadings in the
Stewards Court, but would have all matters decided by the Four Syndicks, so
that he retired into the Country of Focigny. The Jailer of the Isle did the
same, leaving a Person to look after the Prisoners; One of whom, being
convicted of Felony, was by the Syndicks condemned to die. The Vidame's absence
was well known: but to take away all occasion from the Duke to complain, he was
sought for in his House, by a Notary and Witnesses; where they were told, that
he had left the Town. They had the same answer at the Bailiffs House. Whereupon
it was concluded in Council, notwithstanding, to proceed on to Execution. The
common Sergeant was ordered to supply the Vidame's place, which he did, and
after the sentence was read, he led the Malefactor toward the Castle gate,
causing the Bailiff of Gaillard to be called: according to custom the Duke had
bestowed this office on Servant, as a recompense for his Services and Exile
from Geneva. Servant sent a Man in his place to receive the Prisoner, who
demanded of the Sergeant whether he was Vidame? he answered no, but that he was
the City and Councils servant. Then the Bailiffs Deputy replied, I will not
receive him at your hands, seeing you are not my Lords Officer; for neither you
nor your Syndicks have power to command me: which having said, he set spurrs to
his horse, and returned. The Common-Serjeant gave notice of this to the
Syndicks, who bad him proceed, and gave him order for the Execution, which he
obeyed, and ever since that time, 1526.
the Duke of Savoy has held no Office in the City.

The Dukes Arms stood over the Castle-gate in the Isle, The Dukes Arms battered
down.
but in the night they were battered to pieces with a hammer by an unknown
hand. The Bridge in the Isle over against the great Bridge, was likewise found
broken down. The Duke joined this amongst other complaints against Geneva, and
it was debated before the Cantons, till the year 1530. All outrages on either
side were forbid during this process, but there always happened some
disturbances. For to hinder the insulting of the Dukes party by the fear of
disobliging the Switzers, there were six persons constantly residing at Berne,
and as many at Fribourg.

The Bishop undertook to bring in again the exiled Mammelusses; June 21.
the Council agreed to receive the most moderate of them, paying as a Fine
Eighteen thousand Crowns of gold; but the Duke hindered, sometimes threatening to
deal with them as enemies if they did, and otherwhiles promising to introduce
them all in general upon honorable terms.

The Articles of Burgership being made ready, when they were to be signed,
several of the Dukes party absented themselves, and from that time they were
suspected: a little while after, there was a Diet held at Soleurre, in which
the Confederates answered the Dukes Ambassadors, that they should not mention
any more that matter, seeing he could not prove that he had any right to Geneva
and Lausane, who on the contrary had produced their Titles.

The Duke meditating revenge, 1526.
prohibited all Merchandises and provision to be carried out of his Dominions
to Geneva; October. 19.
but a Herald from the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg, passed through Geneva
in his journey to Chambery, to give notice to the Duke that his Ambassadors,
Nov. 17.
would not be heard in the general Assembly in Switzerland till he had taken
off this prohibition, and reduced things to their former state; December. 3.
which he did some days after publicly in appearance, but he sent notice about
privately, that he would have the former Order observed, and that his Subjects
should be ready in their Arms at the first ringing of the Bell, and beat of
Drum.

Toward the end of this Year arose a difference about a Prisoner of the
Mammelusses faction, 1526.
whom the Syndicks condemned to be beheaded as a Taytor to the Bishop and City;
December. 13.
but his kindred obtained their consent to request the Bishops pardon, which
should be produced at the place of Execution, with this proviso, that he should
remain in Prison till he had paid a Fine; but the Bishop stood at the Castle
gate, 1527.
and gave him his Pardon, and the Officers unbound him and let him go; The Gout
cured.
at which the poor man was so transported with joy, that although full of the
Gout, he ran to the Prison, and entered into it joyfuller than he went out, Feb.
20.
having never since felt his distemper.

The Diet held at Berne, on the 22. of December, 1526. had again ratified the
Burgership with Geneva, and concluded to return the Copy of the Alliance made
with him, because it was made without the peoples consent. In the month of May
another being held, the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg sent to the Duke who
was at Chambery, May 1.
to demand the Letters of Alliance, which he would not grant, no more than he
would make satisfaction for the damages done to Geneva, and do justice on the
Murderers, his Subjects, who had killed a Genevois named Gentil, and some
other persons: neither would he suffer the fugitive Mammelusses to plead their
cause at Geneva, 1527.
upon Letters of Safe Conduct offered by the Bishop.

The Syndicks being informed that there were Soldiers lying in Ambuscade at
Lancy, July 13.
beyond the Bridge of Arve, An Ambassador at Lancy.
commanded Besancon Hugues, Captain General of the Town to take care
accordingly; who caused the Gates to be shut, the Chains to be extended, and an
Alarm to be sounded. Which the Enemies perceiving, and finding they were
discovered, withdrew. It was known afterward that it was the Captain of the
Dukes Guards, who had gathered some Troops to take the Bishop Peter of Baume,
at our Lady of Grace's Church, where he went usually to Mass every Saturday,
but by good fortune he was not there that day: it is thought they designed to
put him to death, 1527.
and to choose another in his room; which obliged him to withdraw secretly into
the Franche-Comt^, August 1.
having first cancelled the Letters Testimonial, which he had heretofore made
against the Alliance of the Town with the Confederates.

Fifteen days after he sent the Syndicks a Copy of a Letter, Aug. 18.
dated the first of April, which the Emperor had written to the Duke of Savoy,
which fell into his hands in passing through S. Claude; the Contents of which
were, that his Imperial Majesty having understood that they of Geneva had made
an Alliance with the Cantons for to maintain themselves against the Dukes
oppressions, The Emperor injoyns the Duke to desist from his endeavors after
Sovereignty over Geneva.
and his Officers, who had violated the Bishop and Cities privileges; it
enjoined the said Duke to forbear his pretensions for the time to come of
Sovereignty, otherwise he would make it appear that this displeased him, for he
would maintain whatsoever his predecessors had established in this Imperial
City.

The two Cantons of Berne and Fribourg, wrote likewise to the Duke not to
molest their Allies of Geneva. The Mammelusses finding they could not prevail
with the Cantons, to enter again the City, removed their suit to Vienna; but
the general Council being met, there was a Copy of the Imperial Letter read, by
which they were in hopes to find that Geneva was not subject to Vienna, and
from thence forward, it was concluded that no person for the time to come
should prosecute any cause in that Court. The Bishop Baume desirous to show his
affection to the City, and the care he took for its interest, made himself a
Citizen thereof, as appears by an Act dated the fifteenth of July, 1527. at
which the Duke being enraged, seized on the Abbeys of Sure and Pignerol which
belonged to him, which he offered to him again for the Vidomat or Stewardship.
The Bishop likewise at the same time remitted the cognizance of civil Causes to
the Syndicks, to lessen the charge which persons were at in his Court.

After the Mammelusses faction, The fraternity of the Spoon.
there arose another out of the City, which did much hurt to the Citizens,
which was the Confraternity of Gentlemen of La Cuillier, or the Spoon, with
whom were joined some disaffected Chanons of the Dukes party. This Fraternity
was instituted in the Castle of Vaud, where some Gentlemen being at Table,
eating amongst other things Broth with Wicker Spoons; they bragged that they
would make them of Geneva do the same. They hanged each of them their Spoons
about their necks for a note of distinction, and those Francis of Pontverre,
Sieur of Terny, a man courageous and skilful in warlike affairs, for their
Captain; they had from that time several meetings to consult on their design,
at which the Duke was not at all pleased; fearing it would end in his
prejudice. They did great hurt to Geneva, wasting the Country thereabouts, and
misusing them whose business led them to the City. Complaints of this were made
to the Cities, who instead of Soldiers sent Ambassadors, which these Gentlemen
valued not. They excused themselves on account of the troubles which the change
of Religion had produced in Switzerland; yet they sent at length two Companies
consisting of about 800. men. These two Companies being arrived, they were
desired to set upon the Enemy, but the Captains refused to do it; saying, that
they were Allies of the Duke as well as Geneva, and that they were only sent to
guard the City, so that they were forced to have patience, and to provide them
good quarters.

The Deputies in the mean time went to the Dukes party, and concluded such a
kind of Peace, that made these two Factions in some sort agree. Six weeks after
they were called back again, by reason the Enemy continued his insultings: but
the Soldiers instead of fighting him, fell upon the Capons and Partridges. The
Dukes party making a jest of it, said, That these Soldier*s had made the
Genevoises real Huguenots, seeing they eat the Birds and left the Feathers to
the Genevoises, who wore them in their Hats for a token of their Alliance; for
we have already mentioned that Eidgnots or Huguenots, as it was indifferently
pronounced, signified Allies.

It seemed the two Cities were very apprehensive lest they should break off
with the Duke; for from the year 1527. to 1530. there was nothing enterprized
against these Gentlemen of the Spoon, but only one sally made on the side of
Gaillard, which was effected by the contrivance of Amy Girard the Syndick, who
sent word to him who watched in the Bell-Tower, that the Enemy was seen at the
Gate de Rive, although there was then a Truce made, which put the City into an
alarm. Three Companies of Foot issued out of the City in very bad order, Geneva
alarmed.
there being but two Horsemen in the whole Army, which were the Prior of S.
Victor and a Priest belonging to him. Bastien of Diespach Deputy of Berne,
followed them with full speed on Horseback, who seeing the night approaching,
by the consent of Victor caused the Townsmen to march back: awhile after the
Captain of the Company of Fribourg, who was at Cartigny, was ordered to quit
the Village and Castle. No sooner had they left it, but Guigues of Grenant,
Captain of the Dukes Guard took possession of it.

The Mammelusses who were fled not returning after so many summons, 1528.
had at length sentence of death pronounced against them by the Syndicks, Feb.
21.
to the number of forty four of them, and their estates for feited.

On Sunday the fifth of April, A Meteor seen at Geneva.
was seen at Sunsetting, a Meteor seldom appearing, and which the people
making no distinction call a Comet; it was a flying torch in the form of a
firebrand, which went from the East to the West, and left behind it
wheresoever it passed, sparks as it were of fire; a quarter of an hour after it
had disappeared, there was heard a noise like the report of a great piece of
Ordnance, which coming from between the West and the East ended it self toward
the North; and for at least an hours space afterward there was heard such a
kind of noise as comes out of a fiery furnace, at which the very beasts being
affrighted, wandered bellowing from one side to the other.

It was in this Year that the Bernoises after several disputes and discourses,
1528.
banished the Roman Catholic Religion from their City, Bernoises embrace the
Protestant Religion.
and embraced the Protestant Faith. Zuinglius and Oecolampadius Preached it up
in Switzerland, and Bertholdus Haller at Berne, whilst Luther did the same in
Germany. The Bernoises would have certain Villages which the Fribourgers
pretended belonged to them, to receive the same Doctrine, which raised a
disturbance betwixt these two Cities, who both demanded assistance from Geneva.
The Genevoises fearing lest in pleasing one they should disoblige the other,
sent to each of them a Company of Musketeers, consisting of about one hundred
and fifty men a piece: John Philippe went Captain of them who were designed for
Berne, and Richardet Captain of those who were sent to Fribourg. It was
observed that these two Companies began to quarrel, and annoy one another at
Geneva; but at length these two Cities were reconciled, and the Forces sent
home again.

Some Roman Catholics of Berne were forced to fly to Geneva, amongst others
Conradus Wilhermin, and Anthony Bischebach, who farmed the Revenues of S.
Victor, who being gone to Cartigny with eight Horsemen, and thirty two Foot
Soldiers, to gather his Tithes, had the boldness to attaque the Castle. He lost
Thiebald Loffer there, but took Prisoner de Grenans whom he kept Prisoner three
months in S. Victor. The Gentlemen of the Spoon desirous to try whether they
could draw Bonnivard out thence, came one night with four or five hundred men
beyond the Bridge of Arve, The Fraternity of the Spoon appear before Geneva.
crying out, Treacherous Eidgnots, and you Cows of Switzerland, come over here
and fetch Fodder: And at the same time they discharged their Carbines, which
did no other hurt than the alarming the Town* the Bell rang, and Bonnivard came
to Coquet, Captain of the Borough of Four, who immediately got together five or
six hundred men, maugre Hugues the Syndick then Captain General, who was
thought to hold intelligence with the Enemies, to do Bonnivard an ill turn;
there were some skirmishes, and so the Gentlemen withdrew.

From that time the Bernoises frequented more Geneva than the Fribourgers, and
in all their discourses were still inveighing against the Priests, and their
forbidding to eat Flesh in Lent, and on Wednesdays and Saturdays; so that they
persuaded several to disobey them. The Fribourgers on the contrary vehemently
exhorted them to follow the Religion of their Ancestors, or otherwise they
would forsake their Alliance. Victor his advice to the Genevoises.
In this confusion the Genevoises observing how Men's minds began to be divided,
and that there were some who talked of Reforming the Clergy, and the
corruptions which they said were crept into the Church, they addressed
themselves to Bonnivard, Prior of S. Victor, who had the reputation of an
honest and knowing Man, to have his advice in this matter. Who made them this
bold answer, If you will be ruled by me, you shall do one of these two things:
That is, If you continue debauched, as ye are at present, you must not wonder
if others be so too. And, Secondly, If you will reform the Clergy, you must
first show them the way by your good examples.

These and other Remonstrances, which he afterward made them, gave them
occasion to pry more narrowly into Religious matters. The Fugitive Mammelusses
had obtained of the Archbishop of Vienna, a Writ of Excommunication, upon their
complaints against the Genevoises, which they caused to be set up. It happened
that Bonnivard traveling to Berne, with the Deputies of Geneva, was minded to
read this Excommunication, set up on the Church porch, in the Road to
Switzerland. But the Deputies bade him have a care what he did: For as soon as
ever you shall have read it, said they, you will stand excommunicated.
Bonnivard, smiling at their scrupulous simplicity, replied, You are much
mistaken, for if ye have condemned the Mammelusses unjustly, ye are
excommunicated by God himself; but if justly, what power has the Archbishop of
Vienna over your Consciences?

These solid Discourses, together with the Exhortations of the Bernoises,
inspired the Genevoises with courage to deny first obedience to the Pope,
although they had not then renounced the Doctrine of the Roman Church; and
these Sparks were the presages of a greater Fire which would be kindled amongst
them.

About the end of this year, before Christmas, the Fraternity of Gentlemen of
the Spoon were to have a meeting at Nyons, Fraternity of the Spoon hold a
meeting at Nyons.
concerning Geneva. They were permitted to pass through the Town, as they were
wont heretofore. Their Captain Pontverre came last. He entered through the Gate
of La Corratiere, and would have went through that of S. Gervais. But finding
it shut, although the Porter was endeavoring to open it, yet he falls into a
Rage, abusing the poor fellow, and gave him a box on the Ear after he had
opened the Gate, saying, ' S Bud, You Rogue, must Gentlemen wait all this
while? and continuing to swear, it shall not be long first, said he, before we
shall beat down your Gates, and march over them as we have done heretofore.
Which having said, he set Spurs to Horse and rode away.

The Porter failed not to relate this to the Council and City; at which the
People, moved with instigation, said, Will it not suffice them to do us all the
injuries they are able out of our Walls, but they must needs come in the City
to affront us? Let what will happen, this must not be suffered. Yet the Council
durst not openly show their indignation, the Suburb of S. Gervais being only
enclosed with Turfs of Earth, patched up in haste upon report of Wars. Yet
Guards were placed there, as likewise on the Bridge of Rhosne.

In the beginning of the following year, 1529.
about twilight, Pontverre, accompanied with three other Horsemen, Jan. 2.
entered again into the Town. Pontverre enters Geneva.
He was discovered on the Bridge, although he muffled himself in his Cloak;
when immediately there arose a cry, Here is Pontverre, here is Pontverre. They
who were nearest him, clapped their Hands to their Swords, as he for his part
did the like, endeavoring to defend himself in his retreat: but he could not
so well guard himself, but that he received an ugly blow on his Nose. Yet he,
together with his companions, makes his way through the crowd; one of them who
was with him was Monsieur de S. Simon, who endeavoring to get to the Gate of
la Corraterie, he found it shut. Pontverre knowing not where to betake himself,
he climbs up the Stairs of the Hospital de la Monnoye, upon his Horse; and
being at the top, he lights off and hides himself under a Bed. They pursued
him; and having found him, they made at him with their Rapiers, one of them
pricking him in the Thigh, which made him crawle out in a fury; he wounded Amy
Bandiers with his Dagger. But he was immediately so beset on every side with
blows, that he was soon killed in the place. The Syndick, Amy Girard, being
present, caused the Clothes and Arms of Pontverre to be delivered to his
Companions, whom they conducted beyond the Arve, lest the People should serve
them as they did the Captain; his Body was conveyed to the Chapel of the
Hospital of Monnoye, and viewed by the Syndicks: but being dead, there was no
remedy. Two days after he was interred by mada de Brandis; who having obtained
leave, she caused him to be carried to the Convent of Rive, and to be buried in
the Chapel belonging to the Family of the Terny's. There was found about him
Orders relating to his Military Office, summoning his Men to appear at such a
place of Rendesvous, apparelled in White.

The Gentlemen of the Spoon were extremely enraged at his death, Fraternity of
the Spoon enraged at Pontverre's death.
especially the Baron of La Sara, who threatened more than he could do: and
Francis of Beaufort, Governor of Bellevaux, who afterward laid down his Gown,
and took up the Sword, naming himself Monsieur of Roll, (from a Manor he had
purchased, known by that Title) They made their complaint to the Duke, who was
not much moved at the matter, yet he sent Deputies into Switzerland to have
satisfaction. The Genevoises were willing to go there to justify themselves;
but the ways were so blocked up by the Dukes Party, that it was impossible to
get safe passage. Yet Vandelly ventured on the Lake, taking the advantage of
the Wind, and got to Berne; where he so well answered the Duke of Savoy's
Deputy, that the Bernoises remained satisfied that the Genevoises Fact was not
so heinous as it was represented. The Bernoises made up an agreement betwixt
them, and Vandelly returned.

Yet the Confraternity of the Spoon ceased not to molest the City, 1529.
intercepting their provision, Jan.
and making inroads even as near as the Suburbs. Berne and Fribourg granted
some Troops to the City, and sent, together with them of Basle and Zurich,
Deputies for a day which they intended to hold at S. Julien. These passing over
to Geneva, informed themselves of the Rights of the Town, and found them much
to the Inhabitants advantage. The Deputies made several Journies from Geneva to
S. Julien; in all which they did nothing else but obtain the Dukes consent to
the payment of a certain sum of money toward the removing the Troops of Berne
and Fribourg, who were about Seven hundred Men.

Yet the Gentlemen continuing their onsets, March 18.
Eighteen Cavaleers amongst them apparelled in White, The Suburbs of S. Victor
alarmed.
alarmed the Suburb of S. Victor, but there issuing out some Troops of the
Genevoises and their Allies, they were forced to retreat. They returned on
Thursday before Easter, coming up to the Gates to the number of 800, with
Ladders to scale the Town. March 25.
But their courage failed them; a Gentleman who had promised them 1400 Men,
having failed in his promise. The Dukes declarations, which enjoined these
Gentlemen to forbear molesting the Genevoises, were not observed: for the
Confraternity, having the whole Country at their command, did but laugh at
these orders. Several Houses about Geneva were plundered.

The remaining part of the year was spent in Deputations from the Allies of the
Duke of Savoy and the Bishop, in order to the disannulling of this
confraternity; on which these two last mentioned insisted as prejudicial to
their Liberties. The Duke produced his Reasons in the Assembly at Payerne,
which were answered the best they could by them of Geneva. July 13.
His Highness's Right was also examined: and this meeting was continued to the
first of October. There were sent from Geneva, Besancon Hugues* and Nicolin du
Crest; the Earl of Gruyers being chosen chief Arbitrator, who determined that
this Confraternity should be disannulled. The Deputies of Geneva made their
Addresses to the Bernoises and Fribourgers, who told them they would break off
with the Duke, and continue the Alliance with them. Which they did, having cut
the Seal of the Treaty of the Alliance made with Duke Philbert. October. 3.


About this time there was held a General Council, wherein the Syndicks
complained they could not attend so much to the Government of the City: and
seeing the Bishop laid aside all business, it were better to depute Judges for
this matter. Which proposal being approved, Claudius Richardet was chosen
Steward, and had Four Assistants allotted him, Nov. 14.
who have been since called Auditors. Nicolin du Crest, Girardin of La Rive,
Claudius Savoy, John Balurd.
This having been heretofore the Vidame's Office, the Bishop was sent to for
his approbation of this choice, who was at that time in the Franche-Comte. He
privately told the Deputies, He was very well satisfied, but he would have his
consent concealed from the Duke, because he did not like to be troubled with
him: for he had promised never to come into Geneva but in the Dukes company.
There were sent other Deputies to him, who were not suffered to speak with him.

In the year following, 1530.
the Plague raging in Geneva, there was one Michael Caddoz, who pretending to
be struck with it, desired to be put into the Hospital. Caddoz spreads a Plague
in Geneva.
Which being granted, and his forty days expired, he began to acquaint himself
with the Keeper of the Hospital, with the Priest, and several poor People
belonging to it, who commonly for a small gain were wont to perfume and clean
the Sores of the infected. Caddoz finding them disposed to hearken to his
pernicious designs; he thereupon proposes to them an infallible means to get
money in bringing the Plague where it had not yet been, especially in great
Houses, whose Estates might fall to them by Inheritance; or otherwise they
might pilfer without control. They needed not much entreaty, all the
difficulty lay in the manner how they should effect this. They concluded then
to make a pestilential powder of Linen-rags, with which they had wiped the
Sores of the sick, and to disperse them in several places. Caddoz passing then
one day over the Bridge of Rhosne, let fall a Linen-Cloth, thinking no body had
seen him; but a certain Person, perceiving he had dropped something, cried out,
This Rascal Caddoz has let fall a Cloth, in which I believe there is not any
thing of value; which said, he would have taken it up. Another more cautious,
bid him have a care what he handled. They therefore with a Stick tumbled open
this packet, from whence proceeded such a stink as infected the whole Bridge,
no Body knowing whence it came. There was a Woman sent for, lately recovered of
the Plague, who seeing it, said, It was the matter of a Plague Sore. The
Syndicks informed of the business, caused Caddoz to be apprehended and carried
to the Bishopric, where he was examined. It being asked him, what was in that
Cloth he had dropped? He replied, It was the Corruption of a venereal Cancer in
his Leg. Being questioned what moved him to do it, He answered, There were
several who jeared him, because he had the Pox; whereupon he in revenge would
give it them. The Magistrates not content with this answer, ordered him to be
put upon the Rack. He then confessed it was designed for to breed the Plague.
He was examined again wherefore he did it: and having told them who were his
Accomplices, and their designs, they were apprehended: and he and the Keeper of
the Hospital had their Flesh torn off with red hot Pinchers, their Heads cut
off, and their Bodies quartered; the Priest was degraded, and afterward
executed. The Keeper of the Hospital's Son was much pitied, being very young;
but a word slipped from him, which cost him his life: for being demanded if he
knew how to make this Drug as well as his Father: He replied, Yes; and so was
beheaded: and immediately after the Plague ceased.

In the Month following, the Genevoises having granted to Ronnivard a monthly
allowance of four Crowns and a half, in consideration of the loss of the
Revenues of S. Victor, which the Savoyards had seized on, and which he had
bequeathed, after his Death, to the City of Geneva. The Duke being informed
thereof, endeavored to do him an injury. He had, to draw him into his
Dominions, given him a Letter of Safe Conduct, with which he went to Se^ssel,
to visit his Mother who lay sick, being very ancient. A while after he went to
the Bishop at Modon, where there was held an Assembly. He became acquainted
with Francis Neel, who called himself Monsieur of Bellegarde: Bonnivard
betrayed.
he trusted a Gentleman whom he gave him for his Guide and Companion to
Lausane; but he was betrayed by this perfidious Wretch. For he had no sooner
come up to the top of Mount Jura, but he was set upon by one called Rosey of
Thonon, who had espoused one of D. Philberts Bastards, and Bishop Eyries the
Duke of Beaufort's Bastard. These were two desperate Villains, who having spent
their Estates needed a Recruit which they expected from Bonnivard. Their
Accomplices at Modon had observed his Purse, and it being full of Parpilloles,
which was a Coin used in those days, of small value, all of them which he had
about him, not amounting to above twenty Crowns of Gold; they believed each
piece was a Crown. It was known since, the Duke did not give order to take him,
but Bellegarde and the others having written to him about it, he consented he
should be detained. Bonnivard perceiving he was like to be set upon, spurred on
his Horse, but being not well mounted, he could not ride far, they soon
overtaking him. Nevertheless he lost not his Courage, but clapped his hand to his
Sword: but his guide planting himself before him, gave the others opportunity
to enclose him; they took him, and then carried him away to Chillon, where he
remained Prisoner six years and an half: the first two years he was not kept
close Prisoner, but the rest of the time he spent in a Dungeon which lay lower
than the Lake, in which the Duke, when he was at Chillon, caused him to be put.
During all which time he was not examined, nor put upon the Rack. At last when
the Bernoises had taken the Country of Vaud, they drew him out thence. It was
observed that he had hollowed and worn the Rock by much walking in the Dungeon.

The Bishop favored the Insultings of the Gentlemen of the Spoon: August
for his Letters dated from Arbois were intercepted, 1530.
in which he gave Commission to chastise his rebellious Subjects of Geneva, who
entrenched upon his Authority. The Fraternity of the Spoon favored by the
Bishop.
One of the hottest of these Gentlemen was called Monsieur of Alussans, who
killed one day a Merchant of Geneva's Servant in the Country of Vaud. The
Deputations from the Allies to the Duke availed nothing, because he could not
hinder this disorder, September.
and was moreover glad to see the Genevoises damnified. Notice was given that
these Gentlemen having gathered Soldiers from all Parts, were resolved to make
themselves Masters of the Town, three days after the Feast of S. Michael, and
to put all to the Sword. An account of which was sent to Berne and Fribourg,
the City in the mean time standing upon their guard, and continued to
strengthen themselves. There was a Skirmish passed betwixt them and the
Citizens in the Suburb of S. Victor, October. 2.
near la Corraterie, where the Enemy had the boldness to present himself. In
the night they came to the very Walls, but were not so resolute as to scale
them. The next Morning they plundered the Suburb of S. Ledger. Some Prisoners
taken by the City, Bernoise sends Forces to the assistance of Geneva.
discovered their design. In the mean time the Allies understanding in what
extremity Geneva lay, by messages continually sent them, there set out from
Berne seven thousand Men and twelve pieces of Ordnance, under the conduct of
the Governor of Erlach; from Fribourg two thousand with four pieces of Cannon:
and some time after five hundred from Soleurre with two pieces of Cannon. Two
or three thousand Volunteers joined to this Army; which being arrived at
Morges, stayed there four days, being given to understand that the Enemy was
returned back. At the same time arrived Deputies from the ten Cantons and du
Valey, to propose some Articles in order to an Agreement between the Duke of
Savoy and Geneva. De Vauru, Ambassador from his Highness, approached the Bridge
of Arve, to parley with the Deputies of Fribourg and Berne. He desired them to
send to their Masters to call home the Army, telling them the Duke knew nothing
of this last enterprise against Geneva, nor he neither: although it was well
known he was one of the Captains.

The Commanders of the Army of the Confederates sent to Geneva, bidding them
appoint a place of Treaty, but they desired they might be excused, desiring to
speak with them first, to consult together what was needful to be done. The
Army then began to disincamp from Morges, The Castle of Roll burnt.
having fired, as they passed, the Castle of Roll, and most of the other
Castles which belonged to the Gentlemen of the Spoon, whose Garrisons were
retreated to Thonon or into Burgundy; all the Goods in them were burnt, and the
Country of Vaud almost ruined. A Party of Fribourgers, with the Genevoises,
pillaged the Villages about the City, and could not be withheld, alleging for
their excuse, That they would not dye with Hunger. Six score Musketeers
belonging to Geneva, came to seek Forage at Megrim, where the alarm Bell
sounding, they perceived they were discovered by a Body of eight or nine
hundred Foot, and fifty Horse, who had divided themselves into three Companies,
one of which lay in ambush in the Wood, and the two others lay along the side
of the neighboring Mountains; they came to the Wood, and set upon them there
so vigorously, that they left sixty dead on the place, the rest were either
taken or fled. Which affrighted the two other Companies so, that they retreated
as fast as they could, the Genevoises having lost in this Encounter but one
young Man, who was killed, having parted from his Company to fly away.

Two days after came the Army of the two Cities, October. 8.
and were quartered both of them in Geneva; where it was no sooner arrived, but
there was a Discourse of a Treaty of Peace with the Duke. S. Julian was pitched
upon for the place, October. 10.
where the Deputies were to have safe Passage. A Peace concluded.
A Peace was hastily concluded, leaving the Differences about the Vidomnat or
Stewardship, to be determined in the next Assembly, which was to be held in
Switzerland, as also the Charges of the War. It was agreed, that Prisoners
should be released on both sides, and that no acts of Hostility should pass
from either Party, under Penalty on the Dukes part of the Forfeiture of the
Country of Vaud; and on the Genevoises, of the revocation of the Alliance.
Which done, the Army departed home, having remained ten days in the City, which
had been eaten up within by Friends, and plundered without by Enemies. The
Gentlemen of the Spoon threatened it continually, because their Castles were
burnt.

Neither did the Duke of Savoy cease from raising Soldiers. The Confederates
sent notice to the City, that there were 10000 Lancers at Montbeilliard, whom
the Earl of Genevoise had raised to destroy Geneva. Upon which they desired
them to send a Company of two hundred Men to strengthen the City Guards.

At the same time there was an Assembly held at Payerne, 1530.
where both the Genevoises and his Highness had their Deputies. Dec. 3.
The Duke required that the Alliance with Geneva should be cancelled, Assembly
at Payerne.
as it was determined by the Earl of Gruyeres; and that the Vidomnat or
Stewardship, and other Rights which he had in the City, should be restored;
that the Exiles should have their Honors and Estates returned them, and that
the two Cities should pay him two hundred thousand Crowns for the Charges of
the War. The Deputies of the Cantons would have put the matter to Arbitration,
choosing the Emperor Judge in the case: but the Genevoises refused to stand to
his decision, choosing rather that their Cause should be legally debated before
the Cantons, who promised to determine it without partiality.

On the 21th of December they thus decided it touching the Stewardship, Dec. 21.
that it should be restored to his Highness: that the business of the Exiles
should remain as it was: that the Alliance with Geneva should hold firm, and
that Bonnivard should be released: that the Duke of Savoy should pay to the
three Cities concerned in the Charge of the War one and twenty thousand Crowns
at three Payments; which Sum he might require of the Bishop and his
disobedient Gentlemen, who could never raise so many Soldiers without his
knowledge; and in short, that the Treaty of S. Julian should be observed.

The Duke consented only to those Articles which favored him, but he would not
hearken to those Proposals which concerned the Payment of the Money, nor the
releasement of Bonnivard, whom he looked upon as a Person able to do him
mischief. He chose a Steward, and sent him to be established at Geneva. The
Council demanded the seven thousand Crowns which remained due, and why
Bonnivard was not released: to all which they had no answer. Upon this there
arose new Troubles, and there were continual Deputations on both sides to
remove this Difference.

These Jars made the Syndicks think of fortifying the City, Geneva fortified.
and to encompass S. Gervais with Walls, and farther to join the Borough of
Four to the City, and to pull down the other Suburbs, which were only a
hinderance to its defense. Wherefore it will not be needless to show the
Condition it was then in. There were at that present, besides the Boroughs of
S. Gervais and de Four, which are now incorporated into the City, these four
other following Suburbs, viz. the Borough of Rive, which reached from the Gate,
bearing the same name, to Eaux Vives. That of S. Victor, as far as S. Legier,
which reached beyond the large Palace, even to the Bridge of Arve; and the
other which extended from La Corraterie as far as the Post House. These four
Boroughs contained near as many Houses as the City, and were almost all of them
pulled down, to bring it into a round Form, and to make it compact, and instead
of six Gates which it had, there were only left two. The Bulwarks were made of
the Materials of the Suburbs: The City, with its out parts, contained seven
Parishes; the first was that wherein stood the Cathedral of S. Peter, under the
Title of the Holy Cross; Description of the City.
the second, a little distant from S. Peter's, was called our new Ladies
Parish, which serves at present for an Auditory, wherein Divinity Lectures are
read: the third was S. Magdalens; the fourth S. Germans; the fifth S.
Gervais's; the sixth S. Legier's; and the seventh S. Victor's, where stood the
Church of the same Name. These two last Parishes were demolished. There were
three Monasteries in the City, and two in the Suburbs: those in the City were
the Convent of the Gray Friars at de Rive; and the Nunnery of S. Clare, where
now stands an Hospital; the white Friars were seated in the Street of La
Corraterie, in a Convent called the Palace, by reason of its largeness; wherein
the Dukes of Savoy have been often entertained, and where stood the Clock on
the Bridge of Rhosne, which was consumed when the Bridge was burnt in the year
1670. Without the City there was the Monastery of S. Victor, of the Order of
Clugny, with a Prior and nine Monks, who lived on its Revenue. It is thought
that formerly this was a Temple dedicated to Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, which
was since consecrated to S. Victor, S. Vincent, and S. Ours, although the first
was its right name. Though there was a Convent of Augustine Monks near the
Bridge of Arve, called, our Lady of Grace; because the Bastard Rene had caused
a fair Picture of our Lady to be drawn, which he ordered to be set up in the
Chapel he had built: and from the gracefulness of this Picture, has the name
been derived, as it is commonly received: but it is more likely this name has
proceeded from the Graces which she has bestowed: for it was declared that she
wrought great Miracles, and particularly raised up Children to Life, which were
brought from all Parts to be baptized in that Chapel; there was likewise
another Abbey of rich Monks at S. John's in the Groves, over against the Tower;
there were several other Chapels, as beyond de Rive, one called the Temple,
otherwise S. John of Jerusalem's Chapel, where still-born Children were
buried; another Called S. Margaret's, another S. Laurence's, and another of our
Ladies of the Bridge, where at present stands the coining House. There were
besides seven Hospitals, which have since been reduced to two, the common
Hospital, and the Hospital for the infected near the large Palace.

These Differences with the Duke still continued; he had prohibited all manner
of Provision to be brought into the City. 1532.
There was a report that he had sent for ten thousand Italians and three
hundred Lancers to assist him against Geneva.

These Differences were followed by others, June 9.
which arose amongst the Citizens about Religion. Protestant Religion begun to
be maintained by some young men in Geneva.
Some young Men of Geneva had set up, at every corner of the Streets, certain
Articles whereby it was apparently seen, they were inclining to the Protestant
Religion; upon which one Verly a Chanon of Fribourg, having taken a young Man
named John Goulas, who had pasted up a Bill on the Pillar before S. Peter's
Church; he gave him a box on the Ear, and drew out his Sword: for at that time
the Chanons wore Swords in Geneva. Goulas put himself in a posture of defense,
and wounded the Chanon in the arm. There were two persons of the Borough of
Four, who taking the Chanons part were likewise wounded; the Syndicks observing
these divisions among the people, made a Declaration enjoining all persons to
live peaceably, and to set up no more of those kind of Writings, nor broach any
novelty without their permission.

During these transactions, 1532.
two Ministers came to Geneva, viz. William Farel of Gap, Septem.
and Anthony Saunier, who came from preaching in Piedmont. Farel comes to
Geneva.
They had Letters of recommendation from Berne, and being settled at Geneva,
they held several discourses in their houses to make the people understand the
Doctrine they taught. There were several who hearkened to them, and wished the
City would follow the example of Berne: but this being noised abroad, the
Chanons and Priests resolved to remedy this for the future. They cited then
Farel and Saunier before the Episcopal Council, where were present the two
Syndicks, who had promised to shelter them from all danger, if they would
maintain their Doctrine before the Priests.

After several disputes and discourses on both sides, 1532.
it was decreed by the Episcopal Council, Saunier and Farel banished the City.
that they should leave the Town upon pain of Imprisonment. They departed then,
being accompanied by some Citizens who favored them, and went and Preached at
Orb and at Granson.

A while after came to Geneva a young man of Dauphiny, named Anthony Froment,
Froment comes to Geneva.
who had been a disciple of Farel, who had earnestly persuaded him to make this
trial. 1532.
This Froment had caused Bills to be set up in the City, November.
wherein he promised to teach people to Write and Read in a Months time; and
under this pretense he instructed both young and old in the Protestant
Religion: the forwardest of them leading along with them several persons of
their acquaintance both men and women, whose number every day increased
notwithstanding the peoples muttering; saying, that Froment enchanted the women
after him. There was a Grey-Frier called Christopher Bouquet, who was a
Protestant in his heart, for he was so far from opposing that Doctrine then
springing up, that commonly one part of his Auditors after Sermon, went into a
Hall to hear Froment.

One New-years-day Bouquet having ended his Sermon, 1533.
so great a multitude thronged into the Hall to hear Froment, Froment Preaches
at Molard.
that all the stairs and corners of the house were full of people: so that they
cried, To Molard, to Molard, where those who were next him carried him, so
great was the throng, the people calling out to him, Preach to us the word of
God. Froment then having begun again his discourse, the City Sergeant came
thereupon and commanded him to forbear. He answered, it was better to obey God
than man, and so held on his discourse: the Council being Assembled upon this
occasion, gave Order that he should be speedily apprehended; and sent men well
armed to lay hold on him, but he escaped into a Citizens house where he lay
concealed. There was an Order from the Magistrates forbidding such kind of
Preaching upon penalty of undergoing the Strapado; a while after Froment not
being able to stay any longer in safety at Geneva, left the Town in the night,
and returned from whence he came.

The Fribourgers informed of this, Feb. 23.
sent Deputies to Geneva; declaring, that if they received this new Doctrine,
Protestant Doctrine opposed by the Fribourgers.
they would break off their Alliance: the Council answered, they had done their
endeavor to hinder it, and had moreover requested the Grand Vicar vigorously
to prosecute this Ecclesiastical affair; and so they returned satisfied: yet
the Protestants ceased not to Assemble themselves in several houses, where
strangers and the most knowing amongst themselves, interpreted the holy
Scripture. They received their first Communion in a Garden out of Town, where
one called Mr. John Guerin a Capmaker distributed it; the Common people
esteemed him learned in Divinity, although he was but a Mechanic; some days
after, search being made after him, he fled, and was afterward Minister of New
Castle.

It happened likewise that a Friar Preaching in the Convent of the Palace, and
railing against the Lutherans, a person named Peter Robert Olivetan, Tutor to
the Children of John Chantemps, arose up and disputed against him; which caused
a great disturbance: so that if he had not been defended by some of his own
party there present, he would certainly have come by the worst of it. This was
that Olivetan, who first Translated the Bible into French, which Translation
has been received by the Protestants. He caused it to be Printed at New Castle
in the Year 1538. and it is thought he was poisoned at Ferrara.

Olivetan having been banished, 1544.
another stranger who had dwelt near a year at Geneva, openly maintained that
they who went to Mass were Idolaters; which caused the Magistrates to banish
him from the City upon pain of death.

The Bernoises who had already embraced the new Doctrine, March 24.
being informed of all these transactions, B^rnoisis threatened the Genevoises
if they opposed the Protestant Religion.
sent a Herald to Geneva, with Letters to this effect, That they did ill to
persecute those who Preached to them the Gospel, as they had done in the person
of Farel; that if they would not suffer them, they who were their Allies would
resent it. Whilst the Council had this matter in deliberation, came above two
hundred persons, who desired Justice to be done on those who had obliged the
Bernoises to write this, who they said were Lutherans; the Council had much ado
to appease them, promising to take care in the business; for they continually
cried out, that if they would not punish those persons who would hinder them
from living after the manner of their fore fathers, and as they had promised
the Fribourgers, they would take a course with them themselves.

Four days after, Mar. 28.
whilst the Syndicks were yet in consultation, notice was given them of a great
Assembly of people at S. Peter's, as also of a considerable company in the
street of Allemands at Baudichon's of New-house, where several had withdrawn
themselves, who had procured these Letters from Berne. Two of the Syndicks went
immediately to S. Peter's, and the two other to Baudichon's, to appease these
two parties and hinder any disorder. The Ecclesiastics and other Catholics
who were at S. Peter's, having understood that the Protestants at Baudichon's
house were well armed, rang the great Bell, and took up Arms likewise. Peter
Vandel whom they believed to be their enemy, Vandel wounded.
was wounded with a Dagger, and had been killed without the interposition of a
Syndick. A general Alarm being given, ^he Ecclesiastics assembled in Molard
with all them of their party, and were encouraged by several persons of the
Council who were there present. Claudius Ballesserd passing from S. Gervais to
go to Molard, was hurt before the house of Baudichon, and had been killed
without the Syndicks assistance, who appeased the multitude the best they
could. The City was near falling into a sad confusion; the air was filled with
the clamours of the people animated by the Priests, and the lamentations of the
aged, who expected to see their children kill one another, or they themselves
to perish by the hands of those to whom they had given life. The City gates
were shut, and the great Guns made ready to besiege Baudichon's house, wherein
there were near two hundred resolute men: The City being in this condition, no
body dared so much as to speak of Peace, left he should be suspected to be a
Lutheran. By good chance there were in the City some Merchants who were
Fribourgers, persons of known honesty and reputation; who interposing, and
calling both parties fellow Citizens, exhorted them to agreement. The
Protestants consented, but the Catholics would have executed their enterprise;
but understanding the others were considerable for their number and
preparedness, they gave over and consented to an agreement. Hostages were given
on both sides, the Protestants delivered Michael Sept, John Lullin and Stephen
Redhat, into the hands of the Syndick Malbuisson: the Catholics gave the
Chanon Goyet, John Malbuisson, and John Pesmes, who were kept in the house of
the Syndick John Philippe.

The Syndicks caused to be published on the Morrow these following Articles of
Peace. Articles of agreement between the Protestan's and Romanists in the City.


That all enmity on either part should be laid aside, and that they should live
in peace without offending one another, either in word or deed.

That no person should offer to speak against the Sacraments of the Church, and
that all persons might use their own Liberty.

That no Flesh should be eaten on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

That none should Preach without License from the Syndicks and Supe^iors, and
that nothing should be maintained in Sermons which could not be proved out of
the Holy Scriptures. At which every one lifted up his hand, the Seculars before
the Syndicks, and the Clergy before the Vicar, promising to observe these
Articles.

In the Month following the Bernoises sent an Herald to Geneva, April 7.
desiring the Magistrates not to permit Paste and Baudichon to be molested, who
called themselves Gospellers. After Easter they sent Deputies along with Farel
to Geneva together with another Minister, to dispute against him who had
preached the Lent Sermon.

On Sunday the fourth of May toward the Evening, May 4.
notwithstanding the Articles of Peace which were to be observed sworn, there
was a disturbance raised at Molard between certain particular persons of both
parties who drew their swords, and yet a while after drank together and were
friends. Whilst they had their swords drawn, Marin Versonnex ran to the Priests
at S. Peter's for help, who caused the Bell to be rung. The Chanon Verley came
one of the first, saying, he would lose his life for the Christian Faith: he
was Armed from head to foot, holding his naked sword in both his hands, crying
out, Follow me good Christians, dear God, where are these Lutherans? This alarm
raised indifferently both parties to the number of one thousand five hundred,
some swords were drawn; and Verly who saw the place too hot for him, Verly
slain.
when he would have gotten away, was killed; it was not known who did it,
because it was dark. The Syndick John Coquet having run in to part them, was
wounded in the head. At length both parties withdrew at the solicitation of
the Syndicks; Versonnex and Marguillier were imprisoned for alarming the City.

The next morning Verly was honorably buried; May 5.
and because he belonged to Fribourg, Letters were sent to the Magistrates of
that Canton, informing them how that they were making search after them who had
killed him, to do justice on them. Two of his kinsmen, together with an Herald
came with Letters from Fribourg to demand his body, which was granted them.
Some days after they came again requiring justice to be done, not only on those
who had killed him, but who were likewise present, and who did not hinder the
Murder; and amongst others on the Syndick Coquet. He answered that he was
present with his Syndicks-staff according to the duty of his Office, and that
he had endeavored to the utmost of his power to suppress this tumult.

After this Deputies from Berne presented themselves before the Council, May 27.
to offer their mediation, and proposed that every person might be at liberty
either to go hear Mass or Sermons. Liberty of Conscience granted.
A month after an Oath was taken to observe this proposal for the future, and
the agreement made on the twenty eighth of March, that they might not appear
disunited at the Bishops coming, who was shortly expected at Geneva, who in
effect arrived on the first of June, the Syndicks having gone a league out of
Town to meet him, he immediately caused several Priests to be released, who
were imprisoned for some misdemeanors. The General Council being held, after a
Mass of the Holy Ghost was celebrated, and a general Procession, at which the
Bishop assisted with the Deputies from Fribourg, a President of the Franche
Comte spoke in the Bishops behalf, exhorting the people to be faithful to him,
Verlys Relations bring with them 120 Soldiers to revenge his death.
entreating them to live in unity, and not to entertain the new doctrine. At
the same time Verly's kindred had brought with them six score Soldiers to
revenge his death; and having passed over the Lake, they came and encamped
themselves at Gaillard, from whence they sent to demand justice Their suit was
delayed upon the account of a difference betwixt the Bishop and Syndicks about
Jurisdiction in Cases of life and death, which the Syndicks would not yield to
the Bishop. The Syndicks at the instance of the Attorny-General drew up an
Indictment against nine Men and Woman, the greatest part of which were found
not guilty: at night there was a Watch kept left the Bishop should take away
the Prisoners, and bring them to answer it at his Bar. But whilst these things
were doing, he left the Town about the midst of July, July 15.
to take part with the Duke of Savoy against the City, although he was so
strictly bound to the contrary by the Oath which he had taken not only at his
Election to the Bishopric, but likewise in making himself free of the City.
The Council earnestly besought him to set the City in Order, but whether he
feared some Tumult upon the account of the Prisoners, or that he had some other
secret design, he colored over his departure with a pretense of going into
Franche Comte, where the Emperor held an Assembly of the Estates, and he
promised that he would shortly return.

Verly's relations returned home all but two who remained at Gaillard with
about twenty Soldiers, who sued for justice to be done on them who were guilty
of the Murder. They who returned met on mount Jura, Thomas Baudichon together
with some Merchants of Stratsbourg. Peter Verly brother to the deceased set
upon him calling him Traitor, and had it not been for his company, his life had
been in danger, his horse having been already killed under him.

The Syndicks declared one part of the Prisoners innocent, which caused the
Attorney General to make an Appeal; but he was immediately told, August 6.
we having no Superior, do therefore admit no Appeal: but at the same time
Peter Thoberet was found guilty of the Murder of Verly, Thoberet sentenced to
lose his head.
having stabbed him in the back as he went up the Stairs of a House and was
sentenced to lose his head.

Toward the end of the Year, December. 2.
Guy Furbity Dr. of the Sorbon, was sent for from Montmelian, Furbity opposed
by Froment
to Preach during the Sundays in Advent at S. Peter's Church, who speaking
against the doctrine of the Protestants was contradicted by Froment, who was
returned; and by another named Alexander Camus: the last of these upon this,
was banished the City, but Froment was secured, and yet these disorders ceased
not.

The Bernoises sent a Herald with Letters to the Syndicks, December. 27.
requiring first, To be paid their dues according to the agreement made in the
Assemblies held in Switzerland: and in the second place, They complained that
their servants who had Preached Gods Word to them, were driven away by them;
whereas they ought rather to have expelled Furbity, Furbity complained against
by the Bernoises.
and such as he who Preached erroneous and blasphemous doctrine; and thus they
expressed themselves. The people before ever the Letters were read, imagined
there were Luther an Ministers come to Town, whereupon there arose immediately
a great disturbance, the greatest part taking up Arms, and sticking small
branches of Trees in their Caps for distinction. The Proctor General likewise
caused the Clergy to Arm themselves. The Council having debated the matter,
would have delivered Furbity, against whom the Bernoises had complained, into
the grand Vicars Custody, but he would not receive him. He left not off
Preaching, and affirming continually, that all those who received the new
doctrine were people who lived ill, and that they were worse than others. The
Syndicks wrote to Berne, the Furbity was under an Arrest, and yet they knew not
wherein he had offended them, but if they had heard him, they would not have
suffered him, so greatly did they value their Lordships friendship.

Some days after this came an Herald from Fribourg, December. 27
who delivered Letters to the Council to this effect, The Fribourgers threaten
to break off with Geneva.
That the States of Fribourg understanding that Farel and others were at Geneva
to Preach the new Law as they termed it, they therefore requested them not to
suffer him, otherwise they would break off with them.

The first day of the following Year, 1534.
the grand Vicar published through all Parishes, Jan. 1.
that none should Preach either in public or private without the Bishops or
grand Vicars License, and that they who had any French or Dutch Bibles should
burn them, upon pain of excommunication.

Four days after arrived other Deputies from Berne and Fribourg. Jan. 4.
These last said they understood there had been a great Tumult occasioned by
the Luther an Preachers, and that if they intended to suffer them, they would
break off with them. They were answered, that they designed to live as
heretofore, according to what they had formerly determined. The Deputies from
Berne urged the payment of the charges of the former War, and demanded
satisfaction for what Furbity had said against them. The Syndicks made answer
they were sorry, if Furbity had done them any wrong, but that they had no power
over any Ecclesiastical person. The Deputies were not content with this answer,
threatening still to break off with them; and in effect they would have returned
them the Letters of Association which they flung on the Table. The Council
instantly besought them to take them again; and to satisfy them, Furbity was
caused to answer for himself in the Town house, the Syndicks having first
declared that they intended not thereby to prejudice the Bishops authority, nor
the Clergies privileges. The Trial was prosecuted upon condition both parties
should submit to the Syndicks decision, in the mean time a Messenger returned,
who had been sent to the Bishop into Franche Comte, who brought word that the
Bishop would have Furbity sent back to the Spiritual Court.

The Deputies from Berne returned, Jan. 18.
and made the same demands as heretofore, telling them moreover that their
Superiors meant that Furbity should be tried by the Syndicks, and not by any
others. They required further, that a Minister should be permitted to Preach in
the City to them who would hear him, and in case of refusal to renounce their
Alliance.

In the mean time there continually happened some quarrel between the Citizens of
both parties. Amy Perrin of the Protestant party, almost mortally wounded a
Catholic Preacher called Besancon, Quarrels about Rellgion.
and Nicholas Pennet Warder of the Bishopric, of the Catholic party, killed
with a Dagger, Nicholas Porral on the contrary side; which made both parties
take up Arms; and had not the Deputies of Berne interposed, there had been more
mischief: yet they would not lay down their Arms till Justice was done on the
Murderer, who had gone and hid himself with Portery the Bishops Secretary in
S. Peter's Steeple, 1534.
that he might at midnight ring the great Bell; but the Syndicks understanding
where he was, went thither and took him at eleven of the Clock at night, and
the next morning condemned Pennet to lose his head, Pennet sentenced to be
beheaded.
which made all quiet again. There were found in Portery's Closet blank Bills
signed with the Dukes Coat of Arms, as also an order for the constituting of a
Governor over Geneva in Temporals as the Bishops Lieutenant, with power to
punish the Lutherans. There were likewise found Letters from the Bishop, dated
the twelfth of January, Feb. 10.
1534. which were read in the general Council at the time of the Election of
the Syndicks; upon which occasion the Bernoises earnestly exhorted the Council,
not to suffer after this manner their privileges to be invaded, seeing they
alone were Judges in matters of Life and Death, putting them in mind of the
last War which the Bishop had been the chief instrument of in promoting it:
that for their parts they would maintain the Alliance with all their power.
Feb. 29.
Whilst Portery's Indictment was privately drawing up, his Relations produced
the Bishops pardon; but the Syndicks would take no notice of it, saying, he
stood convicted of Manslaughter, Sedition and Conspiracy, together with the
Bishop, against the liberties of the City; so that he was executed.

They had a while before appointed a disputation to be held betwixt Furbity and
the Ministers, Feb. 13.
before the 200. which was afterward Printed; Furbity enjoined to Recant.
the Council after it was ended condemned Furbity to a public Recantation to
be made in the same place where he had injured the Bernoises and their party;
and according to this sentence he was led on the Sunday following to S. Peter's
Church, where was given him, what he was to say, in Writing; but-when he was
got up into the Pulpit, he began as he was accustomed with the sign of the
Cross, and implored the assistance of the Holy Ghost, through the intercession
of the blessed Virgin. The Bernoises and Protestants of the City seeing this,
hindered him from proceeding in his Sermon; saying, he came there to make his
Recantation: and immediately he was haled down from the Pulpit and kept close
Prisoner.

The Deputies from Berne were instant with the Council touching four Articles.
Feb. 22.
First, They demanded justice to be done on the Preacher, who they said had
injured them. Articles of the Bernoises, and their answer.
Secondly, They represented that the Lent Preacher in the Convent of Rive
taught erroneous Doctrine, which they delivered in Writing. Thirdly, They
required that one of their Ministers who had been expelled the Town, might be
recalled. Fourthly, That a Church might be granted them for one of their
Ministers to Preach in during their abode in the City. To which the Syndicks
and Council thus replied.

First, Concerning Furbity, that he should receive such punishment as his
faults deserved.

Secondly, That the Preacher of Rive should be warned to Teach no other
Doctrine but what is maintained in the Holy Scripture.

Thirdly, That they could not Repeal the Sentence of the Ministers banishment.

Fourthly, That they might choose what place they liked best for their Chaplain
to Preach in.

In this same day there arose a great disturbance in the Church of S. Francis
de Rive, occasioned by a Protestant Minister's contradicting a Catholic
Preacher on the first Sunday in Lent, and it seldom happened otherwise at all
Sermons.

On the first day of March, March 1.
after this Preacher had ended his Sermon, the Protestants animated by the
presence of Baudichon, Farel Preaches publicly.
Amy Perron, and several other Citizens who had heard him, caused Farel to get
up into the Pulpit. Mar. 30.
And this was the first Sermon the Protestants heard in public, at which some
Counselors made their complaints to the Council, setting before them the
danger that might ensue thereupon. Deputies from Fribourg likewise came to make
their complaints to the general Council, upon the leave granted to the
Lutherans to Preach, notwithstanding they had promised to live as heretofore;
and that they had already given them notice, that if they suffered any
innovation, they would break off their Alliance. They were answered, that they
approved not of it, yet could they not withstand the desires of the Gentlemen
of Berne, who had brought these Ministers along with them; and that they ought
not for this to break off with them, but rather aid them against the Bishop,
who would deprive them of their privileges. Fribourgers break off with the
Genev^ises.
There were also Deputies sent from Geneva to Fribourg on purpose to appease
them, but to no effect, for they broke off the Seals from the Articles of
Agreement; saying, they would have nothing to do with Lutherans, nor with
people who would not obey their Bishop, and sent to Geneva for their Articles
of Agreement.

The Protestants had taken possession of the Church of Rive, in which they
Baptized, Married, and Administered the Communion. The two parties about this
time were equal in power; Protestants and Papists equal in number.
great was the division in families; here the wise against her husband, and
there the father against his son, who used one another perhaps like Turks or
Jews. It was observed that on Whitsun-Eve, the heads of all the Images standing
over the Church gates were cut off in the dark, no body knowing the Author.
These heads were found in a Well; at which the Syndicks being troubled, caused
them to be set together the best they could; the Protestant party every day
gained ground. Lewis Bernard Priest of S. Peter's Church, laid down his Gown,
and having taken to wise Amy Perrin's sister, was married by Peter Viret.

The Bishop of Baulme coming to Chambery toward the Duke of Savoy, notice
thereof was sent to them of Berne, who writ to his Highness that they had been
informed, the Bishop came purposely to Chambery to resign his Bishopric to
Monsieur of Bresse his son, June 23.
which would be a means of involving their Allies of Geneva in farther
troubles; wherefore they entreated him to let them live in peace, and to
observe the Agreements made at S. Julien and Payerne.

A Plot was discovered of some Citizens dealing with the Bishop about his
coming again, July 29.
and extirpation of the Protestants. The Syndicks having learnt the day before
the enterprise was to begin, A Conspiracy to bring in the Bishop, etc.
that the Bishop was at Salleneure, and that the Nobility of Savoy had raised
great numbers of Soldiers, who were to surprise the Town very early the next
morning; they thereupon at nine of the Clock at night, caused the people to arm
themselves, and to keep strict watch. The Conspirators were to give notice to
them without by a fire to be made in some place from whence it might be best
seen. The City Smith was designed to open the Gates, and several Pieces of
Ordnance, which commanded the Lake, were left on purpose without Ammunition The
Bishop was within two Leagues of the City, near the Village of Leluyset, and
every thing seemed to favor them. But they within, from whom most was
expected, and who were to meet together at Molard under a Red Colors, were
constrained to keep within doors for fear of the Guards, which were doubled.
The Enemies had sent two persons, to see if the Gates of Rive and S. Anthony
were open: But when they saw they were fast shut, and that there was a Torch in
S. Peter's Steeple, which showed that they within expected their coming, they
cried out one to another, 1434.
We are betrayed, we shall never enter into Geneva, seeing we have failed this
bout. So that this contrivance was rendered ineffectual by the care of the
Syndicks. The Enemies finding themselves, next Morning, near Gergonant,
retired, Drum beating and their Colors flying, contenting themselves with only
plundering some Country houses, and leading away Prisoner Peter Vandel; who was
returned by way of exchange for Monsieur of Coudree, Vandelled away Prisoner.
who was detained at Geneva upon his account. The Bishop withdrew into Burgundy
whence he came, and some time after, turned his Officers at Geneva out of their
places, choosing new ones in their stead, and removed his Court to Gex. He
designed to have had the Seal of the Bishopric from Geneva, but the City would
not send it him.

The Deputies of Geneva represented their grievances to the General Assembly
held at Baden; and the Bernoises sent to the Duke to have them redressed. But
he gave them no satisfaction: he likewise complaining against the Genevoises,
who had battered his Arms in the Castle of the Isle, and pulled down his Altar
at S. Francis of Rive, and had excluded him from the Vidomnat or Stewardship,
which he would have restored him. He required moreover that they would receive
their Bishop again. The Genevoises made answer, they would stand to the
Agreement made at S. Julien and Payerne. And as to what concerned the Bishop,
they durst not trust him, and therefore would not permit his entrance. There
was a meeting held at Thonon, and another at Lucern, where the Deputies of
Berne and Geneva could effect nothing.

The City received Letters from the French-King, informing them that out of
respect to them and the Bernoises, October. 5.
he had set at liberty two Genevoises, Furbity's enlargement requested by the
French-King.
who had been apprehended at Lions for their Religion, viz. Baudichon, and
Cologny: entreating them to do the like by Furbity; which they would not
consent to before they had leave from the Bernoises, through whose means he had
been all this while detained. Their consent was obtained, yet he was not set at
liberty, till the end of the year by way of exchange for Mr. Saunier a
Minister, Feb. 12.
whom the Duke kept Prisoner in Piedmont. In the Month of February in the Year
following, a Gray Friar of S. Francis's Order, came and presented himself to
the Syndicks, that he might be permitted to preach; A Friar preaches in Lent at
Geneva.
who having requested the Chanons of S. Peter to lend him their Pulpit, they
would not grant it. But the Curate of S. Germans offering him the use of his
Church, he began to preach on the first Sunday in Lent, and held on till
Easter. It was known beforehand that he was a Protestant, as well as the
Curate of S. Germans, Thomas Vandel, who had been one of the Chanons of S.
Peter. About this time the Protestant party was the strongest, there being
three Syndicks of it. They kept constantly with them a Captain and a Herald of
Berne, 1535.
under pretense of the differences between the Duke and them, but in effect to
authorize their party, and prevent their being molested. They likewise
increased by the additional numbers of Protestants in France, who being
persecuted in their own Country, withdrew to Geneva. April 4.
There was amongst others a Woman of the Borough in Bresse, who came there
under pretense of Religion, but was executed for attempting to take away the
lives of three Ministers, by putting poison in their Mess of Broth: but there
was none but Viret who eat of it, Viret almost poisoned.
and thought he sold have died with it. She accused the Chanon of Orsiers for
confederacy with her, who was by the Syndicks order imprisoned.

On Ascension Eve the Genevoises, May 5.
at Eleven of the Clock at Night, Penay Castle assaulted by the Genevoises.
went to surprise the Castle of Penay with 500 Men, and 7 pieces of Cannon.
They within, although they were but few in number, yet defended themselves most
courageously: they lost but one Man, but the Genevoises two or three, besides
several that were wounded. The Night being spent to no purpose, and the Country
round about being alarmed by break of day, they prepared to relieve the
besieged, which made the Assailants withdraw. This caused them of Penay to
begin again to molest Geneva; and that the more eagerly, because the chiefest
of them were for their obstinacy condemned to pay a Fine to the City of 100000
Crowns. These disorders obliged them to finish the walling in of S. Gervais,
and to pull down the other Suburbs.

Some days after, the Bishops Chancellor, and the Judge in Secular Matters, who
had removed themselves to Gex, cited the Gray Friars of Rive to make their
appearance, because on the first of May Father James Bernard, Guardian of the
Convent, who was Lewis Bernard's Brother, who had forsaken the Convent the year
before, Bernard makes public profession of the Truth.
had caused Bills to be pasted up in the principal places of the City, wherein
he openly declared his acknowledgment of the truth, and that he determined to
maintain public Theses, touching the Mass, the Invocation of Saints, and such
like points. These Disputations were to begin on the 30th of May in the Convent
of Rive. May 30.
The Bishop strictly forbad the Catholics of his Diocese, and the Duke his
Subjects to appear there. On the contrary, the Syndicks encouraged both Parties
to meet there, promising both should have a fair Hearing. These disputations
lasted till S. John's day. There were but two Persons who vigorously maintained
the Catholic Doctrine, viz. Caroli Dr. of the Sorbon, and a Dominican Friar of
the palace, called Chapuisy. The Syndicks had ordered Four Secretaries to write
what should pass on either side, to the end that the whole debate being
considered by the Council, they might thereupon advise what was farther to be
done. After this the same James Barnard embraced the Protestant Religion. And
within a while Married a Printers Daughter, on whom he settled a Jointure.

On the Feast of S. Magdalen, July 22.
Farel, accompanied with a great number of hearers, Farel preaches at S.
Magdalens.
having caused the Bell to ring according to custom, came and preached in S.
Magdalen's Parish Church, the Priests not having time to make an end of their
Mass, and the People who were there running away with them. Aug. 5.
Six days after he preached at S. Gervais, where the Syndicks had set a Guard
of 50 Men to prevent any disturbance. On the 5th of August he preached at S.
Dominick's of the Palace, and on the 8th day of the same Month at S. Peter's,
notice being first given by the sound of the great Bell. In the same day the
Relics and Images of the said Church were defaced and spoiled by the common
People. The Statue of Charlemain, which stood at the entrance of the Church,
was likewise overthrown, whereat understanding Men were much displeased.

The next Morning the three Captains, Nicholas Baudichon, Peter Vandel, Aug. 6.
and Amy Perrin, marched with their Companies, beating their Drums as they went
to S. Gervais, and to S. Dominick; where they did yet worse, for they spoiled a
stately Picture which had cost 600 Ducats. And from thence they went to the
Bridge of Arve, to our Lady of Grace's Church, where the Syndicks hastened with
their Staves, to hinder them from demolishing the Chapel of Rene of Savoy.

On the next day, Farel came and preached to the Council of 200, Aug. 10.
and mightily inveighed against the Priests and their Mass. It was thereupon
ordered that the Disputations held at Rive should be looked into. Farel
preaches before the Council.
Two days after the Syndicks sent for the Augustine Monks, Dominicans and
Grey-Friers, and caused the chief Heads of the aforementioned Disputations to
be read before them, asking them whether they had any thing to object against
them? They answered, It belonged not to them to meddle with Articles of Faith,
which had been received and believed by their foreFathers.

At length the Syndicks made an order, Aug. 27.
That all the Citizens and Inhabitants should embrace the Protestant Doctrine,
Mass abolished in Geneva.
utterly abolishing the Roman Catholic Religion. The Nuns of S. Clare kept to
their old Priciples. There was only one Blasine, the Daughter of Dominick
Varembel, who forsook the Monastery, and presented her request to the
Lieutenant, to the end the Sisters might give her a Dowry. Which they refused,
saying, She had brought nothing to the Convent: yet to avoid all Suits of Law,
they were content to put the matter to a reference. There were ordered her 200
Crowns to be paid out of the Housholdstuff of the Convent. They a while after
requested the Syndicks to have Mass permitted them as heretofore, or otherwise
leave to depart the City. The Syndicks answer was, That they might either stay
or go. So that they determined to depart to Vitry, and from thence to Anecy,
where the Duke caused a Convent to be fitted up for them.

They left Geneva, Aug. 30.
being accompanied by the Syndicks and the Lieutenant as far as the Bridge of
Arve, The Nuns leave Geneva.
according to their request, lest they should have any rudeness offered them.
There were but Nine, and there were some of them who for 30 years together had
not stirred out of the Convent. They reached no farther than S. Julien all that
day, which is but a League distant from Geneva. And they were moreover so
astonished to find themselves in the open Fields, that in seeing either Cows or
Sheep they took them for Lions and Bears, according to Sister Jussie's
relation, who has described this Sally, in a little Book called, The beginning
of the Heresy of Geneva. This Book is written with all the simplicity and
confusion, which could be expected from a poor Nun; for she was, as well as her
Companions, in great fear before she got away, thinking every minute they
should have some violence offered them. Yet, as may be seen in this relation,
they were more afraid than hurt. The greatest mischief they received, was an
Exhortation to leave their Veils and Marry. Farel preached in their Convent,
and took his Text from these words of the blessed Virgin, Exsurgens Maria abiit
in montana: And Mary arose and went into the hill country. Showing them, That
she was never a Recluse, although a perfect pattern of Holiness. But this shook
not their constancy.

Baudichon a while after was chosen Captain General, Beudichon made Captain
General.
in the place of John Philippe, and made a general Muster of them who had
voluntarily Listed themselves under him, who amounted to the number of 400.
This Militia being not strong enough to take the Field against the Enemy,
Claudius Savoy, who was sent to Berne from Geneva, not obtaining help, went to
Newcastle to raise Men for Geneva, who in their march thither had some skirmish
near Nions with them of the Country of Gex: but the Deputies of Berne caused
them to be disbanded, promising to reconcile the differences between the
Genevoises, and the Duke and them of Penay. This did not at all please the
Genevoises, because the Savoyards had detained their Three Deputies, Darlod,
Lambert, and Tocquet, whom they had carried away Prisoners to the Castle of
Chillon.

There came another supply from Lions of about 600 Men, Nov. 16.
who found the passages blocked up by the Savoyards as far as Salleneuve. This
Levy of Soldiers were for the most part People sprung Originally from Geneva,
who were most of them Printers and other Artists, The French come to the
assistance of Geneva.
whose Commanders were a Printer named Roboan, and a French Captain called
Francis of Montbel, Sieur of Very. The latter of these ventured to give notice
to them of Geneva of the Aid they had brought them. He was seen first at the
Gate of Cornevin, where he was in great danger of being killed, having been
taken by them of the City for a Spy. He showed them he had left 400 Horse and
200 Foot at S. Claude and on the Mountain, desiring them of the City to sally
out, for the facilitating of their entrance. The Genevoises then took the
Field, with 400 Men and four pieces of Ordnance. December. 14.
They advanced as far as the Village of Ornex, where the night having overtaken
them, they returned, till they should have farther notice. The first account
they received was, That a part of them venturing to come to Geneva, and being
ignorant of the way, had fallen into the Enemies hands, who lay about Gex. The
rest gained, as well as they could, the Town.

The Savoyards and M. de Roll having entered the Castle of Pency as Friends,
they carried away those within Prisoners to Gex, accusing them of Treason. They
likewise abused the Women and Children of strangers, who were sent out of the
City as unprofitable mouths; they stripped them to their Shifts, and caused
them to return back again. There were several little conflicts on both sides,
while the Cantons endeavored to reconcile these differences.

The Protestants continued to pull down the Images, and spoil the Relics of
Churches.

Some days after the Officers of the City, Farel causes a Fast to be proclaimed.
at the instigation of Farel, published by sound of Trumpet, a Fast, enjoining
all persons the next Morning to Assemble themselves in S. Peter's Church, Dec.
18.
to pray to Almighty God to send them Peace. Farel preached, and the
Congregation was greater than ordinary.

About the end of this Year, with which we will finish this our first Part,
Money Coined in Geneva with the City Stamp.
the City being surrounded with Enemies, wanting Provision, and destitute of
Money; this put the Magistrates upon Coining some with the City Stamp, the Savoy
Coin having been most current before amongst them. And for better assurance in
this point of Privilege, there was search made for all old pieces of the City
Coin. At length there were found some pieces, on one side of which there was S.
PETRVS, written round S. Peter's Head; and on the other side a Cross, with this
Motto, GENEVA CIVITAS, the City of Geneva; after the same manner as we have
represented it in the next side. And because the ancient device of the City in
its Arms was Post tenebras spero lucem, I expect light after darkness; there
was Coined on one side of the new Money Post tenebras lux, or lucem, After
darkness, light. On the other side was the Arms of Geneva, the Key and Eagle,
with this device, DEVS NOSTER PVGNAT PRO NOBIS, 1535. Our God fights for us.
There were likewise some Coined the Year following, which instead of this
Superscription, had this about the Name of Jesus, MIHI SESE FLECTET OMNE GENV
Every knee shall bow before me. Here you may see both sorts to satisfy your
curiosity.

The End of the Second Book.
map of area around Geneva A VEIW OF THE Country Round about GENEVA


THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA.
BOOK III.
From the Year 1536. to this present.
THE Change which happened at Geneva in Religion, 1536.
contributed not a little to increase the differences betwixt the Duke and
Genevoises; there passed several skirmishes from the beginning of the Year near
the Bridge of Arve; 1536.
and the enemies made themselves Masters of the Convent, Jan. 3.
called our Lady of Grace, on the third day of January at night, but at break
of day they quitted that post, which made the Magistrates resolve to raze that
Convent, Jan. 4.
and the houses thereabouts. Some days after, Jan. 14.
the Enemy came at ten of the Clock at night, and approached the Walls to scale
the City on the side of S. Gervais de Rive, Jan. 16.
and S. Victor; but the Alarm being given, they were beat back with some loss.
The ^ernoises promise the Genevoises their assistance.
In the mean time the States of Berne having notice of all these proceedings,
promised them of Geneva their assistance, stance, and wrote to the Duke a
Letter to this effect, That seeing he would not keep to the Agreement made at
S. Julien, and the decree of Payerne, but on the contrary had injured their
Allies, and blocked up their City, They break off with the Duke.
they therefore had sent back his Articles of Agreement, and proclaimed War
against him; whereupon the Duke prepared to send his Troops into the Country of
Vaud, to expect them there.

The Genevoises seeing themselves blocked up, Jan. 24.
and pressed with hunger, made a sally out with three hundred men to disorder
their Enemies. The Genevoises sally out.
Now between Chene and Colony, there lay a Party of about five or six hundred
men of the Enemies forces, which they set upon so briskly, that having routed
their horse, the foor lost their courage, and suffered themselves to be slain
without ressistance. So great was the slaughter, that Captain De Verey, who was
chief in that enterprise, moved with compassion, desired his men to forbear,
saying, Ah Sirs, let us leave some alive to till our grounds. The Duke of
Savoy's Provost was found dead amongst a hundred more of his Company, several
taken Prisoners; the Genevoises having only lost three or four of their men.

Two days after, Jan. 26.
having notice given them by some Prisoners that there were several Troops
garrisoned in the Castle of great Sacconez, they marched thither, giving them a
false Alarm to draw them into an ambush, but they would not stir out before
they had fresh supplies; whereupon they returned back after they had taken some
plunder.

In the mean time the Genevoises having heard no news of the Troops which the
Bernoises had promised them, Jan. 29.
and there being no way to bring them provision by land, A Bark fitted out by
the Genevoises.
they thereupon set forth a Barque, and four other Boats manned with eight
hundred Soldiers commanded by De Verey, and so make to the Lake, on which they
had no sooner arrived, but the Country of Savoy ringing their Bells, sounded an
alarm; as they were about landing on Bellerive, they found three Companies
ready to receive them: wherefore they tacked about to the other side of the
Lake, and set their men on the shore of Gentoux and Versoy, where finding none
but old people and children, they carried away with them all they could, even
to the very Bells of these two Villages, and this was all this whole days
exploit.

The next Morning having learned that the Enemy at the approach of the
Bernoises, Jan. 30.
had quitted Sacconez and Peney; they marched out with De Verey, and put in
them Garrisons. They found in these Castles great store of provision, which they
caused to be transported into the City, and not long after they blew up that of
Peney, which had been so often a shelter to their Enemies, Peney blown up.
and discontented Citizens.

The Bernoises advanced as far as Nions, burning and destroying all the
Fortresses and Abbeys along the Country of Vaud; Jan. 31.
but Morges and Nions, although subject as well as the rest to the Duke, had
been already plundered by seven hundred Italians belonging to the Troops of his
Highness of Savoy. Gex surrendered.
The City and Castle of Gex rendered themselves upon composition, those of
Thonon did the like of their own accord, passing over the Lake that they might
join with the Bernoises. The Castles of Jussy and Gaillard, Feb. 1.
being summoned, surrendered in like manner to the Genevoises.

The Forces of Berne, Feb. 2.
having joined with those of New Castle, made up 700 men, Bernoises arrive at
Geneva
who arrived at Geneva. The chief Commander Hans Franez showed his Orders to
the Senate of 200, and asked their opinion, whether it were not best to
continue their Alliance with Madam De Nemours the Countess of Geneva, who had
offered to furnish them with Victuals. Whereupon it was agreed they should not
break off with her. The Troops marched forth on the side of S. Julien and Du
Wache to batter the Fort of La Cluse, whilst those they had sent on the
Mountain should roll great Stones upon them. La Cluse surrenders.
After the Cannon had played, they rendered themselves, and the Garrison which
was about 500 Soldiers, being most Italians, were carried Prisoners to Gex.
They returned laden with Booty and Provision: But the Genevoises could hardly
satisfy the Bernoises, who demanded the Vidomnat, the Revenues of the
Bishopric and its dependances, to defray the Charges of the War. The Senate
conjured them, That seeing they had generously assisted them in maintaining
their Liberty against the Duke and Bishop, they should not sully so glorious an
action by a demand which tended to their oppression: and that they would
endeavor to gratify them in any other way that was reasonable.

Duke Charles the Third was overwhelmed with misfortunes from all sides. The
French-King, Francis the First, being incensed against him, had possessed
himself of Savoy, de la Bresse, and Piedmont, and had sent his Grand Provost
from Paris to them of Berne, desiring them to Bound their Conquests by the
Countries of Vaud, du Chablais, Feb. 18.
and those on this side la Cluse. The Fribourgers, who had no difference with
the Duke, notwithstanding seized on the County de Romant (which was much to
their advantage) under pretense of preventing the Bernoises from doing it.
These took the last good places which remained in the Country of Vaud, Chillon
Castle besieged.
viz. Lausane and Yverdun, which surrendered on composition. The Castle of
Chillon gave them more trouble, and the Genevoises sent thither their Frigate
to besiege it likewise by Water. It being at length surrendered, there were
found in it several Prisoners, March 29.
amongst whom was Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor, who had been a long time
confined to his Dungeon, as we have already observed. Bonnivard set at liberty.
The Valesans taking the advantage of these disorders, took up Arms and
possessed themselves of one part of Chablais, which reached as far as the River
of Dranse. The Genevoises having made themselves Masters of Jussy, Thy, Peney,
Gaillard, Bellerive, and Seligny, settled Officers in these places, having
first demolished the Castle of Gaillard.

The Syndicks published an Order, May 21.
enjoining every one to go to Church and hear Sermons, utterly abolishing the
Mass: An Oath having been administered to the People, Mass abolished.
and an Inscription set up over the Townhouse, in Letters of Gold, in memorial
of this, and their deliverance by succors from Berne. Saunier teaches School.
They erected a Free^School at Rive, and chose Anthony Saunier chief Master of
it. The Country People kept still to the Catholic Religion. The Magistrates
caused a Convocation of all the Priests in their Jurisdiction to be held, who
were told by the Principal Syndick, Farel and Bonnivard being then present,
That if they did not make it appear from the Holy Scriptures, before
Whit-Sunday, That the Mass, and other Popish Institutions, were approved of by
God, they should no longer be permitted the exercise of them. The ancientest of
them, in the name of all the rest, made this ingenious reply: My Lords (said
he) We are not a little surprised at this sudden command, to forsake without
any farther deliberation a Religion, which has been received for so many Ages
as holy and safe, without the least conviction of the contrary. Ye have indeed
left this Religion, but not in a moment of time, as ye expect we should do,
seeing ye have had several Sermons for your instruction. And although we are
your most humble Subjects, yet are we nevertheless Christians, Redeemed by the
Blood of Christ, as well as your selves, and as much concerned for our own
Salvation as ye can be for yours. We therefore entreat you for our Saviors
sake, our common Lord, That you would give us the same liberty ye have taken
your selves. Send us Preachers who can instruct and show us wherein we err, and
then, if they can convince us, we shall without further delay follow your
example, and submit our selves wholly to your disposal. The chief Syndick
having heard this answer, caused them to withdraw, that he might consult on the
matter. Bonnivard was of opinion it were expedient to grant their request, and
not to force their Consciences, but to inform them: for if they should show
themselves so light, said he, as to pass so soon and easily from one Religion
to another, it was to be feared they would on the next occasion return to the
old one again. Whereas Farel on the contrary, being less moderate, answered
him, saying, Will you hinder the immediate work of God? And proceeding in his
Exhortations, he made the Lords consent to his opinion. The Priests were again
sent for in, and had the same command laid on them as before. Some who said
Mass privately in the City, were found out and brought to Farel, who sharply
reprehended them. The Country People were enraged at this, and would have
returned as bad, or rather worse, usage to the Ministers who preached about in
the Villages, had they not been well guarded.

The Bernoises insisted still on their old demands, 1536.
and there was a Meeting appointed to be held in Berne to decide fairly this
difference. Aug. 7.
The Alliance between the two Cities was confirmed to last for 25 Years on
these conditions: That the Genevoises should pay in six Months time, to the
Bernoises, the sum of ten thousand Crowns, for the charge of the War: that
they should give them entrance into their City as often as they had occasion: and
that they should quit to them the Lordship of Gaillard, the Abbey of Bellerive,
and the Castle of Cholex. The Genevoises keeping in their own possession the
Vidomnat or Stewardship, the Revenues of the Bishopric and of the Priory of S.
Victor, which they designed as a maintenance for Ministers and the Hospital.

It was about this time that John Calvin of Noyon in Picardy, Calvin comes to
Geneva.
accompanied with his Brother Anthony Calvin, intending to retire into to Basle
or Strasbourg, and leaving, by reason of the Wars, the direct Road, came to
pass through Geneva, not intending to tarry there. Yet Farel knowing him to be
a learned Man, would needs retain him. Which he would not a long time consent
to; till Farel was so urgent with him as to admit of no denial, desiring him
only to read Lectures in Divinity. Sept.
A while after the Bernoises caused public Disputations to be held at Lausane,
to which he was called, together with Farel and Viret, who was now become a
Preacher. The Protestant Religion was confirmed by these Disputes, and the
Catholic banished. The Bernoises would have had the Monks of Payerne to
receive the Protestant Doctrine: but they refused it, being upheld by the
Fribourgers, who had an equal right with the Bernoises in this Abbey: And upon
this account these two Cantons were like to have engaged in a War. The latter
of these had already sent to Geneva for 200 Men to assist them, but the other
Cantons interposing they were made Friends.

In the Month of March, 1537.
in the Year following, there came a stranger out of the North Country, An
Anabaptist disputes with Farel.
who publicly disputed against Farel, and the other Ministers, before the
great Council, maintaining, amongst the rest, That the Baptizing of Infants was
unlawful, and that the Sacrament of Baptism ought not to be administered to any
but to those who could give an account of their Faith. Farel proved the
contrary, and convinced him of several other Errors held by the Anabaptists. He
was, together with his Companions, banished the City; from whence they went to
Switzerland, where the Bernoises caused some of them to be put to death.

The Ministers had another Disputation with one Carolyn, March 10.
who undertook to prove the lawfulness of the Mass, Carolyn maintains the
lawfulness of the Mass.
and Prayers for the dead. The Magistrates of Berne, having heard both Parties
at Lausane, banished Carolyn out of their Dominions. Farel compiled a form of
Confession, which was read every Sunday in S. Peter's Church. But the Bernoises
complained that these Constitutions were not agreeable with theirs, for they
observed still some chief Festivals, and used unleavened Bread in the
Sacrament, and married Women after the old custom with their Hair discheveled;
which Farel did not approve. He was present at the Synod of Berne, consisting
of 300 Divines from Switzerland, Strasbourg, and other neighboring Countries,
who rejected the opinion of Consubstantiation, or Corporeal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, which some at that time held, Calvin compiles a Catechism.
especially the Lutherans. Calvin composed a Catechism for the instruction of
Youth: whilst they who had sworn to live according to the Protestant
Discipline, becoming unruly, made a disturbance in the Council, crying out,
They had made them Perjured.

The Syndicks for that Year favored the discontented Party, 1538.
and indeed were yet Catholics in their heart. The Syndicks still Catholics
in their hearts.
Calvin, Farel, and Courant, who was blind, but accounted learned, presented
themselves before the Council, offering to make good their Confession of Faith.
But this not prevailing, they under pretense of preserving the Liberties and
Privileges of the City, and because they would not conform to the custom of
Berne in Celebrating the Communion, they therefore made an Order in Council,
enjoining these three Ministers to leave the City in three days. April 23.
Calvin had no maintenance from the City, Calvin with others banished the City.
living at his own charge there; wherefore he went to Basle, and from thence to
Strasbourg; where being entertained by Martin Bucer, Capito, Hedio, and other
learned men, he obtained leave of the Magistrates to set up a French-Church,
and became the Pastor of it, and had a competent maintenance allowed him. Farel
withdrew to Neuf-Chatel.

After the departure of these three Ministers, Mare committed to Prison.
the Minister of Jussy, Henry la Mare, refusing, as the rest had done before
him, to Administer the Sacrament with Wafers, was thrown into Prison. But he
was soon released, December.
and served the City, together with the other Ministers, who were sent for. out
of the Villages. Their opinion was required, before they were admitted,
concerning the old Ceremony of Women's being Married with their Hair hanging
down loose about their Ears. They made answer, (for fear this trifle should
hinder their entrance) That they did not find it forbidden any where in the
Holy Scripture. Whereupon they were admitted, and gave the Communion, in the
Easter following, with Bread without Leaven; which custom continued a long time
after at Geneva.

They who had been the chief instruments of the Ministers banishment, did not a
little triumph at the matter, carrying along with them throughout the City a
Stove, on which things are wont to be broiled, and the Wick or Cotton of a
Candle, which is called in that Country Language Farets; as much as to say,
they had broiled Farel. Calvin writes to Geneva.
Yet this hindered him not from writing to them, Exhorting them to Union in
Doctrine: the same did Calvin, one of whose Letters had this Superscription: To
my well-beloved Brethren in the Lord, the remnant of the scattered Church of
Geneva: By which and what he wrote at the end of his Letter, it seemed that he
foretold the confusion in which his Enemies would be involved 16 months after.
Saunier with others banished.
At Christmas, Anthony Saunier, Maturin Cordier Master of the Free School, and
several others, refusing to give the Sacrament with Wafers, were ordered to
depart the City.

In the Year following there was a Decree made in the General Council, 1539.
That whosoever should so much as advise a change of Government should lose his
Head. Nov. 5.
In another Session of the said Council, 1540.
three Deputies were condemned for having made an agreement with the City of
Berne touching the Lordship of S. Victor, June 5.
which they demanded, and upon other Articles which tended to the oppression of
the City. Two of these three Deputies had been Syndicks in the Year 1538, and
had procured Farel and Calvin's banishment.

This condemnation made a great noise, and moved the People to Sedition,
because these Persons were some of the Principal Men in the City, and had great
Friends. John Philippe, who was Captain General, and had been Syndick in that
Year, and moreover joined in Friendship and in the same Faction with them,
spoke publicly against it, and was the first Author of the Sedition: Philippe
kills a Man with his Leading-staff.
He killed a Man with his Leading-staff in this quarrel. And a German on his
side was slain in the place. The Council issued out a Warrant to apprehend
Philippe, who having shut himself up in his House, made some resistance, there
having been a Man shot dead in this tumult; he got away at last over the tops
of the Houses, and hid himself in the Stable belonging to the Tower of Perse,
amongst the Hay, where having been found out, he was carried to Prison. The
Syndicks, with the Watch, guarded him from the violence of the People, who
otherwise would have torn him in pieces. Whereupon we may observe the
inconstancy of the vulgar, and how little their Friendship is to be relied on.
It was not eight days since Philippe was exceedingly respected, and had more
credit than all the rest of the Syndicks besides; but now every body exclaimed
against him, and desired he should be put to death, even those who were most
obliged to him. He had made a Party who were no friends to the Protestants, and
who had already procured the banishment of several Ministers. Artichauds
Faction.
The two Syndicks who were condemned, were of it. They were called Artichauds
or Artychokes, because this Faction had taken these Plants to distinguish
themselves, having cut down as many of these Roots as they could find in the
Gardens. It was likewise a word used in the Wars amongst them. Others say this
word of Artichaud came by corruption of Speech from Articlers, by reason of the
Articles which they had inserted in the Treaty at Berne. The contrary Faction
had green Flowers for a mark of distinction, and their word was Farel, which
name was often heard about Streets, and likewise that of Artichaud. Claudius
Richardet, chief Syndick in the Year 1538, one of the Principal of the
Artichaud Faction, having been engaged in this Sedition, would have made his
escape over the City Walls, Richardet dies by a fall.
but being a corpulent Man he was so bruised by the fall that he immediately
killed himself. These are the misfortunes usually attending diversity of
opinions in Religion. Philippe was condemned to lose his Head, notwithstanding
the intercession of the Bernoises. June.
So that this Faction of the Artichauds was very much daunted by the disgrace
of the four who were Syndicks in the Year 1538, and who had been the chief
upholders of it. Yet the three Deputies at length obtained favor by the
intercession of them of Berne and Basle, and were only enjoined to make an
humble acknowledgment of their fault before the Council of 200, and had a small
Fine laid upon them. These differences made them think of calling back Calvin,
who was busied in the Ecclesiastical Synods of the Empire.

About the end of these troubles, August.
the Genevoises received Letters from Charles the Fifth, Dated the eighth of
August, 1540. by which he gave them to understand, that he had been informed,
That they of Berne solicited Geneva to do them Homage, which he did not
believe they would consent to, strictly charging them the contrary, upon pain
of his high displeasure; expecting likewise that the Bernoises, to whom he
intended to write, would desist from these demands, and enjoining the City of
Geneva to remain as heretofore in obedience to the Empire, as an Imperial City,
not permitting the Liberties and Privileges thereof to be lost which were
granted them by his Predecessors, which administered matter of no small joy and
comfort to the City.

The banishment of the three Ministers was repealed by the General Council, The
banishment of the three Ministers repealed.
it being openly declared, they might come again into the City when they
pleased. A while after, there was an Order made, forbidding all undecent
Dancings and profane Ballads. There was a discourse of Establishing a
Consistory. May. 1.
Calvin was sent for to Geneva, Calvin sent for to Geneva.
at the suit of them of Zurich to the Strasbourgers, who could scarcely be
persuaded to part with him. Neither was he, indeed, willing to come, finding
his endeavors so successful at Strasbourg. But Bucer threatened him with Gods
Judgments, if he obeyed not this call, setting before him the example of Jonas,
who refused to preach to the Ninevites: but at length, with much entreaty, he
was prevailed on and came to Geneva, having first made a journey over to
Ratisbonne. He immediately fell to work with unwearied diligence, Sept. 13.
preached almost every day in the Week, read Lectures in Divinity, and never
mist being present at the Consistory on the days in which it was held. Calvin's
painfulness.
And answered multitudes of Letters which were sent to him from all parts for
his advice in points of Learning and Controversy. 1541.
About this time he set up Catechizing according to the Form he had composed.
Nov. 21.
He established that Ecclesiastical Policy, the Liturgy and public Prayers,
which have been ever since in use: there came several French Men and their
Families, who had embraced the Protestant Religion, to settle in Geneva, as a
place of refuge.

The Plague raging at Geneva, several of the infected were put into the
Hospital of the large Palace; 1542.
the Magistrates designed to send a Minister there to comfort them. Plague at
Geneva.
But some refused to go, which Calvin and Castalio observing, they offered to
undertake it. But the Council would not permit the former of these, in
consideration of his serviceableness both to the Church and City. Peter
Blanchet was appointed, who quickly lost his Life in that service.

A while after Calvin went to Strasbourg, to dispute with Carolyn, who had been
heretofore Minister at Lausane, 1543.
where having been condemned for Preaching up the Mass and Prayers to Saints,
Calvin Disputes with Carolyn.
he fled for it, and endeavoring to be reconciled with the Bernoises, he made
his Recantation at Strasbourg: But he turned his Coat the second time, opposing
Farel who had preached at Metz. From thence he went to Strasbourg, where he
would not dispute with Calvin. Death put an end to his inconstancy, and
punished him for his fickleness: for he died at Rome in an Hospital.

The Bishop Peter of Baume, dying in Franche-Comte, Auberive was substituted in
his place by the Pope. 1544.
He took on him the Title of Bishop of Geneva, and kept his Residence at Annecy.

About this time Sebastian Castalio of Chastillon in Bresse, Castalio his
Opinions.
Regent of a College, who formerly had preached, propounded and agitated
several questions in Divinity. He disliked the Canticle of Solomon as profane
and lascivious, and did not approve of the Ministers interpretation of that
Article touching Christ's Descension into Hell; for which being reprehended in a
full Congregation, he accused the Ministers of pride, rashness, and other
vices: which the Council having disapproved, he was deposed, and withdrew to
Basle. He broached several Errors, and made a Translation of the Bible into
Latin and French, wresting several places thereof to countenance his own
opinions. He wrote likewise a Book which he Entitled Theologia Germanica, and
a Treatise of the old and new Man.

The City began again to be overspread by the Plague, 1545.
it being first brought thither (as it was thought) by some Switzers Soldiers
who went to Italy in the French-Kings service. A certain Person, named
Lentilles, who had been a Servant to the Keeper of the Hospital in Caddoz's
time, Lentilles spreads the Plague in Geneva.
began to practice what he had learned of him, carrying about the Plague in
Rags and Linen-Cloths, which had been bound about the Sores of the infected. He
had prevailed upon almost the Nurses and Women who cleaned and perfumed the
Housholdstuff of the infected. They had gotten a bie-word amongst them, by
which they signified the Plague, calling it Clauda, rejoicing upon the increase
of it. When ever they met, they were wont to enquire one of another how Clauda
did. The answer was commonly, She is goood for nothing, she does nothing but
sleep; or if there was any House newly infected, they were wont to answer, She
is very well, she makes way in such a place. A certain person named Bernard
Tallent, one of Lentilles Accomplices, was apprehended by the Bailiff of
Thonon, to whom he confessed the whole design; who sent a Copy of his
confession to Geneva. Whereupon Lentilles was laid hold on and examined, but he
would confess nothing whatsoever torment he suffered. He was sent to Thonon to
be confronted by his Companion, who maintained the charge against him; yet he
ceased not to deny it, for all the torments of the Rack which he again
underwent, even to that extremity as to have his Shoulder broken; at which
being let down, and put to Bed, he immediately died, without saying any thing
more, than only advising them to seize upon all them who attended the Hospital.
Which was done, and the greatest part confessing the Fact, were burnt alive, to
the number of seven Men and twenty four Women. They declared, that Lentilles
had obliged them by horrid Oaths to execute their mischievous designs, to
besmear the Gates and increase the Plague, so far till they of Geneva were
reduced to that extremity, that the remainder of them might be maintained with
a Bushel of Corn. A Man would scarce believe that so great a number of Persons
should be prevailed on to work so horrid a villainy, had they not all severally
confessed it, without communicating one with another. The Surgeon and two
others had their Skins pulled off from them alive with red hot Pinchers; some
of these Wretches were taken in the very Fact whilst their Companions were
leading to Execution. After this the Plague ceased by degrees about
All-Saints-day, it having swept away near Twenty thousand People.

The Divisions of the City, 1546.
another kind of Cont^gion, and no less dangerous than the former, succeeded.
For the young People would not suffer themselves to be deprived of their
Sports, Taverns, and other places of debauchery; and the Ministers insisted
earnestly upon it, both in the Council and Pulpit, threatening the Contumacious
with no less than Excommunication. One of the Council accused Calvin, Calvin
accused for teaching false Doctrine.
That he had for the space of Seven Years taught false Doctrine: but the
Council committed him to Prison, without Calvin's solicitation, enjoining him
to do Penance by carrying a Torch in his Hand throughout the City. Viret's
Servant receiving a Letter from Calvin, instead of carrying it to his Master as
he was directed, he delivered it to the Syndicks, who having broken it open,
1548.
were not a little displeased at some passages in it; especially where he tells
Viret, That they of Geneva would govern without God, and that he had to do with
Hypocrites. Being sent for to answer for this before them, he justified his
complaint, by the instances of several debauched Persons who were suffered to
scoff at the Word of God, and to slight their Instructions. He left the City at
the same time Farel departed from Neuf-chatel to go to Zurich, to be present at
a Synod composed of Divines from Switzerland and Grisons: the Points debated
there have been since Printed. At his return, he set forth his Commentaries on
the Epistle of St. Paul to Titus, which he dedicated to Farel and Viret, in
consideration of the strict friendship and unity betwixt them.

Galeacius Caracciola, 1550.
Marquess of Vico in the Kingdom of Naples, where he had left his Estate and
Family, Marquess of Vico comes to Geneva.
withdrew to Geneva upon the account of Religion. Before his arrival, some
Persons spread a report that he came as a Spy, but his conversation gave
sufficient proofs of the contrary. Bolsec charges the Ministers with preaching
false Doctrine.
Bolsec a Carmelite, who had left the Order, and under pretense of embracing
the Protestant Religion, had betook himself to the profession of Physic and
Divinity; contradicted the Minister in a full Congregation, charging the
Protestants with making God the Author of sin, 1551.
and by that means contributing to the condemnation of the wicked, as if God
had been a Jupiter or a Tyrant; October. 6.
alleging farther, That S. Augustine was forcibly drawn into be a Patron of
this Doctrine, although it is certain he was not of that opinion, of which he
warned them to take heed, it being a new and dangerous Doctrine, and of which
he charged Laurentius Valla to be the Author. Calvin clears himself and
Brethren.
Calvin, being present at the Meeting, he heard Bolsec discourse, with an
admirable patience, and after he had said as much as he could, Calvin presented
himself, and answered most ingeniously to every Article for the space of an
hour: and besides an infinite of places which he cited out of the Holy
Scripture, he quoted so many passages out of S. Augustine as would make any Man
believe he had studied no other Author; so that every one admired it, and shut
up all with this saying, Would to God that he who has so much cited S.
Augustine, had seen more of him than his covering. Farel, who was then at
Geneva, made a distinct Oration to confirm what Calvin had said before him, and
to show that they were to blame who charged them with error. Bolsec was
thereupon committed to Prison, where Calvin endeavored to convince him of his
error, as well by personal Conferences as by Letters. A while after, by the
consent of the Churches of Switzerland, he was banished the City. It Is
reported, That ten Years after, Bolsec writes Calvin's Life.
he recanted in a full Synod at Orleans: but yet writ a Book of Calvin's Life,
wherein he very much injures his Reputation: which occasioned Calvin's setting
forth a Treatise concerning Predestination and Providence, which the
Magistrates of Berne did neither approve nor condemn: prudently forbidding 1552.
their Ministers to preach to the People a Doctrine which they and all Men else
so little understood. Troillet, who had been an Hermit, openly censured
likewise Calvin's Institutions. The Council enjoined him to be silent, but yet
this hindered not often disturbances about this matter. The young people of the
City accusing Calvin of Pride and too much Severity.

About this time came Michael Servetus, Aug.
a Spaniard, who had escaped out of Prison from Vienna, 1553.
to Geneva, where he began to dogmatize. Servetus comes to Geneva.
He had composed a Book, Entitled Christianismi restitutio, full of execrable
Heresies. He annulled the distinction of the three Persons in the Godhead,
affirming the Son and Holy Ghost to have been Created in the beginning of the
World. That the Essence of God was common to all Creatures, even those who were
inanimate, which brought forth in Man a free will, yet did not this hinder, but
that the knowledge of good and evil was stifled in him till he was twenty years
of age; before which time a man could not commit any mortal sin. That it was
sufficient to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, it not being
absolutely necessary to lay hold on his promises; All men, both Jews and
Heathens, being justified by their good moral works. That Baptism of Infants
was but a mere foppery. At first he was countenanced by some of the Magistrates
who hated Calvin: so that besides his natural maliciousness, he was so rude in
maintaining his Blasphemy, as to give Calvin the lie above fifty times in one
discourse, and as often calling him wicked wretch, and Simon Magus. The Council
could no longer endure his impudence, and therefore committed him to Prison;
and Articles were drawn up against him, which were sent to the four Protestant
Cantons for their concurrence; after which he was burnt alive, not showing the
least sign of repentance, but only a great fear of death. Several were not
displeased that so dangerous a person was rooted out, who had sowed his wicked
Doctrine for the space of thirty years amongst Christians. Others thought he
was punished too severely, his Fact being only a matter of opinion, which was
at the bottom of it but only a mixture of Judaism and Anabaptism, and that it
were better to have expected his repentance; which occasioned the setting forth
of a Book, De non puniendis haereticis gladio, composed, as it was thought, by
Castalion, under the name of Martin Bellius, which Book was answered by
Theodore Beza. The Magistrates of Geneva and Switzerland, who had condemned
Servetus, considered him as an Apostate, a Seducer, and an Atheistical person.
Calvin likewise set forth a Book wherein he confuted his Heresies, Grybalde
propagates Servetus's errors.
and exposed all the proceedings against him. In the Year following Matthew
Grybalde Sieur of Farges spread the same errors, but he would not enter into a
public conference with Calvin, but withdrew into the Countries of Berne, where
he made his Recantation, yet living, as before, to the Year 1564. when he died
of the Plague.

The City was fortified, 1554.
and the poor People of Merindol and Cabrieres, who had fled for refuge to
Geneva, were employed about the work; the reason of this precaution was, That
they had notice given them by the Bernoises, that the French had some design
upon them; and that which occasioned this suspicion was, The great multitude of
French men who had withdrawn thither. The Libertines of the City bore them
ill will, and were not willing to grant them the Burgership, The French
designed to be massacred in Geneva.
as they had done to others. They designed one Night to massacre them all, the
Captain General, Amy Perrin, a seditious and factious Person, being the chief
of their Party. But the Council getting notice of it, took care to hinder them.
There were some of them made severe examples. Thirty of them fled, and were
sentenced though absent. And thus the City was cleared of these seditious
People: 1554.
but yet they made several disturbances in the City, and toward the Bridge of
Arve, endeavoring with all their powers to be permitted to return by the
solicitation of the Bernoises: which lasted for some time.

The number of strangers visibly increasing in the City, The English Church in
Geneva.
several English came and settled themselves there, and founded a Church of
their own Nation, 1555.
as the Italians had done before them in 1551. and the Spaniards some time
after; but Queen Elizabeth having succeeded Queen Mary, and bringing in again
the Protestant Religion, the English returned again into their own Country, and
thanked the City for their protection. 1560.
The first Minister of the Italian, Church was Maximilian of Martinengue,
brother to the Earls of Martinengo, an illustrious family in Italy; he was a
very learned man. The French Church at Francfort had some difference which
Calvin went thither to pacify.

The term of the Alliance with the City of Berne being expired, 1556.
Geneva endeavored to renew it, which was not effected without a great deal of
trouble. 1557.
The other Cantons were busied in the Diet of Baden, it was at length concluded
that it should last for ever. October.


Some Italians began to disturb the Churches peace by their opinions of the
Trinity; for to remedy which, 1558.
the Council enjoined them to subscribe to the Churches general Confession; Jan.
but there were seven persons of them who absolutely refused it, some of them
leaving the Town upon it, the others signed it but by constraint, keeping still
the same mind, Gentil disputes against Calvin.
amongst whom was Valentin Gentil, who gave not over dogmatising. He was
thereupon committed to Prison, and disputed before the Lords against Calvin,
whom he charged with oppressing the Truth. Gentil had run himself into
Arianisme and his drift was to show that the Divine Essence belonged properly
to none but the Father. It was the opinion of some Lawyers, that his Heresy
was of that nature, as to deserve death; but he thought to escape all
punishment by a seeming repentance, retracting his opinion by a writing made
for that purpose; which the Magistrates taking notice of, inflicted on him no
other punishment besides the burning his Writings, and a command not to stir
out of the City without their leave, which he obeyed with much submission and
seeming compliance; after which he had leave granted him to go about the City;
but at length he withdrew with some of his followers into the neighboring
Countries at Grybald's, where he taught the same Doctrine as before. The
Bailiff of Gex obliged him to a new recantation: but he still returned to his
old error, whereupon he was at length executed at Berne in the Year 1566.
Calvin wrote a Book against him, wherein he excellently confuted this Heresy.

The number of the Youth increasing who came from all parts to study at Geneva,
A College founded at Geneva.
the old School was not large enough to hold them, wherefore the Council
thought fit to raise a new College. There were immediately settled in it seven
Classes, and three Professors of Greek, Hebrew, and Philosophy; besides
Divinity Lectures which Calvin read himself, to whom was joined Theodore Beza,
who Preached the following week after Calvin. The Statutes of this College
were first published in S. Peter's Church, the Council being present, together
with the Ministers and Scholars, 1559.
which Statutes have been since Printed. June 5.


Duke Emanuel Philbert entering again upon one part of his estates, of which his
father had been almost wholly dispossessed, required the Bernoises in a Diet
held at Neuf-Chatel, to restore him those places they had taken from him, which
he obtained but in part: some years after he endeavored likewise at an
Alliance with all the Cantons, but there were none but the six Cantons who
granted it him.

In the Year following the Genevoises made two persons severe examples of
Justice after the manner of the ancient Romans, 1560.
a Citizen having been condemned to be whipped by the lesser Council, Adultery
severely punished.
for the crime of Adultery, he made an appeal to the Council of two hundred,
from whom he hoped to obtain favor. His Indictment being revised, and the
Council observing that he had been guilty of the same crime heretofore, and had
been reprehended for it, condemned him to die, to the great astonishment of the
Offender, who complained he was too severely dealt withal. Some time after
there was executed for the same fact a Banker, who died very penitent, blessing
God that Justice was so strictly observed.

The young King Charles the ninth writ to them of Geneva by an express, 1561.
Jan.
complaining that the source of all the divisions in his Kingdom sprung from
the Ministers whom they had sent into France, The French King complains against
the Genevoises for sending Ministers into France.
desiring them to recall them, and to take a course that for the future they
should come there no more. To which they answered, that indeed they had not
hindered any persons from coming into their City to study there, in order to the
fitting themselves for the Ministry; but they were so far from fomenting the
troubles of France, that on the contrary they had endeavored to keep back them
who would have went to Amboise, as knowing well that Holy Scripture recommends
to Subjects obedience to their Prince. But the King not satisfied with this,
gave not over threatening them. The Duke of Savoy likewise laid to their charge,
that they had privately assisted his Subjects of the Valleys of Angrogne and
Luzerne, although they protested to be no farther concerned in it, than in
praying to God to deliver them from the Soldiers cruelty.

The Protestants of France enjoying again the clams of peace (whom the
Catholics call Huguenots) the chief Cities of it sent to Geneva for Ministers,
who did not refuse them. Theodore Beza and Peter Martyr, Divinity Professors at
Zurich, were sent for by Letters from the King of Navarre, dated the twelfth of
August, 1561. to be present at the Conference of Poissy.

On Saturday the twenty seventh of May, 1564.
1564. died John Calvin aged fifty six years, Calvin dies.
having by overmuch study brought upon himself several distempers. He was
buried the next morning in the common Churchyard of the large Palace,
according as he had desired in his Will, without any Pomp or Epitaph; his Corpse
was attended by almost the whole City. Simon Goulard of Senlis who came to
Geneva, a while after was chose in his place. Theodore Beza wrote a Discourse
of his life and death, which was published in the same year together with his
Testament.

His death was followed two years after by another more Tragical, 1566.
James Paul Spiffame Bishop of Nevers having left his Bishopric, Spiffame his
Tragical end.
and forty thousand Livres a year, had withdrawn himself to Geneva, to live
according to the Protestant Doctrine. He had presented a Request to be admitted
Citizen, which he obtained, having been received into the Council of two
hundred, and of sixty. The Magistrates and Scholars esteemed him for his
Learning. A while after he was sent into France to serve there in quality of a
Minister, but they had notice that he privately endeavored to get some other
Bishopric, which was the occasion that at his return he was more narrowly
observed, and his former life searched into. It was found that he had a child
before he was married, of her whom he had espoused, and to the end it might not
be declared a Bastard, he had forged a Contract of an antedated Marriage, and
false Seals, for a greater confirmation to make his Son capable of his
inheritance, which was very considerable; for all which he was imprisoned, 1566.
and having confessed the whole matter, he was beheaded at Molard, being very
penitent for what he had done, expressing his sorrow by an excellent speech
which he made on the scaffold. Some persons have thought that these accusations
were only for a color, when in effect it was to gratify Catherine de Medicis,
who had prevailed on the Syndicks, at the instance of the Pope.

Duke Emanuel Philbert, 1567.
who had been a long time urgent with the Bernoises to restore him his lands,
prevailed so far by the Emperors intercession, that they released to him Gex,
Gaillard and Terny with Chablais, on condition they should remain in the state
they were in, having the free exercise of the Protestant Religion permitted
them; which agreement when he was in possession, he did not observe. The
Country of Vaux fell to them of Berne, as it was agreed by the Decree made at
S. Julien and Payerne in case he violated the agreement.

The Duke D' Alva being to pass through Savoy, and near Geneva, Emanuel
Philbert would have laid hold of this opportunity to make himself Master of
that City, and therefore raised great numbers of Soldiers on this side and
beyond the Mountains. The report of his enterprise being spread in France,
there came in a short time several French men especially Burgundians and them
of Provence, to offer their service to the City; May.
the Magistrates likewise took all possible care for its preservation, they
made out seven Companies of these strangers, four of which were commanded by
Captains belonging to the City, and the three others by them of Provence,
besides the inhabitants who mounted the Guard by turn. I. F. Bernard second
Syndick was made Captain General, Amy Varro Sergeant-Major, Amblard Corn
Colonel of the Infantry, and Paul de Mouvans his Lieutenant. The Duke De Alva
being informed of the nature of the place would not stop there, but traversing
the Franche Comte he passed over into Flanders, where there were affairs
expected of greater concernment, Sept.
the Hollanders having taken up Arms, the Troops composed of strangers which
were at Geneva were not willing to remain idle, but took likewise the same road
to assist them of the Religion; they Alarmed Gex and Versoy as they passed by,
the inhabitants being seized with a panick fear forsook these two Boroughs,
this exploit has been since called The battle of Gex, no sooner begun than
ended, concerning which there is a poem extant in Burlesque Verse in that
Country Language. It was about this time that the Arsenal of Geneva was built.
1567.


These rumors of War were followed by the Plague which swept away several
people: Grimaud endeavors to spread the plague.
there was again a discovery made of several persons who endeavored to spread
the infection about the City, and who had learned this cursed art in Lentilles
School. There were diverse burnt for this fact, amongst others one called
Grimaud and his Accomplices; 1972.
yet the Plague ceased not till 1572. which year being very cold put an end to
it, being one of the sharpest as could be remembered to have happened in Geneva.
People passed over the Lake on the Ice almost over against Cologny, and the
Mills could not work, which caused a great scarcity of flower.

The City was likewise twice shaken with Earthquakes, May 3. April 24.
the first of which overthrew the Gate of Cornevin into the Ditch, 1574.
and in the years 1576 and 78. there appeared two Comets which were followed by
the joyful news of an Alliance which Henry the third made with the Switzers,
1575.
in which Geneva was comprised, it being stipulated that for the defense of the
said City, November.
which was styled the Key and Bulwark of Switzerland, 1578.
H^n. the 3. of France makes an Alliance with the Switzers, etc.
the Cantons should send in case it should be besieged a sufficient number of
men to its assistance at the Kings charge, and on the other hand the City
should suffer his Troops to pass through it, marching orderly in rank and file,
granting no retreat or passage to his Majesty's enemies. This Treaty was
concluded at Soleurre betwixt the King and the Cities of Berne, Aug. 29.
Soleurre and Geneva, Zurich was afterward comprehended at the suit of the
Sieur of Cocumartin Ambassador from the King to the Switzers. 1579.


This hindered not the Duke of Savoy, 1582.
from making a new Trial upon Geneva. The Duke of Savoy makes attempts on
Geneva.
A Dauphinoise who lived at Thonon informed him that he held intelligence with
the chief of that City, which put the Duke upon raising some Regiments of Horse
and Foot out of Piedmont, Provence and Savoy, under the conduct of Bernardin of
Savoy Earl of Raconis. These Forces lay hid in several Castles and Monasteries,
the place of their Rendezvous was to be the great Wood of Ripaille, which was
enclosed with Walls, where they were to have Arms and other necessaries. In the
mean time they tampered with some of the City, who let themselves be won: but
they more especially applied themselves to the Captain Lieutenant Lance, who
commanded at S. Gervais. He took what money soever they brought him, and
promised great things; but he informed the Council of the whole transcation.
The Dukes Forces marched through Terny, and came to Gex, from whence they were
to march to S. Gervais, Lance having promised to set open the Gates to them.
The day appointed being come, the Earl of Raconis told the Dauphinoise, that he
would not have him leave him; but he fearing if the enterprise took not effect,
it would go hard with him, got away and came to Geneva; so that Raconis
perceiving how the matter went dared not to approach the Town, although the
Gate stood a long time open, and he had the appointed sign given him, but he
withdrew to Terny, and S. Julien; his conjecture was not ill grounded, for
besides the inhabitants of the City who were all in Arms, there were five
hundred Musketeers with other Companies who waited his coming.

The Earl having mist his mark, and considering what a gallant Army he had
under his command, there being besides others, one thousand five hundred
Switzers belonging to the Catholic Cantons, whom he had raised (maugre their
Allies) for to set them by this means at variance; he resolved not to return
home, without doing something.

On the other side, 1582.
the City was very well manned with Soldiers both French and Switzers who were
Protestants, a considerable number of which they posted near the Bridge of
Arve, where there passed some skirmishes. The Enemy was worsted, which made him
withdraw, having first plundered and wasted the Villages about Geneva. After
their departure the Genevoises permitted their Troops to range at pleasure,
Aug. 16. 1582.
and sent away others who came to their assistance.

Inquiry was made after those who had dealt underhand with the Enemy. 1582.
a Traitor to the City. Des plans April 18.
One called Des plans of Thonon, had settled himself in Geneva for that
purpose. He was made free of the City, having purchased an house near the Gate
of Rive, where he sold Wine to the Soldiers of the Guard. He had sent to the
Duke the height of the Walls, and had introduced some Officers, and made a Mine
in his Cellar to let in Soldiers into the City who were to surprise the Guard:
he was beheaded with three of his Companions. They who saw them executed,
related a strange and incredible accident, which was, that one of the heads
which was cut off, made a leap on the Scaffold, and fell on the ground, from
whence it leaped upon a person there present, and so fastened its teeth in his
Cloak, that it was not possible to loosen it otherwise than in cutting off a
piece of it; now if this be true, this head was of the nature of the Viper, who
is no less dangerous when his head is separated from his body, than before.

During these Transactions, The Jews request to Geneva.
the Sieur of Candole returning out of Germany, brought along with him a
request from the Jews who were threatened to be banished out of the Empire; they
proffered to come to Geneva, to the number of eight or ten thousand, to build
houses at their own cost, toward S. John's or S. Victors, and to close in their
apartment with walls where the City should set a Guard at their charge. They
promised, moreover, to be the first in fight when occasion required, and to pay
a yearly tribute to the Republique, and to undergo any other Taxes which should
be laid upon them, desiring only to have this place for a retreat, and as a
convenience for Trade into Piedmont and Valais. Some were of opinion to accept
of their proposals, representing to themselves and others, the enriching of
their Country by this means, and that they would be as so many good Soldiers
who would do the City service for nothing; and that they might be tolerated,
seeing they were permitted in Italy. They who were of the contrary opinion
alleged that the Protestant States found them dangerous, and that they could
not be trusted in any strait; that they would make provision scarce, and
thereby enrich themselves by impoverishing the Citizens with their Usury, and
that they had been already driven out of France for that reason, as they were
now about to be out of Germany. This last advice was followed, and they on
their side agreed with the Germans, who permitted them to live where they were.

On the first of March 1584. 1584.
on Sunday about noon, the sky being very clear, March 1.
there was felt on a sudden a great Earthquake, which lasted ten or twelve
minutes, An Earthquake.
and showed it self not only by the clattering of the Windows, Tiles, and
Pent-houses; but shaking the very foundations of the Houses, throwing down
several Chimneys; it shattered the Houses about the Lake, and waxed greater
three days following, producing at length this unheard of disaster. Half a
League distant from the City of Aigle in the Canton of Berne betwixt nine and
ten in the Morning, there was seen a prodigious quantity of Earth driven out by
the exhalations of a Rock, which divided it self into two parts, which poured
down like a shower of rain, and overwhelmed in an instant the Valleys and
neighboring Plains. The Hamlet of Corbery was all of it immediately buried
save one house, the Master of which astonished at the strange clatter he heard,
told his Wife, he believed the end of the World was at hand. They fell to their
prayers, and in the mean time the Earth passed like a wave over their house
without hurting any body but the Master, who was slightly bruised in the head
by a splinter. There was found in another house a Child safe in the Cradle, and
the Mother of it killed by the ruins of the house, lying with her arms
stretched over it; moreover the Earth augmenting, as it rolled like a
Snow-ball, overwhelmed in the Village of Yvorne sixty nine Houses, one hundred
six Barns full of Corn, a hundred persons, and a great quantity of Cattle: This
Village being one of the best in Switzerland, inhabited by Farmers, who
maintained themselves by their labor, most part of the men were out at work
and so escaped, there was no house out of which some one or other was not
saved. The Earth was mixed with a kind of hail stones, and with a cloud of
sparks and smoke, which spread a smell of Brimstone thereabouts. The shower of
Earth, being as wonderful as those of the Ancients have been suspicious,
covered at least a League in length, and about twelve Acres in breadth; it was
unequal in thickness, but the shallowest place was ten foot deep. All the
ground which it covered, was made so smooth, that a man would have thought it
to have been run over by a rolling stone, there being not the least appearance
of any houses.

This Earthquake was moreover so violent, that near the Village of Morteru, the
Lake overflowed its usual limits at least a quarter of a Mile, and at
Ville-neuve at the head of the Lake there were found Tuns of Wine standing
upright on their bottoms. Near the City of Aigle, a piece of a Rock was
unloosned and stopped without doing any harm in a cleft of a Mountain.

In the Month of October in the same Year the City of Zurich, Zurich makes a
perpetual Alliance with Geneva.
considering Geneva as a place whereon depended the Safeguard of Switzerland,
made with it a perpetual Alliance; for a Memorial of which, there was set up a
neat Latin Inscription in the Townhouse.

If this Alliance was matter of rejoicing to the City, the mishap of the year
following gave them sufficient cause of sorrow. 1585.
A famine and scarcity of Provision befell them, 1586.
which lasted a whole year. A Famine in Geneva.
The worst of it was, That what was eaten did not satisfy, and it was then it
might be pertinently said, That God had broken the staff of Bread: For People
were as hungry, an hour and a half after they had taken their repast, as
before. There were seen several poor Villagers expiring in the Fields. They who
had Bread in the Oven were forced to go and guard it home, lest it should be
snatched away. And the extremity was so great, that the young Men of several
good Families were forced to rob and steal to sustain themselves. 1587.


In the beginning of the Year 1588. Vita di Sixto V.
the Duke of Savoy, Charles Emanuel, sent an extraordinary Ambassador to Rome,
under pretense of paying his acknowledgment to the Pope: The Pope requested to
assist the Duke against Geneva.
but the real intent of it was, To desire his assistance against Geneva,
resolving to leave no means untried whereby to become Master of it. The Pope
received the Ambassador with the greatest signs of respect: but as to the
business of Geneva he would not concern himself with it, whether he feared the
charge would be too great, or that he thought the enterprise too difficult.
There was then at Rome a Genevois named Francis Fabry, Son of Peter Fabry, of
one of the chief Families in Geneva, who was Bishop de la Cave. Sixtus had some
conferences with him, which proved not ineffectual: for the Pope answered, at
length, the Ambassador, That if it were a War wherein Religion was concerned,
it were then fitting he should be interested in it, as being head of the
Church: but if it was a War which concerned the State, he could not in
Conscience employ the Churches Treasure in maintaining other Peoples interest.

The Duke was not a little displeased at this answer, and being of a choleric
temper, he could not forbear saying in a passion, That Sixtus had rather shed
the blood of Catholics at Rome, than that of Heretics at Geneva. 1588.
At the same time he wrote to his Ambassador to return home: And that if he
could not subdue the Genevoises by the help of the Spiritual Sword, he would
try what he could by the Temporal one, which no Priest was able to withstand.

The Count Olivarez, who had received Orders from Spain to promote, as much as
in him lay, Olivarez's Counsel to the Dukes Ambassador.
his Highnesses interest, comforted his Ambassador in this following manner,
after he had in vain endeavored the same thing: Alas, said he, I know very
well the temper of the Ecclesiastics of this Court, and especially of this
Pope whom I have often dealt with. His Highness ought not to expect any thing
from him toward the War with Geneva. For should be take the City, he would
keep it himself. Wherefore I believe it would be better to let that City alone:
for these Heretics respect the Duke, and bring him profit by trading with his
Subjects: whereas if it should fall into the hands of the Ecclesiastics, they
would not fail to trouble the Duke and Neighboring Princes. So that the Dukes
Subjects would be losers by it, and would find such a Neighborhood uneasy to
them.

The Duke taking advantage of the disorders which the League occasioned in
France, 1588.
had seized on the Marquisdom of Saluces; at which the French-King, Henry the
Third, requiring satisfaction, sent Nicholas Harlay Sieur of Sancy to the
Genevoises, to stir them up to make War against the Duke, Sancy animates the
Genevoises against the Duke.
knowing well the differences betwixt them. Sancy promised on the Kings part,
to send them Men, and to bear all the charges of the War, and to let them hold
whatsoever they should take from him. The Council was divided about the matter,
some alleged, That Henry might die, and his Successors forget the kindness
received from them. That the Duke would be sure to remember it, and be revenged
when he was able. That War was hazardous, and that the City was not in a
capacity to hold out long in case it should he besieged. Others on the contrary
represented, That in obliging a great King they might thereby procure an able
Friend in their time of need; that the Duke had declared himself an open Enemy;
that the French-Churches would be more kindly used upon this account; and that
the Prince Palatine, and the Switzers would furnish them with money sufficient
to carry on this design. This last advice was followed, and afterward Sancy
went to stir up the Switzers, whom he promised that the Duke should be attached
on the other side from Dauphiny. The Prince perceiving this tempest which
threatened him, would have made himself Master of Lausane and the Country of
Vaud, under the conduct of the Baron of Hermance, whose Troops lay about Thonon
and Ripaille. The Bernoises perceiving the Dukes design on their Country, were
easily won to enter into a War with him.

In the mean time the Genevoises edged forward by Sancy's Letters, set out from
the City, with six Companies of Foot, and three Troops of Horse, in the
Evening, under the command of the Sieur Quitry a French-Gentleman, and a Knight
of the Order who was sent to them, together with the Sieur of Baujeu, by the
French-King for to command their Forces, who in the same Night seized on the
Castle of Monthoux, having forced open the Gate, with a Petard. In the Morning
they took the Town of Bonne, with its Castle standing at the entrance of
Focigny. And from thence marched along the River of Arve, Bonne taken by the
Genevoises.
where they broke down the Bridges of Tremblieres and Buringe to hinder the
Enemies passage. They presented themselves before the Castle of S. Joire a
place of strength, and the Key of the Baillage of Chablais, with a design to
win it, not only for the importance of the place, but likewise to find Letters
and Commissions concerning the enterprises on the States of Berne and Geneva,
of which the Baron of Hermance, the Lord of this Castle had been the principal
promoter. The Castle being taken, these said Instructions were found in it, and
great store of Arms and Provision besides. They returned, having left a Garrison
in this place, without the loss of a Man, because that the Duke seeing neither
Switzers nor Grisons in the Field, 1589.
did not imagine the Genevoises had dared to brave it thus in his Dominions.
But the Country sounding an Alarm, he sent away several Troops from Remilly to
observe the Enemies motion.

The Genevoises, April 7.
animated by this success, marched out the next Night after their return, to
besiege Gex, and in the Morning made their approaches to it. But the besieged
pretended to capitulate: yet after several messages from both sides, this
Treaty proved ineffectual, so that the Soldiers in the Castle began wholly to
defend themselves against the Assailants, some of whom were wounded, and two or
three killed. Gex surrendered.
Yet at length, foreseeing their ruin if they held out till the Cannon played,
they surrendered it up, and received a Garrison that Night. The next Morning
Claudius Pobel Baron of Peter, and Governor of Gex, rendered himself to Quitry
at his discretion, who made him Prisoner of War, together with two Captains, an
Ensign and eighty Soldiers, who were all Piedmontoises, and were carried away
the same Night to Geneva. These last were all soon released, except those who
would again take part with their Enemies. But the Baron had his lodgings
assigned him in a Counselors. House till he paid his ransom.

The Duke having notice of this siege, sent away Sonas Governor of Remilly to
succor the place. He set forth with eight Troops of Horse, and nine Companies
of Foot: but hearing of its surrender, he came and presented himself before
Bonne, having first repaired the Bridge at Buringe. There were not above ninety
Soldiers in this Town; and some Peasants who were sent thither to work on its
Fortifications: one Captain Bois was left Governor of the place. Sonas
perceiving they were prepared to receive him, turned aside to seek other more
favorable occasions.

In the mean time the Genevoises had made an attempt on la Cluse; La Cluse
attempted by the Genevoises.
which is a Fort made out of the hollow of a Rock of Mount Jura, and bounded by
the Rhosne, which slides along at its foot. They fixed their Petards against
the Gates; but taking wet, they had no effect. Quitry marched thither after the
taking of Gex. 1589.
He met at Cologne with some Soldiers belonging to la Cluse, whom he, with
twenty nine Men, beat back to their Trenches and brought up the Cannon; which
played in the Morning, but being ill placed and ordered, it could do no
execution. They of la Cluse had posted some Musketeers on the Mountain, to
hinder all approaches to the Fort. Quitry sent the Sieur of Ville-Neufe with a
Party of Foot to beat them off. He immediately set upon them so vigorously that
he routed them. There were several killed with the Musket Shot, and others
precipitated from the Rock. He came down thence from the other side of the
Mountain, and went and fortified himself in the Village of Longerray in the way
to Lions, to the end he might the sooner end the siege: but besides that he had
no recruits sent him, the most part of the Soldiers being tired withdrew in
great numbers; and there remained with him but a hundred Men, who being charged
by Sonas, at the head of 300 fresh Soldiers, were forced to retire.

On the other side, 1589.
the Bernoises and Genevoises endeavored to take the Fort by assault,
resolutely attempting it, although there was no considerable breach made: the
latter of these lost several good Soldiers, and amongst others the Baron of S.
Lagier, whose loss was much lamented as well for his Valor as Piety. Baron of
S. Lagier slain.
The Bernoises lost likewise several of their Captains: and it was well so
desperate an attempt cost them no more.

Sancy being returned to the Camp at Cologne, April 12.
where were arrived several Companies from Berne, under the conduct of Colonel
Erlach, having called a Council of War there, it was determined to leave the
siege of la Cluse, seeing their attempts upon it had been all this while
ineffectual, and to go join with the Forces which came from Soleurre and
Grisons, to consult together what was farther expedient.

So the Army returned in good order to Geneva, April 16.
expecting the promised recruits; which being come, they marched on the side of
Thonon, which is a little City seated near the Lake, having neither Walls nor
Ditches, but a good Castle standing on the highest part of the Town. The Cannon
was brought by Water, to avoid the difficulties of the way, and was three days
before it came, by reason the Wind was contrary: the Enemies in the mean time
appeared on the top of Pinchat, which is a rising ground about a quarter of a
League from Geneva. They were beat back and came and forraged the Bailywick of
Terny.

Whilst the Castle of Thonon was besieged, that of Baleyson, and the other of
Yvoire, were taken, together with the Tower in the Village of Concise. There
were not above seventeen or eighteen Soldiers in this Tower, who held out some
hours against Erlach's Regiment. The Colonel having set fire on the
neighboring Houses, they surrendered themselves, and five of the chief of them
were hanged for their rashness. The Sieur of Dingy who was Governor of the
Castle of Thonon capitulated, and was permitted to depart with eighty Soldiers,
their Swords and Daggers hanging by their sides, April 26.
and their Muskets on their shoulders, their Matches not lighted, nor Drums
beating, nor Colors flying.

The next Morning the Hospital of the Fort of Ripaille began to be built, April
27.
the Wood having been gained by the Lancers: some of the out parts of it were
taken; but the Fort had a good Trench, and was very well fortified with a thick
Wall, and seven Towers standing in the midst of it, whence the besieged might
easily kill the choicest Soldiers in the Army: moreover they relied on the
succors the Duke had promised them. In effect he came the next Morning within
two Leagues of Thonon, with 1500 Lancers, 1000 Foot, and 500 Argoulets,
commanded by the Earl of Martinengue and de Sonas. These Argoulets were a kind
of light horsemen, much in request at that time, without any Breast plates,
armed with Pistols and a Carbine, which has since occasioned their being
called Carbineers. The Lancers were another kind of Cavalry, armed Cap-a-pe,
with a Spear and Pistols.

Sancy and Quity sent out some Troops to observe the Enemies motion: The Royal
Army consisted of 10000 Foot and three Troops of Horse.
but not agreeing, they did nothing, although the Enemy was the weakest by two
thirds: for the Royal Army consisted then of 10000 Foot, Switzers, Grisons,
Frenchmen, and Genevoises, together with three Troops of Horse belonging to
the latter, and some Horse of the Retinue of the two Commanders.

Two days after, Quitry having posted the three Geneva Cornets on a rising
plain, 1589.
called Creste, near Thonon, they ranged themselves into the form of a Hedge,
April 29.
expecting till they should be sheltred by some Musketeers or Pikes: but they
not coming in, and the Enemy having discovered them, came and attacked them
with three or 400 Lancers; who finding the Match unequal, drew back with full
speed to Thonon. They were pursued as far as the Bars by the Enemy, who lost
the Baron of Vitry. After this the Cornets returned to their Post, and with
some Foot, drawn out in haste, made the Enemy give ground; but they being
reinforced by a body of Lancers, beat them back the second time as far as
Thonon. Puffed up with this success, The Regiment of Soleurre re-attacked.
they attacked the Regiment of Soleurre, which had in the Front and Flank some
Genevoises and German Foot: the Pikes of that Regiment bore up bravely against
the Effort, and compelled the Enemies to retire with some loss, and the Earl of
Martenengue their General was wounded in the Leg, not having been able to put
in succors into Ripaille.

These skirmishes did them a kindness: for the Switzers finding themselves
attacked so briskly, by so small a number of the Dukes Forces, resolved
thereupon to forsake those quarters, and to pass over into Franche-Comte. The
building of Ripaille was continued, but they within it, perceiving no succors
coming, rendered upon composition. May 1.
There came out 500 Men, who were permitted to depart with their Rings, their
Swords and Daggers by their side, and the Captains Compois, Bourg and Sinalde
on Horseback. After which the place was demolished. They of Thonon, who had a
Gentleman of the Country of Vaud for their Governor, were sworn to be true to
the King.

The Army removing, May 14.
passed through Geneva to the Franche-Comte: the three Cornets and Companies of
Geneva-Foot tarried behind with some Soldiers drawn out from the Garrisons of
Bonne and of Monthoux, and those beyond L'Arve, and five Colors of Erlach's
Regiment; besides which the Bernoises sent immediately three thousand men to
defend the two conquered Bailliages. The departure of this Army put the
Genevoises to a great deal of trouble, who saw themselves by this means
burdened with the charge of the War, their Treasure, Provision and Ammunition
being almost exhausted.

In effect the Duke made greater Levies, and was resolved to have his revenge.
The Baron of Hermance began with Focigny, and took the Castle of Boege, Boege
taken.
in which there were not above eighteen Soldiers, who after they had a while
stoutly defended themselves, were permitted to depart with their Matches
lighted, and retired to Bonne. The Castle of S. Joire in which there were not
above 30. Soldiers with a Sergeant was taken likewise, who was very much blamed
for leaving so soon so tenable a place, having held out but two days; but he
was killed a while after in a skirmish, and the remembrance of his fault was
buried together with him. The Baron holding on his career sat down before
Marcoussey, giving the Captain who commanded there a summons: he returned him
an answer with Musket shot, and made a Sally out wherein several of the Enemy
were killed. The next morning there set out from Geneva about three hundred
Soldiers, with the Garrison of Bonne, to its assistance, which the Enemy
understanding withdrew in haste.

In the mean time the Duke advanced with his Vaunt-guard of one thousand five
hundred Foot, May 25.
and five hundred Horse to attack the Fort which the Genevoises had begun to
raise near the Bridge of Arve. The Duke advances to attack the Fort near Arve
There was a Sally made out upon them, and they were constrained to give back
in disorder with the Petards and Ladders which they had made ready, the City
not losing a man; they took one of Sonas's Trumpeters. Afterward the Enemy
made two attempts on the Castle of Terny, where they lost Charles of Gr^noble,
one of their Commanders.

The Genevoises at the same time forsook Marcousser, May 27.
having set it on fire, it being a place too troublesome for them to keep,
being four Leagues distant. Yet the Savoyards came and quenched it, and found
some provision left there; they did the same to several other places of small
importance, reserving only Bonne and Monthoux. The Enemy to be revenged for the
spoil made in their Country, wasted the Bailliage of Terny. The Duke himself
came in person with two great Cannons and four Fieldpieces before the Castle
of Terny, which was but an ancient Tower without any fence, only enclosed with
a thick Wall. The besieged having refused to render after Summons, the assault
began, June The Castle of Terny surrendered to the Duke.
and after six score shot of Cannon bullets, which wounded the Lieutenant who
commanded in the Captains absence, the besieged surrendered upon promise of
their lives; yet they were no sooner come out, but they were by the Dukes order
hanged, although those about him set before him the ill consequence of it.

There was some days after a skirmish near the Fort of Arve, June 3.
where his Highness was worsted, although his Army consisted of eight thousand
men; the Baron of Bressiac, who commanded a Party of the Regiment of Maurevel
was taken. There was on the third of June, The Genevoises engage the Enemy.
a very remarkable encounter on the plain of Ouattes. Half a League from this
Fort five hundred Musketeers having discovered the Enemy, went out with a
design to attack them, but they had immediately three thousand Foot and a
thousand Horse to deal with, yet did they resolutely fight them for four hours
together, killing 200. of them, besides several Captains and persons of quality
amongst whom was the Earl of Salenove master of the Camp, one of the best
Soldiers in the Army; he had rashly sworn to enter that day into the Fort, and
so he did, being carried in dead, after the same manner as another Spanish
Earl. Strange it is that the Genevoises should lose on their side but two men,
and only four or five wounded. There was solemn thanks returned to God in all
the Churches for this Success, and from that time the Enemy fearing this small
handful of men, who had given them such sharp entertainment, barricadoed
themselves up in Villages, and built a Fort in Sonzy, which they called S.
Katherines Fort by the name of the Duchess.

The Duke having notice that one part of the Army from Berne, which was sent to
the assistance of Geneva, was advanced within a League of La Cluse, The
Savoyards attack the Forces from Berne.
ordered several Companies of Foot to attack them. The Switzers keeping their
close order sustained vigorously the onset in the Village of Escoran, and
forced the Enemy to retreat with loss in disorder. Colonel Erlach fearing they
would come the second time to set upon them with more Forces, sent to Gex for
succors, to Nyons and Geneva, where he came after he had sent back this
reinforcement, of which he saw he had no need.

The Dukes affairs were little better in Focigny, his Troops were recruited by
a Party of the Bressans, and came and quartered in the Village of Felinge, June.
near Bonne, in which commanded a Captain of great valor who often alarmed
them; challenging the Baron of Hermance or any other principal Officer to fight
in single combat, who receiving a reinforcement of some Troops, he constrained
them to leave that post, where they would have made an effort to block up Bonne.

The Army of Berne, which approached, consisting of forty Companies, and
commanded by the Advoyer of Vatteville, put the Duke upon other resolves. He
concluded by the advice of his Council, that it were best to set upon the
Genevoises before the arrival of this Army, and to waste the Bailliage of
Terny, and endeavor to draw them into an ambush. There being some proposals
afterward made by some of his Highnesses Council, and the Lords of Berne, in
order to a peace, the Duke finding himself strong enough, demanded restitution
of the Bailliages which had been lately taken from him, as likewise the
Bailliage of the Country of Vaud as far as the gates of Berne, and required ten
Millions for the charge of the War; but the Bernoises gave him to understand,
that they were able to make him more moderate in his pretensions. The rest of
this Month was spent in several encounters near the Fort of Arve and Bonne,
which the Earl of Maurevel would have taken one morning by surprise with his
Regiment, June 28.
and Troops from Focigny. The Garrison consisted of not above one hundred and
fifty men, and they believing that they were already sure of the place, called
out to them in raillery, That they should make ready their Dinner, but they
were feasted with nothing but hard Pruins, which forced them to sound a
retreat, having lost several of their men.

In all these rencounters and some others that followed, July 14.
the Genevoises could get no help from the Bernoises, The Bernoises agree upon
a cessatlon of Arms.
because they had agreed with the Duke upon a cessation of Arms which held
three weeks, which being expired, they passed by Geneva, and battered down the
Bridge of Buringe, and came before the Castle of S. Joire, having the
Genevoises for their vauntguard. They took several Forts, ransacked Focigny,
and especially the Priory of Pilloney; the Enemies doing as much in the
Lordship of S. Victor, July 26.
where they burnt the Village. There were several light skirmishes, and the
Genevoises lost one of their best Captains named Bois, a gallant and stout
Soldier, who was killed with a Lance which ran into his mouth.

The death of Henry the third, which happened about this time, filled the Duke of
Savoy with great hopes, especially considering his great intelligence in
Provence. He designed first to make an end of the War with Geneva, 1589.
and afterward to march with a great Army against Bonne, Aug. 22.
which was kept by three Companies of Foot. The Switzers finding themselves not
strong enough to relieve the besieged sat still, and the place having been
battered with two hundred Cannon shot, the Garrison surrendered upon promise of
their lives saved; Mercier the Minister flead alive.
but in coming out they were enclosed by the Horse, and cut in pieces,
reserving only Mercier the Minister to be flead alive, which was done two years
after in Bonne. Some counseled his Highness to prosecute his Victory, and to
seize upon part of the Bernoises Country, whom he had quelled; but he chose
rather to come to an agreement with them, that he might afterward go into
Provence: He endeavored likewise to get the Genevoises to make him some offers
of submission, but they would not yield to it; so that to keep them in, he
erected a Fort called S. Maurice at Versoy and raised a platform on the side of
the Lake, for to batter with his Cannon the Barks, which should venture, October.
to set out from Geneva; he left the Baron of Serra Governor there, and he
withdrew his Army beyond the Mounts.

The Genevoises having this thorn in their foot, called a Council, wherein it
was resolved to obtain this Fort at any rate; having gathered then all their
Forces, viz. 800. Foot, two Troops of Horse, two Troops of Argoulets of
Light-Horsmen, and 150. Volunteers, under the Command of the Sieur Lubigny,
whom the King had sent them, they set out about ten of the Clock at night,
after they had been at public Prayer, being furnished with Petards and scaling
Ladders. Versoy besieged and taken.
The Garrison of Versoy who had been harrased all day on purpose by false
Alarms, were a good part of them asleep. The Genevoises being arrived at two of
the Clock in the morning before Versoy, divided themselves into four Companies.
The Horse made a halt, and the body of Foot went to the Gate which looks
directly to Copet to set the Petard, against it. The other party climbed up the
Walls, and seventeen of the resolutest of them followed a Peasant who was their
guide, with iron bars on their shoulders; he led them between the Lake and the
Borough, to a passage where there was a private entry into the place. The
nearest Sentinel gave the alarm to the Corpse du Guard, but these seventeen
Soldiers not giving them time to bethink themselves, knocked down several of
them with their Partisans and Cutlaces. Some Captains being awaked would have
put themselves into a posture of defense, but they were soon dispatched; the
Baron endeavoring to rally the rest, saw himself attacked by those who had
broken open the Gate, and scaled the Walls. All that he could do before it was
day, was to retire in haste with about two hundred Soldiers into the Castle,
having left in the Borough near two hundred of his men dead on the place. Nov.
8.
This same Baron, who had often threatened the Genevoises to force them by
Famine to come with halters about their necks to cry the Duke mercy, found
himself then not a little in trouble, being destitute of both Wine and Water,
and the most part of his Soldiers having nothing but their Wastecoats. Yet to
divert the Assailants, and to give notice to the neighboring Garrisons to come
and help him, he made his Cannon thunder the next morning till night against
the houses of Versoy; having continued thus the day following to little purpose
against the besiegers, and seeing no succors coming, he came to composition.
They marched out with their Drums on their back, their Matches put out, and
their Colors rolled up, and were conveyed as far as Gex; great store of
Ammunition which was found there was carried to Geneva. Sixty Turkish Slaves
who had wrought at the Fort were permitted to depart, the Fort was afterward
demolished, and the greatest part of the houses burnt. The remaining part of
the Year was passed over in several exploits of small consequence.

On the first day of the following Year, Jan. 2.
a party of Horse from Geneva beat a party of Savoyards; 1590.
and a body of Genevoise Foot attacked the Castle of the Bastie on the side of
Versoy, from which they were vigorously repelled; but twelve days after they
returned again, bringing along with them their Cannon. The Garrison
surrendering, the place was demolished. Some days after the Genevoises surprised
the City of Gex, Gex surprised.
and so straightly beleaguered the Castle, that it was surrendered the next
morning. Jan. 18.
The Castle, of Monthoux which was full of resolute persons, sworn Enemies to
Geneva, was forced to yield, and all those who were in it were put to the
sword. March 29.
The Savoyards on their side attacked the Fort of Arve, from which they were
twice beat off.

The Genevoises, after the taking of Gex and some other small places, resolved
to attack the Castle of Pierre, which had often molested them. Lurbigny then
marching out with some Troops, there were 50 Argoulets or light-horsemen, April
16.
who set upon the first, and met about 30 Harquebuzieres or Carbineers,
belonging to La Cluse, near the Village of Farges: they had taken away the Bell
of the Church, which they paid dearly for: for the light horse set upon them so
fiercely that scarcely four of them escaped, the Genevoises having only one of
their Sergeants wounded. D'Arsene, who was Governor of the Castle of Pierre,
pretended he would come to their assistance; but seeing the Troops come upon
him so fast, he shut himself up, and surrendered two days after, without
offering any great resistance.

Lurbigny laying hold of this opportunity, determined to try what he could do
on la Cluse. He dispatched away for this purpose three Companies to the other
side of the Fort to block up the passages. He placed, at the same time, People
on the Mountains to roll thence great Stones on the besieged, causing the
Cannon to play from his side, which beat down the murdering Pieces, and the
Cloister of Ravelin, which lay before the Fort. This Ravelin was won three days
after notwithstanding the vigorous resistance of the besieged, and the frequent
shot from the Fort of Wache on the other side the Rhosne. The next Morning the
Assailants seating themselves at the foot of the Fort, they plied the besieged
with Petards, Mines, and Grenades. Moreover, there was thrown down into the
Fort lighted Straw, which almost choked the besieged with smoke. Their fellows
from Wache encouraged them, telling them their relief was approaching; as
indeed it was. The Troops from Savoy gave notice of their coming to their
relief from three several parts. La Cluse surrenders.
Yet notwithstanding (...), Lurbigny perceiving his Men in good heart, and
resolved to carry away the place, more vigorously continued his Mines; so that
the besieged seeing themselves in this extremity, and upon the point of being
taken by main force, capitulated, promising to leave the place if they were not
relieved before such an hour the next day, which was consented to. The Troops
from Savoy being tired, and having rested that Night at Chatillon, came not
within the time. Lurbigny used a stratagem, to the end the besiged might not
hear the hollowings and shouts of Joy, which they of the Fort of Wache made,
seeing the succors approach; for he caused the Drums to beat, and the Trumpets
to sound continually near the Fort: so that the Captain, a Piedmontois, who
commanded it, marched out with 28 Soldiers, April 21.
being all that were left; and at the same time Lurbigny entered into the Fort.
The Savoyards coming near, and believing the place still belonged to them,
called the Captain by his name, and were much amazed to be answered with
Musket Shot. Yet after some skirmishes, Dom Amedee Bastard of Savoy, having
seized on an advantageous Post on the neighboring Mountain, through the
cowardice of Captain Esgaillon who was left there, Lurbigny saw plainly he
could not hold la Cluse against a whole Army and in an Enemies Country, which
caused him to leave it, having blown up part of it. He brought back his Troops
to Geneva, and at the same time the Enemy made a furious spoil in all the
Bailiwich of Gex, and put the Fort again in a posture of defense. Esgaillon was
afterward sentenced by the Council of 200 to be beheaded; Esgaillon beheaded.
which Sentence was executed, notwithstanding the intercession of many Persons
of quality for him.

Eight days after the Garrisons of Thonon and other neighboring places, May 21.
having notice that three Barks were set out from Morges bound for Geneva,
laden with Merchandises, and had in them 10000 Crowns besides, The Savoyards
set upon three Barks bound for Geneva.
and that they sailed slowly without any Convoy; they thereupon began to devise
how to take them. For this effect they embarked 130 Soldiers on two Frigates
and some Boats: but the Bailiff of Nions having notice of their design,
gathered immediately what Forces he could to prevent them. Colonel Diespach,
attended by a Party of Horse, advanced toward R^ll^, where the Barks then
gently sailed. Yet could not he come there so soon, but that the Savoyards had
already seized on a Bark, and began to divide the spoil, having for their
greater security planted 30 Musketeers on the shore. But seeing People from
all parts coming in upon them, they let go their Prize, and were contented to
carry away only some Cheeses and other Provisions to the value of 50 Crowns.
They retired in disorder, but for want of Boats they could not be pursued;
there were only two of them killed. And Geneva thanked their Allies of Nyon for
their so ready help.

There seldom passed a Week without some act of Hostility on one side or other.
Captain Guiche, who was Governor of the Castle of Crest for Geneva, going out
to Doveine and the neighboring Villages, Guiche assaulted by the Peasants.
to receive the contributions laid on the Peasants, they began to (...) their
Beacons, and in a little time there were gathered 300 Men, who set upon this
small Company of seventeen Foot-Soldiers, and seven Horse, who having been
several times routed, rallied again by the valorous Conduct of two of these
Horsemen, and in a strait passage knocked down the chief of these Peasants, and
killed three others, having taken three more who were wounded. But fortune did
not always favor the Genevoises: for marching forth two days after to surprise
the Garrison of Brant in the Bailywick of Thonon, they were vigorously repelled,
having lost twenty of their Men.

In the Week following there was a very considerable encounter, the Peasants
having alarmed the City by break of day upon account of the Savoy Troops, who
had set fire on the Bailywick of Gex, and had driven away 300 head of Cattle:
an hour after some Horse and Foot pursued them, being 400 Footmen, and 150
Lancers. The light-horsemen of Geneva frequently skirmished with them as they
retired, Lurbigny not intending to hazard a Battle with them. The Savoyards
finding it difficult to carry off their prey, there being several of the
hindermost of their company already slain, Lurbigny defeats the Savoyards.
left their Booty and kept close together. Lurbigny taking good notice of them,
and judging them to be weary, gave the Lancers a rough charge: who amazed at so
fierce an onset, and seeing several overthrown, fled, having good Horses and
better Spurs, leaving their Foot behind, who finding themselves no longer
guarded, endeavored to get on the side of la Cluse: but being hemmed in by
Lurbigny, he gave them such a fierce charge, that in the Village of Farges, or
thereabouts, there remained 120 dead on the place, both Spaniards and Italians,
and the rest were put to flight. The Geneva Troops, wearied and almost spent
with heat, having performed all this, fasting from five of the Clock in the
Morning, returned back into the City toward six of the Clock in the Evening,
bringing along with them three Drums, two Colors, and great quantity of Arms,
and five Prisoners. Lurbigny lost but one Man: but he being hot in pursuit, and
coming in to the rescue of one of his Troopers who had advanced too far, he got
a fall off his Horse, and being a corpulent Man, he bruised his Body in several
places, which caused him a great while to keep his Bed.

Two days after Dom Amedee, the Duke his Brother's Lieutenant, sent a Drummer
to Geneva, to know the number of the Prisoners, saying, That he found his Army
diminished by 400 Men, complaining he was too rudely dealt withal, they having
not so much as spared his Drummers. Answer was made him, That they were found,
as the others, with their Arms in their hands: setting before him the cruelty
which his Troops had exercised in all the Villages, where they had made War
against the weakest of their Subjects, setting upon old Men, Women, and
Children, who were not able to resist them. They hindered him not from doing yet
worse in all the Country of Gex.

Another time, when the Light Horse and Cavalry made a sally out of Geneva, the
Enemy made himself amends for his former disgrace. They were gone with a
Company of Foot, and some Volunteers, on the side of the Fort of Wache to
Forage the Country. Half a League distant from Vourban they spied 120 Lancers,
who were strengthened by four divisions of Foot. One of the Captains of the
Horse would not tarry till they were advanced near them, but caused the
Trumpets to sound, so that the Light-horsemen began to run in upon them a full
gallop, and overthrew them, having likewise put the Lancers to flight. But
instead of prosecuting the Victory, this Captain who had been too hasty in
sounding the Charge, was as hasty in sounding the Retreat, being affrighted at
some shouting which he heard afar off, which he thought was an Army making up
to them. Having then several times cried out, Let us turn back; these words
being reiterated, so greatly dismayed his Party, that they began to retreat
disorderly. The Lancers perceiving that they began to turn backs, rallied
themselves and pursued the Genevoises for two Leagues together, Genevoises
worsted.
as far as Bernay, slew twenty of them, and carried away forty of them
Prisoners to Wache. It is certain that this defeat had been greater, had they
pursued but half a League further these Runaways, who were stupefied with shame
and a panick fear. There were endeavors made to wipe off this disgrace by
several inroads into Savoy.

The absence of the Sieur Lurbigny, who still kept his Bed, was partly the
occasion of this rout, and of another more to be lamented, which happened awhile
after: for the Soldiers wanting an experienced Captain, 1590.
and one whom they might respect, observed no order. July 6.
Dom Amedee coming into the Country of Gex, with 500 Horse, and 1500 Foot,
placed a Guard in several Villages a League distant from Geneva. The next
Morning he laid an Ambush near Bouchet and Chatelaine of several Squadrons of
Horse and Companies of Foot, Amedee says Ambushes about Geneva.
leaving the Plain which lay betwixt these two Villages at liberty. A Company
of Foot, coming out of the Town by break of day, had been enclosed by them, but
they defending themselves, by means of the Hedges and Ditches, got off. Dom
Amedee, desirous of drawing a greater number of the Genevoises into these
Ambuscades, commanded a Party of Horse to drive away openly several Herds of
Cattle, and to kill some Peasants: An alarm being given to the City thereupon,
both Horse and Foot crowd out of it in throngs, half armed, and without any
Leader, to the assistance of their Companions, who discovering no Body in the
Plain between Chatelaine and Bouchet, kept on their way to the end, not minding
how they should return, and in an instant saw themselves surrounded by the
Savoy-horse, attended by several Companies of Foot who thundered upon them.
This skirmish was exceeding sharp, The Genevoises defeated.
and lasted almost an hour: at length the Geneva-horse finding themselves
weakened, and unable to hold out, began to give back; and so did the Foot, when
the Enemies having disordered them, wholly defeated them. An hundred Citizens
and Inhabitants lay dead on the place, and as many Peasants who bore Arms. They
who could reach the Town, died for the most part of their wounds, and
especially those who were carried to the Hospital, whose Physician instead of
curing them poisoned their wounds. The villain some seventeen or eighteen Years
after received the reward of his crimes. This defeat gave such an alarm to the
City, that they within thought the Enemy was at their Gates, as indeed he drew
near, and was saluted by the Cannon: But moreover in this encounter there was
nothing but confusion, there being neither Cannoneers nor Ammunition at hand.

They who have since considered this fatal day, have marvelled that one of them
who went out could return alive, so great was the confusion. Yet this Victory
was dear bought by the Enemy, at the beginning of the fight, so that he might
say with Pyrrhus: If we win another Battle, which costs us as much as this, we
are undone.

The Savoyards expected that at Night the Genevoises would come and carry away
their dead, to the end they might make a new slaughter: but the present
consternation of the City, and the prudence of Lurbigny, who notwithstanding
his ilness, stood without the Gates in his Nightgown, to hinder any farther
mischief they were kept back. The Company of Foot-Soldiers, who had been beset
in the Morning, came off best, for they having courageously defended
themselves, returned at Night into the City, having lost not above eight or
nine Soldiers.

The arrival of the Sieur Clugny Baron of Conforgien, who was an excellent
Soldier, Aug. 23.
gave them fresh hopes, being sent to command the Geneva Forces: The Baron of
Conforgien arrives at Geneva.
for an hour after he had light of his Horse, three Companies were commanded to
be in a readiness in the Evening, and to make their appearance before their
Captains Lodgings. They Embarked at nine of the Clock at Night, stearing their
course toward Roolle, to pass over immediately to the shore which lies
over against the little City of Evian, on which they had a design. But those of
that City hearing of their coming, strengthened themselves by an addition of
five companies to their Guard; which the other perceiving, hoisted up ^ail and
returned without doing any thing. Yet the Frigates made some courses on the
Lake, and brought home some booty.

Toward the midst of September, the Enemy not appearing it was thought they
were retired: besides that several Peasants either overcredulous or suborned
for that purpose assured the Magistrates that there was not in all Focigny,
above three hundred Foot, and a hundred Horse, upon which it was resolved to
forage within half a League from Bonne; But a spy carrying notice thereof to
the Baron of Hermance, he sent to all the Garrisons, so that the night
following there came to him two hundred Horse and five hundred Foot, with which
Forces he designed to enclose the Genevoises by an ambush, when they were laden
with spoil.

The Genevoises were as little careful of their Enemies as if they had been
thirty Leagues off, and imagined their booty so easy to be obtained, that
although the Baron of Conforgien was so prudent to give order to march out with
their greatest strength, to defend themselves if need required, yet the
greatest part of them having slept that Night at their ease, without thinking
on their equipage, could not get themselves ready. So that the train of these
Vintagers consisted only of 150 Foot, and 130 Horse, who went out with their
Chariots and Tuns, about six or seven of the Clock in the Morning, not dreaming
of fighting, being accompanied with several Peasants, Hermance lays an Ambush
for the Genevoises gathering their Wine-harvest
to gather the Vine-harvest, which they imagined would be done without the
least trouble. In the mean time came the Baron of Hermance, whilst they were
busy at work, through bie-ways and beset the passages, placing eighty
Musketeers in a Mill on the River of Menonge, posting others on the Banks, and
the rest in Ambushes, and so waited for them of Geneva, without any noise, till
Noon, about which time they were to return. Three Squadrons of Lancers being
discovered, with Foot-Soldiers in several places; notice hereof was given to
the Baron of Conforgien, who, without seeming astonished at the matter,
encouraged his Soldiers, and said Prayers himself; which done, observing the
Enemy as near as he could, he sent a Company on one side to begin the attack,
and on the other fifty stout resolute fellows to gain the Mill, thirty Horse to
relieve both Parties as need should require, and to get some advantageous
ground, keeping with him the greatest number to help where there would be most
need. The fifty went resolutely through the Musket Shot to the Mill, killing
and taking Prisoners as many as they found there. Whilst the Baron of
Hermance's Lancers making no reckoning of the thirty Horse, whom they imagined
would be soon dispatched, they set upon a Company of Light Horse: but they had
no sooner assailed them, but that the foresaid Party of thirty Horse broke in
upon their Squadrons through their Flanks, and, assisted by the Light Horse,
put them to a rout.

Another of the Enemies Squadrons having seen ten or twelve of their Company
slain by an Ambuscade, began to fall back, and was immediately set upon and
overthrown by the Horse, who being assisted by the Infantry, fell upon a great
Body of the Enemies Foot, who yielded after some resistance, and the greatest
part of them lay in the dust. This combat lasted three hours, and was one of
the notablest Victories the Genevoises had ever yet obtained. The Baron of
Conforgiens Horse was killed under him, who managed his business with a
marvelous prudence and presence of mind. One of his Foot Captains likewise
bravely signalized himself, The Valor of a Captain.
and having slain five of the Enemy with his Sword, he at length lost its
guard, yet did he continue fighting with the Blade of it, with which he struck
a Halbard out of a Sergeants hand, took him by the Collar and stabbed him; got
a Horse and a Sword from another whom he pursued, and animated the rest by his
example. Although at first there were several who had more mind to get away
than to stand it out and fight, yet the resolution of some edged on the rest,
and the present strait made them all resolute. The spy who had advertised the
Baron of Hermance, and a rash Monk who bore a Mace, were found lying amongst
the dead, with two Captains, besides several Lieutenants and Ensigns. In fine
this was so general a defeat, that some days after, several Horsemen riding out
to number the dead, found two hundred and sixty two lying in the Field, and
almost as many amongst the Vines and along the Banks; so that it was judged the
Savoyards lost three hundred and fifty who were slain, and one hundred who were
taken Prisoners, besides eighty who were wounded. The Baron of Hermance having
had almost all his Company of Redcoats killed, saved himself on a Spanish
Gennet. The booty was very considerable, for the most of them were well clad,
and several Gentlemen had Velvet Coats or of rich stuffs laid in with rich gold
and silver, as if they were going to a wedding; so sure were they (as they
imagined) of the Victory. It is reported they intended to put all to the Sword,
without troubling themselves with taking any Prisoners. The Genevoises lost but
ten Footmen, and one Trooper, and had but fifteen of their men wounded, who
were all of them curable. This Victory was owing to the Baron of Conforgiens
prudent conduct, and the exact obedience of the Soldiers; so likewise did he
solemnly return thanks unto God in the midst of his little Army, before he
stirred out of the place. The rest of the Month was spent in making inroads
into Savoy, and in the demolishing some Castles.

Toward the end of the following months the Genevoises made a very desperate
attempt. October. 29.
In the evening all the Companies both Horse and Foot marched out through the
new Gate, and passed over the Arve, and took the Road which leads to Crusille,
a small and weak City about three Leagues distant from Geneva. There were in it
three Companies of Neapolitans, Spaniards, and Italians, great Boutefeus, and
who had extremely wasted and destroyed the Country of Gex. The Peasants
perceiving these Forces making toward them, alarmed the whole Country; and the
noise of this reached to Crusille at one of the Clock at night. One part of the
Garrison made no reckoning of it, but the wisest of them went and kept watch
about the Walls, and some other betook themselves to a Platform, fortified with
part of their Baggage. A little before day, the Genevoises approached near it,
Crusille sacked and burat.
and Prayers being ended, the Baron of Conforgien sounded a Charge, and offered
to scale the City; the besieged made some resistance, but confiding in the
Castle and Platform, the Soldiers withdrew thither; the City was sacked, and
the greatest part of it burnt; those Soldiers who were found in the houses,
were all of them put to the Sword: for the Genevoises would not trouble
themselves with Prisoners, the Prisons being already full, and they on their
side desired no quarter. The Baron observing his men to be scattered and laden
with booty, and fearing lest they should be set upon by the Enemy from the
Castle, and perceiving likewise the whole Country to be alarmed, he sounded a
retreat, having staid there six hours, and having lost but three Soldiers and a
Lieutenant; the Enemy lost on their side a hundred men. The Year was ended in
the performance of actions of small importance, they of Geneva having burnt the
Villages of Thyole and Frangy. Sancy returned with fresh Forces, and set on
foot new designs.

On New-years-day following, 1591.
the Castle of Buringe was besieged by the Kings Army, together with the Forces
of Geneva; Jan. 1.
both of which consisting of two thousand men, Buringe besieged.
were commanded by the Sieurs of Sancy, Lurbigny and Conforgien. Three hundred
of the Dukes Lancers pursuing some Geneva Curriers, came into the very quarters
of the Besiegers, and had surprised a party of them, had they come with less
noise; some Light-Horsemen and Albanoises whom the French Ambassador had sent
from Venice, got immediately on Horseback, and with the help of some Foot fell
upon the Lancers, overthrowing in an instant their Captain Christopher Guevara.
The Lancers fought on still, but seeing sixty of their men lying on the ground,
they drew back and retired in disorder; the next morning the assault began a
fresh more vehemently than before, and the besieged who had at first appeared
very hot, desired to come to composition: but no other terms were admitted but
to render themselves at the Generals discretion, being threatened with no
quarter if they tarried till the next assault. They perceiving that they could
not obtain what they desired, got through a back door to the Bridge of Arve,
from which the Assailants could not hinder them; they escaped in disorder, and
were pursued as far as Bonne. This happened well for the Soldiers, a great many
of whom would without doubt have perished had they given another assault to the
place, the breach being a Pikes length from the ground, and fortified with a
Ravelin, and an inward Wall and a Bulwark behind it. This Castle was
demolished, but the Enemy built it again and made it tenable.

Thonon was likewise retaken by Quitry. Feb. 6.
The French Soldiers minding nothing but their plundering, 1591.
committed several outrages. The Castle was rendered up on composition, and
there was found in it Ammunition to the value of six or seven thousand Crowns
of gold; the same was done at Evian, they of the Castle whom the Sieur of
Bonvillars commanded, Feb. 11.
held out for some days, but seeing no succors coming, The Dukes Army
approaches.
surrendered, their Arms and Jewels saved, the Country was afterward
plundered. In the mean time the chief of the Royal Army holding a Council, they
were told that the Dukes Army was arrived at Roche consisting of six thousand
Foot, and four hundred Dragoons, and five hundred Lancers.

Olivarez an old and experienced Captain who commanded the Spaniards in the
Dukes Army, counseled them not to advance, but to watch the motions of the
French for to take them upon an advantage, alleging that want of Provision
would force them to retire, or if they engaged farther into Savoy, their defeat
would be easy. Dom Amedee liked well this Advice, but Sonas the Marquis of
Treffort, and the Earl of Chateau Neuf, who had more heat than light in his
head, was of opinion they should march forward without delay, alleging there
would redound more honor and advantage to them in chastising the French, than
in expecting till they should return of their own accord. That Quitry's Camp
consisted most of pillagers who were laden with spoil, and who for fear of
losing it, would choose rather to use their feet than hands; and in short, that
their own Army being ill paid would soon disband themselves, if they stood
still without fighting. This Counsel was taken, and the attack was resolved
upon.

The Sieurs of Sancy, Quitry and Conforgien, who were encamped at Buringe,
being advertised that this Army was coming to break in upon them, took out
immediately the Garrisons of Polinge and Visery, and fired these Castles, and
sent out Scouts to view the Enemy. They had an account by some Prisoners, but
lest it might be thought they were afraid, they remained one day more in the
same place, and the next morning instead of advancing further into Focigny,
they came and encamped on this side Menoge at Anemasse, and Ville-la-grand, to
keep themselves from any surprizal, and to hinder the enemies from posting
themselves toward this River between Geneva and them. 1591.
Dom Amedee having passed over the Arve, March 12.
came and seated himself at Bergue Lussinge and other Villages. At noon the
Kings Army and Genevoises possessed themselves of the highest part of the plain
of Monthoux, where they did not believe the Dukes Army, although exceeding them
far in strength, durst to attack them; but scarcely were they seated, when five
hundred Musketeers chosen out of the Dukes Army, The Kings Army attached by
the Savoyards.
came and charged a French Regiment posted about a mile distant from the main
body to keep a Copse at the bottom of a little hill, where they had begun to
block up themselves. The attack was so vigorous, that the French were
immediately put to flight. Quitry sent three or four hundred Musketeers of
Chantals and Cheron's Regiments to help them, with three Companies belonging to
the Baron of S. Remy; but Dom Amedee and Olivarez sent forth a party of about
thirteen hundred Musketeers who won the Copse, Ditches, and Counter-scarps;
Sonas and the Earl of Tressort riding up at the same time to second them,
leaping over a thick short hedge to enter into the plain. When the Baron of
Conforgien seeing them almost half over, Sonas slain.
he took this opportunity to fall upon them, and charged them so vigorously,
that Sonas, and the most resolute of his fellows being killed in the place, the
rest were put to flight, and pursued beyond the hedge, as far as the main body
of the Army; where lay entrenched Dom Amedee, and Olivarez, having a thick hedge
on one side of them. On the other part Chantal and Cherons Regiments had newly
attacked the one thousand three hundred Musketeers, with whom they had a sharp
conflict; but the Spaniards and Neapolitans seeing their Horse routed, began to
quit their ground, and were beat back as far as the place where their main body
lay, consisting of three thousand men, who had not stirred all this while. They
retired so fast that they threw one another into the Ditch, and unhappy was he
who was so tall that he could not stoop low enough to avoid the Shot. Their
main Body defended them: and the victorious rallying with much difficulty,
having first rifled the slain, who were near 300, amongst whom were found above
100 Gentlemen, with Sonas their Leader. The Two Armies kept afterward in sight
one of another till Night.

At midnight the Savoyards dis-encamped and marched to Focigny, and passed over
the River at Buringe, whose Bridge they broke down lest they should be pursued.
On the side of the French, although their loss was not half so great as their
Enemies, yet did they find themselves much weakened, so that to avoid an utter
dissipation of their Forces, they took the way which led to the Franche-Comte,
and instead of the Baron of Conforgien, were left at Geneva the Sieur Chaumont,
and Captain Caron.

During these transactions died at Geneva Anthony Sadeel Baron of Chandieu,
Sadeel dies at Geneva.
who had been Minister of Paris, of Nismes, of Rochelle, and at last of Geneva;
to which City he left several Writings and Monuments of his Eloquence and
Learning in Divinity, and especially in the Holy Tongue: he had taken this
Hebrew word Sadeel for his name, which signifies in our Language, Gods Field,
being the same with his French name.

The Savoyards being withdrawn, May 17.
there were several inroads made into their Country, in one of which there was
taken at Thonon the Baron of Hermance, who was honorably lodged in the Town
house, but endeavoring to make an escape six Months after, he was kept close
Prisoner in the Bishops Palace, where he remained till the Month of February in
the following Year, having paid 8000 Crowns of Gold for his Ransom, by the
mediation of some Lords of Valais, who came for that purpose to Geneva.

The Baron of Conforgien being returned to Geneva with some Horse, 1592.
October.
caused them to gather in their Vintage-harvest toward Bonne in the beginning
of October, the Baron of Hermance not daring to hinder him, although he was the
strongest, remembering the overthrows which he had received from him in the Year
1590. He surprised afterward Bonneville, Nov.
made inroads into Anecy, and beat three Companies of Soldiers who guarded the
Suburb of Roche. 1593.
After which, March 19.
by the consent of the City, he came to a Treaty with the Baron of Hermance,
but which produced nothing. And in the following Month, April 17.
having taken distaste at some proceedings which were a little too precise
against him and his Men, Conforgien returns home.
he obtained leave to return.

Soon after his departure Joachim of Rye Marquess of Treffort, came and
encamped with 300 Horse and 800 Foot at Lancy, near the Fort of Arve, where
there was some skirmishing, in which the Master of his Camp was killed. He
being retired, the Genevoises concluded to demolish the Village of Lancy, Lancy
demolished.
in consideration of its being a place which might serve hereafter for a
retreat to the Enemy; which resolution was put immediately into execution, but
with much regret, it being a very pleasant Village, having near seventy Houses
in it. The Baron of Conforgien was sent for to oppose the Marquess of Treffort,
but it was two Months before he came, about the time when there was a Truce
made to last three Months betwixt the King of France and the Confederate
Princes. Sept. 9.
The Duke of Savoy likewise was comprehended, and accepted of the proposal. The
Duke's Secretary Esdiguieres bringing a Copy along with him, of this Truce, to
Geneva, to know whether they would accept of it; which was consented to by the
Council of two hundred, and published on the 16th of September.

Six days after arrived Deputies from the four Cantons, 1593.
making offer of their mediation between the Duke and the City; for which they
had thanks: And answer was returned them, That they could not leave the
French-Kings interest, who would be sure to resent it, should they conclude a
Peace. The Truce was afterward continued, 1594.
and lasted two Years, without any publication; and during this time the City
Officers demolished the Fort of Arve, The Fort of Arve demolished.
it occasioning oftentimes the Enemy to invade them.

During this Truce the Genevoises kept a Governor under the Kings name in the
Country of Gex, 1595.
who held his Court of Justice in Geneva, after the same manner as the Stewards
of Gaillard, Chablais, and of the Country beyond the Arve. The Savoyards and
Genevoises began to be conversant one with another, and to exchange Prisoners.
There was a Genevois who had been taken thirty Years since, and had all that
time served in the Galleys, never sending word what was become of him, so that
he was supposed to be dead; his Wife, seven Years after his detention, was
married again, and had lived another seven Years with her second Husband. At
the end of thirty Years, this her first Husband returned to Geneva, and would
have entered into his House. His Wife took him at first for an Impostor: whether
that this long space of time had deprived her of all knowledge of him, or that
the grayness of his Hair and wrinkles in his Forehead had made this
alteration, he having few charms left him to attract a Woman's love. The Husband
might swear as long as he pleased that he was the Man, yet for all this would
she not believe him. The business at length came to a trial at Law, where he
brought such proofs of his being her Husband, that she openly acknowledged that
it were impossible, for any but him, to have knowledge of so many minute
particulars. Having then at length owned him for her Husband, they lived
afterward a great while together.

In the Year 1597. 1597.
there was spread a report throughout Germany, Holland, Sep.
and Italy, that Beza had renounced his Religion before the Senate, Beza
reported to have turned Papist.
and had exhorted the Magistrates to reconcile themselves to the Church of
Rome. And, that by a special order from the Pope, the Bishop had absolved him
before his death, and that in effect the City had sent Deputies to Rome to
yield obedience to the Pope: which caused several People in Italy to resort to
Rome to see these supposed Deputies. And yet Beza died not till six Years
after. There was a more likely report of a Peace concluded betwixt the King and
the confederate Princes: 1568.
it was not yet known whether Geneva should be comprehended: May.
for the Dukes Subjects committed acts of Hostility, having driven away some
Herds of Cattle belonging to the Genevoises: whereupon they detained some
Troopers, who were Spaniards, being in the Dukes service. The Savoyards had
apprehended Hosea Andre a Minister, whom they had taken in Michaille; and for a
requital the Earl of Salenove was detained at Geneva.

Two days after Dom Philippin the Bastard of Savoy, The Bastard of Savoy makes
his entrance into Geneva.
made his entrance into the City with a moderate Train, where he was highly
treated by the Citizens. He on his part sparing no complements. He departed the
next Morning, and promised to procure the releasement of Hosea Andre; upon
which the Earl of Salenove was released beforehand. Yet the Minister was not
set at liberty, neither was there any likelihood of it, had he not dexterously
made his escape.

The Peace was at length concluded betwixt the King of France, A Peace
concluded.
of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy; in which were likewise comprehended the
Switzers and their Allies, and so by consequence, Geneva, as the King of France
openly declared it by word of Mouth as well as by Letters; understanding
thereby that the Duke should withdraw his Army. The Duke, who affirmed it was
not comprehended, having not been named as the other Cities were, would not
return answer by writing, lest he should prejudice his pretensions, causing
only those Forces to withdraw who had marched over into Lombardy. Monsieur
Villeroy in the printed Copy of the Treaty of Peace, had added to the 34th
Article, written with his own Hand for the instruction of the Sieur Botheon,
who was sent by the Duke to take the Copy of the Oath, That under the
generality of the Allies and confederate Lords were comprehended them of
Geneva. Chapeaurouge, their Deputy to the French-King, brought home Letters,
wherein that King promised to defray all charges of the War. 1598.
The City to testify how acceptable this news was to them, May.
caused their great Guns to be discharged, and solemn Thanks to be returned to
God in all their Churches.

Yet was this rejoicing allaied by the return of the Plague, although the
mortality was not great, and by the troubles wherein they of Thonon were
involved upon the account of Religion, occasioned by a Capucin-Frier called
Peter Cherubin, who would constrain the Inhabitants of that place, and them in
the Countries thereabouts, who were thought under obedience to the Duke, to
return likewise to their old Religion. This Friar challenged the Ministers to
dispute publicly with them; which they would not agree to, choosing rather to
defend themselves by writing: yet the Magistrates of Geneva made them consent
to a verbal Conference: and in the mean the Duke arriving at Thonon to forward
the matter, the greatest part of the People returned to their old Religion,
alleging they were forsaken; upon which there were printed several Disputes
and Libels, which served only to exasperate Men's spirits. May.
Toward the end of May, John Serres died at Geneva, having withdrew there
after he had wrote the History of France: Serres dies at Geneva.
his Wife and he were buried both together in the same day.

The Duke of Savoy continued his claims on the City, and got the Magistrates to
consent to a Conference, which was held at Hermance by Deputies from both
Parties, and lasted from the seventeenth of October, to the eleventh of
November. His Highness's Deputies were the Sieur Jacob his Lieutenants on this
side of the Mountains, the President Rochette, the President Berliet Baron of
Bourget, Lambert Baron of Terny, and Marin Earl of Viry. The Deputies of Geneva
were, the Counselors Maillet, Daufin, Lect and Roset, together with Secretary
John Sarrasin. Them of Savoy made their demands, and were answered by them of
Geneva in defense of their Privileges. Whereunto the former made their reply;
and the latter returned a second answer: so that this conference at Hermance,
Copies of which having been taken, is a kind of Collection of all that can be
said on that subject, and is sufficient to make a large Volume. The difference
remained as before, it being a very difficult, if not impossible matter, for
these two States, so opposite in their Interests and Religion, to come to any
perfect agreement.

Even the King himself, that he might allay the heats of both Parties, wrote
Letters which bore Date from the 11th of November, 1599. in favor of the
Genevoises, showing that he took the City and its Territories into his
Protection, understanding it to be comprised under the name of Ally and
Confederate, as it had been already declared by the Deputies in the Treaty.

The Duke being gone to Paris, 1600.
toward the beginning of the following Year, about the Marquisdom of Saluces,
which King Henry urged him to restore, The Duke of Savoy desires that the King
would desist from Protecting Geneva.
would have inserted in the Articles of Agreement, That the King should desist
from protecting Geneva. He got the Bishop of Modern the Popes Nuncio to
mention it to his Majesty. This Prelate, watching his opportunity, tells him,
There was a means whereby he might fairly end the difference between him and
the Duke. That the same reason which enjoined the Duke to render him the
Marquisdom, insinuated in like manner, that his Majesty should not hinder the
Duke from obtaining what belonged to him as his right. To which the King
assenting, he drew from thence this consequence: That the City of Geneva
belonging to the Duke, and nothing hindering him from re-establishing the
Authority which his Fathers had in it, but only his Majesty's Protection, it is
therefore reasonable (said he) that if he restores to you the Marquisdom of
Saluces, which belongs to you, you should in like manner permit him to have the
City of Geneva which is his own. 1600.
The King to answer this Argument, tells him the case was different; for it was
not he who had taken the City into his Protection, but his predecessors, and
that he was obliged to it by the Oath taken at the Treaty, and by the respect
he owed his Predecessors: And farther, That what he had done, proceeding from
the acknowledgment of the good services he had received from that City, it was
neither handsome nor just to violate this Obligation. The Prelate had his answer
ready: You will not Sir, said he, leave protecting Geneva because of the
example of your Ancestors; and by the same reason the Duke is not obliged to
restore you the Marquisdom of Saluces, because it belongs not to you, but to
the deceased King your predecessor who took it. To which the King replied, The
Duke of Savoy has usurped my Marquisdom, nothing can excuse an Usurper from
restoring that which he has taken; neither will I hinder his claims on Geneva,
provided he proceeds not against them in a hostile manner: for if he uses
violence, I know what I have to do. And whereas he is of opinion that if I
should abandon them, he could soon subdue them to himself, I would therefore
have him consider, how much thereby I should dishonor both my self and Kingdom.

And thus dropped the Duke of Savoy's proposal, and consequently the Treaty of
agreement. The King took the Field, and won in a short time Bresse and all
Savoy, except the Castle of the Borough, and S. Catherines Fort which lay two
Leagues distant from Geneva, before which he came and encamped. This Fort was
built with five corners, and raised on four firm Bastions encompassed with
Ditches, which laid the Campain level and open, on the highest part of which
this Fort was situated. There was in it a Carrison of six hundred men, this was
the sorest thorn in the Genevoises foot. So the King who desired to gratify
them, kindly received their Deputies, who were enjoined to request of the King
in consideration of the service which they had done the Crown, and of their
sufferings in the late War, he would be pleased to put this Fort into their
hands to be demolished, it having been so prejudicial to him. The Duke of
Saully introduced these Deputies into the Kings presence.

Theodorus de Beze chief Minister, Beza makes a Speech to the King.
whose age and learning made him venerable amongst his own party, made a speech
in behalf of the rest, which was but a general complement, in these terms: Sir,
Humane Eloquence, being not sufficient to raise your praise to the pitch of
your admirable actions; and my style being too loose, and voice too weak to
celebrate the fame of your Majesty's virtues, which the Universe will publish
without ceasing, seeing you never cease from performing actions worthy of glory
and praise, I shall leave the celebration of the Elogies which are due to you
to the holy Angels, for having rescued the Churches of God from oppression, and
obtained for his children the liberty of serving him according to his divine
Precepts, and to invoke him alone in the Trinity of persons. I shall content my
self in saying and applying to humane things what Simeon said of divine, Now
Lord, let thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, seeing that mine
eyes have seen before I die, not only the deliverer of us your humble servants,
but of all France, and of the faithful in general, who have tasted the effects
of your precious bounty.

To which the King answered, The Kings answer.
Father, These few words which signify much, are worthy the reputation which
Monsieur Beze has acquired by well speaking. I take them in good part, and
accept them with those kind resentments they deserve. I will tell you, the
Kings my predecessors having ever held your City under their protection, I am
resolved not only to imitate them in this, and in all other things answerable
to the glory of a King of France, but likewise to requite the sincere affection
which your City has ever showed me, and would have him who has presented you,
whom I hold here by the hand, and who is so affectionate toward you, to be
your Solicitor; and that you signify to him what you desire I should do for
you: for the matter must be a very difficult one which I shall not grant you.
And whispering to the Deputies he told them, I know what you most desire I
should do, (for they had already mentioned it to the Duke of Sully,) You would
have S. Katherines Fort demolished. There are several people who would persuade
me to desist, but I see plainly it is through envy, and therefore I shall not
mind them. I will leave nothing undone which respects your advantage. S.
Katherines Fort shall be razed, and here is a man in whom you confide, and that
not without cause; (meaning the Duke of Sully,) to whose charge I commit this
affair.

From that time the City Gates were set open to all belonging to the Court and
Army, so that there was reckoned one Evening to be in it above four thousand
men; and amongst others, several Lords, as Messieurs of Guise, Elboeuf,
Espernon, Guiche and Biron; the last of these walking with some Counselors of
Geneva as he came to S. Gervais, upon some discourse begun, he clapped his hand
to his Sword and told them, Gentlemen, This shall do your work, or I will lose
my life. They thanked him for his good will, but he made it appear afterward
that he meant otherwise than they understood him. Monsieur Sully who came
likewise, eased them of their trouble in being so crowded with people, having
ordered his Horse and several Volunteers to return to the Camp. The Fort
capitulated soon after the Trench was made, they within promising to surrender,
if they were not succored in ten days, December. 16.
which was only a formal business, seeing it was well known the Duke was not in
a capacity to relieve them. The Garrison marched out beating their Drums, The
Fort razed.
and their Colors flying, with three pieces of Ordnance. Monsieur Sully blew
up immediately the Bastions by means of the Mine, of which the Genevoises
having notice, according to the Kings Order, there came so many of them, and
fell so wholly to their work, that within a day or two there was not the least
trace to be seen; the King gave them six Cannons which were found in the Fort.

There happened three months before a thing very remarkable: 1600.
After several great Claps of Thunder which lasted all the Morning, Sept. 16.
the Rhosne after several ebbings and flowings, The Ebbings and flowings of the
Rhosne.
at length became dry in some places, where it was wont to be five foot deep;
the Boats which were at the Lakes mouth relying on the ground, so that children
took up little Fish; and Smiths who dwelt on the Bridge came down, and picked
up old Iron; but the waters immediately returning, happy was he who could
soonest get away. If one of these refluxes had lasted but one quarter of an
hour, the houses on the Bridge, and part of S. Gervais would have been drowned;
it is very likely that this prodigy was occasioned by some kind of Earthquake
or uprising of the Earth, by which the ground where the Rhosne issues forth
from the Lake, being twice or thrice lifted up by the subterranean agitated
vapors, hindered the Rhosne from running, and that the same ground sinking down
again, by reason of its own weight, it took again its ordinary course. The same
happened in the year 1584. in that great Earthquake, which raised up that heap of
Earth, which we have already mentioned, and caused the Lake to overflow twenty
paces, which instance may serve to confirm the other. All the difference lies
here, that these exhalations were not strong enough to force a passage, and to
shake the neighboring parts. That which makes this more clear, was an
Earthquake which reached from Geneva as far as Switzerland, which happened a year
after in the same month, with so great a violence, that Monsieur James Godefroy
observed in his Memoires, that he was rocked in his bed with it after the same
manner as if he had been in a Cradle.

The War with Savoy was ended by the interposition of the Legate Aldobrandin,
1601.
Jan. 17.
the Duke exchanging with the King the Marquisdom of Saluces for Bresse. The
King of France declares Geneva comprehended in the Treaty.
His Majesty declared in his Letters dated the thirteenth of August, 1601. that
Geneva although not expressed in the Treaty, yet was understood, and ought to
enjoy the benefit of the Peace. The Duke yielded likewise the Bailliage of Gex
with La Bresse which was held by the Genevoises, who desired the King to let it
remain in their possession, as a place whereon depended the safeguard of their
State: but the King told them he could not grant their request, seeing that by
the Treaty held at Lions betwixt him and the Duke, La Bresse, Veromey, and Gex,
were to be incorporated into the Crown, and were never to be cut off from it,
upon any occasion. Immediately after this Liberty of Conscience was granted,
and the Mass said in S. Peter's Church at Gex.

The Savoyards did not forbear their insultings over the Genevoises, having
possessed themselves of the Villages of Focenay and Thonex; and would have in
like manner seized on Vandoeuvres, April 5.
but this Village was defended by James des Arts, accompanied by a Minister,
and some Soldiers who kept the Church, and drove out thence the Priests, who
were brought in by force.

In the Summer following the Jubilee was celebrated at Thonon, 1602.
where was contrived the famous enterprise of scaling Geneva. A Jubilee at
Thonon, where the design was laid to scale Geneva.
Certain Frenchmen whose occasions led them to and from the City, got notice of
the design, and gave an account of it to their friends at Geneva; which the
Citizens could hardly believe, the Articles of Peace having been sworn to by
both parties to be observed, resting secure on the two Treaties held at Verins
and Lions, not considering that the Invasion of these Villages, and the seizure
of several Impropriations, were the sparks of a fire which would soon break out
into a flame.

There were complaints made of this to the Sieur Albigny, Lieutenant General on
this side of the Mountains; his proper name was De Gordes, son to him who had
been Governor of Dauphiny; but he had left the Kings service for his
Highnesses. He made answer to the Messengers from Geneva two several times,
that it was both his own and his Masters intention to let them live in peace;
and that his Highness meant the Treaty should be religiously observed. Moreover
the President Rochelle Counselor of State was arrived at Geneva some days
before this Scalado, for to lull the Magistrates asleep, to observe their
countenance, and to understand the condition of the City; telling them it was
expedient to make some lasting agreement, profering his assistance for the
carrying on so good a work. A warning given to the Genevoises concerning the
attempt on their City.


Whereupon the Genevoises resting secure, and distrusting nothing, neglected
the guarding of the City; although they had warning given them even by the
Dukes Subjects. Amongst others there came one from Chesne, who drawing near to
the Gate, the day before the execution of the enterprise, told them positively
that the Enemy was coming, and that they should stand upon their guard: but
this advertisment was slighted, either for want of due heed, or else that they
reputed this person to be some dealer in Visions. The Duke had caused several
Troops to advance undiscerned into ^ocigny, the Duke of Nemour's Country, yet
under the jurisdiction of Savoy; amongst the rest the Regiment of the Baron of
La val d'Iseare, who was born in Picardy, which Regiment consisted of near
eight hundred men, the most part of them French fugitives, and people who would
undertake any thing right or wrong. Brunaulieu this Barons Lieutenant had with
some others viewed the City at his ease, taken the height of the walls, and the
depths of the ditches in the night and had assured Albigny of the facility of
the enterprise; moreover the intelligence which they held with the Syndick of
the guard, who was to displace the Sentinel from that part where they were to
scale, made their undertaking so sure, that on Saturday the eleventh of
December, which was the day before the execution of their intended enterprise,
several persons came into the City to buy Horses, and had spoken Aenigmatically
that they would come the next day to conclude the bargain. It was confidently
affirmed (how true I cannot tell) that Brunaulieu before he set forth on this
enterprise, had by a special dispensation received the extreme Unction,
swearing he would live no longer, if he could not effect his design; and that
the rest had confessed themselves and taken the Sacrament upon it. The Jesuits
and Capucins failed not to exhort both great and small to observe the Oath made
at the Jubilee in Thonon for the extirpation of Heretics.

In the mean time Albigny began to draw up his men toward six of the Clock in
the Evening near Bonne, Albigny draws up his men near Bonne.
La Roche, and Bonneville. It was on the 11. or 12. day of the Month according
to the old style, and the longest night in the year. He had his Company of
guards, the Regiment belonging to Baron de la val d' Isere, four Troops of
Horse, and some Gentlemen of Savoy. The Spaniards and Neapolitans quartered at
Anecy, and were to make up the Rear-guard, and march up as soon as they had
notice. Out of the first Troops were chosen three hundred men, armed at all
points with Breast-plates, and their Helmets on their heads, their Pistols at
their Girdles, their Cutlaces in their hands, and another party of them with
half Pikes and Muskets. As they marched along they stopped the Peasants in
their way, lest they should alarm the City; yet were there some who escaped and
came to the Gates thereof, Warning a second time given to the City.
giving notice to the Sentinels to stand upon their guard, the Enemy
approaching^ but their words were not regarded, being taken for people who
jested. The Watch whose duty was to lie out of the City, in order to discover
any who should approach it, had dispersed themselves, and perceived not the
Troops, who advanced undiscovered along the Arve.

The Duke who doubted not of the success, came post Incognito from beyond the
Mountains, and caused himself to be called Monsieur the Ambassador. He came the
same Night to the Bridge of Tremblieres, which is a little Village about a
League distant from Geneva, that he might animate by his presence those who
were fearful. First of all a Hare starting up amongst them, as they drew near
to Champel, where was the place of their Rendesvous, struck some of them with
terror. About five or six hundred paces from the Ditch they spied several
Stakes drove into the Ground, on which workmen were wont to hang their Serges
to dry them. The Night being dark, and neither Moon or Stars appearing, there
were them who took this for some Ambuscade laid by the City, and were thus
ranged in a row in expectation of their coming. Yet they took courage, and
having left the main Body of their Army in Plein-Palais, Brunaulieu and the
resolutest of them, who had undertaken to scale the City, and who were come on
Horseback, light off, and made toward the Counterscarp, and went down into the
Ditch of Corraterie. No sooner were they there but a ^light of Wild-ducks
arose, and put them to a start, they fearing lest these Birds (like the Geese
of the Capitol who saved Rome) would wake the Sentinels, and spoil their
Enterprise.

At length taking courage, The Savoyards raised up Ladders against the
City-Walls.
they passed softly over the Ditch upon Hurdles, which they had laid to keep
themselves from sinking into the Mud, and raised up three Ladders against the
Walls, near the Watch Tower toward Monnoye, and to try if any body heard them,
they took up Stones and knocked with them against the Walls, as they since
related. Brunaulieu had made the same trial heretofore, and was not heard,
because that for a long time they had placed no Watch there. But before we
proceed, we may take notice of the form of their Ladders: they were colored
with black, to make them undiscerned in the dark, and made of several joynted
pieces, that they might be more easier carried by the Mules, and shortened or
lengthened as they had occasion. The Feet of them were shod with sharp Iron
Spikes, that they might be easilier fastened, and stand firmer in the ground.
The top of these Ladders, which were to touch the Wall, were furnished with a
Pully, and covered with a thick Cloth, that they might slide the easier and
with less noise. They who would better comprehend the fashion of them, may see
part of them still kept in the Arsenal of Geneva.

Besides these Ladders they were furnished with great Steel Hammers, one end of
which had sharp edges to cut the Chains of the Drawbridge, the Locks and
Bolts; they had likewise great Pinchers to pluck out Nails and Hinges from the
Gates, and several Petards to burst them open. And being thus furnished, they
began to climb.

Sonas who was one of the resolutest of the Company, Sonas bleeds at Nose.
and was determined to revenge the death of his Father, who was killed at
Monthoux, began by a bad omen to bleed at Nose, before he ascended the Ladder,
and being gotten half way up received such a blow by the fall of a Stone from
the Wall, as almost took away his senses, and was forced to come down. Albigny,
whom it most concerned that this enterprise should take effect, stood at the
Ladders foot, encouraging his Soldiers, by setting before them the honor and
booty which they might expect if they prevailed. He animated likewise Sonas,
who began to climb again. A Scotch Jesuit called Father Alexander, Alexander a
Jesuit encourages the Enterprizers.
besides the exhortation which he had made them in Plein Palais, confessed them
at the foot of the Ladder, assuring them, That if they should die in the
Enterprise, the Rounds of the Ladders would be as so many steps leading them
directly to Heaven. But the good Father could not foresee that it was on an
other kind of Ladder provided for them that they were to get thither. He had
likewise given them little Bills, wherein were written some passages of Holy
Scripture; and other pieces of Paper, in the Form of Conjurations, which would
preserve them, who carried them, from any violent death.

It was about one of the Clock in the Morning when they began to mount, Dec. 12.
and the 12th of December according to the old Style, Sonas with six others
first climb up into the City.
and the 22d of the said Month according to the new; all things were quiet and
still, so that Sonas, Attignac, and six others, who were first entered into the
City through Tartasse, which is a Gate within, always left open, walked about
the Streets by couples, to observe whether the People were fast asleep, and
whether this great silence was not some trick to entrap them. But all was
quiet; And they behind climbed up in great numbers.

The Duke understanding that the most courageous amongst his Men were entered
without resistance, The Duke dispatches Messengers to all parts, to impart the
news of their success.
sent to the Spaniards and Neapolitans, commanding them to come up quickly, and
dispatched Curriers to all parts to carry news of this happy beginning, which
caused it to be confidently reported in Piedmont, Savoy, and Dauphine, that the
City was taken. And indeed the Duke might well believe himself to be Master of
it, there having already entered 200 of the stoutest Men in the Army; some of
which lay flat on the Ground under the Trees of the Parapet, others stood up
close against the Houses in Corraterie, till they should be stronger: for
Brunaulieu and others who were chief mannagers of the design, intended not to
appear till four of the Clock in the Morning, that their Men might have more
time to climb up, and that the Rearguard might draw near, and likewise that
they might have more light to carry on a business of so great consequence. But
before that time, betwixt two and three in the Morning, a Soldier, who stood
Sentinel in the Tower of Monnoye, having heard some noise in the Ditch, called
his Corporal, to know what it might be. The Corporal sends a Soldier with a
Lanthorn; who takes along with him his Musket, and gets upon the Parapet, and
perceives some armed Men making toward him, to whom he cried, Who comes there?
and having no answer, he discharged his Musket at them. They immediately fell
upon him, and as he cried, Arm, Arm, they knocked him down. Which the Soldier
who stood on the Sentinel perceiving, he discharged his Piece to give notice to
the main Guard, who, alas, were but six Men.

Brunaulieu, and the most resolute amongst them, perceiving they were
discovered, and that it was impossible for them to put it off any longer, and
finding moreover that they were strong enough in number in the City, resolved
immediately to stand to it, and to dispose of their Men to the best advantage,
and to set upon those who should oppose them, in four several places, viz. at
the new Gate, at Tartasse, at Monnoye, and at the entrance of the Townhouse,
which they would keep till the Petards could be brought to the new Gate, to
force a passage, and let in the Troops which lay at Plein-Palais: reserving a
considerable Party to assist them, who still were climbing up.

They fiercely then set upon the Guard at the new Gate, who were no more than
thirteen Men, some of which belonged to the neighboring Sentries. The most
part of the Guard, when they had Fired, betook themselves to their Heels, and
ran to give the Alarm to those who watched the Townhouse, to the Bourg of
Four, and to the gate of Rive. They were pursued as far as la Treille, which
was speedily clapped to. The Enemies then finding this passage shut, came down to
the new Gate, of which they were Masters. In the mean time, of the three who
remained at this Gate, two of them hid themselves, and the third getting on the
top of the Gate, advisedly thought to let down the Percullice. The Person who
managed the Petard, was amazed to find his design of applying it ineffectual,
being prevented by the Percullice.

A Citizen, who was one of the first who awaked at this noise, came out of his
House, which was near the Gate of Tartasse, and would have passed down half
dressed, with his Halbard, to repair to his quarters at the new Gate. In coming
down, he discovered four or five armed Men who made up to him to get before him
to Tartasse. He believing they belonged to the City, asked them aloud,
whereabouts the Enemy was: they still advancing toward him, cried out to him,
Peace, Slave, come hither, and be on our side, God bless the Duke of Savoy:
upon which, perceiving it was the Enemy, he flies back, and alarmed the
neighboring streets. In the mean time the Enemy won the Gate of Tartasse,
keeping their ground, and endeavored to make good the passage. The Citizens
ran thither, and began to barricado the way which led to this Gate. Some of
them having been perceived with their Torches, were wounded; others passing
boldly on were killed. Canal, who was of the City-Council, and Captain of those
parts of the City, a Man in years, but of great courage, was slain after this
manner: He was helped in his passing over the Chain, which was fastened at the
corner of the Street, and was desired to venture no farther: yet, not believing
the Enemy to be so near, he would needs go on till it was too late for him to
think of returning. The Enemies perceiving the Citizens to gather apace, left
the place, and returned to their fellows at the new Gate.

In the mean time the City being througly alarmed, some of them rendered
themselves according to custom at their usual place of Rendezvous; others
without any stop, ran where was the greatest danger, directly upon the Enemy,
who believing that they had finished their Enterprise, shouted out a-long
Corraterie, God bless the King of Spain, God bless the Duke of Savoy, the City
is our own; Kill, kill, kill them; Down with them, down with them. The first
who met were known to one another by their Watchword, which consisted in a
kind of noise like the croaking of a Frog, or like unto that which Riders use
in encouraging their Horses. When they were asked by them of the City, Who goes
there? They answered, Friends. There were some, who to divide them who might
come in to help their Companions, cried out aloud, Arm, Arm, Arm, the Enemy is
at the Gate of Rive.

The Enemy had broke twice through the Guards at Monnoye, and having burst open
one of the Doors, behind which the Soldiers had barricadoed themselves, would
have passed on further, and have rushed into the City: but being met by the
Grand Rounds, who made head against them, there were some of them left dead in
the place. The Citizens likewise coming in, briskly charged those who put
themselves in a posture of passing through this Gate of Monnoye, killed one on
the Bridge of Rhosne, and another between the Gate and the Percullice, which
was let down.

Being driven back thence, there were some who endeavored to break into the
Houses in Corraterie, to plunder them, or to pass through into the City-street,
and began first with Julien Piaget's House, where they killed the Serving man,
and applied a Petard to the Stable-door, from which they were beaten away.
Whilst these things were doing, a Canoneer having fired a Cannon from the
Bulwark of Oye, which lay level to the Walls, he had the good hap to shatter
the Ladders, and threw them all down. The first report having been heard by the
Regiment of La Val d' Isere, who lay quiet in Plein-Palais, some of them cried
out in amaze, March up, march up, the City is our own, thinking that the Petard
had made this noise, and the Drums without any farther notice began to beat:
which set them all a running toward the new Gate, dividing already the spoil
amongst them: but they were very much surprised to find it still shut; so that
descending into the Ditch, near their Scaling-Ladders, the Gunner having fired
his Cannon a second time, charged with small Shot, made a slaughter amongst
them. The Horse, some distance off, having heard the sound of the Drum, and
perceived the light of the Torches in several parts of the City, had a short
joy in approaching unto it, of which they believed their own Men had made
themselves Masters.

At the same time a small party of Citizens, who issued out through the Gate of
Treille and S. Ledger, resolving to sacrifice their Lives in defense of their
Country, came down to recover the new Gate. They set upon the Guards there in a
most resolute manner, and had two of their Men immediately slain, they
continued fighting vigorously. Picot, who managed the Petard, being busied
about it, was killed. Seconded at length by others who ran to their assistance,
they drove the Enemy from their Court of Guard adjoining to the Gate, and made
them retreat to the middle of Corraterie, to the Party who lay to assist those
who scaled the Walls.

The Savoyards being greatly astonished to find themselves shut up betwixt the
Walls and the Houses, and knowing not which way to turn themselves, began to
lose their courage. They proffered to let down Brunaulieu from the Wall with a
Rope. But he chose rather to die than to live with shame: The Shot flew about
their Ears like Hailstones, out of the Windows and tops of the Houses.
Baudichon, one of the City Captains, who was half dressed, signalized himself
most eminently. The valor of a Tailor.
A Tailor who brandished a two-handed Sword, did wonders. A Woman throwing out
on purpose an Iron-pot on the Head of one of the most resolute amongst them,
split his Scull.

The Citizens courage increasing, and the Savoyards seeing above fifty of their
Men lying on the Ground, betook themselves to the place where their Ladders
stood, on which some already had saved themselves, making more haste to get
down than they did to get up, fear having given them wings: but finding no
Ladders, they cast themselves down from the Wall, at which the good Father
Alexander found himself besides his reckoning, one of these armed Men having
sadly bruised him in falling from the Wall. The Chevalier Dandelot sliding down
broke his Nose. Others were maimed or killed by so dangerous a leap. They who
lay dead in the City were reckoned to be about 54. the greatest part of them
being Officers and Men of note, and 13 were taken Prisoners. The Cannon was
brought on the Platform of Treille, and was levelled against Plein-Palais, and
perfectly routed both the Horse and Foot which lay there.

Albigny being astonished at the unsuccessfulness of his undertaking, so well
contrived and so ill performed, and finding the Shopkeepers (as he was wont to
term the Genevoises) had courage to defend themselves, and to make his Men leap
over the Walls, sounded a Retreat, which was very welcome to his dispersed
Troops, who were benumbed with fear and cold. They marched back in haste to the
side of Bonne, and brought the Duke the news of the unfortunate success which
the Sieur of Albigny's rashness had produced. The Duke said nothing else to
him, but that he had made a very fair flourish: For this was his common
expression.

In the same day the thirteen Prisoners were condemned to be hanged, Thirteen
of them who had scaled the City, hanged.
which some have censured as too severe; but the Magistrates alleged that they
considered them not under the notion of Enemies, but Thieves who broke in in
the night, and who had violated contrary to all right, a Peace which had been
so solemnly sworn to. It is said of Sonas, that he would have redeemed himself
for his weight in silver. Chaffardon, Attignac, and other persons of Quality,
were treated after the same manner, and were accompanied by the Ministers to
the place of Execution. The Council of sixty ordered that their heads, as
likewise of the others who were killed between the Walls, should be cut off,
and ranged on the Wall of the Bullwark near the place where they scaled, and
their bodies to be thrown into the Rhosne. They were found to be sixty seven in
all; and it was superstitiously observed, that it had been so many years since
they had thrown off the Romish yoke: but if we reckon those who were slain in
the Ditch, and died by the way, the number will amount to two hundred; whose
quality the Enemy kept secret: it is known they lost Cornage, the Sieur Albigny
Lieutenant, De Gruzy, La Tour, and Payen.

On the Genevoises side there were but thirty wounded, amongst whom was the
principal Syndick Peter Forbry, and John Bodichon; and seventeen killed, who
were interred in S. Gervais with an honorable Epitaph. It is said that
Theodore de Beze, who was then alive but very ancient, heard not the least
noise of this uproar and disturbance, and was amazed when he was led forth to
see the slain, who lay stretched out along Corraterie. Beza Preaches a
thanksgiving Sermon for their deliverance.
He had left off Preaching, yet did he get up into the Pulpit, and caused the
124. Psalm to be sung, Now may Israel say, if the Lord had not been on our side
when men rose up against us; which Psalm has been ever since sung on that day,
which is observed by an Order of Council once a year, with public
Thanksgivings and rejoicing; two days after was kept a public Fast, to offer
up unto God their solemn acknowledgements. There was likewise set up in the
Townhouse a Latin Inscription for a lasting remembrance. The Magistrates
dispatched immediately an Express to Berne to carry them the News, and to
desire their assistance in case the Enemy should set upon them afresh. The four
Protestant Cantons sent them immediately twelve hundred men, promising them
more if they had occasion for them. The Duke rode Post back again over the
Mountains, leaving his Forces in Focigny, and in the Bailliage of Terny. The
Genevoises wrote likewise to the Sieur of Guiche, who was Governor of Lions,
this Letter.

SIR,
YOU have heard before by several Letters that his Highness of Savoy, A Letter
from the Genevoises to the Sieur of Guiche.
notwithstanding he knew and acknowledged we were comprehended in the Treaty of
Peace, made in the Month of January, 1601. betwixt His Majesty of France, and
himself, has yet several times oppressed us not only by keeping back our
Revenues, Prohibitions of Commerce, and other Violences; not at all minding the
just Remonstrances reiterated by ^is said Majesty: but has also set on foot
several designs to surprise our City in the midst of the Calms of Peace. It
has happened then, that for to obtain his pernicious ends, that the Sieur
Albigny on Saturday last, the Eleventh of this Month, about Midnight, brought
before our City on the side of Plein-Palais, about two thousand chosen Men,
both Horse and Foot, and has caused two hundred of them to descend into our
Ditch toward Corraterie, where was heretofore a Gate leading to the City; and
having provided Ladders, caused them to climb the Walls about three of the
Clock in the Morning, on Sunday the Twelfth of the said Month, he standing in
the Ditch, and encouraging them; so that having gotten down into the City, some
of them marched directly to the new Gate, endeavoring to force it open, and to
bring in their main body to assist them, which lay at Plein-Palais: others
would have gained the Gate of Monnoye, to enter by this means into the heart of
the City: but it has pleased our good God to look down upon us with an eye of
pity, and to encourage our men in such a manner that they drove them back, and
slew the greatest part of them; some have been taken and hanged since by our
Order. The remaining part have cast themselves down from the Walls, so that
several of them being wounded, have died thereupon. This is a marvelous
deliverance which God has wrought for us, and for which we are bound to praise
him. But it being very likely that the said Sieur Albigny intends to prosecute
his design; and in as much as we do also understand that his Highness lies not
far hence, we therefore earnestly entreat you, that you would please to take
into your Consideration, the prejudice his Majesty would suffer by the taking
of this City; and to continue your favor toward us, and to assist us by your
wise and prudent Counsel.


The King was immediately informed that Geneva was taken, the design appearing
so likely to take effect, that there was less reason to doubt of it than to
believe it. He was not undeceived till he received Letters from the Sieur de la
Guiche, which preceded the account which the City published. His Majesty
vouchsafed to write to them of Geneva Letters full of sincere affection, and
becoming the generosity of so glorious a Monarch. The Contents of the Letter
were as follows.

Most dear and well beloved.
I Have heard to my great grief, A Letter of the French King to the Genevoises.
of the enterprise made on your City by the Duke of Savoy's Subjects; and
having known how courageously ye have repelled and chastised them, let me tell
you, I am heartily glad thereat. I have promised my assistance to preserve your
City, and have told the Duke as much by word of mouth when I last saw him; and
likewise them who have come from him: an occasion then now offering it self, I
am resolved to show you effectually what I then did put promise, hoping that
God will revenge the breach of those Protestations and Oaths which have been
made at the Treaties of Vervins and Lions. I cannot yet guess what the Dukes
after-Designs may be, nor yet what need you may have of my help, which shall
neither be refused you, nor deferred; and having not as yet understood what
resolutions ye have taken in this affair with our other Allies and
Confederates, I shall defer the discovering of my thoughts to you till I
understand yours, and then I shall be better able to judge of the Remedy, which
we must use in a matter of so great importance; you will oblige me in sending
notice of whatsoever shall occur, and what you shall resolve upon touching this
last occasion. In the mean time I will tell you, if the Duke sets upon you
either by open force or fraud, you shall not want my assistance, and if
occasion requires it, my person too: howsoever let me have notice how he deals
with you. I intend without delay to Write to all the Governors and
Lieutenant-Generals of my Provinces who are near you, to watch diligently over
you, and assist you at your need to their utmost power, and that with the same
care and diligence as if it were for the saving of the most important places of
my Kingdom under their Government. I beseech God, most dear and loving friends,
to have you in his holy keeping.

Written at Paris the Eighth of January 1603. Signed Henry, and underneath de
Neuf-ville.


The day wherein the Walls were scaled, had been a day of trouble and confusion
to every body in general; but it had like to have proved double dangerous to
the Syndicks: for on Saturday night a man came to the Gate of Rive, to give
notice of the Enemies approaches, which news was carried to the chief Syndick;
who remitted the affair to the fourth Syndick who was a savourer of the Enemy,
so that this was like sending a Patient from the Physician to the Hangman. The
people who could not brook this proceeding, considering the danger threatening
them, and what they had already sufferred, determined thereupon to be revenged
on these two Syndicks: but they were so prudent or fearful as to keep their
Chambers till noon, the time when the Prisoners were led to execution; the
people then running to behold this spectacle, were taken off from the thoughts
of being revenged on them. The Sermons at night allayed the heats of some. One
of the Senators had made answer, when they went to him for the keys of the
Arsenal to take out Arms, Surely these are not Birds to fly thus over the
Walls: not believing it was possible for them to get in.

In the beginning of the Year, 1603.
there arose a great difference in the general Council, Jan.
in the choice of Syndicks, by reason of the scaling the Walls which had happened
three weeks before, for fear they should fall into the hands of some
Magistrates ill affected to the public. At length there was chosen John
Maillet, John du Pan, John Favres, and John Bude, which gave occasion to this
Proverb, We are at S. John' s, and because that the Lieutenant too was named
John Rillet.

Maillet was soon after clapped up in Prison upon suspicion of Treason, Maillet
committed to Prison.
and likewise for that contrary to his Oath, he had betrayed the Liberties of
the City in the case of the Village of Moin, at the instance of one of his
Creditors who was a Counselor in Berne. He remained a Prisoner seven years,
and at length was released, and withdrew with his family into Savoy, where he
had a small Pension allowed him, but not sufficient to maintain him; so that he
was forced to live very sparingly, he died in the year 1625. having persevered
in his Religion, amongst them of the contrary party. He was much pitied, being
a man learned; for it was he who composed those neat Inscriptions which are to
be seen in the Bishops Palace.

The Duke gave out that the principal motive which induced him to make the late
attempt on Geneva, was the establishment of the Catholic Religion amongst
them; for the promoting of so good a work, he having neither spared his
Soldiers, his Treasure nor his Person. But the Genevoises replied thereupon,
that he took not the way to show himself zealous for Religion, when he gave
such a plain demonstration how little he valued his Oath; and that doubtless
God would not let them escape unpunished who had taken his name in vain. On the
other side the Earl of Tournon his Hignesses Resident amongst the Cantons, came
from Fribourg to Berne, for to make this following Harangue to the Lords of
that City, and to endeavor to palliate the matter, according to the
instructions sent him from the Duke by his Secretary Caron. These were his
Words:

Most Mighty Lords, etc.
FRom the day and hour I heard of the enterprise against Geneva, Tournon his
Harangue to the Lords of Berne.
I was desirous of nothing more than of knowing from my Sovereign Lord and
Prince, how the matter really had passed, to the end that I might, in the name
of his Highness, inform your Lordships and other affectionate Friends; seeing
that in such like affairs, false Reports never fail to be spread abroad by the
Adversaries. For being destitute of all lawful reasons and equity, they have
endeavored to color over their bad cause, to the dishonor and prejudice of
his Highness, and to render him odious to his friends. Wherefore having been
advertised by his Highness as well by word of mouth as by writing, and also by
his Secretary who is joined with me in this affair, of the whole truth of the
matter, and having received an express charge to communicate the same unto you,
according to the good correspondence which ought to be amongst Neighbors, to
the end ye may no longer doubt of my Masters good will and affection. My self I
say, and his Secretary would not be wanting likewise to inform you according to
the instructions given us of this late undertaking; this then in short is the
true account of it. Your Lordships know very well the reasons moving his
Highness to make the late War against the City of Geneva, it being upon the
account of the Tallies, Imposts, and other ordinary Charges on the Estates
which the Genevoises hold in his Highnesses Dominions. They were solicited and
entreated to submit to reason and equity, after the same manner as their other
Neighbors who possess Estates in his Highnesses Countries. But they on the
other side have never ceased from making their complaints, and representing
their cause to his Majesty of France, as also to your Lordships, although they
have been rebuked by several noble Lords about his Majesty, for their
unseasonable requests, and sent back to make satisfaction to those equitable
demands, after the same manner as your Lordships have dealt with them. Yet have
they still obstinately continued in their unjust pretensions, and have not only
endeavored by force to maintain their pretended right, as his Highness has
been well informed; but endeavoring moreover contrary to his Highness's
declaration, to bring and convey into their City Corn, which ought not to be
transported out of his Highness's Countries, for the relief of his Subjects,
and to preserve in store against time of need; so that they have by this means
infringed and violated this Edict, for which just causes and reasons, his
Highness had a design of bringing Geneva to Reason, but he has deferred his
resentments till some other opportunity, especially till his Highness can be
present in his own person, to prevent all mischief and confusion, which
commonly happens in such like occasions. But forasmuch as the said Genevoises
do allege the privileges granted them by your predecessors of blessed memory,
against the pretensions of hs Higness, they are of no validity, seeing they
have not acquitted themselves in what they were obliged to on their parts, and
have by this means made void their privileges. And thus it is likewise in the
claims which they lay to the Treaty, as if they were comprehended in it, and
included with his Majesty of France, and the Duke of Savoy my Master: whereas
it ought to be considered in this case, they have no grounds or reasons for
their pretensions, for it is certain they cannot be understood under this word
of Allies, seeing they are not in League with all the Cantons of Switzerland,
and that they have not been expressly specified and named as the other Allies;
and so consequently could they not be inserted in his Highness's absence
against his will and pleasure, as being a party principally concerned. Moreover
I will not forbear to tell your Lordships, that his Highness has been credibly
informed that my Lord Esdiguieres designed to surprise the said City; which had
he effected, it would have proved highly prejudicial to his Highness and to
your selves, and therefore his Highness thought it his most prudent course to
prevent him. But lest your Lordships should suspect that he had any design
against you his ancient Neighbors, with whom he has all this while held so
good a correspondence; He has therefore withdrawn his men on this side the
Mountains, resolving to keep up a good understanding with you, as his
predecessors had done before him; and for this effect he will maintain and
encourage all Traffic and Commerce betwixt the two States, expecting in the
mean time an answer from you, which we hope will prove satisfactory to our
desires, and worthy your resolutions.


This Harangue of the Earl of Tournon was heard by the Council of Berne,
Bernoises not satjsfied with this harangue.
yet did it not satisfy them; for they dismissed both him and the Secretary
without answer, and had they not speedily departed, it is very probable the
people, forgetting the respect due to persons of their quality, would have
affronted them, so much did they slight his apology for an attempt, which was
not only condemned by them, but as it is said, by all Europe, and even by the
Pope himself. The Duke of Bouillon passing about that time through Geneva, was
desirous of being informed of all the circumstances of the enterprise, and went
to see the places where they entered and made their efforts.

In the mean time they of Geneva strengthened by the Troops of their Allies,
and several French Soldiers both Horse and Foot, whom the King permitted to
assist them, maintained themselves against the Garrisons with which they were
surrounded, and drove away them who approached their Walls; they cut down the
Trees about the City to take away all shelter for the Enemy, and made several
incursions into the Countries of Savoy, and surprised the City of S. Genis d'
Aoste, Genis taken by surprise.
where they settled the Baron of Vilars Governor, from whence they continually
molested the Dukes Subjects, and kept Chambery in exercise, marching many times
up to their Gates, and had it not been for the death of a valorous Gentleman
named Monsieur de Nesle, Chambery would have run the same risque as S. Genis.

The King gave order to de Vic, De Vic ordered to assure the Gene^oises of the
French Kings favor.
his Ambassador in Switzerland, that in his return home through Geneva, he
should assure the Citizens that he was not one of them who only love their
friends whilst they advantage themselves by them, and that he would never be
wanting to defend and protect them; he therefore desired to know of them the
means they intended to use in making an offensive War, to the end that the
succors which he should send them might be profitably employed. They received
the Sieur of Vic with the greatest respect, and heard his general proposals and
particular remonstrances, which tended rather to exhort them to a lasting peace
than a short War. He was desired to offer this to the Council, because there
were several who judged that a War would be no less conducing to the
advancement of the public Weal, than it had been in the time of Duke Charles;
that all who were interessed in their preservation would undoubtedly assist
them; that several stout men who were desirous to show their courage, would
come and proffer their service. De Vic on the contrary very elequently and
truly showed them, that Peace was so necessary for them, and War so pernicious,
that there was an indispensable necessity of chosing the former, and avoiding
the latter; that although the inducements to War were specious, and the means
easy, yet were its effects never the less terrible, and the success uncertain.
That War in general was profitable, and ought to be undertaken, when Peace
could not be procured; but that a well governed State which had ever thriven by
Peace, 1603.
ought not to set out in these storms, nor to please it self in Warlike
incounters with its Neighbors. May.
In short he prevailed so far by his persuasions that they all inclined to
Peace, provided it was an honorable and profitable one, and so well settled as
to take away all occasions of it for the future. Immediately after this there
was a Truce made, and this Treaty of Peace which was deemed so necessary, was
for some time in agitation; but at length it broke off, the Genevoises not
being willing to accept it on any other terms but what were honorable and
advantageous. The Earl of Fuentes, the King of Spains Lieutenant in the Duchy
of Milan, hearing of the Treaty which had been ended, sent orders to Don Zanche
de Luna Master of his Camp to renew it, and bring it on again. He sent for this
purpose a Spanish Captain named Sebastien Culebro to Geneva, who having
obtained a safe conduct, presented himself to the Council, telling them that
the Earl of Fuentes having been informed of a Treaty began between the Deputies
of the Duke of Savoy and Geneva, which yet had produced nothing; he had
thereupon sent an express to Don Zanche de Luna, enjoining him to dispatch a
Captain to Geneva, to desire them of that City to think of Peace, and of the
good resulting from it, openly declaring, that in case they did not agree with
the Duke, his Catholic Majesty as his Highness's Ally, and having his Country
in protection, could do no less than assist him in this War. And at the same
time he delivered them the Original of his Commission, being the same which Don
Zanche had given him, which runs thus translated out of Spanish.

Captain Sebastien Culebro shall go to La Roche, Culebro his Orders.
and desire Monsieur Albigny to conduct him safely to Bonne, taking along with
him Captain Vatanour and Peter the Drummer belonging to his Company; the said
Captain being at Bonne, shall desire safe conduct to go speak to Messieurs of
Geneva, telling them as from me, and giving them to understand his Excellencies
pleasure; which is, That his Catholic Majesty's Forces are obliged to defend
the Duke, and to oppose them in whatsoever they shall undertake against him,
and that they should endeavor as soon as they can to comply with him, because
that if it falls out otherwise, he will order his business accordingly. At
Anecy, the 28* of May, 1603. Signed Don Zanche de Luna, and lower de Roza. The
Terms of the Spanish Laconisme are remarkable: Para her allar a los Sinores de
Sinebra, disiendo les come va di mi part, y dandoles a entender la voluntad de
su Excellentia, que es, Que la gente de su magestad a de deffender al Duque, y
opponer se a quantos intentaren, y que vean conciertar secon el luogo proque
donde se tomara forma.

The King of France foreseeing that this War would not end only amongst them
between whom it was begun, but that the flame of it would break out farther,
was desirous to maintain Christendom in that Peace, for the sake of which he
had laid down his Arms, at that time when they would have procured him great
advantage: wherefore his Ambassadors in Switzerland, by his order, prepared the
Cantons of Glaris, Basle, Soleurre, Schaffonse and Appenzel, as them who were
least suspected and interested for to be the mediators of this accord. Which
with much difficulty was at length obtained. The Genevoises considering that
the profits which might redound from the War could not equal the damages
thereof, and that all their hopes of advantage by it depended on the assistance
from their Neighbors. That the hope which is founded on a Foreign prop is
usually uncertain. That undoubtedly the Catholic Cantons would not break off
with the Duke upon their account, and that being his Neighbors it was
absolutely necessary to come to some terms or other. These reflections, and the
persuasions of their Allies, made the Genevoises relent; so that both Parties
by degrees calmed their passions, A Peace concluded between the Duke and
Gen^voises.
and laid down those Arms which they had taken up with so great an animosity.
The Deputies from the five Cantons mediated this Peace at Remilly, and it was
concluded at S. Julien.

During all these several Journies backwards and forwards, which these
mediators of the Peace made from Geneva to S. Julien which lasted a Month, the
Highways from the Bridge of Arve to S. Julien were almost continually filled
with People, especially Savoyards, who passionately breathed after this Peace,
and blessed the Deputies who gave them hopes of it. July 21.
So that immediately upon the Signing of it at S. Julien, the President
Rochette put his Head out of the Window of the House where was held the
Conference, and cried out to these poor People who thronged the Streets, My
Friends, praise God, the Peace is concluded. Upon which they shouted for Joy,
and the Trumpets sounded forth the public gladness. This Treaty of Peace may
be seen described in the printed Book, called The Citizen of Geneva.

Both Parties having laid down their Arms, a while after they began to combat
with their Pens. Buttet Advocate of Chambery, entered the Lists, Buttet writes
a Book which he calls, The Cavalier of Savoy.
setting forth his Cavalier of Savoy, wherein he described all his Highnesses
pretensions on Geneva. It was debated in Council whether this Book ought to be
answered. They who were for it, represented, that should it not be done, the
World would be apt to believe that the Dukes Reasons were well grounded.
Whereas they who were of the contrary opinion, alleged, That in so doing they
would expose their cause to the censures of passionate Men, who being
pre-possessed with prejudices, would make use of their reasons against them.
The first advice was followed, so that a learned Man of the Council, Sarrazin
sets forth his Book called The Genevois Citizen.
a Person zealous for his Countries honor, whose name was John Sarrazin, was
enjoined to write an answer: which he did, and called his Book the Genevois
Citizen; against which there was published a little Book by a Savoyard, under a
feigned Title, called Monsieur Picter' s Harangue, or the Mischief of the
Aristocratical Government of Geneva; these Books abound with sharp invectives,
and are good for nothing but to renew former differences.

Philibert Blondel, 1604.
who was Syndick in the Year when the attempt of scaling Geneva was on foot,
Blondel his villainous actions.
had been several times censured in the Council, and blamed by the People for
having been so careless in securing the City, although the principal Syndick
had put him in mind of it the Night before the execution of their design,
according to the notice he had brought him of the Enemies march. Blondel took
it ill that he should be suspected, and had the impudence to complain thereof
to the Council, pretending much zeal for his Countries service. His complaint
ended in his confusion, for a Cutler, whose name was Guidonet, whom he had
heretofore solicited to be confederate with him in his Treachery, having a
quarrel with him* could not suffer his Pride, and called him Traitor before
Witnesses. Blondel taking it to heart, addresseth himself thereupon to the
Council, and obtains an order to imprison his Adversaries; amongst whom was
Comb, who at length brought such proof, and alleged so many reasons against
Blondel, that at length for his Neglect and Treasons he was fined 2000 Crowns
of Gold; for the payment of which they seized on his Mills: yet did he still
stand upon his justification: but the Witnesses proved again their Charge so
clearly and fully against him, that he was fined to pay 2000 Crowns of Gold
more, and degraded from the Council of 25. But he valued not the Money, having
gotten in a short time an Estate to the value of 40000 Crowns, no Body knowing
how: but he could not suffer his degradation with a quiet mind. He resolved
thereupon rather to lose his Head, than to lie under this imputation. The
business was so agitated, that at length the truth was bolted out, it having
been made apparent that he held the Lordship of Compois, without paying any
Taxes to the Duke: that since the taking of Bonne he was observed to grow rich
on a sudden: that he had some private discourse with a Stranger the Night
before the Walls were scaled; and that to avoid the Officers deposition, who
had seen him, he had sent the said Officer to Genes, and given him a Horse:
that he being dead, Blondel now thought himself secure; and that there was
found a Lanthorn in the Ditch having his mark; and that a certain Person from
Chesne brought him oftentimes Letters from the Governor of Savoy. But this
Article not being proved so clearly against him as the others, he was sentenced
only to lie in Prison for the space of seven Years, and to pay another Fine of
2000 Crowns. And forasmuch as the Persons deposition, who carried the Letters,
was the chief cause of this his Condemnation, he determined therefore to send
for this Peasant, to try whether he could not make him retract what he had
declared against him; he used such means that at last this poor fellow was
clapped up in Prison, where he offered him a great sum of Money to deny what he
had before affirmed. The Jailer, whom Blondel had won by his gifts, brought him
word that he would not move a jot from his former deposition: whereupon Blondel
offers the Jailer fifty Crowns to strangle him in the Night. Which being
done, and the Magistrates coming the next Morning to hear what this Witness had
to say, found him dead. The Physicians were called to search him, and make
their report, that he had not killed himself, but had been strangled by some
other. The Jailer and Porter are thereupon apprehended; the latter of which
only was wont to visit the Peasant. He was put on the Rack, and confesses the
Fact, and persists in this confession till death, namely, That what he had
done, was at Blondel's instigation; who being convicted of the Murder, and
consequently of the crime of High Treason, of which he was accused, was put on
the Rack. It was supposed that the ordinary torment would not move him,
wherefore he was put into an Engine made of Wood, called the Beurriere, and had
immediately Escarpins applied to him: but all these torments could not draw
from him a confession of his being privy to the Enterprise of scaling the
Walls; but he owned the Murder, and that he had offered his Service to the Duke
of Savoy, But this was enough to deserve death. He was therefore condemned to
be hanged and quartered: and was led to be executed, without showing any great
remorse. It Is reported that he mentioned the Name of God but once, upon
occasion of a Woman's crossing S. Peter's place: for having used some great
injustice toward this Woman when he was Syndick, she broke out into this
Imprecation, wishing that he might one time or other receive as just a
punishment, as that which he had imposed on her had been unjust: and he hearing
her reproaching him with it at the time he was leading to execution, he said to
her, holding up his hands: Alas, pray to God for me, you see the miserable
condition I am in. This was the end of this wretched Man.

After this Execution the Walls were raised higher, and the number of Watchmen
was increased, and Palisado's were drove into the Ditches, and the City
fortified that they might be the better prepared against suchlike Enterprises.

In the Year following died Theodore de Beze, 1606.
whose life has been written by Anthony de la Faye. October. 13.
The last time he preached, was on the day the Peace was proclaimed 1598, Beza
dies.
and expounded the 85th Psalm, Thou have made peace, Lord, with the people. He
was present at the Conference held at Poissy, and presided oftentimes in France
at the National Synods. 1605.
The Catholics commonly called him, The Huguenots Pope. He was interred in S.
Peter's Cloister, and not in the Cemetery of the Plein-Palais, because the
Savoyards gave out, That they would take up his Corpse, and send it to Rome.

The King of France dispatched about that time the Baron of Luz to be Governor
of Burgundy, and Boisse to be Governor of Bourg, and the Sieur de Nerestan, for
to desire the Genevoises to grant him a place where he might build an Arsenal,
to prevent the Cities being in the like danger for the time to come. The
Council was divided. One part said, That God showed himself propitious to them
in sending them a Foreign assistance of that importance, and that in accepting
of it, the Enemy would have no means left for making his incursions. Others
opposed on the contrary, That the who had such assistance did thereby bring
themselves under an Obligation to them from whom they received it: that perhaps
this Arsenal might be given in trust to such a Person, who by his liberalities,
and winning behavior might gain the hearts of the Citizens, and dazzle their
eyes with the brightness of Royalty: And farther, Perphaps all the Kings of
France would not be so candid in their intentions as Henry the Fourth, and then
it would be too late to repent. So that upon this different advice, the
Common Council remitted the business to be determined by the Council of 200,
and they to the General-Council. These French^Lords interpreting these delays
to be a kind of mannerly denial, departed home: and there was no mention made
of it afterward.

In the first day of the following Year the Foundations of a Bulwark were laid
near the Lake, 1606.
the better to defend and fortify the Gate of Rive, 1607.
and it was finished in the Month of October following. There was an
Inscription Graven in Stone for an acknowledgment of a Present made the City of
12000 Crowns by the Landgrave of Hesse, The Landgrave of Hesse makes the City
of Geneva a Present.
who had passed through it, and of 6000 which the Prince Palatin had given
them, which was a great help toward carrying on the work.

The City acquired every day learned Men, and lost them as fast. Charles
Perrot, 1607.
a knowing Divine, and very Charitable to the Poor, died about this time. He
was a Man of an exemplary Life, but of a strange humor, causing himself to be
called always Peccator, for which some blamed him, saying, That this smelt of
the Monk. His hands were always lifted up toward Heaven: a great contemner he
was of the World and its Vanities, and a great admirer of Antiquity. His care
for the Poor caused several abuses to be reformed in the Administration of the
Revenues belonging to the Hospital, which were consumed before in feastings. He
wrote a Book, Entitled, De extremis in Ecclesia vitandis: which made some
disturbance, and was suppressed after his death.

In the War-time there were appointed extraordinary Prayers to be read on
Wednesdays and Fridays, 1608.
but one Minister not being sufficient to perform all these Offices, they
reduced it to Fridays only. There were likewise Proposals made touching the
reducing the Sermons made on Week days to the number of them of S. Magdalens
Church, to save the allowance which must be made to a Minister. But the
Consistory would not hear of it, choosing rather to give them another Colleague.
King Henry the Fourth granted, in the same Year, Letters of Naturalization to
the Genevoises, to free them from the Aubeine and other Taxes. They were dated
from Paris in the Month of June, 1606. Signed, Henry, and on the fold, by the
King. Brulart.

The City was extremely surprised by an information, 1609.
that notice of whatsoever passed in the Council was sent into Savoy. Canal a
Traitor to the City.
At length it was discovered, That one named Canal, the Common-Serjeant of the
City, sent an account thereof to a Lady of Savoy, under the feigned names of
Chapmen, and under pretense of a Lawsuit which he had at Chambery: he wrote
daily, no body being able to discover the mystery, when his Letters should be
intercepted. But at length, when he was apprehended, not being able to give
satisfactory answers to the questions proposed to him, he was committed to
Prison, and an Indictment was drawn up against him for this crime, and likewise
for Sodomy, whereof he stood convicted, Feb. 2.
and for an execrable design of blowing up the Council by a Mine. 1610.
He was first broken alive upon the Wheel, and afterward burnt in a small
fire; he seemed to be very sorry for his crimes.

A more dangerous Enterprise was at the same time carried on against the City,
Terrail his designs on Geneva.
by Lewis of Comboursieur Sieur of Terrail. He was a French-Gentleman of a very
good Family, and of a goodly personage, he had been chosen heretofore by King
Henry the Fourth to be a Cornet in the Dauphin's Company, who was afterward
Lewis the 13th. 1609.
But being a stout Man, he had a quarrel with a Gentleman, whom he killed in
his Majesty's sight, who was then at the Windows. Which obliged him to fly
quickly out of France, lest he should carry his head to Greve. He retired into
Flanders toward the Arch-duke's, where he was well received. He undertook
three Enterprises to no effect, two on Berg op-zom, and the other on L'ecluse.
Afterward there being a Truce made in those Countries, he went on Pilgrimage
to Lorette with a Bourdelois called la Bastide, a great Ingeneer. At their
return passing through Turin, they saluted the Duke of Savoy, who discovered to
them the desire he had by some Enterprise to make himself Master of Geneva.
They set before him the means, and offered their service, which he accepted
with great expressions of kindness, and thereupon presented du Terrail with 700
Ducatoons, and with a Ring worth 300 Crowns of Gold; and gave to Bastide 260
and Philippes, injoyning them to go first to Geneva, and observe the State of
that City, and what Guard they kept there.

La Bastide went to Geneva, and took an exact notice; and being returned
toward his Highness, gave him an account what alterations there had been made
in the Fortifications of that City since the Enterprise of scaling the Walls of
it. Upon which the Duke amended his ancient Platform; and they discoursed
together on their design. Du Terrail was for surprising by a Petard, or
otherwise, one of the Gates of Geneva. La Bastide alleged it was impossible
and too hazardous, considering the great number of Fences which were before the
Gates, and the strict Watch kept at them. That which was he proposed was
opproved of both by the Duke and Terrail, which was to surprise the Gate
leading to the Lake, where there were no appointed Guards, and where, with a
good number of Soldiers making a descent, they might seize on the Gate of Rive,
and by this means become Masters of the City without any difficulty. It
remained only to resolve upon the manner. They passed over then both of them
from Evian to the Lake side, where they remained eight days, informing
themselves, by the Boatmen who frequented Geneva, of the dispositions of the
Watchmen, and the search made in Boats. They learned several defects, but to
be the more certain, La Bastide passed over the Lake, and went to Morges, where
he embarked himself in Genevoise Bark, and being brought into the City, he
observed the condition of the Port and the Gate of Rive, and returned by Land.
Being with the Duke, they assured him of the success of their undertaking,
which was put off to the end of May. They were to take along with them from
Savoy five large flat-bottom Boats, and lade them with Wood, which should be
piled after such a sort that 200 Soldiers might lie in each Boat under these
piles of Wood; with which lading they might enter the Port without the least
suspicion, and easily kill the Searchers, and seize on the Gate of Arve, and
likewise let in the Troops of Horse, who were to lie ready near Geneva at an
appointed hour, and in the mean time they were to conceal themselves in the
Valleys on the side of Evian, which lies at a small distance from Geneva,
together with some select Soldiers who were to be put into these Boats, who
were not to be embarked till a favorable Bize should carry them in a short
time to Geneva. As to what concerned the Horse, they were to meet about Anecy,
under pretense of the Marriage of the Duke of Nemours.

But this design could not be so privately carried on but the Genevoises got
some intimations thereof, although they could not dive into the bottom of it.
The greatest knowledge they had of it was this: Terrail's design discovered.
Du Terrail having played at Tennis in Chambery till he sweated, whilst he was
rubbed and dried, la Bastide and some others presented him a Paper, wherein was
contained a draught of Geneva, discoursing together softly, as in matters of
great importance; yet the Valet who warmed his Shirt, heard them talk of
Geneva, which made him give the greater attention; and he comprehended they
talked about some Enterprise designed against it, having heard these words from
Terrail: They are taken, there is no remedy. This Valet, who had a Brother in
Geneva, went and reported this to a Merchant of that City, who was then at
Chambery, desiring him to give his Brother notice, to the end he might save
himself from this danger. The Merchant at his return not only advertised his
Brother, but likewise the Magistrates, who did not slight this warning, 1609.
yet they held it secret, and sent Spies throughout all Savoy to discover and
pry into all Terrail's practices. They got his Picture, and having understood
that he was coming to Geneva to view the City, they sent Tokens to several
Persons how to know him, that he might be apprehended.

Some days being past over, du Terrail and la Bastide, having set forth from
Turin to pass over into Flenders to take their leave of the Archdukes, and to
fetch their Baggage which they had left there, and having received an Order
from the Duke of Savoy to bring along with them as many as they should judge
fit and able Persons to help forward their Enterprise, Terrail sets out from
Savoy for Flanders.
they were discovered as they passed over the Mountains. Notice hereof was
given to the Bailiffs of the Countries belonging to Berne. Whereas they
suspecting nothing, crossed over the Lake and part of the Country of Vaud,
lodging only in Villages and Hamlets, and so arrived at Yverdun a little City
belonging to the Bernoises, which lay on the borders of Franche-Comte

Du Terrail, passing over the Bridge which leads into the City, saluted the
Bailiff, who met him, and took no notice of him: but a Deacon, who was in his
Garden, and to whom a Syndick had sent marks whereby he might know him, seeing
him coming afar off; saluted him, and doubting that he was the Person, he
observed whether he was bald; which perceiving, he went immediately to the
Bailiff, and gave him notice of it, who sent two Men after him to watch which
way they took their course, and to follow them till they took up their abode.
Which they did, and viewed them more nearly, compared them with their Pictures
which had been given them. One of these returned to Yverdun to give notice that
they had taken up their Lodgings in the Village of Villebeuf. Whereupon
immediately the Bailiff sent four Troopers with an Order to apprehend them by
main force, and to bring them away; they found them ready to mount their
Horses, and brought them back to Yverdun. Terrail apprehended.
Du Terrail told the Bailiff that his name was Paul de Constans, and that he
went to Lorrain to prosecute a suit of Law: but the Bailiff took not this
answer for payment; wherefore he wrote to Geneva, to the end there might be
some person sent who knew him; two Soldiers, one of whom had belonged to his
Company, were dispatched to Yverdun, and were caused to come into his Chamber
when he was at Supper; the Soldier knew him again: Du Terrail who suspected
the occasion of his being there, draws him aside, and promises him a thousand
Crowns, if he would go and advertise the Earl of Chamite in Franche Compte of
the danger he was in La Bastide offered him a hundred more, but the Soldier
refused both their proffers.

Du Terrail being after this manner known, was committed to prison in the
Castle of Yverdun; the Genevoises deputed one of their Syndicks to desire the
Bernoises to deliver them into their hands; which was granted, and they were
both conveyed to Geneva. La Bastide being first put on the Rack, confessed the
whole design; after his confession, he was confronted with Terrail, who at
first earnestly denied it, but seeing that Bastide persisted in his confession,
and he being threatened with the Rack likewise, with tears in his eyes he
confessed the whole project, and requested that he might be shut up for ever
between four Walls, hoping that his relations would come and intercede for him,
as indeed they did as soon as they knew he was taken: but for reasons of State,
the Council quickly dispatched his Trial, and condemned him to be beheaded at
Molard, two days after La Bastide was hanged. April 19.
Du Terrail was much lamented, for he was a person of a very good mien, Bastide
and Terrail executed.
and extreme courteous. In his going to the place of execution, he begged the
peoples pardon, and the people on the other hand wept bitterly for him; some
people blamed the Magistrates of Geneva for their severity, but they replied
that they did not consider them so much as Enemies, but as authors of a
Conspiracy in a time of peace. Monsieur de L' Esdiguieres, who had interceded
for him and his relations, were very much enraged at this execution. The first
of these came never after that into Geneva as he was wont, and his kindred were
made to believe that he had been forced to change his Religion; but being
informed of the contrary, they comforted themselves the best they could. This
their design appeared very easy, which they were resolved to put in execution
in the time when they of Geneva make a King of the Harquebuze, because then all
the people are in Plein-Palais, and these Soldiers upon this occasion might be
taken for them who belonged to the City, and it had been an easy matter to
have fastened the Gates against them.

The Republic suffered a great loss by the death of Michael Roset, 1610.
who had composed a Chronicle of Geneva. Roset dies at Geneva.
He was a person of great gravity, and a real lover of his Country; he had been
Deputy in Ordinary to the Cantons, having been fifty years a Counselor, and
Master of a College twenty years more.

An Italian named Giovani coming from Rome, Giovani accuses one of the Council
of Treason.
maintained that a certain honorable person of the Council was a Traitor, and
that he had seen his Picture in the Dukes Closet, which he could easily
verify. When his Lord was brought to him whom they thought he meant, he said
this was not the person; which caused him to be hanged as a Calumniator and
Impostor. It appeared afterward that they had been too rash in their judgment,
seeing there were two persons of the same name, one of which often frequented
Savoy; the Attorneygeneral required* satisfaction for this, and desired that
the Process might be prosecuted according to the form of the instructions which
were given him; but because the person was dead, all farther proceedings were
laid aside.

The French King Henry the fourth having been treacherously assasinated, the
Duke made great preparations of War against Geneva, as it was before suspected.
1610.
The Protestant Churches of France collected several sums of money, 1611.
and sent a considerable number of men to assist them, which the Queen ill
resented; but Anjorrand, the Genevoises Deputy to the French Court, making it
appear by the Treaty at Soleurre, that his Majesty permitted his Protestant
Subjects to assist Geneva both in their persons and estates, this satisfied
her. About that time arrived M. de Soubize of the house of Rohan, M. de Bethune
the Duke of Sully's nephew, the Sieur Desmarets son to the wife of the same
Duke, and several other Lords and Gentlemen. M. de Bethune raised
Fortifications near S. Victor, and S. Paul's, and not far from the Bullwarks of
S. Anthony and Pin, making trenches all along. Yet after the French Switzers
had remained a considerable time in the City, and perceiving no act of
hostility, every one returned home.

A while after died James Lect (Jacobus Lectius) a great Orator, Lectius dies
at Geneva.
Poet and Lawyer, who held great correspondence with several learned men in
Europe. He was toward the latter part of his life chosen several times both
Syndick and Counselor, and but once Lieutenant, because that being very exact
and strict in his Office, the people would choose him no more.

About this time the side of the Gate of Rive, was fortified by a Rampart and
Ditch, 1613.
with a good Esperon or Spur of green turfs at the end of it. A Sergeant
executed.
The Sergeant of the River was put to death, who was an excellent Soldier, and
had signalized himself in the former Wars; but to terminate a Lawsuit which he
had at Chambery against his Father, he had offered his service to the Marquess
of Lans of the house of Est, who was Governor of Savoy, and designed to bring
in his Troops into S. Anthony's Bulwark. A Gentleman of Dauphiny, who was in an
antichamber belonging to the Marquess, heard some part of the discourse, and
gave notice thereof to the Council.

A great Tempest which happened in the year following, 1613.
did much hurt in several places near Geneva, 1614.
and produced a lamentable effect at S. Claude, which is a little City on this
side mount Jura, where a flash of lightning burnt a whole street. The
Genevoises perceiving the fire, sent immediately to them, offering, as good
neighbors, to relieve them; which they at first refused, but afterward
accepted of it. There is reported a very remarkable story concerning them,
which was, that in the year 1590. and 91. they being fearful lest S. Claudes
body (from whom the City takes it name) should suffer violence by the
Genevoises or Bernoises, S. Claudes Relics imbalmed and sent to Geneva.
they therefore imbalmed his Relics, and sent them as a case of Merchandises
into the Halls of Geneva, where they knew it might remain a long time without
discovery, no body coming to claim it, and there they let it lie till the Peace
was concluded. There are some who place this to the year 1636. 1614.
then when they were afraid of the French, but M. Godefroy who carries not on
his Memoires any farther than to the year 1627. mentions it as a matter happening
in the preceding Wars; yet I have been told as a certain truth, that this
happened in the year 1636. for fear lest the French should Transport these
Relics.

The following year was dreadful to the Genevoises by the Contagion, The Plague
in Geneva.
which was brought into their City from Piedmont. There died to the number of
four thousand people, who were most of them of the meaner sort; for there were
but two Counselors and two Ministers, who perished amongst all these; one
amongst them named Gervais, offered himself of his own accord to visit and
comfort the sick; there died several of his servants, but he had the good hap
to escape. This Christian service he did the sick, keeps his memory. ^ll alive
amongst good people, although he died five years after.

Come we to affairs of State; 1616.
The Duke of Nemours having often demanded satisfaction of the Duke of Savoy
touching his pretensions, to no purpose, had recourse to the Spaniard, who
supplied him with men. The Duke of Savoy on his side, seized on several lands
belonging to the said Duke, and placed a Garrison in Anecy, and sent to the
State for Arms, Ammunition and Soldiers, which were granted him; and several
belonging to the City went to him, and offered their service. He obtained
likewise contrary to the Treaty of S. Julien to quarter his men along the
Rhosne, and he had almost drawn out of the City its whole Forces; The Battle
between the Duke of Nemours and the Duke of Savoy.
the Prince, Major, and the Duke of Nemours met and fought in the Valley of
Cheisery, there being only a Brook which parted these two Armies; they of Gex
being impatient to know the event of this combat, went down the mountain of
Farges, where they could hear them talk, and behold them fire one at another;
but they could see none fall down: which made the Genevoises believe that this
was but a trick, to weaken their City, under pretense of driving away the
Spaniard, and as a testimony to the Duke of Savoy of the Genevoises gratitude
for his kind usage of their Subjects in the time of the Plague, which had
already devoured the best Soldiers: yet the Duke of Savoy, the better to resist
the King of Spain his Brother-in-law, and the Duke of Nemours, addressed
himself to the Bernoises, 1617.
and treated about a perpetual Alliance with them, and for that effect quitted
all his claim to the Country of Vaud. They sent him three thousand men, and
they marched by Geneva, but there returned not back again three hundred of
them, the War and Sicknesses having carried away the rest.

The City of Geneva subsisted by Trade. 1617.
A rich and able Citizen having undertaken some Manufacture, perceived that
instead of grateful acknowledgments he had nothing but ill will returned him;
whereupon for a revenge, he withdrew to Yverdun, where he set up a Workhouse,
a Printing-Press, and a Shop wherein he made Serges, which did very much
prejudice Geneva. About the same time the Genevoises suffered a great loss by
the death of M. Cusin, a most affectionate Preacher, who was much lamented by
the people and his Colleagues.

Chenalat a person of good quality, 1618.
and who was capable of doing the City good, had he followed the example of his
Ancestors, offered his service to the Marquess of Lans, Governor of Savoy; for
which proffer he received five hundred Pistols, with a promise of twelve
thousand Crowns of gold, and to be made Captain of the Guard. He would have
purchased a house near S. Legers Gate to undermine it. Nicholas le Fert his
Brother-in-law, caused him to be apprehended, and discovered his intrigues. The
Baron of Aubonne who was likewise his Brother-in-law, was at the same time a
prisoner in Berne upon suspicion of Treason. Chenalat executed for Treason.
Chenalat being pressed, confessed his intelligence, with most solemn
protestations that he had no other design than only to draw money from the
Marquess, but this saved not his head.

The Republic sent afterward John Diodati and Thedore Trochin Professors in
Divinity into Holland, 1619.
to reside as their Deputies in the Synod of Dort, Diodati, etc. sent to the
Synod at Dort.
whom the States had invited, together with the English and Dutch Divines, to
oppose the Doctrines of Arminius; at their departure, they were each of them
presented with a Medal by the States.

The Duke of Savoy having begun to make great Levies, alarmed thereby the City
of Geneva; 1621.
Monsieur d' Alincourt who was Governor of Lions sent notice thereof to the
King, who was sollicitious for their preservation; and desired that he might be
informed if any thing was undertaken against them: this occasioned the
fortifying of S. Gervais. Mottet an Engineer, whom the Prince of Orange had
sent, drew a Trench which reached from the Rhosne as far as the Lake, the
better to shelter the Borough, being assisted by Ferault a French Gentleman
who had ^led to Geneva.

In this same year on Whit-Sunday there happened such an Earthquake, that the
Ministers in the time of their Preaching were fain to hold fast by the Pulpit
for fear of falling.

In the following year, 1622.
there died a Woman who was learned both in Greek and Latin, and who had
passed through her Exercises in Philosophy in the College. She was M.
Offredy's Wife, a skilful Physician who writ several Commentaries on
Hippocrates. And lie having but bad eyes, his Wife assisted him in his Studies,
writing his Bills, and reading to him.

A National Synod of the Protestant Churches being held at Paris, the Ministers
of Geneva wrote to it, that they being conformable to the French Churches in
Essentials, A Synod of Protestant Ministers at Paris.
they would likewise be the same in indifferent matters, and give the Communion
henceforward with unleavened Bread, as the Bernoises had already began to do,
adding moreover that the Elders should no longer give the Cup as they were
wont, but the Pastors after the same manner as in the French Churches. Tronchin
being enjoined by the Council and Consistory, gave notice hereof to the people
one Sunday night after Sermon, and showed the reasons moving them to this
change in so indifferent a matter.

Some small differences had like to have broke the peace: 1624.
for although it was agreed in the Treaty made at S. Julien, that there should
be a free Trade; yet had the Duke strictly forbidden any Corn to be Transported
to Geneva: and the Council by way of requital, prohibited the carrying out of
Iron, Salt, or any other Commodities into Savoy: but Wake the English
Ambassador passing through Geneva, and observing how scarce Corn was amongst
them, interceded for them to the Duke, and got off the prohibition.

The Marquis of Bade a Lutheran Prince, Marquess of Bade retires to Geneva.
being stripped of his Estate by a Decree from the Imperial Court, withdrew to
Geneva with his Wife and a Minister. The Council permitted him to have
preaching in his House for his own Family; but several Germans, 1625.
inhabitants of the City, and others, resorted thither, at which the People
muttered, saying, That in time the Mass would be permitted to be read in the
City, seeing Lutherans were permitted after this manner. The Council of twenty
five, understanding the matter, sent a Syndick and the Lieutenant to entreat
him not to let any Citizens into his house at Sermon time; which request of
theirs he despising, instead of granting it, sent them word, that the City
belonging to the Empire, and he being one of its Princes, he had as much right
there as they had themselves; some say that he lifted up his hand to strike the
Syndick, which caused the Magistrates to repeal the permission they had granted
him; at which he being enraged, left Geneva, and withdrew to Thonon, where the
Duke permitted him the exercise of his Religion.

Another great Lord who in the Year 1624. 1626.
had withdrawn to Geneva as to a place of refuge, ended his days there; his
name was George Erasmus of Tzernembel, Biron of Esclavonia, etc. retires to
Geneva.
an Hereditary Baron of the Marches of Esclavonie and of Carniole, who had been
formerly Counselor to the Emperors Rodolphus the second, and Matthias the
first, and one of the Directors of Bohemia; but after the new Kings defeat, he
was forced to give place to the Victorious, and to fly out of the Empire. He
came to Geneva with his Wife and Daughter, and another Relation, and was a
second Job in his miseries and afflictions; for having been deprived of all his
Offices, and tortured with the Gout, and other vexations both of body and mind,
he at length had news brought him that his son who stayed behind to gather up
the pieces of his shattered fortune, was drowned, and all that he brought with
him; so that having nothing left him but patience, the Magistrates and the
Church gave him a monthly allowance for his families subsistence, and continued
it after his decease; he was honorably interred in S. Peter's Cloister
according to his quality. 1627.


Emilia of Nassaw Princess of Orange, The Princess of Orange resides in Geneva.
and sister to Prince Maurice, and Widow to Don Emanuel son of Anthony King of
Portugal, after that the Spaniard had made himself Master of that Kingdom, she
came and dwelt at Geneva with her six daughters; but having purchased a Castle
near Nyons, she withdrew thither. She died in the year following, and was
interred at Geneva in the Chapel on the left hand of S. Peter's Quire.

This Princess, 1628.
although of great quality, resided several years at Geneva, living in a
condition much beneath her quality and desert, her Daughters were married to
ordinary Gentlemen of the Country of Vaud; one of them who had espoused Colonel
Grol, was buried near her Mother in 1647. Madam the Duchess of Rohan, remained
for some time in the City with her Daughter, and afterward went to Venice.

Geneva likewise served for an Asylum to the Sieur of Aubigne a French
^entleman, Aubigne comes and lives at Geneva.
who having published his History of France, had thereby so much displeased the
King, that he would have him taken into custody for it; and moreover his Son,
whom the Jesuits had won to their party, heightened the Kings displeasure
against his Father: but he foreseeing their design took about thirty thousand
Crowns of gold, which he hid in the Saddles of his Horses, and fled to Geneva
about the year 1619. He was received by the Magistrates and Church with great
respect, for they had been informed of his zeal for the Protestant Religion,
1628.
and of his valor and conduct in Military affairs. So likewise when there was
any kind of Fortification undertaken, they always asked his advice. It is said
that he had a secret enabling him to speak to any person a hundred paces
distant from him. and they who stood by should not hear him. Aubigne's death.
He died at length, being aged Eighty years, 1631.
and was interred in the Cloister where is a kind of Epitaph or Testament which
he left to his Children, Composed by himself, which is as well remarkable for
its Latin as ingenuity of matter.

It was about this time that the Swede entered into Germany. The Chevalier Rache
was sent to the Switzers to engage them in this party. He had likewise an order
to visit Geneva, to assure that City of the Kings good will. He was received
with extraordinary respect, and stayed there some time. 1632.


A while after there was a person executed, Antoine his errors and abominable
practices.
whose death caused as great a noise as that of Servetus. His name was Nicholas
Antoine who had Apostatized from the Christian Religion. Some people murmured
and were displeased at the proceedings, saying they were too severe, to put
people to death merely for an opinion. But the Council considered him not only
as an Apostate and Blasphemer who treated the Blessed Trinity as a Cerberus or
three-headed monster, but likewise as a seditious Impostor and perjured
Villain, who Preached his false Doctrine contrary to the Oath which he had
taken at his reception. Here follows an account of his Trial and Condemnation,
by which it may be judged whether the Genevoises were to blame in their
proceedings against him.

A Criminal Process, Made and formed before Us the most Honorable Lords,
Syndicks and Counselors of this City, at the instance and pursuit of the Lord
Lieutenant in those Causes, against Nicholas Son of John Anthony, 1632.
of Berry in Lorrain, who being committed Prisoner, has freely confessed, That
from his Youth he had diligently set himself to the study of Philosophy, and
conceived damnable and execrable Opinions touching our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.
ITEM, That about seven or eight Years since, he had applied himself to the
study of the false doctrine of the Jews, and for to be the better instructed in
it, he had addressed himself to them of the City of Metz, who after several
Conferences had sent him to other Jews, and namely to them of Venice. Item, He
has confessed, That had it not been for fear of being discovered, he had
undertaken to have persuaded his Kindred and Relations to return to Judaism.
Item, That about five Years past he went to Sedan, and there perverted a young
Student of that place, and enticed him along with him into Italy, entertaining
him in their way thither with the Articles of his abominable Creed. Item, That
being arrived at Venice, they went and visited the Jews, the said Anthony
desiring them to admit him into their Synagogue, and to Circumcise him: but
they refused him, fearing lest they should fall under the Magistrates severity.
Whereat he remained satisfied, being told by them, That he might live amongst
the Christians, and yet be a Jew in his heart: and that he was told the same by
the Jews of Padoua. Item, That embracing this detestable doctrine, he came to
this City, under pretense of studying Divinity, and offered to dispute in
Philosophy, and for some time had exercised the charge of chief Regent in a
College; yet all this while counterfeiting himself a Christian, although
privately he lived and prayed after the Jewish manner, not daring to make an
open profession of his belief. Item, That being called by a Church near the
City to be their Minister, The Church of Divonne in the Country of Gex.
after his examination and consent to the Doctrine of the Orthodox Religion, he
took an Oath to live and teach according to the confession of the reformed
Churches, although in his heart he believed in the Jewish Faith, and by a
cursed equivocation, his meaning was different from his Oath. Item, That
instead of preaching Jesus Christ, according to the Oath he had taken, he had
only insisted in his Pulpit on the explication of the Old Testament, and falsely
wrested and applied passages thereof pointing to our Savior, The second Psalm.
and appropriated them to other Persons, and above all in his last Sermon: from
whence it followed by the just Judgment of God, that he the said Anthony became
deprived of his Senses, and ran about the Field like a distracted person, and
came bare-legged into the City, uttering horrid blasphemies against our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Item, That after he had been under the hands of
Physicians, and carefully looked after in the Hospital of this City, coming
again to his Senses, and being out of his mad fits, he had persisted in his
blaspemies against the Holy Trinity and the Person of our Blessed God and
Savior, maintaining as well by word of mouth as writing, That Jesus Christ was
an Idol, and that the New Testament was but a mere fable. Item, He has
confessed, That in Administering the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, in the
Exhortation to the People, he said only, Remember your Savior: And that in
reciting the words of the Apostles Creed, where our Savior is mentioned, he
pronounced not those words, but muttered them betwixt his Teeth. Finally, That
notwithstanding the serious exhortations and remonstrances which have been made
him since he has been in custody, as well by the Magistrates as venerable
Pastors of this Church, tending to persuade him to renounce these cursed and
damnable Opinions, yet has he persisted in his horrible and impious
blasphemies, having compiled and signed a Treatise, in which he endeavors to
combat and overthrow the Holy Trinity, still obstinately denying the Deity and
Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, having several times renounced his Baptism:
as it plainly appeared at his Trial.

Here follows his Sentence:

The Sentence of Condemnation against Nicolas Anthony, which was read, and
executed on the 20th of April, 1632.
WE the most Honorable Lords, Syndicks and Council of this City, having seen
the Criminal Process made and formed before Us, at the instant suit of the Lord
Lieutenant in the said Cases, against Nicolas Anthony, by which and by his own
confessions it appears, That he forgetting the fear of God, has been guilty
of the crime of Apostasy and High Treason against God his Creator and Savior,
having fought against the Holy Trinity, denied our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, blasphemed his Holy Name, renounced his Baptism, for to embrace the
Jewish Religion; and has been perjured in dogmatising, and teaching his
damnable doctrine; a case, and crime deserving the greatest punishment. For
these and other causes moving the said Lords, sitting in the Tribunal of their
Ancestors, according to ancient custom, having the fear of God and the Holy
Scriptures before their Eyes, and having invoked his Holy Name, that they might
thereby be able to make a right Judgment, beginning, in the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, do by this final Sentence, which they have committed now to
writing, condemn the said Anthony to be bound and led to the place of
Plein-Palais, to be there fastened to a stake on a pile of Wood, and strangled
according to the usual manner, and afterward to have his Body burnt and
consumed to ashes, and thus to end his days, for an example to others:
Declaring moreover, his Goods confiscated to the City, and charging the Lord
Lieutenant to put the said Sentence into due and entire execution.

The Genevoises had in the Year following some apprehensions on the side of
France and Savoy, Cardinal Richlieu being supposed to have no great kindness
for them. It is thought likewise that he offered the Duke of Savoy to change
with him the City of Geneva for that of Nice, and that he would put him in
possession thereof at the charge of France, 1636.
and it should cost him nothing: but the Duke would not accept of the Proposal,
because he valued Nice at a greater rate, having no other Seaport in his
Dominions.

The Duke of Rohan had an honorable Funeral made for him a while after in
Geneva. 1638.
He had a stately Marble Tomb erected, May 17. The Duke of Rohan his Funeral,
etc.
with a Statue placed on the top of it, in the Chapel of S. Peter's Church.
His Body was Embalmed and wrapped in a Sheet of Lead, where it was to be seen
preserved entire, at the time when Madam of Rohan was interred, which was 23
Years after, to wit, on the third of January, 1661. There was moreover Engraven
on his Tomb stone a Latin Epitaph for a memorial of his Heroic actions. The
Flemmings, Spaniards and Germans had felt the effects of his valorous Conduct.
Yet his last Victory obtained against the Emperor near Rhinfield cost him his
life, for he died awhile after of his wounds, to wit, on the fourth of April,
aged 55 years. His Body (according to his order) was carried to Geneva, for he
was a great lover of that City. He had taken up his abode there a considerable
time some years before: and it was he who made the Mele in Plein-Palais. His
Son Tancredus was placed by him three or four years after, with an Epitaph
which Madam of Rohan the Duke's Daughter caused to be effaced, having obtained
of the Parliament of Paris a Decree whereby he was declared illegitimate.

The Alliance between Zurich, 1638.
Berne and Geneva, according to the seventeenth Article of that Treaty ought to
be renewed from time to time. Which was effected in the Year 1642, and was
solemnly sworn to be observed in each of these Cities. The Deputies from
Switzerland were received by the Citizens in Arms, 1642.
a Company of which went out of the City to meet them, all the great Guns were
discharged at their coming, and they were sumptuously entertained in the
Arsenal, where at every Health they drank, there was fired a Gun.

We must not here forget a remarkable accident which happened two Years and a
half after this; which was, That on Sunday the 19 th of January, 1645.
1645. between seven and ten of the Clock in the Morning, there arose such a
great Wind, that it drove back the Water in the Rhosne and Lake, so that for
the space of two hours several Persons passed over to the Chains upon the Land,
and others crossed over from Monnoye to the Isle: this Wind was so violent that
it carried away the House-tops, blew down several Chimnies, and plucked up
Trees by the Roots; it is reported that it did two thousand Crowns damage as
well in the Windows as Tiles of public buildings. Monsieur Calendrin has
mentioned it in a Latin Poem, which is to be seen in the Works of Monsieur de
Zuilichen.

Seeing we have mentioned the Rhosne and the Lake, A discourse of the Rhosne.
it will not be amiss to clear a difficulty stated by Authors; which is,
Whether the Rhosne passes cross the Lake without mingling its Waters with it?
and whether its course can be discerned amidst the calm Waters of the Lake?
Observe here what Marcellinus has wrote of it in the 15 th Book of his Roman
History. Seeing, says he, we are led by our discourse to these parts, it will
not be amiss to speak something of the Rhosne, which is a most famous River: It
takes its rise from the Alps, where several Fountains furnish its Springs; and
from thence swiftly descending from a rising ground, it runs into the Lake; and
crossing it, does not mingle its Waters with it: but passing over the calm
Waters of this Lake, makes way by its swiftness: and by this means losing none
of its depths, pierces through the thickest of its streams, and dis-intangling
it self, slides to the borders of the Sequanoises, etc.

Several of our Moderns have followed this ancient Author; and others have
reputed this his account fabulous. 1645.
But this is the truth which I have learned of several Persons who dwell near
the Lake, and who have often passed from one side of it to the other. The
Rhosne coming into the Lake with great swiftness, runs about half an hour or
more without confounding her Waters with it, distinguishing it self by its gray
color: but near Vevay, Laurane, Roll and Nyons, that is to say, almost all
the length of the Lake, the Rhosne cannot be distinguished by its color nor
motion, every part being equally calm and of the like color. It Is certain that
for about two Leagues from Copel to Geneva, the bottom of the Lake beginning to
rise higher, it begins therefore toward the middle to slide softly, to
discharge it self of the Waters of the Rhosne, and other Rivulets which it has
received into its bosom.

The swiftness of the Rhosne, 1645.
before it enters into the Lake, is the occasion of a rarity happening in Winter
in that place, which is, That only the bottom of the River freezes: and the
reason of this is obvious, because the bottom of it being still, is by that
means sooner seized on by the cold: whereas the surface of it is in continual
agitation, and renewed by a perpetual succession of Waters. Gothofredus his
Latin Inscription.


The Suburb of S. Gervais was fortified this Year by a Bulwark which they named
S. John's, near the Temple of S. Gervais, on the side of which there was set up
a Latin Inscription made by Monsieur James Godefroy, better known under the
name of Jacobus Gothofredus the Author of the Theodosian Codices, and it is
specially to this learned Man we owe the Memoires of a great part of this
History. He had been Syndick five times, and died aged 65 Years, in 1652. His
loss was lamented by his Country and by all Scholars. Denis Godefroy his Father
had likewise written a Commentary on the Body of the Justinian Laws.

John Deodati died a while before, 1649.
aged 73 Years, he was of the Noble Family of the Luquesses, October. 3.
Deodati's death.
and had been made Hebrew Professor in Geneva, being but 19 Years old, and
afterward Professor in Divinity. He was sent to the Dort-Synod in 1619. by the
Church of Geneva with Theodore Fronchin his Colleague. Deodati was so esteemed
in this Synod, that he was chosen with five other Divines to draw up the
Canons; for he was a knowing Person and an expert Preacher; he translated the
History of the Council of Trent.

The Year 1651. 1651.
was not otherwise remarkable than by a great overflowing of the Arve, Nov. 21.
which swept away most of the Bridges, and made the Rhosne rise on the side of
the Lake, Dec. 7.
even to the making the Mills turn backwards. In the Month following there
happened an Earthquake in the Evening, which yet did no hurt.

Two Years after, the Subjects of the Countries in Germany under the
Jurisdiction of Berne, complained they were overburdened by their Bailiffs, and
thereupon rebelled against their Sovereigns, under the Conduct of one named
Leuberg: 1653.
the City of Berne was in great danger, being blocked up by this multitude of
Peasants: Geneva sent 300 Men to their assistance, who were divided into three
Companies, which were commanded by three Captains, viz. Debons, Corn and
Dumont: diverse of the chief of these Rebels were hanged, and Leuberg quartered.

In this Year 1653. Gautier hanged.
Isaac Gautier of Portentru, was arrested Prisoner at Geneva at the suit of the
Republic of Venice, in whose service he had been a Captain, having been found
guilty of a Massacre committed by him on a Spanish Family, which were passing
over to their own Country, and pillaged the Vessel. The Command of which had
been entrusted to him. He was hanged on the ninth of August. Aug. 9.


The Genevoises received a Letter from Cromwell, 1655.
written in the Latin Tongue. Cromwell writes to the Genevoises.
The Contents whereof were these: He told them, That the extreme miseries
wherein to the Duke of Savoy had reduced the Protestants in the Valleys of
Piedmont, had so far moved him with compassion, that he had ordered Collections
to be made throughout all England, that he might give proofs of the great
Charity of that Nation toward its afflicted Brethren. And forasmuch as these
Collections required some time, and the necessities of these poor People
admitted no delay, he has therefore judged it meet to send in the mean while
the sum of 2000 l. Sterling out of his own Treasury, which sum he ordered to
be paid into the hands of the Officers of Geneva, to distribute it to them who
had most need, according to their prudence, supposing they would readily accept
this trouble in their Neighbors behalf, as in whose miseries he believed they
had a fellow-feeling, beseeching God to strengthen all those who profess the
Orthodox Religion, that they may maintain their common cause, and assist one
another against their Enemies, in which service he shall be glad to be
employed. Dated from the Palace in Westminster the seventh of June, 1655. He
sent afterward the Lord Morland to the Duke of Savoy, to interceed for the
said poor People of the Valleys; and whilst this affair was in agitation, this
Ambassador resided several Months in Geneva.

In the Year following the Protestant Cantons had a War with the lesser Cantons
upon the account of their exercise of the Reformed Religion, who dwelt in the
individual Bayliwicks. Geneva sent immediately 300 Men to assist their Allies
of Zurich and Berne, who set out from Geneva, on the fifth of January, under
the Command of Captain Debons, Captain Girard, and Captain Fabry, and were at
the Siege of Rappersvil. A Peace was concluded a while after, and these
Companies called home.

There was begun a Work on the Mount of S. Victor before the Bastions of Pin
and S. Anthony, 1656.
whose corners reached a great way into the Country, but it was pulled down
again in the Year following, as being judged to require more Men than they
could spare to guard it; it was at first carried on by People of all ranks and
qualities of both Sexes, The King of France comes to Lions, etc.
who wrought unweariedly at it. The French-King much about this time being come
to Lions, the State sent the Sieurs Voysine and Pictet to complement him, as
well for that he had recovered his Health, having been sick of the Smallpox,
as for to entreat him to continue his favor to their City. To which the King
answered, I thank my Friends of Geneva for the sense they have had of my
sickness, and for the joy they have received at the news of my recovery: I
shall always keep them under my Protection; and ye may assure them of this from
me. He gave each of them a Golden-Chain with a Medal. And they presented him
with delicate Trouts, weighing forty or fifty pound apiece, for these are the
greatest which are to be met with at Geneva, 1658.
although some Persons would make us believe there are Trouts which are of
eighty and a hundred pound weight.

In the Year following there was a Work carried on in the form of a Moon, in
the same place where the other was begun, but not so far advanced from the
City. There were found several Urns and Medals in the Ditch of Ravelin de la
Noue. But it being determined that the City should be considerably Fortified,
and Money falling short, there was sent the Sieur Turretin Professor in
Divinity, into Holland, The States of Holland contribute to the building of the
Fort on S. Victors Mount.
to entreat their assistance, who ordered Collections to be made throughout all
their States, and there was gathered a hundred thousand Franks, with which Money
he returned to Geneva, where they immediately fell to work again. The Ingineer
Ivoy (who is at present chief Ingineer to the Prince of Orange) traced four
great Bastions Royal with Courtines, on the side of Plein-Palais, enclosing
them from the Rhosne to the Bulwark of S. Ledger; these take up no less than
1700 paces in compass round the Walls, they were finished and enclosed with a
Wall in ten Years space, but the Money from Holland held out no longer than to
finish the first Bastion near the Rhosne, which has therefore been called the
Dutch Bastion: 1660.
there was an Inscription Engraven on a black Marble-Pillar, for an
acknowledgment of the Hollanders liberality.

In the Year 1661. the Bishop of Geneva residing at Annecy, made an Address to
the King, 1661.
as being Sovereign of the Country of Gex, The Bishop of Geneva presents a
request to the French-King.
which is part of his Diocese, beseeching him to suffer him to settle Curates
in the Villages of Chansy, Avoully, and Moin, which were held by the Republic
of Geneva; and over which, as this Bishop affirmed, the King was Sovereign. Now
the better to understand this affair, it is needful for us to speak something
of these Villages. Moin belongs wholly to the Chapter; that is to say, the
Jurisdiction, the Tenths, Fee-Farms, Salt, Ministers, sentences of Death, all
these belong to Geneva, and the King has the last Appeal in Civil Causes, and
the execution of the Sword. As to Chansy and Avoully these are Lands belonging
to S. Victor, which are almost of the same nature as them of the Chapter (these
appertaining to the Chanons of S. Peter, and the others to the Prior of S.
Victor) but by the Treaty at Lions in the Year 1601. the King in restoring all
the Countries of Savoy to the Duke which he had taken from him, reserved to
himself all the Ports of Rhosne from Geneva as far as Lions, and so that the
Sovereignty of Chansy and Avoully, which are Ports belonging to the King,
although situated on the Borders of Savoy. The Genevoises, who were greatly in
favor with Henry the Fourth, represented to him, That they were already in the
possession of these Villages, and so this Sovereignty was of no value to him,
bringing him in no profit. The King desirous to gratify them, 1661.
remitted it to them by his Letters, but the worst of it was, That these
Letters were never attested in Parliament, and ever since they have exercised
Sovereignty over these two Villages, and even in the Year 1675. they put to
death a Malefactor at Chansy. I specify this not only for the better
understanding the Bishops pretensions, but likewise upon the account of another
affair, which lies at this present before the King, which shall be mentioned in
is place. To return then to the Year 1661. John Lullin was dispatched
immediately to Paris, but before he could come there, the Bishop had already
obtained, by surprise, a Decree conformable to his demand, and Monsieur Bouchu,
the Intendant of Burgundy, 1662.
came to Gex in February, 1662, to establish Curates in these places according
to the Kings Decree. But there was such care taken, that the Intendant deferred
to perform it, it having been represented to him, That the States Deputies were
at Court upon that occasion, and that if they could not get that Decree
repealed, yet might it be put soon enough in execution. Lullin having
solicited his business for the space of two Years in Paris, at length gained
his cause, and the Bishop was put by his demand, and the Villages left in the
same condition they were in before.

In the year 1664. 1664.
the Duke of Crequi returned from his Embassage at Rome, Crequi passes through
Geneva.
passed through Geneva; he had not that honor done him which was desired, for
want of timely notice. The Council sent their Deputies to meet him out of the
City, and three or four Companies of trained Bands stood ready to welcome him.
The Council went to complement him, and presented him with Wine and Trouts. But
he staying no longer with them than Dinnertime, the City could not show him as
they desired, the affection they had to do the King service. In parting thence
he passed through two Files of the City Trained Bands, which reached from his
House where he refreshed himself, as far as the new Gate, beyond which there
stood six Companies belonging to the Garrison who attended him as far as the
Bridge of Arve. 1664.
As soon as ever he was in PleinPalais, he was saluted by the City Cannon, he
was attended half a League farther, beyond the Bridge of Arve, by a Troop of
Horse, and then four Deputies from the City complemented him, and took their
leave of him: he seemed to be very well pleased with his entertainment.

Although there passed no act of Hostility in the Year 1667. 1667.
between Savoy and Geneva, yet there arising a considerable difference wherein
they were both concerned, I shall not therefore here omit it.

After that the Officers of Savoy had for a long time molested diverse ways them
of Geneva, which showed that the Duke had a design to break off with them,
having several times declared that he thought himself no ways obliged to
observe the Treaty at S. Julien, because (said he) it has been already broken
by both parties in sundry particulars; he brought into Savoy toward the Spring
in the Year 1667. 1000. men as well Horse as Foot, under the command of the
Marquess of Pianezze, The Duke of Savoy quarters Forces about Geneva.
who were quartered round about Geneva; but yet five or six Leagues distant
from it, according to the Articles contained in the Treaty made at S. Julien,
that is to say at Anecy, at Remilly, at Salanche, at Cluse, at Thonon, at Evian
and other places; and there they lay till December following. The Savoy
Squadron consisting of five hundred Gentlemen, was commanded to be in a
readiness to mount their Horses at the first word of command; likewise all the
Militia were enrolled, and ready to march upon the first order; and forasmuch
as the greatest part of them had no Arms, there were therefore brought into the
Country great store of Muskets, Swords, Pikes, Powder, Match and Bullets,
together with other Ammunition, and the Peasants of every Village were
exercised once a week.

Moreover for to facilitate their Communications with Geneva, there was a stone
Bridge made over the Arve at a place called the Trembieres not above an hours
Sail distant from Geneva; and that they might have forces on the Lake, there
were several Seamen and other workmen sent for from Nice, who built three flat
bottom Boats which went only with Sails, and lay at Bellerive in a Port which
they had made for the same purpose, which was secured by a Chain, and several
firm Pallisados, and strengthened besides by a building which they had reared,
which was fenced with two Towers.

The Genevoises called this building a Fort, and complained that they acted
contrary to the Treaty at S. Julien, one of whose Articles was, that his
Highness should build no Fort within four Leagues of Geneva. The Savoyards who
would not acknowledge that they had broke the League, because the Switzers were
the undertakers or sureties for it, made answer, that his was not a Fort,
seeing it had no Ditches, it being only a Magazin, wherein they would lay their
Salt, which was wont to be carried by Water through Geneva; but now they would
Transport it in Carts by Land from Seissel to Bellerive, the Bridge of
Trembieres having been made for that purpose; and that the Vessels they had
built were only designed to carry the Salt which they usually sent to Chablais,
Valais, Fribourg, and several other Cantons, for most of the Switzers have
always brought their Salt by the way of Geneva: and indeed the building at
Bellerive, and the Boats there have not yet been used to any other purpose than
what they mentioned. But the Genevoises in so dangerous times, suspected all
these pleas, and imagined there lay some design concealed under this pretense,
as knowing that the Magazin and the Boats might be fitted out for War in two
days time: and these were indeed the Savoyards preparations for War.

Yet were not the Genevoises asleep all this while, so many Soldiers lying near
them, and the Dukes Subjects continually threatening them, besides the notice
given them from all parts, put them out of doubt, that the Duke had a design
against them; yet they imagined that it was not likely the Duke would openly
besiege them, but rather set upon them by surprise, whether by day or in the
night they could not tell; being perhaps encouraged by some private
intelligence which he might have in the City, The Genevoises fortify the City.
which made the Genevoises take all possible care to secure their Gates and
Walls. They increased their Garrison, by an addition of ten men to each
company, besides the usual guard of Citizens, thirty of which were joined with
the Garrison every night, and were not relieved till the next evening by a like
number; the Grand rounds set forth every quarter of an hour, besides the usual
Watch, the four Beadles belonging to the Council of two hundred, and the two
Majors, who never failed to perform their Office in their own persons; and by
this means the Sentinels had no opportunity to sleep: the Watch who lay without
the City were reinforced, and some placed in Boats on the Lake. For better
security in the day time, the Sentinels were doubled, and they who stood on the
Drawbridge were enjoined to wear Breast-plates to prevent Poynarding; there
were new Percullices fitted to the Gates, and other machins to prevent
surprisals, and new Bars or Pallisado's a hundred paces distant from them. All
the Hedges and Trees were cut down within a Musket shot of the City Gates,
especially those toward the Gates of Rive, to the end there might be made a
clearer discovery of those who should approach them: besides the persons whose
Office was to watch at the Gates, there were others appointed by the Council of
two hundred (called Notables) to search all strangers whether they were armed.
The Hay-Carts were likewise pierced, to find if any person was hid therein; and
several other such like precautions. At the Chains which went cross the Lake,
there stood a guard of Citizens; the Chains were always extended, neither were
the Boats suffered to pass till the Guard belonging to the Port had searched
them at Nilons Stone, and had given the sign that there was no danger.

Moreover every Housekeepers arms were viewed, and every person was obliged
according to his ability to furnish himself with Corn, Powder and Bullet, and
all things else that were necessary. It was ordered that every Citizen should
wear a Sword, and that all Merchants and Tradesmen should continually have
their arms lying ready by them in their Shops, to the end they might be in
readiness on the first occasion. Two hundred of the wealthiest Citizens were
obliged to keep each of them an able Horse, besides others which are kept
commonly in the City. There were several strangers, especially Frenchmen,
quartered on the rest of the Citizens who came from all parts to offer their
service to the City, and M. de Balthazard the Quarter-Master-General, offered
to command the Horse.

In the mean time there was care taken to send several Spies into Savoy, Spies
sent into Savoy.
but especially in those places where the Troops lay, to the end they might
have notice of their motions; and that their Councels might not be divulged,
there was settled a private Council, which consisted only of seven chosen men,
who had full power in all Cases unless of extraordinary importance, for such
matters were brought before the general Council.

In Switzerland, they of Zurich and Berne raised a considerable number of
Soldiers to assist Geneva, and to the end they might not be burdensome to the
City before they had need of them; they were quartered in the Cities and
Boroughs near the Lake, that so they might be in a readiness in a short time at
Geneva, when occasion required, by means of a sign which they had agreed upon.
The Bernoises moreover caused two great Galleys to be made, which were able to
hold two hundred men a piece. The Genevoises likewise built a great one.
Monsieur Joffery called du Torrent has been since made Commander of these
Vessels, one of which carried fourteen, and the other ten cast Guns.

This is the nearest account of the preparations on both sides, which yet
served to no purpose. It is almost impossible to imagine how desirous and well
disposed the Genevoises were to receive their Enemies, several of them being
troubled that the Savoyards should remain all this while armed, and yet not
declare a War; and indeed it is strange that the Duke should maintain such
considerable Forces about Geneva during eight or nine months time, it being
unknown for what end: it is likely he had some design on the Genevoises, but
their preparations and watchfulness hindered it.

We must not here forget how cheerfully the people in general labored at the
fortifications, The diligence of the people in working at the Fort.
all the Corporations of Merchants, Artists, and other professions strived to
outdo one another, marching round the City with a Drum beating to show
themselves. The Students, and Divinity-Professors, went before them with four
Drums, every man endeavoring to exceed his companion; they thought it not
enough to work themselves, but brought workmen along with them, one man ten,
and another twenty; there was a rich Dutch Merchant then at Geneva, who brought
a long with him two hundred workmen.

In the mean time there was carried on a kind of Process or Lawsuit between
Savoy, Geneva, and the French Ambassador, which was managed before the
Confederates, upon account at first of an inconsiderable difference, which yet
had given occasion to all this bustle.

In the Month of March, The Savoyards and Genevoises at variance about their
privileges.
in the Year 1667. The Curates of Megny, and of Choulex, gave the Sacrament to
a sick person lying in a house at Coursinge, which depended on the Sovereignty
of Jussy, although the rest of the Village belonged to Savoy. The State sent
the elder Syndick Colladon to be informed further of the matter, who cites
these Curates to appear on such a day. The Senate of Chambery on the other side
cite Colladon to make his personal appearance before them, and publish a
Declaration against him by beat of Drum, with an Order to have him apprehended
that he might have his Trial. The Council marveiling at this proceeding, sent
the Syndick Liffort to Chambery to the chief President of La Perouse Commandant
in Savoy, to make their complaints to him, and to show him their Title, and to
justify their right of Sovereignty over that House; but he refused to peruse
it, and to hear their reasons; which put the Syndicks and Council to send
Deputies into Switzerland, who made several journeys to the Dyets of Arau and
Baden, where the Baron of Greisy the Ambassador from Savoy alleged his
reasons: he published a Factum, which was answered by another. At length
toward the latter part of the year the State deputed Andre Pictet, and John
Dupan to Turin, to end this difference with his Highness himself; who caused
them to be received and treated with much civility and respect in all his
Dominions; but the Marquess of Pianezze, and other Commissaries whom the Duke
had appointed to regulate this affair, used such delays, that the Deputies were
forced to tarry three Months at Turin without concluding any thing. At length
the King wrote a Letter to the Lords of Geneva, which was brought by Monsieur
of Lionne: and M. of Servient his Majesty's Ambassador at Turin, desired the
Deputies for his Masters sake, and to preserve the peace, they would release
this house at Coursinge, which they did.

They were yet at Turin, and the Forces of Savoy were still in the field, City
divided.
whilst a matter happened at Geneva, which lacked but little of ruining it: for
the Council of twenty five, and the Council of two hundred could not agree, but
were divided, which difference lasted all Sunday being the 7. of December. I
would here relate all the particulars of it, but it having been ordered to be
scratched out of the Council Registers, to the end that it might be for ever
forgotten: it will be sufficient to say that John Sarrasin the Auditor, having
presided in the Council of two hundred in the Syndicks absence, and over the
Council of twenty five, the lesser Council committed him to Prison, and set a
guard over him belonging to the Garrison. The Council of two hundred not being
able to endure that he should be used as a Criminal, who had been guilty of no
other fault but of being their head, resolved to release him by force; finding
themselves backed by all the people who were assembled at S. Peter's, where the
two hundred sat in Council. The lesser Council who had the Garrison on their
side, would not endure to be imposed upon. At length when they were just ready
to fall upon one another, the Prisoner was discharged, and all things quieted.

On the 27. of Jan. at night 1670. 1670.
there happened a fire amongst the Houses on the Bridge of Rhosne, A fire on the
Bridge of Rhosne.
which being all Timber-Houses, the greatest part of them were burnt down in
less than two hours space, six score persons perishing in the flames. A Miller
chose rather to save his Mother than his Wife, but she followed after in a
rage, wading in the water up to her chin, and escaped; another Woman who lay
sick, and was to take Physic the next morning, cast her self out at the
window, and recovered both her life and health in the Rhosne; having had the
good hap to escape out of the water after she had shunned the fire. In short
this Conflagration had done more mischief, had it not been stopped by the
Towers of Monnoye and of the Isle which served as bars against the flames; and
it is observable that several pieces of Timber kept burning in the water, so
great was the violence of the flames: but that which was more strange, and
which all the inhabitants beheld, was that the Channel of Rhosne between the
Isle and the City, which contained two hundred sixty five foot in breadth, was
filled and dried up by the ruins of the Houses; The other Channel, although
commonly running very swift, and swelled by the overflowings of the other, yet
four days after was frozen up. There were collections made for the relief of
those families who were sufferers by this fire. There were six thousand Crowns
gathered for them of Geneva, and the Bernoises made liberal contributions.

The Prince Elector Palatine came to Geneva in the Year 1671. 1671.
and stayed there some Months; The Prince Palatine entertained at Geneva.
he came there in the Evening, and therefore had not such reception as was
intended: but the City being sensible of their obligations to that family,
during his abode in the City, he had all the respect they were able to show
him. But that which appeared most considerable, was his entertainment on the
Lake; for the great Gally was fitted out and manned by the flower of the Youth
of the City: M. the Prince was received on Board her with part of the Council.
All the Morning was spent in the sport of fishing, when at Noon they landed at
Secheron, and went to the Castle of Roset to eat the large Trouts they had
taken; there was a stately dinner provided and made ready for them, where the
Prince was attended by the sons of persons of quality belonging to the City,
and the Lords of the Council, by the Princes Gentlemen. After Dinner they
walked forth on the Lakes side, the Cannons which thundered from the Gally were
answered by the Drums and Trumpets, from the Boats which were to the number of
thirty attending on the Gally: there was nothing thought of but mirth and
divertisement, when on a sudden there appeared a Frigate, having fifty Moors
on Board her, and an Algerine Flag on her main top. Whereupon immediately all
the people made ready to fight, and several Guns discharged on both sides, and
at length they came to boarding; but in the end the Algerine was vanquished,
there being good reason for it, and the Captain of the Frigate came to
Complement the Prince. At last they returned into the City toward the Evening,
but the night was kept off a while by the light of the Cannon, which were
discharged from all the batteries of the City, and other places along the Port.
Some weeks after, the Prince fell dangerously sick of the small Pox, and
Prayers were made for his recovery in all the Churches, which at length
obtaining, he set out for Grenoble, being very well satisfied with his
entertainment at Geneva. The Citizens and the Garrison appeared in their arms,
for to do him honor, and the Council accompanied him, and the Cannons were not
silent in this occasion.

It is not above six years since an enterprise was discovered on Geneva, 1673.
which has been known to few. An account of another project for the taking of
Geneva, discovered by its Author.
In the year 1673. on a Communion day in September, the chief Syndick found at
his House (at his return from Church) a Letter which a person unknown had left
in his absence; the Contents whereof were, That upon a Proviso of a
proportionable reward, he would make such a considerable discovery, that the
public safety depended on it, and if they desired to speak with this person
next morning about it, the Superior of the Convent of the Capuchines of Gex
would inform them where he was; but if they neglected this advertisement, they
might be certain of finding the City in a short time reduced to the greatest
extremity. Wherefore the Council failed not to send the next Morning the
Advocat Dunant to Gex, who discoursed this unknown person in the Capuchin's
garden, and dexterously drew from him part of the secret: he learnt that what
he had to discover was an enterprise against the City, the particulars whereof
he might well discover, seeing himself was the Author of it; that having
conceived some distaste-against the Duke of Savoy, he was resolved to discover
the design; but first desired to be rewarded with a thousand pounds, and that
he might have a place where he might live secure. Dunant replied, that he had
no power to treat with him about that particular; and that it would be more
convenient for him to come to Geneva, where he might more easily treat with the
Council about it in his own person. And whereas he desired to have a Letter of
safe conduct, he answered him, that this was not their Custom, but that he had
power given him to engage the Public Faith upon it; and that he might come
into the City with the same surety, as others had done before him. This person
was contented with this, and came the next morning and presented himself before
the Council at Geneva, telling them that his name was John Baptiste Noroy, of
Nozeray in Burgundy; that having found out an easy way to surprise Geneva, he
had passed over into Piedmont some months since for to make it known to the
Duke, which he did in a long conference he had with him at Rivoles, in which
the Duke told him amongst other things that he had a score of Pensionaries in
Geneva, four or five of which were of the Council; that some days after his
Highness said, that he had considered the matter and found it too difficult,
and moreover this juncture of time was not proper to enter into a War; yet he
thanked him for his good will, and had at the time ten pieces given him: and to
make it appear that what he said was true, he produced Letters from the Dukes
Secretary, and from some Lords belonging to the Court.

His project was to be effected in the time of Vintage-harvest, at which season
a great part of the Citizens are in the fields, and to send on several days,
and through several Gates, under diverse pretenses, four or five hundred men
without Arms, who as fast as they came, should have their lodgings prepared for
them in the Houses of their Confederates, where they were to be furnished with
Arms, and lie hid till the day of the execution of their enterprise, which was
to be in Sermon time about eight of the Clock; all these people who were hid
coming out with their Arms, were to divide themselves into several parties,
three of which consisting of about 80 men a piece, should speedily seize on all
the doors of the three Churches, and not only hinder the people from coming
out, but in the fright would constrain them to get up upon the top of the
Churches, and by this means there would be no place needing a guard but only
the Steeple stairs: another company should scour the streets, and kill the
Citizens, who being not at Church would come out of their Houses to rally
themselves; the rest were to set upon a certain Gate of the City, which being
not succored by any Citizens would be soon won; which done, there should be
let in Forces who were to march all night, that they might be at the Gates at
the hour of this execution. He added that he was moved to make this discovery
for two reasons, First that the Duke had given him but ten pieces, which he
took as a great undervaluing of him; and Secondly, that having desired to be
made governor of Geneva when it should be taken, his Highness instead of
promising him it, set to scoffing at him.

He was earnestly desired to declare the names of those persons who were
Pensionaries to the Duke, but he solemnly protested he knew them not, and that
it might be easily imagined that his Highness would not discover to him a
secret of that importance before it was time. They who judged charitably of
their fellow Citizens, could not believe there could be any so wicked, and that
this was but an artifice to raise suspicions in the people against some of
their Governors

The lesser Council after they had heard him, Novoy secured.
sent him to Prison to secure him, and the next morning the Council of two
hundred were assembled, before whom the whole matter was opened; they were not
a little perplexed in their resolves about this man, some would have him set at
liberty, seeing the Public Faith was engaged for him, although but in words;
others were of opinion to put him on the Rack to make him discover the
Traitors, this being a matter wherein the security of the City was concerned;
others would have have him put to death, considering the apparent danger there
was in setting at liberty a man of this disposition, that he had not discovered
his design out of any good motive, but only out of spite and for money; and
that moreover the Public Faith was not engaged by the promise which was made
him, that he might come with the same security as others before him, these
terms being very general and ambiguous, seeing that by the last of these
forementioned words might be understood, that he might come with the same
surety, as other such like enterprizers had done before him, who were put to
death when they could be taken. In the mean time the greatest number of voices
carried it, who were for avoiding both extremes; to wit, to save his life, and
to condemn him to perpetual imprisonment, under which sentence he still lies.

The two Princes Philip and George brethren to Charles Landgrave of
Hesse-Cassel, 1674.
came to Geneva to tarry there for a while. Prince George dies at Geneva.
Prince George the youngest of the two, who was but eighteen years of age, died
there of the small Pox. 1675.
The whole City was concerned at his death, because that this Family holds a
considerable rank amongst Protestants; and has ever expressed a particular
affection to Geneva. The Council having waited upon Prince Philip, and the
Prince now reigning, ordered that for three days there should be an
intermission of all public business, to testify thereby their sorrow and
respect; and because that Prince Philip would have his brothers body buried
amongst his Ancestors at Cassel, it was therefore embalmed, and laid in S.
Peter's Chapel, where lies buried Emilia of Nassaw, till the time should serve
to transport it, which was not till eight months after. He was conveyed to the
Chapel with great solemnity, being carried out in the night, accompanied with
a great number of Torches, which was not a thing usual among Protestants in
those parts. July 7.
The Soldiers of the Garrison were placed in two rows along the Streets, to
keep the crowd off; ten German Gentlemen carried the Bier, and the four eldest
Syndicks held up the Pall. The Prince who was brother to the deceased, and the
Prince of Chourland his cousin, followed the Corpse; and after them, the Earls
of Stolberg and Dona, the four Syndicks, and the whole Council with the
Lieutenant and Auditors, all in Mourning all the Ministers and professors were
in their Gowns, and Mourning Hat-bands; and last of all the whole body of the
German Nobility.

About this time there happened some differences with Savoy concerning Salt. The
principal Farmers who have the Farming of the Salt of France, 1675.
Savoy and Geneva, that is to say, the only permission to sell it, for which
they pay the City twenty thousand Franks per annum: but their time being
expired in the Year 1675. There was a greater price required of them, but they
resolved to give no more than heretofore, and so they held it no longer; this
so greatly moved them that they determined to resent it when occasion offered.

In Savoy they would have taxed the quantity of Salt which every Subject of
Geneva within the limits of Savoy ought to take, Savoy and Geneva at difference
about the impositions of Salt.
under pretense that there was committed an abuse. which put the Council upon
sending six Wagons laden with Salt in the night to Jussy, with a guard of
twenty Soldiers for to keep up their privilege in that matter; this made a
great noise in Savoy, the Regent wrote to the Ambassador in France, and to the
lesser Cantons in very sharp terms against the Genevoises, 1675.
whom he charged with making an Invasion, and entering in an Hostile manner by
night into her Country. In Autum.
The minor Cantons, and the Kings Ambassador in Switzerland, wrote to Zurich
and Berne, and they to Geneva. Information was sent them of the whole matter,
and they approved of the proceedings of them of Geneva, promising them
assistance in case of a rupture, wherewith the Savoyards threatened the City.
The Militia of Savoy consisting of eight hundred Gentlemen having been
commanded to be in readiness; and there were frequent Musters made, and great
quantity of Arms and provision brought into Savoy, which obliged them of Geneva
to stand upon their guard.

A while after the City received a Letter from the King, 1676.
by the hands of Monsieur de Gravelle, The French King assures the Genevoises
of his good will.
whom he sent Ambassador into Switzerland in the place of the Abbot of S.
Romain, in which he assured the City in very obliging terms of the continuation
of his good will.

John Dupan and Amy du Chapeaurouge were deputed into Switzerland about the
affair with Savoy. June 12.
They went to Berne and Zurich, and afterward to Soleurre to the French
Ambassador, Deputies dispatched from Geneva.
and from thence to the Diet held at Bade, where Dr. Leonardi her Royal
Highnesses Resident having had audience; the Deputies of Geneva had theirs
afterward, and fully refuted whatsoever he had alleged; at length they
returned very well satisfied at their journey. This business has layn dormant
all this while, yet has the City been acquainted by Monsieur de Pompone, that
Madam Royalle remains as yet very much discontented at the Transportation of
Salt to Jussy through her Countries, July 18.
and requires still satisfaction.

The same Farmers did the like in France as they had done in Savoy, against the
Genevoises. October.
Monsieur Bouchu Intendant of Burgundy came to Colonges, with a design to make
the Villages of Chancy, Avoully and Moin, whom we have above mentioned, to take
the Kings Salt, and likewise all the Houses dependant on Geneva included in the
Country of Gex; to wit, in the Villages of Malagny, Ressin and others. In fine*
notwithstanding all the Remonstrances made by them of Geneva, he sent Guards
into each of these Villages who took away all their Salt, and commanded the
inhabitants to fetch it at Gex.. Notice hereof was sent into Switzerland, Roset
harangues the Queen and Dauphin.
and the Sieur Roset was deputed to wait on the King about it. He had a
favorable hearing at S. Germans, and harangued afterward the Queen, and my
Lord the Dauphin. The King ordered Monsieur de Pompone to examine the business,
who had several Conferences with the Deputies, but they could not come to any
Conclusion; in the mean time the King having fortunately won Valenciennes,
Stoop intercedes with the French King in behalf of Geneva.
Colonel Stouppe seeing him in a good humor by this success, took this as an
occasion to mention to him the business of Geneva. Whereupon his Majesty
granted that the Villages of Chancy, and Avoully should take Salt of Geneva,
but not the others. 1677.
In the mean time Roset died at Paris, and the Sieur Fabry was sent to succeed
him to obtain the same favor for Moin, March.
and other places in like manner as in the two above mentioned Villages. He had
public Audience of the King, and finding that he advanced nothing in the
Court, he desired leave to depart, and was dismissed with very courteous
languge by the King, November.
who gave him a Chain of gold with his Medal: 1678.
but this affair has remained undetermined in the same state as heretofore,
Feb. 1.
which has obliged the Peasants of Moin and other places in controversy who
could not live without Salt, to go fetch it at Gex.

The Earl of Harach Ambassador from the Emperor returning from 1677.
Spain came to Geneva, October. 23.
where he stayed but a day. The City pretended ignorance of his quality till
after his arrival, The Emperors Ambassador passes through Geneva.
to the end they might make a difference between his reception, and that of
Monsieur Crequi's the French Ambassador in the Year 1664. yet he had the same
Complements and Presents made him at his departure.

The Viceroy of Galice Ambassador from Spain, 1678.
going toward the Emperor, took Geneva in his way, March 24.
and parted thence four days after his arrival. The Spanish Ambassador passes
through Geneva.
He had the same Civilities showed him, as the Earl of Harach had before him,
and was the more satisfied with them, in that he came from Lions, where
scarcely any body took notice of him. In parting from Geneva, he wrote his
Master word of the Civilities he had received there.

And thus has Geneva subsisted to our times, Conclusion.
whilst several flourishing Cities have perished; and diverse mighty States have
been overturned: which God often permits by his admirable providence, to let
both great and small States know, That their subsistence or ruin depend not on
their own strength or weakness; but that they are all in his hand, and their
happiness or misery come only from him.

FINIS.
ANCIENT INSCRIPTIONS Which are to be seen AT GENEVA.
I.
At the ascent of the Trellis.
IOVI O. M. THIS is the foot of a Stall or Booth which was found thirty Years
since on the side of the Arve, having been thrown up by an inundation.
Guichenon is the first who has mentioned it, but he has forgot the word
Stabulo. The Stone is hollow in the upper part of it, wherein was kindled the
fire for the Sacrifice which was offered to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, for this
is the meaning of these two Letters O. M. I am not yet satisfied whether
CINGIDVO is some Surname of Jupiter, or whether it is to be read as two words
CINGI DVO, that is to say, Cingii duo Stabulo and Aulus: for there has been a
Roman Family called Cincia, which perhaps might be the same with Cingia. Yet it
seems, upon a through consideration, that this is but one Word.

II.
IOVI THis fragment is another Vow to Jupiter, and has been mentioned by
Gruterus.

III.
At the great Street.
APOLLINI THis is a Vow to Apollo by Marcus Aufustius Catus, or Catuso: for it
is a hard matter to say whether the o which is at the end, is a Letter which
should be joined to Catus, or a kind of pointing.

IV.
At the College near the fourth Class.
APOLLINI IT is a common Opinion in Geneva, that in the time of Heathenism,
Apollo was particularly worshipped, and that he had a Temple in this City in
the same place where now stands S. Peter's Church. There is to be seen, on a
Gate behind this Church, a Head made to resemble that of the Sun. Monsieur
Morus alleges this proof in his Harangue de Sole and scuto Genevensi, for to
confirm the common opinion. But this Head seems to me to be nothing else but
the Carvers fancy, and does not look as if it was very old, it being made only
of Molasse Stone. Being some Years since at Geneva with Monsieur Patin, who is
a competent Judge in these matters, I showed him this piece, and he was of
opinion that it was not very old. Neither do I believe with others, that this
part of the Church, near which stands the forementioned Head, is the remains
of a Heathenish Temple, seeing there is not to be seen any difference in the
other parts of it, neither in its Frame nor Materials. But this Temple might
perhaps have been built on the Foundations of that of Apollo.

V.
On the Wells du Four de Fer.
MARTIAVG. THis Stone was dedicated to the god Mars Augustus by Sennius
Sabinus. This title of Augustus is oftentimes joined to the names of the
Deities, since the age of Augustus: for the Heathens by a ridiculous
superstition believed that they honored their gods in giving them sometimes
the names of Illustrious Men, after the same manner as they thought to honor
Men in giving them the names of their gods.

VI.
At the same place.
M. CONNI SECVNDI MArcus Julius Marcianus had caused this Inscription to be
Engraven, in remembrance of his Brother Marcus Connius Secundus: but why,
seeing they were Brothers, did not they bear the name of the same Family? But
it may be they were Brethren but by the Mothers-side.

VII.
At the Borough of Four at Monsieur Sarrazin's.
M. IVL. MARCIANVS NEither Gruterus nor Guichenon have mentioned this, it being
nothing but a plain Monument, which Julius Marcianus caused to be made in his
lifetime for himself and posterity. Vivos is commonly used for Vivus.

VIII.
This Inscription was seen heretofore near S. Peter's.
D. M. S. THere were few Epitaphs which were not dedicated to the gods Manes.
Which are meant by these three Letters D. M. S. Di^s Manibus Sacrum. I have
inserted on the third Line, instead of D. CIL. which are not of any
signification, and which I take therefore to be a mistake, D. FILL. Decimi
Filius. The freed Men took often upon them the name of them who delivered them
out of Bondage, adding thereunto some Surname, as this Cajus Julius Caesar
Longinus, who was Julius Caesar's freed Man, had done here. Such was his
destiny, that after he had taken a great deal of pains in traversing the
Mountains to come to Geneva, he died there soon after his arrival. The Pagans
esteemed it a great misfortune to die in a strange Land out of their own
Country. This Inscription then is one of the ancientest in Geneva, seeing it
was made in Julius Caesar's time. Its whole Phrase is good Latin, especially
that of perruptis montibus is very pretty: for does it not seem that a Man must
break through the Mountains to find his way from Italy to Geneva along the
Alps? This Longinus lived forty one Years, three Months and just thirteen Days
exactly to an hour, for this is apparently the meaning of these two abridged
words HORam NVLlam. The everlasting farewell which his Companion gives him, is
this S. T. T. L. Sit tibi terra levis, Which were usual expressions to Friends:
That the Earth may be light to you, and not hinder the Soul by its weight, from
disintangling it self from the Body.

IX.
In S. Peter's, over against the Princess of Portugals Chapel.
Q. IVLIO SERGIO THis is a Memorial which Fullonius Justinus, Terentia
Belatulla, and Julius Macrinus have set up in honor of their Protector Quintus
Julius Sergius, whose Heirs they were.

X.
CN. ARVTIO CN. F. CELERI THis fragment is in honor of one Cneus Arutius, or
Aruntius Celer, Son of Cneus, Prefect of the Cohort of Portugaises. Gruterus
has mentioned it twice in Page CCCLXVI. 5. and in Page DXXIII. I. with this
difference, that in one he inserts the whole, and in the other Page only the
first Letters, as we have here represented it.

XI.
In the great Street over against the Pelisserie.
NVMINIBVS THE freed Men oftentimes testified to their deliverers how much they
were concerned in their preservation, causing the Vows which they made for them
to their gods to be Engraven in Marble; as we have here an instance of it in
Victor, who was Augustus's freed man, who invocates those particular gods, to
whom the Romans believed the preservation of the Emperor belonged, and that of
all their divine Family. And whereas we call the Family of our Kings and
Emperors the Royal Family, they to show it greater respect, gave it the Epithet
of Divine.

XII.
In the City-Walls, on the outside of them, over against la Corraterie*
T. IVL. T. FILL. CORN. VALERIANO FOrasmuch as that few Men are acquainted with
the abbreviations of Inscriptions, I will here set this down at length.

Tito Julio Titi Filio Cornelia (tribu) Valeriano, Patrono Coloniae, Duumviro
Aerarii, Triumviro locorum publicorum persequendorum, Tribuno militum legionis
Sexta Victricis, praefecto Fabrum, Flamini Augustali, Pontifici, Julia Titi
Filia vera Patri optimo.

So that this is a Monument dedicated to the memory of Titus Julius Valerianus
of the Cornelian stock, Protector of the Geneva-Colony, chief Overseer of the
Treasury and public Buildings, Campmaster of the sixth Legion which was called
Victorious, and Overseer of the Workmen, Priest of Augustus, Pontifici, by his
Daughter Julia Vera.

It need not seem strange that I render Patrono Coloniae, Protector of the
Colony of Geneva: for although this is not expressly declared, yet must we
understand him to be Patron and Protector of that Colony where the Inscription
was placed: for this Stone is too large to be brought thither from any other
place: it being likewise inlayed with the City-Walls, which were built long
since. We need not doubt, but that Geneva had the Privileges of a Roman
Colony, seeing it had all the Offices thereunto belonging, as we may observe in
these Inscriptions of Duumviri's and Sextumviri's. The word Colony seems still
to be preserved in the name of the Village of Cologny, which is not above a
quarter of a League distant from Geneva.

XIII.
At the College and other places are seen some fragments of Letters of a foot
high; or, Onciales, as they call them.
C. IVL... IVLIA From whence some have conjectured that it might be thus
supplied:

C. IVLius and IVLIA AND so that Julius Caesar had built the Walls of Geneva.
But this is but a mere conjecture, for C. IVL. does not necessarily signify
Julius Caesar; but only some Person of that Family, as it is in XXVI
Inscription thus: C. IVL. SEMATVS.

XIV.
This was heretofore seen at Monnoye.
C. VALERIOT. Titi Filio Auli nepoti.
F. A. N. Been merenti posuit.
THis is a considerable Inscription. Here is mentioned one Cajus Valerius
Master of the Camp of the second Legion, to whose memory the Province of Geneva
had caused this Stone to be Engraven for the benefits which it had received by
him as a good Patron: for this word Patroni signifies something more than
Protectors: And these two words of Genevensis Provincia are remarkable, seeing
they inform us, That the Genevois was erected into a Province, of which Geneva
was the Capital, seeing it gave it its name.

XV.
At S. Peter's, near the Steps.
Q. STARDIVS MACER THese are the names of six Sextumvirs of Geneva. This
Magistracy was established since Augustius his Reign, consisting of six Persons
who were changed from time to time, after the same manner as it is now with the
four Syndi^ks.

XVI.
At the College.
SEX. ATTIO SExtus Attius Carpophorus was, it seems, one of these Sextumvirs,
to whose memory his Wife set up this Monument.

XVII.
Another in the same College.
...XTI FILL. THis fragment has been made for some Roman Nun whom they called
Flaminica.

XVIII.
Again.
MEMORIAE Fieri curiavit sub Ascia ^x dicavit.
C. THis Epitaph was Consecrated to the everlasting remembrance of Verria
Verula Colusa by her Husband Sturdius, who had dedicated it, together with the
Ax which he used in cutting out and polishing the Stone. The severity of the
ancient Romans, who would have retrenched the Funeral expenses, had caused them
to make a Law, Rogum ascia ne poleant: but their vanity was too strong to be
curbed by the twelve Tables, and their luxury extended it self as well to the
dead as the living.

XIX.
At S. Peter's, toward a back Gate.
CALL. VERNAE Ponendum curavit.
C. Sub Ascia dedicavit.
A. D. THis short Inscription had been made by Verria Verula, for her Son Call.
Verna.

XX.
At the College.
.......RI THis fragment tells us nothing else but that the Heirs of a certain
Centurion of the tenth Legion had acquitted themselves of the charge laid upon
them by his Will. We may observe here, as likewise in several other
Inscriptions, that the word Here Is is only written with a single e, and not by
an ae: for this word comes from Herus, because the Heir becomes Master of the
Testators Estate.

XXI.
Under the Clock at Molard.
D. VALERIO ASIATICI LIBERT Coloniae Equestris.
EQ. Ex Testamenta.
THis Inscription, as well as that which follows, has been brought heretofore
from Versoy, where they stood in Gruterus's time. See underneath what we say of
the Colony of Equestres, amongst whom Decimus Valerius the freed man of
Asiaticus was Sextumvir. It seems that it is of this Valerius Asiaticus of
whom spoke Suetonius: Talibus principiis magnam imperii partem, non nisi
consilio and arbitrio vilissimi cujusque histrionum and aurigarum administravit
and maxim Asiatici liberti. The Geneva Manuscripts tell us, That it was he who
gave his Surname of Sessius to a Village of the Country of Gex called Seyssi,
and in Latin Sissium.

XXII.
Near the same place.
D. M. Diis Manibus THis Epitaph being dedicated to the gods Manes, is in
honor of Lucius Aurelius Respectus a learned young Man, who had twice pleaded
at the Bar, although but eighteen years of age, as his Father Lucius Aurelius
Respectus testifies of him. The Son is named Civi Vallense and Equestre,
Citizen of Valay and the Equestres: The one lying on the East Side of the Lake,
and the other on the West. Some read it VALINSAE, and thus has Gruterus cited
it; but I have read it distinctly Vallense, although that the rest be worn out.

XXIII.
At the Gate of Rive.
ANNOR. THis Inscription was made for a Monument of a Father and his Son, who
were of the Family of the Plinies, which was Illustrious under the Empire of
Trajan and his Successors: we must read the Fathers thus, Caio Plinio Marci
Filio Caii Nepoti Fausto Aedili Duumviro (Coloniae) Juliae Equestris, Flamini,
Caius Plinius Faustus vivos, or vivus sibi fecit. So that he raised this
Monument himself, when his Son Lucius Plinius Sabinus being but twelve years of
age died. Some who understood not this word E Q. have rendered it Equiti a
Knight: which it cannot signify, for it would have been placed immediately
after the name, and before the other qualities; and moreover the Ediles, or
they who had the superintendance over public Buildings, were not chosen from
amongst the Knights, but the People. And in effect what would IVL. signify. As
for the word Coloniae it is understood, as in the name of Corinthe, which has
been called heretofore Colonia Latina Julia Corinthus, and sometimes LAVS IVLIA
CORINTHVS: for the name of Jules has been given to several Colonies which have
been sent over in his time, or favored by him, as without doubt the Colony of
Equestres were. What I have said of this Colony may be seen in Munster, p. 23.
T. 1. Guilliman, and the Author of the Book called the Citizen, thought that
the Colony of Equesters was Geneva, or at least that it was the Capital, and
that Chablais had taken its name from Caballis, or Equis; and that which has
inclined them to be of this Opinion, is the great number of Inscriptions which
are to be seen in Geneva, where there is mention made of it. Guichenon has
very well judged, that they might have been brought from some other place, and
I have read in the Manuscripts, that those two which are at Molard, where there
is made mention of a Sextumvir of the Equestres, and of a Citizen of the same
Country, had been brought from Versoy, in the Year 1590. and likewise another
Inscription wherein is mentioned Civitas Equestrium, is cited in Authors who
have written of the Country of Vaud, as if it had been heretofore to be seen
there. It is likewise very probable, by the right of Neighborhood, that
several Persons of Quality who had Offices in the Colony of Equesters, had
likewise the same in Geneva, or at least that they had died in that City.

The true situation then of this Colony was in the Country of Vaud, betwixt the
two small Rivers of Versoy and Aubonne, and the word Enquestres, which is used
still in this Territory amongst the People of that Country, Guichenon in his
History of Savoy, p. 8.
is a sufficient proof of this. There is likewise an ancient Act made in the
Year 1011. wherein this small Country along the Lake is called Pagus
Equestricus. Nions, which was in the middle, was the Capital City, which was
the occasion that this name was added, as in the Notes of the Empire, written
in Theodosius his time, it is called Civitas Equestrium Noviodunum under the
Province of the Sequanoises, in which likewise Pliny places it, whereas Geneva
was comprehended under the Province of Vienna. The Itinerary of Antoninus
distinguishes very well Geneva, which he calls Civitas Genavensium, under the
Province of Vienna, and Nions Civitas Equestrium, id est, Nevidunum, under the
Sequanoise Province, the same with that abovementioned. obverse of coin SEEDS
LAVSANE
reverse of coin CIVITAS EQVESTRI
For a confirmation of what I have said, I should have added, That there has
been found an ancient Coin, which has on one side CIVITAS EQVESTRIS, and on
the other SEEDS LAVSANE, which shows that the Colony of Equestres acknowledged
the Episcopal Seat of Lausane.

In effect what reason had Munster and Gailliman to place the Cavalry in
Chablais, which is a Country surrounded with Mountains, or in Geneva which is
situated on a little Hill? The Country of Vaux which abounds with pasturage,
and which is hardly any thing else but a flat Campaign, was far more proper for
this. There are likewise several Villages in this Country, which seem to have
taken their names from some ancient Romans, who perhaps had been Lords of it,
Vide Inscript.
in the time when this Country flourished. There are yet such names as these:
XXI.
Roscy, which perhaps might come from Roscius, Crassy from Crassius, Dudy from
Duelli^s, Se^^y from Sissius, who are mentioned in an Inscription at Geneva.
P^^rmen^on, which is not far from Nions, takes likewise its name from the
neighboring Cape of this Village, for the Latins called a Cape promontorium.

The Tower in the Isle of Geneva is attributed to Julius Caesar, which has his
name given it, but I know not for what reason: for my part I see no cause to
make me believe that this was built in his time, on the contrary the materials
which are the most part of but Mollasse Stone, as one of S. Peter's Steeples is,
moves me rather to think that it is the work of some King of Burgundy, several
of which have dwelt at Geneva; and perhaps; (not to oppose a received oppinion)
it has been raised on foundations of another building by Julius Caesar, or by
some one of his successors in the Empire, who have all taken upon them the name
of Caesar's.

Munster has misunderstood that passage of Caesar's Commentaries, Cosmograph,
L. 2.
thinking that the Bridge which is there mentioned, belonged to the Switzers.
Ex^eo oppido pons ad Helvetios pertinet, where this last word signifies not
apperta^neth, but only looks toward, or spectat; for on this Bridge men
passed over from Geneva into the Country of the Helvetians, who ^^ld that which
we now call Switzerland, and the Country of Vaud.

This likewise may serve to convince us of the popular error which takes a row
of stakes which appear above water in the Lake, for the remains of this Bridge;
for it does not face the Helvetians Country, but the Country of Chablais, which
then belonged to the Allobroges; and it being a hard matter to root out
opinions which have sunk deep into peoples minds, I shall therefore make bold
to relate here the observations made by a friend of mine, to whom I am obliged
for several Memoires relating to this present History. Be pleased then to
observe what he has written to me thereof.

In a walk (said he) I made some days past on the Lake to inform myself in the
matter of these pretended ruins of a Bridge, I observed that these were two
rows of Stakes which were all like one another, one row being only two paces
distant from the other, which beginning at the head of the Isle where stands
Caesar's Tower, and from thence going up the River, reach through the Chains,
and the Isles called Barques, drawing toward the Village of Cologny, and
reaching no farther than the end of it; so that these two rows are in length
about three thousand paces, the Fishermen call them Fiches. These Stakes are of
Oak, squared, and about the thickness of a man's thigh, and being not above two
or three foot above ground, are always at the bottom of the water, the Stakes
on either row are not above three foot distant one from another; which makes me
believe that this never never was a Bridge, because the States are too small
and too near one another, and that the Bridge thereupon would have been too
narrow; moreover how absurd would it have been to have made a Bridge of this
length, which does not cross the River, but leads upwards against the stream;
and besides what occasion could there be of making a Bridge to pass from Geneva
to Colog^e, seeing one may go by Land thither. I suppose therefore that these
stumps have served heretofore for a Ditch or Entrenchment, which had been
raised to make the Rhosne pass cleverty between the Isle, and S. Gervais, and
to hinder the water from overflowing the low streets as it has done heretofore
when the pavement was not raised, so that this Bridge which is mentioned in
Caesar's Commentaries stood no where else but in the same place, where is at
present that whereon we pass over from the City to S. Gervais.

XXIV.
L.IVL. P. F. VOL. BROC. THis curious Inscription was not known to Gruterus,
having been found since the impression of his Book. Monsieur Godefroy had
caused this Stone to be brought into his Court, where it still lies. Guichenon
had seen it, but has not exactly copied it, or the Printer has not followed
his Copy: for there is five or six mistakes which spoil the sense, LEVI for L.
IVL. BROCCIVS for BROCCHVS. AVG. for AVGVR. VTANIS for VIANIS. LACCVS instead
of LACVVS, and D. M. for DAT. Observe here how it must be read without
abbreviations.

Lucius Julius Publii filius Voltinia tribu Brocchus Valerius, or Valerianus
Bassus, Praefectus Fabrum, bis Tribunus Militum Legionis Octavae Augustae,
Duumvir juri dicundo, Triumvir locorum publicor. persequendorum, Augur,
Pontifex, Duumvir, Flamen in Colonia Equestre Vianis Genavensibus Lacuus dat.

Except the word Vianis, which may be a mistake of the Carver, all the rest is
easy, and is thus in English:

Lucius Julius Brocchus Valerianus Bassus, Son of Publius, and of the Tribe of
Voltinia, Overseer of the Workmen appointed to make Engines for War, twice Camp
master of the eighth August Legion, one of the Magistrates who are appointed
Judges in matters of Equity, Superintendant of the public Buildings, Augure,
chief Prelate, Duumvir and Priest in the Colony of Equestres, gives the Lakes
to the Genevoises.

The Lords and Roman Magistrates, who were Lieutenants for the Emperors in
their Provinces, had great Authority, seeing we read that they have sometimes
disposed of Crowns. So that it need not seem strange to us that this Person
here-mentioned has given the Lakes to the Genevoises, for he puts La^u^s in
the Plural, comprising perhaps other lesser Lakes of the Country, with the Lake
Leman. His great Offices in the Province and the advantage he had in being of
the Family of the Juliusses, gave him without doubt this power: and what can
make more plainly appear, the esteem which the Romans had for the City of
Geneva? That I may therefore the better set forth this illustrious Family of
Julius Brocchus, I shall produce some other Marbles which are to be seen at
Geneva and its adjacent places.

XXV.
At Nions.
D. IVL. F. VOL. RIPANO DEcimus Julius Ripanus capito Bassianus was Son to the
said Julius Brocchus, and had likewise very honorable Employs: for besides
that, he had a Horse which was kept at the public charge, he was likewise
Overseer of the Workmen, and Campmaster of the first Gauloise Legion. Nions was
the Colony of Equestres where his Father was Duumvir.

XXVI.
At Geneva heretofore in the Halls was seen.
D. IVL. D. F. VOLT THis Decimus Julius Capito was Son of the fore named
Decimus Julius Ripanus Capito, and was Augure and Duumvir of the public
Treasury, Priest of Mars and Master of the Camp. And thus did they unite
Religion and Arms with the Gown, in giving all these Offices to one Person: and
since that the Emperors have become great Pontifexes, their Lieutenants and
Subjects might well take upon them that of Augures and Priests, although they
followed Arms or were Gown-men.

XXVII.
At Pragin, near Nions.
C. IVL. C. F. VOLT. CAjus Julius Capito Son of Cajus, was of the same Family
with them abovementioned, and of the same Tribe, and held likewise the Office
of Duumvir and Priest of Augustus. Lucius Julius Capito his Friend was some
collateral branch, and this following Inscription, which I have seen, belongs
to him.

XXVIII.
At Aix in Savoy.
L. IVLIO CNenus Julius Lucinus and not Lucinius, as Guichenon would have it,
was the Son of Lucius Julius Capito, and of Julia Tertia, for whom he had
caused this Stone to be Engraved.

I have produced all these Inscriptions, because they confirm the number of the
Family of the Jul's settled in these parts, as we have noted in Page 22. T. 1.
And because likewise that they guide us to the knowledge of the Family of L.
Julius Brocchus.

XXIX.
This has been heretofore in the Walls of Geneva toward Corraterie.
VIXI VT VIVIS THis fancy is very ingenious: I have once lived as thou live
now, but thou must die as I am dead: so our life flies away: Adieu, Traveller,
and go and mind thy business.

This was, (says the Author of the Book called the Citizen) ominous to the
Savoyards, when they scaled the City near this place: but can any Man think
they were so much at leisure as to read Tomb-stones, and that they brought
Lights along with them? I do not believe it.

XXX.
Beneath the Clock du Molard on the side of the Lake.
IMP. CAES NERV. THis Stone is one of those Columns or Millinary Stones which
serve to mark the distance of places. The deceased M. Revilliod, who caused it
to be brought from Versoy, had copied out the Inscription: we are not able to
make sense of every particular Character in it, because that the Rain and
overflowings of the Lake have washed out a great part of the Letters of it. It
was made under the second Consulship of the Emperor Nerva Vlpins Trajan, and
was to give notice that it was 8000 paces distant to some part of the Country
from that place where this was set. Which perhaps might be Geneva, which lay at
the entrance into the Countries of the Allobrogeses, Helvetians, and
Sequanoises.

XXXI.
Over the Treillis or Lattice.
IMP. CAES. THis is a Stone set up for the same purpose as the former, for it
is made in the fashion of a Pillar, and there is at the end of it MIL. P.
Milliarium posuit: although that the Character which should show us how many
Miles it meant, was worn out, yet that little which is to be seen, gives us to
understand, that it has been set up in the time when Marc. Aurel. was Emperor,
who was the adopted Son of Antoninus Pius.

XXXII.
In S. Peter's Wall.
IMP. CAES. M. THis Stone it is probable has been brought from the Country of
Vaud: for Guilliman mentions one like it, in his Memoires of Switzerland, where
it then without doubt lay. Civitas Equestrium is the same with Colonia
Equestris. Although that these Names and Titles of Marc. Aurelius Antoninus,
etc. are common to three Emperors, viz. to Marcus Aurelius, to Caracella and to
Heliogabulus, yet I am of opinion it belongs to the first, because there has
been seen heretofore in these parts this inscription quoted by Guilliman, and
by Gruterus after him, wherein was read TRIB. POTEST. XVI. COS. III. Now of
these three Emperors whom we have named, the last has not so often had the
power of Tribune. And Caracalla was Surnamed when he held the sixteenth time
the Office of Tribune, Germanick and Britannick, which would not have been
omitted in this Inscription: whereas Marcus Aurel. to whom this belongs, had
not then any Title when he was in the 16th year of his Tribuneship, seeing it
was then but the second year of his Reign: for Antoninus had granted it him
when he was but Caesar, that is to say, designed for the Empire. Neither is
there seen in this Inscription any title added to his name.

XXXIII.
On the Treillis or Lattice
D.. THis is nothing but the ruins of a Stone dedicated to the Manes of Rusia
Aquilina. caii Filla.


XXXIV.
Under the Hall of the Auditory.
L. NAMMIO NVmida might be the name of Lucius Nammius's Country: but the name
and praename being Roman, there is more likelihood that it is but a Surname.

XXXV.
In S. Peter's-Wall, on the side of the Stairs of Poule.
Supply D. M. THis was dedicated to the gods Manes, and to the everlasting
repose of Mansuetinia Juliana a freed Woman and Wife of Cajus Mansuetinius
Paternus, which testifies of the holiness of her Life.

XXXVI.
In the Wall of the same Church over against the Bishops Palace.
-- RICCIO T. F..... RIccius Fronto Son of Titus, the freed Man of Caia,
Overseer of the public Treasury, is the Person for whom this Inscription has
been made by one of his Heirs, who was enjoined thereto in his Will. There is
mention made of the same Office of Duumvir Aerarii in the twelfth Inscription.

XXXVII.
Near S. Germains.
DIIS MANIB. SAgarius is a dealer in Gowns: Negotiator Sagarius is in other
Inscriptions. Narcissus is the Surname of a freed Man, as was this famous
Narcissus whom the Emperor entrusted with the chief care of the Sale.

XXXVIII.
At la Pelisserie.
IMP. CAES. THis was a Millenary Column made in the time when Trebonian and
Volusian held the Empire. We may observe, that the latter of these carried
these six: Cajus Vibius Anintus Gallus Trebonianus Volusianus, which
observation you will not meet with elsewhere. Aurelius Victor mis-names these
two Emperors, Virius Gallus and Volesianus.

XXXIX.
This was seen heretofore at Geneva.
D. M. S. CAjus Veturius of the Ousentine Tribe, and his Wife Juliana of the
Scaptian Tribe, had caused this Inscription to be set over the Tomb of their
Daughter Veturia Bella. O. F. that is to say Cajae filiae, the praenames of
Women being marked by a Letter turned backwards: but it seldom happened that they
had any praenames.

XL.
This was heretofore at S. Gervais.
D. M. Caii filius.
PAPIRIVS. C. F. PROBVS Parents maerentes filiae meritissimae.
MOER. THis Inscription, which is for a Monument to preserve the memory of
Papiria Polcra, who had lived but nine Years, and two Months and twelve Days,
had been set up by Lucius Papinius Probus a Military Tribune, and by his Wife
Aelia Aeliana; the Father and Mother being afflicted at the loss of so dear a
Daughter. MAGNA FREQVENTIA LEG. XIII. EL. EST. which signifies, if I mistake
not, Magna frequentia leg^oni^ tertiae elata est; that she had been attended at
her Burial by a great number of Soldiers of the thirteenth Legion, of which her
Father was without question the Commander or Tribune. Sertorius Vrsatus in his
Book de Notis Romanorum, has expounded after the same manner these Characters
EL. EST. Elata est.

XLI.
This was found in the Year 1678. at the foot of the Tower of the Isle, and may
be seen at this present at the House of Monsieur Minutoli the public Professor.
DEO SILVA THis is the Basis of a Statue dedicated to the god Sylvian, for the
health of the Superior Boatmen, or who had their Quarter assigned them in the
upper part of the Lake and the Rhosne, by Marcus Arrius Citizen of Switzerland
or Helvetia, their Friend, who had by this means discharged himself of his
Oath. Sylvian was the god of the Woods, and the Bargemen honored him, upon the
account that he should furnish them with good Wood, either to make Barks, or to
bring along with them in their Rafts (Radeaux) or flat-bottom Boats: for this
word Radeaux is derived from Ratis; from whence has been formed the word
Ratiarius, which is seldom used. Rates, says Festus, vocantur tigna inter se
colligata, quae per aquam aguntur: quo quidem vocabulo interdum etiam naves
vocantur. Eodem nomine significamus remos.

These following Roman Inscriptions are to be seen in several parts about
Geneva.

XLII.
In the Church of S. Saflorin, near de Vevay.
TI. CLAUDIUS DRVSI F. THis is a Millenary Stone, by which the Romans were wont
to mark out the distance of places, for it is made in form of a Cosumn, and the
numerical Characters are Engraven on it. It was perhaps thirty seven Miles
thence to Avanche; for this may be the meaning of these two Letters, F. A.
Faederata Aventicum. Guichenon and John Baptiste Plantin have not read
correctly the first word TIT. which signifies Titus, instead of TI. which
signifies Tiberius, and which is the praename of Claudius, in whose Reign this
Stone had been set up. For to confirm what I have said of the two Letters, F.
A. behold here another Millenary Stone, whereon the word Aventicum may be read
at length. It was found in 1640. and is not any more than the preceding,
observed by Gruterus.

XLIII.
At Entreroches.
IMP. THat is to say, Imperatori Caesari Tito Aelio Hadriano Augusto, Pontifici
Maximo, Tribunitiae potestatis, Consuli tertium, Patri patriae, Aventicum
milliarium posuit quadragesimum primum. Plantin and Guichenon, insert on the
second line TR. P. AELIO, which is a palpable mistake, for TR. P. signified
Tribunitiae potestatis, which would have then been twice repeated, seeing there
is the same again.

XLIV.
At Nions.
C. LVCCONI CO.. THere are several Inscriptions at Nions, but I only produce
this, because it is not taken notice of by Gruterus, and that it is remarkable
for the charge which Cajus Lucconius Tetricus had, de Praefectus arcendis
latronibus, the same with what they call in French, Grand Provost. whose Office
was to keep the Road free from Thieves. The charge of Duumvir, Produumvir and
Priest of the Emperor, were held by the same Person: and we have already
observed that the Sword, the Gown, and the Priesthood were not inconsistent
amongst the Ancients.

XLV.
At Coppet.
D. M. P^^endum ^^ravit.
C. THis Inscription is not correct in Gruterus, Plantin and Guichenon: which
obliged me, some Years since as I passed by to light of my Horse to take a Copy
of it, although there is no great matter in it. Gruterus reads PHILETI BRITAI
and D. II. VNC.. OS for DEFVNCTO: and Plantin PHILE. II. BRITTAI. Philetus
Brittallus was a young Man of twenty four Years, for whom his Father Claudianus
had caused this Stone to be Engraven, and had dedicated it sub ascia, as a
token of his Paternal affection. This is all that can be made out of it.

XLVI.
At Seligny, a Village dependant on Geneva, near Coppet.
D. M. THis Stone is in the Temple wall of this Village, and the top of it has
been made hollow to serve instead of a Font, or Holy-water-pot: Gruterus and
Guichenon read Biicaisio, instead of Bilcaisio: which word savours of the
rudeness of some ancient Helvetian or Gauloise name. The Stone is nothing else
but a Monument set up for a remembrance of Cornelius the Son of Bilcasio by his
Wife Publicia Perpetua.

XLVII.
At Annemasse, a Village belonging to Genevois.
D. M. THis Office of Protector Ducenarius, which Aurelius Romanus held, is
remarkable: Mercius in his Lexicon Graecobarbarum says that Ducenarii were
Tax-gatherers; concerning whom there is a Law in the Codex L. Ducenarii de
exact. Trib. ne ducenarii plus quam quadraginta octo in singulis habeantur. The
Greeks used the same word. Photius Biblioth. (...), where I believe the word
(...) ought to be corrcted and (...) put before (...) making it (...), for
Perennia is not the name of a Roman Family, but rather Herennia, to which this
Publius Herennius belonged, Ducenarius or Receiver of Tributes.

XLVIII.
In the Village of Meyseri, three or four Leagues distant from Geneva, between
Beauregard and Nermier, on a Column.
..EPI SEVER.. GVichenon who thus describes it in his History of Savoy, thought
he had discovered that the ancient name of Savoy had been Sabadia, and which
consequently had been in use in Severus his time. Inscriptions are in truth of
great use in the knowledge of History, and Geography; but when they are ill
transcribed, and so by consequence ill misunderstood, they commonly introduce
several errors. And this may serve for a proof of all the rest, for there never
was such a word as Sabadia, and the whole of that Inscription produced by
Guichenon, is a confused piece of nonsense, in which a man may make some
uncertain guesses. For thus it ought to be restored.

Imp. sEPT. SEVERO Aug. So that it will be no hard matter for us to understand
how- Guichenon in these two words ARAB. ADIAB. should make such a mistake. This
Column was a Millenary Stone erected in the time when Septimus Severus Augustus
surnamed Parthick, Arabic, Adiabenick, was Emperor, who took on him these
names, because he had vanquished the Parthians, Arabians and Adiabenians, when
he was chief Prelate, having exercised the Office of Tribune nine times, and
having been then twice Consul and designed again to the same Office, being
entrusted for the third time with the power of the Tribuneship, under Marcus
Aurel. Anotoninus his son, and designed Consul. M. P... signifies Millarium
positum, or posuerunt, or as others expound it. Milliaria passuum, to which we
must add the number of Miles which is worn out.

Upon which I would advertise the lovers of Antiquity, that a man must use his
own judgment in the Reading of Guichenon. He has collected several
Inscriptions which are not in Gruterus, but we should have been farther obliged
to him had he been more exact. Lo here is one which he has pitifully
deciphered.

XLIX.
At the Castle of Monfalcon.
IVN. AL AVG. MA. Observe how I have restored it.

IVLIAE AVG. MA THis is an Inscription set up in honor of Julia Augusta the
wife of Severus, to whom as we learn by the Medals and Inscriptions, there was
given the name of Matter Castrorum, the Mother of Armies. The Stone having been
engraven by the order of Septimius Honoratus Procureur, or Lieutenant to the
Emperors Severus and Caracalla, and of Geta Caesar who was designed to the
Empire. These corrections may be proved to be right by uncontrollable reasons,
but it is not necessary to lose time in these matters; seeing they will appear
thus to any person who is versed in ancient Inscriptions.

L.
This and the following fragment are to be seen over the Gate Du Bourg of Four
at Geneva.
....S. N. PATRIT... THere can be nothing else made of this, but that it had
been engraved by a Tribune or Colonel of the twenty second Legion, called
Adiutrix.

LI.
In the same place.
....ADVS REX C.. M THis might relate to Gondebaud King of Burgundy, who dwelt
at Geneva: and the first Line might be GVNDEBADVS REX CLEMENTISSIMVS, for in
the Ancient Courts we read indifferently, Gundebadus, Gundebaldus, and
Gundebaudus.

There is kept, in the Townhouse, several ancient Urns, the greatest part of
which are very large, because one of them served a whole Family. There is one
of these at Monsieur Mestrezat's the Professor, on whose Handle there are these
Letters, C. V. VA. which perhaps are the Letters of the Potters name.

LII.
A fragment of the Epitaph of Ansegisus Bishop of Geneva, standing at the
Corner of the Channons-street, in Monsieur Tremblet's House.
NON MERITIS PRECOR HE died in the Year 840. those kind of cornered C's which
are in the Original were in use in those days. Near the Temple of Cologny there
is seen the remains of a Character like this, where we find -- GISVS EPS, that
is to say, Ansegisus Episcopus. But it is great pity that this Epitaph is not
entire, it consisted of four Dystichs. In the first of which he seems to say,
that he desires not to be judged according to his merits, but according to his
faith and trust in Gods mercy. In the second, he recommends himself to the
Readers prayers. In the third, he implores S. Victor's help and the Churches,
out of which this Epitaph was taken; when that of S Victor was pulled down to
make fortifications, and in the last Dystich, he declares his name to be
Ansegisus, and entreats again the Reader to remember him in his prayers.

LIII.
At a little Gate of S. Peter's-Church, on the Shoulders of this Apostle's
Statue.
PETRE AMAS ME TV THis is several hundred years old, as may be seen by the
Characters although they are not Gothic. So it is likely to have been made in
the time when Conradus was Bishop who finished S. Peter's Church.

MODERN INSCRIPTIONS.
I.
On a Bell which belonged to the Dominicans, and which has since been used for
a Clock in Monnoye.
Reverendissimus Dns Jo. de Brogniaco Roman. Ecce Cardinalis JOhn of Brognier
was Bishop of Geneva in 1423. and was Cardinal and Bishop of Ostie in the year
1405. as it appears by this Inscription; so that this quality of Cardinal
Bishop of Ostie, could not be attributed at the same time to John Bertrandis
Bishop of Geneva in 1414. according to Roset's account in his Chronological
Manuscript.

II.
In the Philosophy-School, or Chapel of the Cardinal of Ostie.
L' AN MCCCC and John Brucesses Pfues which you may read if you please. THis
Inscription may serve to convince those who will notallow this Chapel to have
been built in 1416. or in 1414. of the same date with this Epitaph, by the
Cardinal John of Bertrandis, who was then Bishop, and not by John of Brognier
who was but in 1423. but this reason is not so prevalent as the Arms of John of
Brognier, and of his Nephew Francis of Mies which are to be seen there: and
this Stone perhaps might have been brought thither either when it was finished,
or perhaps since.

III.
At S. Gervaises Steeple.
Anno MCCCCXXXV THis was dated from the Year 1435. when this Steeple was
repaired by Francis of Mies Bishop of Geneva.

IV.
In S. Peter's Church, round a Tombstone.
HIC IACET VENERABILIS Dnus Ansermus de Chenay Eccliar Viennen. and THis is the
ancientest of all the Chanons Epitaphs in S. Peter's Church. It is in Gothic
Letters, and the Arms of this Anselme of Chenay are joined with it. The Shield
is charged with two Bends. The Bishopric of Geneva was under the jurisdiction
of the Metropolitan of Vienna, so that there was great Communication held
betwixt these two Churches. The Canon is signed in an ancient Act cited by the
Author of the Book called the Citizen, in p. 256.

V.
In Verdaine-street, on a Gate belonging to the Hospital, which was heretofore
the Convent of S. Claire.
PATRONVS NOSTER THis Inscription informs us that the Noble William Bolomier
Fabius had founded the Convent of S. Claire at Geneva in 1443. his Arms are
engraven on it, of...with a pale of Gules, and for his Crest a Dogs head. This
William of Bolomier was Chancellor of Savoy, and the Dukes chief Minister of
State there; but three years after this foundation, viz. in the Year 1466. he
was thrown alive into the Lake with a stone about his neck, for having falsely
accused of Treason the Lord of Varembon. You may read this History at large in
Guichenon's History of Savoy, page 508. Roset tells us that the College of
Geneva was built in 1558. in the same place where Bolomiers (Hutins) lodgings
lay. It is very likely they were called after this manner, because he had
several houses near the Convent of S. Claire, and that he took thence an
occasion to build anew the said Convent.

VI.
At S. Peter's.
Hic jacet Reverendus Pater Dns Aplice Ecclie Dni MCCCCLVII, cujus aia THis is
in Gothic Letters on black Marble at the entrance into the Chapel, of which
he was the Founder ten years before his death: there is written in the windows
of it these words Dns Humbertus de Chilliaco 1447. This Humbert of Chilliaco
was qualified Doctor of Laws, and Prothonotary of the Apostolic See, (which I
believe was but only a bare title without any profit, (and Channon of Geneva:
he departed this life in 1457. Chilly is a Village five or six Leagues distant
from Geneva, from whence his Family sp^ang.

VII.
At the same place.
Hic jacet Nobilis and Potens vir Dni Mo. CCCCo. LXIX. Aia Requiescat in pace.
Amen. THis is written in Gothic Letters, and has the Coat of Arms belonging
to it joined with it, which are three Bars wavy. The termination (i) makes me
apt to believe that this Ginessiati was an Italian.

VIII.
At the same place.
Hoc Antro recubat R. Pr. Grener. AMblard Prothonotary of the family of the
Viry's departed this life in 1475. the Eighth of September. This which follows
is of the same stock.

IX.
Near the same place.
Marmoreo tegitur isto vir generosus pr Dns Petrus Ecclie Annorum 4o tpe oes
impetus PEter de Viry Channon of Geneva was of the illustrious Family of the
Viry's. This Epitaph is engraven in Roman Letters, and the Coat of Arms
adjoining thereunto is a Shield paly, and over all a bend, and charged with a
Crescent; in Chief and under the Shield is written Viry. Menestrier in his
Abridgment of Blazonry, p. 85. yet blazons them of this Family of Viry in
Genevois, paled with silver and azure without and bend or crescent. Perhaps
there are labels belonging to them.

X.
Near the same place.
Hic jacet Venerandus Petrus Ferodi Dni MCCCCLXXXXVI and THis is in Gothic
Letters, and the Arms belonging to it are an Anchored Cross, this Confraternity
of the Holy Trinity of which this Peter Ferodi de Grandeval a Licentiate in the
Laws was one, had been established at the Gray-Fryars of Rive, as I have learnt
by the remnant of an Inscription at Chapoterie, where this Convent heretofore
stood.

XI.
In the same Church in Roman Letters.
Reverendus Pr Dnus Andreas de Malvenda utriusque juris Doctor Applice
Prothonotarius, Ecclie THis is an Epitaph belonging to Andrew de Malvenda
Channon and Chanter of S. Peter's at Geneva, Doctor of Laws, and Apostolical
Prothonotary. There is a great Vineyard near Geneva called still by that name
of Malevendes, and there is farther a famous Author of the same name: the Arms
engraved on this Tombstone, are a Flower-de-Luce, the Crest is a Hat with three
Tassels. They are moreover to be seen painted in the Church-windows in green
color with the Flower-de-Luce.

XII.
Another in Roman Letters.
Hic jacet No.lis Gondissalvus de THis Family descended originally from Spain,
and the Christian name of this Malvenda was Spanish, Gonsalve, Burgensis,
Gebennensis, Citizen of Geneva. This was the way of speaking in those days, his
Coat of Arms were in a shield impaled, in the first side of which there is a
Flowerd-de-Luce as in Malvenda's Coat.

XIII.
Another in Gothic Letters.
Hic jacet vir venerabilis Dns Dni 1501. THis Channon Andrew du Croset died in
1501. and bears in his Arms a Kid with three Roses.

XIV.
At the foot of one of S. Peter's Towers.
Haec Turris e fundamentis instaurata WHich tells us, That it has been built
anew in the Year 1510.

XV.
In S. Peter's-Church, in Gothic Letters.
Hic jacet R. Pr. D. Fran. de Menthone Apus Pthon and vener. Dni, primus 1490.
3o. non October. THis Epitaph was made for an Uncle and his Nephew, the former of
these is called Francis of Menthon the Apostolical Prothonotary, who deceased
in 1490. and the other Richard de Rossillion, Channon of Geneva, and Dean of
Anessy who died in 1508. The first of these bears in his Scutcheon a Lion and
over all a bend componee, the second a Cross, which are the Arms of the County
of Rossillon near Geneva, in Sable with a silver Cross.

XVI.
In the same Church.
Joannes Ronzerius hujus insignis Dni 1516. 26. JOhn Ronzier Channon of S.
Peter's at Geneva, and Archdeacon of Chambery, had instituted an annual
Procession in this City, and died in 1516.

XVII.
In the same Church.
R. I. XP. D. Amblardus Goyetus THis is cut in Roman Letters as well as the
eight Verses following on the same Stone, whose expressions are very neat.

Parce precor lacrymis fatum gravare, quid urges?
Omnibus heic solido est scripta adamante dies.
Pulvis and umbra sumus tantum, post funera virtus
Nomen inextinctum sola superstes habet.
Nil aurum, nil pompa juvat, nil sanguis avorum:
Excipe virtutem caetera mortis erunt.
Hanc cole and ante oculos imitanda exempla parentum
Pone: sed interdum sit tibi cura mei.
He has for his Arms a Fess engraled between three Stars. They are yet to be
seen over the Counselors seats, with a Crosier and a Hat with four Tassels.
Filly, the place of which this Amblard Goyet was Abbot lies three Leagues
distant from Geneva on the side of Thonon, and was comprehended under the
Bishop of Geneva's jurisdiction: the Gentlemen of S. Martha recite the names of
the nine Abbeys dependant on the Bishopric of Geneva, viz. Entremont, Filly,
Sisseray, Six, S. Katherine, Hautecomte, the Alps and Bonnemont.

XVIII.
Another in Gothic Letters.
Sub hoc lapide jacet R. P. D. Ecclie Geben. and Bernensis HIS Coat of Arms is
a Tree with two Stars. Peter de Bona held several Benefices, being Archdeacon
of Tarantaise, and Channon of Geneva and of Berne.

XIX.
In Gothic Letters.
Precipue nobilitatis and prudentiae Dnus Ludovicus Ecclie Canonicus HE has a
Lion in his Coat of Arms: the next is a woman's Epitaph of the same Family.

XX.
In the same Church.
Hic jacet nobilis Beatrisia de Lulier Dni.............quae obiit 27 THis
Beatrix de Lullier Wife to Claudus of Arlo, was perhaps the Mother of the
forementioned Lewis of Arlo. The time and the names agree with the Arms: for
she bears party au premier a Lyoned Leopard crowned, and in the second a Lion.

XXI.
Another in Gothic Letters.
Marmore sub isto recubat Rdus Ecclie Canonicus, generalem Xrianae aia pace
fruatur. Amen. THe Arms of this Hugues Violette Channon of Geneva, who died in
1525. are a Cheveron with a beaufil in base point.

XXII.
In the same Church.
Hic jacet generosus Reverendusque Pr. D. Fran. de Viriaco Eccl. Dnis populoque
gratus probe vivens, HE bears the same Coat as the preceding does in number
nine, being of the Family of the Viry's, which is yet the name of a Village
which leads from Geneva to Chambery. This here mentioned was a Prefect or
Provost of the Bishopric of Lausane, and Channon of Geneva, and keeper of the
Seals belonging to the Bishopric of this City, and who departed this life in
the Year 1521.

XXIII.
Reverendus vir Petrus Gruetus THe Arms of Peter Gruet who was a Channon
likewise, are a Column accosted with six Stars, and the shield covered with a
Hat having three Tassels pendant. His Effigies, and these four Distichs are
annexed to the Epitaph.

Qui nostrae fuerat custos gratissimus Vrbis,
Virtutis decus, and relligionis honos:
Praesule sub quinto sceptri donatus habenis,
Nunc diro mortis subdit ur Imperio.
Marmoreo clausus jacet hic resupinus in antro.
Astra tenet virtus, caetera pulvis habet.
Disce tuum quisquis simili pede claudere passum,
Et tergant oculos haec monumenta tuos.
The third line tells us, that this Channon had been Vicar General under five
Bishops, as we have already observed in our History.

XXIV.
In S. Peter's Cloister there is this Epitaph of M. d' Aubigne Historiographer
of France.
D. O. M. THE style of this Epitaph is not common. He had made it himself, and
had left it as a public Testament to his Children. The sense of it is so
excellent that it deserves to be universally known. He begins then thus, In the
name of the Almighty and most merciful God. Behold here, my Children, my last
Will and Desires for you, that ye may enjoy that ease and plenty which I have
purchased for you with a great deal of trouble, although by lawful and honest
means, maugre the tempests which have threatened me on all sides. And ye will
live comfortably, if you serve God and tread in your fathers footsteeps:
otherwise you will not fail to meet with the contrary. It is your Father, who
has been twice your Father who gives you this Council, from whom although not
primarily) ye have received your being and well-being. And this has he written
for to be an honorable testimony to you, if ye follow his example; but if ye
degenerate, he designs it for a reproach and public disgrace. Theodorus d'
Aubigne Octuagenarie, who departed this life, 1630.the twenty ninth of April.

depiction of sepulcher THE TOMB oF THE DUKE of ROHAN


XXV.
At S. Peter's. The Duke of Rohan's Epitaph.
D. O. M. S. NAVARRAE ET SCOTIAE PRINCEPS, CONFOSSVS VVLNERIBVS, THis is
written in Letters of Gold on a black Marble-stone.



1. St. Peter's. 2. the Borough de Four. 3. St Ledger. 4. la Trelle. 5. the Gate
of la Trelle. 6. Arsnall. 7 the Town house. 8. St. Germans. 9. the Gate of la
Tartasse. 10. the Coraterie 11. the City. 12 the Bullwork de Loye. 13. the new
gate. 14. the Churchyard and Hospital for those that are inse^ted with the
Plague. 15 the Money gate. 16. the Isle 17. St. Gervais 18. the Lake of Geneva.
1^. the river Rhosne.

XXVII.
On the front of S. John's Bulwark.
Viator I Have transcribed this Inscription which was made by Monsieur
Godefroy, because some persons have judged it to resemble the beauty and virtue
of Antiquity. Yet we shall meet but with few such like affected Antitheses, or
sporting with words, amongst the ancients, as munita and morata, armati and
animati, secura nimis and si cura numinis, munimentum and monumentum, although
it is in the main of it very ingenious.

There are several other modern Inscriptions which are in the Printed Book
called The Citizen, and likewise several particulars, and acts which might
serve for proofs in this History, but we do not think fitting to ingross our
Book with them.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST and SECOND BOOK.
A
ANcient names of Geneva page 2 Antiquity of Geneva 3 Articles of agreement
between the Earl of Savoy and Bishop of Geneva 22 Articles between the Duke and
Fribourgers. 69 Alliance with Berne and Geneva 81 Ambuscade at Lancay 84
Articles of Agreement between the Protestants and Romanists in the City 97 Ame
the Eighth does homage 29 Articles of agreement between the Duke and City 47
Ame of Gingins chosen Bishop of Geneva. 49 Assembly at Payerne 93 Articles of
the Bernoises 101
B
BIshop of Geneva 12 S. Bernards Epistles 18, 19 Bishop of Geneva's claims of
Sovereignty over the City considered. 20 Bishop of Geneva quits his Bishopric.
22 Bishop and City disagree 25 Bishops of Geneva's Authority over the City
considered. ibid. Battle between the Earls of Genevois and Savoy. 26 Bishop of
Geneva a favourer of John Huss. 29 He builds Common-Halls 30 Duke of Burgundy
conveys the Duchess of Savoy to Geneva. 37 Bishop of Geneva kills the Bishop
of Viviers. 39 Bishop of Geneva's character 40 Berthelier sought after by the
Bishop 55 Berthelier proposes an Alliance to the Fribourgers 58 Bernoises
threaten the Genevoises if they opposed the Protestant Religion 96 Bernard
makes public profession of the Truth. 104 Baudichon made Captain General 106
Besancon Hugues with some others makes an Alliance with Fribourg 62 Burgership
complained against by the Princes. 63 Berthelier acquitted by the City 64
Berthelier apprehended by the Duke 71 Berthelier Executed 72 Bandiers appears
before the Council 80 Bishop returns to Geneva 81 Bernoises embrace the
Protestant Religion. 86 Bonnivard betrayed, etc. 91 Bernoises send Forces to
Geneva 92
C
ROman Colony sent to Geneva 8 Culverins left by the Prior of S. Victor to
Geneva. 51 Consilii stabbed 75 Claudius Richardet breaks his Staff on the
Treasurers head 78 Council divided 80 Several Churches built in Geneva 14
Charlemain comes to Geneva 15 Contract between the Bishop and City of Geneva.
31 Caddoz spreads the Plague in Geneva 90 Castle of Roll burnt 92 Conspiracy
to bring in the Bishop 102
D
DErivation of the word Geneva 5 Disagreement between the Earl of Genevois and
Bishop of Geneva 17 Duke of Savoy writes to the Pope 30 Duke of Savoy turns
Hermit 33 Duke Lewis of Savoy quits all claims to Geneva. 35 Disagreement of
the Genevoises in the choice of their Bishop. 40 Duke of Savoy desires he might
for some time remain at Geneva 41 Duke of Savoy comes to Geneva ib. Duke
Philbert dies 46 Duke and Duchess of Savoy arrive at Geneva. ibid. Dukes Arms
battered down 83 Deputies sent to the Duke 61 Deputies present the Dukes Letter
to the Council ib. Duke raises an Army 64 Dukes Answer to the Deputies 66 Duke
enters with his Army into Geneva. 67 Dukes Proclamation 68 Deputies Answer to
the Duke ibid. Duke sends for Hugues and Malbuisson 69 Duke desires to be
acknowledged Sovereign over Geneva. 79
E
EArl of Genevois treats with the City of Geneva. 24 Earl of Genevois defeated
ibid. Earl of Genevois dies 25 Earl of Savoy dies 26 Emperor Charles the fourth
comes to Geneva. 27 Earl of Savoy endeavors to insinuate himself into the City
28 Earl of Genevois charged with felony 29 Earls of Savoy made Dukes 30 Emperor
declares Geneva an Imperial City. 32 Eyria accused by Rene 42 Eignots or
Huguenots whence derived 62 Emperor and King of France at variance. 76 Eidgnots
faction endeavored to be weakened. 79 Emperor enjoins the Duke to desist from
his pretensions of Sovereignty over Geneva. 84
F
FOrt of Penney built by Aim of Grandson 22 Fire at Geneva 26 Another. 33
Felix dies 35 Fairs removed from Geneva 37 Famine in Geneva 45 Francis Mallet
his liberality 48 French Ambassador confined to Geneva. 50 Fribourgers send an
Herald to the Duke. 66 Fribourgers send Forces to Geneva 68 Fribourgers demand
satisfaction for Bertheliers death 73 Fraternity of the Spoon 85 Fraternity of
the Spoon appear before Geneva. 86 Fraternity of the Spoon hold a meeting at
Nyons. 87 They are enraged at Pont-Verre's death. 88 They are favored by the
Bishop 91 Farel comes to Geneva 95 Froment' s arrival at Geneva ibid. He
Preaches at Molard ibid. Furbity opposed by Froment 99 Furbity complained
against by the Bernoises. ibid. Fribourgers threaten to break off with Geneva.
100 Furbity enjoined to recant 101 Farel Preaches publicly 102 Fribourgers
break off with the Genevoises. ibid. Furbities enlargement requested by the
French King 103 A Friar Preaches at Geneva in Lent, ib. Farel Preaches at S.
Magdalens 105 Farel Preaches before the Council ibid. French assist Geneva 106
Farel causes a Fast to be proclaimed 107
G
GEnevoises formidable to the Romans. 5 Genevoises protected by the Romans
against the Switzers 6 Geneva burnt in Marc. Aurelius' s time 8 Geneva rebuilt
9 Geneva first received the Christian Faith 11 Gay causes the Peasants to take
up Arms against the Nobility 41 S. Gervais Walks finished 47 Grossi's Mule
ham-stringed 53 Geneva excommunicated 58 Gout cured 83 Geneva Alarmed 85 Geneva
fortified by the Syndicks 93
H
HElvetians invade the Gauls 7 Hubert Dauphin of Viennois assaults the City of
Geneva 23 Humbert of Villers dies 29 A Herald sent to the City 64
I
JUlius Caesar's name yet retained in sundry Families in Geneva 7 John of
Morellis chosen Bishop of Geneva. 28 John of Bertrandis chosen Bishop of
Geneva. 29 John of Pierre seizes the Founder of the Bishops Palace 3^ John of
Savoy obtains the Bishopric of Geneva. 49 John of Savoy dies of the French Pox
74
L
LEvrery sent for by the Duke 77 Levrery put to death 78 Liberty of Conscience
permitted to both parties in Geneva 98
M
MAlefactor dies under the torments which he suffered, to make him confess. 44
Mortel a famous Thief 45 Marcossay's lot to be King 74 Mammelusses Conspiracy
82 Meteor seen at Geneva 86 Mass abolished in Geneva 105 Money Coined at Geneva
107
N
NVns leave to Geneva 106 Names of Geneva 2
O
OLivetan first translates the Bible into French. 96
P
Privileges of the City of Geneva 28 Philippe chosen chief Syndick 81 Peace
concluded between the Duke and City of Geneva 92 Protestant Religion began to
be maintained at Geneva 95 Protestant Religion opposed by the Fribourgers 96
Pennet sentenced to be beheaded 101 Protestants and Papists equal in number in
the City 102 Peter of Focigny chosen Bishop of Geneva. 26 Penay Castle
assaulted by the Genevoises. 104 Privileges of Geneva confirmed 29 Popular
Tumults 52 Pecolat joques on the Bishop 53 Pecolat put upon the Rack 55 Pecolat
cuts out his own Tongue 56 Peter of Beaume chosen Bishop 75 Preparations for
the entertainment of the Duchess. 75 Pontverre enters Geneva 88
Q
QVarrels about Religion 100
R
REne endeavors to make his Brother Sovereign over Geneva 42 Rene declaimed
against by a Preacher 43 Rene begins to be out of favor with his Brother.
ibid.
S
SItuation of Geneva 9 Shoomakers Prediction concerning John of Brognier 32
Switzers mutiny for lack of their Pay 38 Alliance made with the Switzers by
John Lewis Bishop of Geneva ibid. Syndicks put by their Office. 73 Suburbs of
S. Victor alarmed 89 Saunier banished the City 95
T
THoberet sentenced to lose his head. 99
V
VIdame Imprisoned 48 Vandel imprisoned 52 Victor imprisoned 67 Victor his
advice to the Genevoises 87 Vandel wounded 97 Verly slain 98 Verly's Relations
bring along with them sixscore Soldiers to revenge his death ib. Vandel led
away Prisoner 103 Viret almost poisoned 104
W
WIlliam of Constance dies 23
The TABLE of the THIRD BOOK.
AN Anabaptist disputes with Farel 113 Artichaud's Faction 115 Adultery
severely punished 121 Amede lays ambushes about Geneva 137 Albigny draws up his
men near Bonne 150 Alexander the Jesuit encourages the enterprizers 152 Aubigne
comes and lives at Geneva 174 His death ibid. Anthony his Errors 174 Abominable
practices and end 175
B
BArk fitted out by the Genevoises 110 Banishment of the three Ministers
repealed 116 Bonne taken by the Genevoises 128 Bernoises agree upon a Cessation
of Arms 133 Baron of Conforgien arrives at Geneva 138 Beza Preaches a
Thanskgiving Sermon for their deliverance from the attempt of the Savoyards 156
Buttet sets forth a Book called the Cavalier of Savoy 163 Blondel his villainy
ibid. Beza dies 165 Bastide and Terrail executed 169 Battle fought by the Duke
of Nemours and the Duke of Savoy 171 Bernoises promise them of Geneva their
assistance 109 They break off with the Duke of Savoy 110 Bernoises arrive at
Geneva 111 Bolsec charges the Ministers with teaching false Doctrine 118 -- He
writes Calvin's life 119 Baron of S. Lagier slain 129 Boege taken 131 Buringe
besieged 141 Beza reported to have turned Papist 144 Bastard of Savoy comes to
Geneva 145 Beza makes a speech to the King of France 147 Baron of Esclavonia
retires to Geneva 173 Bonnivard set at liberty 111
C
CAlvin comes to Geneva 112 He compiles a Catechism 113 Was together with
others banished the City 114 He writes to Geneva 114 Sent for again to Geneva
116 His painfulness ibid. He disputes with Carolin ibid. He is accused for
teaching false Doctrine 118 He answers Bolsec ibid. His death 122 Castalio his
opinions 117 College built in Geneva 121 Captain Guiche assaulted by the
Peasants 136 Crusille sacked and burnt 140 Conforgien returns home 143 Culebro
his Orders 162 Canal a Traitor to the City 166 Cromwell writes to the Genevoises
180 Crequi passes through Geneva 182 City divided 186 Chillon Castle besieged
111 Carolyn maintains the lawfulness of the Mass 113 Chenalat executed for
Treason 172
D
DVke of Savoy makes new attempts on Geneva 124 Des Plans a Traitor to the City
124 Duke advances to attack the Fort near Arve 131 Dukes Army approaches 141
Duke of Savoy desires the French King to desist from protecting Geneva 146 Duke
dispatches Messengers to all parts to publish his good success 152 De Vic
Ordered to assure the Genevoises of the French Kings favor 161 Duke of Rohan's
Funeral 178 Discourse of the Rhosne ibid. Deodati' s death 179 Duke of Savoy
quarters great number of Soldiers round about Geneva 183 Diligence of the
people in working at the Fort 185 Discovery of a late design on Geneva 187
Deputies dispatched from Geneva 190
E
ENglish Church at Geneva 120 Earthquakes 125 Esgaillon beheaded 135 Ebbings
and flowings of the Rhosne 184 Emperor' s Ambassador passes from Geneva. 191
F
FRench designed to be Massacred in Geneva 120 French Kings complaint against
Geneva 121 Famine in Geneva 126 Fort of Arve demolished 144 Fire on the Bridge
of Rhosne 186
G
GEnevoyses sally out against the Savoyards 110 Gex surrendered ibid. Grybalde
propagates Servetus his opinions 120 Gentil disputes against Calvin 120 Grimaud
endeavors to spread the Plague 123 Gex surrendered 128 Genevoyses engage the
Enemy 132 Gex surprised 134 Genevoyses shamefully worsted by the Savoyards 137
Genevoyses defeated 138 Genis taken by surprise 161 Giovani accuses an eminent
person in the City of Treason 170 Gothefredus his Latin Inscription 179 Gautier
hanged 180 Genevoyses fortify their City 184
H
HEnry the third of France makes an Alliance with the Switzers 123 Hermance
lays an ambush for the Genevoyses gathering their Wine-Harvest 139
I
JEws request to Geneva 125 Jubilee at Thonon where the design of scaling Geneva
was laid 149
K
KIngs Army attached by the Savoyards 141 King of France declares Geneva
comprehended in the Treaty 149 King of France comes to Lions 181
L
LA Cluse surrenders 111 Lentilles spreads the Plague in Geneva 117 La Cluse
attempted by the Genevoises surrenders 134 Lurbigny defeats the Savoyards 136
Lancy demolished 143 Letter of the Genevoyses to the Sieur of Guiche 156 Letter
of the French King to the Genevoyses 157 Landgrave of Hesse makes the City of
Geneva a Present 166 Lectius dies at Geneva 170
M
MAss abolished 111 Mare committed to Prison 114 Marquis of Vico comes to
Geneva 119 Mercier the Minister flead alive 133 Maillet committed Prisoner 158
Marquis of Bade retires to Geneva 173
N
NAtional Synod at Paris 172 Noroy secured. 189
O
OLivarez Counsel to the Dukes Ambassador 127
P
PEney blown up 110 Peace concluded 145 Peace concluded between the Duke and
Genevoyses 163 Philippe kills a man with his Leadingstaff 115 Plague at Geneva
116 Pope requested to assist the Duke 126 Prince Palatin's entertainment at
Geneva 187 Prince George dies there 189
R
RIchardet kills himself by a fall 115 Regiment of Soleurre attached 130 Roset
Harangues the Queen and Dauphin 191 Roset dies at Geneva 169
S
SAunier teaches School at Geneva 111 Saunier with others banished 114 Syndicks
still Catholics in their hearts 113 Servetus comes to Geneva 119 Spiffame his
Tragical end 122 Sancy animates the Genevoyses against the Duke 127 Savoyards
attack the Forces from Berne 132 They set upon three Barks bound for Geneva 135
Sonas slain 142 Sadeel dies at Geneva 143 Serres dies at Geneva 145 Sonas
bleeds at Nose 151 He together with six others first climb up the City walls
152 Sarraz in compiles a Book called The Genevoise Citizen 163 A Sergeant
executed 170 Spies sent into Savoy 184 Savoy and Geneva differ about the
imposition of Salt 190 Spanish Ambassador passes through Geneva 191 Stouppe
intercedes in the behalf of Geneva ibid.
T
TOurnon his Harangue to the Lords of Berne 157 Terrail his designs on the City
of Geneva 167 His designs on Geneva discovered 168 He sets out from Savoy for
Flanders ib. Apprehended and executed 169
V
VErsoy besieged 133 Valor of a Captain 140 Valor of a Tailor 155
W
WArning given to the City of Geneva 149 Warning given a second time to them
150
Z
ZUrich makes a perpetual Alliance with Geneva. 126
THE END.

