A Protestants Account OF HIS Orthodox Holding In Matters of Religion, at this
present; In difference in the CHURCH. And For his own and others better
confirmation or rectification in the points treated on, Humbly submitted to the
censure of the Church of England.

Printed Anno Dom. 1642.

Good Reader,
THE dissentions in our Church about matters of Religion, being so great, as
that there is scarce any thing in practice so well established, but is by some
or other called in question, and the distempers of the State being such, as not
any man scarcely knows where to make address for resolution: I do here (as I
hold it my duty) make a public presentment and submission of the judgment,
that upon calling my understanding to an account, I have been able to make in
these matters, to the pious censure of our Mother the Church of England, to the
end that from her sincere admonishment, both thou and I may receive as the case
shall require, either approbation or rectification in our judgments; which I
heartily wishing, rest,

Thine in all faithful affections, J. S.

A Protestants Account of his Orthodox holding, in matters of RELIGION.
WHen in all Controversies about matter of Religion, the dictate of the Word of
God is principally to be attended; and the certainty of that dictate depends
upon the assurance of the true sense and interpretation of the Scripture; It is
necessary that in the first place we have consideration of the assurance one
may have of the true and genuine sense thereof.

For though without controversy the Scripture be a Rule of the highest, most
absolute, and most sacred Authority that may be, and such as wheresoever it
extends to give Rule, binds and regulates all humane Laws and Constitutions,
from what authority soever derived, and though in many things (as namely, in
the Fundamentalls of Religion, in matters of necessary faith, and in the
express Commands of God) the truths thereof are so manifest, and of so assured
receipt, as that no authority, no not of an Angel from Heaven is to be received
to the contrary, but every one must of his own illumination embrace and hold
them; yet are there other truths which may so easily admit dispute, as that
without the awe of some authorized Moderator, men of perverse affections would
inevitably subvert the peace of the Church with their infinite dissentions
about them. It is true, that to the great calamities of the Church, there is
much dissension made about the Morator or Interpreter of the Scripture; but
that is not so much through error of Judgment, as obstinacy of parties, among
whom the two most adverse and dangerous parties are neither of them so
blameless, but that they are culpable of detracting from the authority of the
Scripture, by authorizing unwarrantable interpretation of it.

It is true, that in the first place the Church of Rome is the great subverter
of the Scripture, by assuming to her self the person of the whole Church
Catholic, and by virtue thereof, to have infallibility of judgment in
interpretation of Scripture; for whilst she as Judge arrogates to her self
infallibility, she makes that there is no more regard to be had what the Text
is, than there is heed to be taken what was the Warrant that the holy Ghost had
for those things which he has at any time delivered; for he that is
infallible, pronounces of his own authority, and can no more depend or be
restrained to any original out of himself, than infiniteness can be
restrained to a finite thing, or God himself unto a creature: wherefore there
can be no extrneall Judge of Scripture, of infallible authority, for that of
necessity annulls the Scripture, and makes it no other than a dead Letter.

But in the second place they also destroy the Authority of Scripture, who when
in word and outward profession they magnify it above all things, do then by
subjecting it indifferently to the judgment of every one that takes upon him
to interpret it, trample under foot the honor that they gave unto it; for as
infallibility of the Interpreter takes away the Scripture from the hearer, so
incertainty in the Interpreter takes away the hearer from the Scripture: for
how can one hear, when he may either doubt the judgment or fidelity of the
Interpreter? or when (as it often happens) the Interpreters that are authorized
one as much as another, do make a diverse, perhaps an adverse delivery of the
Scripture? As in the Romish error the Scripture is made a dead letter, so in
this it is made a Trumpet of uncertain sound, which none can with safety hear
and receive, unless you will suppose some hearer also infallible. To say
truth, as in the question whether one God or many, it was truly said, Dicite
plure^, dicite null^s; so in the Interpreters of Gods Word (whereof none can be
authentic, but with whom the Spirit of God is warrantably to be presumed) if
in equal degree and authority we make many, we make as good as none at all. We
must therefore find an especial Interpreter, and that of such potiority of
judgment before all others, as that we may safely confide therein, and yet so
confide, as that we may not detract ought from the Authority of the Scripture,
by ascribing infallibility to the Interpreter.

We are taught negatively, 2 Pet. 1. 20.
That no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation; We are also
told, That the Church is the ground and pillar of the truth; 1 Timothy 3. 15.
And we are warned not to adhere to the doctrines of particular men, be they
never so eminent and famous in the Congregation, but to weigh their Doctrines
delivered as the Word of God, and to see if they have always been so
understood and received by the Church; for if we find not authority (of our
own Church at least) for them, we are then but cautiously to receive them; but
if we find the judgment of the Church Catholic against them, we are
altogether then to reject them: for when the promises of the holy Ghosts
assistance were made, not to single disciples, nor to some in particular, but
indefinitely to the universality of them: Matthew. 28. 20.
I am with you unto the end. He that hears you, hears me. He (the Spirit of
Truth) will guide you into all Truth; Luke 10. 16.
that is, not some, nor every one of you, but generally the Body of you: Ioh.
16. 13.
We cannot receive Doctrines with any confident assurance, but from the
concurrent Judgment of all the Pastors of the whole Church Universal, to whom
the promise of assistance is properly, and in the first place made; or in
defect thereof, from the concurrent Judgment of the Pastors of our particular
Church, which, as to her own Members, is to be received as the Judgment of the
whole, till the Judgment of the whole appears to the contrary. For as the
spirits of the particular Prophets in every Church ought to be heard and
received of all the Members thereof, until it appear that their particular
spirits and Doctrines recede from the concurrent Judgment of all the Prophets
of that Church (to which they ought to submit their judgments) so ought the
concurrent Judgment of all the Prophets of every particular Church, to be
received of that Church, until it appear that it is contrary to the Judgment
of the Church Universal: But then as the Universal Church must be heard
before the particular, so must the Universality of the particular, before any
particulars of that particular Church; for God, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
32, 33.
is not the author of confusion: And therefore he not only objects against the
refractory particulars of Corinth, We (that is, 1 Cor 11. 16.
the Church of Corinth) have no such Custom; But lest they should allege
error also in that particular Church, he justifies their practice, by the
practice of the Universal; Neither (says he) have the Churches of God. By
which it appears, private men are tied to submit to the judgment of their
particular Church, and that unto the judgment of the Universal.

But if any ask what is the Catholic Church, when and how is her judgment to
be had.

The Catholic Church (properly so called) is the whole number of Christians
in all places Universally professing Christ; And this, since the Apostles
times, never was, nor can be assembled into one, to give sentence upon any
thing: But as in the Politic Body of Civil States, the real assembling of
all the Members personally being unnecessary, inconvenient, and almost
impossible; some persons representative of the whole, being by intimation of
the superiors from all parts, delegate to give the common suffrage of the
whole, do by the Laws of God and man, give the binding sentence of the whole
Body Universal, So in the mystical Body of the Church, the Ecclesiastics,
which are the only authorized Members, for discerning and judging matters that
depend upon the Word of God, because that to them, and to them alone, were the
promises of the holy Ghosts assistance made, they (I say) either all assembling
themselves together, or at least in their several Diocesses, chosing and
delegating from among themselves trusty men, to do the office of the Clergy in
that point, do truly and properly give the entire Vote of the whole Catholic
Church: And in this way we have many sentences and Decrees thereof remaining to
us; which being from age to age successively received, do stand in force and
speak, unto this very present: against which, whosoever shall in practice or
doctrine attempt any thing to the prejudice of what is so established, shall
apparently declare himself an insolent and schismatic exalter of himself,
and of his own private judgment, against the judgment of the whole Catholic
Church: and in the same way that the Church Catholic speaks, in the same
also, if need be, speaks every particular Church.

This being the extraordinary way wherein the Church speaks not, but upon
extraordinary occasions; she has also for ordinary occasions, a continual
constant voice in an ordinary way; The Church, considered in it self, is not,
nor cannot be less than the whole Body of it; but considered in the actions of
it, any part by which it duly works; as to that work only which it so
intends, is truly and properly enough called the Church: If we speak of a
man, as of his being, as that he lives, is in health, young, lusty, etc. we
mean by the man no less than the whole man, with all his members; but if we
speak of the particular actions of the man, as that he did hear, see, speak,
take, etc. we do not then intend that every distinct member of his body did
actually hear, see, speak, take, etc. but that the man performed those actions
by the proper members respectively ordained for the doing of them, and that
nevertheless the office of each member so ministering, was the proper act of
the whole man; so that though the eyes of the man only saw, his ears heard,
his tongue spoke, and his hands handled, yet is the whole man said truly to
hear, see, speak, and handle.

As then in the body natural, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
so in the Body mystical, the Church; though the Church, in her being
comprehend all members, as well Lay as Clergy, yet in her work and actions she
works not promiscuously by all, but by her proper and ordained members; for
if every one were an eye to see, a head to judge, or a mouth to give sentence,
then were they all but one equipotent member, 1 Cor. 12. 19.
and where then were the body? says S. Paul: therefore though in the question
of circumcising the believing Gentiles, the letters of Ordinance went in the
name of the Apostles, Acts 15. 23.
Elders, and Brethren; yet plainly the Brethren had no vote in the decision of
the question, but as the Apostles and Elders are only said to have come
together to consider of the matter, so the debate and decision there, is only
theirs, and the Decrees thereupon are in the 16 Chapter, Acts 16. 4*
called only the Decrees that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, and if
we will have the Brethren to have been named in the Apostles Letters, to show
that Laymen have authority to vote in matters of Religion, then must we also
confess that Laymen, as well as the Man of God, have authority to judge in
matters of Doctrine also, for they that writ the Letters, say of the point of
Doctrine, We gave no such Commandment. Therefore plainly the judgment of the
Apostles and Elders, was in that matter, the judgment of the Brethren, and of
the whole Church there, by their unanimous submission and agreement unto them.
And when all is done, the voting of Apostles, Elders, and Brethren together, is
a thing far differing from the voting of Laymen only, and from Laymens
choosing of the votes.

In the same manner the voice of the ordained Governors and Ministers in every
particular Church, in those things that are committed to their Care and Charge,
is the voice of the Church it self; and the voice of that particular Church,
not being repugnant to faith, nor the declared judgment of the Catholic
Church is, (as to the Members of that Church) the voice of the whole Church
Catholic: so that he that refuses to hear the voice of the Governors of his
particular Church, refuses to hear his particular Church; and not that Church
only, but the whole Church Catholic.

Again, as in the body the most useful members thereof, the eyes, the ears,
the tongue, the hands, the feet would not only be useless, but make a
confused deformity, if they were every one annexed immediately to the gross of
the body, and not joined by the mediation of some noble limb, the eyes, the
ears, and tongue, by the head; the hands, by the arms, and the feet, by the
legs: so would it be in the Church Catholic, if every particular Member
should hold it self immediately to depend on it, and not on the noble and
mediating limb of his particular Church; that so by a useful and decent
subordination of the Members under the head. Coloss. 2. 19.
The Body from thence (as the Apostle speaks) by joints and bands having
nourishment and knit together, may increase with the increase of God.

These same things does our Savior teach, when giving a Rule for governing
ones self in private offenses betwixt his brother and him, Matthew. 18. 17.
he bids him Tell it to the Church: Our Savior meant not that upon every such
occasion the Church Catholic should, or could be convoked, but only that the
offended should complain to the Governors of the Church he lived in, the doing
whereof, is properly to complain to the whole Church, yea to the whole Church
Catholic, as appears by our Saviors adding, that if the offender refused to
hear the Church, he should be as an Heathen man; as much as to say, That if by
refusing to hear his particular Church, he refused to hear the whole Chuch
Catholic, he should then be as an Heathen man, cut off from the Communion of
the whole Church; for it were no just sentence to cut off one from the whole
Church, for disobeying the particular, unless that disobedience to the
particular, were disobeying of the whole Church.

Every particular Church then has so far the authority of the Church
Universal, that (as to her own Members) her voice is the voice of the
Catholic Church, and ties them all in conscience to submit their judgments
to hers, and to yield observance to all her Ordinances that are not against the
express Word of God, nor judgment of the Catholic Church. And even in her
Ordinances that minister question, whether they be Orthodox and agreeable to
the Word of God or no, her authority is so far binding, as that even those
Ordinances^ are not to be rejected nor condemned upon the judgment of any of
her private Members only, but either by her own review and censure, by some
more general National Assembly, or (if the consequence require it) by a full
and true General Assembly of the Church; whose sentence when once it shall be
obtained, shall be received, as the most sacred, and most authentic judgment
that may be had in that matter, and nearest approaching to the judgment of the
holy Ghost; but shall not be received as infallible, as if pronounced by a
Judge infallible; for what assistance soever God has promised to his Church,
it is only such as agrees with the condition of a Church Militant, therefore
he has neither promised it to the single Ministers in every of their
Preachings, neither yet so to the Church it self, as that in every of her
Consultations and Decrees, she should infallibly produce the sentence of the
holy Ghost (for then were the Scripture needless, seeing the Church should be
able to pronounce infallibly with authority, equal to the very Text, and the
Church as to error in knowledge and understanding should not be Militant, but
Triumphant: but every judgment of every Church shall have such a potiority of
credit and authority, in respect of the judgment of any part or Member
thereof, as that it must not be rejected nor overruled by any other judgment,
than either her own revisall and censure, Assembly of her proper Judges, a more
general National Assembly, or a full general Assembly of the Church.

To conclude then, when for avoiding confusion in the Church, God has
subjected the spirits of the (particular) Preachers, 1 Cor. 14. 32.
to the concurrent judgment of all the Preachers; for men, under pretense of
preaching Gods Word, to preach their own private judgments, in detraction from
the authority of their Church, and without submitting their opinions to the
judgment of their Church; this is so far from honoring God by magnifying of
his Word, as that contrarily it destroys the authority of the Scripture, by
confused and wrong arrogated judgment in interpreting of it, it by sects and
schisms subverts the peace of the Church, and contrary to the Admonition that
God has given in that behalf, makes God the author of confusion.

The assurance of our Orthodox profession, depending upon the consideration of
these things, cannot but occasion a little further examination of them.

Religion, a religando ex vi termini is that, which whatsoever it be, ^ Tim. 3
2.
ought to bind the Professor; but of all other Godliness (which only is the
true Religion) must not have that binding power of hers denied; and therefore
will worship, as repugnant to Religion, is to be rejected. Ye shall not (says
Moses to the people when they were to enter into the Land, and be a settled
Church) Ye shall not (says he) do as we do this day, Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
every one that which is good in his own eyes. It is impossible for the
Professor which follows his own judgment or conscience only, to avoid
disobedience and will worship; for private judgment and conscience, are
neither sure nor constant observers of Gods Law, nor can a man always tell
whether his judgment, or his affection leads his conscience; but as obedience
is that which our Savior himself learning, shows that we all must learn; so
the power of Godliness is to constrain obedience. Heb 5. 8.
And if there be a question what we shall obey, Mala. 2. 7.
the Scripture tells us the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and we
should seek the Law at his mouth. And our Savior tells his disciples, He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and bids that
he that will not hear the Church, be as an Heathen man: And St Paul tells us,
The Church is the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and against private singularities and indecencies in the service of God: he
objects, that their Church had no such custom, 1 Cor.
neither the Churches of God: We are also commanded to submit to all manner of
Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2 13
for the Lords sake; And that every soul be subject to the higher power; that
he that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and receives to
himself damnation. The Scripture is abundant to this purpose, Genesis 17. 6.
and among many other places, Genesis 27. 6. is remarkable: When Jacob (or Israel)
was afraid, in the apparel of his elder brother, to seek his fathers supreme
blessing, lest by seeking it in a undue manner, he should, instead of a
blessing, get a curse; his mother requires his obedience to her voye; Israel
obeyed her, and by it obtained the blessing. If this Allegory so much concern
us, as that we be the Israel, the younger brother that want and seek the
blessing, our Savior our elder brother, in whose clothing we seek it, and God
our father that gives it; who is our directing mother, by oheying whose voice
we obtain the blessing, but she that is the wife of our father, the Church of
God? By these then, and many other Scriptures, it appears, That in all matters
of Religion, wheresoever there is a doubt, and consesequently use of judgment,
the judgment of the Church is to be preferred; So Gods Word (which must be
observed) directs, so the exigence of things requires, the particular man
cannot otherwise avoid will worship and singularity, nor the Church of God
confusion.

When now there is so great offense taken at diverse Ordinances of our Church,
what is there in any of them so erroneous or corrupt as to discharge ones
conscience from the terror of these Precepts, and from the obedience that they
command? Is there any thing in the Ordinances of our Church against the
express command of God? If there be, Why do not the offended show it, that
they may justify themselves, vindicate Gods Truth, and stop the mouths of all
gainsayers? But when instead of things expressly crossing Gods Commadments,
they find no exceptions but what, at the most, are disputable, grounded upon
inferences and collections, and those not generally received, nor yet all
approved by the judgment of any particular Church, but late imaginations of
men, of a few, and them private men, whether it be meet in the sight of God,
upon such grounds to follow men, or indeed ones own self, rather than God,
every one may judge.

And were that granted (which indeed cannot be proved, nor may be granted) that
the Ordinances of our Church are superstitious, How yet will that warrant the
disobeying of them, to a conscience that is guided only by the Word of God?
For where is superstition by the Word of God forbidden? Or where is it there
described? Though then we grant superstition to be the foulest corruption a
Christian Church can be depraved with, and nearest approaching to Idolatry, yet
being a corruption discovered by the judgment of the Church, rather than any
express Word of God, With what warrant can any man's conscience, against Gods
express command, disobey the Ordinance, for fear of superstition, when
concerning it he has received no command from God? 1 Samuel 15. 23.
especially, when disobedience being like the sins of Witchcraft and
Idolatry, he commits a sin that is equal to them, and only to avoid
superstition, which is less than either. Nay, that is not all, but while he
disturbs his duty with false apprehenhensions of superstition, he with his
disobedience, commits the superstition which he fears; for when superstition
properly is an over-strict religious insisting upon the doing or not doing of
that which in it self is but indifferent; his own scrupulousness not to kneel,
not to bow, not to stand up, not to be uncovered, not to answer, etc. according
to the use of the Church, is not only disobedience, but very superstition it
self, placing Religion in that wherein there is no Religion to be placed; and
teaching the conscience more to fear pollution from without, by things
externally enjoined, than to fear it within, from the haughtiness,
stubbornness, or self-conceitednesse of the heart, than which, nothing does
sooner defile the actions of a man, and make his Religion vain.

But, will he say, His conscience cannot be satisfied, but that the Ordinance
of the Church in some things, is superstitious, so as he may not submit unto
it. We must answer, Let him use the liberty of his consci^nce, but let him
withal take heed he use it not for a cloak of maliciousness; for if through
weakness of conscience he takes offense at the Ordinance of the Church, as
superstitious, which otherwise he knows himself tied to reverence and observe,
let him, in true humiliation of his soul, behave himself like one afflicted,
that laments the breach between the Church and him, let him labor for
satisfaction by the help of those whose integrity in that behalf, shall not by
any averseness to the Ordinance, be suspected: let him forbear railing
language on Governors, and contemptuous behavior toward the Ordinance, that
so though he cannot be conformable, he may not yet become refractory, but may
be piously embraced of the Church, till in the spirit of meekness he be at
last restored to his strength: But if he will not do thus, but will contend,
hold his own opinion sufficient to oppose against the Judgment of the Church,
add contempt to his nonconformity, seek to poss^sse others with his opinions,
glory in their association, and toward the Governors of the Church be as one
of those that control the Priest, Hos. 4. 4.
yea, that control the whole Priesthood; that man, in pretending conscience,
lies unto the holy Ghost; he is not pressed with conscience, but a lift up
heart, self conceited, and affecting singularity, has seduced him, and makes
him maintain an affected scruple of his own, before the judgment, yea, and the
peace of the whole Church.

From these generals, we come somewhat more particularly to consider that
which some affirm, that for remedy of the corruptions of the Church, any
Assembly representative of the whole Body of any State, seeing it implicitly
comprehends all Orders, Degrees, and Conditions, that are parts of the State,
have full power and authority of doing whatsoever any order or part of the
State may do; and that therefore they, as well as the Clergy, may, in that
State, determine what form of Ecclesiastical Government, what discipline, what
Ceremonies are most fit for the Church, and most agreeable to the Word of God.

Who knows not but that by the same reason they may as well determine what
Doctrines are most agreeable to the Word of God: but we shun captiousnesse, and
seek our own and every ones clear satisfaction.

It is true, a Body representative of the whole State, has the power of the
whole State, to do whatsoever the whole Body of the State, if it could be all
assembled, could do; but the whole State, if it were gathered together in one,
and the whole Clergy in it, could not by their promiscuous Vote determine of
any thing that God has subjected to the judgment of the Clergy only. Some
argue, That the whole State be Christians, and every true Christian a
spiritual man; The Spiritual man judges all things; And it is true; but that
judgment is only as to himself, to discern and judge for his own right
governance, but not to bind others therewith; he may exercise such judgment
as grace administreth, but cannot exercise directive judgment, for that is not
to be practiced, but by especial Commission of Authority. It was the ground of
Corah's fearful sin, Number. 16. 3
that because all the Congregation were holy every one of them, and the Lord
among them, that therefore Levites and Laymen might offer Incense as well as
the Priests: one without lawful authority may not more meddle with decreeing
the suppression of vice, and encouragement of virtue, in a way that belongs
only to the Jurisdiction of another, Act. 19. 14
then might the sons of Sceva use the authority of Christ's Name to casting
out of devils; Therefore particular men must have express Warrant, before
they can decree any thing. And were it granted that they, if known, might in
this life exercise directive judgment in Ecclesiastique affairs, yet being so
small a number, in respect of worldlings, and it being impossible in this world
to distinguish them, or to avoid, but that while they vote together with
worldlings, their votes will be overruled by worldlings: for these causes, the
being inwardly a spiritual man, can nothing more avail him in that point, than
if he were not so.

And for this last cause, it nothing also avails, though the Clergy themselves
actually vote amongst seculars; for where the carriage of matters cannot
certainly follow the votes of the Clergy, but be subject to the votes of the
Seculars, their votes so given, cannot have the authority of Ecclesiastique
votes, but of Lay. And both for the peace of private consciences, and also for
the peace of the Church, it would advisedly be examined whether the votes of
Clergymen chosen by the Seculars (say by the Body representative of a whole
State) be of more authority for deciding matters of Religion in question, than
the votes of the Seculars themselves that chose them be; for when by the
express Word of God, 1 Cor. 14. 32.
The spirits of the Prophets, are to be subject to the Prophets, the Prophets
must either all of them together hear and determine, or all of them freely make
choice of such of their Brethren as shall do it for them, lest if the secular
power assume the choice of the men, they, by assuming the choice of those that
shall give the Clergies vote, assume the giving of their vote, and upon the
matter reject the vote and judgment of the Clergy: for the few men that so be
chosen, have no authority of themselves, to judge by themselves, but have the
authority of those only that made the fiduciary commitment of power to them;
and if they that committed the authority be Seculars, then is the judgment and
executing of the spirit, of Seculars only. And it would further be taker into
consideration, Whether, as the Bishop of Romes usurpation of the authority of
the universal Church manifested him to be the great spirit of Antichrist, so
in every particular Church, any usurping or undue assuming of the authority
thereof, will not amount to an inferior exercise of the same spirit?

Now whereas it is conceived that Forms of Government Ecclesiastique are not
tied to the Judgment of the Clergy, but are arbitrary as the State shall
judge expedient, it is not denied but that Church Government may be accommodate
to the occasions of the State; but then those cautions are to be observed, (1)
That as the State is Judge what form of Church Government will be most
commodious for the welfare thereof; so the Clergy be Judges, whether the
form desired be safe for the Church, and agreeable to the Word of God;
otherwise the one may be oppressed, while the other is accommodate: Therefore we
see that upon every change and remove of the Camp, Numb. 4. 15.
not only the taking down and folding up of the Tabernacle, and all things
belonging to it, was committed to the Priests, but even the utmost act of
carrying of it, when all was disposed and ordered by the Priests, was given in
charge to those only that were Levites: And whereunto are helps in Government
reckoned among Apostles, 1 Cor 12. 28.
Prophets, Teachers, and other Members which Christ has set in his Church, if
the Government of the Church be to be managed by those that are not to be
numbered among them. And if among Pastors which God has set in his Church, he
has ordained some to be helps in Government, how dangerous a matter will it be
for those that are not of their calling, to justify them out of their
authority, and in that point usurp their Function? Moses has long since put
terror in the case, when with a Prophetical spirit praying for Levi, he
says, Smite through the loins of them that rise up against him: Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
And the Prophet likewise, where speaking of the Church, he says, Isa. 54. 17.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
cries against thee in Judgment, thou shall condemn: And our Savior himself,
where he says to his Apostles, What ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
Heaven.

Another Caution to be observed, is, That in accommodating Church Government to
the frame and occasion of the State, nothing be disestablished or unsettled,
that seems to have been settled by any authority of the Scripture. Therefore
whereas we see there, the Government of the Church first settled, in the hands
of Bishops (that is, of Pastors that had authority over Pastors, To rebuke with
all authority: Tit. 2. 15.
Not to suffer themselves to be despised: 1 Timothy 4. 12.
Tit. 1. 5.
To ordain Elders: 1 Timothy 5. 19
To receive accusation against them: 1 Timothy 13
To charge some to preach no other Doctrine: Tit. 1. 11.
To step the mouths of unruly deceivers: Tit. 1. 5.
To set in order things that are wanting, etc.) And we find not any other form
of Church Government neither in the Scripture, nor in the practice of the
Universal Church, as well* where the Pope never ruled, as where he did; that
therefore men make not such an accommoda^ing as by an entire rejecting of the
Ordinance set on foot by the Apostles themselves, so appearing in the
Scripture, and Universally so followed by the Church, they reject both the
Judgment of the Universal Church, and also of the Spirit of God revealed in
the Scripture.

For as in the change of the Sabbath from the Saturday to the Lords Day, the
Church has clearly shown that she had power to make such a change; but that
change being once made for important causes, the like whereof hereafter can
never happen, that power of hers once lawfully used, can never lawfully come to
be used again, because there can no more such ground and cause to do it, come
again to pass; So it is likewise in point of Episcopal Government; though the
whole form and frame of it is not so expressly prescribed, but that the Church
may, in many things, have power of making therein accommodations to the times
and exigence of State; yet may not those acts of accommodation amount to such a
height, as to subvert or abolish the Government which by the judgment of her
Members than infallible was set on foot, because no judgment of her present
Members now, can come in any competition with her first: And if any State shall
so accommodate it self, the accommodators may, perhaps, be found fighters
against the Spirit of God, manifested both in the Scripture, and in the
Judgment and practice of the Universal Church of God.

One further particular depending upon these points, and necessary for every
one to have his conscience clear and well assured, is the lawfulness of the
Liturgy of our Church, concerning which, these considerations present
themselves.

The Church being freed from the tyranny of the Heathen persecutors, and settled
in peace, it was necessary that God ( that had done so great things for her)
should be honored, not only by the private devotion of her single Members, but
also with the public service of her greatest Congregation; And seeing that in
the Church Jerusalem (ever since Christianity) becoming inhabited without
walls, occasions the making of as many places of Worship, as there are places
of several cohabitation; it was necessary, both for observing decency and
order, for avoiding confusion; and for showing (by as much unity of way as might
be) the unanimity* and true communion of the Churches members; that thorowout
all her several Congregations (at least, all of one Nation) one Form of Divine
Service should universally be observed. Hence have the Western Churches (where
Religion flourished most and longest) received much what one Form perhaps not
all at once, nor always the very same, but with some addition or change, as
use and experience gave occasion* until the Church of Rome (corrupting with
her greatness) suffered not the service of God to be exempt from her
corruptions; and growing at length so licentious in them, as even to subvert
the Fundamentalls of Religion; It pleased God in diverse parts, so far to
enlighten and strengthen his Church, as to examine the Roman alterations by
the Test of Gods Word, which the Church of England having more happily than
others performed, rejected what was repugnant to Gods Word, and wisely
retaining the rest, left us that Form of Divine Service, that unto this day, by
the Laws of this Kingdom, is advisedly confirmed in the Church.

In this our restored Liturgy, the long practiced judgment of the Church
(regarding one way the property of devotion, and another the infirmity of man)
thought it fitting not to have prayers, preaching, and thanksgiving alone,
without the public reading also of the very Word of God; neither thought they
it fit that the Confessions of sins, Supplications and Thanksgivings that
publicly were to be made, should all at once in one continued exercise be
performed, lest happily in many, devotion wanting matter of present excitation,
should wax cold, and then the intention of the mind growing remiss, and the
thoughts wandering, men in spite of their hearts should with their lips only,
perform an empty mock-God service.

To the end therefore that the whole service of the Congregation should be
truly publicly performed with true communion, and likewise with true and
lively fervor of spirit, they ordained such change and succession of all
duties belonging to Gods service, as might best make those several duties most
effectual to the performers.

First therefore, That the Congregation observing one and the same demeanor
thorowout all her Members, should upon their knees, with loud voices, and
articular Confessions, make an humble and public and acknowledgement of their
sins, and vile dition, and beseech God for mercy and forgiveness; and the
Minister, for the comfort of the penitent, to pronounce Gods pronesse to
forgive, and to pray for them, and with them.

That after their humiliation they should with Hymns of mutual exhortation
taken out of Scripture, stir up one another to proceed to praise, to singing
and rejoicing before God.

Then some portions of the Scripture should be read in course, of which, the
Psalms should ever be part, which because they contain matter so abundantly
useful for instruction, for meditation, for comfort, prayer, praise, and
thanksgiving, they should therefore be read alternally betwixt the Minister and
the Congregation, to make them in public more fervent in the prayers and
praises wherewith the Psalms abound, and to make them also more perfect in the
Contents of them for their private use; then as Gods works (especially of man
Redemption) are so done as that they ought to be had in remembrance, so on
Sundays, and other days of especial Commemoration of them, Psalm. 111. 4
such portions of Scripture as tended most to the setting forth of Gods work on
that day annually commemorated, should be read; at the end of which, the
Congregation (as moved by the impressions which these portions ought to make in
every one) to render God that praise, that glory and blessing which the sense
of his mercy in his work then declared, does justly procure from the heart and
mouth of the thankful hearer; and this they do in Hymns either taken out of
Scripture, or composed and allowed by the ancient and general approbation of
the Church.

After the Lessons of Scripture and Hymns ended, the Congregation to stand up,
and make a public confession of their faith, and then prostrate on their
knees in prayers fitted to the diverse necessities and infirmities of humane
nature, to make supplications for all sorts, degrees, and conditions of men; in
which the Minister should not always himself alone utter the words of prayer,
but (for the better entertainment and incitement of devotion) every Member of
the Congregation, with frequent interjecting of their Votes and Invocations,
should like more active parties in Gods service make a more frequent and
effectual joint importuning of him.

Then (after an especial prayer for grace and sanctification) the two Tables
of Commandments to be read, which summarily containing our whole duty both to
God and man, the Congregation conscious of the breach of every one of them,
should at the reading of each Commandment, cry out for mercy for their breaking
of it, and implore grace for the betcer observing of it in future: And that
done, some choice portions of Scripture of especial comfort and instruction,
and more especially relating to the work of Redemption that day commemorated,
taken out of the Epistles of the Apostles, and the Gospel of the Evangelists to
be read, with which (unless the Communion be administered, the Word preached,
or an Homily read) the public service of the Church to be concluded with
certain prayers, and with the Ministers blessing of the people.

How well this Ordinance provides for offering unto God the reasonable service
of man, we must leave unto the consciences of every man. As for the exceptions
that are made against it, they are chiefly these: First, in general, That it
is popish superstitious, Antichristian, (a charge which is very foul, if true)
then in particular, That it is in a set Form.

Now first to be popish, is no more than to partake of the Manners, Customs,
or Ordinances of the Popes, which when in plain terms it is not forbidden in
the Scripture, we must seek how it it comes to pass, that to partake of them
must be unlawful.

The Popes (briefly) were the Bishops of Rome, of which the foremost having both
for life and doctrine been glorious members of the Church, that Church grew so
renowned, as that for judgment in matters of Religion, they had the priority
of repute, were to the Western Church the authors of many good Ordinances in
Religion, and the great support thereof; till abusing their repute, and by
little and little degenerating, they grew into so unspeakable corruptions* as
no intelligent man may partake in those things with them, without a conscious
committing of manifest sin against the Word of God.

Now though their corruptions are by all means to be rejected, yet are they not
therefore corrupt, or to be rejected because they were the acts of Popes, but
because they were things which the Popes acted contrary to the Word of God; so
as repugnancy to Gods Word being the true and only ground of their
unlawfulness, we can reckon them no further unlawful than that ground or
reason will demonstrate: and we may no more for respect of persons (be they
Popes or whatsoever) call good evil, Isa. 5. 20.
or evil good, then we may for respect of persons break the Commandments of
God; Nor is it more to be abhorred as a popish corruption to use the Ordinances
of Popes, which are not wicked Ordinances in themselves, than blessing the
people of in the words wherewith Balaam blessed them, is to be abhorred as a
Balaamish corruption; for when by the names of Popish, Jewish, Heathenish, etc.
we condemn any thing, we all intend that the thing condemned is of the nature
of those things wherein they were especially corrupt, and not of the nature of
their doings, which were neither good nor evil, and much less of the nature
of those wherein they excelled; So as to be popish simply being no argument of
necessary faultiness, we must see whether our Liturgy partakes of any popish
corruption or no.

To come readily to the matter, when in all the whole Frame of our Liturgy
there is no Worship nor Innovation, but of the true God only; neither is he
worshipped any other way, than by the sole and immediate mediation of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, there first can be no Idolatrous corruption in the
Liturgy.

Secondly, It cannot be Antichristian, because that contrary to the proper work
of Antichrist (which is to to deny the Son and the Father, 1 Ioh 2. 22.
and as God in the Temple of God, to exalt himself above all that is called
God) the Liturgy thorowout the whole course thereof, 2 Thessal. 2. 4.
makes an exact acknowledgement, adoration, and exaltation above all things
whatsoever; and as it acknowledges them in profession, so there is not any
thing in it, whereby they are denied in practice; So as to call it
Antichristian is a malicious slander against the clear truth examined by the
Light and Rule of Gods Word.

Lastly, It cannot be superstitious neither; for howsoever in the performance
of it there may be some few Ceremonies brought in, which rightly weighed, do
perhaps conduce more to worldly solemnity and ostentation in Religion, than to
true and necessary religious decency and reverence, and therefore would be laid
down, yet being things otherwise indifferent, introduced for decency only, and
not pressed as things of any other necessity, they can (at the worst) be but
errors of Judgment, mistaking what is decent and orderly, they cannot be
superstitious, seeing they are not made matters of Religion, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
but of decency and order, without which, nothing ought to be done.

When then, according to true understanding and intention, nothing is meant
popish, but what partakes of the superstitious corruptions of the Popes, the
Liturgy of the English Church must needs be acquit and discharged, not only of
the infamous calumny of being Idolatrous, Antichristian, and suspicious, but
even also of that malicious aspersion of popish; And then it will follow, That
the censures of those sinners against their own souls, who in and for these
things do falsely judge, censure, and condemn their Mother Church, and renounce
obedience to her, and communion with her, because, as they suppose, she is
popish, superstitious, idolatrous, Antichristian; their unjust censures (I say)
will prove the condemnation of themselves, both of uncharitableness, of
self-conceit, and of insolent exalting themselves against the Church of God at
least, if not of Antichristian persecution of it also; and the more for this,
That while they promise liberty and freedom from superstition, they themselves
become slaves unto superstition, making a matter of Religion not to obey the
Ordinance of their Church in things indifferent, and where the Word of God does
not forbid obedience, but command it. This briefly touching the general
exceptions, Popish, Superstitious, Idolatrous, Antichristian.

As for the particular exception, That in our Liturgy all prayer, praise, and
thanksgiving is in a set Form, a device of man's, not the command of God; a
muzling of the Ministers spirit, a nurse of idleness, and means of neglecting
the gifts and graces of God, etc. We must consider, 1. That there is not any
express Scripture against set Forms of prayer, and therefore the use of it is
not against any express command of God.

2. All Christian Churches thorowout the world, as well the Greek and Eastern
(where Popery never reigned) as these our Western Churches when once they
attained a settled Government, have in all ages served God in set Forms of
Divine Service; yea, even the reformed Churches beyond Sea use some set Forms.
And for our set Liturgy, if any man lift to be contentious against it, we can
truly say, It is the Custom of our Church, and also of the Churches of God;
and then the depravers of it will prove to be despisers of Authority, and
advancers of their own private judgment against the Universal Judgment of the
Church Catholic.

3 Under the Law there were set Forms of public Confessions, Thanksgivings,
Blessings, etc. which being no part of the Ceremonial, is warrant enough for
Christians to use the like.

4. The Psalms of David (which as they abound with all those necessary parts of
Gods public service, confession of sins, prayers, Praise and Thanksgiving, so
especially with Prayer) many of them having that Title ( A Prayer) they were
not only used publicly by both the Jews Church and the Christians, but were
penned to that end, and dedicated to the Priests that had the Office of
praising God, and were most excellent in those kinds of Music to which they
were set, and the most excellent passages of praise and prayer in them had the
word Selah added to them, to the end that in the public use of them, those
passages might be iterated, and said or sung over again. Also our Savior
himself having given us one Form of set Prayer (which he bids, When ye pray,
Say) and not at all forbidden the use of set Forms, makes it out of question,
that to pray in a given Form is lawful (so the Form be good) And what doubt we
but when John Baptist taught his Disciples to pray, he did it by giving them
some Form, which our Saviors Apostles liking, desired to have the like from
him, and our Savior (we see) did not so much give them Precepts and Rules,
instructing them how to make prayers of their own (though his Prayer has that
office too) but gave them a perfect prayer in an exact conceived Form, how much
should men fear that their conscience (offended at the use of set prayer,
without the Light of Gods Word declaring it to be unlawful) are consciences
blinded with superstition, afraid where no fear is, and their consciences not
only darkened, but their hearts also seduced with self-conceit and
singularity, unto perverse and affected contention with the Church.

5. While they pretend to be free Ministers from a supposed restraint put upon
their spirits by the use of set Forms, they lay a real restraint upon the
spirits of all Congregations; who being always perfect in the Contents and use
of their set prayers, do with prepared hearts and spirits attend the public
and joint presenting of their known supplications to God for those mercies and
graces which the Church, by those Forms, declares all men to stand in need of,
and every ones particular spirit attesteth to be necessary for him: But if all
Congregations (which God forbid) should be deprived of the use of them, every
man shall go to Church bound in the spirit, and know not what supplications he
shall make to God, till the mouth of the Minister shall declare it, and then
the single Minister (whatsoever his gifts or faculties be) shall determine of
the devotion of the whole Congregation, and conclude them all, that they shall
make no public Invocation of God, neither for matter nor form, otherwise than
as his spirit, and perhaps sudden conceit, shall minister unto him.

6. When all the Service of the Church shall stand only upon the strength and
gifts of the Preachers, and they differing in gifts one from another, it will
inevitably follow, That those of the best gifts will more draw disciples after
them than ever, and men will become followers of men, when they shall have no
other means of public communion with God, either to hear him, or to speak unto
him, than only by the gifts of the Preacher, and so the Church shall, against
Gods Word, be necessarily drawn into Sectarism and Division.

7. Lastly, If we change our set Forms of Divine Worship into the various and
arbitrary service that is to be performed by the Minister only, among many
evils (not now to be foreseen) there is to be feared, that when men shall have
known no other public exercise of Religion, than by the Preachers arbitrary
administration, and that he be generally beh^ld, as the only Minister of the
spirit, of public service and prayer, the consciences of men thenceforth
subdued to an awful dependence on him, shall find the Ministers (like the
Jesuits) through the Sovereignty they hold in matters of Religion, to exercise
an external dominion over their fortunes also, and set on foot a more
dangerous tyranny in Religion, than hitherto the Church has ever known. And if
their opposition to set Forms of public Service, and to what is used in the
Church of Rome shall proceed so far, as to reject the public reading of the
Scripture (eight several Lessons or portions of which are now, Viz. Two in the
Psalms, two in the old Testament, two in the new, and two out of the Epistles
and Gospels.
by Gods merciful providence, daily, or at least every Sunday and holy day,
publicly read in the Church) then shall our Church of England, by an
ill-guided meaning to oppose the Church of Rome, come to imitate her, and
toward her children commit the same cruelty that we justly condemn the Church
of Rome for using toward hers; who though she suffer her Layicks to hear the
Word preached, yet suffers them not to hear in their own Tongue the powerful
Word of God read unto them; and we, as well as the Romanists, shall (toward
those that cannot, or are careless to read) even wholly take away the means
which our pious Mother the Church has ordained for their conversion, And
whereas such public reading of Gods lively and powerful Word is no mean
degree of Preaching, we shall, in an important part, suppress the Word of God,
and through disuse of frequent hearing, breed a general unacquaintednesse with
the Precepts and Stories of the Scripture, which will in time hinder both the
understanding and applying of that which shall be preached.

We need not further seek to give particular answer to every quarrel that is
now made against several parts and passages of our Liturgy. But when kneeling
at the receipt of the Sacrament is so agreeable to the religious performance of
that Duty, and yet is quarrelled with, we cannot in silence pass it over: For
when want of due preparation is dangerous, yet is not performed without
humiliation, contrition, abhorring ones self, forgiving others, turning to them
in all charitable affections, thirsting for grace, and fervent invocation of
the Divine Majesty for them; how can we perform these rightly, without the
lowliest prostration of soul and body that one can solicit God withal? Will
we say, It should be done before, but not at our receiving? It is true, it
ought to be begun before, but he that can so approve of his preparation before,
as to cease and say, I have done enough, he is rather to fear his presumption,
than to rest in such preparation, he perhaps makes a popish opus operatum, of
his preparation, and cries peace, before there is peace; nor can he say
kneeling is an unfit posture to receive that grace in, which is fittest to be
begged on our knees. Will we say kneeling is Idolatry to the Bread and Wine? We
must then show that it is commanded to be done to the Bread and Wine, or
intended so, or at least, by Protestants abused so, if none of those be, but it
be commanded only as the proper expression of the reverence and humiliation
belonging to the duty, then is the exception not only without cause, but
slanderous and malicious. Will we say, That in the Institution of it, our
Savior made not the disciples kneel; True, but let us also confess that the
disciples had the Bridegroom with them; who, though he were their Lord, yet
called them friends, and admitted them to a liberty suitable. We will not (I am
sure) say the Sacrament is now to be celebrated in all things as it was then,
and no otherwise; and if in any thing there be liberty of receding from what
was done at first, whose judgment shall we trust what we must hold, and what
we may recede from, if not the Judgment and Practice of the Universal Church
from the first to this present? And if indeed we would observe the first
Institution, Why spurn we at receiving it together at the Table, for so the the
disciples did? And Saint Paul calls it the partaking of the Table of the Lord;
1 Cor. 10. 21.
and David, The preparing of a Table for us: Truly the receiving every one, or
every family apart by themselves in their seats, Psalm. 23.
^uits not with observing of Communion, nor coming together to eat, nor eating
together into one Body, but savours of singularity and inconformablenesse to
the observance of a true Eucharist.

It is not to be expected we should here examine all the dissentitions in
Religion that are among us. But seeing that in general they are the quarrels
of particular men for exercise of Religion, in ways either besides, or
contrary to the established Ordinances and usage of our Church (in which yet
they can neither charge the Church, with violating the Word of God, nor show by
the judgment of the Church Catholic, that their own exercise of Religion is
that which by the Word of God, is only to be taught and practiced;) It will not
be unnecessary, to represent to further search and consideration, how much some
passages of Gods Word (too little examined by us) are pertinent to the decision
of these matters.

For, Whereas true Christianity is a perfect Catholicisme, and contrarily
Antichristianisme, or fighting against God, walks in singularities,
partialities, sects, separations, and the like. It is too apparent, that the
ways wherein men now pretend, that the true exercise of Religion lies, do
very much hold the byasse of Sectarisme; who sees it not in our extraordinary
running after choice and affected Teachers? In which, though the show of
godliness so awes our judgments, that we distrust no error in it; yet does
it concern us to take heed of a deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness in it. To
love, desire, and seek, the lively delivery of Gods Word, is good, and our
duty, and so is it also to love, and honor the Preacher for the Words sake.
But there is great danger in the comparing, preferring, and despising of one,
in respect of another; For while we assume the judgment, and choice of our
Teachers, and hear, and follow them according as we like their Doctrine, and no
otherwise: We under the show of godly longing after Gods Word, and honoring
the choice Preachers of it, discover an hidden exaltation of our selves, and of
our own minds, and judgments, both above the Preachers, and the Word they
preach.

On the other side toward the Ordinance of the Church, and our proper
Ministers, we do not only unduely exalt our selves, but add unto it
disobedience; yea, even a faulting of Gods providence, we make our own Jordans,
too shallow brooks to cleanse our Leprosies. Io. 9. 7.
Our Siloams that are sent; too unclean pooles to help our blindness: Isai. 8.
5.
Yea, and we refuse the waters of Shiloah for no other reason, then that, they
run softly; We choose our selves streams to our liking, which like the Rivers
of Damascus must be better waters, and of more approved depth and current.
Every one must follow his Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
his Apollo, his Cephas, his Christ.

And as our selves incline to these ways, so have we Teachers that cherish
that inclination in us, and find it no small advantage to them, that by
applying themselves to the present affectations of men, they can so draw
Disciples after them. For the effecting of which, Though the weak in faith,
ought not to be received to doubtful disputations; yet they, making no
difference between strong and weak, School and Pulpit, Governors and private
Men, do unto their vulgar Auditories (who, they know have neither capacity to
judge, nor authority to reform) frequently preach their own apprehensions
concerning the Government of the Church, and the right exercise of Religion,
not only in things apparent, and agreed on, but even in things which they
themselves have lately questioned, and drawn in doubt, whether they be right or
no. By which means, private presumption, insolence, self-conceipt, disdain,
uncharitableness, and disobedience (sins most incompatible with true Religion)
are grown so great and general, as that they are become like an Epidemick
contagion, putting all men in a maze, what shall be the end and consequence of
them. Of which when we cannot have a greater admonition, then where the Spirit
of God sets forth the last and perilous times of the Church; It is not amiss
to sum up into one entire view, what it is, that the Holy Ghost does there
admonish us of.

Our Savior himself first warnes the Church, to beware of false prophets, that
come (says he) in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Woolves. Whom
that we may know he gives a rule, Ye shall know them by their fruits, and in
another place, by their works: Where we must note, the fruits and works, are to
be taken, as they are in themselves, and as they are naturally taken notice of
in all men's understandings; otherwise we make our Savior teach, ignotum per
ignotius. It is true, that in every fruit and work that is good in it self, if
an evil circumstance, or way, or end, accompany it, the fruit that was good in
it self, may by way, or end, be made evil, as if mercy, charity, zeal, etc. be
showed for ostentation, or for a cloak of pretense, etc. But in evil fruits,
and works, it is other wise, for no end, or circumstance whatsoever, can make
that work good, that is evil in it self, as disobedience, sedition, treason,
etc. For God having no need of a wicked man, and forbidding us, Thou shall not
do evil, that good may come thereon, he takes from evil works all the help
that their good end, or circumstances may do them. When therefore we find a
deed, that in it self is evil, we must not make that good, for the good end,
or good intent of the doer; but contrarily, we must make him a misdoer,
notwithstanding the good end and intent of the action. Our Savior further
reveals, That many shall come in his name, and shall deceive many; the manner
of whose coming, he intimates to be by way of secret insinuation here in the
Chamber, or by way of separation there in the Wilderness.

In the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 29. 30
Saint Paul gives warning of the like false Teachers, and tells the Pastors of
the Church, Of your own selves shall men arise, preaching perverse things, to
draw away Disciples after them. 2 Thessal. 2. 3.
In the second of the Thessalonians, he foretells of a falling away, and of the
revealing of the man of sin that exalts himself above all that is called
God, or worshipped; whose coming he shows to be after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness. 1 Timothy 3 2
Again in the first of Timothy, he foretells a departing of some from the
faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and that speak lies in hypocrisy,
forbidding marriage, and meats. In the second of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 2.
he declares that in the last days, perilous times shall come, the
perilousnesse of which he shows to be in this, That men shall be lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, truce breakers, false-accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of the good, traitorous, heady, high minded,
etc. having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, etc. Of which
sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. And lastly, That the time would come, when they would not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts, heap to themselves Teachers.

Saint Peter forewarneth also of false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 10.
showing that they should privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them; and an especial description of whom, he makes in this,
that they despise Government, are presumptuous, self willed, and not afraid to
speak evil of dignities.

Saint John tells us, 1 Ioh. 2. 19
That as we have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many
Antichrists. And them he deciphers by their inconformity, and disobedience.
They went out from us ( says he) but are not of us, for if they had been of
us, they would have continued with us.

Lastly, Ep. Jude 4.
Saint Jude in his general Epistle, warns the universal Church of men of
like singularities, noted by this, that they creep in unawares, that they
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, that they speak evil of those
things they understand not, that they go the ways of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balam for reward, and perish in the gain saying of Core,
(as much as to say, men of unbrotherlike affections, seekers of their own gain,
and disobedient to their Superiors;) further, that they are murmurers,
complainers, walking after their own lusts, speaking swelling words, having
men's persons in admiration for advantage; And lastly, That they be they that
separate themselves.

What have we in this, but an entire description of the whole practice of the
spirit of error, and of adversation to Christianity, which the Scripture
calls Antichrists. By which, sin (that through the light of the Gospel was
subdued, and deprived of his first and natural Empire, consisting in the
viciousness of corrupt nature) turning himself unto his Arts, like the devil
into an Angel of light, does now with refined and mysterious falsities, (such
as resemble Piety, and true Religion) renew his onsets in a warfare of a more
dangerous consequence; so various and (in appearance) so contrary often to
sin, as puts the strongest Christian to the use of all his Armor of
righteousness, as well on the right hand, 2* These. 2. 3, and 8.
as on the left, to be able to withstand him.

This Antichristianisme is here represented to us in a twofold form. The first
an Empire of mysterious sin; A body of members well united together under one
head, or Sovereign, set forth one while by the names of the Man of sin, The
son of perdition, The wicked one; Another while by the name of Babylon the
great, The mother of fornications, The greatwhore, etc. The description of
which Empire is in such Characters, as marveilously sureth with the Roman
Papacy.

The other form of mysterious wickedness is, of a quite contrary nature. A
loose Anarchy of singulars, of men by themselves, not united together in one by
any common Bond of true Communion; but (like quicksands cast together, by the
working of the Sea, and from time to time shifted and changed with it) so they,
as judgments, private ends, or affections do concur, are brought accidentally
to a concurrence among themselves, but without any ground, or sollid principle
of uniting. For though they seem to put on the Yoke of Christ, yet every one
keeps the Bonds of the yoke in his own hands, and is the Sovereign Arbiter of
his own obedience. Notwithstanding which contrariety of theirs to the Roman
Church (who abuses obedience as these do liberty) they are no other then
derivatives of the same spirit of error, begot by way of opposition, on her
that is the mother of fornications. Who having against the manifest Word of God
usurped a tyrannical sovereignty both over Gods Word, his Church, and all the
Princes of his Church, and being beaten from it, the devil instead of quitting
the rule, that he held by her Monarchall tyranny, changes only his vicegerent,
and continues the same usurpation in a popular, and Anarchall way; that is, by
the hands of every particular man, or number of men, who (abusing the example
of rejection of her usurped authority) shall invade and reject all authority
how lawfully soever established in the Church. Both are opposers of Christ's
Doctrine, both usurpers of the authority of his Church; both hiding their
usurpation under a form of godliness; they differ but in this, Men in the one,
partake only of the iniquity by influence from the head; but in the other,
every distinct member, is the original Author of it to himself.

We finding then such an alarm in the Scripture blown against perverse, and
self-led professors of Religion, set forth unto us by such Characters, 1 Pet.
2. 15*
as Wolves, Foll^wers of Cain, Balaam, and Corah, cursed children, Ep. Jude 11.
and the like; Notwithstanding that they have sheeps clothing, forms of
godliness, and fained words to cover them. It remains, that we strictly
examine what fruits, or works, have passed our hands, which in their common and
natural acceptance are evil, though brought forth for good ends, and that we
utterly relinquish them, that we take heed of ways of singularity, that lead
to false accusation, trayterousnesse, headynesse, high-mindednesse, and denying
of the power of godliness; That we take heed of the doctrines of those that
draw disciples after them, That creep into houses, That go out from the
fellowship of the Apostles, and continue not with them, That follow the ways
of Cains uncharitableness, of Balaams prophesying for lucre, or of Corabs
disobedience; That we take heed of those that despise Government, Are
presumptuous, self-willed, not afraid to speak evil of dignities, that despise
dominion, have men's persons in admiration because of advantage, That heap to
themselves Teachers, That separate themselves. And lastly, That while we justly
hate Popery, we do not in any thing partake of that sin of the Popes which
made him that hateful Apostate, and mystical enemy of the Church, namely,
That we do not, by assuming into a wrong hand any power or authority which God
has by his Word committed to the Body of the Pastors of his Church only, rob
him of his rightful Jurisdiction, as they that have invaded his Tithes and
Offerings, Mal. 3. 8.
robbed him of his rightful Possessions.

FINIS.

