SCRIPTVRE MISTAKEN THE GROUND OF PROTESTANTS AND COMMON PLEA OF ALL NEW
REFORMERS AGAINST THE ANCIENT CATHOLIC RELIGION OF ENGLAND.

Many texts quite mistaken by Nouelists are laid open, and redressed in this
treatis, by restoring them to their proper sense, according to which, it is
made manifest, that none of them are of force against the ancient Catholic
Religion.

By JOHN SPENSER of the Society of JESUS.

Videtis id vos agere, vt oninis de medio Scripturarum auferatur auctoritas.

S. Aug. li. 32. contra Faust. c. 19. PRINTED AT ANTWERPE By JAMES MEVRSIVS.
ANNO M.DC.LV.

The points of Controversy contained in this Treatis.
I. Of worship of Saints and Angles. page 1. II. Of the making and
worshipping of holy Images. page 69. III. Of Justification by faith only. page
137. IV. Of the merit of good works. page 161. V. Of Purgatory. page 179. VI.
Of the real Presence. page 189. VII. Of Communion under one kind. page 317.
THE PREFACE.
THose victories are deservedly inroled amongst the most noble and memorable in
the momuments of Antiquity, wherein an Enemy is ouerc^m me with his own weapen.
Thus David's beating down that Tower of the Philistines, seemed to the
Israelites, to have been a conquest over ten thousand Enemies, Saul percussit
mill, and David december millia, because he cut of Golias head, with Golias
sword. Thus the sone of God and our dearest Savior, purchased the noblest of
all victories, against the strongest of all Enemies, vt qui in ligno vincebat
in ligno quoque vinceretur. because he who overcame us by a tree, was through
him by a tree overcome. And thus, our dear Redeemer having been furiously
attacked by the Tempter in the desert with the authority of his own word, put
to flight and vanquished the same Tempter by the authority of the same word
which he had pressed against him. Hence it is, that not the sling of David
werewith he begun, but the sword of Golias was reserved, and wrapped up in a
holy Ephod, in the Tabernacle, as an eternal trophe, and monument of his
victory. Hence, that anciently most ignominious, and hateful of creatures the
cross, is now erected in triumphal manner not only upon the highest towers of
Christian temples, but upon the most sacred and sovereign heads of Christian
Emperors. And hence it also is, that the Catholicque Church, has so
carefully conserved, so religiously honored, and gloriously triu^phed in those
breathes of divinity the holy Scriptures, because that as her spouse stopped the
fontaine, so she by the heat of his spirit has dried up the troubled and
divided streams of all errors, and heresies, trough their heavenly light and
authority.

This is the victoty which I represent in triumph in this present treatis, as
the most heroicke amongst all others of the Roman Church; because it conquers
heresy, by the weapen of heresy, vt qui in verbo pugnabant, in verbo quoque
vincerentur; that those vvbo have hitherto fought with the sole word, might
be overcome with the sole word.

The Roman Church, even from the first Challenge of her adversaries in these
last ages, has given them the foil (nay quite defeated them) at the weapens
of Antiquity, vniuersal^^y, unity, succession, visibility, sanctity, miracles,
Fathers, Councils, reason, authority, but these were so far and clearly her
weapens, that they scarce ever dirst lay claim to any of them, and so the
victory (glassed in their eyes) seems either none, or small, because not
gained with a weapen of their choosing, now therefore to accomplish what she
has so prosperously attempted, she accepts the combat even with that weapen,
which they take (by mistaking) to be their own.

It is the vvrit^en word of God, the sole written word, to which all
appeall, here they boast and glory, here they exult and triumph, not only
before the victory, but befote the fight, this and this alone they take for
their bucklar of defense, for their armor of proof, for their deep piercing
dart, their swift flying arrow, and their sharp edged sword; this they brandish
before the eyes of innoce^ts, with this they flourish in their books, and
Pulpits, in their publicque meetings, and private conuenticles, nay in the very
streets, and tauernes; and that so seemingly with a gloss as false as it is
fair, that they dazzle the eyes of the vulgar, and strike them with admiration
in each motion of it.

Here they fully persuade themselves that those of the Roman Church dare not
meddle with them, and take for granted, that whatsoever we have gained upon
them by other weapens, yet we yield our selves clearly conquered by this. So
confide^t are our Adversaries in their own conceits! where as the Roman
Church, never as yet acknowledged to have been either worsted, or so much as
touched by any one text of Scripture which they ever pressed against her,
witness the many and large volumes of full and clear answers to every
sentence objected by her Adversaries. Neither ever refused she to encounter her
enemies, with this weapen of their own choosing. True it is she requiers judges
present, to see and determine which party has the better in the encounter, but
they refuse all other judges (quite contrary to the light of reason) save that
very weapen where with rhey fight, and though she still keep the feeld,
continue on the co^bat, and maintain the quarrel, without so much as yielding
either a step or hairs breadth, not withstanding she must be worsted, only
because her adversaries say she is.

What will an impartial ey judge of such proceedings? yet to show how empty
and vain all these flotishes are, and how strong desires she has of the
eternal good of her enemies, rather then leave them wholly destitute of
redress, she freely like an indulgent mother condesce^ds to their infirmities,
and conformes her self to their wayward humors, and that so far, as to
expose the equity of her cause even to the judgment of her very Adversaries,
and confides with holy David, and inimici nostri sunt iudices, that even her
most forward enemies, will not be so void of light, reason, and equity, as not
to acknowledge her conquerant, and themselue vanquished, even in their own
judgments, and with their own weapen.

Thus she enters the list, and confides in the strength of her God and spouse
that the day will be hers. And finds noe surer means to incompasse it, then by
disarming her enemy, because to dissarme him him, is to dissanimate him, for
yield he must, when he can feight noe longer.

I have indeauored in this present Treatis, to give my Readers an essay of this
kind of victory of the Roman Church, where in I hope he will find it manifest
that the texts which our Adversaries usually allege against the Roman
doctrine in such points as I have tuched, are not arguments, but mistakes.

And that so gross and palpable that half an ey may discover them. Thus
therefore the matter stands, and the combat proceeds betwixt us.

Our Adversaries have now above a hundred years proclaimed through the ears of
Christendom that the Roman Church resists the known truth, and the evident
testimonies of the written word of God: a heavy accusation! I demand in the
poursuit of this discourse, that these testimonies be cited and euidenced out of
the authentical editions, and original languages of the holy Bible. In place
of these they press the words of their own late translations. These I prove to
be dissonant and dissagreeing from the original, and so not the words of true
Scripture, but of a false translation, will make against us. They tell me that
whatsoever the words are in the original, yet the sense is evidently against
the Roman Church. I dema^d how, shall the sense (at least in their principle of
sole Scripture) ever evidently appear but by the words of the original. They
tell me, whatsoever the words be, yet the sense is evident. I reply that I am
nothing mouued with their saing, without their prouuing. They bid me prove that
it is not evident. I tell them, that it belongs to him who affirms, to prove
his own assertion. which if they refuse, the whole world will discover that they
have nothing evident in the whole Bible against the Tenets of the Roman Church.
Yet to comply beyond all obligation, I undertake to prove that the texts which
they most press against us, are neither evident, not so much as probable, but
evidently insufficient, and not so much as capable of that sense which they
draw from them to make them sound against us, and consequently nothing but pure
mistakes.

And yet farther, that nothing may be vvanting to a full victory, I press
against them clear words either out of their own Tra^slations, or out of the
original, the force whereof they cannot possibly avoid, but either by denijng,
the plain and proper sense of the words, and flying to tropes, and figures,
and improprieties, and shadows and abscurities, and that without any
necessity, save only of mainteyning their own assertions; or translating the
words in a secondary signification, leaving the primary and most proper when
it makes against them, which notvvithstanding they put in other places where
it makes not against them; or by translating the words quite contrary to the
original (eue^ by their own acknowledgeme^t) or when they are so troughly
pressed that their is noe way of escaping, to reject the express words of the
never questioned original, and affirm that they crept out the margent into
the text.

The discovery of these, and such like particulars, is the maine drift, and
sum of this Treatis. which I have intiteled, Scripture mistaken the ground
of Protestants, etc. The occasion of my falling upon which, was as follows.

This Treatis, was at first a private controversy, in answer to a long
Cathalogue of texts, taken (and mistaken) out of the Protestants Bible, and
sent to a Person of quality, to divert him from the Roman faith. Through
importunity of friends I condescended, that it might pass the print, hoping
that some might reap profit from it, and therefore couched it in a plain and
easy style that not only the learned, but the vulgar also might understand it.
I keep my self close to Scripture in the whole process, and connection of my
proofs either against my Adversary, or in my own cause, scarce affirming any
thing which I confirm not by one clear texr or other, and those such as I
have read, and diligently examined my self, in what language foeuer I cite
them, and therefore, if any false dealing be found in the citations I am
content, (as in that case I should well deserve) to bear the shame of it. The
texts whieh I answer, are those which are commonly, and chiefly stood upon by
Protestants, and indeed which mainly vvithhold them from embracing the Roman
faith, and the points of controversy, such as are the most pressed against us,
and maintained by our Adversaries, so that I have noe reason to doubt, if the
Readers be once convinced that they have noe ground against us even in their
own Bible in these maine, and radical controversies, (as I am in great hope
they vvil be) that they will at least begin to suspect the weakness of
their own, and to diseouer the strength of our cause, and so put themselves in
a fare way of returning to the bosom of that mother church, from which the
late mistakers, and misusers of holy Scripture have seduced them. Some
controuerfies of lesser moment set down in the paper, I have here omitted
(which I reserre to an other occasion) being now pressed, for want of time, to
content my self with these.

Wherein that I may proceed upon a suer foot, I observe this method, first I
set down plainly and unquestionably, the Doctrine of the present Roman Church,
delivered as such in the express words of the Council of Trent, in each
controversy which I treat, there by stating aright the question, and
disabusing the Protestant Readers, who are commonly wholy missin formed of
our doctrine, by a vvrong conceit of it, in stilled into them, and preserved
in them, by either the malice, or ignorance of their Teachers.

Secondly I set down the Protestant positions, either as I find them in the
paper, or in the nine-and thirty Articles of the English Protestant church.

Thirdly, I cite and answer the texts, of the Adversary, by discouuering
clearly the several mistakes contained in them. and lastly I allege some
plain passages of Scripture, as they stand in the Protestant Bible, in
confirmation of our doctrine.

The greatest favor therefore that I expect from you dear contrymen, is, that
you spare me not, neither in troughly examining what I allege, nor in
demanding satisfaction in matters which you cannot fully examine, of persons
abler, and learneder then your selves.

Please therefore to ponder what you read noe less impartially, then
seriously, to disingage your selves from that vvithdrawing bias, which
education, custom, contry, friends, self love, will, and judgment have
insensibly instilled into your hearts. labor with a strong and humble desire to
be informed aright, with a love of truth* above all transitory interests of
this short and miserable life, and lastly have your earnest recourse to Allm.
God, both to discover what is best for your etetnal welfare, and to embrace it
when you have discovered it, prefer God before creatures, your soul before
your body, heaven before earth, and before time, eternity.

SCRIPTVRE MISTAKEN THE GROUND OF PROTESTANTS, etc.
THE FIRST CONTROVERSY. Concerning the worship of Saints and Angels.
The doctrine taught, believed, and professed in this point as matter of faith,
by the Romain Church. And dliuered in the Council of Trent as Such. Sessione 24.
MAndat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis, and caeteris docendi munus, curamque
sustinentibus, vt -- Fideles diligenter instruant, docentes eos, Sanctos vna
cum Christo regnantes, orationes suas pro hominibus Deo offerre; bonum atque
vtile esse suppliciter eosinuocare; and ob beneficia impetranda, a Deo per
Fili^m eius Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, qui solus noster Redemptor and
Saluator est, ad eorum orationes, opem, auxiliumque confugere:

THe holy Synod commands all Bishops, and the rest which have the office and
care of teaching that -- they diligently instruct faithful people, teaching
them, that the Saints which reign together with Christ, offer up their
praires to God for men; that it is good, and profitable humbly to inuoke them,
and to have recourse to their praires, help, and assistance, to obtain
benefits of God through his Sone Jesus Christ our Lord, who alone is our
Redeemer and Savior.

Whence it is clear, that according to the Council of Trent (to whose doctrine
all those of the Romain Church hold themselves obliged to subscribe) first,
that we pray not the Saints, That they Should procure any blessings by their
sole force and virtue independent of God, but only that they present their
praires to God to obtain them of him, for us, orationes suas pro hominibus Deo
offerre, which plainly cleares us from all idolatry, in this particular, both
they and we praying to the same one only God. And secondly, we have not
recourse to their praires to God, as if they were to be granted for the worth
and dignity of the Saints imdepedently of Christ's merits, but only through and
for his merits, ob beneficia impetranda a Deo per Filium eius Iesum Christum
Dominum nostrum, to obtain benefits of God, through his Sone Jesus Christ our
Lord, excluding the Saints from being either our Redeemers, or Saviors, which
we all acknwledge to be christ alone, qui solus noster Redemptor and Saluator
est, as this holy Council here teaches us, which makes us undeniably free from
the least shadow of injury done to our Savior, and his infinite merits when
we inuoke the Saints.

Thirdly we are here taught to give re^ence, and worship to the Saints in
heaven suppliciter eos inuocare; to inuocque them humbly, devoutly,
suppliantly, neither as Gods, nor as saviors, but as pure creatures reigning
with Christ, and as dependent of God, and Christ as we are our selves, as
appears by the former words of the Council now cited.

Lastly we are here taught, that this humble invocation of the Saints (and the
same is of Angels) is good and profitable, but the Council teaches not, neither
gives any general command to inuoke them, nor that the actual practice of it
is absolutely necessary to Salvation, or that noe man can be saved, who has not
thus humbly inuoked the Saints, for their praires are only furthering helps,
not necessary means to Salvation, so that, noe man is bound to believe any
absolute necessity of it, but in rigor it is sufficient not to reject it as
bad, or hurtful, but to allow of it as good and profitable, leaving the
practice, or not practice, the greater, or less use of it to every ones
particular piety, and devotion. This I say not to induce any one to think,
that it were either laudable or allowable, in such as believe the goodness,
and profit of this invocation (as all Romain Catholicques must do) never, or
very seldom, to practice it, for this were to be supinely negligent in using
the helps, which we believe to be profitable for our spiritual good, (as the
same appears in desiring the praires of Gods servants whilst they live here on
earth, which is nor absolutely necessary, but yet good and profitable) but I say
it only, that all may know distinctly what the Council here teaches as
necessary, and what only as good, and profitable, and to dissabuse vulgar
Protestants, who think that the Romain church teaches, that it is as necessary
to salvation to inuoke and worship the Saints, as to inuoke and worship Christ,
himself. Having thus declared the doctrine of the Romain church delivered in
the Council of Trent, let us now see, what Protestants allege aganist it, out
of Scripture mistaken.

The first Protestant Position, Thus framed by the opponent.
God only to be worshipped, therefore neither Saint nor Angel.

This is proved by Scripture mistaken.

Mat. 4.10. It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, says Christ.

The first mistake. The words of this text affirm not that God only is to be
worshipped.
THe text says thus, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, from which cannot be
proved, thou shall worship the Lord thy God only, that word only being not
joined in this text, to the worship of God, as no Protestant can, or does prove
that God only is to be feared, from the like text of Scripture. Leuit. 19. v.
14.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, seeing that a wife is commanded to fear
her husband, Ephesians. 5.25. And subjects to fear their Magistrates, and
Governors, Romans 13.4. Neither is any one so senseless to affirm, that God
only is to be loved, because David says, O love the Lord all ye his Saints,
Ps. 31.23.
for if God only that is none save God were to be loved then noe man were to
love his neighbor, which not with standing is most strictly commanded, as all
know, nor husbands to love their wives, which S. Paul commands Ephesians. 5. v. 25.
and how come they then to prove, that God only is to be worshipped, because the
Scripture here cited commands us to worship God, but commands noe more to
worship him only, then the former texts, to fear and love him only. How come
they, I say, to urge such a text as this, without the least appearance of
proose, but by a pure mistake of the words of Scripture? especially seeing that
the Scripture in an other place, comma^ds us as clearly to worship something
beside God, as it commands to fear and love others beside God, Psalm 99.5.
worship his foorstole. where the very same Hebrew, and Greek phrase, and words
are used, which are in this text cited. Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God; howsoever that text Psalm. 99. is mistranslated by Protestants, as I
shall show here after. Ande the Prophet Isay foretells that the enemies of
Jerusalem, should worship the steps of her feet, Isay 60.14. but what soever
be meant by those steps, certainly it cannot be God, therefore the text of
Scripture, cited Mat. 4. commands not, that God only should be worshipped. If
any Protestant shoud say, that though the word only, be not joined to worship,
yet it is joined to serve in the text cited, Mat. 4. and him only shall thou
serve, which seems to be of as much force, as if it were joined to worship. I
answer, that if the Opponent had framed the Protestant position thus, God only
to be served, therefore neither Saint nor Angel, the latter part of the text
having, and him only shall thou serve, there might have been some show of
proof, in alleging these words Mat. 4. But seeing the position runs thus, God
only to be worshipped, and the text says not, thou shall worship the Lord thy
God only, but thou shall worship the Lord thy God, who sees not, that there is
noe show at all of proof in it? as when the Scripture says, Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 10.20.
and him only shall thou serve, one might at least seemingly prove from this
sentence, that God only, is to be served, but one shall never prove, by the
force of those words, that God only is to be feared. If a Protestant should
reply, that worship, and serve, seem to signify the same thing, and so only
being added, to serve, is as much as if it were added to worship. I answer that
if we have regard to the Greek text, (in which only the difference betwixt
worship, and serve in Mat. the 4. v. 10. is clearly discovered) there is a
large difference betwixt those two words, the one signifying properly, and by
mere force of the word, worship in general, and so used familiarly in holy
Scripture, to signify both the worship due to God, and to men, Saints, and
Angels, and the other a service due to God only, and never applied to the
religious service of any creature, which I shall here after make manifest.
Beside, serve signifies more largely, then worship, for we serve God by faith,
hope, charity, obedience, and all good works done to his honor, but we
worship (...) him, only by an act of Religion. As appears. Hebr. 12.28. let us
have grace, wereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and Godly fear.

MISTAKE II. Worship missapplied in this text, Mat. 4.10.
I Have already proved that this text, commands not that God only should be
worshipped, because it says not thou shallte worship the Lord thy God only;
but though it had said so, yet it were to be understood not to forbid, the
exhibiting of all kind of worship to any save God, but only such worship as is
proper to God alone, and which without Sacrilege, and Idolatry cannot be given
to any but to God. Thus though Saint Paul say, that God only has immortality,
yet that must be understood of a most divine, infinite, 1. Tim. 6.15.
and uncreated immortali^y proper to God alone, and not of all kind of
immortalities, for then S. Paul would contradict him self, when he says, 1.
Cor. 15.54. Lue. 18.19
that our mortal bodies shall put on imusortality. Thus when our Savior said,
none is good save one, that is God, it must only be understood of an
essential, incomprehensible goodness, for otherwise, that text would be
contrary, to S. Luke, saying and behold there was a man named Joseph, which
was a counselor, Luc* 2^.25.
a good man and a just, and to that of the Acts which speaking of S. Barnabas,
says that he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost. Acts 11.23
Now as there are different kinds, of Immortalities and goodnesses, the one
infinitely perfect, divine, essential, and vncreared, the other, imperfect,
humane, accidental, and created; so that the scriptures ascribing the one to
God only, and the other to creatures, are easily reconciled, and plainly
understood without any show of contrariety, or contradiction, amongst them
selves, or injury to God, so are there in Scrtpture different kinds of
worships, the one acknowledging, and exhibiting honor to, an Infinite, divine,
uncreated immortality, and goodesse in the Person, which he worships, and the
other a creaded and finite; Thus in the text cited, Mat. 4.10. Thou shall
worship, the Lord thy God, though the word worship, considered in it self,
signify properly both these kinds of worships, yet as it lies here, it must be
taken for the first kind, of highest and chiefest worship only; but the very
same word, both in hebrew, greek. latin, and English, in other places of
Scripture, must be taken for the Second kind of lower and inferour worship,
acknowledging, and intending only to express, an imperfect, limited, and
created goodness, in the persons, or things worshpped. Thus we read in
Genesis, The sons of thy father shall adore, Gen* 49.8.
or worshipp thee Says Jacob, blessing his son Judah. Genesis 42.6.
And of the btetheren of Joseph, saluting their brother, when his brethren had
worshipped him, and nothing more ordinary in holy hcripture, then worship given
to persons in dignity, and authority. As therefore this Protestant position,
that God only is to be worshipped, being understood (at it must here by the
opponent) that noe worship ath all is to be given to any save God, plainly
contradicts those and the like places of Scripture. So the Roman Catholic
position, that some kind of worship, is to be exhibited to others, then God,
is both evidently consonant to these texts, and noe way dissagreeing, from that
of Mat. 4.10. and the like texts, which command us to worship God, nay though
they should command us to worship God, only, because such commands are all
ways to be understood, of that first, and highest kind of worship, above
mentioned; neither is there any possible means to reconcile, different places
of Scripture, which seem to ascribe to God only, that, which in other places
is ascribed to creatures, but by such distinctions, of perfections, or
worships, as I have declared. And this is so clear, that it must be, and is
confessed, by Protestans themselves, who generally grant, that Religious
worship is to be given to God only, but civil worship to creatures; which
distinction being once admitted, the opponent, will never be able to convince
any thing against the worship of Saints and Angels, out of Mat. 4.10. for if
one will term the worship given to Saints and Angels, a civil worship, as I
will presently demonstrate Protestants must do, if they make noe distinction
betwixt religious worships, then even Saints and Angles may be worshipped at
the least with some kind of civil worship, even according to Protestants,
notwithstanding thath text of Mat. 4.10. which according to them must be
understood to forbid only Religious worship to any save God. But because the
common tenet of Catholic Doctors is, that things created may be worshipped
with some kind of Religious worship, I will make it evident out of Scripture,
that some Religious worship has been, and may be lawfully exhibited to
creatures, and so not to God only. Thus we read in the books of kings, that
the captain of 50 men worshipped Elias the Prophet, 2. 4. Reg. 1.13. 2. 4.
Reg. 2.15. 2. 4. Reg. 4.37. Exodus 3.5. Psalm. 99.5.
and 50 men together the Prophet Elizeus, and after the Sunamite receiving her
revived sone, adored the same Prophet; The Same is of Moses commanded to adore
the ground where on God stood, and of David commanding to worship the
footstool of God. And least it should be thought that this manner of
worshipping was only in use in the old testament, we have an express
president of it in the new, for our Savior in the revelation speaks to the
Angel of philadelphia thus. Reu. 3.9.
Behold I will make them (that is his enimyes) come and worship before thy feet.

Now that it may appear, that these acts of worship, were Religious, and not
merely civil, we must know in general, that worship is nothing but an
humiliation of our selves in acknowledgme^t of some goodness, and excellency,
in that which we worship. So that there are two kinds of worship the one
interior, the other exterior, the interior is in the mind, and soul only,
the exterior is that interior signifeyd by some humiliation of the body, so
that though one may have the inward of the soul, without any outward or
exterior in the body, yet one can heuer have a true act of exterior, or
bodily worship without an interior worship, in the soul, thus the soldiers
in the time of our Saviors passion, though they bended their knees to him,
which is one part of exterior worship taken Separately, and absolutely in it
self, yet because it was not accompanied with the inward humiliation of the
soul, it was noe act of worship, but of mockery. I say it follows, that as
the outward corporal humiliation is constitured, an act of true worship, by
the inward intention of the mind, So are the different kinds of worships
distinguished only by the different intentions, and humiliations of the soul;
For the very same, external comportment and prostration of the body may be
used both when we worship God, an Angel, a Saint, an Apostle, a Bishop, a
Priest, a King, a Magistrate, a father, a mother, etc. thus the very same
hebrew, Exodus 20.4. Genesis 49.8. Genesis 42.6. 2. King. 1.13. 2. King. 2.15. 2.
King. 4.37.
and greek word, is used in these different worships, (the same bowing and
kneeling is practiced to them all as I have already proved. But though the
same external gestures of the body may be used to all, yet they b^ome
different kinds of worships, according to the different humiliations,
intentions, and acknowledgments, which he who worships desires to exptesse by
those outward deportments of the body. Thus if when I kneel I intend to
exhibit worship to the Creator and maker of all tkings; that kneeling will be
a divine worship proper to God only; If I kneel with intention to acknowledge
only some civil dignity, or moral exccllency in the person before whom I
keele, it will bc a mere civil worship, but if I kneel before, or to some
other thing, or person, with intention to acknowledge in them 'a worth or
dignity, neither infinite nor divine, but finite and createed, neither yet
civil, moral, humane, and natural, but christian, spiritual, and
supernatural, such a kneeling will neither be an act of divine worship, proper
to God only, nor of civil worship, proper to persons or things endued with
meare humane, and natural, excellences, but will be an act of supernatural,
and religious worship taken in a larger sense, as I shall presently declare.
Thus we see that the different intentions of the mind, make the same
external, kneelings of the body, to be different kinds of worships, by
intending there by to acknowledge, a worth in that which is worshipped, divine,
Supernatural, or civil; so that all the difficulty in this matter, consists
in showing clearly, that there are these three different worths, or
excellencies, to be acknowledged and honored, by an act of worship. Two of
these, to wit, divine, and civil excellency, the one found in God alone, the
other in the civil Magistrate, all Protestans Acknowledge, the difficulty
therefore at the last, comes to make it eleare, that there is also a third
worth, and excellency, which is neither infinite, nor increated, nor divine,
nor yet humane, or natural, but wholly spiritual, and supernatural, inspired
or communicated, above all reach, of natural force and light, from the holy
Ghost, and given to men, through the only merits, and by the authority of our
Savior. These heavenly excellencies I find to be of two sorts the one
internal, and justifying graces and gifts, or at the least given freely to
men, as other supernatural things: the other external powers and authorities:
both which I will convince out of holy Scripture, to be such supernatural
gifts of God as I have affirmed. S. James, speaking of the internal graces
says thus. James 1.17. 1. Ccr. 15. v. 10. John. 15. v. 5. John. 1.10.
Every best and perfect gift is from above, descending from the father of
light. And S. Paul by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace was not
void in me. and that of our Souiour, without me ye can do nothing. And S.
John. So many as received him he gave them the power to become the sons of
God, who are not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man but of God. And many like texts, which evidently prove, that all true
grace, and Sancttitie, is a free gift of God, above the force of man's nature,
understanding and will, and this Protestans commonly grant, and noe Christian
can deny, without falling in to Pelagianisme. Concerning the external
authority, dignity, and preheminencie of Ecclesiastical persons in the true
Christian church, they are as evidently ascribed to Christ, and the holy Ghost
as the former. Thus S. Paul. And some verily God has set in the church, 1.
Cor. 12. v. 28.29.
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors, next miracles, then
graces of doing cures, helps, gouermens, kinds of tongues. Which he ascribes
with many other heavenly gifts, to the holy Ghost, toward the beginning of this
chapter, in the words following. And there are divisions of graces, but the
same spirit. 1. Cor. 12.4.5.6.7.9.10.
And there are divisions of ministries, but the same Lord. And there are
divisions of works but the same God who works all in all; But to every one is
given the manifestation of the spirit to profit. To one by the spirit is given
the word of wisdom; but to another the word of knowledge according to the fame
spirit: to an an other faith in one spirit: to an other the work of power, to
an other Prophecy, to an other discretion of spirits; to an other kinds of
tongues, to an other interpretation of speeches. All these, works one an the
same spirit dividing to every one as he will. And to the Galathians. Gallath.
4.11.12.
And he (that is our Savior) has given some to be Apostles, others to be
Prophets, others to be Evangelists, but others to be Pastors and Doctors, to
the consummation of the Saints, into the work of the ministry to the edifying
of the body of Christ, till we all meet in the unity of faith, and the
acknowledgment of the sone of God, in a perfect man, in the fulness of the
age of Christ, whence it is eleare, that not only in the Apostles time, but
through all ages till the end of the world, the dignities in the church were to
be gifts of our Savior, and not conferred by any authority purely humane, and
natural. And as those testimonies couince, that both inward holiness, and
ecclesiastical dignities are gifts of the holy Ghost, and conferred by the
power and Authority, derived from Christ; so lickewise the worth and
excellency of the Saints in heaven, are to be accounted the highest and
chiefest supernatural gifts, and graces of God. Thus S. Paul. Romans ^.23.
The grace of God (Protestants read the gift of God) is eternal life, which
all the Saints of heaven enjoy. And S. John. Be faithful until death, Revel.
2.10. Mat. 19.18. 1, Cor. 6.2.3.4.
and I will give the a crown of life. And S. Mat. Ye shall sit upon twelve
seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And S. Paul. Know you not that
the Saints shall judge the world, if the world shall be judged by you, are you
unworthy to judge of small matters. Know you not that we shall judge the
Angels, how much more things of this life. And S. John, brings in the 24.
Elders, saying, Reu. 5.19*
thou have made us a kindome and Priests and we shall reign upon the earth.
whence most clearly appears, that the Saints in heaven have those two highest
dignities which are in esteem amongst men, of Judges, and Kings of the whole
world, which notwithstanding is above the power of all mortal men to confer
upon them, and only in the power of God, and therefore these judiciary* and
Royal powers must be of a higher rank and order, then are any dignities
merely civil, humane, and natural. And the like dignities are ascribed in
holy writ, to the Angels, for our Savior calls them holy Angels, Luck 9.26.
Mare. 8.36. Acts 7.53. Gen, 19.1. Luc. 1^11. 1. Mat. 20.
and so they must have true holiness, wihch is a gift of God above the force
of nature. They were the Promulgers of the old law, the Ambassadors of God,
in matters of highest concernment, the inflicters of Gods punischments, Genesis
19.1. Reu. 15. trough out. The captains and generals of the armies of God.
Joshua 5.14. The Gouerners and controulers of kingdoms. Dan. 10.12.13.14. The.
deuiders of the Reprobate, from the elect in the day of Judgment. Mat. 13.49.
And the Sendres of the wicked in to hell fire. ibidem. with many such like
dignities, and preheminences, all great and high in them selves, and above the
reach, both of all humane, and Angelical nature, bestowed freely upon them,
through the liberality of God. And as this supernatural excellency is found in
Saints and Angels, so is it ascribed all so to other things in Scripture, to
which God has freely communicated certain blessings and privileges. Thus we
read in Joshua. Loose the shoes from thy feet, Joshua 5.16. Exodus 3.5. 1 King
21.4.6. Psalm. ^.8. Ps. 10.4. Ps. 17.7. Mat. 23.17.18.19. Exodus Leui^. Numbers
etc.
for the place where thou stand is holy. And in Exodus. Loose thy shoes from
thy feet, sor the place where thou stand is holy ground. Thus the bread of
the temple, is called holy bread, and sanctified bread. The Temple is called
holy, yea so holy, that our savior says, that the temple Sanctisieth the
gold, which is in it, and the Alter sanctifies the gift which is offered upon
it Thus the most inward place, of the temple, had noe other name, then Sanctam
Sanctorum, the holy of holies, that is the most holy place of the whole world.
The holiness of these, and the like things, where in soever it consisted,
issued not from any civil, or humane power, but was drawn from the power, and
authority of God, as author of the true Saving religion of those times. Thus I
have made it clear out of Scripture, that there is a worth, a dignity, a
power, an excellency, which is merely created, and infinitely inferior, to
the attributes, and perfections of God, and yet far excelling all civil, and
humane worth, and above the reatch, sphere, and force of all civil power and
authority. The most clear rule, to the capacity of the vulgar, to distinguish,
civil, worths and excellencies, from Spiritual and supernatural, is, that
those which are common to the true religion, with all other kinds and
professions of men, are only civil and natural, such as are, wit,
understanding, knowledge, learning, eloquence, nobility, valor, Government,
Magistracy, etc. But those which are proper to the true religion, are
Spiritual, and Supernatural, as are, the dignity of a Saint in heaven, of an
Angel, a holy man yet living, a Prophet, an Appostle, a Bishop, a Priest, a
Godfather, a God mother, etc. And because these and the likc excellencies, are
proper to religion, they may in a large sense, be termed religious
excellencies, or dignities^ That this may be better understood, the Reader, may
take notice, that the word Religion, may either be taken in a strict sense, for
the virtue of Religion, as it is distinguished, from othet infused, and
supernatural virtues, whereby true worship and honor is given to God: or in a
more large and general sense, for the whole profession of those who esteem
them selves to have the true saving way of serving God, and attaining
Salvation. And this is the more obuious, and vulgar understanding of this word
Religion, thus we commonly say the Catholicque Religion, etc. that is their
whole belief, and profession. In the first strict and and rigid sense,
Religion is taken amongst the School doctors, when they dispute of the nature
of infused virtues: and in the like sense it is often taken in the books of
Moses, Exodus 12.26.43. Exodus 29.9. Leuit. 26.31. n. 19.2. where it is
restrained either to sacrifice, Number* 19.2.
or or some other worshrp of God. In the Second more large acception, it is
found, both in the old and new testament. Hester 8.17. So that many of an
other nation and sect, joined them selves to their Religion and ceremonies.
Hester 9.27. Upon all those who would unite them selves to their Religion.
Acts 26.3. Saint Paul says, that before his conversion, He lived a Pharesie
according to the most certain sect of his Religion. James e. 2. If any one
seem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain.
(...), Religious, pious, according to scapula. Deuou^ in the pro^estant Bibles.
(...), According to scapula, amongst Ecclesiastical Authors, Religious,
Pious, the protestants translate i^ Deuou^.
In which texts it is manifest that Religion is taken for the whole belief,
and Profession, both of Jews and Christians. Hence it follows, that as the
word Religion, so the word Religious, derived from it, may be taken in the two
fore said differe^te senses; yet I find it usually in Scripture in the second
larger acception, where a Religious Person signifies nothing, but a person
truly devout, virtuous, and fairhfull. Thus Acts 2.5. But there were dwelling
in Jerusalem Jews Religious men of all nations vvhieh are under heaven. And
Acts 10.2. where it is said of Cornelius, that he was Religious, and fearing
God with his whole household, giving many alms to the common people, and all
vvayes praying God. And Acts 13.50. The Jews stirred up certain Religious,
and honest women, and the chief of the city, etc. And James the 1.26. (...),
Religious in protestant Bibles.
If any man seem to himself to be Religious, not bridling his tongue this
man's Religion is vain where Religious, is taken for pious, virtuous etc. For
else the ill government of the tongue, would not hinder a true exercise of the
virtue of religion, strictly understood as it differs from other theological
and moral virtues, as it hinders not the true exercise of faith and hope; as
they are particular virtues. This large acception therefore of these words
Religion, and Religious, being so clearly delivered in Scripture It will be
sufficient for defense of the Catholic Roman faith in this point, to
affirm, that when our Doctors say that any thing created may be or is,
worshipped with Religious worship, that it is Religious in this large acception
found so familiarly in Scripture, that is, virtuous, pious, christian, a
worship belonging to our Religion, proper to our Religion, and tending finally
to the acknowledgment of God, and our Saviors honor, as author of our faith
and Religion. So that having these references to Gods honor, though those
Acts of Religious worship tend immediately to the acknowledgement of some
created supernaiurall excellence in that which we worshipp, by them, yet that
hinders not their being Religious acts in this larger sense. As appears by
these following texts of Scripture; where Moses is commanded to prescribe
certain ceremonial rites in Sacrifices, and Holocausts, Leuit. 7.6.
amongst which one was, that the breast and right Shoulder of that which was
offered in sacrifice, should be given to the Priests, as belonging to them by
right and ordinance of God, The giving of these two parts of the thing offered
to the priest, was an action done immediately to a pure creature, and not to
God, and yet it is called Religion, as appears by the words. These things God
commanded to be given to them (that is to Aaron, and his offspring, as it is in
the precedent words,) from the children of Israel, by a perpetual Religion in
their generations. Secondly S. James. Pure and undefiled Religion with God, and
the father is this, to visit the orphans, James 1.17.
and widows in their tribulation, and to keep himself unspotted in this
life. where a work of mercy to the pore is called Religion, that is a work
proceeding from Religion, and belongrg to Religion, though done to creatures,
such as are orphans and wedows.

All that I have cited out of Scripture in the discovery of this second
mistake, will, I hope, have co^uinced the judicious, and well minded Reader,
that there is a Supernatural created excellency, communicated liberally from
Allm: God to some creatures, infinitely below the divine, excellency of God,
and yet far above all natural and civil worth, which therefore must deserve
honor, and worship seeing that natural and civil excellencies, (even
according to protestants) though far inferior to them, deserve it. which
worship seeing it is done in acknowledgment of the Spiritual and supernatural
dignities, which are only proper to Gods true religion, and so are religious
excellencies, may be rightly termed a religious worship in the fore named
sense: For seeing the humble acknowledgme^t of divine perfections, is
deservedly termed divine worship, and of civil, perfections, rightly styled,
civil worship so the humble acknowledgment of religious perfections, for the
like reason, is to be named Religious worship. which will yet seem less
strange, to an indifferent eye if one consider, that the some different degrees
may be found in Acts of other virtues, which are here found in worships. I have
already proved from Scripture that there are different kinds and degrees of
fears, and loves. whence it follows, that when one fears the justice and
wrath of some civil Prince, or magistrate, it may be called civil fear, but
when one fears the justice and authority of an Apostle, a Prophet, etc. whose
power is drawn from Religion, it may be named a Religious sear. Genesis 3.10.
Thus the fear of Adam, hiding himself from God, was a divine fear. 1. Kings
1, Acts* Acts 5, ^*
The fear of Adonias flying from king Solomon, was a civil fear: but the
fear of the Prim^tiue Christians of S. Peeter, when Ananias fell down dead at
his feet, was a Religious fear. And the same distinction is in different
ordres of love. S. Peeter loved our Savior as his God and Redcemer, with
divine love. Ifack loved Esau, with a civil love; John. 21.^7. Genesis 25.28.
Acts 20, 37.
but the Primitive Christians loved S. Paul, with a Religious love. And in the
same manner, as I have already Proved, Moses worshipped the infinite majesty
of God, with a divine worship, the children of Jacob worshipped the power and
excellency of Joseph, with a civil worship, but the Sunamite worshipped
Elizeus, and the captain of fifty men, Elias, (whose authorities were derived,
known, and acknowledged only from faith, and Religion) with Religious worship.

And the giving such a Religious worship as this, which I have described to a
creature is so far from derogating any thing from the due worship of God, or
from ascribing any worship proper to him, to any creature, that it would be an
insufferable injury to God, And horrid Sacrilege, to affirm that he is to be
worshipped, with any such worship for that were to acknowledge in him only a
created, finite, and imperfect excellency, which were to make him an Idol,
and a false God. Neither can his honor be any thing diminished by exhibiting
this kind of Religious worship, to a creature endued with spitituall graces,
for his honor cannot be injured, but by giving to a creature the wotship
proper, and due to him only, seeing therefore this is no worship due to him
neither only nor at all, it cannot be any way a prejudice to his honor. For as
civil and religious fear, and love commanded to be given to creatures, is no
way preiudicious to the divine fear and love which we-owe to God; So neither
can civil, nor religious worship commanded to be exhibited to creatures, (as
I have proved) be preiudicious to the highest divine worship which we owe to
God. And thus much Allm: God seems to say by his Ptophet Isay. Isay 42.8.
I am the Lord this is my name, I will not give my glory to any other, nor my
praise to Idols. where he says not, I will not give glory to any other, for
that would be contrary to the words of the Psalmist, speaking of man in his
first creation, Psalm. 8.6.
Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, but I will not give my glory to
an other, that is that infinite glory which properly belongs to God only, which
is specifyed in the precedent words, I am the Lord, this in my name, so that
God will never give that which is his proper name and title, to be Lord of all
things, to an other; which is yet more expressly set down, by the same
Prophet, And I will not give my glory to an other: hear o Jacob and Israel
whom I call. I, Isay 48.11.12.1^.
I my self am the firrst, and I am the last. And my hand also laid tbe
foundarions of the earth, and my right hand measured the heavens, etc. This is
that glory proper to him alone, of being the eternal God, creator of heaven
and earth, which he will not give to an other: which so long as he keeps
inviolable to him self, all under glories limited and created, which are like
so many little motes compared with the infinite extent, and light of his
glory, he both liberally gives himself, and wills they should respectively be
given to his creatures. If not withstanding all these evidences both of
Scripture and Reason, any one should remain so strangely wilful, and
immouable, by force of education, and continual custom from his infancy, as
to deny all kind of Religious worship in how large a sense soever it be taken,
to be lawfully exhibited to any save God alone. I say if any such should be
found; so long as he yields to the thing it self, that is, to exhibit
reverence, and worship to persons, and things in acknowledgement of the
supernatural, and free gifts, graces, and blessings of God, where with they
are enriched. (as I have showed many holy persons mentioned in the Scriptures,
have done) let him call that worship supernatural, or christian, or pious, or
an exterordinary rank of civil worship, I shall not much contend about the
name, when the thing is done. For what soever he call it, it is, and cannot but
be, a Religious worship in it self, at least in that large sense, so clearly
drawn from the Seriptures. And Thus much of the discovery and redress of the
second mistake.

THE THIRD MISTAKE. The word serve in Mat. 4.10. is misunderstood.
THe opponent indeuoring to prove that God, only is to be worshipped, and
therefore neither S. nor Angel, from the text of Mat. 4.10. Thou shall
worshipp the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Seeing there is noe
proof in the former part of the text, as I have showed, must have recourse to
the latter, and him only shall thou Serve, and that this clause may have any
appearance of force it must suppose, that the word Serve here used, signifies
all kind of Service; So that these words, and him only shall thou Serve, must
signify thus much that noe service must be done but to God alone. which must
needs be a very gross mistake, for the word Service taken in this general
sense, plainly contradicts the Precept of S. Paul. Ephesians. 6.7.
Obey your temporal Lords, etc. Serving them with a good will, as to our Lord,
and not to men. And that Prophecy in Genesis of Jacob, and Esau. Gen^ 25.21.
Romans 9* 12.
The greater shall serve the Less. So that it is manifest, that not God only
is to be served. Whence may breefely be noted, that before one cite any text of
Scripture, for the proof of any thing, one must first consider, whether the
sense in which that text must be taken to be of force to prove what we intend,
contradict not other plain places of Scripture, as this does, which if it do,
we must seek some other proof, for that will not be a proof, but a mistake.
But the mistake in this place of Mat. 4.10. proceeds not only from want of
reflection upon other places of Scripture, but from want of knowledge of the
greek word used here by the Evangelist. For though both in English, Latin and
Hehrew, there be only one word to signify the serving of God, and creatures.
Yet in the greek there is a proper word, which signifies only the service, of
God, or proper to him alone, and is never used for the religious se^uice done
to any creature, as a creature, but as esteemed by those, who exhibit that
service to be a God. This word in greek is (...), latreuin, used by the holy
Ghost in this place, Mat. 4 10. to signify serve. That this may be understood,
the Reader may please to note, that many words have two kinds of
significations, the one by force of their first institution, which they
anciently had, and have amongst heathen Authors, the other by use and
application, to some one particular Sense, by virtue of common use and custom,
which has in process of time obtained force, to limite them to that
particular Sense. Thus the word (...), tyrannos, amongst the ancient Greeks
first signified a king, and was taken in a good Sense, but amongst later
Authors, and now universally it signifies a Tyrant, or cruel, and unjust
oppresser, of such as are under him.

And as the unanimous consent of approved Authors, and common wealths, has a
power to give a new signification to words, or rather to limite or restrain
the old, to some determinate part of what they signified, by force of their
first institution, so has allsoe the universal consent of ecclesiastical
approved Authors, and the common voice of Christendom, the like power, so to
alter the ancient signification of some words, that it determines the
indifferency, and universality of their original Signification to some one
part or member of it, when they apply it to express something in Christian
Religion. Thus (...), Baptismus, which anciently signified any kind of washing
amongst ecclesiastical, and Christian Authors, is taken for a Sacrament,
known by that name. Thus Evangelist, which originally signifeyed any one who
told good tydinges, signifies a writer or promulger of the Gospel. In the like
manner (...), which signified amongst the ancient infidels, any kind of
feruice, amongst Ecclesiastical Authors, signifies only that kind of
Religious service, which is don to God. So that it has two significations,
the one moral, the other Ecclesiastical, as Scapula a Protestant author, of
our nation acknowledges in his Lexicon both of this, and the former, and many
other words, granting that according to the Sense, which it has amongst
Ecclesiastical authors, and in the new Testament, it signifies a Religious
worship only, and in proof of this, cites the epistle to the Hebrews, where
being put absolutely it signifi^es the worship of God. This dubble
significa^ion supposed, Hebr. 9.9.
I urge further that this word (...), Latreuin, in the Scripture, signifies
that Religious worship only which is exhibited to God, or divine worship, and
is never used through the whole Scripture, for a religious Service done to any
creature, as to a creature, I have bestowed some days study, to examine this
matter, and having searched all the places of Sctipture where this word (...)
is, I never found it signify any religious sesuice save divine, and I Prouocke
any Protestant author to prove the contrary.

True it is that (...) douleuin, is indifferently used very commonly in both
Testaments, to signify the religious serving of God, or creatutes; (...)
Latreuin, never but for serving, either a true, or false God. when it is
referred to worship blonging to Religion. And though Scapula being a Protestant
only say, that this word (...) signifies a religious worship, yet the proof
which he bringes for it out of the epistle to the Hebrews conuinces that being
absolutely put, that is alone without any oblique case, it signifyes, as he
acknowledges, the Service done to God only. (...), perfectum facere seruientem,
Heb. 9.9.
that could not make him that did the service perfect. And he might also have
cited the same word put absolutely, and signifying only the service of God,
Luc. 2.37.
in S. Luke, where he says Anna the Prophetess was night and day in the
Temple. (...), serving, that is doing service to God. This text, Luke the 2.37.
The Protestant bible of 1589. with Fulks commentary translates (...), Served
God. And Heb. 9.2. (...), seruings of God, and the later Bibles translate it,
divine feruice. whence it appears that the absolute significarion of this
word, is the service of God, or divine service. In the like manner I find it,
Acts 7.7. Romans 1.9. and Revel. 22. taken for the service of the true God, and
for the service of Idols, or false Gods. Acts 7. v. 41. 1. Cor. 5.1. and Romans
22.15. and in the old Testament very often. From this ground proceeds the
ordinary distinction of Religious worship, into (...), Latria, and (...),
doulia, for seeing that (...), Latreuo, signifyes noe other Religious Service,
save that which is due to God, through the whole Scripture, and (...), douleuo,
signifyes in hundreds of places, as well that which is due to God, as to
creatures, hence the service done to finit Persons, belonging to Religion may
rightly be termed doulia, and that which is exhibited to God alone, Latria, and
hence it proceeds also, that the service of false Gods or Idols, is never
called either in Scripture, nor in approved Ecclesiastical Authors, noe nor
by Protestants themselves, Idolodoulia, but Idololatria, Idolatry because it
gives to them divine service due to God only, being derived from Larria, which
signifies noe other Religious service save divine. Seeing therefore noe Roman
Catholic teaches, that divine service due to God only is to be given to any
creature, but the quite contrary they hold nothing against this text of S.
Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
(...), that is with the service of Latria, or highest degree of Service, which
(as I have demonstrated) by Scripture is due to God only.

Thus have I discovered three plain mistakes in these few words of Mat. 4.10.
to prove that God only is to be worshipped, where in I have been forced to be
more large, then I wished, because upon what I have here delivered, depends
the clearing of the ensuing controversies, in this matter of worship.

The second Protestant Position, Forbidden the worship of Angels. This is
proved by Scripture mistaken.
I John saw all these things and heard them, and when I had heard and seen, I
fell down to worship, before the feet of the Angel, Revel. 22.^.8.9.
which showed me these things: then said he unto me, see thou do it not, for I
am thy fellow servant, worship God.

The first mistake. This text is made contrary to other plain texts of
Scripturc, allowing the worshp of Angels.
Genesis 19.7.1.
ANd two Angels came into Sodom at ninght, Lot sitting at the gates of the
city: who, when he had seen them, rose and went to meet them, and he adored
prostrate upon the ground, etc. which worship the Angels accepted, noe way
reprehending Lot, or forbidding him, as appears in the text. And when Joshua
was in the feeld of Hierico, Joshua 5. v. 14.
he lift up his eyes, and saw a man standing against him, houlding a naked
sword: and he went unto him and said, art thou ours, or our adversaries? who
answered, no; but I am a prince of the army of our Lord, and and now I come:
Joshua fell groueling upon the ground and adoring said, wy does my Lord speak
unto his servant? etc. where it appears that this Angel was a creature, and
not God, for he is called a prince, That is one of the Princes of Gods army.

The second mistake.
THis text of S. John proves noe more that all worship of Angels is forbidden,
then an other of S. Luke that the worship of Saints yet living is forbidden.

As Peeter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at is feet and
worshipped him. Act. 10. v. 25.26.
But Peeter took him up saying, stand up, I my self also am a man. And yet
it is clear out of Scripture, that holy men yet living are to be worshipped,
and have accepted of the worship, of others. 2. Kings 4. v. 37.
Again he sent a third captain of fifty men, and fifty men with him; who,
when he was come, bowed his knees tovvard Elias, and prayed him and said man of
God despise not my life and the lives of thy servants that are with me, etc.
She (that is, the Sunamite) fell at his feet, and adored upon the groond.
where we see that the Prophet Eliseus was worshipped and he refused it not. 4.
Kings 4. v. 37.
And it is the common practice of Protestants in Engeland to kneel down and
ask blessing of their Godfathers and Godmothers, desiring them to pray for
them to God; which is a true worship, and yet it is noe civil worship, because
the reason why they do it, belonges not to any dignity in the common wealth,
but to Religion; and therefore it must be a worship appertaining to Religion,
as was the worship of Elias and Eliseus now cited, which is the weary same with
that worship, which by Romain Catholics is given to Saints and Angels, as
creatures, belonging to faith, and Religion.

The third mistake.
ONe may prove as well, that it is unlawful to weep, as to wurship Angels,
because an Angel forbad S. John to weep.

And I wept much because noe man was found-worthy to open and to read the
book, Reu. 5.4.5.
neither to look therein, And one of the Elders said unto me weep not. And
yet certainly it is lawful to weep, for if it wear not, neither our Savior
would have wept over Jerusalem, Luc. 23.28
nor commanded the women of Jerusalem, to weep over themselves, etc.

The text of S. John, Revel. 22. v. 8. v. 8. ad 9. reconciled with the other
texts of Scripture.
IF any one would prove out of the 10. of the Acts, v. 25. and 26. now cited,
that noe Apostle, or saint yet living, were to be worshipped, because S. Peeter
refused the worship which Cornelius exhibited to him, I demand, what would a
Protestant answer to such an objection. Either he must say that S. Peeter
refused this worshep (though he might laufully have accepted it. as being due,
no less then the like worship was accepted by Elias, and Eliseus) that S.
Peeter, I say notwithstanding, Refused it out of humility and respect, which he
bare to Cornelius: and this supposed, Protestants must give us leave to apply
(with the greatest part of the ancient Fathers and Doctors) the same answer to
S. John's worshipping the Angel, and his refusing it; for some worship was noe
less due to this Angel then it was to the two Angels, which Lot worshipped.
Genesis 19. v. 1. and the Angel which Joshua worshipped, Joshua 5. v. 14. now
cited: and yet this Angel refused it out of humility and respect, which he
bore to S. John, as S. Peeter did, Acts 10. v. 25. and 26. or if this answer
seem, not so convenient to this plare of the Acts, a Protestant must answer,
that Cornelius here gave him the worship which was due to God only, that is,
the highest divine worship, which he therefore refused' as injurious to God noe
otherwise then' S. Paul and Barnabas with all earnestness possible, Act. 14.
v. 10.11.12.13.14.
refused the saerifice which the heathen Priest of Lystra would have offered to
them, as to two Gods, Jupiter and Mercurius, whom they took them to be. And if
they like of this answer, they will give us also leave to apply the same to
the passage of S. John. Reu. 22. v. 8.9. not that S. John committed any
Idolatry or false worship, willingly and sinfully, but that the Angel upon
good ground either thought, or at least feared, that S. John took him to be
our Savior, and so gave him presently the worship due to the Divine Person
which he thought him to be: for though it be wholly improbable, that Cornelius
gave divine worship to S. Peeter Act. 10. because he was noe heathen, but a
true believer, and so knew that divine honor, was to be given to God only;
and religious and fearing God, as appears, v. 11. and so was far from
committing Idolatry, and knew well enough that S. Peeter was a man, v. 5. and
the 6. and so could not suppose him, out of ignoranee to be God, and though it
seem as improbable, that S. Peeter conceived that Cornelius intended to
worship him with divine honor, seeing he was sufficiently informed, that he
was a true believer, and Professor of the law of Moises, v. 22. yet many
ancient fathers teach that S. John did really think that this Angel which
appeared to him, was not an Angel, but our Savior, or at least it was very
incident to the Angel, to conceive or fear (being ignorant of S. John's
intention) that he took him to be our Sauiuor, because the Angel said in the
precede^t verse behold I come quickly, which was the usual phrase and speech
which our Savior used to S. John when he appeared to him, as is manifest chap.
2. v. 6. chap. 3. v. 21. c. 16. v. 15. c. 22. v. 12. and must necessarily have
been pronounced, either by our Savior himself, or by an Angel in his place,
and speaking in his name, because these words, I come quickly (as is clear in
all the before cited places, and particularly chap. 22. v. 12. presently
following) can neither be meant nor verifyed of any one but of our Savior: and
this to have been the opinion of S. John, by reason of those next precedent
words, Behold I come quicly, may have some ground in the text it self here
cited by the opponent, And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship,
etc. for the seeing of those strange visions, and hearing those precedent
words. Behold I come quicly. So proper to out Savior, gave this occasion to
worship the Angel, as taking him to be our Savior: and therefore the Angel
presently disabused him, and let him understand that he was not our Savior,
but a creature and servant of God, as appears in this text objected v. 8. and
9. if it should be objected that c. 21. v. 9. S. John affirms, that this very
Angel which he worshipped was one of the seven Angels, who carried the viols
filled with the last plagues, and therefore could not think that it was our
Savior. I answer that though in the beginning and continuance of this vision he
seemed to him to be an Angel, yet when he heard him pronounce words proper to
our Savior, he might have sufficient reason to think that his former
apprehension was amiss, and that whatsoever he seemed before, yet it was our
Savior appearing under the form of that Angel. If it be further objected
that S. John writes expressly that it was one of the Seven Angels, which
appeared to him, and therefore could not after doubt of it, it may be answered
that when the Euangclist writ this he was wholly assured that it was an Angel,
because the Angel had, before this was written, determinaetly assured him,
that he was not our Sauiuor; yet whilst the vision happned, before it was
either written, or the Angel had rectifyed the judgment of S. John, he had
ground enough to think it was our Savior, when he heard those words proceed
from him, behold I come speedily. Neither is it any wonder that S. John was
ignorant of some things, concerning the visions which appeared to him. For he
thought that none could be found worthy to open the seven seals and
therefore wept, and was as much forbidden to weep by the Angel, c. 5. v. 4.
as to worship, c. 19. v. 10. He aeknowledges also that he knew not who they
wear who appeared in white Stoles. c. 7. v. 13.

Though these answeares may satisfye all that is opposed against them, yet
because the matter is in it self obscure, and leaves a probability on both
sides, I rather stick to the other answer that though S. John knew it was noe
more then an Angel, yet the Angel refused the worship he gave him, at S.
Peeter did that of Cornelius. And yet whatsoever may be thought of these two
answers, that which is most clear and unquestionable is a third answers. That
though S. John knew that he who speak to him was an Angel, and not our
Savior, and so gave him, the worship only due to an Angel, yet the Angel
being ignorant of S. John's intention, might diseruedly fear, or conceive, that
he took him to be our Savior, and so gave him divine worship, and therefore,
he presently dissabused him, telling him that he was one of his fellow
servants, etc. And each of these answers may be equally applied to the like
text, Reu. 22. v. 9.9. Reu. 19.
Revel. 19. for out of the same ground of Act. 10. it may be said that he
refused this worship though in it self lawful, as S. Peeter did that of
Cornelius: or that he supposed him to be our Savior, (and so gave him divine
honor which was no way due to him) because he there used the phrase of our
Savior, when he said scribe, write, as appears in the three first chapters,
and chap. 14. v. 13.14.15. neither can it be clearly proved that any one
commanded S. John to write, saying to him, Scribe, write, but our Savior,
save only in this place, through the whole Revelation; and then it was spoken
in the name and person of Christ by the Angel; so that S. John had great
reason to think that it was the voice of our Savior, and therefore gave him
the honor due to our Savior, till he was better informed: or according to the
third, and clearest answer, the Angel had reason to think, that S. John
worshipped him, (when he heard him use that phrase of our Savior) with divine
worship, as taking him to be our Savior, though S. John, knew that he was but
an Angel, and so gave him only the worship which was due to an Angel. And thus
much for the text of S. John.

The text of S. Paul mistaken. Against the worshipping of Angels.
Let no man beguile you of your reward in voluntary humility, and worshipping
of Angels, Coloss. 2. v. 18.
intruding into those things, which he has not seen, vainly puffed up in his
fleshly mind.

The First mistake. The worshipping of Angels missapplyed.
I Answer, that this text speaks of a worshipping of Angels, whereby they are
made equal to Christ, or that Christ is depending of them, which contains
plain Infidelity, and blasphemy against our Savior. Now that this is so,
appears evidently, first out of the text it self if it had been wholly cited;
for it follows immediately v. 18. in your own Bible, and not holding the head
by which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. Which is nothing but so to
worship Angels, that they deny the souerainty of Christ, and acknowledge him
not to be the chief nourishing head of the church; which all Romain Catholics
condemn as mainly injurious to Christ, and destructive of the church, because
it takes a way his divinity, and exhibites worship to the Angels, not as
Christ servants, and vassalls infinitely inferior to him, and on whom he has
no dependence at all, but as to his equals, or Superiors.

But Romain Catholics not denying Christ's absolute souerainty and Divinity,
but most constantly believing it, even whilst they worship Angels as his
servants, do not any thing against this text of S. Paul. Coloss. 2. v. 18. and
19. wherein is forbidden only such a worship of them as destroys the belief
that he is the Sovereign head of his church, worshipping of Angels, etc. v.
18. not holding the head, etc. v. 19.

The Second mistaken. The greek word (...) is mistranslated.
SEcondly, that not all honor and worship of Angels is forbidden in this
text, but only such as destroys the Souerainty and Divinity of Christ, may be
gathered out of the greek word here used by the Apostle, threskeia, which (as
Scapula a Protestant in his lexicon notes) has for the first signification,
Coll. 2. v. 18.
Religion, and so the vulgar latin translates it Religionem Angelorum, the
Religion of Angels; which intimates thus much, that those against whom the
Apostle here writes, did compose out of their own heads, a religion of Angels,
whom they had never seen, nor did they understand, as the Apostle signifies in
these words v. 18. intruding into those things which they have not seen; and
fayning unto them selves certain subordinations and dependences amongst the
Angels, and making our Savior, a mere Angel as the rest, and not God. And so
framing their whole faith and religion in Angels, that it might justly be
termed by the Apostle (...), threskeia ton Angelon, the religion of Angels.
Col. 2. v. 18.
And had your Protestant translations been so punctual and faithful in
giving the full signification of the greek text as you imagine, they should
rather have translated the greek word Threskeia (according to the prime and
first signification) religion, then according to a secondary signification,
worshipping: but they chose this rather then the former because it sounds in
the ears of the unlearned, more against the doctrine an practice of the Romain
Church, who are carried away much more by the words then the sense of
Scripture, which the unlearned and unstable pervert to their own destruction
1. of Peetet, the 3. v. 16. and this is the ordinary deceit of your new
translatours, in very many other places of holy Scripture, when the greek or
hebrew words have different significations, always to put that which makes
most against us, leaving the rest; which notwithstanding they put when the
other serve their turns better against us, though the greek word be the same;
which I am able to demonstrate if it be demanded: the translation of the word
Threskeia shall now suffice: for though they translate it here worshipping,
because that word seemed to be of force amongst the ignorant readers, against
us, yet James 1. v. 26. and 27. they translate the very same word threskeia
here used, religion, not worshipping, or worship: this man's religion is vain
v. 26. pure religion etc. v. 27. because there it was no advantage. for them,
nor disadvantage to us, to translate it Religion: but howsoever when such texts
as these are used against us, Protestants must not think that we are bound to
stand to their translation which we allow not of, but to the hebrew, greek, or
Latin, (with proportion:) and so when the words in those languages have
different significations, we are not bound to answer to the text as it stands
in their new translations, but have freedom to take the word in some other
signification, especially when antiquity has so translated and onderstood it:
and therefore I answer here that the greek word having different
significations, it is not the worshipping* but the religion of Angels, which
is here forbidden; for so the vulgar translation has it, which is ancient
about twelve hundred years: and how can any Protestant, though learned, ever
convince out of Scripture, that the word threskeia, is rather to be translated
worshipping, then religion? seeing the greek word signifies both, and the
scope and context of the Apostle rather agrees with religion then worshipping;
nay how shall the pore unlearned readers be certain that their translation is
the word of God, and the true and only signification of the word in the
original in that place, when the original word has sundry significations?
and further, how shall they not have cause to doubt of, and call in question
the whole translation of the bible? seeing they know not when the words in the
original have different significations, or only one, and so may doubt wether
the true signification, and that which is only meant there by the holy Ghost,
is put, or rather an other which was not intended by the holy Ghost in that
place, especially in places of controversy, where their Translatours use to
take all advantages against us, as I have showed: And yet neither of those two
inconveniences toutch Romain Catholics, because their translation is commended
and approved by the holy church, which thy believe cannot err in her
definitions in points of faith; and so rest assured that their translation
delivers the true signification of the words meant by the holy Ghost in each
particular place, though the words in themselves be indifferent to many
significations in the original.

Now it appears evidently, that S. Paul speaks of a Religion (or as the
Protestants will have it, a worshipping) of Angels, which makes them equal to
Christ, or Christ dependant of them, because the stream of holy ancient
fathers affirm that the Apostle wrote here against Simon Magus, Menander,
Saturninus, Cethiani, Caiani.
and other Archheretikes in the Apostles time* who coined these errors of the
Angels, forging certain subordinations, dependences, and preeminencyes
amongst them, that our Savior was one of them, and (as some Cerinthiani.
thought) subject to them. The ancient Fathers, who affirm that the above said
heretics held these errors about the Angels, are Clemens Romanus, who lived
in the time of the Apostles, lib. 6. Constitut. c. 10. S. Ireneus, who lived in
the next age after the Apostles, lib. 2. against hereseys etc. S. Epiphanius,
who flourished about 300. years after Christ, in his Catalogue os heresies,
speaking of Simon Magus and the rest: and Theodoret, who wrote about 400.
years after our Savior, witnesses that the holy Apostle S. Paul in this place
writes, against these heretics: S. Epiphanius also witnesses that Simon Mahus
excluded our Savior from the office of mediator, and put the Angels in his
place, as the Apostle seems here to say.

The Third mistake. This text is made contrary to other texts of Scripture.
THirdly, the Religion, or worship of Angels here forbidden, cannot be all
kind of worship exhibited to them: for then this place of Scripture would be
contrary to the other which I cited before, Genesis 19. v. 1. Joshua 5. v. 14.
where Angels were lawfully worshipped: and so this place cannot conclude any
thing against us: for if some worship may be lawfully given to Angels
notwithstanding this place, it can never be proved from hence, that the worship
we give them is forbidden, unless it be first proved to be unlawful, which
can never be deduced from this general prohibition.

And if any one should object here that seeing this word threskeia signifyes
religion and worship, thence may be gathered, that all worship appertayning
to Religion, or all religius worship is forbidden, to be given to Angels. I
answer, that if we take religion and religious worship as it is strictly and
presly taken amongst the Doctors in its prime and formal acception, for a
virtue whereby due honor is given immediately to God; it is true that all such
religion or religious worship is there forbidden to be given to Angels: and in
this sense noe Catholic teaches that religious worship is to be given to
Angels, or any creature, but only to the creator of all things, because he
only it true God: but if by religion or religious worship be understood in a
larger sense, a virtue or reverence belonging to religion, and exceeding the
bounds of nature and civil worship; then religious worship to Angels is not
forbidden in this place. Now that religion may be taken in this larger sense,
is clear as I have already showed out of S. James now cited chap 1. v. 26.
and 27. If any man amongst you seem to be religiouus, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure religion
and undefiled before God and the father, is to visit the fatherless, and
widows, in their afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

Where we see. that actions performed to creatures of piety and mercy, are
called religion, and are religious actions: and so this worship, though it be
done to creatures, may according to the phrase of Scripture be called religious
worship, at least in this large sense, that works of piety and mercy are
called religion, or religious actions here by S. James. And thus much for the
second place.

We are commanded to pray unto God: therefore no presumption but a bounden
duty. Proofs out of Scripture mistaken.
Come unto me all ye that labor, Matthew. 11.2.28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

When you pray, say our father which art in heaven. And what soever ye shall
ask the father in my name, Luke 11. v. 2. John ^6. v. 23. Luke 11. v. 9.
he will give it you.

Ask and ye shall have: seek and ye shall find knock and it shall be
opened unto you.

If the opponent mean here that we are to pray to God without all presumption
of our selves, or our own works (for the words are obscure) we most willingly
admit this whole objection, and all the proofs of it, as most consonant with
the doctrine of the Romain Church, and only against Pelagian and Semipelagian
Heretics:

For she teaches that the good works of Gods children are truly good, and
pleasing to God, and meritorious of the increase of grace and eternal glory,
Council. Trid. sess. can. 1.2.3*
yet she teaches also that all good works are the free gifts of God,
proceeding from his grace, and not to be ascribed to any natural force of ours
left to it self, which is not able to do any thing at all pleasing to
Allmighty God; and so we cannot glory in our selves, but in God only, as S.
Paul teaches us: Again she teaches, that though the good works of God's
children be meritorious, Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 9.16.^ can. 13.14.15.
as is declared, where they are; yet no man can be in this life (without a
particular revelation) infallibly assured that he is the child of God, or that
he ever did any one work truly good and pleasing to God; and so lives and dies
wholly relying upon the mercies of God, and merits of our dear Saviors bitter
death and Passion, of which he is assured by a firm and steadfast hope, not
presumptuously relying upon his own works, whereof he has no sufficient
assurance whereon to found his salvation: and so he is kept in a most humble
and low esteem of himself, and all he ever did through his whole life: for it
is not the believing that good works where thy are, are meritorious, but the
believing that we have such meritorious works, which can give any show of
reason to rely upon them: (I say believing with an infallible faith which
Reformers teach) for we may and ought to have a steadfast hope that through the
grace of Christ, we have done some good works and meritorious) as it is not
the assurance that the abundance of money and gould, where it is, is able to
purchase great possessions, but the assurance that one has such an abundance
of gould, which makes one confide that he is able to compass such a purchase:
and yet, though a just man should infallibly know that he had done works truly
pleasing to God, he would not be presumptuous, because he knows they proceed
from the grace of God. If therefore this be all that is intended by this
objection, that we are commanded to pray to God without all presumption, and
upon bounden duty, we have nothing against it: but if hereby be intended,
that we are commanded to pray to God upon bounde^ duty, and therefore it is
noe presumption to pray to him, yet so that we are to pray to him alone, (as
the ensuing, objections and proofs seem to insinuate) then we give our
reasons for the contrary, in the ensuing answer: which will be also common to
this: only a word or two unto these four places cited for proof of this
difficulty thus understood.

The text of Mat. 11. v. 28. mistaken. Come vnro me all ye that labor, Matthew.
11. v. 28.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
THis text is in the mouth of every ignorant Protestant, to prove that we are
neither to pray to saint nor Angel, but to Christ alone. Come unto me, says
our Savior: he bids us not come unto Saints, ot Angels, say some illiterate
Scripturistes: therefore we must neither come to Saints nor Angels according
to our Saviors command. But how far this discourse is from common sense, every
understanding person will easily discover: for, to say that our Savior bids us
not here come to Saints or Angels expressly, is most true: but that shows
only that coming to Saints or Angels is not here commanded, which no man makes
question of: for though the coming by prayer to them be not commanded here, yet
that hinders not but either in some other place of Scripture, or by other
lawful authority commended in Scripture, it may be either commanded, or
allowed: as if one should argue against Protestants even out of this place in
this manner: our Savior says Matthew 11. v. 28. Come unto me all ye that
labor etc. He says not here address your prayers expressly, and by name to
God the Father, or the oly Ghost, by saying our Father which art in heaven etc.
or come holy Ghost eternal God etc. but come unto me, therefore it is
unlawful to utter such particular prayers to God the Father or the holy Ghost,
expressing them by name, but all must be made to our Savior only. who sees not
how false and senseless this reasoning is? for though our express coming to
God the Father and the holy Ghost be not commanded here, yet neither is it
forbidden, and is commanded in other places, and practiced by the whole church
of God, yea and by the Protestants themselves.

Others urge the Same text in this manner, Come unto me, says our Savior,
Therefore to me alone and to no other, and so neither to Saint nor Angel;
which has as much force as this; Come unto me, says our Savior: therefore
go not by name to any other divine person but to me, and so neither to God the
Father, nor to God the holy Ghost expressly, who are two distinct Persons from
him: or as forcible as this, come unto me all ye that are pore and needy, and
I will relieve you, says some rich charitable person, to the pore of the city
where he dwells* therefore he commands them to come to no other but to him, and
forbids them the asking alms of any ^aue himself. Or very like to this. Come
unto me etc. says our Savior: therefore to no other but to him; and so
forbids children to pray to their Parents, or to beseech other Christians yet
living to pray for them etc. which notwithstanding Protestants daily practice:
for if our Saviors meaning be to exclude all save himself, when he said, come
unto me etc. then the living must be excluded noe less, then the Saints and
Angels of heaven: and if the Saints yet living be not excluded, then our
Savior did not intend by those words to exclude all, and if not all, then it
can never be prouued from this text alone, that the coming, as we do, to
Saints and Angels is forbidden in this text.

I answer therefore, that though our Savior in these words command all
sinners to come unto him; yet he commands them not to come unto him only; and
so forbids not the coming unto others, and this answer will, I hope satisfy
any considerate person standing precisely in the force of the wotds, and in
what by true discourse may be deduced from them.

Yet for a more full satisfaction, all Protestants are to understand, that when
Catholics come by prayr unto any Saint or Angel, they still perform, what
our Savior here commands of coming to him: for we come by their intercession
mediately unto him, when we beg of them to pray to him for us, no less then
Protestants children come mediatly unto him by the intercession of their
parents when they desire them to pray to God to bless them: and as the
Centurian who by one Evangelist is said to have gone to our Savior; and yet by
an other, Matthew. 8. v. 5.6, Luke 7. v. 2.3.4.5.
he only went to some of his friends to speak to our Savior for him; which
was to come mediately, or by their means to him: especially seeing that when
we pray to any Saint, or Angel, Council. Trid. sess. 14.
we desire that all their praires for us may be heard through the merits of
Christ.

The text of S. Luke mistaken. When you pray, say, our Father which art in
heaven. Luke 11.

THis text if it were only cited to prove, that we ought to pray to God in
this form, is not against us, but against those Nouellists who disallow of it.
If to prove that we are to pray in no other words nor form suaue this; It
concludes as much against Protestants, who use other forms, as against us: if
to prove that we are only to pray to God the father, it contradicts the former
of coming to God the Sone; and if to pray to God only and not to Saints, or
Angels; it proves as well that one Christian living may not pray to another.
So that Protestants must confess it proves either too much, or nothing. In a
word, all that can be drawn from it, is, that it teaches an excellent form of
praying to God, as appears by the Apostles demand, Lord teach us to pray, and
the scope of our Saviors doctrine, against the hypocrisy of the Jews. Matthew.
6. v. 7.

The text of S. John mistaken. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you. John. 16. v. 23.

THis is the constant and universal doctrine, and practice of the Church of
Rome: for whether we pray to any Person of the Blessed Trinity, or to any
Saint, or Angel, or to Father or Mother, Council. Trid. sess. 24. Decret. de
Inuoc* etc. supra cit.
or any Christian yet living, we beg all Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
etc. through our Lord Jesus Christ, or in his name, knowing that nothing is to
be demanded or granted in heaven or in earth but for his sake. which I repeat
often. because it imports much.

An other text of S. Luke mistaken. Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye
shall find knock, Luke 11. v. 9.
and it shall be opened unto you.
THis text has not so much as any show of proof against us: for we daily
ask, and seek, and knock with full hope of what is here promised.

The third Protestant Position.
Christ our Savior only mediator, our Advocate and intercessour. how dare we
admit of any other?

This is proved by Scipture mistaken.

For there is one God, and one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. 1, Tim* 15.


The first Proof mistaken. The word mediator, misapplyed against us.
THis text speaks of a mediator of Redemtion only as appears by the words
following v. 6. One mediator etc. who gave himself a ransom for all, Council.
Trid. sess. 24. cit.
which all Romain Catholics grant to be but only one, to wit, our Savior. If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
1. Io. 2. v. 1. and 2.
and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours, but also for the
sins of the whole world: It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us.

The second Proof mistaken. The w^rd Advocate misunderstood and misapplyed.
IN this whole text, is not found that Christ only makes intercession for us;
or, that he only is our advocate, (which is to be proved) all that is said
here, is, that we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus etc, and who
also waketh intercession for us; which hinders not but that there may be other
advocates, and others who make intercession for us, in an inferior kind;
besides, this text, (as the former) speaks only of an advocate, and
intercessour, of redemption for sins, as appears by those words, If any man
sin, we have an advocate etc. and, he is the propitiation for our sins, and, it
is Christ that dyed etc. which we grant must be only one Thirdly, th^^e two
texts speak of an advocate and intercessour worthy to be heard for himself
and his own merits; which is our Savior only, Council. Trid. sess. 2. Decreto
de Innoc. etc.
not of other inferior intercessours and advocates, who are not worthy to be
heard for themserues, or by virtue of any merits proceeding from themselves,
considered according to their own natural forces, or dignities, but have only
access through the dignity and merits of Christ. This appears by the words
now cited, that they speak of an advocate: worthy to be heard for himself.
1. Timoth. 2. v. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all. 1. Ioannis 2. v. 1.2.
He is the propitiation for our sins, it is Christ that dyed: so that if in the
title of this objection, when it is said, Christ our only media^uor, our
advocate, and intercessour, how dare we admit of any other? be meant, how dare
we admit of any other mediator, advocate, or intercessour of redemption, and
propitiation for our sins, and who is worthy to be heard for his own dignity
and merits, all Romain Catholics unanimously grant that we dare not admit of
any other save Christ: but if by the same words, be meant, how dare we admit
of any other mediatuor, advocate, or intercessour, not of Redemption, but
merely of praying to Allmighty God for us as his servants, and our friends and
fellow servants, and that to be heard not for themselves, but for Christ; we
may return the same question upon Protestans, and demand of them, how dare
they permit their children every night to kneel down and beg of their
parents, that they will pray to God to bless them: for what is this but to be
a mediator, advocate, and intercessour, betwixt God and them, not of
propitiation, or redemption, but of praying to God for them through the metits
of Christ? The same practice amongst Protestants is, of grandchildren,
nephews, god-children etc. nay of all generally amongst them, commending
themselves to the praires of others. So that it is evident, that such advocates
as these, even according to Protestants are not to be excluded by virtue of
these texts, unless they will condemn themselves. And this is the very same
intercession that we put amongst the Saints and Angels in heaven; because
both the one and the other pray to God for us through the merits of Christ;
Council. Trid. cit.
neither imports it for our present question of one sole advocate, etc. that
those to whom we pray, be in this world or in heaven: for if there be but only
one, then no less those others on earth, then those in heaven, are excluded:
or if the intercession for us upon earth be not excluded by force of this
text, then Protestants must confess that they themselves must acknowledge
Christ, not so to be our mediator, advocate, and intercessour, but that they
dare, and do admit of others, and so are faulty themselves in what they aecuse
us: or if they acknowledge no fault in this, as indeed there is none, then they
must cease to accuse us, and use the same distinction and explications of the
texts, here cited in the objection, with us; to wit, that they admit only one
mediator, or intercessour, and advocate of Redemption and Salvation, where of
the texts speak, but more then one, of praying unto Allmighty God with us, and
for us by way of charity, and society, Contra Fanstum Manicheum l. 22, c. 21*
(as S. Augustine says) whereof the texts do not speak: or thus, that there
is but one only intercessour which is worthy to be heard for his own dignity
and merits; but more then one, who are made worthy by the merits of Christ, who
is that only independent mediator, and all others depending of him, and his
merits. Besides these are mediators, and intercessours to Christ as he is both
God and man, for us, which Christ cannot be to himself, for a mediator must
be bewixt two, as S. Paul says. Gal. 3.20.


The Third mistake. It has been always the practice of God's Saints in their
troubles, and at all times, to call upon him.
When I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord, Psalm. 119.1
and he heard me.

Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel, Psalm. 98.6*
these called upon the Lord, and he heard them.

And in the night Paul and Silas being in Prison, prayed, and sung praise to
God; Acts 16. v. 25.
so that the prisoners heard them.

The third proof mistaken. These texts are cited to no purposse.
We grant all this as nothing at all against our doctrine or practice; for who
can deny that we both teach, and use to pray to God in all occasions, and in
all our tribulations. But if it be intended that these texts, prove that we
are at all times to pray to God, and so at noe time to any creature, to pray to
God through Christ for us, it is a pure mistake, for the texts say noe such
matter.

The fourth mistake.
BY all this is plain, that it is the ancientest, the best and the safest way
to come only to God in our prayers; and the contrary doctrine is both new, and
absolutely against Gods word.

This mistake discovered.
Noe such matter can be draun, from the texts cited, for by all that I have
answered, appears, that Protestans themselves, come not only to God in their
prayers, but have recourse oftentimes one to an others prayers, and desire
others to pray to God with them, and for them, no less nor otherwise then do
those of the Romain Church, and therrfore this practice either must be ancient
and agreeing with Gods word, or the Protestants practice is new, and against
Gods word. Here also may be added, as a further satisfaction to these above
cited mistaken Proofs, that there is an other maine difference betwixt praying
to Christ, the Blessed Trinity, or any of the divine Persons; and our praying
to an Angel, a heavenly Saint, or a good Christian yet living. For our praires
to God, and Christ as our only Redeemer, are stritly commanded, and are
necessary means to Salvation, and are acts, belonging to the worship of God
properly and primarily, and so are exercizes appertayning to the virtue of
Religion taken presly, and thus the invocation, or praying, to either Angel,
Saint, or living Chtistian, is neither universally commanded, nor a means
absolutely necessary to salvation, (though it be a very great help toward it)
nor an act belonging immediarely, and necessarily to the strict virtue of
Religion, or the worship of God; bur an exercice good and profitable, and
necessarily to be esteemed as such, by all true Christians, as I have already
deduced out of the Council of Trent. Council. Trid. sess. 24. ci^*
which I thought fit to renew in the Readers memory, least the contrary
misconceipt amongst Protestants, of our doctrine in this poinct, might alienate
his affection from our Religion. If any one desire to have the invocation of
Saints and Angels, (thus explicated) prouued by Scripture, he may please to
examine, Job. 5.1. Call if there be any which will answer the, and to which of
the Saints will thou turn? where the seauenty Interpreters have it in Greek,
(...), that is, and turn the to some of the holy Angels. And Genesis 48. v. 16.
The Angel which redeemed me from all (...), bless these Laddes. which is a
plain invocation of an Angel, as in the former verse 15. the like speech was
an invocation of God. And lastly the first of Samuel, 28. v. 7. to the 22.
where the Scripture affirms expressly. 1. thrice over that Samuel himself
appeared, v. 15.16.20. 2. that Saul worshipped him, and Samuel did not forbid
him, and so accepted of it, v. 14. 3. that Saul desired Samuel to assist him,
and so inuoked him, v. 15. 4. that Samuel prophesied truly what should become
of Saul and the Israelites army under him, as apprares in the next chapter,
which was a manifest sign that* he who appeared was not the devil, but a true
Prophet of God, both because the devil has noe certain knowledge of
accidental, and casual things to come, as those which Samuel foretold were,
and because the Prophet Ierem. c. 28. v. 9. gives this for the signc of a true
Prophet sent from God, The Prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word
of the Prophet shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known, that the
Lord has truly sent him. That he who here appeared to Saul, was Samuel
hemselfe, and that he truly prophesied, is witnessed by Ecclesiasticus c. 46.
v. 20. And after his death he prophesied, and showed the king his end, and
lift up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of
the people: which book though it be not accounted canonical by Protestants,
yet they must acknowledge it to be of greater authority, then any they can
allege of their party, to prove that it was not Samuel. neither concluds the
reason, brought commonly by Protestants any thing against this, for though Saul
had recourse to that witch to raise him up Samuel, and she had consented to do
it, yet the text says not that her conjuring raised him, or that he was
enforced to come by force of her witchcraft, for first Samuel attributes his
coming up not to her, but to Saul, v. 15. why have thou disquieted me?
secondly, it seems that so soon as the woman had consented to Saul's
petition, that Samuel (by the power of God) preventing her wicked conjurings,
came up unexpectedly, and suddenly, and in a terrible, and unusual manner, and
therefore the text says, v. 12. And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out
with a loud voice. Thirdly, That woman said not, I raised, but I saw Gods
ascending from the earth, where the Hebrew word, Elohim, Gods is vety
ordinarily taken for good Spirits, or Angels in the old testament.

These three texts may suffice for the present, it being not my intention to
prove, but to defend.

THE SECOND CONTROVERSY Concerning the making and worshipping of holy Images.
The Doctrine of the Romain Chruch, concerning the use and veneration of holy
Images, delivered in the Council of Trent sess. 24.
MAndat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis, and caeteris docendi munus curamque
sustinentibus, vt -- fideles diligenter instruant, docentes eos -- Imagines --
Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum, in templis praesertim
habendas, and retinendas, eisque debitum honorem, and venerationem
impertiendam, non quod credatur inesse aliqua in iis diuinitas vel virtus,
propter quam sint colendae, vel quod ab eis sit aliquid petendum, vel quod
fiducia in Imaginibus sit figenda; veluti olim fiebat a Gentibus, quae in
Idolis spem suam collocabant, sed quoniam honos qui eis exhibetur referrur ad
Prototypa, quae illae repraesentant: ita vt per imagines, quas osculamur, and
coram quibus caput aperimus, and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and Sanctos
quorum illae similitudinem gerunt veneremur. Id quod conciliorum, praesertim
vero secundae Nicenae Synodi decretis contra imaginum oppugnatores est sancitum.

THe holy Council commands all Bishops, and all others who have the office and
care, of teaching, that they diligently instruct faithful people, teaching
them that the Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other
Saints, are to be had, and retained, especially in churches, and that due
honor and veneration is to be given to them, not that one believes that there
is any divinity in them, or power, for which they are to be worshipped, or that
one is to asck any thing of them, or that confidence is to be put in them, as
anciently the gentiles did, who placed their hope in Idols, but because the
honor which is done to them, is referred to those whom they represent. So
that through the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncouer our heads,
and prostrate our selves, we worship Christ and his Saints whose similitudes
they are. which doctrine is established by the decrees of Councils, especially
of the second Council of Nice.

Seeing therefore here the Council of Trent, expressly commands that all
Bishops, and Paslours etc. teach this doctrine to all faithful Christians, noe
Adversary of the Romain Church, can either doubt in prudence, whether this be
her doctrine, nor in charity judge or affirm upon a mere coniecturall
supposition, without any certain and particular information, or proof, that
Romain Catholicques commonly, and ordinarily pray to pictures, and put their
confidence, and hope in them, believing that there is power, life, and divinity
in those carved, or panited Images which they have before them, and so hoping
to be heard and helped by them, as the heathens did by their Idols, this I
say, noe man can say, or judge in charity, because he must either judge that
the Prelates, and Pastors of our church, are generally neglecting to teach the
faithful under their charge, what they are here commanded, which would be to
accuse them of a high, and heinous neglect, or he must judge that faithful
people, being sufficiently taught this doctrine by their respective Pastors
are proudly dissobedient to their Pastors, and the whole church in doing the
quite contrary to what thy are taught, which were to condemn them of a
grievous sin, and that without any sufficient reason, upon a mere
conjecture, or voluntary and rash judgment contrary to the express command of
our Savior, Luc. 6.37. Nolite iudicare, and non iudicabimini. Judge not, and
you shall not be judged. And as contrary to that of S. Paul, Romans 14.4. Tu quis
es qui iudicas alienum seruum, domino suo stat aut cadit. Who art thou who
judges an others servant, he stands, or falls to his own master.

The Council of Trent in the same session.
IN has autem sanctas ac salutares obseruationes si qui abusus irrepserint, eas
prorsus aboleri sancta Synodus vehementer cupit, ita vt nullae falsi dogmatis
Imagines, and Rudibus periculofi erroris occasionom praebentes* statuantur.

But if any abuses have erept into these holy and prefitable observations, the
holy Council vehemently desires that they be wholly abolished, or taken away,
so that there be not exposed any Images teaching false doctrine, and giving
occasion of dangerous error to the common people. And then the Council adds
these wrds.

Quod si aliquando historia^ and narrationes sacrae Scripturae cum id indoctae
plebi expediet, exprimi, and sigurari contigerit; doceatur populus, non
propterea diuinitatem figurari, vel quasi corporeis oculis conspici, vel
coloribus aut figuris exprimi possit.

But if some times it happen that the histories, or passages of holy Scripture
be expressed, and figured out in pictures, when that shall be expedient for the
unlearned, let the people be taught, that thereby the divinity is not painted,
either as if it could be seen by corporeal eyes, or expressed by colors or
figures. And presently after.

Omnis porro superstitio in Sanctorum inuocatione, reliquiarum veneratione, and
Imaginum sacro vsu tollatur, omnis turpis quaestus eliminetur, omnis denique
lasciuia vitetur.

Moreover let all superstition in the invocation of Saints, the veneration of
relics, and the holy use of Images be taken a way, let all base lucre be
banished, and let all immodestie be avoided.

And least any Protestant should conceive that the second Council of Nice,
cited here by the Council of Trent, delivers any doctrine contrary to what is
here delivered, I thought fit to adioyne the words of that Council.

The second Council of Nice Action 3.
NOn materiae vel coloribus cultum offerentes, sed per haec inuisibilibus
visibus ad principalem adducti honorem illi debitum impendentes. Scientes
secundum Basilium Magnum, quod Imaginis honor ad principalem transeat.

Not presenting worship to the matter or colors, but through these being
brought to the person represented by them, we give due honor to him. Knowing
according to Basil the Great, that the honor of the Image passes to him who is
represented by it.

Having delivered the doctrine of the Romain Church in this point of Images,
let us now see what her Adversaries produce against it out of Scripture
mistaken.

The first Protestant Position.
It is not lawful to represent God the Father in any likeness whatsoever of
any Image.

This is proved by Scripture mistaken.

The first Proof.
Romans 3. v. 23.
THey changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to a
corruptible man, and to birds, and to four footed beasts, and to creeping
things.

The second Proof.
Deut^ 4. v. 15.16.
TAke ye therefore good heed unto yeur selves: for ye saw no manner of
similitude on the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst
of the fire.

Least you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of
any figure, the likeness of male or female.

These proofs mistaken^
THese texts are missappleyed against the doctrine of the Romain Church, we
grant most willingly all that is said here: neither do we ever represent God
the Father by any image at all immediately or directly: that is to signify that
he is of a figure or shape like that image: but chiefly (as we have now showed
in the Council of Trent) we represent by our Images, Council. Trid. cit.
the figures wherein he appeared to the ancient Prophets, historically. Dan. 7.
v. 9.13.22.
And I beheld till the thrones were cast down; and the ancient of days did
sit: whose garments were white as snow; and the hair of his head like to pure
well. This figure here described by the Prophet Daniel we represent: neither is
it forbidden in any of the places alleged, or any other of holy Scripture, to
represent the figures wherein Allmighty God has pleased to represent himself:
for where is it forbidden to represent by way of history, this vision of Daniel
as he describes it, or the vision of other Prophets, and of S. John in the
Apocalypse, more then any other historyes of Scripture? Let any such place be
produced: neither by such representations, do Romain Catholics more believe
that God the Father is an old man, then did Daniel the Prophet believe he was
one, when he saw this vision. For the Roman Church both steadfastly believes her
self, and strictly commands all her Prelates, Pastors, and teachers, to
instruct all her children, that God is a pure spirit in himself, and has no
body, or figure, at all; and that such like pictures are not to represent God
immediately, but the figures wherein he appeared: And this even the little
children are taught in their catechismes: and if some chance to be ignorant of
it, it is not the Churches fault, but the fault of her particular Pastors, who
are negligent in instructing their flocks: as also ignorant people may easily
fall to think as well amongst Protestants, as Catholics, that God the Father
has a right hand, and consequently a body, because they have mention of his
right hand in their creed: and the like is in many places of Scripture (read
ordinarily by common people in England) where God is said to have feet, hands,
head, face, mouth, eyes, ears, and particularly in this vision of Daniell, and
others of S. John in the Revelations, if these words be not, by negligence of
Pastors, or Ministers, well explicated: and yet notwithstanding, as these
words, he sits at the right hand of God the Father Allmighty, and the like, are
not to be blotted out of the creed, or Scripture, but to be well explicated; so
also those pictures, though some, through their Pastors negligence, may fall
into error by them, are not to be taken away, but explicated and expounded
according to the grounds of the Christian faith, and the doctrinc of the
Catholic Chruch. Yet if any one would urge that some attributes of God may be
signified by some pictures which are used in the Catholic Church, I answer,
that thence follows not that we intend to picture the Divinity, or nature of
God, or to signify that it is a visible, corporal thing like to that picture,
but only to make a hieroglyphicall expression of certain attributes as we do
when we represent virtues or vices in certain shapes, of men or weome^, the
better to express the nature of them, not to signify that they are corporal,
or like to those persons. Thus the white hair mentioned by Daniell, signifycs
the never beginning, nor ending eternity of God: the crown, scepter, and world
his absolute dominion over all things: the light about him, his infinite glory
and so of the rest.

Only here I thought fit, to note, that (according to the Council of Trent
above cited) The Church of Rome, has not commanded, nor ordained, that the
Pictures, which thus represent the apparitions of God the Father or God the
holy Ghost, should be had, and retained espeacially in churchs, for there the
Council mentions only the Images of our Savior, and of Saints; but she only
tolerates, or permits that such other pictures may be made, when it is found
expedient; and that only historically.

The second Protestant Position.
Noe Image whatsoever ought to be worshipped.

This is proved by Scripture mistaken.

The first Proof.
Leuit. 26. v. 1.
Ye shall make you no Idols, nor graven Image^; neither rear ye up a
standing image: neither shall ye set up an Image of stone in your Land to bow
down to it; for I am the Lord your God.

The first mistake.
Noe word in this text, neeessarily signifies Image in the original which is
here translated Image.
HEre is named Image three times, in so few words; and yet neither the 70.
Interpretes in greek, nor the vulgar translation in Latin, have so much as
once this word Image in the whole verse: neither is there any word in the
Hebrew text, which necessarily signifyes Image, in this place, as is clear out
of Pagninus his translation, word for word; So that this appears also to be a
mistake like the former, Coloss. 2. to deceive the ignorant reader, by making
him abhor holy Images, seeing them so clearly and often forbidden in his
English Bible. I deny therefore that Images are forbidden in this place, or the
reverence due to them: and it belongs to Protestants to prove it, neither will
it be enough if they prove that some one of these words may be taken to signify
an Image; for they must show that it must needs signify an Image, in this very
place, if they will convince any thing against the worship of holy Images, out
of it, for it may signify also that which is no Image: and till they prove that
it necessarily here signifyes an Image, they effect nothing, especially seeing
that though any of these words in the Hebrew mighr signify an Image in some
secondary sinification, yet here they do not: both because the 70.
Interpreters, and the ancient vulgar translation, and Pagninus, and almost all
(save the new Protestant translations) put it otherwise; and because the first
word, Elilim.
Elilim in Hebrew signifyes an Idol or false God, as it is here translated by
Protestants, and consequently all the words following must be taken for Idols
to agree with it; the difference betwixt an Idol, and an Image, I will give you
presently.

The Second Proof.
Exodus 20. v. 4.5.
THou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven, above, or in the earth heneath, or in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.

The Second mistake. The Hebrew, and Greek words here put, Graven Image are
mistranslated.
HEre again is the word, graven Image, put in to the English text, contrary
both to the Hebrew and Greek text: the Hebrew word here is (...) pesel, which
the 70. Interpreters in this place translate in the Greek (...), an Idol, or
false God, and the Latin, sculptile, which in the eeclesiasticall
signification, is always through the whole Scripture taken for an Idol or
representation of a false God, when it is forbidden; as also the Hebrew word
pesel, which is never taken in a good sense for any Image truly representing
anything existent as it is really in it self, as carved or graven curiosityes.

Now the difference betwixt an Image, and an Idol is this: an Image is a
representation of a true thing, which either is, or is possible to be, in that
very manner wherein he who makes or uses the Image, intends to represent it as
the paintings or caruings of trees, of flowers, of beasts, of men, or women,
which we ordinarily use in our houses. Thus the word Image is taken, Genesis 1.26.
and 27. Genesis 5. v. 36. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 16. 2. Cor. 4. v. 4. Coloss. 1. v. 15. and
in many other places: and in Hebrew it is called tsalem in Greek (...), ikon.

But an Idol is a representation of what neither is, nor can possibly be as he
who makes, or vsees it, intends to represent it; and therefore is called Abacuc
2. v. 18. a false fantasy in the 70. Interpreters, and according to the
Hebrew, a thing which tells a lie, that is, represe^ts that to be, which
neither is, not can be. And Isay 44. v. 10. an Idol is called vanity, or,
profitable for nothing. And S. Paul 1. Cor. 8.4. we know that an Idol is
nothing in the world; because it represents that to be God, which neither is,
nor possibly can be God, because there is but one only true God; and therefore
in Hebrew, Idols are called Elilim, that is vanity, or falsity; and in Greek
(...), that is, an empty and Idle fiction of the brain. Hence it comes to
pass that the very same material representation, may in diverse respects be an
Image, and an Idol; an Image, in regard of that which is truly represented by
it; an Idol, in reference to that which it represents falsely and lyingly. Thus
the picture of the Sun is an Image thereof, so far as it represents the face,
beams, and figure of the visibile sun, and puts us in remembrance of it: But
the very same material picture will be an Idol in as much as it is made to
represent the sun as a God, and a sovereign divine power, as the heathens
represent it in their Idols; And hence by different persons, the same material
picture, or statue may be esteemed and respected as an Image, or as an Idol:
for a true Christian seeing the Image of the Sun, will regard only the true
representation of the true sun^e in it; but the Heathen will esteem it as
containing, or representing some divinity or deity, and so to him it will be an
Idol. That which here I exemplify in the Suns picture, is to be extended to
all other representations of men, or other creatures: for if any one, in an
historical way would represent some real passage in the life of Mars, Juno,
Jupiter, Saturn, Venus etc. as they were men, or weomen once here living upon
earth, and go no further; those very pictures will be Images only, that is,
true representations of that which once was; but if one intend to draw their
pictures, or carue their statues, with design to represent them as Gods and
Goddesses; it will be in that regard no Image, but a pure Idol, falsely
representing that to be God, which neither was, nor can he God.

And the very same different respect is in force in those very pictures which
Protestants allow of: for if one should have the pictures of Queen Elizabeth,
or King James, merely to represent them as they indeed were, the one true King,
the other true Queen of England, the would be Images only; but if a Heathen
should make a God of each of them (as they used to do of their ancient Kings
and Queens) and intend to acknowledge them, by that picture, as such, those
very pictures would become Idols, falsely representing, what neither was, is,
nor can be. And the same rule is to be verifyed in the Catholic pictures of
Saints: for if they be only represented as holy persons, as Martyrs, as
Virgins, as glorious in heaven with their and our God, then their pictures are
only true Images, as truly representing the Saints as they are.

But if any one through ignorance, or malice, should attribute any divine
power, or any thing proper to God, to them, or account them Gods, or Goddesses,
to such the pictures of Saints would be no Images, but Idols.

This therefore supposed as necessary to distinguish, between an Image and an
Idol, I answer to the text of Exodus cited in the objection, Exodus 2. v. 4. d.
that both according to the hebrew (...) pesel, and the greek (...), idolum,
and the ancient Latin sculptile, that which is here forbidden, is an Idol, and
not an Image, as the Protestants English Translation falsely has it; and
consequently the other word following Temounach, which in hebrew signifies an
Idol also, which represents any creature falsely as a God; it being only a
deelaration of the former word pesel, and so signifying the very same thing
which pesel signifyes, that is an Idol; which the conjunction ve (and in
English) not obscurely declares to such as are skillful in the hebrew tongue,
which ioynes two words together, in the same signification for greater
explication: and yet this is made wholly out of doubt Deuteronomy. 5. v. 8. as it
stands in the hebrew Lo tegase lecha, pesel, col temounach etc. where the very
same words of Exodus 20. are repeated, thou shall not make to thy self an
Idol, all the likenesses in heaven: where the sense is nothing but this, thou
shall not make to thy self an Idol, that is any likeness or figure in heaven:
so that all the likenesses forbidden in the 20. of Exodus, are the same which
are forbidden here Deuteronomy. 5. that is, such as are pesel, Idols, or
representations of false Gods. And this is further confirmed out of Exodus 20.
v. 33. where God himself explicates those former words in the same chapter. v.
4. you shall not make to your selves Gods of silver: nor you shall nor make to
your selves Gods of gould, which are pesel, and temounach, Exodus 20. v. 4. and
yet lastly that pesel put there in the Hebrew, signifyes the same with el, a
God, is most clear out of Esaias 44. v. 10. who has formed a God, or molten a
graven Image which is profitable for nothing. in hebrew the word here is pesel;
and though the Protestant English translation have it, graven Image falsely, as
I noted before, yet certain it is, that even according to your own
translation, it here signifyes the same with a false God, as is clear out of
the words, and yet much clearer in the 17. verse, and of the risidue of it he
makes a God, even his graven Image, says your translation; where the same
piece of wood carved, is called a God of the heathens, and a graven Image, in
hebrew, lephislo, his Idol, or graven representation of a false God, and yet to
show vnanswearably that this word pesel, even by Reformes ought to be
translated Idol, or at least is capable of that signification, let any
Protestant read his more ancient translations, and he shall find that which is
called graven Image, in the later translations, to be called Idol, or his Idol,
v. 17. of the 44. of Isay in their more ancient, which in Hebrew is Phesel
Phiselo, which in this 20. of Exodi v. 4. they always translate graven Image.
(See the Bibles printed, in King Edwards time, and others of the most ancient
Protestant Prints,) comimg of the word pesel so often cited.

Having therefore demonstraded, that in the two places cited in the objection,
Exodus 20 v 4, and Leuiticus the 26. v. 1. no other picture, representation, or
likeness of any creature is forbidden, but only such as are intended, to
represent them, by way of Idolatry, as Gods, and deityes, (which they neither
are, nor can be) and not as creatures, Saints, Angels, etc. which they truly
are. The second point propounded in the objection, about the worship of
pictures, or Images, of our Savior, or Saints, etc. will easily be determined:
for it must be a worship, (which is forbidden in the forenamed places)
proportionate or correspondent to the thing which those Idols represent* which
is a God; and that can be nothing else but a divine worship, or an homage given
to a divine power: and this is so clear, that none who understand it, can
doubt of it. Yet because I intend, as much as may be, to confirm every thing I
say, by clear texts of holy Scripture, we must first note, that the foolish
Idolatry of the Heathens condemned in holy Scripture (almost throughout) is
that they did adore, worship, and pray to that very material graven, or
painted thing (which they had before their eyes) as a God: This is so evident
out the 44. of Esaias, v. 17. just now cited, that it puts the matter out of
question, even as it stands in your own Bible: And the residue thereof he
makes a God, even a graven Image; he falls down unto it, and worshippeth
it, and prays unto it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my God. So also is
this matter clearly set down in the book of wisdom, chapters 13. and 14. in
many verses at large which, though Protestants receive not as Canonical
Scripture, yet they put it in their Bibles, and therefore esteem it not to be
a lying fable, especially agreeing so well in this matter with other parts of
Canonical Scripture. So also Jeremy 2. v. 28. and 16. v. 20. Dan. 3. v.
12.14.18. and the 5. v. 4.23^ Oseas 8. v. 6. Psalm. 133. v. 4. and many other
places which I omit for breuitys sake: where it appears clearly that the
Heathens, and Idolaters esteemed that visible picture befote them to be a God,
and to have power to hear their prayers, and to help them, and so they bowed
unto it, worshipped it with divine honor, prayed to it, and put their hope in
it. This supposed as certain, it will presently be thought most reasonable to
understand that worship of pictures, or resemblances of things to be forbidden,
Leuit. 26. v. 1. and Exodus 20. v. 4. which is generally explicated in so many
other passages of holy Scripture; for by clearer places the more obscure are to
be explicated and expounded, even according to Protestants: Seeing therefore,
the word bowing down, and worshipping in the Protestants translation is set
down in the two said places, generally and without clearly expressing what
kind of worship is meant, we must gather the further explication of it out of
other places of holy Scripture, where it is more distinctly and clearly
delivered: and indeed, though the text in the 20. of Exodus be obscure, and
general in Protestants translations in these words, thou shall not bow down
to them, nor worship them, yet in hebrew, and the 70. in greek there is light
enough given to direct us in the true understanding of them, namely, that it is
a divine worship alone, which is forbidden; for the hebrew words ve lo
tagauethen^ signify, and you shall not serve them; which word shows an homage
or service done to those Idols, as to things capable of such offices done unto
them, and endued with knowledge, understanding* power, and divinity: for no man
is strictly and properly said to serve that which is wholly void of knowledge to
exact or accept of that service: and hence appears, that if the Protestants
had followed closely the first and ordinary signification of this word in the
original (as they profess to do) and translated it thus, thou shall not bow
down to them, nor serve them, the word serve would have given occasion of
understanding a right the word bow down, that is such a bowing down as is used
to those whom we serve, who are only in the proper and ordinary understanding
of service, such as we esteem to be endued with knowledge understanding, and
power, able to receive our service, and assist us in our petitions. And to
demonstrate that this translation of yours is not without partiality and dubble
dealing, of putting worship for serve, the word worship being put in of purpose
to bring the ignorant people from the reverence of holy Images, as they are
reverenced amongst Romain Catholics; you must know, that in a hundred other
places of Scripture where Moses, Caleb, Joshua, David, and othets are called
servants of God, in your translation, not worshippers, the hebrew has the very
same word gauedy my servant, which is used here in the 20. of Exodus; end yet
further the fraud appears more clearly Hier. 13. v. 10. the 16. v. 11. and 22.
v. 9. where the two very same words put in hebrew, which are in Exodus 20. now
cited, and applied to false Gods, are always translated adore, and serve,
because it served not their purpose to translate it otherwise; only in Exodus
20. and the like to breed a hatred of the worship of holy Images, in the common
peoples minds, it must be translated fall down and worship: and yet more
clearly by their own translation they convince themselves of partiality; for
in the Psalm 96. aliter the 97. v. 7. they have these words; confounded be all
those who serve graven Images, who boost themselves of Idols: where in the
Hebrew, the same words are, which are Exodus 20. gauthe', pesel^ where also may
be gathered, that, that which they please falsely to translate graven Image, is
the very same with a heathen Idol, as being joined with it as the same thing in
signification. And to urge an other place, this partiality is clearly convinced
out of the first text cited by the person who writ it: Matthew. 4. v. 10. It is
written, thou shall worship the Lord by God, and him only shall thou serve:
where the 6. of Deuteronomy. v. 13. (from which that of S. Matthew is taken) has the
very same hebrew word gauedth, which is here translated worship in the 20. of
Exodus, and there serve. But to put all out of question, and to bring an
undeniable discovery of their fraud and falhood in the translating of this
hebrew word gauedh worship, not serve, it is to be noted, that in their more
ancient translations of these words. Exodus 20. v. 4. they translated it, thou
shall not bow down unto them, nor worship them, as appears by the text here
cited in the objection, and by the Bibles themselves: but in their later
impressions and translations of the year 1638. and somewhat before, and since,
they have corrected this error, and put it, thou shall not bouw down unto
them, nor serve them, both in Eod. and Leuiticus: yet because they had taught
all the common people to say it after the ancient erroneous manner, it is still
in the cate^hisme set down in the common prayre book, thou shall not bow down
unto them, nor worship them, least if they should have changed it there, the
people might have discovered that they had been taught their commandments
amiss, and that in the ancient editions of the common prayer, the
commandments were otherwise then in the latter: Exodus 20. v. 4.
but the correction in the Bible might more easily be admitted, because few of
the common people read the commandments as they stand there. But that at one
view may be seen the manifold tricks and diuises, frauds, and deceits used in
the sophisticating and falsifying of this text in their translations, I will
briefly set them all down together: First therefore, contrary to both hebrew
and greek, and Latin, and all antiquity, they translate, pesel, (...),
sculptile; graven Image. Secondly, they ad the word any; thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image; which is not in the hebrew, but thus, thou shall
not make to thy selue an Idol: or if the Protestant translation of pesel were
true, it should have been a graven Image, not, any graven Image. And this they
seem to add, thereby to make the ignorant believe that all sorts of Images
whatsoever, even of our Savior, and of his Saints, are here forbidden by this
general clause, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image* Thirdly, to
make the text yet more to sound against us, in the ears of the vulgar, they
make it say, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above etc. when
it should be according to the hebrew, col tegumach asher, nor any likeness
which is in heaven, or verbatim thus, or all and every likeness which is in
heaven, not of any thing which is in heaven, these words any thing being added
unto the hebrew text; thereby to persuade the unlearned, that the likeness of
all things in heaven and consequently of our Savior, the Angels, and Saints,
are here prohibited: where as the direct meaning of the text is, to forbid
these likenesses to be made which appear visibly in the material heaven to
the corporeal eyes, as the sun, moon, slarrs etc. as is clear Deuteronomy. 4. v.
19. which agrees well with the hebrew text, any likeness which is in heaven;
for at that time, when this commandment was given, there was nothing in the
imperial heaven, which had any visible figure, or could be immediately
expressed by any visible picture, as a true Image of it, for there was nothing
then in heaven but God and his holy Angels. But the English translation, the
likeness of any thing which is in heaven, is subject to give occasion to the
simple reader (who being taught that our Savior with his Saints are in heaven,
and that they are forbidden in this commandment to make the likeness of any
thing which is in heaven, to think that they are clearly forbidden to make the
likenesses or Images, of our Savior, and the Saints: and thus the common
people of our nation ordinarily understand it, and their ministers, and
teachers, nuzzle them up in this error. Fourthly, yet further to extend the
words of this commandment to all sorts of holy likenesses, and similitudes,
though in the little catechism contained in their common prayer-booke, they
put the commandment thus, nor the likeness of any thing mhich is in heaven
above etc. which was less intolerable, yet in their Translations from the
year 1638. they add another any to the text, thus, nor any likeness of any
thing, that they may be sure to include all. And though in their later
Translations, they put the word any, any Image, any thing, in a different
letter, to signify to the more learned, that it is not in the original; yet in
their little Catechism they are still put in the very same letter with the
rest, as if they were no less in the original then the other words; which may
be noted for an other fraud: and I find these words of Exodus thus translated,
in a book called the confession of faith, reprinted at London for the
Compaignie of Stationers, 1652. all the words being in the same leter: page
167. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor any likeness of any
thing. Lastly, for serve, they have put worship, as I have now declared. So
that in these few words, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor
any likeness of any thing etc. thou shall not bow down unto them, nor worship
them, are six mistakes, corruptions, or additions to the text. And though some
of these, in themselves, may be judged to be of no great moment, and might
pass amongst such as with a sincere meaning should admit some of them in their
translation, yet in our new Reformists, who labor all they can to press this
text to common people above all others, against us, and about the meaning
whereof we are in great Controversy: and who profess, rejecting all other
Translations, to stand closely and strictly to the hebrew text, they are wholly
inexcusable. Now if any illitterate Protestant much devoted to his ministers,
and teachers, and confident of their sincerity in Translating God's word,
should not be brought by what I have yet said, to believe that they would put
Image, in the place of Idol, and add other words to the text, which are not in
the original, thereby deceiving the people: for a clear and undeniable proof
of their partiality and deceit in this particular, let him examine the 11.
chapter to the Romans, v. 4. and the first of the Kings, c. 19. v. 18. and his
own eyes will tell him that they have added the word Image to the text: for he
shall find in the Translations of the year 1648. and about that time, these
words, Romans 11. v. 4. who have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal: where
these three words, the Image of, are added to the text, being neither in the
greek, Latin, nor hehrew for it should be, who have not bowed the knee to
Baal. Not as they have it, to the Image of Baal, the word Image being added of
putpose (as it seems) to create a hatred in the hearts of the common people,
against the use of holy Images, seeing them so expressly forbidden in their
Bibles, even in the new Testament. Now that it may unanswerably appear, that
this word Image is added to the text, look into this very text cited by S.
Paul, out of the first of the Kings, c. 19. v. 18. in their own Bible, and you
shall find it thus, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, without these
words, Romans 11* v. 4.
the Image of Baal. And that they may undoubtedly know that these words are
added to the text in those later Translations, let them peruse this place in
the more ancient Translations, of King Edwards, or Queen Elizabeth's time, and
they mill find this text to the Romans c. 11. v. 4. without this addition, thus;
which have not bowed the knee to Baal, as indeed it should be. And though in
the latter Translations, those words the Image be put a different print, or
letter, which may signify to such as are learned, that they are not in the
original, yet this may reasonably be called into question, because the word
of, which has a necessary relation to the two fotmer words the Image, is put
in the same print or letter with Baal, and the rest of the text, which is in
the original; thus, which have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal; and
for what belonges to the unlearned, who are most in danger to be seduced by
such shifts as these, they are commonly ignorant of the reason why some words
are in different or less letters, and all they find in the text, they take to
be equally Scripture, and the word of God, as I have had experience of about a
hundred together, who all esteemed the words the Image to be no less
Scripture, then the rest of that text, yea I found one who very eagerly and
strongly urged this text, against Images, telling me, and glorying in it, that
Images were condemned expressly in the new Testament by these words of S. Paul.
Neither can it stand with the rules of true and sincere Translatours, to add
when they please, and when it makes for their advantage, and indangers the
deceiving of the unlearned in matters of Religion; (as here it does) by adding
certain words, which are neither found in the hebrew, greek, nor Latin, (as
these are not) though it be in a different letter. In the Bibles printed, 1648.
at London, by Robert Barker, I find the said words in the same letter with the
rest, thus, which have not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal, by which the
unlearned Readers cannot judge but that these words, the Image of, are as much
the word of God as the rest, seeing them all in the same print and leter, with
the other words of the text, especially when they mark, that in a hundred
other places, the words which are not in the original are printed in a
different leter, from the others in that very Bible. which makes it probable in
a high degree, if not certain, that the manner of printing in this text, is a
mere corrupt dealing of our adversaries, and a wilful adding to the word of
God, to incense the ignorant against Images.

M. Fulck, in his English translation, and commentaries upon the new
Testament. Printed at London by the deputies of Christopher Barker, 1589.
exuses this addition by alleging that in the greek text here in S. Paul,
Romans 11.4. the article is of the feminine gender, (...). and therefore must
agree with (...), image, being also of the feminine gender, which word though
it be not expressed in the greek, yet says Fulck, it is to be understood, and
so might lawfully be expressed in the English translation. But that this
answer is a mere evasion, grounded upon a false principle, I will presently
make manifest for first it is not the custom of Greek authors, speaking of
the statues, or Idols of their Gods, to express them in the feminine, as
referred to (...) but in the masculine article, as referred to the God, whose
name that statua bears.

Secondly Acts 19.35. those words which M. Fulck and other Protestants
understand, of the statua, or Image of Diana, are not put in greek with the
feminine, but with the masculine or newter gender, (...), whereby is manifest,
that when the greeks speak of their Idols, and statuas, they refer them, not
to (...) and the feminine, but rather to (...), of the newter gender, or some
such like word.

Thirdly, in the 1. of Kings 19.18. whence this text of Romans 11.4. is taken,
the Septuagint have it in the masculine gender, (...). and yet both this place,
and that of S. Paul must necessarily be understood to speak of the same thing,
and in the same sense, which seeing the Protestants will have to be only, the
statua, or picture of Baal, it must needs follow, that the reason why S. Paul
has it in the feminine gender, is not because it speaks of that visible, and
artificial Idol, for 1. Kings 19.18. speaking also of that, has it in the
masculine gender (...). This therefore is not the Reason, but S. Paul puts it
in the feminine and the Septuagint in the masculine gender, because Baal was a
common name to the Idols of the heathens, which wear adored by the Jews, thus
nothing is more familiar in the old Testament, then to put that word in the
plural number, Baalim, because it was common to many false Gods, which wear
comprised in that name- now those Gods some were males, and some femalls, and
so of both genders; amongst which Astarthes Queen, and Goddess of Sidonia,
was the most famous, where of familiar mention is made in the old Testament,
speaking of Baalim, and Asteroth. Seeing therefore that both S. Paul, 1. Kings
11.5.33.
and the book of kings speak of a general worshipping of Baal through the
whole kingdom of Israel, which must be extended to all their false Gods whether
men or women, it might likewise be translated truly both in the masculine
gender in the first of the kings, and in the feminine in the 11. to the
Romans, as comprehending both. And so S. Paul has it (...), in the feminine,
not in reference to (...), Image, as Fulk would have it, bur in reference to
Astarthes, or other women Goddesses, comprehended in that general word Baal,
as Catholicque doctors understand it, for according to this exposition, both
the old and new Testament are easily reconciled, but according to Fulk, neither
can the old be here reconciled with the new, nor the new with it self, as I
have declared. whence appears, seeing this reason fails, which Protestants
folly allege for their defense, that the word Image, is here added to the
text, with out any sufficient reason, and so falsely and corruptedly.

I find the like addition of the word Image, Acts 19.35. above cited, where
though the greek word be of the masculine gender, (as I have declared) yet the
word Image (which is not in the original as M. Fulk acknowledges) is put into
the English text, thus, of the Image which came down from Jupiter, where there
was noe reason at all to put Image, seeing the greek words are masculine, but
the Reade^ may easily discover by such indirect proceedings as these, that it
is not the gender, but the general disgust against holy Images, which caused
these additions, for whether the greek article be masculine, or feminine, Image
must come in, as is evident from these two texts^ Neither is that which M. Fulk
alleadges of any force, for the greek words may be refered, to (...), and be
translated, as our vulgar has it, Iouis Prolis, Jupiters child, having rather
relation to the Person, then to the Idol of Diana. Or if it be referred to that
Idol which was reserved, with so great honor in the temple of Ephesus, yet
by reason of the great stupidity, and brutality of the Heathens described in
many places of holy Scripture (as I shall here after declare) that very Idol,
Isa. 44.15.17. Luc. 19.3. Oseae 11.2.
was held by them to be a true deity, and the living Goddess Diana, and
therefore they made so loud, and strong acclamations, magna est Diana
Ephesiorum, great is Diana of the Ephefiens, who was noe other, then that dull,
and dead Idol, which was adored by them in the temple of Ephesus. But though
they had been wiser then the ordinary strain of Idolaters, and so had
esteemed that Idol, to be a mere representation of their Goddess, yet seeing
that the original, has noe word which signifies Image, but uses a general
expression, which is indifferent, to the one, or other of these explications,
why should not the English, as well as the greek have only said, that which
came down from Jupiter, neither expressiing Image, nor any other determinate
thing, if they had as fully intended to follow the original, without all
passion against holy Images, as they predend it?

But that I may further lay open how vehemently they were transported in the
first appearance of their new Church, against the use of Images, I will breefly
allege some other places of Scripture wherein their translations of the
years 1562. and 1577. as M. Fulk acknowledges, and 1589. they have translated
the greek words, (...), worshippers of Images, (...) Images. Thus Ephesians. 5.5.
where the greek has, Idolater, these tra^flations have, a worshipper of
Images. And Coll. 3.5. where the greek has Idolatry, they have worshipping of
Images, and the like is Gal. 5.20. 1. Joan. 5.21. for Idols in greek they
translate Images, in the Bible printed, 1562. and though in Fulks testament it
be translated Idols in the text; yet in the margent he puts, or Images. Now
how great a difference there is betwixt an Idol, and an Image, I have all ready
declared, and M. Fulk acknowledges, fol. 456. that the use of our English
speech has made the name of Idol odious, and of Image indifferent. whence
follows necessarily, that the word Image according to him may signify noe
less a good then a bad representation, but the word Idol allways a bad, so
that the word Image, or Images cannot be put absolutely in those places of
Scripture, where they are universally to be understood of things bad, or
unlawful; thus therefore, 1. John 5.2. where the Apostle says, Babes keep
your selves from Idols, being an indefinite, and so an universal precept he
commands Christians to keep themselves from all kind of Idols what soever,
and so is fitly, and truly expressed, by the word Idols, because that word is
always taken in our language (even according to M. Fulk) in an odious, and bad
signification: but it can neither fitly, nor truly, be expressed by the word
Images put absolutely, and with our any adjunct, as it is in those first
ttanslations of English Protestants, babes keep your selves from Images, for
then the precept could not be indefinitly, and universally understood, as it
must be, to keep themselves from all Images whatsoever, for all Christians
should be here commanded, to keep themselves from all money, Mar. 32.16. Genesis
1.27. 2. Cor. 4.4,
because it has Images upon it, and the husband to keep himself from his
wife, because she is an Image of God, nay Christians to keep themselves from
Christ, because he is the Image of his father. But if Protestants would use the
word Image, in this text, fitly and truly, they must have added some adjective,
to it, which would have tied it to signify something which is universally
unlawful, thus Babes keep your selves from false Images, or from bad Images
etc. but this they refused to do, first because there was noe such adjective
in the original, and and secondly, because the addition of that adjective,
would have made the text to have had not so much as any seeming force, against
the doctrine of the Romain Church, for we should presently have answered, that
our Images are neither false, nor bad but true, and holy, and so not forbidden
in that place. Thus though the word desire, be indifferent to signify as well
bad, as good desires, yet this would be a very absurd command* keep your selves
from defires, for that were to oblige one to abstain from all desires, and
therefore the Apostle, when he gives a command about desires, he speaks not
indefinitly, but expresses by the adjective, which he adioynes, what desires he
means, Abstinete vos a carnalibus desiderijs, 1. Pet. 2.12
Keep your selves from carnal desires, all which are bad and unlawful. whence
appears that Protestants, by this their translation, make S. John, and the
holy Scripture, to deliver a command, not only false, and senseless, but even
wicked, and blasphemous; for it must command Christians to keep themselves
from all Images, and consequently, not only from all Koyne, and Company, of
men, which are Images, but even from Christ himself, who is the Image of his
eternal father.

The like inconveniences follow, from the other texts now cited, where Image,
is put absolutely. for Idol. for when the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.5. Reckons up those
heinous sinners, who are excluded (di^ng without repentance) from the kingdom
of heaven, he calls an auaritious man, an Idolater in the original, and the
English Protestants, make the text say, an auaritious man which is a worshipper
of Images, now every aua^itious man is truly called an Idolater, because he
commits spiritual idolarry, in making his gould, his God; but an auaritious
man cannot be truly termed a spiritual worshipper of Images, absolutely taken,
for that supposes, that all worshipping of any Image whatsoever is sinful, as
all avarice is, which notwithstanding is not only false but blasphemous, for
civil worship exhibited to the Image of some lawful Emperor, is not sinful
even according to Protestants, and divine worship given to our Savior, who is
the Image of his father, is not only not sinful, but most lawful and holy.

The like follows, from their translation of Gal. 5.20. where the Apostle
giving a catalogue of those capital sins which unrepented deprive a soul of
eternal happiness, amongst many others, names, Idolorum seruitus, in greek
Idolatry, now as all the rest whenever they are done; are sins, so
whenever any kind, or act of Idolatry is committed, it is a sin; but the
Protestant changing Idolatry, into worshipping of Images, must make the
Scripture say, that as whenever any fornication, adultery, witchcraft,
idolatry, or any other here named, is committed, sin is committed, so when
any kind of worshipping of Images is committed, sin is committed, which
notwithstanding is manifestly false, for neither is the civil worship of an
Emperors Image a sin, and much less the divine worship of our Savior, who
is the Image of his father; Thus is it made evident, that whilst Protestants
show their vehement passions against holy Images, they make the Scripture to
speak not only falsities, but even blasphemies. which the later Tra^slaters
having observed, ashamed of so foul errors, have corrected (as any one may
see) their former, and ancienter translations, and have restored Idols,
Idolaters, and Idolatry, to the respective texts, which I have above cited.
neither is that which M. Fulk alleadges in defense of those ancient
translations, of any force at all, for though the vulgar latin^ translation,
translate the greek (...), sometimes simulacrum, and some amongst the ancients,
not only heathens, but Christians, take that latin word in a good sense, yet
according to the acception which it has through the whole latin Bible, it is
never taken for any thing save an Idol: neither cites M. Fulk, so much as any
one text of Scripture, where simulacrum, is not taken for an Idol: where as the
word Image, in all languages, is familiarly taken, not only in all authors,
both Heathens, and Christians, but also in holy Scripture, for true, lawful,
holy, and divine Images. Notwithstanding all that I have said in manifest and
undeniable proof of the false translation of the commandment Exodus 20. v. 4.
etc. yet to show how little force these texts have, even as they stand in the
Protestant Bibles, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc. to
prove any thing against the use of holy Images practiced in the Romain Church;
I most easily answer, that if they understand by graven Image such as are also
Idols as it is taken, Isay. 44.17. Ps. 105.19. Ps 78.5. Judge. 18. where that
which v. 17. and 18. and 20. is called a graue^, and a molten Image, v. 24. is
called Gods, and in the Protestant Bibles in different other places, as I have
already showed, nay through the whole Protestant Bible, the word graven Image,
is never taken but for an Idol, or a false God, for as much I ever could yet
discover in it: then I grant that such Images are neither to be made,
worshipped, nor served: but this concludes nothing at all against the Romain
Church, who abhorres, detests, and anathematizes all such Images, with the
wotshipping, and worshippers of them. But if they understand by graven Image,
an Image which is no Idol, but a true representation of some holy person now in
heavenly bliss, such as where the images of the two Cherubins Exodus the 25.
then I deny that such graven Images are forbidden, either to be made, or
worshipped, according to the explication already delivered. Now the reason of
this answer, and distinction is clear; for if true Images of holy things and
persons were forbidden Exodus 20. v. 4. then that place of Seripture would be
contrary to the others, Exodus the 25. which command them: and if all kind of
reverence, respect, and worship be here forbidden to holy Images, then this
text Exodus 20. v. 4. would be contrary to the Psalm. 98. alias 99. v. 5. where
we are commanded to worship, or adore the footstool of God, which was nothing
but the Arc of the Testament with the two goulden Cherubins in the holy of
holyes. Adore, or worship his footstool, says there holy David; ^. Par. 18.2
where the very same hebrew word, and phrase is used which is in Exodus 20. v.
4. Some ignorant reader may happily say, that those pictures of the Cherubins
Exodus 25. were commanded only to the Jews, and to be used in the old law, and
so tutch not christians any thing. I answer first, the forbidding of Images is
also only in the old Testament, Exodus 20. v. 4. etc. Secondly, that command
Exodus 25. to make some Images, was brought to show that all kind of Images were
not forbidden, Exodus 20. v. 4. and consequently, that some images might be
lawfully made, and seeing there is now no prohibition forbidding all Images,
given to Christians, it is lawful for them, to make holy Images, like to the
Cherubins Exodus 25.

Seeing therefore one place of holy Scripture cannot be contrary to another,
for then the one should be false, (and so could not be the word of God, as it
is supposed to be) they must necessarily be reconciled and made to agree. And
seeing the Images of the Cherubs are so expressly commanded to be made by
Allmighty God himself, that there is no way to deny or avoid it, if a
christian will reconcile and agree these two places, he must grant that all
kind of Images, even such as are no more Idols, nor less truly sacred and holy
Images then those Cherubs in the Tabernacle were, are not forbidden in the
commandment Exodus 20. v. 4. for if they were, then God should forbid Exodus 20.
what be commands Exodus 25.18. and so contradict himself. And what is said
about the understanding of the word graven Image, is respectively to be applied
to the word, worship: for if all kind of worship of Images be forbidden in the
commandment Exodus 20.4. then holy David will contradict Gods command, when be
commands the Israelites to worship his footstool, where those Images of the
Cherubs were. There is therefore no other possible means to reconcile those
two commands, but by saying, that Exodus 20. forbids not all kind, nor can be
understood of that which holy David commandes, but only such a worship as is
wholly unlawful, superstitious, and Idolatrous, whereby the creature is
worshipped and prayed to, as God; and the Image made an Idol, or a false God:
which is neither commanded nor allowed in any place of holy Scripture, but
always forbidden and condemned. Neither can it be said, that Allmighty God.
Psalm. 98. dispensed with his command given Exodus 2. for if there were forbidden
all kind of Images, as being superstitious and Idolatrous, and injurious to
Gods honor, and so of themselves, or intrinsecally (as the school speaks)
unlawful, and all kind of reverence or worship exhibited to them, as in it
self dishonorable to God, as Protestants understand this command. Then it
cannot be said without most high blasphemy, that God dispensed with this
command: for then he should dispense with men to commit superstition, Idolatry,
and dishonor to him by a command to do them, which were to make him not only
author; but even fauorer, and commander of sin.

Neither can it avail Protestants to say, (as some others have said) that the
making all kind of Images, and all reverence to them, was forbidden to the
Jews Exodus 20. v. 4. though not unlawful in themselves, by reason of the
great danger they were in, to be broughr into Idolatry by them, as appears in
the brazen serpent, and their perpetual falling, upon every light occasion,
into Idolatry. This, I say, nothing auayls Protestants: first, because I have
already showed that it is Idolatry only, and Idols, which are here forbidden.
Secondly, because if this command of forbidding all kind of Images, and worship
of them, though good and holy in themselves, was only directed to the Jews as
long as they were in so eminent danger of falling, by reason of them, into
Idolatry, superstition etc. then it cannot be pressed now against Christians;
whom it touches not, they being not in any such danger of committing heathenish
Idolatry, but destroying it, and rooting it out through the whole world; and so
it will be lawful for them to make, and worship (according to my former
explications) holy Images, as having no command to the contrary.

From what I have now said, will easily appear how little reason the Romain
Church has, to blot those words, Thou shall not make to thy self any Idol
etc. out of the commandment, as vulgar Protestants are made believe by a most
false aspersion of their ministers: for if they make nothing at all against
her, as I have showed, why should she blot them out? But that I may give a full
and co^pleat answer to this mistake of common people, which I have learned by
long experience to be one of the greatest stumbling blocks, that hinders them
from embracing Catholic Religion: because, say they, we leave out the second
Commandment: I will breefly clear this point, and convince evidently, that it
is a mere devise to catch the ignorant, having neither truth nor substance in
it For first, there never was yet so much as one sole Bible, of ours in
whatsoever language, place, time, or edition, which has not these words, which
Protestants, call the seeond commandment, as fully and completely as any
Protestant Bibles have: and I challenge the best versed amongst them, to
produce one only in the whole world, which has them not, and that the more
ignorant, who understand English only, may have what assurance they are capable
of in this particular* let them press their ministers, to show them the Remish
Bible set out by Romain Catholic Divines: and there Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 5.
they shall find, all the said words fully an intyrely.

Secondly, not only in all our Bibles, but in our larger and fuller
Catechismes, this whole commandment is expressed. So Catechismus Romanus set
out by order of the late Council of Trent, part 3. page 298. n. 8. and
Canisius his Catechism, de Charitate and Decalogo 1. q. 5. p. 74. 75. where
setting down the commandments, he puts the first thus: Non habebis Deos
alienos coram me^non facies tihi sculptile, vt adores illud. Thou shall have no
other Gods before me: thou shall not make to thy self any Idol to adore it:
and then cites the commandments all at large, as fully as they stand in the
Protestant Bibles Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 5. And in an English Catechism, called a
Summary of Controversies, composed by P.C. of the Society of Jesus, and printed
in the year 1639. The third edition chap. 3 q. 5. page 68. has it thus: Thou
shall not have any strange Gods before me: thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image to worship it. And in the same manner are they set down in an other
English Catechism, which I have seen and read in a public auditory of
Protestants.

The ground therefore of this false imposition, if it may be termed a ground,
may happily have been some small short Catechismes made for little children,
and new beginners, for the help of their memories, to be learned by heart,
wherein this commandment, (as all the rest of the longer commandments) set
down Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. is abridged and brought to so many words as merely
serve to express the substance of them, omitting the rest, thus. 1. I am the
Lord thy God: thou shall not have any other Gods before me. 2. Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. 3. Remember thou sanctify the
festival days. 4. Honor thy father, and mother. where not only many words
adjoined to the command against adoring false Gods, or Idols, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy.
5. but to the three ensuing also, are here for breuity's sake omitted: setting
down in few words the substance, and making no mention of the reasons and
amplifications found in Exodus, and Deuteronomy, least, were they all set at
large, as they are there, both the memory of young children might be
ouercharged, and their weak understandings confounded, not being able to
distinguish the substance of the command, from the reasons and amplifications
of it.

Now if we delivered the commandments with this preface, as Protestants do in
their common prayer book, The same which God spoke in the 20. chapter of
Exodus, saying etc. we were obliged to put them all word for word as they are
found there: For otherwise the commandments would not be answerable to the
Title. But seeing we find them in other places of Scripture, set down in a much
briefer manner then they are there; and find no precept neither in Scripture,
nor in the Church, to deliver them to Christians as they are delivered in Exodus
20. and Deuteronomy. 5. rather then in other places; our adversaries can no more
condemn us of falsefying them when we put them briefer, then they can the holy
Scripture it self for abbreuiating them more in other places then they are in
Exodus now cited, and Leuiticus.

That they are thus abbreuiated in Scripture, is manifest Leuit. 19. v. 1.2.3.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying; speak unto all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and say unto them; ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your
God am holy; ye shall fear every man his father and his mother, and shall
keep my sabbaths: I am the Lord your God: ye shall not turn undo Idols, nor
make molten Gods, I am the Lord your God etc. where that which our adversaries
account the second commandment, is put even shorter then many of our
catechismes, have it: Turn not your selves unto Idols, nor make unto your
selves molten Gods: as it is in Exodus 20. v. 23. Ye shall not make unto your
selves Gods of silver: neither shall ye make Gods of gould.

Neither indeed is it any way convenient to deliver the commandments publicly
and generally to Christian people word for word as they stand Exodus 20.
Leuitit. 26. because thereby they are endangered, either to take sunday to be
saturday, or the Jewish Sabbath; or must hold themselves obliged to observe
Saturday with the Jews, that alone being dies Sabbati, the Sabbath day, wherein
only, God rested after the creation of the world* which only he also
Sanctified, and commanded to be kept, as clearly appears by the words of the
commandment: so that it is not any seventh day, or one indeterminately every
week, which God commands to be kept holy in this precept, but one only, and
determinately, that is the same seventh day, where in God rested from the work
of the creation, as appears, Genesis 2.1.2.3. Et benedixit diei septimo, and
sanctisicauit illum, quia in ipso cessauerat ab omni opere suo quod creauit
Deus vt faceret. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, hecause
that in it he had rested from all his works, which God created and made. now
it is most evident, that God rested only, upon one determinate day, and that,
noe other then the Jewish Sabbath, or Saturday. or if they understand well what
day is meant in the commandemenr, they must needs be scandalized, to see a
commandment universally delivered to them of keeping the Jewish Sabbath, which
is, and ever was, Saturday, and yet never observed by any of them, but Sunday
in place of it.

Hence therefore we see in general, that it is very inconvenient to propose
Gods commandments publicly to Christians word for word as they stand in
Exodus: and so we can never be justly condemned if we put some of them as they
are more briefly delivered in other places of Scripture, or now to be in
observance amongst Christians.

But there is an other point boggeled at chiefly by the ignorant, about the
division of Gods commandments. Ye (object they against us) put the two first
commandments into one, and divide the last into two. I answer, that a
Catholic seeing their division, may with much more reason tell Protestants,
ye put the two last commandments into one, and divide the first into two.
Briefly therefore to clear this point, it is to be noted: that though it be
expressly declared in Scripture that Gods commandments were ten in number, and
written in two tables, yet through the whole Bible never is it declared which
is the first; second, third etc. nor so much as one word spoken concerning the
division of them: but this was left, either to tradition, or to the prudent
determination of Doctors: so that, howsoever they are prudently divided, there
will be nothing contrary to Scripture, so long as the whole substance be
expressed, and the number of them be observed.

Hence, in and even before S. Augustins time, (as he witnesses) there was a
double division of the commandments amongst Christians: some dividing them as
we do; and others as our adversaries. Yet both S. Augustine himself, q. 71.
in Exodus and S. Hierome Comment. in Psalm. 32. and Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 6.
Stromatum, follow our division, S. Augustine proving it very largly to be the
better, and putting in the first commandment, Idol, not Image; and serve, not
worship; and S. Hierome setting down the three commandments contained in the
first table, Item Lutherus impr. Ienae 1589. page 117. Et Hus Norinbergae 1558.
page 30.
as short, or shorter then any of our Catechismes do: and from them even to
our times, it seems to have been the received division, at least in the
western Church, and should have been followed by those of our nation, (who
ever before the breach, were estemeed a part of it, and yet pretend to be so)
had not the spirit of contradiction against the Romain Church induced them to
the contrary.

Now as we have authority, so have we solid reason to prefer this division,
before that of our adversaries: for certain it is that each different
commandment forbids a different maine sin; so that neither are we to make two
forbid one capital sin, nor one, two sins. This our division strictly
observes, but that of our aducrsaryes, not so: for their two first
commandments forbid only the sin of Idolatry, as being the capital sin
forbidden in them both, and so can be but one commandment, as we put them: and
their last prohibites two maine distinct sins, the desire of adultery, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and the desire of theft, thou shall not
covet thy neighbors goods etc. which are as different in thought, as adultery
and stealing are in act: if therefore, as they acknowledge, there be two
commandments to forbid them; in all reason there must be two to forbid the
desires of them; and this reason is pressed by S. Augustine in the place
alleged.

It is further most manifest, that these which are made two commandments by
the Protestants, can be noe more then one and the same commandment, for in the
2. of Kings 17. v. 35. the whole substance, of that which Protestants call the
second commandment is put in one single sentence, together with the first in
these words, you shall not fear strange Gods, neither shall you worship them,
neither shall you serve them, neither shall sacrifize to them. now, what is
meant by those strange Gods, is declared, v. 40. and the 41. How be it they did
not harken but they did after their former manner, so these nations feared the
Lord, and served their graven Images. whence it is evident, that that which is
called strange Gods, v. 35. is called graven Images, v. 41. and so to forbid
the service, and worship of strange Gods, which is in the Protestants first
commandment, and to forbid the service, and worship of graven Images, is the
same command, as forbidding the same thing. Hence also appears, that the word
Phesel, used Exodus 20.4. and is also used here v. 41. signifies an Idol, or a
strange God, as I have often said: and noe less is manifest from these words,
that the service which is here mentioned, to those graven Images, Pheselim, v.
41. was to fear them, and sacrifice to them, as strange Gods, v. 35. And,
moreover thus these which are here called strange Gods, v. 35. were material
Idols, or as Protestants term them graven Images, is most clear, v. 33. They
feared the Lord, and served their own Gods after the manner of the nations, whom
they carried away from thence, for they could not carry with them, any other
Gods, save such as these, from one place to an other.

That nothing may me wanting to the full satisfaction of the Reader, I have
here adjoined, the hebrew words as they stand in the original of this text
which is so violently, and frequently pressed against us.

Exodus 20. v. 4. (...)

Deuteronomy. 5. v. 5. (...)

Which words out of what I have already alleged, may be thus translated.

Thou shall not make to thy self, an Ido^, any figure which is in heaven
above, or in the earth beneath or in the water under the earth, thou shall not
bow, down to them, nor serve them. or thus^

Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol, of any figure which is in heaven
above, Bible 1629.
for the Protestants themselves, give the like translation to the like phrase,
Deuteronomy. 4. v. 16. and Pagninus gives for the first signification, of Moun, or
Temounach, figuram, a figure, not only artificial, but natural, or apparent,
as when angels appear, in the figures of men. Deuteronomy. 4.15. Psalm. 17.15. I shall
be satified when I awake with thy likeness, Temounacb, which is nothing but
the substance, and essence of God, conceived clearly in our understanding, as
we commonly say in our language, let him appear in his likeness, that is in
his own shape, figure, or person.

So that the meaning of these words as they ly in the 20. of Exodus and 5. of
Deutronomy compared with the 2. of Kings 17. where a strange God, and a graven
Image are the same thing, as I showed just now, can only have this sense, that
Allmighty God here forbids, that we should have any strange Gods before him,
that is, that we should not make an Idol, according to any visible figure whieh
we see either in the material heavens, or in the earth, or in the waters,
worshipping, and serving, that is, fearing those very Idols, and sacrifizing
to them, as to things indewed, with life, power, understanding, and divinity.
which horrible Idolatry is as far from the doctrine of the Romain Church,
(which in the beginning of this controversy, I cited out of the clear words
of the Council of Trent) as darckenesse is from light.

To correspond to the desire of other Readers, I have also thought it
convenient to cite the Greek text, of the 70. Interpreres.

Exodus 20. v. 4. (...).

Where they do not only translate it serve, but show that it is a service
proper to God, which is here forbidden, (...), and thou shall not serve them
with a divine or highest service, as I showed in the beginning out of Scripture
to be understood by the greek word (...) and (...), and S. Augustine q. 61.
upon Genesis confirms the same.

Now that the difference betwixt worshipping, and serving, may be better
understood; and that worship, may in some true sense be attributed to things
inanimate and without knowledge, but not service; the Protestants themselves
grant that civil worship may be given to te chair of state, or picture, of a
temporal King; but service only to his Royal person, not to his picture; so
that no man can be rightly said to serve the Kings chair of state or his
picture, but to serve the King, and yet they may be, and are said truly, to
worship or honor, by some external sign, his chair of state, etc. In the
very same manner with proportion, one may truly be said to worship or reverence
the picture of our Savior, or his Saints, as things known and esteemed to be
(as indeed they are) wholly dead, and inanimate, without any power at all, in
themselves, to hear us, or help us, merely because they represent those holy
persons whose pictures they are* but we cannot be said in any true or proper
sense, to serve them, so long as we make only this esteem of them. And hence
it is, that the reverence or worship which we yield to holy Images, is not
intended to them, or to beg any favor of them, or think that any help can
be conferred upon us by any power in them, Council. Trid. sess. 24. c. 2.
and no Romain Catholic is to do otherwise. But we pray before them, that we
having them before our eyes, may better and more attentively think of those
whom they represent, and the reverence and honor which we give to them, is in
a double respect; first we give them that reverence which is due to holy
things, dedicated, and consecrated, or tending to the worship of God, as are
altars, holy vessels, and such like; and in this respect we give them no more
honor, nor worship, then the Protestants use to do to Churches in England, by
keeping their hats of, kneeling etc. for as they do that to such places,
rather then to their own houses, because they are the houses of God; so do we
reverence holy Images, because they are holy things, putting us in remembrance
of God, and heavenly things. Neither do we this without warrant of holy
Scripture: for Iosue 5. v. 15. an Exodus 3. v. 9. Iosue and Moses are commanded
to put of their shoes because the earth was holy whereon they stood; which was
nothing but a reverence unto that earth made holy by the presence of God, or an
Angel: and if a piece of ground must have been re^erenced because it was
holy, why not all other things, which are consecrated or referred to the
worship and reverence of God?

The second respect which we have in worshipping holy Images, is particular to
them as they are Images and representations of other things: and in this
respect, all the acts of external reverence or worship, which we exhibit to
them, is not directed to them, as the end or reason of our worship, but it is
only to pass by means of them, to that which is represented by them; where it
wholly and only rests, as in a thing intended to be worshipped by it. Thus when
we do any reverence to an Image of the Virgin Mary, respecting it merly as
her Image, the reverence or worship passes by means of that to the B. Virgin,
and there only rests and terminates it self; and it is impossible to honor an
Image, as an Image, otherwise: for being in its, proper nature, nothing else
but a representation of such or such a person, or thing all which is done to
it, is intended by it to that which it represents: neither is it possible, at
least in this life, to give any honor to God, or his Saints, otherwise then by
means of one Image or other either corporal, of spiritual: for it is
impossible to honor or worship any thing unless we think upon that which we
worship: and it is impossible to think of any thing unless there be framed in
our heads, or understandings a representation of that thing which we think of:
now nothing can be represented, without some representation, as is clear, and
every representation is an Image and likeness of that thing which is
represents. So that we always honor whomsoever we honor, through that Image
of our thought, which we frame of them; and all our acts of honor of worship
pass through that interior imagination or thought which we have framed, to
the object or thing, which is represented by it. Now for the better help of our
imagination, or internal thought, we use some external thing as an object of
our senses, to excite us to such thoughts, and keep us more lively and fixedly
in them: thus words and discourses (wherein the things which we intend to
worship, are described, or signified) help us to a more strong and attentive
thought of them, and are the Images of the ear; through which as through
representations of what we worship, we give honor to that which they represent
to us: thus pictures and images, painted or carved, help the eye to frame a
more full and ferme imagination, or thought of that we worship; now we have
warrant enough in holy Scripture, to give honor, or adoration, to such things
as help us to think of God, and have a reverence given them to that end.

Thus in the 98. Psalm alias the 99. v. 5. Adorate scabellum pedum eius,
worship or adore his footstool, which was nothing but the Arc of the
Testament, as all agree, and notwithstanding here is a command to worship it.
Your English translation to avoid the force of these words, translates it in
this manner worship at his footstool: as though indeed no worship at all were
commanded to be given to it; but only that God were to be worshipped at it. But
this is another manifest fraud: for the hebrew word, and greek is the very
same here with that of the 20. of Eodus, lo tishtachaue lachem, and here, ve
hishtacauou la hathom ragluau. and in Exodus 20. because they will exaggerate
the command against holy Images, it must be, thou shall not bow down unto them:
and here, Psalm. 98. v. 5. because they fear that the people might gather from
hence, that creatures, and Images, (such as were the two Cherubins in the
tabernacle, putting us in mind of the true God, were to be worshipped, it must
be with them, worship at his footstool. Thus they change and chop the words of
holy Scripture, to serve their own turns, at their pleasure so far, that even
two Psalms before Psalm. 97. v. 7. they translate the same word and phrase in
hebrew, worship him all ye Gods: and here it must not be worship his
footstool, but, worship at bis footstool: nay in hundreds of other places of
Scripture, where the same word and manner of speech is in the Hebrew either
attributed to God, or men, or Idols, or false Gods, they translate worship or
worship not, the things forbidden or commanded: only here forsooth, because it
makes quite against them, if it be truly translated, they will needs have it,
worship at his footstool: but both the hebrew, and greek, and the
Septuaginta, and the ancient vulgar Translation have it plain enough bow down
unto his footstool, or, worship his footstool. whence I gather, that it is
warranted in holy Scripture, to give reverence and worship as I before
explicated, to such things as put us in mind of Allmighty God, and consequently
to holy Images. And as this is clear in Scripture, so is the practice thereof
no less clear even amongst Protestants: for what more common amongst the more
moderate of them, then to make a profound adoration at the name of Jesus? which
is nothing but a representation, or Image of our Savior, to the ear: which
practice seeing it is grounded (according to them) in those words, Phil. 2.10.
In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and those words, extend themselves
as much to that sacred name seen by the eye, as heard by the ear, brings in a
necessity, of granting a religious worship, to that most divine name, when we
see it either printed in a book, or carved in a stone etc. what worship soever
therefore, a well minded Protestant should judge to be given to that name thus
engraven, with out all superstition or Idolatry, or breach of this
commandment, let him give the same to any Image of our Savior, and in the
same manner, or at least judge that the like may lawfully be given to it, and
noe more in this point will be required of him, to be esteemed conformable to
the doctrine, and practice of the Roman church. and what more generally
practiced before these troubles then to kneel in receiving the communion,
which is only a resemblance or likeness of our Saviors Passion with them? and
so giving the reverence of kneeling to it, they properly worship an Image, or
similitude, or remembrance, of our Saviors death. And if any should answer
that they worship not the bread and wine in the Lords supper, nor kneel to
them, but only to God when they receive them, I demand presently, whether they
exhibit any kind of reverence to the bread and wine as a representation of our
Lords Passion, or no? if they answer that they give none at all to them: why
then do they make an exterior show, and that by way of command and
obligation, of exhibiting reverence and respect to those signs, seeing that in
the exterior, none who see them, can judge that they give not some reverence
even to them? again, if they give no reverence at all to them, what greater
respect do they bear to the Lords supper, then they do to their own in their
houses? so that if a zealous brother would kneel to God at the same time when
he eats his supper, he whould show as much respect to a brown loaf, as he
does to the Lords supper when he kneeles only to God, in receiving it. And yet
further, if one who goes to their communion, had no maw to adore God at that
time, but should put it of to some other, when he found himself more moved by
the spirit, why could not he receive sitting, or standing, and that without any
external reverence at all, to what he receives visibly?

Nay how could he in conscience receive kneeling 'or showing any external
reverence? If they answer that they exhibit some reverence, to the external
signs, as representations of our Lords death; I demand, whether it be a civil
or a religious reverence: to say it is a civil reverence, were absurd: for that
is in matters of state and civil authority only; and this is in matter of
Religion. If they say that it is a religious reverence, then I have my intent,
that even Protestants do exhibit Religious reverence to signs, figures. and
representations of our Savior, no less then Catholics: and then I demand
further, by what external sign they make profession of such a reverence to
the signs of their communion: certainly they will find no other which shows
it more clearly and fully, then their kneeling; or whatsoever they name, it is
an external exhibition of religious reverence, which is nothing but worship in
a true and Christian sense: whence appears that Protestants themselves are
guilty of what they accuse us, that is, of giving woiship to an Image or
figure, of our Savior dying upon the cross for us. That which I have
answered to the 20. of Exodus, is in like manner applyable to the 26. of
Leuiticus, v. 1. and to the 6. v. 73. for they speak only of Idols, and false
Gods: from which, all Roman Catholics abhor far more then Protestants.

It is not my intention here to enter into any school questions, which can
neither easily be made plain enough to be rightly conceived, by all those whom
I intend to inform in this treatis, nor are they necessary to be known by all
Catholicques, nor if they were known, is it necessary to believe them. So long
therefore, as the doctrine of the Council of Trent cited in the beginning of
this controversy is believed and observed, noe more will or can be required,
(for so much as belongs to this point) of any one who either is, or intends to
be, a Child of the Roman Church. which doctrine is not only without all danger,
but even without all possibility of Idolatry: for seeing an Idolatrous worship
must acknowledge a divine power, and virtue in that which it worships, and the
Council expressly theaches that noe such divine power is to be acknowledged in
any Image, it is impossible to follow this doctrine, and to commit Idolatry in
the worship we give to any Image, all therefore which is required to unite a
Protestant in this particular to the doctrine of the Roman Church, is only
this, that he believe noe more that there is eyher life, virtue, or divinity in
any Image, then he now believes there is in the name of JESUS spoaken or
written; that he put noe more confidence, nor hope in the picture, then he now
puts in the name, that he pray noe more to the picture, then he now prays to
that name, if kneeling before the name of JESUS graven upon some stone, he
pray to our Savior: but as he now puts of his hat and boweth his knee or body,
when he sees or hears that name, he hold it lawful to exhibit the same
reverence when one sees the picture of our Savior, and as he may now kiss
that sacred name in devotion to our Savior, so he hold it lawful to kiss
our Saviors picture in devotion to him, or in his regard.

If a Protestant should demand, whether there be as clear proofs of Scripture
for the worship of Images, as there are for the worshipping the name of JESUS,
I answer there are. That some Images may be lawfully made, is clear in the
Brrazon serpent, Number. 21.8.9. That they may lawfully be put in places dedicated
to the service of God, is evident in the two cherubins of gould, Exodus 25.18.
That they may have a reference to divine service, and be ordinances helonging
to it, is manifest Hebr. 9.1.5. That it is lawful to exhibit some worship to
them, is all ready proved, Ps. 99.5. Adore his footstool. That the worship
which is done to the Image of another, tends as much to his honor whose Image
it is, as the worship done to his name, tends to the honor of him-whose name
it is, is undeniably prouued, Reu. 13. v. 15.16.17. And he had power to give
life to the Image of the beast, that the Image of the beast should both speak,
and cause that as many as would not worship the Image of the beast should be
killed; and he causes all both small and great, rich and pore, free and bond,
to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: and that noe man
might buy or sall, save he who had the mark or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name. whence is manifest, that the worship of the Image, of this
accursed creature, tended to his honor, otherwise he would never have
compelled men to worship it, and that he was honored noe lose in this, if not
more, then in carijng his mark, and his name. which can be deduced from no
other principle then this, that all worship done proportionally to the Image,
is an honor to him who is represented by it, and consequently, that in this
our Savior and the Saints are honored as truly as any other in their Images.

If any Protestant, demand farther whether there be any express command in the
new Testament, to worship holy Images. I answer there is noe express command.
If it should be replied, that nothing is to be held, or practiced by Christians
which is not set down in express words in the new Testament. I answer that
that is manifestly untrue, and must be confessed to be so even by Protestants
themselves, for they can never find any express mention in the new Testament:
that nothing is to be believed, or practiced lawfully by Christians, save that
which is expressed in the new Testament, 2. that any churches were made or to
be made amongst Christians, distinct from dwelling houses, 3. that fonts for
baptism were put in those churches, 4. that childeren were ever actually
baptized in those fonts, 5. that Godfathers, and Godmothers were to be used
in Baptism of childeren, 6. that any spiritual kindred arises by virtue of
Baptism, betwixt those Godfathers, and Godmothers, on the one side, and the
childeren Baptized, and their Parents respectively on the other. If therefore
none of those can be found mentioned expressly in the new Testament, with what
show of reason, can Protestants demand, that the worship of Images, should be
mentioned in the new Testament, seeing they practice these particulars, noe
less, then we the worship of Images? But in these, and such like religious
practices, it is sufficient (even according to the Protestant Principle of sole
Sctipture) that either there be express mention made of them, either
commanding or allowing them in the old Testament, which is never revoked or
dissallowed in the new (as is that of the worship of Images) or at least, that
the lawfullnesse of them, can be deduced, from the old, or new Testament, by a
good consequence, drawn according to the rules of right reason, as the worship
of Images is manifestly, from the 13. of the Revel. now cited, for if the
worship of the Image tend to the honor of him who is represented by it, (as is
there evident) and that it is lawful to do all that which tends to the honor
of our Savior, then it follows ineuitably, that the worship of his Image, is
lawful, and the like is of the Images of Saints.

Thus have I indeauored to discover the different mistakes of Protestants, in
the texts of Scripture cited by them against the use of holy Images, taught,
and peactized in the Roman Church, and with all the strange mistranslations
invented by them, to make holy Scripture speak to the vulgar, against the
doctrine, and practice of the Roman Church in this particular. and this may
sfuffice for the second Controversy.

THE THIRD CONTROVERSY Concerning Justification.
The Doctrine of the Roman Church delivered in the Council of Trent, touching
this Point.
Sess. 6. can. 1.
SI quis dixerit, hominem suis operibus, quae vel per humanae naturae vires,
vel per legis doctrinam fiunt, absque diuina per Iesum Christum gratia, posse
iustificari coram Deo; Anathema sit.

It any one shall say, that a man can be justified by his works, which are
done by the force of human nature, or by the doctrine of the law, without
divine grace through our Lord Jesus Christ; let him be accursed.

Ibidem. can. 2.
Si quis dixerit ad hoc solum diuinam gratiam per Iesum Christum dari, vt
facilius homo just viuere ac vitam aeternam promereri possit; quasi per
liberum arbitrium vtrumque, sed aegre tamen and difficulter possit; anathema
sit.

If any one shall say that divine grace through Jesus Christ is given only to
this end, that a man may more easily live justly, and deserve eternal life, as
if he could do both, though with labor and difficulty, by his freewill; let
him be accursed.

Ibidem. can. 3.
Si quis dixerit, sine praeuenien^e Spiritus sancti inspiratione, atque eius
adiutorio, hominem credere, sperare, diligere, aut poenitere posse sicut
oportet, vt ei iustificationis gratia conferatur; anathema sit.

If any one shall say, that without the preventing inspiration of the holy
Ghost, and his assistance, a man can believe, hope, love, and repent, as he
should do to have the grace of justification bestowd upon him; let him be
accursed.

Here I demand upon what ground the 13 of the 39 English Protestant Articles,
speaks thus of the scoole men of the Roman Church, Works done before the
grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit are not pleasant to God, for
as much as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men
meet to recriue grace, or (as the school Authors say) deserve grace of
Congruity. I would gladly have those school Authors named and cited, who
affirm, contrary to the express words of the Council of Trent, so great a
semi-Pelagian Heresy, as this is whereof they are here accused. And if none
attall can be produced, how great an untruth is contained in this article,
where it is said, not as some of the school Authors, but, as the school
Authors say, that is, either universally, or commonly affirm; whence may
clearly be collected, that those new Prelates and Doctors, who composed those
39 articles, which have been (ever since they were composed) esteemed the sum
and substance of the Protestant Religion, and faith in England, were either
grossly ignorant, in the doctrine of the school Authors, and exceeding
temerarious in affirming that of them, which they never understood, or
insufferably deceiptfull, and malicious, in accusing them (against their own
knowledge and conscience) of holding generally an error, which not so much as
any one of them ever held, but the quite contrary.

Conc. Trid. ibidem cap. 8.
Cum vero Apostolus dicit iustificari hominem per fidem and gratis, Romans 8.
ea verba in eo sensu intelligenda sunt, quem perpetuus Ecclesiae Catholicae
consensus tenuit, and expressit; vt scilicet per fidem ideo iustificari
dicamur, quia fides est humanae salutis initium, fundamentum, and radix omnis
iustificationis: sine qua impossible est placere Deo, and ad filiorum eius
consortium peruenire: Hebr. 11.
gratis autem iustificari ideo dicamur; quia nihil eorum quae iustificationem
praecedunt, sieve fides, sieve opera, ipsam iustificationis gratiam promeretur;
si enim gratia est, Romans 11. Ephesians. 2. Tit. 5.
iam non ex operibus, alioquin, vt idem Apostolus inquit, gratia iam non est
gratia.

When the Apostle says that a man is justified by faith and gratis, or freely,
those words are to be understood in that sense, which the perpetual consent of
the Catholicque Church always held, and expressed; to wit, that we are said
to be justified by faith, because faith is the begin^ing of man's salvation, the
foundation, and root of all iustifieation: without which it is impossible to
please God, and to come into the number, of his childeren. But we are said to
be justified gratis, because none of these things which go before
justification, whether it be faith, or works, deserve the grace of
justification; for if it be grace, it is not of works, otherwise, as the same
Apostle says, grace would not be grace.

Conc. Trid. ibidem. cap. 10.
Sic ergo iustificati, and amici Dei, Psalm. 83.
ac domestici facti, euntes de virtute in virtutem, renouantur, vt Apostolus
inquit, de die in diem, 2. Cor. 4. Coll. 3. Romans 6.
and exhibendo ea arma iustitiae in sanctificationem, per obseruantiam
mandatorum Dei, and Ecclesiae, in ipsa iustitia per Christi gratiam accepta,
cooperante fide bonis operibus crescunt, atque magis iustificantur, sicut
scriptum est, Qui iustus est iustificetur adhuc. Apo^. vl^*


Being therefore thus justified, and made the friends, and of the household of
God, going on from virtue, to virtue, they are renewed, as the Apostle says,
from day to day and using those arms of justice to sanctification, by the
observance, of the commandments of God, and the Church, their faith
cooperating with their good works, they increace through the grace of Christ,
in the justice which they have received, and are justified more and more, as is
it written, he who is just, let him be justified still.

Conc. Trid. ibidem. can. 9.
Si quis dixerit, sola fide impium iustificari, ita, vt intelligat nihil aliud
requiri, quod ad iusticationis gratiam consequendam cooperetur, and nulla ex
part necesse esse eum suae voluntatis motu praeparari, atque disponi; anathema
sit.

If any one shall say, that a wicked man is justified by faith only, so that
he means that nothing else is required, which may cooperate to the obtaining
the grace of Justification, and that it is noe way necessary that he be
prepared, and disposed by the motion of his will; let him be acc^rsed.

From these authorities of the Council, it is manifest, that in this matter of
Justification, the Church of Rome, theaches, 1. that noe works done by the
mere natural force of our freewill; 2. nor by the sole doctrine or knowledge
of the divine law, can justify a sinner in the sight of God. Can. 1. 3. That
noe unjust person, can without the preventing inspiration of the holy Ghost,
do any thing (as it should be done) to obtain, the grace of justification.
can. 3. 4. That neither faith, nor works, done by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, before Justification, can merit Justification, for it is a free grace of
God, given not of works, but by the sole mercy of God, and for the sole merits
of Christ. cap. 8. 5. That though the justification of a sinner cannot be
merited, yet a soul may be disposed, and prepared to instification, by acts
inspired by the holy Ghost. c. 6. 6. That we are not thus disposed by faith
only, but also by other good motions of our will, prevented and assisted by the
grace of God. can. 9. 7. That being thus freely justified, and become the
childeren of God through the assistance of Gods grace in Christ, we may do
good works, and by them (accepted through Christ's merits) become more and
more just, in the sight of God. cap. 10. where in chiefly, consists the Roman
doctrine, of Justification by good works.

This doctrine supposed, we will now take a view, of those texts, which
Protestants usually press, out of Scripture mistaken against it, having first
proved the Roman doctrine.

The Catholic Position. Faith only iustifyeth not.
YOu see that a man is justified by works, James 2* v. 24.
and not by faith only. which must needs be understood of a true and internal
justification before Allmighty God: for it must be that justification which
comes by faith; but that is true and internal justification, as appears by
all the texts cited hereafter in the paper, for proof of justification by
faith only: that the justification which S. James speaks of here, is the very
same with that which comes by faith, is most clear out of the words
themselves. Ye see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only.
For it would be quite contrary to common sense to understand a justification
before men, in the first part of this sentence, ye see that a man is justified
by works, and a true internal justification in the sight of God, in the
latter part, and not by faith only. For the word only, clearly demonstrates,
that the same justification is to be understood in both parts of the sentence.
Now that the justification common to both members of this place, must
necessarily be meant of a true justification only in the sight of God, is out
of all question to such as ponder what is delivered in it: for it would be most
false, were it understood of a justification only before men^; no less then
this manner of speech, ye see that this man is understood by his words, and
not by his thoughts only, would be wholly false, were there only mention made
of a man's being understood amongst men: for amongst them he is not understood
at all by his thoughts; and so the latter part of this proposition would not be
true and therefore to verify this manner of speech, it must of necessity be
meant of a man's being understood by Allmighty God who only by his own power
understands both thoughts and words; and so it is truly said, ye see that a
man is understood (to wit, by Allmighty God) by his words, and not by his
thoughts only. And for the very same reason, this proposition of S. James we
see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only* cannot be
understood of a justification before men: for we are no more justified by says
before men, then we are understood amongst them by our thoughts: and therefore
it must be interpreted of a justification before Allmighty God; who only
understands our faith as he does our thoughts (by his own power and knowledge)
and can only see whether our faith be true, sincere, and justifying, or no;
faith being nothing else but a thought, assent or judgment of the soul. And as
all Protestants, in the ensuing texts urged for justification by faith only*
understand an internal justification in the sight of God, so must they (will
they not be unreasonably and willsully partial) understand the same by
justification by faith, in this place of S. James, which is cleared v. 2. was
not Abraham our father justified by worket when he had offered Isaac his sone
upon the altar? for this having been done privately in the desert could not,
when it was done, justify him before men. and yet more clear v. 22. see thou
not how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?
what is here spoken of but the operation of faith and works in the soul,
justifying in God's sight? For faith cannot be truly made perfect but declared
to be perfect, by works so far as they justify only before men. And it is
further demonstrated v. 23. And the Scripture was fulfilled which says,
Abraham believed God, Romans 4. v. 1.2.3.
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend
of God. Can any Protestant deny this to be meant of an imputation of
righteousness, as they term it, or a justification before Allmighty God,
seeing it is the very same justification which is mentioned by S. Paul to the
Romans which they mainly contend to be a true justification in the sight of
God: or if they will have it here a justification only before men, they must
acknowledge that the same mentioned to the Romans is no other then before men;
and so, by endeavoring by such shifts to weaken the force of this text against
themselves, they take away all force from that of Romans 4. to conclude any thing
against us. Besides, this justification of Abraham here mentioned by S. James,
can be no other then that which is true and interuall before God: for, as it
follows in the text, he was called a friend of God; and that truly, for he was
indeed, as he was called, a friend of God: and hence it follows ineuitably,
that the justification which S. James deduces from that of Abraham, by works,
and not by faith only, as appears by the word then, we see then etc. is a
true intrinsecall justification in the sight of God; for no other, save that,
could be rightly inferred from the former. And indeed though we had none of the
foresaid evidences, to convince the true meaning of S. James, yet what man of
judgment can imagine that this holy Apostle would labor so much to prove that
Christians are justified by their good works before men, when that is a matter
too clear and known, to need proof, and too light and frivolous to deserve
it? or what considerate man can think that this Blessed Apostle or the holy
Ghost by whose inspiration he writ this, would so earnestly exhort Christians
to abound in good works, to the end that they may be justified before men?
seeing corrupt human nature is too too prone to do good works for such by
ends as these, and has more need of a bridle then a spur in this
particular, and rather to be deterred from it, then put upon it, as our
Savior did the Stribes and Pharisees, who did their works to be seen, and
consequently to be praised and justified before men. This text therefore having
been demonstrated to be meant of justification before Allmighty God by works,
and not by faith only; seeing S. Paul inspired by the same holy Spirit, in what
is cited out of him in the ensuing text, cannot possibly contradict S. James
here, as he must needs be thought to have done if he said (as Protestants would
have it) that we are justified in the sight of God by faith only, and not by
good works, working with faith and perfecting it, informing and vinificating
it, as S. James describes them here. we will now see in what sense S. Paul's
words are to be understood, James 2. v. 22.26.
and reconcile them with this text of S. James.

The Protestant Position. Justification by faith only. This is proved by
Scripture mistaken.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith. Romans 3. v. 28.
without the works of the law.

Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Romans 5.1.


For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, from faith to faith, Romans
1.17
as it is written, the just shall live by faith.

Gal. 2.16.
Knowing this, that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Christ Jesus: that we might be justified by Jesus Christ, and not by
the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no living flesh be
iustifeyd.

The first mistake. The word only, is not found in any of these texts.
In all these texts is not once the words faith only, to be found; which is put
in this Protestant Position and was to be proved by them. Neither i^ i^
consequent: a man is justified by faith without the works of the law; therefore
a man is justified by faith only: no more then this follows, a man is nourished
by bread, without the grass of the field; therefore a man is nourished by
bread only. for though the grass of the feeld do not nourish us, yet many
other things besides bread de nourish us. in like manner, though the woreks
done by force of the grace of God, and not by force of the law, do justify us,
and so we are not justified by says only, nor at all by the works of the law;
but by faith and good works done by the grace of Jesus Christ, and not by the
k^owledge of the law.

The Second mistake. The works of the law misunderstood.
That S. Paul here understands only by works of the law, such works as are done
by force and knowledge of the law, before the faith of Christ infused into a
soul, or that it is enlightened and assisted by his grace: and by this law is
understood the law written in the books of Moses, both moral in the ten
Commandments, and ceremonial, as circumcision, and other rites and ceremonies
of the Jews.

That by works of the law, I say, are understood by S. Paul, only such works as
are done by force of knowledge of the law, befotc the inlightning of the faith,
and grace of Christ, is evident out of this chapter, Romans 3. v. 14. Now we
know, that what things soever the law says, it says to thcm that are under
the law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. Here he speaks of the law, speaking or teaching what is to be done
according to it: and then adds presently, as a conclusion from that knowledge
got by the law, v. 10. therefore by tbe deeds of the law no flesh shall be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. The reason why
the deeds of the law justify not, is, because they come from the knowledge of
the law, and by the law is the knowledge of sin. whereunto he opposes the
tighteousnesse of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, in the first
texts following verses 21. but now the righteousnetre of God without the law is
manifested, being witnessed by the law and Prophets: v. 22. even the
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe; for there is no difference. This is the known doctrine of
all Roman Catholics against the Pelagians, that no work can justify which
comes only by doctrine and light of the written law; but all justifying works
must come from the faith and grace of Christ so that we all confess and
conclude with S. Paul, that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the law, that is, wirhout such works as are merely of and from the law, as are
opposed here by S. Paul to the grace and faith of Christ.

Secondly, by the law in this place is understood, both the motall law written
by Moses in the ten Commandments; and the ceremonial, contained in the
books of Leuiticus, Deuteronomij etc. for the moral law, Protestants
themselves, doubt not that the Apostle speaks of it, and that the ceremonial
is here meant is evident in the two next following Verses, speaking of Jews
and Circumcision, v. 24. Is he God of the Jews only, and not also of the
Gentiles: yea, of the Gentiles also. v. 30. Seeing it is one God which shall
justify circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith. and ^. 1.
What advantage then has the Jew, or what profit is there of circumcision?
and the seven last verses of the second chapter make it yet clearer; seeing
that the Apostle's intent is there to prove, that justification did not only
belong to the Jews, but to the Gentiles also, and therefore the Jews: were not
to think that justification came by the observance of their ceremonial law
which Moses had given them: and whereby they were chiefly distinguished from
the Gentiles, who had knowledge of the moral law, and esteemed themselves
obliged to observe it. Which is the present doctrine of Roman^e Catholics.

The Third mistake. The word Justify missapplied.
Thirdly, by Justification here, is understood, only the fitst Justification
from sin to justice, whereby a believer is made of a child of the devil, the
child of God. this is clear v. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God, v. 23. being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Jesus Christ. v. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation trough faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearante of God. And in this
all agree that the first justification of a sinner is a work of the mercy and
grace of God, through the merirs of our dearest Savior; Council. Trid. siss. ^.
^, 8.
and cannot be condignly merited by any works precedent. But the Apostle makes
here no mention at all of the second justification, or increase of that justice
and grace which is given us in the first justification, and whereof S. Ihon
speaks Reu. 22. v. 11. Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc, he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still, says your English text, which signifyes
only a perseverance in that righteousness or justice which was first received;
when it should be, he that is righteous, let him be made righteous still: as
the latin has it, iustificetur adhuc: and all the other phrases adjoined, show
not only a perseverance, butsalso an increase, of that wickedness, or
holiness wherein they were before: or, let him work righteousness, or
justice still, as the greek has it, which comes all to the same purpose. Now
the question between us and Protestants, is only of the second justification,
or increace of justice acquired in the first; which we only affirm to be
augmented by good works done in and through the grace of Jesus Christ.

The fourth mistake. The word faith misconstu^ed.
Fourthly, by faith is not to be understood a bare, sole, act of Christian
faith; and much less of particular confidence, and application of Christ
merits to our selves, (whereof the Apostle speaks not one word in this place)
where on P^otestants rely so much; but a faith viuificated, informed, and
animated with charity, and other Christian vertus joined with it. This is
cleate chap. 4. v. 1.2.3. where the faith of Abraham is brought in by the
Apostle in proof of what he had said. Now who can deny but this faith was
viuificated with charity? seeing S. James, c. 2. v. 22. now cited, affirmcs,
that his faith wrought with his works, and by works his faith was made
perfect. And Galat. 5. v. 6. where the Apostle treates of the same
justification by faith, makes this matter out of question: for in Jesus Christ
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor incircumcision; but faith, which
works by love, or charity. This truth is embraced by all Roman Catholics,
though it be not, as they hold, our formal justification, nor a condign merit
of our first justification; but only a congruous, and yet sure disposition to
it, through the merciful and faithful promise of God, and through the only
merits of our Savior. By all these particulars duly pondered, appears, that
this text of the Apostle, Romans 3. v. 28. therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law, says nothing but what is
taught by Roman Catholics universally. But if Protestants would conclude any
thing against us, they must produce a text which says, good works of such as
are justified already, done by virtue of the grace of Christ, and not by the
bare knowledge of the law, do not justify, (and this only is in question
betwixt us) that is, augment and in^crease that righteousness or justice
already acquired, and make us more just. The former answer is likewise to be
applied to the other texts, Romans 5. v. 1. Romans 1. v. 17. Galat. 2. v. 17. for
the Apostles meaning is the same in them all.

Yet because I intend to give full satisfaction to each text objected against
us, I will add a word or two to these several texts.

The second text. Romans 5. v. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, through out Lord Jesus Christ.
This text is mistaken.
Here S. Paul speaks of the fitst justification, whereby a sinner is made a
servant and friend of God (agreably to Roman Catholics now delivered) as
appears, v. 8. But God commends his love to us in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us, and v. 10. for if while we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God, by the death of Christ, much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life: and the whole sequel of the chapter shows
evidently that his maine discourse is of the first justification and atonement
of sinners and enemies to God through the death of Christ: yea even the text it
self v. 1. here objected, declares it self sufficiently to be meant of the
first justification, Therefote being justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, says the text; for this having peace with
God by justification, argues that before that justification, we had not peace,
but ^mnity with God, and so were in state of sin and damnation; which is only
true of the first justification; for before the second justification or
increace of justice we have that peace with God, and so receive not peace by
reason of it. And though there were no other answer save this, that, of
whatsoever justification this text speaks, Romans 5. v. 1. yet justification by
faith only, (for proof of which it is alleged, will never be proved from it;
for it says, being justified by feith, but no news here of faith only.

The third text. Romans 1. v. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the just lives by faith.
This text is mistaken.
These words prove nothing at all for justification by faith only, no more
then this proposition, the just man lives by breath, proves that the just man
lives by breath only: for as his living corporally by breath. hinders not his
living by meat, and drink, so his living spiritually by faith hinders not his
living by good works: for as breath, meat, and drink concur to his
temporal; so faith an good works concur to his spiritual life. and even
Protestants themselves must confess that this text, the just man lives by
fatih, cannot possibly infer that he lives by faith only: for S. Paul says,
Romans 3.24. being justified freely by his grace: and v. 18. even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to the justification of
life. So that according to S. Paul, the just lives by grace, and by the
righteousnsse of Christ, as well as by faith; and so not by faith only. Neither
can it be answered, that faith it self is that grace where of the Apostle
speaks, and consequently this objection of mine is to noe purpose, for though
faith be a gift and grace of God, yet there are many more gifts and graces
besides it, signified by the word grace, and particularly that preuentinge
grace, or divine light, and inspiration, which the holy Ghost infuses into man's
heart as the principles, and causes of divine faith in us, which is bestowed
upon us, purely gratis, and out of mere mercy.

The 4. text, Gal. 2. v. 11. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of
the law shall no flesh be justified.

This text is mistaken.
These words prove as little as any of the former, that is, nothing at all for
justification by faith only. For, as it is most manifest by the whole precedent
context in the chapter, the whole matter there handled, is about Circumcision
and observation of the ceremonial law of the Jews, as different from the life
and practice of the Gentills: see v. 2.3.5.7.8.12.14. and chap. 4. v. 10. Ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years, says S. Paul reprehending
the Christians for returning to those empty elements of the ceremonial law, v.
6. and the like chap. 5. v. 1.2.3. about circumcision, stand, and be not held
in again with the yoke of servitude, behold I Paul tell you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; and I testify again to every man
circumcising himself, that he is a debtour to the whole law.

Now neither Roman Catholic, nor English Protestant believe that they are
justified by the ceremonial law of the Jews, which only is touched in this
chapter. And it is no less clear that there mention is made of the first
justification whereby a sinner becoms a child of God, v. 10. We sinners by
nature Jews, and not of the Gentiles. Nay the text it self objected, Gal. 2.
v. 16. speaks clearly of the first justification of a sinner to the state of
grace, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified; the word flesh
signifijng most familiarly in S. Paul's Epistles, that which is not yet
spiritual, but carnal, under the guilt of sin, and corruption of nature. For
though such as are already justified, retain the concupiscenses of the flesh
in them, yet because they resist and subdue them, so long as they remain
justified. they are not called flesh, by S. Paul, but rather spiritual men.

And that he speaks of the law as known by its own force, light, and doctrine
is evident also v. 16. For if by the law be righteousness, then Christ is dead
in vain. which is most true if we speak of the law as known to us, and
working in us by its own force, wholly independent of the grace and
illumination of Christ; but can have no true sense if we speak of the law as
justifying by the grace of Christ: for then Christ will not have dyed in vain;
because by his death he merited that grace and light by virtue of which only the
law iustifyes. And chapter 3. v. 2. Have ye received the Spirit by the works
of the law, or by the hearing of faith? whereby is manifest, both that he
speaks of the works of the law, as working before the receiving the holy
Ghost, and of the first justification, or receiving of the Spirit, by the faith
of Christ. and v. 18. For if a law were given which could viuificate,
righteousness were truly from the law. which shows evidently, that the
Apostle speaks of the law as considered in it self, and its proper force: for
if we consider it as illuminated by faith, and the grace of Christ, it is able
to viuificate, and consequently to justify, as the Apostle here plainly
affirms. And that he speaks of the law as preceding the faith of Christ, is
out of all question v. 23. Before faith came, we were concluded under the law,
into that faith which was to be revealed. Therefore the law was our
schoolmaster in Christ, that we might be justified from faith.

THE FOVRTH CONTROVERSY Of the merit of Good works.
The Doctrine of the Roman Church delivered by the Council of Trent in this
Point. Sessione 6.
THe Couneil of Trent having delivered (as appears in the former Controversy)
that noe work truly pleasing to God (which only we understand by good works
esteemed by us meritorious) can possibly be done either by the force of nature,
or of the law, without the inspiration of the holy Ghost; nor that any good
motion of the will, assisted, by such Inspirations, can merit the grace of our
first Justification, the Council supposes that none can produce any good work
truly meritorious of heavenly blessings, but such as are already justified,
and in state of grace: and so delivers the ensuing doctrine. Sessione 6. c. 16.

Been operantibus vsque in finem, and in Deo sperantibus, proponenda est vita
aeterna, and tanquam gratia filiis per Christum Iesum misericorditer promissa,
and tanquam merces ex ipsius Dei promissione, bonis ipsorum operibus ac meritis
fideliter reddenda.

Eternal life is to be propounded to those who do well, and hope in God, both
as a grace mercifully promised through JESUS Christ to childeren, and as a
reward faithfully to be rendered through the promise of God, to their good
works and merits.

And yet the Council gives an other ground of Christian merits. Ibidem c. 26.

Si quis dixerit, iustos non debere pro bonis operibus, quae in Deo fuerint
facta, expectare and sperare aeternam retributionem a Deo per eius
misericordiam, and IESV Christi meritum ^i been agendo, and diuina mandata
custodiendo, vsque in finem perseuerauerint; anatheme sit.

If any one shall say, that just men are not to expect and hope for an eternal
recompense for their good works, which were done in God, through the mercy of
God, and the merits of Christ, if they persevere, to the end in doing well, and
keeping Gods, commandments; let him be accursed.

And the full reason of this doctrine is gi^en, Sess. 6. c. 16.

Cum enim ille ipse Christus JESUS tanquam caput in membra, and tanquam vitis
in palmites, in ipsos iustificatos iugiter virtutem influat; quae virtus bona
eorum opera semper antecedit, and comitatur, and subsequitur, and sine qua^
nullo pacto Deo grata, and meritoria esse possunt: nihil ipsis iustificatis
amplius deesse credendum est, quo minus plene illis operibus, quae in Deo sunt
facta, diuinae legi pro huius vitae statu satisfecisse, and vitam aeternam suo
etiam tempore, si tamen in gratia discesserint, consequendam, vere promeruisse
censeantur.

For seeing Christ himself, infuses virtue continually into persons already
justified, as the head into the parts, and the vine into the branches, which
virtue always precedes and accompanies, and follows their good works, and
without which they could not by any means be grateful to God, and
meritorious; it is to be believed that nothing else is wanting to them, but
that by those works, which are done in God, they may be thought to have
satisfied the divine law, proportionably to the condition of this present life,
and truly to have merited eternal life, which is here after to be rendered to
them, if not withstanding they die in the state of grace.

And to show, that this doctrine, hinders not the humility of a Christian, the
Council, gives this admonition.

Absit tamen vt Christianus homo in seipso vel confidat, vel glorietur, and non
in Domino: cuius tanta est erga homines bonitas, vt eorum velit esse merita,
quae sunt ipsius dona.

Far be it notwithstanding that a Christian should either confide, or glory
in himself, and not in our Lord: whose goodness to men is so great, that he
wills that those which are his gifrs, should be our merits.

And lastly to show what it is, which just men* merit by their good works, the
Council delivers this doctrine. can. 32.

Si quis dixerit -- ipsum iustificatum bonis operibus, quae ab eo pcr Dei
gratiam, and IESV Christi meritum, cuius viuum membrum est, fiunt, non vere
mereri augmentum gratiae, vitam aeternam, and ipsius vitae aeternae, si tamen
in gratia discesserit, consecutionem, and gloriae augmentum; anathema sit.

If any one shall say -- that a just person, merits not truly by his good
works, which are done by the grace of God and merit of Christ, increace of
grace, eternal life; and the attayning eternal life, if he depart hence in
state of grace, and the increace of gloey; let him be accursed.

From these definitions of the Council, is clear, 1. that none save persons
already justified can have these meritorious works. 2. That they must all be
done by force and virtue of the gtace of Christ. 3. To make even such works
which proceed from grace completely, and truly meritorious is required the free
and merciful promise of God, whereon all merit is grounded. 4. That this
Promise of God, to reward such works, and the acceptance of those works to
be merits, are grounded in the sole merits of Christ most sacred passion. 5.
That the things which are merited through such promises, and merits of Christ,
are increace of internal grace, eternal life, the obteyning of eternal life,
and the increase of glory in heaven. amongst which seeing the Council puts not
actual grace, that is the inlightning of our understanding by heavenly
thoughts, and the inflaming of our will by pious affections, it gives free
liber for all Christians to believe, that noe just person, can by his good
works or merits, deserve to have such actual graces, but that they all
proceed from the free grace, and mercy of God, bestowed liberally upon every
just person, for the sole merits of Christ, and not dew to any whatsoever of
his good works. 6. Hence the Council affirms that all our merits are the true
gifts of God, coming from his free grace, and that so we are neither to
confide, nor glory in our selves, but only in God. 7. Hence clearly follows,
that this doctrine of merits, cannot possibly be any way injurious to our
Saviors passion, seeing it is grounded, both according to the grace where by
such meritorious works are produced, and the free promise of God to accept of
them, as meritorious, and to render a reward to them, for the sole passion of
our dearest Savior, the virtue whereof is applied to us by the meritorious
force of such works. as it also is by the impetratory force of prayres, the
first derogating noe more from the power of his merits, then the second of his
praires.

That which is here said, of the impretatory, and meritorious, is to be
extended to the satisfactory virtue of good works. For so the Council of Trent,
speaks of them. Sessione 14. cap. 8. neque vero ita nostra est satisfactio
haec, quam pro peccatis nostris exoluimus, vt non sit per Christum IESVM: nam
qui ex nobis tanquam ex nobis nihil possumus; eo cooperante qui nos confortat
omnia possumus, ita vt non habeat homo vnde glorietur, sed omnis gloriatio
nostra in Christo est, in quo viuimus, in quo meremur, in quo satisfacimus,
facientes fructus dignos poenitentiae, qui ex illo vim habent, ab illo
offeruntur Patri, and per illum acceptantur a Patre.

Neythcr is this satisfaction so ours which we pay for our sins, that it is
not through JESUS Christ. For we who of our selves, as of our selves, can do
nothing, he cooperating who comforts us we can do all things, so that man
has nothing where of to glory, but all our glory is in Christ, in whom we
live, in whom we merit, in whom we satisfy, bringing forth worthy fruits
of penance, which have force from him, are offered by him to the father, and
are accepted by the Father through him.

To these Athorities of the Council of Trent in declaration of the Roman
doctrine, I thought fit to add one clause of the 39 articles, which favors
much the merit of Good works.

Arti. 12. Of Goodvvorkes.
Al be it that good works, which are the fruits of faith, cannot put away
sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and
acceptable to God in Christ.

If pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, then noe way sinful, but truly
and absolutely good and just, for noe sin, whether out of Christ or in Christ
can be pleasing, and acceptable to God, for then God should not be a hater, but
a lover of sin, and Christ should not take away sins, but make them pleasing,
and acceptable to God, which is a flat blasphemy. If truly and absolutely
without sin, and just, then having in holy Scripture the promises of God annexed
to them, to reward them, and that we must receive Gods promises in such wise,
as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture, as says article 17.
sub finem, it is most manifest, that all the good works of just and righteous
persons, shall be rewarded in Christ, and so be truly meritorious in Christ:
having such a supernatural goodness. comfortable to that heavenly reward in
them. which is all that is taught, in this point, by the Church of Rome.

The Protestant Position. That the good works of the Regerate are not such, as
can deserve heaven.
This is prouued by Scripture mistaken.

The first Proof.
Romans 8. v. 18.
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed unto us.

The first mistake. Nothing against merits in this text.
NO more is a grain of mustard seed worthy to be compared to that high and
spread stalk, and those multitudes of increase which it bears; and yet it
produces them: as also do the small sufferings of thy world that fair tree of
life, and glory in heaven, as witnesses S. Paul 2. Cor. 4. v. 17. For our
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory.

The second Proof.
So likewise ye, Luke 17. v. 10.
when you have done all those things which are commanded you, say; we are
unprofitable servants: we have done that which was but our duty to do.

The Second mistake. These words missapplied against merits.
What is there here which denies the deserving heaven by the good works of the
regenerate? is it because we have only done our duty? and why then deserves a
servant his wages, by doing his duty, and nothing else? is it because we are
unprofitable servants? and who can bring any profit to God who is incapable of
profit? Hence is only proved that Allmighty God is no way beholden to us, but
we to him for all our good works: and therefore we are all to humble our selves
before him; and to acknowledge that all our merits are his gifts, and the
reward bestowed on them, grounded in his free promise, and acceptance of
them, for the merits of Christ.

The third Proof.
We are not saved by works, least any one should boast. if righteousness
come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.

The Third mistake. The word works misunderstood.
The answer to Romans 3. v. 28. etc. is here to be applied: for he speaks
manifestly of the works of sinners before rheir first justification, as
appears v. 11.12.13.14. and of works done by force of the law only; which he
distinguishes from the good works of the regenerate, v. 10. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them.

The fourth Proof.
Romans 6. v. 23.
For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord. if a full gift, then no merit.

The fourth mistake. The word wages, and gift missapplied.
The true mearing of this text must be drawn from the greek word here used,
where that which the English has wages, is in greek (...), opsonia, which
properly signifies the base and ignoble stipend which was wont to be given to
common soldiers, as their ordinary pay: and therefore it is fitly. Used to
express the wages of sin, which is death. That which in English here is
called a gift, is in greek (...), charisma, which signifyes a donatiue, or
noble an precious reward; which was used ancie^tly to be bestowed upon such as
had carried themselves famously and valiently (where by they deserved it) for
some service of war, above their ordinary pay: and therefore was fit to be
applied to signify that high reward which shall be obtained in heaven by such as
shall have perseuered in good works till death.

Which could not be signified by the other word (...), by reason of the
baseness and lowness of it: so that both these words do properly signify a
recompense: the one a high and noble one, and yet proceeding from the worthy
and liberal disposition of the Prince, and so happily exceeding the precise
worth of the service, as also Allmighty God does in rewarding our works, qui
remunerat vltra condignum, who rewards beyond the condignity and worth of the
merit, as our Divines teach; and the other an ordinary low stipend due to
common soldiers who have noe particular worth in them. So that the true
meaning of this text, according to the proper signification of the words in the
original is this the base recompense and hirelings wages of sin^ is death, but
the high, noble and rich reward of God is eternal life, and thus the text
makes nothing against the merit of good works, but rather, makes plainly for
them. Further if we take the word (...) for a pure free gift we may answer
with S. Austin, and the Council of Trent now cited that because the good works
and merits themselves are the free gifts of God, so also the glory of heaven
which is deserved by them, is called truly a gift; as if one should give any
one a tree the fruit which it bear also may be called his gift who gave the
tree. More over, seeing (as we have learned from the Council of Trent above
cited) that the primary title, and right which all Gods childeren have to
eternal life, is that of inheritaene; which is a free gift of God, before all
merit of heaven, eternal life may be properly called the gift of God, as being
absolutely decreed to be bestowed upon them as his childeren, before they had
any merits, to deserve it, supposing that they die in state of grace.

The Catholic Position.
That the works of the regenerate are such as can deserve heaven.
I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4* v. 7.8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Hence forth there is laid up
form a crown of righterusnesse (iustitiae, of justice, says the Greek and
Latin) which the Lord the righteous (iustus, the just) Judge shall give me
(...), reddet, shall restore unto me, at the last day, (the greek at that day)
and not to me only, but unto them also who love his coming. By a crown of
justice, he means a true reward, or prize, got by labor, as appears, 1. Cor.
9. v. 24.25.
know ye not that those which run in a race, run all, but one receives
the prize, so run, that ye may obtain and every man that strives for the
mastery, is temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible: 2. Cor. 4. v. 17.
for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

If our afflictions work a crown of eternal glory then they are a true cause
of it which cannot be but by merit. Gal. 6. v. 8. For what things a man shall
sovv, those also shall he reap for he that sows to his flesh (latin in
his flesh) from his flesh also shall reap corruption: but he that sows in
the spirit shall reap life everlasting. So that life everlasting is a proper
fruit of a spiritual and godly life, and so such a life, is the true cause of
salvation. Revel. 3. v. 4. Speaking of the elect. says: They shall walk
vv^ith me in white garments, because they are worthy. Therefore the true
servants of God, have something in this world which makes them worthy of
eternal life: and that is their innocent and unspotted lives, as the
Evangelist declares in the next precedent words, but thou have some in Sardis
who have not defiled their garment. R. 3. v. 8. Behold I have given thee a door
open which noman can shut, because thou have some small virtue, and have kept my
word, and have not denied my name. where the virtuous life, and good works of
that person, are affirmed to be the cause, why eternal happiness was to be
bestowed upon him. Hebr. 6.9. for God is not unrighteous, to forget your
work, and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye
have ministered to the Saints and do minister, and v. 12. That ye be not
flothfull but followers of them, who through faith, and patience inherit the
promises. where it is said, both that it belongs to the justice of God to
remember our good works, and that not only by faith, but by patience also
(and the same is of all other virtues) we inherit the promises, as Abraham
did, v. 13.14. Revel. 3. v. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience,
I will preserve the from the hour of temptation which is to come through the
whole world to tempt the inhabitants upon earth. where the desert of good
works is most clearly delivered.

The Protestant argument against merit of Good works.
The blessed saints were ever ready to acknowledge their unworthiness with
humility.

Mistake. This tutches not the merit of good works.
THey are humble and ever will be, and must be according to our doctrine both
because they are never fully certain, that they have any one work that is
truly pleasing to God, and if they were fully certain, they must attribute all
the glory to him, seeing it is only his grace which works all good in them.
And all their merits, are his gifts, as S. Augustine says, and rewarded through
the free acceptance of them for the merits of Christ according to the Concill
of Trent sess. 25. c. 16. But if by this title be understood, that noe just man
has any works truly good, and pleasing to God, through the working of Gods
grace in them (as the mistaken proofs seem to insinuate) it will be a false
humility, because it stands upon a false ground, and so no humility of Saints.

This Protestant argument is proved by Scripture mistaken.
The first proof.
Dan. 9.7.
O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us confusion of face. says
Daniel.

The first mistake. The Persons here mentioned were not Saints.
These words were spoken by great sinners. Therefore Daniel ascribes confusion
of face to the Izraelites of his time, because from the highest to the lowest
they, and their Predecessors had grievously sinned against the law of God. As
appears through the whole prayer of Daniel in that chapter, and he puts his
own sins to the rest, v. 20. as having transgressed with the rest. But how
proves this that neither he nor any other Saint had done any good works?

The second proof.
Ps. 103.3.
And David. If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss. O
Lord who may abide it.

The second mistake
This text proves that all Saints have some sins, but not that they have no
merits.
How proves this that noe Saint can have any good wotkes, or merits, for they
do many things a miss, yet through the grace of Christ they may do some
things aright?

The third proof.
Speak not thou in thy heart saing for my righteousness, Deuteronomy. 9. v. 2.
the Lord has brought me in to possess the Land, but for the wickedness of
this nation, the Lord does drive them out from before thee, was the counsel of
Moses to the Israelites.

The third mistake. This tutches sinners but not Saints.
The reason of this counsel was because the Israelites had grievously offended
god in the wilderness as appears, v. 7.8.9. etc. where Moses reekons up the
heinous Idolatry, and other great sins which they committed.

THE FIFTH CONTROVERSY Of Purgatory.
The Roman Doctrine declared in the Council of Trent.
Sess. 6. Can. 30.
SI quis post acceptam iustificationis gratiam cuilibet peecatori poenitenti
ita culpam remitti, and reatum aeternae poenae deleri dixerit, vt nullus
remaneat rearus poenae temporalis exolueudae vel in hoc saeculo, vel in futuro
in Purgatorio, antequam ad Regna caelorum aditus patere possit; anathema sit.

If any one shall say, that after the grace of justification is received, the
falt, and guilt of eternal punishment is so remitted to every penitent
person, that there remains noe guilt, or liablenesse to some temporal
punishment to be paid either in this world, or in the world to come in
Purgatory, before the entrance into the Kingdom of heaven can be opened to
them; let him be accursed.

Conc. Trid. sess. 25. Decreto de Purgatorio
Praecipit sancta Synodus, vt sanam de Purgatorio doctrinam, a sanctis
Patribus, and sacris Coneiliis traditam, a Christi fidelibus credi, teneri,
doceri, and vbique praedicari diligenter studeant. Apud rudem vero plebem
difficiliores, ac subtiliores quaestiones, quaeque ad aedificationem non
faciunt, and ex quibus plerumque nulla fit pietatis accessio, a popularibus
concionibus secludantur. Incerta item vel quae specie falsi laborant, euulgari,
ac tractari non permittant. Ea vero quae ad curiositatem quandam, aut
superstitionem spectant, vel turpe lucrum sapiunt, tanquam scandala, and
fidelium offendicula prohibeant.

The holy Synod commands the Bishops that they take diligent care, that the
sound doctrine of Purgatory, delivered by the holy Fathers, and the sacred
Councils be believed, held, taught, and preached, by the faithful of Christ.
But that amongst the common sort of people, all difficult, and subtle
questions, which make not for edification, and by which commonly there is noe
access to piety, be secluded from popular sermons. But those things which tend
to curiosity, or which taste of base lucre, as being scandalls, and offenses of
the faithful, they are to prohibit.

In these two places we see, 1. That none but just persons suffer in
Purgatory, 2. That those pains are only the remainder of such temporal
pains, dew after the remission of sin, and eternal punishment, which they
deserved in this life. 3. That the Church of Rome, forbids all temporal gains
to be made, of the doctrine of Purgatory, where by it appears how injurious
the aspersion of some of our Adversaries is to the Church of Rome. in accusing
her, to have invented Purgatory, not to gain souls, but money. 4. All
difficult questions, are here excluded from ordinary sermons, to common people,
and all curiosities forbidden.

The Protestant Position.
That the souls of the faithful (in their departure) are happy, we often
read: but noe news of Purgatory.

This is proved by Scripture mistaken.
Blessed are the dead who dye in the Lord: from hence sorth says the spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

The first mistake. The text says not they rest presently after their death.
They are not said here to rest presently after their departure, but that they
may rest: and yet they may be termed blessed, as our Savior calls the pore in
spirit blessed in this world, Mat. 5.3.
and in their misery: because the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them, as it
does to those in Purgatory.

The second mistake. The word labors misapplyed.
They are not said to rest from all labor; but from their labors; that is
such labors, persecutions, afflictions, sorrows, temptations, mortifications,
troubles, anxietyes as they suffered in this world; from all which they rest
after death. By their labors also may be fitly here understood their good
works, and patience in suffering the miseries of this life with hope of
eternal reward, so that they are said to rest from their labors, because the
recompense and crown of their former labors are alloted to them as certainly
to follow, as the next words declare, opera enini eorum sequunturillos, for
their morkes, (that is, their labors) follow them: and yet in some of them it
may happen, that they, may not presently receive the reward of them which
hinders not the resting of their labors, because they are not to have any
reward for what they suffer after this life.

The second proof out of Scripture mistaken.
For we know that if the eartly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, 2. Cor. 5. v. 1.
a house not made with hands eternal in heaven.

This text is mistaken. These words say not that presently after death they
shall go into that heueauenly house.
How follows it hence, that so soon as they depart they must go into this
house prepared for them? seeing that many may have houses that are hindered to
live in them, especially in these distracted times: and our Savior says,
Blessed are the pore in spirit: Mat. 5.3.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; even whilst they are living in this
world. And the Apostle: Ephesians. 2. u. 19.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and furainers, but fellow citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God. 1. ep. Io. c. ^. 13.
And yet more clearly S. John, these things I writ unto you that ye may
know, that ye have life everlasting, ye who believe in the name of the sone
of God. That is in full hope and expectation, not in actual possession, which
yet i^ said more clearly to belong to those in Purgatory, who have, an
infallible certainty, of life eternal.

The third proof from Scripture mistaken.
Wisd. 3. v. 1.
But the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall
touch them.

Mistake* The word torment misunderstood.
The Latin has it, non tanget illos tormentum mortis: the torment of deach,
shall not touch them. which is most true of all the just departed; because they
shall live eternally: but Protestants regard not the vulgar Latin translation.
The greek has (...), which, according to Scapula, particularly signifyes a
torment, to which malefactors, or suspected to be so, are put to make them
confess the truth, or to try whether they be guilty or no, as are the rack,
or such like. Now no such torment as this; shall tuch the souls of the just
departed, because God has sufficiently tried them, and approved of them in
this life, as apeares v. 5. and having been a little chastised, they shall be
greatly rewarded, for God proved them, and found them worthy of him self.

Which is a plain place for merits: but when it is against Protestants it is
only apocryphal.

If any shall demand, whether the word Purgatory be expressed in Scripture, I
answer that it is as much expressed, as the word trinity, (...), divine Petson,
which not withstanding, are believed by Protestants.

If it be replied, that at least the substance or meaning of those words, are
expressed in Scripture; I answer the same of Purgatory. which I demonstrate in
this manner. Purgatory is nothing else according to the Council of Trent now
cited, but a place where temporal punishments are suffered by just persons
after death, which they deserved in this life. Now if any justified soul be and
often is liable after death to suffer such punishments, then certainly there
must be some certain place where they must be suffered. But justified souls
may be and often are liable to suffer such punishments after death, ergo there
must be such a place where in they are to suffer them. That justified souls
may be and often are liable to such punishments I prove thus. Justified
persons yet living after the remission of their sins, and consequently of
eternal torment, are liable to some temporal punishment, therefore souls
departed of just persons, may, and often are liable to the like. I prove the
antecedent, out of the, 2. Sam. 12. v. 13.14. And David said unto nathan I have
sinned against the Lord, and Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put
away thy sins thou shall not die: Howbeit, because by this deed thou have
given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also
which is borne unto the, shall surely die. whete for that very sin which was
put away, and forgiven, David was punished by the death of his child, because
thou have given by this deed, Romans 6. v. 23.
etc. the child shall die.

The same is proved by the example of Adam who after his sin was forgiven
him, was notwithstanding liable to the punishment of death (which is the wages
of sin) as are also all just persons, for the same reason.

The antecedent therefore being clear, I prove the consequence, by this
argument. Seeing God is noe respecter of persons, Reu. 21, ^1. 1. Pet. 1.17.
and that he rewards every one according to their works, whosouer deserves the
like punishment that David deserved, shall surely be punished, as David wa^slet
us therefore put this case, that at the same time with David, there had been an
other Person, guilty of sins as great as were those of David, who should
have also repented, with the same degree of sorrow, and consequently obtained
pardone of his sin as David did, this sinner must have been liable to the
same temporal punishment that David was, now suppose that this other sinner^
should have died, the very instant after his sin was forgiven him, according
to the doctrine of the Roman Church he should have been punished temporally in
the other world, with a punishment correspondent to that of David, and so God
should not have been a respecter of persons, but have rewarded every one
according to their works, but according to Protestants, he should have had no
punishment at all after this life, and consequently, he should not have been
rewarded according to his works, not suffering the condign punishment, which
he truly deserved, and God should have proceeded unequally, in inflicting his
punishments, and have had respect to his person more then to that of David.
neither is Purgatory any way injurious to the justice of God, because though he
forgive the guilt of the sin, and the eternal punishment, for which man is
not able to satistisfie, yet he reteynes a part of the punishment, which being
finite and temporal, may either by works of penance and patience be remitted
in this world, or paid in the world to come, or released by the prayers, and
penances of other faithful Christians. And this may satisfye for the point of
Purgatory.

THE SIXTH CONTROVERSY Of the Real Presence of the Body and blood of Christ in
the Eucharist.
The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, delivered in the Council of Trent.
Sess. 13. Can. 1.
SI quis negauerit in Sanctissimo Eucharistiae Sacramento contineri vere,
realiter, and substantialiter Corpus and Sanguinem, vna cum anima and
diuinitate Domini nostri IESV Christi, ac proinde totum Christum, sed dixerit
tantummodo esse in eo vt in signo, vel figura, aut virtute; anathema sit.

If any one shall deny that in the most holy Eucharist is contained truly,
really, and substantially the body, and blood, together with the soul and
divinity of our Lord JESUS Christ, and consequently whole Christ; but shall say
that he is in it, only as in ^ sign, or figure, or virtue; let him be accursed.

Ibidem. Can. 2.
Si quis dixerit in Sacrosancto Eucharistiae Sacramento remanere substantiam
panis and vini, vna cum corpore Domini IESV Christi, etc. anathema sit.

If any one shall say that in the holy Sacrament of the Eucherist remains the
substance of bread and wine, together with the body and blood of our Lord
JESUS Christ, etc. let him be accursed.

Ibidem. Can. 4.
Si quis dixerit, peracta consecratione in admirabili Eucharistiae Sacramento
non esse corpus and sanguinem Domini nostri IESV Christi, sed tantum in vsu dum
sumitur, non autem ante vel post, etc. anathema sit.

If any one shall say, that the consecration being done, in the admirable
Sacrament of the Eucharist is not the body and blood of our Lord JESUS Christ,
but only in the use, whilst it is received, and neither before nor after, etc.
let him be accursed.

Ibidem. C. 6.
Si quis dixerit, in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum vnigenitum Dei
Filium non esse cultu latriae, etiam externo adorandum, etc. anathema sit.

If any one shall say, that Christ the only Sone of God in the holy Sacrament
of the Eucharist, is not to be worshipped with the worship of latria, or divine
worship, even external, etc. let him be accursed.

This is part of the doctrine of the Council of Trent in this point, the rest
may be seen in the Council, as drawn from this.

To dispose the Reader to a right conceit of this high mystery, and to inform
him, upon what ground the Church of Rome teaches this doctrine, I thought it
necssary to cite those texts of the new Testament, which deliver the
institution of this Sacrament that the Reader may with one view, see how
largely, and clearly the holy Scripture, if it be understood according to the
proper signification of the words, speaks for this doctrine of the Real
presence. And that I may not be thought to have cited the words, otherwise then
Protestants admit of them, I will cite the texts as I find them in the
Protestant English bible.

Mat. 26. v. 26.27.28.29.
And as they were eating Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it, to his disciples and said, take, eat, this is my body.

And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying drink ye
all of it;

For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins.

S. Mark c. 14. v. 22.23.24.25.
And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave
to them, and said, take eat, this is my body.

And he ^ooke the cup and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and
they all drank of it, and he said unto them, this is my blood of the new
Testament which is shed for many.

Luc c. 22. v. 19.20.
And he took bread and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them saying,
this is my body which is given for you, this do in rememberance of me.

Likewise the cup after supper saying, this cup is the new Testament in my
blood, which is shed for you.

S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. v. 23.24.25.
For I have received of the Lord that which also I deliver unto you, that the
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread.

And when he had given thanks, he brake it and said, take eat this in my
body, which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying, this
cup is the new Testament in my blood, do this as often as ye drink in
remembrance of me.

The Protestant discourse of the Eucharist begins thus.
Objection 1.
THe institution of this Sacrament is expressed in the 3 first Eua^gelists S.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and also by S. Paul, in all which they agree in these 4
things, that JESUS took, blessed, brake and gave bread: for he that says,
JESUS took bread, blessed, brake and gave it, says plainly enough, that he
brake, and gave bread, and not the species of bread as they hold.

Answer.
If this objection intend to prove (as certainly it does) thar our Savior
took, blessed, brake, and gave bread to his disciples so, that that which he
gave them, was bread remaining in the same substance of natural bread which it
had when he took it, I deny that our Savior gave bread to his disciples, or
that the three Evangelists and S. Paul cited agree in this: the proof that our
Savior gave natural bread to his disciples, because (says the objection) he
that says Jesus took, bread, brake, and gave it, says plainly enough that he
brake and gave bread: is grounded in a false translation or addition to the
text of holy Scripture in the English Protestant Bibles: for neither has the
greek nor latin the word it; and though the Protestant Bible, of the year
1630. and 1632. have these words, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it to his disciples, all in the same letter and print, as if the
word it were no less in the original then the others adjoined, yet the latter
Bibles and namely that of the year 1646. put the word it in a different
letter, to signify that it is nor in the original, but added (as they pretend)
for greater explication, as appears in a thousand other places: and in the
Bibles of the years 1630. and 1632. S. Mark and S. Luke have the words thus,
Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave unto them: where the
word it is not joined to blessed and gave, but only to brake, and then the word
it is put in a different smaller letter then the other words. All which
convince that the word it is not in the original; and so is not holy divine
Scripture, but an addition of men and so no solid argumenr can be drawn from
the word it as from the word of God, not being the word of God, but of men. And
hence also appears, how cunningly the Protestant translatours detain the
ignorant readers by putting in words serving, as they think, to their own
purpose in the very same print and letter with the rest whieh are joined to
them, and are in the original, as if they were in the Original no less then
the others; which notwithstanding in othet editions, translations, and places
of Scripture they signify, not to be in the original nor Gods word, by
printing them in a lesser letter, after they were convinced of fraud and
falsity in the former. And thus, in some editions putting this and such like
words in the same letter with the rest, and in others in a different, the
unlearned which are not able to examine, what is, and what is not in the
Original, may be in doubt which of these translations is the true word of God,
and cannot be infallibly certain of either of them seeing the translatours of
their Church, which are of equal authority, some of them put a word in their
text in the same tenor, as if it were no less Scripture then the rest; and
others in a different letter. to signify, that that word is not Scripture, but
added by them (as they suppose) for greater clarity.

If it should be answered, that whether the word it be in the sacred text, or
no, yet the argument will have force, for though the text run thus, Jesus
took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to his disciples, yet it may
seem that he blessed, brake, and gave no other thing then that very bread
which he took, remaining in its own substance and nature. For certainly he
must have blessed, and broken, and given something to his disciples: and what
can that be imagined to be but what he took? that therefore which he took,
having been true natural hread, as the text expressly says, Jesus took
bread, he must be supposed to have blessed, and broken, and given true natural
bread to his disciples.

I answer, that our Savior, though he be supposed to have blessed, broken, and
given some thing to his disciples, yet it follows not that he broke and gave
natural bread: for he might take bread remaining in its own nature, and after
break and give his Body, wherinto the bread which he took, was changed: as in
the marriage feast of Galile after the vessels were filled with water, and our
Savior said, draw now and bear to the governor of the feast: certainly they
drew, and carried, and the governor of the feast drunk something; yet it
follows not, that as they filled the vessels with water, so they drew, and
carried, and the governor of the feast drunk natural water; but as it is said
v. 9. water made wine, or wine wherinto the natural water wherewith the
servants filled the vessels, was changed. yea though the word it had been in
the text, or were supposed to be rightly joined to it, could any one thence
prove more, that, as our Savior took natural bread, so he brake and gave
natural bread remaining the very same which he took, then one can prove from
the water of Galile that as the servants filled the vessels with natural
water, so they drew, and carried, and the master of the feast drunk natural
water remaining the very same which was filled, because the text says v. 8.
and they carried it, and v. 9. the ruler of the feast knew not whence it was.

But the objection in prevention of this answer urges the former argument yet
further in this manner.

Objection 2.
For the actions of brake and gave, were before the words of consecration This
is my Body* and consequently, not being changed, it must be bread which he
brake and gave.

Answer.
This argument proceeds from misunderstanding and mistaking this text of
Scripture* for though it says, our Savior brake, and gave to his disciples,
and said, This is my Body; yet it says not (as the objection would have it
say) that our Savior after he brake and gave to his disciples, said, This is
my Body, these being very different senses: for though the Scripture first
mentions brake and gave, and then sets down that our Savior said This is my
Body, yet it may well stand with the truth of the words, that at the same time
and instant whilst he brake and gave, he said, This is my Body, and so gave not
bread till it was changed into his Body, as if one should give a piece of bread
to a person in want, one might say truly, he took bread and brake it, and gave
it to him, Luke 22. v. 19.
and said, take this alms, though he spoke these words, take this alms, at
the very same time when he gave it. And that our Savior spoke these words,
This is my Body, whilst he was giving what he gave to his disciples. and not
after, is manifest: first, because S. Luke affirms it to be so, he took
bread, and brake, and gave to them, saying, This is my Body: that is, whilst he
gave, he was pronouncing these words. and though in the institution of the
chalice, S. Mark says, and he took the cup, and when he had given thanks,
he gave to them, etc. and said, This is my Blood of the new Testament, which
shall be shed for many. Luke 22. v. 20.
Yet S. Luke says: Likewise the cup also after supper, saying, This cup is
the new Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed for you. S. Paul also in the
same manner* 1. Cor. 11. v. 25.
also he took the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new
Testament in my Blood. Secondly, because all, as well Ptotestants, as
Catholics, agree that our Savior gave his disciples a Sacrament; and, as they
say, a sign of his Body which was made a Sacrament by virtue of these words,
This is my Body: therefore it were an impiety to say that our Savior gave
bread to his disciples before these words were pronounced; for then he had
given a mere piece of bread, and neither Sacrament, nor his Body, nor sign of
his Body. Thirdly, if our Savior had perfectly given that which he put into
the disciples hands, before he had pronounced the words of consecration. the
Scripture saying, he took bread, brake, and gave to his disciples, and said,
This is my Body. then it would follow by the same argument that our Savior
gave bread, that is to say, put bread into the hands of his disciples before
they took it into their hands, which is impossible: or, that he bad them take
what they had already taken, which were absurd, because S. Matthew relates the
institution so, that he mentions first gave, and then take Jesus took bread,
and blessed, and brake, and gave to his disciples, and said, take, eat, this
is my Body. If indeed the Scripture had affirmed that our Savior gave to his
disciples, after he had said, This is my Body, the argument had been of force:
but s^eing it says not so, but only mentions first, gave, and after, the
words of consecration, as it mentions gave before it mentions take, and that
common sense tells us they must be done at, the same time, there is nothing
against the real presence by this rather mistake them argument.

Objection 3.
S. Paul observes, that after he brake and gave, he said, This is my Body which
is broken for you.

Answer.
S. Paul's words, according to the Protestant translation, are these, took
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, This
is my Body. where there is no express mention of giving to his disciples at
all: and therefore what the objection here affirms, that S. Paul observes that
after he brake and gave, he said, This is my Body, is very far from truth.
Again, though S. Paul said, This is my Body, yet he says not that after he
brake, he said, This is my Body, as the objection affirms. Neither said S.
Paul, when he had broken, he said, Take and eat, as he says, when he had
given thanks, This is my Body. for that would have some show of proof that he
pronounced the words after he had broken; but only affirms, he brake and said,
This is my Body: which words may as properly signify that he brake and spoke
these words morally at the same time, as that he first beak, and then
pronounced them. As when it is said in S. Matthew, In those days came John
Baptist preaching in the desert, and saying, Repent etc. where, though saying
be put after preaching in the text, yet no man is so senseless as to think
that he preached before he said something; or, that he preached before he said
what the Evangelist affirm him to have said as the subject of his preaching,
Repent etc. Job 21. and alibi*
So also in Job different times Almighty God, Job, and his friends are affirmed
in the English Bibles, then Job answered and said etc. Then the Lord answered
and said etc. where, though answered be put before said, yet no child will
imagine they answered before they spoke, or spoke before they said what the
text affirms them to have said.

Whence it is most evident, that words which are set one after another, signify
not always, nor ever certainly (merely because they are set one before
another) that the actions done and signified by them, follow one another just
as these words do. And so merely thence can be drawn no forcible argument in
this particular. And yet if we should grant for other reasons and
circumstances, that our Savior brake the bread before he pronounced the words
of consecration, whilst it was yet but bread; what would this help our
adversaries, or hurt us? for then it would follow, that bread was broken whilst
it remained in its own substance; but given to the disciples after it was
changed into the Body of Christ, or morally speaking whilst our Savior was
giving it unto them.

Objection.
Here we see plainly (both by their own rules, and our Saviors actions) that
it was bread which he brake, and gave, and not the species of bread which was
broken and given, that is to say the breadth, color and taste of bread, but noe
bread.

This word broken must needs have relation to that bread broken before he said,
This is my Body, because he did not break it again after he said, it was his
Body.

Answer.
If we understand by broken mentioned by S. Paul when he said. He brake, and
said, Take, eat, this is my Body, that he brake the bread changed into his
Body by consecration, or in a moral understanding, whilst he changed and
consecrated it by these words, This is my Body, it might happily contain no
great absurdity, to grant that this second word is broken may have relation to
the former he brake: for in both of them (according to this opinion) his Body
was mysteriously and sacramentally broken for us.

But if we understand by brake, as the Objection supposes upon a false ground
(as I hauc already demonstrated) the breaking of natural bread before he said
This is my Body, then it is wholly false, and injurious to our Savior and the
work of our Redemption to understand that these words whith is broken for you,
have relation to brake which was mentioned before. For that were to say, that a
mere piece of bread, before it was made either a Sacrament, or his Body, or so
much as a sign of his Body, was hroken for us; which neither Catholic, nor
Protestant, nor Christian does or can affirm without blasphemy: for before
these words, This is my Body were pronounced, all agree that the bread was
neither made his Body, nor any Sacrame^tall sign of it. Neither can it
possibly stand with the other Evangelists, that broken here should be only a
breaking of common and natural bread before it was made a Sacrament by these
words, This is my Body: for it is certain that S. Paul here understands by
broken for you, the same which S. Luke signifyes by this is my Body which is
given for you; especially seeing that by breaking and giving things belonging
to eating, whether temporal or spiritual, the same thing is signified in many
places of Scripture, according to the Hebrew phrase. Now to say, that a piece
of natural bread unconsecrated, was given for us, is an intolerable blasphemy.
And yet this is clearer in the other species of the chalice: Mark. 14. v. 24.
for S. Mark relates it thus, This is my blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many. and S. Matthew, Which shall be shed for many for the remission
of sins. Matthew. 26. v. 28.
Which no heart truly Christian can imagine to have any relation to pure and
common wine before consecration.

To that which the Objection adds, that therefore broken for you must have
relation to that bread broken before he said, This is my Body, because he did
not break it again after he had said these words: I answer first, that it can
never be proved from the words of S. Paul, that the first breaking here
mentioned by S. Paul, was not presently (speaking in a moral sense) after
these words were, pronounced; for though it be mentioned before, yet it
follows no more thence that it was not presently after, then when S. Mark
says, speaking of the chalice, and they drank all of it before he mention the
consecration of the chalice, that the disciples drank not after the
consecration of the said chalice, and after it was made a Sacrament, as all do
and must grant they did. and so there will not be two actual breakings, but
one actual or mystycall or Sacramental together signified by these two words
break, and broken for you, which happened after consecration.

But if we say that the first breaking was before consecration, and the second
broken for you, signified something done after consecration, that is, the giving
of Christ's Body for the remission of sins, as the Evangelists seem to
signify, then it will not be necessary that either the bread should have been
twice visibly broken, or that broken for you should have relation to the bread
broken before he said, This is my Body, as the objection contends.

Objection.
But to proceed from his actions to the words JESUS added, Take, eat this is
my Body. The understanding of these words depends principally upon the
explication of the word this. we say, by the word this, Christ meant that which
he held when he spoke the word this, because transubstantiation is not yet made
till the words following, This is my Body, be fully pronounced. They expound
all the four words This is my Body, thus: under the species is my Body: but
enquire of them what is it which was under the species when Christ spoke only
the word this; and they confess that it was as yet bread: which is the same
that we mayntaine against them. It is bread then: and by consequence, this
there signifyes bread that I hold: and these words, This is my Body. are as
much as, this bread is my Body.

Answer.
The maine diffiulty here urged, is about the word this in the words of
consecration, This is my Body. I demand first, when our Savior changed water
into wine in the marriage of Galilee, whether he could truly have said these
words upon the water, this is wine, and by virtue of these words changed the
water into wine. the water remaining when the word this was pronounced by him,
and changed into wine when the whole proposition, this is wine, was spoaken, as
we hold it happens, in the change of bread into the Body of our Savior in the
Eucharist.

I scarce think that any Protestant will be se bold and temerarious as to deny
that God can do this; and yet all the difficultyes that are invented and urged
against the word this in the words of consecration, are the very same here, as
is manifest. So that the objection about the word this proves not only (if it
prove any thing) that the Body of our Savior is not de sacto put really in
the place of bread by virtue of these words This is my Body, but that it is
wholly impossible for our Savior to work any such change by virtue of these
words: for, if whilst the word this is pronounced, water (being only there
actually) must necessarily be signified by the word this, as the objection
conte^ds, then it is impossible by virtue of this proposition this is wine, that
water should be changed into wine: for the signification of this proposition
this is wine, would require the presence and continuance of water by reason of
the word this which is supposed to signify water: and the change of water into
wine would require the absenec or non existency of water, it being supposed to
be changed into wine, and so water would be and not be at the same time, which
is a formal contradiction, and acknowledged by all to be wholly impossible. So
bold are Protestants in restrayning and limiting the Omnipotency of God to
defend their own groundless fantasies, who oppose the Roman Church in this
manner. And therefore the more moderate and considerate amongst them grant this
to be possible; and so urge not this argument because it proves either too
much, or nothing. Secondly demand, when our Savior said, this is my command
that ye love one another, what was meant by the word this? John. 15. v. 12.
either something, or nothing was meant by it: if something, that was either the
command which he gave after the pronuntiation of the word this; and so something
which was not when he pronounced the word this, was understood by it. And then
in our present question why cannot by the word this something be understood
which was not at that instant when he pronounced the word this. Or by the word
this in the former speech of the command, was understood something which was not
his command: but this is absurd; for then he should have said that which is not
my command, is my command. if it be said, that nothing was understood by the
word this it will follow, that the word, this signified nothing; and so his
command was nothing, or nothing was his command, or the word of God signified
nothing all which is absurd.

Hence therefore it evidently follows, that the word this in the text This is
my command that ye love one another etc. cannot have any other sense save
this. John 15. v, 12.
This which I am presently to say to you, to wit, that ye love one another, is
my command. and this sense, and manner of speech is so ordinary, both in holy
Scripture, and common discourse, that there can be no difficulty in the
understanding of it: for it is not necessary that the thing which is signified
by the word this in such manners of speech be then existent, or in being when
the word this is pronunced; for ir may be either past, or to come. thus it is
ordinary to say in the day time, I hope to sleep well this night, that is the
night to come: or, in the morning, I have slept well this night, that is, the
last night past. and this, not only by reason of the thing it self whereof we
speak, but also in regard of the meaning and intention of the person who
speaks: for words were not instituted to signify things and objects only, but
also, (and that more immediately (the thoughts and affections of him who
speaks: and hence it comes to pass, when the same word signifyes many things,
it is to be explicated and taken in that sense only which appears to have
been intended by them who speak. hence, therefore it happens, that, seeing
things not yet in being when the word this is pronounced, may be understood by
it, we must gather that a thing not yet existent, is to be understood when it
appears by other clear circumstances, that the meaning and intention of the
speaker is, to signify something which is not actually when the word this was
pronounced, but after is to be.

Thus in the forenamed example, where our Savior said, This is my command,
that ye love one another, it is clear that his meaning was, by the word this
to signify that which he was presently after to say; and not. what was just
then when he said the word this. for then no command was given. And that this
signification of the word this, is most common and familiar, even in ordinary
discourse, is manifest in a thousand instances: thus when I begin to draw a
circle, and when I have drawn, only thus much of it C (precisely when I say the
word this) I may truly say this is a circle: whereby my meaning is not, this c
being a little part of a circle, is a circle; (for that is no circle) but,
this figure which now I am a drawing, or shall presently draw, is a circle.
Thus, if one beginning to power wine into a glass, when he has powered some
few dropps, or small quantity, into the glass, should say, this is a glass
full of wine, it being only full when the last word wine is pronounced,
certainly the word this cannot signify that small quantity of wine which was in
the glass precisely when the word this was pronounced; for that is not a
glass full, but the wine which he is then a pouring into the glass, till he
have filled it with wine, must be signified by the word this. In the same
manner, if one desirous to show to another, how quikly flax becomes fire,
holding flax in one hand and a candle in the other, flax being in its own
natural substance in that precize instant, when the word this is pronounced,
should say This is fire, and as he pronounces the words, he kindles the flax,
so that when the whole sentence, this is fire, is pronounced, the flax is
kindled, and changed into fire, noe man can be so simple to think, that his
meaning is, this flax rema^ing as it now is vnkindled, is fire, but this which
I am now a showing, to wit, flax kindled is fire* noe other wise happens it in
our present case, where our Savior, by the word this, intends not to signify,
this bread remaining as it now is, when I prunounce the word this is my Body,
but being consecrated, and by consecration changed into my Body, (as flax by
being kindled is changed into fire) is my Body. This supposed, as a ground of
this truth, I answer to the whole discourse of the objection, that, when our
Savior said, this is my Body, this is my Blood, his meaning was, This which I
am to give unto you. and which ye are presently to eat and drink, is my Body
and my Blood: which, though it were not existent actually then when he
pronounced the word this, yet it was to be presently after; no otherwise then
when he said, this is my command; not of any command which was then given, but
of one which he was presently to give when he had pronounced the word this.
That this was the meaning of our Savior in the institution of this Sacrament,
is most clear to all such as understandingly read the text for he commanded
his disciples to take and eat what he was instituting in this holy Sacrament,
Take, eat, this is my Body. Therefore his meaning was to signify by the word
this, that which his disciples were to take and eat. now his disciples were
not to take and eat any thing but what was instituted and made a Sacramen^
before it was eaten: neither was the Sacrament instituted but by the words of
consecration, This is my Body; which I have already proved. Therefore the word
this, according to our Saviors meaning, must signify something which was to be
after the words of consecration, This is my Body. So far from truth is it
that by the word this, our Savior intended to signify that which he held in
his hands whilst he precisely pronounced that word this, that he signified that
which he was to give out of his hands, and put into the hands of his disciples:
and therefore he says not see, behold, but, take, eat, This is my Body; that
is, not what ye now see whilst I say the word this; but what I command you to
take and eat presently, is my Body. And yet this truth is made clearer in the
institution of the chalice, Matthew. 26 v. 28.
And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drink
ye all of this; for this is the Blood of the new Testament, which shall be
shed for many for the remission of sins. where our Savior renders the reason
why he commanded them to drink of it, because it was his Blood, etc. So that
he says not, look ye all on it, for this is my Blood, etc. which might have
been done before the words of consecration were pronounced, or the Sacrament
instituted, whilst he said the word it, or, this; but drink ye all of it:
which was not to be done till the consecration and institution was past, as I
have already proved, and the objection herafter acknowledges.

Objection.
There is not one word which Christ spoke, which we do not steadfastly believe
to be true: for we hold, that this bread is the Body of JESUS Christ since he
said that the bread which he brake and gave, was his Body.

Answer.
I doubt not of the sincerity of this profession for so much as concerns the
petson that wrote this paper: there is more want of true information of the
understanding, then good affection in the will, and zeal certainly there is of
truth, but such an one as S. Paul describes, not according to knowledge. Romans
1^. v. 2.
For I have clearly now demoustrated, that the meaning of this proposition,
This is my Body, is not, this bread which I now hold in my hand whilst I say
the words This, is my Body; but, This which I am now to give you, and ye are to
eat after it be made a Sacrament by the words of consecration, is my Body.

Objection.
It is not our parts to gloss the word of God, or ad any thing of our own
since then we have those two things in the Gospel: the one that JESUS gave
bread; the othet, that, that which he gave, was his Body, we believe both the
one and the other: not as they who will believe the latter, but the former they
will not credit: and though we could not comprehend how this may agree, that
it should be bread which we eat, and yet the Body of Christ our Lord, yet it
were our duties to rest without any scruple.

Answer.
The good disposition expressed in these lines, will no doubt have a great
influence to induce the person that wrote them, to a right understanding of
these mysterious words of our Savior, after a due and impartial ponderation
of what I have said concerning them, where by it may appear that it was not
bread remaining in the nature of bread, as it was before consecration; but
bread made the Body of Christ by consecration; which the Apostles did eat and
our Savior called his Body, and signified by the words this.

Objection.
But the Gospel, in the line following, instructs us and draws us out of
all difficulty. for Christ having said, that that which he gave, was his Body,
added presently that it is a remembrance, or commemoration thereof.

Answer.
The opponent may please to remember, that just now we read in the former
objection, that it is not their part to gloss the word of God, or to add any
thing to it of their own: and yet presently upon it in the very next
objection, the word of God is glossed, and something added which is their own,
and not God's word. Christ (says the objection) having said that that which he
gave, was his Body, added pr^sently, that it is a remembrance or co^memoration
thereof. where, I pray you, in the whole Scripture find you that our Savior
said in express and plain words, as you affirm he says, that which I said
was my Body, is a commemoration or remembrance of my Body? or where stands this
written in God' word, This is a commemoration of my Body? or where in the whole
Bible find you that our Savior so much as once pronounced these words, The
commemoration of my Body? Certainly in the whole new Testament no such express
words as these, are to be found. Seeing therefore our Savior says in express
and plain words, This is my Body, and never says in as express terms, that
is to say, a commemoration or remembrance of my Bady, nor so much as once names
the commemoration of his Body, is it not to gloss the word of God, and add
some thing of your own, to affirm that he says what he never said nor named in
the whole new Testament? If therefore you stick to your rule just now
delivered, of believing the express word of God without all gloss or
addition, you must steadfastly believe without all scruple, that out Savior
gave his true Body to his disciples; seeing what you say of the commemoration
of his Body, is no where our Saviors express words, but your own gloss and
addition to them.

If you answer, that though he says not in as express words, that what he gave
to his disciples, was a commemoration of his Body, as he says, This is my Body,
yet that may be gathered to be his meaning by other words: give me leave to
reply first, that supposing any such matter could be gathered from his words
(which I will presently prove to be false) yet the consequence or collection
drawn from an others words, is not to be preferred before his direct, clear
and express words to the contrary, and if you will follow the rule of good
interpreters, you must expound the more obscure words by the more clear and
express, and not the contrary as you do here. Secondly when you draw from
other words of our Savior this consequence that he meant that that which he
called his body was as much as to say, commemoration or remembrance of his
Body, either you have some express place of Scripture which warrants that
consequence to be good (and that place must be alleged which will he as hard
to find as the other proposition this is a commemoration of my Body, neither
the one nor the other being any where in Scripture) or you must believe some
thing with a Christian faith (as you profess to believe this consequence)
which not withstanding is not in Scripture: which is contrary to your own
principle of believing nothing which is not in the written word of God. and if
this consequence be not in the written word of God, then it is framed only by
your own discourse and judgment. what impiety then would it be to prefer your
own discourse before the express words of our Savior, and to expound them, and
draw them from their own natural, proper and direct sense, to an improper and
figurative by a consequence gathered by humane discourse only, neither expressed
nor warranted to be good expressly in any place of Scripture.

Thirdly that I may give a full and complete answer to this objection so
frequently in the mouth of every Protestant, I deny that our Savior ever
speak or meant our could possibly mean that that which his Apostles did eat,
and he affirmed to be his body, was only a commemoration of his Body: or that
by these words my Body is understood a commemoration of my Body.

That this may appear, I only contend for the present that in time of our
Saviors institution of the Sacrament at the last super that which the Apostles
did then receive and eat, was for that time not affirmed to be a remembrance
of his Body, nor did our Savior speak any words in the said institution where
by he signified that he gave then to his apostles a remembrance or
commemoration of his body, which if I prove, I convince evidently against the
objection, that our Savior (not having ever said or meant it to be a
commemoration of his body; and so these words, do this in remembrance of me,
being noe explication of the former word: This is my Body) gave his true and
real body substa^tially present under the form of bread to his Apostles in
his last supper, and consequently that it is still given in the same manner to
all true Christians in this Sacrament.

I have proved, and the objection it self confesses that these words taken in
themselves and without relation to any thing going before, are to be understood
of the real body of Christ, and that our Savior said that the thing which he
had in his hands, was his body. I will now prove that this plane and clear
signification of these words as they sound, is not hindered or taken away by any
thing following these words. The maine ground where upon is built the
objection, for the figurative explication of these words is this that our
Savior says, This is my Body which is Given for you: this do in remembrance
of me. and S. Paul, This is my Body which is broken for you, do this in
remembrance of me. From these textes the objection gathers this consequence
that our Savior says that that which he calls in the former part of the
sentence in express words, his Body, in this latter he calls (by way of
explication, the remembrance or commemoration of his Body. So that by these
words my Body: he meant the remembrance or commemoration of my body: and indeed
if our Savior had expressly said thus, This is usy Body, that is the
cowmemoration or remembrance of my Body: the difficulty had been at an end.
but this was neither said nor meant by him, but imposed upon him by a false
gloss and gross mistake of Protestants; for to say: do this in remembrance
of me, and to say: this is a remembrance of my Body are as different as to say
when one friend lends a book unto an other: read this in remembrance of me,
and, this is a remembrance of my Body, which every child will see to be quite
different: and if any one should say that these two sayings were the same in
meaning and signification he would either be thought to have no wit, or to have
lost what he had: for the one speaks of an action which passes, do, or read
this: the other of a thing permanent this thing, or this book. the one speaks
of a work done in remembrance, the other affirms a thing to be a remembrance.
the one speaks of a person, of me: the other of a Body which is but one part
of the person who consists both of soul and body united: so that the whole
proposition is quite different the one from the other.

Secondly though these propositions had not been so different as they are, yet
our Savior cannot possibly be thought to have meant by these words my Body, a
mere remembrance of his Body, because this explication must be verified of the
bread which was consecrated by our Savior in his last supper, as it is
evident. For he speaks of that even according to Protestants. now that could
not be a, remembrance of his body, for nothing is said, according to
Protestants to be a remembrance of a thing which is actually and visibly
present as the body of our Savior then was to the Apostles being seen and
heard by them: neither could it be a remembrance of his passion because we
remember things past, not to come as the passion of our Savior then was, and
so it should have been a type of our Saviors death, as the ceremonies of the
old law were before he dyed, and not a remembrance or commemoration. Therefore
it is evident that by the thing which he called his body in his last supper,
could not be meant a remembrance of his body as Protestants would have it, and
so this explication is very false. Therefore when our Savior commanded his
Apostles in these words: do this in remembrance of me. he could not mean any
action or thing then present or done at that time, but an action which he
enjoined the Apostles and their successors to do afterward in the Christian
Church, in remembrance of his passion principally, which is clearly delivered
by S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. v. 26.27. This is the new testament in my blood, this
do as often as you drink in remembrance of me. where the greek word (...)
signifies, shall drink, quotiescumque bibetis, do this so often as you shall
drink. and so it is translated by Beza, in his latin translation,
quotiescumque biberitis, as often as you shall drink, and should have been by
our English Tra^slatours, had they closely followed the greek text, as they
pretend to do, but here it made not for their purpose, and so they put it
either falsely, or at least obscurely, so often as you drink; which evidently
shows that our Savior meant by: do this. not any action which was done in
time of the last supper or institution and receiving of the Sacrament by the
Apostles, but what they were to do in the future: and that our Savior in
these words: do this in remembrance of me, did not command the present action
of eating and drinking when our Lord celebrated his last supper, is evident,
because had it been of the present action, it would follow that he twice
commanded the same action to be done at the same time, for he commanded his
Apostles to do what was then to be done when he said, take, eat. drink etc.
therefore to free our Savior from a nedelesse tautologie, must be understood
the command of doing some thing else, and at some other time, to be contained
in these words, do this in remembrance of me: especially considering that the
mention of remembrance could not be understood of any thing then visibly
present, or after to come, as I said before. These words therefore being to be
understood of the consecrating and frequenting of this Sacrament for the future
only, cannot possibly be an explication of the former words, this is my Body*
which speak only of a thing that is then present, as is evident, and
consequently those words (according to the objection) are plainly and simply
to be believed as they sound, without any glossing of the words of our Savior
(there being no ground in this place of Scripture for any such figurative
gloss, (as I have prouued) and each Christian must believe that that thing
which our Savior gave his Apostles was his very body as his affirmed it to be.

If happily not withstanding that this were granted, some Protestants should
gather from these words: do this in remembrance of me, that this Sacrament in
times ensuing after our Saviors death was only to be a remembrance of his
body, and so not his body, whatsoever is to be said of rhat Sacrament in the
first institution. I answer that though some ancient heretics have been of
this opinion, yet I never heard of any Protestant who held that the Christians
after our Saviors time received not the same which the Apostles did from his
hands; and so this objection is to noe purpose for the Protestants.

Yet that I may clear all difficulties which may probably occur against what
I have said in this matter: I answer that this is noe good consequence: our
Savior would have this Sacrament celebrated and frequented in remembrance of
him, therefore the host after the consecration is only a remembrance of his
body and not his true body: or thus, therefore that which Christ called his
body in the institution, is now amongst Christians only the remembrance of his
body. for if these words: do this in remembrance of me: were not an
explication of those others: This is my Body: in the first institution, they
will never be any explieation of them, and so there will be noe reason to say
that the meaning of thesc words: this is my Body, is this: this is a
remembrance of my Body, by reason of these words: do this in remembrance of
me: for these words only signify that the action here commanded, do this: is
to be in remembrance of me, not that the thing conteyncd in the Sacrament was
to be a remembrance of him. now who can doubt but the same person may do one
action in remembrance of himself, that is, of some action which he had done
before? how ordinary is it for any one to write his own works and what he
himself hat done or suffered? did not S. Faul do this? and was not this done
in remembrance of himself, doing or suffering such things: and shall any
thence make this consequence: S. Paul writ this in remembrance of himself,
therefore he was a remembrance of himself, therefore it was not S. Paul who
writ it, for nothing can be a remembrance of it self: who sees not how false
and childish this discourse is? may we not say the same of our Savior when he
appeared to S. Thomas whom he put in remembrance of himself suffering upon
the cross, when he commanded him to put his hand into his side, and look
upon his hands and feet etc. and shall we then say that our Savior was not
himself, or that is Body was not that which suffered because it did something
in remembrance of his body crucified? what Christian will dare to discourse in
this manner? if then our Saviors own body that suffered upon the cross can
do something to put us in remembrance of the same body crucified once for us,
why should we deny that the same body sacrificed upon the altar, or
consecrated upon the table of God should be able to put us in remembrance of
the passion of our Savior, and of the very same body crucified, that is those
actions there done of consecrating the host separate from the chalice, of
sacrificing, of giving to others, eating, drinking etc. should signify that
our Savior there inuisibly present, suffered for us many years ago and
sacrificed himself to nourish us to eternal life. and so our Savior not
having said, this is a remembrance of my Body, but, do this in remembrance of
me, by virtue of these words precisely made the actions done to him in this
Sacrament, and not himself or his body, a remembrance of himself as before
crucified.

Objection.
So that that which he gave into his disciples hands being a remembrance or
commemoration of Christ, is not Christ himself, for nothing can be a
remembrance or commemoratian of it self; for who would not think him to
speak simply that should say: I give you this ring in remembrance of this
ring, or I give you this bookc for a co^memoration of this book, certainly the
remembrace of things are otherwise then the thing it self.

Answer.
Though these words of our Savior: do this in remembrance of me, by force of
themselves signify only that the action which the Apostles were commanded to
do, was to be in remembrance of him, that is, of him crucified. yet speaking
independently of these words, it is noe absurdity but a truth to grant that a
thing or person may be a remembrance of themselves considered in different
circumstances, for though nothing in the same time, place and circumstances can
be a remembrance or co^memoration of it self, for that were to signify idem
per idem, the same by the same, which is absurd: and in this sense the
objection says well; yet it would nor be absurd to say I give you this ring
now to be a remembrance or commemoration here after that this same ring was
giving you by me for who can doubt but that very same ring when he looks or
thinks upon it who received it, is apt to put him in remembrance that it was
given to him by such a friend so many days or years before and so at one time
it is a remembrance of it self, as considered in a another different precedent
time. Thus when friends and ancient acquintance after a long separation meet
first together, they presently put the one the other in remembrance of
themselves, and so are accoustomed to say, I remember you very well: Thus if a
king or General should act his own part upon a stage. he would put his
subjects or soldiers there present in remembrance of himself fighting or
becoming victorious in some precedent battle. Thus our Savior appearing to S.
Thomas made him presently believe and remember that he was the same person who
not many days before was crucified for him, and to say: Dominus meus and Deus
meus: my Lord and my God. Hence appears manifestly that the very same body
which was given and that very blood which was shed for us remaning in its own
proper substance and nature in this Sacrament which it then had (but after an
invisible and divine manner) by reason of the visible actions of consecrating,
sacrificing, eleuating, and receiving of him, puts us in remembrance of that
same body, blood and person which so many years ago was given, shed and
crucified out of pure mercy for us. If any one here shouid replye that though
in the fore named instances he proved that one thing or person may put us in
remembrance of themselves in different times and circumstances, yet the same
thing cannot properly be said to be a remembrance, commemoration or memorial
of it self even in those different times according to the ordinary course of
speech amongst men. I answer that when a thing remains in its whole visible
substance as it was before, there may be some difficulties whether it be to be
called a memorial or remembrance of it self or not, though it he capable of
putting one in remembrance of it self, as existent in some other time, because
it has other functions and perfections properly belonging to it which being of
cheefer and more primary use and consequence give the name to the thing, and so
it is not rightly termed a memory or remembrance of it self, but when it
actually reduces any one to the temembrance of it. But when a thing is so
changed in respect of its proper functions amongst men (though it remains the
same in substance and all other proprieties that it was) that one of the maine
ends for which it is put in that manner, is to be a remembrance of what it did
or suffered in former times, then it may properly be called a memorial,
commemoration, remembrance or memory of it self. Thus though our Savior
appearing to his disciples after his resurrection in a visible and living form
put them in remembrance of his passion, or that he was the same who suffered,
and yet because his other actions of teaching, inlightning, comforting,
confirming in faith, etc. were his primarie actions he had his appellations
according to to them, and not from the remembrance which he caused in them,
because that was secundary and of less consequence. But by reason that in this
holy Sacrament he has noe use of any of those functions or the like, but is
put in an invisible and hidden manner as the food of our souls, and the end
why he is so put is chiefly to continue a perpetual remembrance of his bitter
death and passion, he is most deservedly termed a memorial of himself
suffering upon the cross. Thus for the like reason a sword wherewith some
valiant champion has atcheeued some notable feate of arms, so long as he
wears it himself, or any other uses it, it cannot properly be said to be a
remembrance of it self, as the instrument of those famous exploits: but if it
be hung up as a monument for those exploits in some public place or temple, it
becomes a memorial of it self as working those noble actions, and in this
sense the sword of Golias used by David in the beheading of that tower of
flesch, and kept in the temple as a monument, was a true memorial of it self
as the instrument of atcheeuing that victory.

Objection.
All that has been said of these words, This is my Body, may and ought to be
applied to to these, This is my blood, and there is nothing more convenient
then te receive the same manner of speech in the distribution of the one kind
which is in the distribution of the other.

Answer.
All that is contained in this paragraphe of the objections may easily be
granted (supposing there be a right explication given of these words This is my
Body) as containing nothing against us.

Objection.
But as they repeat only these words: This is my Body: without relation either
to that which goes befote, or to that which follows after, that he took bread
or do this in remembrance of me. so they will forget etc.

Answer.
How far this is from truth clearly appears by what our approved authors
write in this point who most exactely exanime all precedents and consequences
belonging to these words, which also I have hitherto indeauored to do in this
treatis.

Objection.
So they will forget that this cup which our Savior said was his blood, was
after consecration called by him the new Testament, for that it was a holy
sign of the new Testament.

Answer.
The obiecter would make us to be of a very short memory, should we forget
these words which usually we pronounce every day in saying Mass: we therefore
remember very well that our Savior said according to S. Luke and S. Paul: This
cup is the new Testament in my blood. but we remember not that either S. Luke
or S. Paul or any other writer of holy Scripture ever alleged this reason
here mentioned in the objection, that this sacred cup was called by our Savior
the new Testament in his blood, for that it was a holy sign of the new
Testament, and I would gladly have any Protestant help the weakness of our
memory by producing any clear text of Scripture where this reason is given, and
if there be noe such to be found (as undoubtedly there is not) then they must
give us leave to esteem this explication (according to their own principles)
groundless and noe way belonging to Christian faith, but a mere gloss framed
from their natural discourse or rather a pure mistake grown from their
ignoranee of the true meaning of the word, new Testament here, according to the
Scriptures acception of that word, which that it may appear.

We must not by new Testament here understand (as many ignorant readers of
Scriptures may and do happily misconceaue) the books of the Gospel commonly
called the new Testament, for none of those were then written, neither is there
any one of understanding who will think that the cup which our Savior had in
his hand was a sign of the books of the new Testament, much less that by new
Testament in our Saviors blood should be understood a sign of the said books.

Secondly we must conceive that the very same thing may be a sign in respect
of one thing, and an essential and substantial part in regard of another:
thus words and sentences are signs of the inward thoughts and affections of
the speaker, but part of his outward discourse, and in this manner the words,
new Testament were a sign of our Saviors internal will and intention, but
withal were a necessary part of the complete Testament of the new law then
inacted by our Savior, and so bear the name of the whole Testament, as we
shall presently see.

I answer therefore to the objection, and deny that by new Testament, is
understood a sign of the new Testament, but truly and really (though
partially) the new Testament it self solemnised by our Savior in his last
supper not long before his death, and that in his own most precious blood there
properly received and divided amongst his Apostles: whereby he certified and
obliged himself to be the author, head, protector and defendour of his law
and all those who should truly profess it by giving what he held in his hands
to the Apostles, and they testified and obliged themselves and all Christians
representatiuely to teach, profess and continue in that law by receiving and
dividing of it amongst them.

Now to make clear what I have said, we must also know in general what a
Testament is. In latin it is called testamentum: of wose etymology Iustinianus
Instit. de testamentis ordinandis, says, Testamentum ex eo appellatur, quod
testatio mentis sit. it is called a testament, because it is the testification
of our mind, or will: so that a true testament includes two things, a real
mind and intention to do what we testify: and an outward testification of
what we intend, or oblige, our selves to do. so that neither this outward
testimony without the inward will, nor the inward will without the outward
testifying of it, can be completely termed a testament. not the inward will
alone, because that cannot be understood amongst men unless it be externally
testified: not the outward testimony alone, because it must have something
real which it testifyes; but the outward testification as corresponding to the
inward will, and exhibiting it to others, is a testament. now all kinds of
external significations of our wills ot intentions, are not sufficient, but
such as signify by way of a complete confirmation, that the will of him who
makes this testament, is such as it is signified there to be: and hence it is
that so many witnesses, subscriptions, seals, and other solemnityes are not
mere signs, buts parts of the testament, as the pronuntiation of the words in
a sermon, though it be a sign of the mind of a preacher, yet it is
essentially required as a part of the sermon.

Now this outward part of the testament, or last compliment or confirmation of
it, was accustomed to be exhibited in blood; Liu. l. 1.
as witnesses Liuie speaking of a solemn league or testament made betwixt the
Romans and the Albans and no less Moses in Exodus, Exodus 24. v. 8. Hebr, 9.
v. 20.
speaking of the testament or pact made betwixt Allmighty God and the
Israelites, unto which our Savior may we have alluded in the institution of
the chalice. using according to the first two Evangelists, the very same
phrase, or manner of speech, This is the bioud of the testament which our Lord
has made with you, etc.

This is my blood of the new Testawent, etc. the word testament is in Hebrew
(...) Berith, and in Greek (...), diatheke, and though the Hebrew word signify
a pact, league, or solemn promise mutually obligatory betwixt two parties, and
the Greek word a testament, or last will of a person before his death, and
confirmed by it, Genesis 9.53. Ps. 54.21. Ps 29.34. Ps. 105.45
as S. Paul says Hebr. 9. yet because that last will is the most solemn and
strong of all other pacts, or leagues, the Greek word diatheke often signifyes
a pact or promise mutual, in Scripture. And the Septuaginta translate the
Hebrew Berith by the Greek diatheke, as S. Hierome notes Zachar. 9.11. and
Psalm. 82.1. Match. 1. and often the English Protestant translations for berith
put testament; thus they call the arc of Moses the arc of the testament,
Berith in Hebrew.

Seeing therefore in the 24. of Exodus, the blood is there sprinkled first
upon the altar, which supplied the place of God, and then amongst all the
people whereby, as Interpretours, and ancient authors observe, was signified
that the blood of that party who first broke this pact, or testament, should be
shed, and dispersed as that was, and that our Savior in S. Matthew and S.
Mark commanded his blood to be divided amongst his disciples, drink ye all
of this, ir is so far from any signs, or figures of our Saviors blood, as
the opponent here imagines, that hence is drawn a most forcible argument, that
as in Exodus there was shed and dispersed true real blood, and not a sign or
figure of it, which was called the blood of the testament, so hcre also must
needs be understood the true blood of our Savior, E^od. 24. v. 8.
as it is called by him; both Moses and our Savior using the same manner of
speech, Hebr. 9. v. 20.
as I have showed, and such a solemn le^gue or testament as this was,
requiring no less, but rather much more, to be confirmed by true blood, then
that in Exodus, or in other ancient times.

And hence may clerly enough be gathered, first, that our Savior himself
held, the cup of his blood, to confirm this league, or pact betwixt him and
mankind, of his part, as the Apostles took it and drunk it to confirm it of
th^yrs; and so it is called, as it is, his blood of the new testamens, that is,
whereby the testament of the law of Grace was stregthned, confirmed, and
accomplished on both parts. Secondly, that as in a testament, an authentical
instrument drawn of any dying man's wili, witnessed, subscribed, sealed, etc. is
rightly and ptoperly called his last will, and testament; so in our present
occasion, the covenant, or will of our Savior, testified or confirmed by his
blood, is rightly called the new Testament of Christ, and that sacred blood of
his as testifying and confirming this will, and decree, is most properly termed
by our Savior, in S. Luke, and S. Paul, the new Testament in his his blood,
that being the authentical instrument whereby this will of his was confirmed,
and testified. And hence evidently appears how vain and false the explication
here given by the oppone^t is, for if here by new Testament be only to be
understood a sign of the new Testament, then Exodus 24. by Testament should be
only understand, a sign of the Testament then made betwixt God and the
Isrealites, (the very same phrase being used in both places) which were
ridiculous.

Objection.
He called the cup is blood, in the same manner as he called the bread his body.

Answer.
Still more glosses, additions, and mistakes: where did our Sau^our call the
cup is blood? where read you these woades, this cup is my blood? he says
indeed, haiung taken the cup, this is my blood of the new Testament, but
never, this cup is my blood: he said, this cup, the new Testament in my blood;
but he never said, this cup is my blood, no more then he ever said, This bread
is my Body. Such propositions as these therefore, are not to be put upon our
Savior, unless you can either show them in Scripture, or prove them evidently
out of it.

Objection.
And if the cup must be the Testament or sign of his blood, wy should not the
bread be the Testament or sign of his body.

Answer.
The cup was just now called the new Testament, (according to the opponent) for
that it is a holy sign of the new Testament: now it is called the new
Testament; or sign of his blood; so that new Testament now signifyes a figure
of the new Testament, and then a sign of our Saviors blood, and what it
pleases the opponent, according to different apprehensions and fantasies
framed of it, without Scripture or ground; so inconstant are Protestants in
their assertions! neither is therefore new Testamenr here, a sign of tha new
Testament, nor a sign of our Saviors blood as I have proved, but his blood is
the blood of the new Testament, and the cup the new Testament in his blood, as
he declares expressly in the Gospel; and if that which he called here his
blood, must needs be (as I have showed) his true real blood, why should not
that which he called his body, be his true real body? whether his body here
may be termed the new Testament etc. seeing we have nothing in Scripture or
fathers, concerning it, I will not determine, it is a curious and needless
question; and we see that the leagues betwixt persons were confirmed by blood,
yet seeing it was the custom both in antiquity, and in Exodus c. 14. now
cited, to kill and sacrifice the bodies of those creatures whose blood they
sprinkled, and that, as it seems in confirmation of the covenant betwixt them,
and that here our Savior made a true sacrifice of his sacred body, putting it,
as Divines tell us, mortuo modo, in the manner of a dead body, exhibiting it as
separate from his blood and his Apostles receiving it from his hand, it might
happily be termed his body of the new Testament, or the new Testament in his
body vnbloudily sacrificed; but then will follow, that here must be no less
his true body then were the true bodies of those creatures sacrificed in Exodus
the 24 or then I have proved his true blood to be there by the like argument:
but I will not be author of any such new manners of speech, and so conclude
nothing in this particular, as conducing little to the point in question.

Objection.
They will not endure any figure, or impropriety of speehe in these words this
is my Body, though in affect they themselves wrest them, for whether by this
word this, they understand, under this, or under those species, or that they
will that this word this, signifyes nothing present etc.

Answer.
I am not obliged to defend every man's different opinion, each has his
particular reasons, and ways to maynteyne his own: it is sufficient that I
defend what before I have answered, and demonstrated out of Scripture, that
our Saviors meaning by the word this, was to signify nothing precisely present
by way of a Sacrament when the word this was pronounced, but what was to be
present when the Apostles took, and ate it, or presently before; that is, so
soon as the wholl proposition this is my Body, was pronounced. which sense, by
way of instance may be gathered out of the expression used here by the
opponent, when it is said, for whether by this word, this, and, or that they
will by the word, this. for when the objection says, this word, not having
yet set down the word which is meant by it, but presently after, to wit, this,
certainly the opponent cannot signify any thing present precisesy when these
two words, this word were written, but what was presently to be set down, to
wit, this, so that by the opponents own writing is convinced that the word
this may, and does ordinarily signify something not present when it is
pronounced, or written, but presently after to be set down, or spoken.

Objection.
Or whether by this word, is, they understand shall become, or shall be
transubstantiated: surely these distractions can be no testimonies of truth.

Answer.
Here again the objection, puts the word this, and that which is signified by
it, to wit is, follows after it. To this objection I answer that it is a mere
calumny forged by Calvin, and from him dispersed amongst the vulgar, that any
Roman Catholicque Doctors by the word is understand shall become, or, shall
be transubstantiated; for though they gather, as a necessary sequel,
transubstantiation, from the real and proper signification of these words,
this is my Body, yet they all understand the word is, in its own native,
common, and ordinary signification, and none of them take it for
transubstantiated, or become my Body, neither indeed can they, unless they
destroy their own principles, for if they should by is understand, become, or
transubstantiated, then they must understand by the word this, bread; (seeing
they all affirm that bread only becomes, or is transubstantiated into Christ's
body) but that were plainly to contradict themselves, it being one of the
maynest points in this controversy betwixt Caluinists and us, they affirming
that hread is understood by the word this, and we denying it.

That which is added, that, those distractions can be no testimonies of truth,
that is, the diversity of opinions amongst us here reckoned up, about the
understanding of these words this. and is, seems to me to have something of
that eye condemned in the Gospel, which sees a mote in another eye, and
discouers not a beam in it self. The opponent sums here up four different
opinions, whereof the last, I have proved to be a false imposition and no
opinion of ours: the first and second, of the word this signifying under this,
or under these species, are one and the same opinion, set down by the opponent
in different words; for seeing by under this, none of our Authors understand
under this bread, they must needs mean by it, under these species of bread, to
omit that no Catholicque Author says, that the word this, precisely
signifyes, under this, or under these species, etc. but, that which is under
these species, is my Body: the third opinion, that by the word this, is
signified nothing present, if by nothing present, be meant, nothing present
after consecration, it is another imposition upon Catholicque Authors, making
them speak like Caluinists, against themselves: but if thereby be meant,
nothing present precisely in that moment when the word this was pronounced, it
is true, and Catholicque, as I have showed; but then it is not opposite to the
former opinion, for seeing no Catholic teaches that the body of our Savior is
under the species of bread, till the substance of bread be transubstantiated
into it, agrees well with their opinion that nothing in particular be
understood by the word this, which is existent when that word was spoktn, bread
being then under its own species. Thus, upon a just examination, we find that
in truth there is but one only opinion of Catholicques in the whole reckoning,
and therefore vnderseruedly termed distractions, or no testimonies of truth.
But had the opponent put some real diversity of opinions amongst Catholicque
Authors about the understanding of these words, and brought them to the number
of four, as here is a show made, yet seeing they all agree in the proper and
native signification of these words This is my Body, without all figures or
improprieties, which exclude the real presence: this variety can be no more
termed no testimony of truth in this point controuersed, then are other
different opinions of Schoolmen in many other mysteries of faith, being
nothing but diverse ways which learned men take to explicate or defend the same
point of faith wherein they all agree against Infidells or Heretics. But had
the Opponent known or considered the diuersityes of opinions risen up within
the space of few more then a hundrcd years, about the understanding of these
words this is my Body amongst Protestants, and that in the main signification
of them, which Luther confesses to have amounted to the number of ten before
his death, and another not many years after rekons up to the number of two
hundred there had been just occasion given to say, these dis^ractions can be
ne testimonies of truth.

Objection.
In the midst of these discords, they make these words, this is my Body, but
half true, for they all hold that there were two things in the hands of Christ
when he spoke these words, his Body, and the species of bread; whereof it
follows that these words are true but of the half of that he held in his
hands; and if he had said, this is not my body, having regard to the other
half of that he held, the species of bread, he had also spoken the truth.

Answer.
This difficulty arises from want of knowledge in Philosophy, to distinguish an
accident from a substance, so that it cannot well be so explicated, that the
unlearned will be capable of it; and so will be better understood by a familiar
instance, even in this present matter, then by a philosophical discourse. The
Opponent cannot deny but our Savior might have said of that which he had in
his hands ( this is bread) when he said the word this. now I demand, seeing
according to all, there were two things (as the Opponent terms them) the
substance of bread, and the species of bread, whether these words this is bread
had been only half true, or no? if it be answered that they had been but half
true, it will follow, that whenever we demonstrate any thing; in ordinary
conversation, saying, this is a man, a horse, a tree, a stone etc. we speak
but half truly, because there is always the substance, and species, or
accidents of those things, yea when S. John Baptist said, behold the lamb of
God, or the heavenly Father, this is my beloved Son, our Savior having both
substance and species, those propositions had been but half true. if it be
answered, that this proposition this is bread, is absolutely and entirely true,
then I answer the same to all that is here opposed; for species, or accidents
are not different things, absolutely speaking, but relative appendixes,
dependances, adjuncts, or exhibitions of things which are so absolutely
denominated, that is, substances; as when we see a person clothed, it is
absolutely, and wholly true to say, this is Peeter, or John; for though there
be two things, the person, and the clothes, yet the clothes being only
adjuncts, or means to demonstrate the person whose they are, are not intended
to be included in this demonstration. and so, if one having only regard to the
cloak of a person, should say, this is not Peter, meaning this cloak is not
Peeter, though he should speak true to such as know his meaning; yet in
ordinary conversation, unless by some particular sign he gave to understand
his meaning, he would either not be understood, or understood to speak false,
because the demonstration this is instituted in such circumstances, to signify
the person or thing demonstrable, and not their adjuncts, ot accidents. Apply
this to our present purpose, and all is solued.

Objection.
Now let any judge which opinion is less forged, and more natural; ours who
say, tbis signifyes, that which Christ held; or that of theyrs who say under
this, or, under these species: if they grant that the word this signifies
bread, as they must needs, being spoken before consecration, will they make it
signify nothing after consecration: can it both be something and nothing. If the
word this signify bread, then we must understand that this bread is my Body,
but no other thing can they make it signify but bread: not the species of
bread, why? because yet it was not when he said this; not his body, for his
body could not signify his body, neither as yet was it consecrated when he said
this: they must therefore confess it to signify bread, or nothing: if bread,
then of bread he said, This is my Body; which is as much as to say, this bread
is my body.

Answer.
Here is only a repetition of what has been objected before: wherefore I
refer the reader to my former answer, wherein I avoid all these difficultyes
by replying that the word this, just when it was pronounced by our Savior,
neither signified the species of bread, nor, under the species of bread; nor
bread, nor that which he precisely then held in his hands before he pronounced
the other words, nor yet nothing; but, this which I am presentely to give you,
and you are to take and eat, is my Body: and this well considered, let any man
judge whether opinion is less forged and more natural; ours, which puts a
plain, proper, obuious signification both to the word this, the subject, the
word is, the copula, and the word body, the predicate of this proposition This
is my Body, agreeing with the wholl context and intention of our Savior; or
theyrs, which will have signified a mere piece of natural bread not yet made a
Sacrament by the word this, and by is my body, is a commemoration of my body;
and that not only without all ground in Scripture, but contrary to the plain
text, contrary to the mystery here instituted, and contrary to common sense and
discourse: all which I have already proved.

Objection.
Now that it is discovered what our Lord brake and gave; what he bad them take
and eat, and what he said was his body: none need doubt but that the disciples
did eat, that which he took, blessed, brake, and gave, and which he bad then
eat, it was bread by their own rule; for as yet he had not said it is my Body:
if they did eat that which he said was his body. what can any conceive it to
be but bread? for what said he was his body? was it not bread which, he took,
blessed. brake and gave, and bad them eat, saying it was his body. if they
could disprove the Protestant church in this point, they could never maintain
transubstantiation by the words of institution, which in all circumstances,
words, and actions of our Savior, is agreeable to what we believe; but we may
safely conclude that the Apostles did eat bread, and that it remaynes bread
after consecration both by that which has been said etc.

Answer.
Here the same thing seems to be repeated twice or thrice over, and
altogether is nothing but a new repetition of what has been answered before.
only here seems another objection to be pointed at, which may be framed, as it
is more clearly by other Protestants, in this manner.

That which our Saviors took, blessed, brake, and gave, was bread: for
certain it is that which he took, was bread, and is confessed to have been so
by both sides: but that which he took, he blessed, that which he blessed he
brake; that which he brake, he gave; therefore from the first to the last, that
which he gave his disciples, was bread. I answer that all this is true; for it
was bread in denomination both which he took, blessed, brake, and gave; but
the bread which he took, was bread remaining in its own nature, the bread
which he ga^e, was bread made his body, and yet it was the same bread in
denomination; for the very same bread which was yet in its own nature when he
took it, was made his body when gave it.

Now if one should reply that this is said gratis, and seems to be a mere
shift, for obscuring and inuoluing the matter to escape the difficulty, or
rather an explication destroying and contradicting it self; I will show that
this is said with great ground, even in Scripture it self: for if an Infidel
should oppose the change of water into wine, in the second of S. Ihon with the
like argument, and say, that that wherewhith the servants filled the vessels at
our Saviors command, was that which they drew out of the vessels; that which
they drew out, was that which they carried to the master of the mariage-feast;
that which they carried to him, he drunk; but that which the servants filled
the vessels first withal, was water; therefore that which the master of the
feast, drunk, was water. A Christian unto such an objection may answer, that
all this is true; if we respet only the name or denomination of the thing: for
that which was put into the vessels, the master drunk, and as it is true that
water was put into them, so is it true (to say) that the master of the feast
drunk water; but the very same water which remained in its own nature when in
was put into the vessels, was denominated water made wine, when the master
drunk it.

And that this may appear to be no fiction of mine, all that I affirm hereof,
is plainly delivered in the Protestant Bible the words are these. Jesus says
unto them, Io. 2. v. 7.8.9.
fill the water-pots with water. here behold water was to be put into them; and
they filled them to the brimme: see here is water put into them by the
seruanrs. and he said unto them, draw out now, and bear to the governor of
the feast, and they bare it. mark yet here, the servant bare it, that is, that
which they had put into the vessels, which was water. when thc Ruler of the
feast had tasted the water which was made wine and knew not whence it was,
behold it is still called water, not water remaining in its own being, but
water made wine: but the servants which drew the water, knew: still it is
called watcr: and the water, that is, the very same that it was in
denomination, when it was put in, but changed into wine. Apply this in each
particular to the present mystery, and it will appear how light the objection
is, fit only to deceive unlearned people who are not acquainted with such
subtilityes, and sophismes as such like objections conteyne.

Objection.
And likewise that S. Paul called the consecrated bread, bread three times
after consecration: for as often (says he) as you eat this bread, and so let
him eat of this bread, and whosoever eats this beead unworthily; but we do
not eat till after consecration: it is then bread after consecration.

Answer.
I have given just now a full answer to that which is objected here, that S.
Paul calls the host bread three times after consecration: 1. Cor. 11.20.28.
for it follows no more that therefore it should be pure bread, remaining as it
was before the words of consecration; then that the water remained in its own
nature after it was made wine, because after the change it is called water.

Neither does yet S. Paul (if his words be well marked) say that the
consecrated host is natural and common bread, such as it was before, fit to
be eaten at an ordinary table, as the Protestants must grant it not to be: for
at the least it is sacramental bread, and consecrated to a religious and holy
use, according to them, and therefore though he had put the same word bread,
before and after consecration, yet it follows not that the signification of
that word after consecrati^n should be the same with the signification of the
same before consecration; for before it signifyes common, ordinary, natural,
and usual bread; but after, sacramental, significant, co^memoratiue, holy,
divine bread, according to Protestants, and therefore if Ptotestants must
confess that though the word be the same, yet the signification is not the
same, why blame they Roman Catholicques if they give the same answer, saying
that by the word bread in S. Paul, before consecration, or blessing, is meant
the substance of natural, and usual bread; but after consecration,
supernatural, heavenly, spiritual, divine bread; which our Savior terms
himself to be, in the sixth of S. John, six or seven different times, and
which every Christian chiefly begs of God in the Pater noster, or Lords prayer,
saying, give us this day our daily bread; for it is to be noted, that bread in
greek, familiarly in holy Scripture is taken for all manner os meat, and not
for bread only, as it is distinct from all other meats.

But to make it yet clearer that S. Paul did not mean natural bread remaning
in its own substance as it was before, when he called the Sacrament bread after
it was consecrated or designed for a part of that holy mystery: it is
particularly to be reflected on, that in this acceptio^ he never calls it
absolutely bread, but allways with in article determinatiue or restrictiue,
referring it to that which consecration had made it; and so he calls it, this
bread, this cup, that bread, that cup, to wit, which was held for a Sacrament,
and mystery amongst Christians by force of our Saviors words: and to put us
out of all doubt that it was not that natural bread and wine, which it was
before it was consecrated, he clearly calls it the bread of our Lord, and the
cup of our Lord, v. 29. wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup of our Lord unworthily. etc. and as we gather Joan. 6. v. 48. that
when our Savior termed the bread whereof he spoke there, the bread of life, he
meant not natural and visible bread, but supernatural and divine; in the same
manner are we to gather from the words of S. Paul, that by the like phrase the
like bread is signified; and as our Savior terms that bread whereof he spoke
Io. 6. v. 51.58. this bread, to distinguish it from natural and usual bread,
and to signify that he thereby meant his true body, so also does S. Paul here:
neither can it more be gathered, from the being tetmed bread by S. Paul, that
is natural, and substantial bread, then it can be gathered from the canon of
our mass, that we believe, it to be the substance of bread, because it is
often called bread in the said canon, after consecration.

Objection.
If by this word bread so often repeated by the Apostle, he should understand
flesh, were not he worthy to be blamed to entertayne the people in error,
since he knew that sense and reason gives in evidence, that it is bread, which
man naturally believes; would he not rather have advertised us to hold our
senses in suspension, and to believe that it is his flesh though it seems
bread, then to join himself with the report of our senses, calling it always
bread without any explication?

Answer.
We are not to prescribe to the holy Ghost what he is to disclose to the
writers of divine Scripture: he could have delivered many other mysteries of
our faith in clearer words in the holy Scripture then he has done, if it had
seemed good in his divine Providence, and therefore though he command us not
here in express terms, to deny our senses, and to believe that it is his
flesh, though it seem bread (as some holy fathers have done with in the first
five hundred yares) yet he calls it as expressly the body of Christ, as he
calls it bread: and seeing we find bread often to be taken in a spiritual
sense in holy Scripture for the food of out souls, but never find the body of
Christ which is given for us, to be any other then his real true Body, one
would think that the darker or more doubtful word should in any reasonable
man's judgment yield to the more clear and certain, and be interpreted by it
then the contrary which is here alleged: and though our Savior call his
flesh bread twice as often as S. Paul calls that which was consecrated bread
here, Joan. 6.
Ioannis 6. yet no man dare from thence argue that his flesh was not true
flesh, but corporal and material bread.

And if S. Paul by calling it so often bread after consecration, should join
himself with the report of our senses, as the opponent here affirms, he would
draw us also to think that it is mere natural, and usual bread after
consecration, as it was before, and therefore we may apply the same objection
in almost the same words, against Protestants, which here is brought against
us; in this manner: If by this word bread so often repeated by the Apostle he
should understand a Saerament or mystery as it is believed to be amonst all
Christians, were he not worthy to be blanted, to entertain the people in
error since he knew that sense and reason gives in evidence that it is usual
and common bread, which man naturally believes, would he not rather have
advertised us to hold our senses in suspention, and to believe that it is
sacramental and spiritual bread, though it seem usual bread, then to join
himself with the report of our senses, calling it always bread without any
explication? Thus whilst Protestants frame arguments fitter for Infidells then
Christians, against us, they never consider what force the like arguments have
against themselves.

But it is very untrue that S. Paul called it bread without any explication, or
that he any way draws us to what our senses would judge if they were left to
themselves, but eleuates our thoughts unto faith telling us that it is panis
and calix Domini, the bread, and cup of our Lord, which our Savior confesses
himself to be. John the sixth: and besides, that he who eats this bread, and
drinks this cup of our Lord vnwortily, shall he guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord, which gives enough to understand what kind of bread, and cup he
meant here: for they cannot be properly said to be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ, who receive unworthily an external sign, or remembranee of it,
(though otherwise they may highly offend him) as a subject cannot be rightly
said to be guilty of the body and blood of his King, who receives not his seal
or signet with that reverence which becomes a subject te show to his Prince;
but in the opinion of Catholics, it is literally and propetly true, being a
most high affront and injury done to the very body, and blood of Christ there
present: and yet this is more clearly insinuated in the 29 verse: for he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lord's body: where the Greek word (...) signifies a determinate
judging one thing from another, which is clear in Catholic doctrine, but not
easy to be understood, in the Protestant; for how can one be said properly to
discern that which he acknowledges not to be present in that thing which he
receives Unworthily? and though happily in some improper and far fetched sense,
this might be said, yet according to the true rule of interpreting holy
Scripture, we must understand the words of it in a proper sense when nothing
compells to the contrary, as the Opponent acknowledges.

Objection.
And which is more, attributing to this bread, things which cannot agree to the
Body of Christ, to wit, to be broken.

Answer.
I have before answered to this, and showed that the word broken is familiarly
taken for given, by way of division, or distribution amongst many; which is
used by other Evangelists: so that given and hroken here may signisy the same
thing. But if by broken be understood a breaking in pieces of that which was
whole before, who can deny that such a breaking agrees with* the Body of our
Savior absolutely speaking? was not his sacred flesh all torn, and broken
with the nails, thorns, and scourges: as the Prophet foretold, ipse attritus
est propter scelera a nostra, Isay 53.5.
he was broken for our wickednesses. and though natural bread be properly said
to be broken; yet it cannot be affirmed by any Christian, to be broken for us,
as the Apostle here said it was, that is, for our salvation, as onother
Evangelist affirms of the chalice. And therefote Christians must believe and
confess quite contrary to the Opponent here, that S. Paul is attributing here
to this bread, that which cannot agtee with natural bread, but only with the
true Body of Christ, to wit, to be broken for us, as that only was mystically
in this Sacrament; by may of an unbloody sacrice: and visibly upon the Cross.

Objection.
And Christ himself called the cup. after consecration, the fruit of the vine,
both in S. Matthew, and S. Mark.

Answer.
But in S. Luke, Luke 22. v. 22*
he calls the cup as much the fruit of the vine before consecration. Therefore
if you urge S. Matthew and S. Mark's authotity for the one, give us leave to
urge S. Luke's authority for the other, and know that you have concluded
nothing, unless you prove that we are rather to stand to the narration of S.
Matthew and S. Mark, then of S. Luke, which here you have not done. Certain
it is that there can be no contradiction nor opposition amongst the
Evangelists: therefore seeing S. Luke relates these words, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the vine, etc. before the institution of the Sacrament;
and the two former Eua^gelists after: and yet none of them expressly affirm
that our Savior said these words after or before the Sactament was instituted,
though one put them before, and the other after, we must gather by the context
and other circumstances, whether indeed they were spoken by our Savior before,
or after the consecration of the chalice.

That this may be understood. Nothing is more otdinary with the Evangelists (as
all Interpreters note) then to set things down by transposition, or
anticipation, somtymes putting things just in that order they happened:
somtymes transposing them into a former or latter place. This supposed, it is
more probable that S. Mark sets down those words, out of their proper place,
then S. Luke. for we have a clear testimony that S. Mark in this very
institution of the chalice puts those words by way of anticipation, and they
drunk all of it, out of their ptoper place, the chalice having not then been
consecrated, nor any of the Apostles having then tasted of it. therefore it is
more likely of the two, that S. Mark uses here a tra^sposition, then S. Luke,
who reckons all othet things in their proper places and orders, as they
happened. and if there be a transposition admitted in S. Mark, it must be also
one in S. Matthew. But though it were that our Savior said these words after
consecration, and that by this fruit of the vine he meant real and material
wine, (which I will presently discuss) yet the argument proves nothing at all
against us. for, our Savior having drunk in his last supper, true and real
wine with his disciples, before the institution of this holy Sacrament, may
very easily be understood to have referred words to that first dtinking in time
of his last supper; and so, in relation to that, say,) I will drink no more of
the fruit of the vine, etc. as if some person having first drunk wine, and
after, some other drink at a banquet, may usually say, I will drink no more
of the fruit of the vine till I drink it in my own house: referring, those
words only to that which he drank first. neither can I see how Protestants
according to their principle of believing nothing but what is in Scripture can
deny this explication, for seeing our Savior sais expressly here, I will drink
noe more of the fruit of the vine, etc. and that we have noe place of Scripture
which either affirms, or insinuates that our Savior then drank of the
consecrated chalice he must necessarily, refer his drinking the fruit of the
vine, to some other wine which he had drunk, before the conscration.
Understanding the two first Evangelists in this manner, we clearly reconcile
them with S. Luke. for he must probably be understood of that which our Savior
drank before the Sacrament was instituted; as according to this interpretation
the others also must understand it: but it will be much harder to reconcile
them if those words be referred to the consecrated chalice; for, that having
not been yet instituted, according to S. Luke's setting down our Sauiour's
words, they cannot possibly be referred to them. for our Savior according to
the Protestant opinion, would presently have drunk wine in the Sacrament, and
so must have falsified his own words as soon as he had spoken them, promising
then not to drink any wine till his father's kingdom were come, and yet
presently after drinking it. which is an evident argument if we stand to S.
Lukes relation according this explication, that it was not material real wine
which he drunk in the consecrated chalice.

And hence follows another conuincing argument against Protestants in this
particular. for seeing our Savior said, I will drink no wore, etc. and that
they refer these words against us, to the consecrated chalice, and
consequently must affirm that our Savior drank of it, (for he could not say
he would drink no more of that whereof he had never drunk) I demand of them,
whether our Savior drank this as a Sacrament? This they cannot deny: hence it
will follow that he took it as a memorial, or commemoration of himself in
their opinion: and thence it will necessarily follow that Christ had forgot
himselue, having need of a remembrance of himself. Secondly, that a man
present to himself, can without an absurdity take a momoriall of himself.
Thirdly, this memorial was to he taken by the mouth of faith, as they say, and
so our Savior should be deprived of his most divine, all-cleare and
beatificall vision, and knowledge of himself and all things, (whereby S. Paul
affirms that faith is euacuated) and led by the dark light of faith: 1. Cor,
1^. v. 8.
which no Christian can say without blasphemy. Fourtly he commanded not
himself, but his Apostles to do what he did in remembrance of him. and so
there is no ground in Scripture to say, that out Saviors received this
Sacrament a a remembrance of himself: and yet he must have done so if that
first Sacrament had been essentially only a sign and remembrance of our
Savior, as our adversaries teach. If therefore our Savior be supposed to have
drunk of the consecrated chalice, and that he could not possibly drink a
remembrance or sign of himself, or his Blood, he must needs have drunk his
own real Blood: for according to the Opponent, if it be not a rememhrance of
his Blood. it must be understood to be his real Blood; but if he drunk that
which was his own blood, it was not wine, therefore when he says, I will
drink noe more of the fruit of the vine etc. it cannot be referred to what he
drunk after consecration, but to what he drunk before, as S. Luke relates it.

Hitherto I have argued, admitting, not granting that when our Savior said, I
will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, etc. he meant real and natural
wine. now I will show, that though those words were referred by the Evangelist
to the consecrated chalice, and understood of a real and material fruit of
the vine; yet it is not necessary to understand wine by them: for there be many
fruits of the vine which may be drunk beside wine: the juice pressed out of
grapes not yet ripe, is properly the fruit of the vine, which may be drunk,
and yet is no wine; nay should one press the young branches, and draw liquour
from them, it would be that which is here called in Greek a (...), genimen
vitis, the generation, or the thing produced naturally by the vine: and yet it
would be no wine. and even wine corrupted, and quite changed is the generation
and effect of the vine: and yet it is no wine. so also in our present case, the
accidents or species of wine are genimen vitis, the true effects or productions
of the vine, and yet are not the substance of wine, Seeing therefore here even
after consecration, according to the Roman Catholic tenet, those species
remain; our Savior might truly be said to have drunk ex genimine, or
generatione vitis, of the fruit or propagation of the vine, though there had
been no substance of wine there, but in place thereof the Blood of Savior
under those species. so that the very literal sense of the words retained, and
referred to the consecrated chalice, conclude no more then this, that our
Savior spoke of the species of wine; which is properly the propagation or
generation of the vine.

But the words bear and admit as well another explication (plainly suting
with the Roman tenet) as of the fruit or issue of a real vine. For our
Savior styles himself, as the Opponent presently observes, the vine. Why then
might he not call his Blood here the fruit of the vine? and so referring it to
the consecrated chalice, confirm that it was the chalice of his Blood
proceeding and issuing from his Body, as the wine or species of wine proceeds
from the vine.

All these explications show how little this place proves against us: or rather
how much it advantages our cause. But if the text be considered entirely as it
stands in the Evangelists, it will neither hurt us nor help them, nor so much
as tuch the matter in question: for our Sauiout says thus, Mattk. 26 v. 29.
Mark 14 v. 25.
But I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of this vine till that
day that I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father. Verily I say
unto you, that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until that day that
I drink it new in the kingdom of God. where he expressly affirms that he
speaks of such a fruit of the vine as he is to drink with them in heaven:
which, whether it be material wine, or no, I leave to the Protestants to
consider.

Objection.
But it might be objected, why might they not call it bread, and the fruit of
the vine? in respect they had been so before consecration: as the serpent is
called a rod: and God said unto Adam, thou art dust, because he was made of
dust. But if things be named by the names of what they were before, it does not
follow that we should so take it of the body of Christ. for it is not only
false, but impious to think that the body of Christ is called bread for that
it had been bread before the consecration. the serpent indeed had been a rod,
but the body of Christ had never been bread. So Adam was called dust because he
had been dust: but Christ is not made of bread. The holy Scripture says well
that Moses rod became a serpent, but the Scripture does not say that bread was
converted into flesh.

Answer.
I answer first that we do not say that the body of Chtist was bread before
consecration at least I remember not ever to have read any such proposition in
Catholic authors: because his sacred body still existent visibly and
gloriously in heaven cannot be said absolutely to have been bread, it having
been made of the sacred virgins most pure blood for that in its full sense
would signify (if any such proposition were in use) that the thing which is
affirmed to be made of an other, is not existent in an other place, whilst that
whereof it is made is changed into it: as neither Adam nor the serpent made of
the rod of Moses were (for then only they began to be) when the rod of Moses,
and dust were changed into them.

Secondly I answer that the objection proceeds upon a false supposition, for
the rod of Moses is not called a rod when it was turned into a serpent,
because the serpent had been a rod before: nor Adam dust because he was before
dust: for though it be true to say that that which was become a man or a
serpent, was dust or a rod by reason of the subject which remains common to
them both (called in philosophy materia prima) yet it is not true in any
formal philosophical sense to say: Adam was dust: the serpent was a rod: for
Adam never was, nor never could have been any thing else then what his essence
made him viz: a man and a reasonable creature: nor a serpent any thing then
what the being of a serpent requiers, to wit, to be a serpent. when therefore
in holy Scripture Adam is called dust, and the serpent the rod of Moses, it is
not because Adam was once dust, and the serpent a rod (for how can that be
proved out of any place of Scripture?) but because Adam was made of dust, and
the serpent of the rod of Moses, which is clearly testified in Scripture. so
that the supposition and fundation of the ob^ectio^ failing. that which is
built upon it viz: that the body of our Savior is called bread after
consecration by S. Paul because it was bread before, must needs fall to the
ground. For we say not that the body of Christ was ever bread, but because that
which was bread, is now become the body of Christ, bread casing to be under
those accidents by virtue of Christ's body coming in the place of it: so that
though this sacred body cannot be said to be made of bread' as a house is made
of wood and stones which remain in their own substances to compose it, nor as
fire is made of wood where the matter common to them both remains, yet if
there be understood only that the body of Christ succeds to the substance of
bread under the same accidents and so issues from it as the day issues from the
night, as from the term from which it begins to be, as one may say: ex necte
fit dies: of the night is made the day; so may one say: ex pane fit corpus
Christi: of bread is made Christ's body, as it is mysteriously in this
Sacrament, and might be therefore called bread after consecration, as the wine
in Cana in Galilee is called water because it was made of water, and the
serpent called the rod of Moses, because it was made of the rod of Moses. or
which is the same in other terms; because that which became wine was water,
and that which became a serpent was the rod of Moses which if it be resolved
into philosophical terms, is nothig but this, that the substantial matter
which was united to the substantial forms of a serpent and wine, was
immediately before united to the substantial forms of the rod of Moses and
of water, which happens in other changes of one thing into an other.

Thirdly: it is not the ordinary way of speech to say that all things which are
made by substantial changes were such things as were changed into them. thus
though fire be made of wood, or wood be changed into fire, yet it is an
ordinary manner of saying to affirm this fire was wood: neither say we: these
flowers were earth, though they were made of earth changed into them. In like
manner when our own flesh is produced of the different meats we eat, we use
not to say, our flesh was beef, or mutton, or herbs, or btead, or drink
etc. and yet it is made of all these when they are changed into our substance:
and hence is true the same proposition of our Savior in time of his
nourishment: for his meat was as truly changed into his flesh as our meat is
into our flesh, and consequently the bread which he did eat, was changed by
nourishment into his flesh. and so it is true even out of holy Scripture which
speaks of his eating and drincking and increasing (and by consequence of his
nourishment) that the flesh of Christ at least in some part, was made of bread,
and yet it is not the ordinary manner of speech to say that those parts of the
flesh of Chrtst were bread, not withstanding it would be neither impious nor
false to say that some parts of Christ's flesh were once bread (supposing it
were true that the serpent had been a rod and Adam dust, as the Opponent here
affirms) to wit, those into which bread was changed by natural nourishment.
if then it might be truly affirmed of some parts of Christ's flesh that they
were bread in this sense for-named why should it be not only false but impious
to affirm that the flesh of Christ as it is in the Sacrament (for we affirm
it noe otherwise?) was bread? there being noe more difficulty in the one then
in the other. fourthly this change being made in a way wholly supernatural
where noe part of the substance of bread remains, to wit, neither form nor
matter, as we speak in the schools, which happens not in any natural nor in
many supernatural changes, where the matter and substance still remaynes, now
receiving one form, now an other, by reason whereof the thing that succeeds
may be said (as the opponent contends) to have been the thing that was changed
into it: by reason I say that noe such common subject remains here, but the
whole substance of bread is changed into the substance of Christ's body, it will
not be so proper a manner of speech to say that the flesh of Christ was bread
as the like would be in other natural and ordinary changes, if that manner of
speech were allowable.

Fifthly, the objection mistakes the complete reason of Catholics why S. Paul
calls thc Sacrament bread after the consecration: for it is not only because
the bread is changed into the flesh of Christ, for this might have been done so
inuisibily that neither the body of Christ nor the species of bread should have
appeared, and then we should have had nothing common to them both to have
continued the denomination of bread* but the entire reason given by Catholic
Doctors is that the bread is changed into the flesh of Christ which is put
under the outward shows or species of bread, which give occasion or ground of
giving it the same denomination it had before. Thus we call the dead carkase of
a lamme a lamme, and the dead body of a man, a man, by reason of these outward
organs and proportions which remain the same they were before, though the
thing be quite changed from what it was. Unto that which is added that we have
nowhere in Scripture that bread is converted into the flesh of our Savior as
we have that the rod of Moses was converted into a serpent I Answer that it is
not necessary to have all things in Scripture in the like clearness and
explicitenesse of words, for we have nowhere expressed in Scripture, that the
bread our Savior did eat was converted into his flesh as we have that the rod
of Moses was converted into a serpent, and notwhithstanding even Protestants
must believe it. so though we have it not in express terms that bread is
changed into the flesh of our Savior in this Sacrament, as we have that Moses
rod was converted into a serpent, yet we must heleeue it, because the truth of
Scripture cannot stand unless this be granted: for seeing our Savior said
This is my Body, and it is wholly impossible and implying contradiction that a
piece of bread remaining in its own nature should be the true and real body of
our Savior (as we have showed that those words must import) it follows
necessarily that the nature and substance of bread cannot be under those
visible species, and therefore bread must cease to be out of the force of
Christ's body, which must succeed in place of bread, under the same species
which is nothing else then to have bread changed into the hody of our Savior.

Objection.
Why should they only take these words This is my Body: in a litterall sense
and noe other? does he not as well say: I am a door: I am a vine? doubtless he
was able to transform himself into a door, or a vine but did he therefore do
so? he said to his disciples: ye are branches, ye are sheep. did they
therefore become so in respect either of his power or words?

Answer.
I Answer that there is a maine difference between these propositions and the
other where of we treat This is my Body both in the subject and in the
predicate, that is in the first and last word of them. for the first word or
subject in the former is (I ye) which signify determinately and expressly
our Savior and the Apostles to whom he spoke. But in the latter, the first
word, or subject is (This) which neither expressly nor implicitly signifies
bread, but this which I am about to give you, as I have already said. the last
words also: door, vine, vinebranches, sheep in the former propositions are
indetermined and fit to take a spiritual, mystical and metaphorical sense:
for he does not say, I am a door made of wood and boardes which is used to
shut and open in visible houses. nor I am a vine which visibily springes from
the earth and bears such grappes as men use to make wine of, neither said he
that his Apostles were such sheep as feed in the fields, as bear wool to make
cloth of as are boiled and roasted to be eaten at the table: nor such vine
branches as are cut of from the vine, and either rot, or are burned, or bear
grappes in the vine visibly etc. For it had been an impossibility and a plane
contradiction to affirm that living men remaning in there own nature as they
did, should be such things as those, truly and really, and therefore those last
words door, vine, sheep, vine branches being not determined in Scripture to
these material and visible things which we commonly understand by these words,
give full scope to interpret them of things in a spiritual and mystical
sense, in which only these propositions are true. but in these words, This is
my Body: the last word body is not left indeterminate and applyable to a
metaphorical sense as it is in holy Scripture, and the discourse of our Savior
expressly determined it to signify his true natural, material, substa^tiall
body which was there present before the Apostles: for if our Savior had only
said these words, This is my Body, and added noe further explication: some
scope might seem to have been given to have interpreted it either of his real
or mystical body which is his church whereof S. Paul speaks: but he takes
away this liberty when he adds presently: Coloss. 1. v. 24.
This is my Body which is given for you. This is my blood which shall be shed
for you. which cannot b^ understood of his mystical body, but only of his true
real body and blood which only were given and shed for our redemption. so that
the subject or first word of the former proposition I ye being wholly
determinate to those particular persons of Christ and the Apostles: and the
predicate or last words: door, vine, sheep, vinebranches, being wholly
indeterminate in themselves; neither expressly naming corporal nor spiritual:
seeing it is contrary to all reason and wholly impossible that thereby those
things in a corporal sense should be affirmed of our Savior and his Apostles,
as I have faid, those propositions must make this sense which is true and
orthodoxe: I am a spiritual door or vine, ye are spiritual vine branches, or
sheep etc. but on the contrary the indetermination or indifferency of the
first word or subject of this proposition, This is my Body: being considered in
it self making it noe way limited to bread: and the last word or predicate,
Body which is given you, being expressly determined to the real and
substantial body of Christ, it must make this sense: This which I am about to
give you, is my real and substantial body, which is a true and Catholic
proposition and not this: This bread is my true and real Body: which implies
as much contradiction and impossibibility, as this other that Christ is a door
of wood etc. For it is as impossible that a piece of bread actually existing
should be the real body of Christ as that Christ should be a wooden door. nay
if we consider it in greek (...), in Latin, hoc, disagreeing with bread in
gendre (...) panis, which are both masculine, it cannot be referred to bread.
Now to show out of Scripture it self that our Savior calls himself the door
in a spiritual, mystical and metaphorical sense only, is clear out of S.
John c. 12. v. 9. I am the door, if any man enter by me, he shall be saved,
etc. which is not true of a natural door of wood, for all such as enter in by
such a door are not saved, but such only as enter by the spiritual door of
there souls which is our Savior. so also when he calls his Apostles sheep,
he shows clearly that the speaks of metaphorical or spiritual sheep: for
he affirms that they hear his voice, or know him: and hence appears also.
(by the way) another mistake contrary to their own English Bible which
Protestants ordinarily urge against us, mistaking the words of the Gospel: they
tell us that our Savior said he was a door, a vine, a way, which he never
says according to their English Bible; but thus: I am the door, the vine, the
way etc. which determines the words to a spiritual and metaphorical sense, as
when he says: I am the bread of life, I am the good fheapherd etc. and when he
calls his disciples sheep, he uses always this restraining and limiting
particle, my sheep: which is only true of spiritual sheep, for our Savior
had noe other. That which the objection said that our Savior was as able to
change the Apostles into sheep as to change bread into his body, is true if
the Apostles had ceased to be men and had been so converted into sheep, as Lots
wife ceasing to be a weoma^ was converted into a pilar of salt. but then the
proposition which Protestants pretended out of Scripture: ye are material
sheep, had not been true: neither could the truth of that proposition ever have
caused that conversion as conformable to it. but this proposition only should
have been true: ye are made, or are become material sheep by virtue of a
miraculous change of men into sheep: noe otherwise then the water in the
marriage in Gallilee is said to be made wine: fot when one thing is affirmed of
an other, then that where of it is affirmed is supposed to be existent, as when
I say: I am a man: the person must be existent where of it is aff^rmed that he
is a man. but contrariwise when one thing is said to be made an other
naturally, not artificially, then that which is said to be made the other
ceased to be what it was, and is converted into the other; as when it is said,
water was made wine, water ceased to be and wine was made of it. and hence it
is a plane contradiction to have any change or conversion made in a pure
affirmative and simple proposition in this manner: Peeter is a real and
natural sheep. for then this person Peeter, is supposed to be and not to be
at the some time. to be, because he is affirmed to be a sheep not to be,
because he is changed into a sheep, and so ceases to be as water ceased to be
when it was made wine. And the same absurdity and contradiction had followed if
our Savior had said: this bread which I now have in my hands, is my natural
Body truly and really. for bread should have remained because it was affirmed
to be his body and yet it should have been destroyed and so not remained,
because it should have been changed into his body. I am sorry that such
speculations as these should be propounded to those who have not ftudied, but
the objections require them. yet I must add to make this matter out of
question: if the propositions: I am the vine: ye are the vinebranches, employed
any change of our Savior into a real material vine etc. then this
proposition adjoined, and my Father is the husbandman. would have employed a
power in God the Father to be changed into a real hushandman and so God
himself would be changeable, which cannot be affirmed without a blaphemy. So
then as God the Father is called only a Spiritual husbandman, so also our
Savior a Spiritual vine, and the Apostles spiritual branches, noe more
change being implied in the one then in the other. Now that many things
affirmed of others, are to be understood, of those things as spiritual, not
corporal, is most evident, 1. Cor. 10.3. cited herafter by the Opponent, and
they did all eat the same spiritual meat and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ. So that as Christ is here called the spiritual Rock,
so is he in the places cited in the objection, called the spiritual way,
door, vine, etc. which he truly and really is, without, all impropreties of
signs, or figures, for otherwise,, as Protestants make, this is my Body, to be
this is a sign of my Body, so must they say I am a door, is as much, as I am
the sign of a wooden door, which were both blasphemous, and ridic^lous, being
applied to our Savior.

Objection.
And if he was in a figurative manner a door, a vine; why may not bread be is
body figuratively? and why should they think it is a less^ change, for our
Savior to call his body bread, then to call bread his body? doubtelesse he
called his body bread in respect of the nourishement which a faithful soul
receaues in the Sacrament; even so the bread is the body of Christ
sacramentally and takes the name of the body of Christ as being a sacred sign
or Sacrament thereof.

Answer.
I have before given the reason of this difference, for certain it is that in
this proposition ^n protestant doctrine by the word this, is ^ignified real
and material bread, and by my Body the real body of Christ, where of they will
have this material bread to be a sign now ^n the other proposition: my flesh
is meat, or I am ^he bread etc. though the words my flesh and I signify really
and truly our Savior and his sacred body; yet the word bread cannot any way
signify true and material bread: for he expressly calls it the bread that
came down from heaven: the bread that gives life to such as worthyly eat it,
and living bread. which can by ^oe means agree with bread made of wheat or any
other corn.

Hence therefore apeares that the flesh of our Savior;, or he himself are
neither a Sacrament, nor a sign of visible and usual bread: ^or it would want
little of blasphemy to say that our Savior or his sacred body were a sign ^f
a loaf of bread which seeing it is so, there can ^e thence noe argument drawn
that bread is called the body of our Savior because it is a ^igne of his body:
but rather the quite contrary our Savior or his blessed flesh are tuly and
^eally living bread, life giving bread, heavenly ^read, spiritual bread.
Therefore that which ^ur Savior gave his disciples was truly and ^eally his
real and natural body: or thus, that ^read of our Lord, that heavenly, living
spiritual which the Apostles received from the hands of our Savior, was his
true substantial body.

But if by the words: this is my Body: should be understood true visible bread,
as in the objection they are, there will be noe other parity or consequence
save this: or Savior calls his flesh bread because it is true living, heavenly
bread: therefore a piece of common bread is called the body of Christ because
it is a sign of his body: which is quite out of joint.

Now certainly (to answer the question he^e propounded) it is much less
strange for our Savior to call himself meat, or living spiritual bread etc.
then to call a piece of wheaten bread his true and real body; for he is truly
the one, but natural bread can never be the other.

Concerning the other question first propounded, why may not bread be his body
figuratively? if it had been set down in this manner: why might not bread have
been his body, figuratively? I would have answered that there is no reason but
it might, as were the figures of the old law and amongst them the bread of
proposition, and of Melchisedech, and many such like types of the old
Testament: but the reason why it may not now be so in this Sacrament is because
I have showed that according to the first institution, it was our Saviors will
to change bread into his body: and so not being at all, it could not be his
body figuratively: neither can a figurative sense stand with the truth of this
proposition: This is my Body which is given for you. That which is lastly added
that bread is a Sacrament of his body, cannot stand with the Protestant
doctrine: for they define in the little catechism in the common prayer book a
Sacrament to be an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual grace. now
certain it is that our Saviors body was as outward and visible to the
Apostles in the first institution as was the bread it self, and so neither an
inward nor spiritual grace, and consequently it could not be a Sacrament of
it. and if noe Sacrament, it could be noe sign of it. for Protestants
acknowledge noe other sign here then a sacramental sign: and though after
our Saviors ascension we cannot actually see his body by reason of the
distance betwixt us, yet that makes it not an inward spiritual grace, for then
Rome and Constantinople would be spiritual to those that live in these
climates because for the same reason they cannot see them. and yet much less
could the body of our Savior, either in the first institution or at any time
after, be termed an inward grace according to Protestants: and yet we are not
constrained to acknowledge that there is not a Sacrament, for it signifies that
heavenly an^ divine grace which by virtue of it is given to nourish our souls
which is truly inward an^ spiritual: and that which sensibly appears in it,
and is called by divines Sacramentum tantum, is a sacramental sign of our
Savior sacred body inuisibly but truly existent under those shows or species
in this Sacrament, and nourishing our souls and bodies (and so may be truly
and properly called a spiritual grace or gift) and that inward also when it is
sacramentally received. And noe less is it now ^ sacramental commemoratiue
sign of the passion, death and sufferings of our Savior which are long since
past, and so become now invisible, working mysteriously and meritoriously in
this holy Sacrament.

If here should be replied that hence would follow that this Sacrament might
also in the first institution have been a sign of our Saviors death and
sufferings representing them as presently to follow: and so these words ( This
is my Body) might have this sense: this bread is a representative sign of my
body as instantly suffering and dying upon the Cross: which death and
sufferings were then invisible because they were not then existent. I answer
that our Savior might have pleased according to his absolute power to have
instituted such a Sacrament, but because we have neither ^n Scripture nor
tradition that he instituted ^ere any such: and the words of the institu^ion,
This is my Body, are properly and literally ^o be understood when there is
nothing that ^onstraines us to the contrary; we deny that any such typical or
empty sign as this was ^ctually constituted by our Savior in the in^titution
of this Sacrament; especially seeing that the paschall lamme represented much
^ore lively and perfectly the passion of Christ ^hen the bread and wine: and
that such typi^all representations were proper to the old ^aw which was the
shadow of things to come. And for Protestants they must confess that ^hey have
noe ground in Scripture for any other sign of our Saviors passion, then by
way of commemoration or remembrance, which supposes his suffering and death
past, and not to come, as I have already prouued. And though it were gratis
admitted that in this Sacrament such a prefiguratiue sign of our Saviors
passion was exhibited in the first institution, yet this would noe more hinder
the real presence necessarily required by virtue of this proposition, this is
my Body etc. ^hen its being now a commemotatiue sign of his said passion, as I
have declared and proved already.

Objection.
In the old and new Testament it is usual to call the signs by the names of
that they signify, why then should it be thought strange that our Savior in
this Sacrament (calling bread his body and wine his blood) should speak in the
same manner.

Answer.
I have now showed against Protestants in these principles that there was noe
sacramental sign of the body of our Sauiout in the first institution of this
Sacrament: (Christ's body having been then as visible and present as the bread
and consequently noe sign at all; and if noe sign: the true and real body as
the opponent has granted. Though therefore where the Scripture gives clear
evidence that there is a sign, or that it may be clearly gathered thence,
that the sign should be called by the name of the thing signified, yet there
is great reason where noe such evidence is, but rather to the contrary, that
our Savior should not speak in the same manner; neither is it yet convinced
by all the textes alleged presently by the opponent, that signs are called
by the names of the things signified or be that which they do signify: as
will appear by the particulars.

Objection.
Circumcision is called the couuenant with God. This is my couuenant between
me and you. now that the word couuenant, Genesis 17. v. 10.11.
must be taken for a sign of the couuenant, the line following ^heweth, where
God said: And it shall be a sign of the couuenant between me and you.

Answer.
There were two couuenants or pacts made between God and Abraham in this
chapter. the first ver. 1.2.4.6.7; 8. which was of the favor of God promised
to Abraham and his seed. The second v. 9.10.11. etc. which was of Abraham's
obedience and his childre^s toward God. whereto he obliged them in taking
circumcision: now this second couuenant was a confirmation, sign or seal of
the first on Abraham's part: and so though being considered absolutely in it
self, it was a true and real couuenant, yet in regard of the former couuenant
it was a sign or scale as S. Paul calls it: Hebr. 4. v. 11.
and so it is called here both a couuenant, and a sign of the couuenant that
is, of the first. as if one should make a couuenant with an other of inferior
note: first that he would favor and patronize him in all things; and then that
the other might show his gratitude, and acceptance of this couuenant on his
part, he makes an other that once a year he should come and wait on him at
his table. This second couuenant would be as true real a part of the couuenant
or agreement between them, as the first; and yet would be a confirmation,
ratification, sign or seal of the former. Now that this second was a true
couuenant, is evident out of the words, for it is a true command, obligation,
or iniunction of God accepted of by Abraham, which being done, God of his part
obliged himself to stand to his former couuenant of showing his grace and
mercy unto Abraham and his children. So that that which the objcctio^ says
that the word couuenant is here taken for the sign of the couuenant: if it
means thereby that it signifies not a true couuenant in it felfe which was a
sign of a former couuenant, is far ftom the truth. And though this solution
be clear and cannot be questioned, yet if one would stand merely in the words
cited, one might easily answer that the obligation of circumcision put here
upon Abraham and his children was a true couuenant, but the actual
performance and execution, that is, circumcision in it self performed upon
the Israelites was a sign of this obligatory couuenant. and so it is said.
ver. 10. hoc est pactum meum etc. circumcidetur. this is my couuenant etc.
every mal child shall be circumcised, that it may be a sign of the couuenant
between me and you, that is, that the actual circumcision may be a sign of
this couuenant. So that neither is here the obligation to be circumcised,
called a sign of the couuenant, nor circumcision called the couuenant as the
opponent affirms, not out of Scripture, but from the Protestant gloss or
addition to it. And these answers which I have given are clearly confirmed by
S. Paul Romans 4. v. 11. where speaking of Abraham he said: he took the sign of
circumcision, the seal of the justice of faith etc. that he might be the
father of all believers: where not the obligation appointed by Allmighty God to
be circumcised, but circumcision it self is called the sign, and chiefly the
sign or seal of his being the father of all believers, which was the first
couuenant here made with him.

Objection.
So the lamb of the Passouet was called the Passover because it did figure
the passing over of the Angel.

Answer.
The Scripture in this place calls not expresfely the Lamb the Passeour. Ye
shall gird your loins and put shoes on your feet, holding staves in your
hands, and ye shall eat hastily for it is the Passover of our Lord. the
hebrew has it the Passover to our Lord. which whether it be meant of the
lamb it self, or of the whole compliment of the ceremonies required, or of
thc lamb as eaten in that manner or order imports little, because it makes
nothing at all against us. for we must observe that the word pascha has a
double sense: sometimes it is taken properly and primarily for the real
passing of the Angel from one house to another through Egypt: at other times
and that commonly improperly or figuratively for the solemnity or feast
ordained on that day when he passed, and so yearly upon the same in ensuing
ages. Thus we take ordinarily the words Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension of
our Lord, either for his real birth, rising from the dead, or his ascending
into heaven; or for the solemnities of Christmas, Easter or Ascension: and to
come to our purpose we take the word, Corpus Christi, the body of Christ either
for his real and true body, or for the feast in honor of his body called
amongst us ( Corpus Christi) so that upon that day one might say: Hic dies est
corpus Christi. this day is Corpus Christi.

Now the same was amongst the Jews, and instituted by Allmighty God in this
place: so that by the word Pesach or Passover was understood not the real
passing over of the Angel, but the feast or Passover in honor of it, and so
it is not called in hebrew (as I have noted) the passing over of out Lord, but,
to our Lord; that is in his honor for the great benefit represented in the
feast of the Pascha. Now if the Scripture had said: This is that very Passover
wherein our Lord killed so many thousand Egyptians, and saved so many of our
forefathers, as here is: This is my Body which is braken for you. This is my
blood which shall be shed for many for the remission of sins, whereby the
words body and blood are determined to his real body and blood. for noe figure
or type of them was brooken or shed for our finnes: it might have had some show
of parity. for then must the paschall lamb needs have been called the real
passage of the angel, and not the festiuityes nominated by the same word. Thus
upon Corpus Christi day one may say: This day is the body of our Lord;
understanding by Corpus Christi, the solemnity so called as it is ordinarily
understood: it might well pass. hut if one should say upon that day: Hic dies
est Corpus Christi quod pro nobis datum est: this day is the body of Christ
whieh so many hunderd yearcs a go was given for our salvation. all the world
would condemn him noe less of foolery then of falsehood and impiety. Though
therefore the thing it self, and the picture, memorial and solemnity of it
may be called by the same name in a large or general acception (thus the
picture of Caesar is called Caesar, the solemnity of Corpus Christi is called
Corpus Christi) yet when there be certain other particles and words adjoined
which tie it to a signification of the thing it self, and distinguish it from
the picture or memorial of it, then the figure or memorial can never be
understood by that word accompanied with such adjuncts: neither can the
pourtraict or solemnity be ever joined with that word explicated with those
said restrictiue particules. Thus though seeing the picture of the present King
of Spain, I can say: this is King Phillip the fourth: for that word signifies
as well King Phillip painted as really existing, yet I cannot say with truth if
the word, is, be taken in its proper and substantial signification which for
the present is supposed I this is that King Phillip who lives now in Spain,
and whom this picture represents. neither can I say seeing the King himselue:
this is King Philip which stands in such a chamber painted in the low
countries: for that is not the real, but painted King, seeing therefore in the
words of the institution, that which our Savior gave his. Apostles is not only
called his body which happily alone were indisserent to fignifie his body
painted or real; substantial or figurative natural or mystical: but adds
this restrictiue ( which is given for you) which particle can agree only with
his real body. the opponent will prove nothing at all against Roman Catholics
unless there be produced out of Scripture some text where the word signifiing
the thing it self, be applied to the sign or figure with the same restrictiue
and limiting particles, as proper to that thing it self; as here the word, my
Body, is affirmed of the word, this, and declared to be that body which was
given for us, so that the words, my Body which is broken or given for you, can
never be taken for any sign or figure of his true body for then a mere sign
of his body should be broken for us.

Objection.
In the same sense, the arc the sign of the presence of God, is called God.
for when the arc was brought into the camp, it is said, God is come into the
camp.

Answer.
It is said so indeed but not by the Israelites which were the faithful people
of God, but by the unbelieving philistines who esteemed the Israelites to have
an idol for their God, as well as themselfes: and the philistines feared much
and said: God is come into the camp. 1. King 4. v. 7.
and by this argument the opponent may prove as well that it was a sign of
many Gods, because the philistines called it Gods. 1. King 4, v. 8.
who will save us from the hands of these high Gods? these are the Gods etc.

Objection.
So the rock is called Christ, because it is a figure of Christ.

Answer.
1. Cor. 10. v. 4.
The words are these: They drank of the spiritual rock which followed them,
but the rock was Christ. where seeing that the text speaks expressly of a
spiritual rock and says that rock was Christ, it speaks not of any rock
which was a sign of Christ (for that must have been a material visible rock)
but of that which was Christ himself: for he is truly a spiritual rock
without all signs and figures, as he is our spiritual phisician, our good
shepherd etc. and this spiritual rock only from which as the true
supernatural cause that water flowed, and which alone can truly be said to
have followed the childeren of Israel in the desert, was properly our Savior.

Objection.
Genesis 41. v. 6.
The seven ears ares said to be seven years.

Answer.
Certain it is that Pharao knew well enough that those were not real but
imaginary ears framed in his fantasy in time of his dream, and so never
intended to demand what they were in themselves, but what they portended, or
what was signified by them, for it was the interpretation of his dream which
he sought for. Genesis 41. v. 25.
and if Joseph had answered him that these seven ears were cettaine
representations which passed in his mind (as in themselves they truly were) he
would have deserved disgrace and punishment, rather then praise and reward: for
Pharao knew that as well as he. Joseph therefore answered according to Pharaos
intention, that those seven ears signified seven years: and though in the
English and Latin be the word ( are) are seven years septem sunt anni: yet
the Hebrew according to the propriety of that language, has noe word expressly
signifiing ( are) which may (for any thing that can be convinced srom the
Hebrew text) have as well the verb signify or represent understood as the
verb, are, seven ears, seven years, that is, seven ears signify or
prefigure seven years: so that standing close to the original the argument
proves nothing. yet though we should with the English translation understand
the words are seven years, yet it would prove as little: for they were
certain Hieroglyphikes, emblemes, or characters defining or prescribing what
was portended by the dream. noe otherwise then when one seeing a virgin
painted with her eyes blinded and a pair of scales in her hand, should ask,
what is this? if one should answer him that it is a pi^ture drawn upon a
painted cloth, he would scarce have patience with such a folly or mockery: for
he could not prudently be supposed to demand that which he saw with his eyes.
but if it should be answered that it is justice, he would presently be
satisfied. or if one who I know, could read Latin, and not understand it seeing
this word, domus, should ask me what it is, and I should answer him that it
is, domus, he might think I mock him: but if I answered him that it is a
house, he would take it for an answer. but if I knew he could not yet read, I
might answer him that the word he asked me was, domus. thus according to the
different circumstances and reasons that one has to judge that he who
demandes, what this or that is, intends to know either what it is substantially
in it self, or significantly in respect of some other thing which it figures
out unto us, the answer is to be framed, but yet with this caveat, that when
the subject of the demand is a thing absolute of it self, and not a sign,
figure, or emblem of anothcr thing, then we are truly to answer what it is
substantially in it self, unless it be clear that the demanders intention be
to know what in some extraordinary case it signifies. but when the subject in
question is it self a sign, figure, emblem or representation of some other
thing, it is to be answered what it signifies, unless it appeates evidently or
very probably that the intention of the demand is to know not what it
signifies, but what it is.

Thus when Pharao demanded what those ears wear, they being only conceived by
him to be certain presages or tokens of something else, noe man could in
common sense answer him but by telling him what was presaged or intended by
them. that is, what they were in that sense in which he demanded, which answer
could not be true in any other sense then a figurative. for when Joseph gave
this answer that seven ears were seven years, had he understood it properly
and substantially, it had concluded a formal contradiction and implication in
the terms. For it is impossible that the thoughts of ones head which pass in
an hour should be truly and really one or many years. So the truth of holy
Scripture and Joseph's answer necessarily requiers a figurative sense. and had
our Savior said as expressly, this bread which you see is my body, as Joseph
said seven ears are seven years, he should have been understood to have
spoken for the same reason only in a figurative sense. but seeing he neither
said, nor intended to say any such matter, but only, This is my Body etc. that
is, this which I am now to give you, and you receive is my body (as I have
showed) he must be supposed to affirm in a real, proper and substantial
sense without all signs or figures, that that which he was then about to give
them was his true body. for the word this both in it self and in those
circumstances signifying a thing absolute in it self and noe sign or figure,
as the word ears do in the place objected, cannot be thought to have any
figurative signification: neither the word, my body (being expressed by that
which follows, which is given for you to be his real body) can be impropetly
nor figuratively understood to signifye a sign, figure, remembrance or
commemoration of his body for it was not a sign, figure and remembrance of his
body, but his real and true body which was given for us. neither can there be
any figure or impropriety in the word, is, as though it were nothing but
signifies or commemorates: for seeing the subject of the proposition this, that
is, which I am to give, and the predicate, my Body which is given for you:
properly understood, can be truly and really the one affirmed of the other
thus: This which I am to give you, is really and substantially my body which is
given for you, according to the rules of all good interpreters it must be
understood so as the opponent also acknowledged before. if therefore the
opponent, or any other Protestant will prove any thing against us in this
particular, there must be produced some text of Scripture where a proposition
(all things considered) can be verifyed in a real and proper sense: as I have
proved this proposition: This is my Body which is given for you, can be, and
yet is to be understood figuratiuly and improperly. for so long as they produce
ptopositions which cannot possibly be understood in a real and proper sense as
this is which they have cited: seven ears are seven years, and the like,
there is a manifest disparity, because the former can very connaturally be
understood in a proper sense, and these not. and the fundamental and
unanswerable reason is because the words of Scripture as also of all other
authors, must be understood properly when soever they can be understood so, or
when nothing compels us to the contrary.

Objection.
Even before the fall of Adam there were two trees, the one whereof was called
the tree of life, because it was a sign and memorial to Adam that so long as
he obeyed God, he should inioye life: the other of knowledge of good and evil,
because it was a sign and memorial unto him, that if he obeyed God, he should
know by experience the difference between good and evil.

Answer.
These are only glosses and additions to Scripture contrary to what was before
promised. where read you in the Bible that those two trees were so called
because they were signs, the one of life, the other of knowledge of good and
evil? if there be any such place, why was it not cited in the margent? if noe
such, what can it be but glossing and adding to Scripture? and not only
without, but against Scripture, in the very places cited, if we stand to the
express words? for if the tree of life had been so called only because it was
a sign or memorial to Adam that so long as he obeyed God he should enjoy
life, as the objection affirms, why then did God Allmighty provide even after
his disobedience that he should not eat of the tree of life by putting a
cherub in the way least by eating he should live for ever? Genesis 3. v. 23.24.


Thus far I have answered the objections, and laid open the mistakes which
are extant in the paper: some others there are which are commonly objected and
mainely stood upon by our adversaries in this most weighty point of the real
presence, least therefore some might stik upon them, as not being yet solued,
I will propound distinctly some of the cheef of them observing the method
which I held before, of objection and answer.

Objection.
What soever may be answered to any figure or sign in these words, my body
which is given for you, as being so clear and determinately signifying the
real body of Christ, yet why can there not be a figure in the word, is. which
may be as much as, signifies, so that those words of our Savior This is my
Body: may have this sense: this signifies my Body?

Answer.
I have in effect already satisfied this difficulty, or at least given
sufficient grounds to satisfye it. for the word, is, is never to be drawn from
its ordinary and proper signification when it can with all conueniency retain
it, as I have just now demonstrated, it may here, beside that which is more
clear and known, cannot prudently be signified by that which is more obscure
and remote from our knowledge, now the body of Christ visibly present before
the eyes of the Apostles was more clearly known to them then the significant
figure of the bread, and so could not be signified without absurdity by the
bread in time of the first institution of this Sacrament, as if I show my naked
hand to any one, it were absurd to hold up my glove to signify that my hand is
there.

Further, had the bread then barely signified the body of Christ as presently
after to suffer, it would have been a bare type and figure of his passion, as
was the Paschall Lamb, and so a shadow of things to come, proper to the old
law, and consequently would not have been a Sacrament of the law of grace, as
certainly, according to all, it was.

Objection.
Joan. 6.
When the Jews thought that our Savior would give them his true flesh to eat,
he corrected their error and told them, it is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing, the words which I speak unto you, are spirit and
life, therefore our Savior gives us not his real flesh to eat.

Answer.
Says our Savior here my flesh profits nothing? where find you that? noe,
replies the protestant, but he says, that the flesh profits nothing, and
seeing he had spoken much before of his own flesh, what can he be though^ to
mean by the flesh, but his own? and can any Christian think that he meant his
own, unless he deny that he is redeemed by the torments, and death of Christ,
or esteem his redemption noe profit: or dare a Christian entertain so base an
opinion of Christ's most sacred and divine flesh, as to think that it is in
opposition to the Spirit of God, as the flesh here mentioned, is affirmed to be
by our Savior, it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing:
or where through the whole Bible shall they find, flesh contradistinct from
spirit, as here they are, whereby is not meant, our corrupt nature, our fleshly
immaginations, our low and natural discourses, ignorance, malice, etc. and
must it only here signify the flesh of Christ? is not this Scripture mistaken!
it is therefore of the Jews carnal and gross understanding whereof he
speaks, which was wholly opposite to the true spirit, light, and life of God,
which made them immagine that our Savior would cut out pieces of flesh from
his body and give it them to eat, or permit himself to be visibly cut and
quartered, as meat is at the shambles, and so roasted, and eaten by them, as S.
Augustine observes in this place, which natural, and carnal discourse our
Savior affirms to profit nothing, and not his own most pure and heavenly
flesh understood aright only by true faith, which he calls here the Spirit, or
spiritual light. it will be said, that we affirming that our Saviors flesh is
truly eaten by us though not in so gross a manner, are no less condemned by
our Savior, for our carnal understanding of this mystery, then were the
Capernaites. I answer, that there is as much difference betwixt us in this
particular, as there was betwixt S. Iofeph and Herod, about our Saviors
nativity, for though both of them understood that he had true flesh, and was
borne of a woeman, yet Herod imagined that he was conceived and borne in the
ordinary manner of other children, that he was a mere man, etc. and was holy
ignorant both of his mothers virginity, and that his human soul and body were
united to the divine person. Thus the Capernaites having no more knowledge of
his divinity then Herod had, thought that his flesh was to be eaten after the
same ordinary manner that other meats use to be eaten, merely to feed the body,
and went noe sarther. But all true Catholics believe, that his sacred flesh
is living, and united to the divine person, and eaten by us, though truly, and
really as he was truly and really borne, yet after a most pure, heavenly, and
in effable manner as he was brought into this world, whereby his blessed flesh
considered absolutely in it self is neither rent, nor torn, nor divided, nor
consumed, but remains as whole, perfect and entire, after he is eaten by us as
it was before, as the Apostle S. Andrew sais. In this manner, though our Savior
spoake of his real flesh, yet were his words Spirit and Life, noe less then
these words of S. John, the word was made flesh, Joan. 1.
and a thousand such like are, though they speak of the true flesh of our
Savior: because his very flesh it self by reason of its union to the divine
person, and glorious proprieties wholly deifyed, and spiritualizd, in such sort
that receiving it we receive a Spiritual body, though true and real; Here the
earnest Reformer will tell me that I speak contradictions, for it is as
impossible that a body should be spiritual, as a Spirit corporal, I answer.
If I speak co^tradictions, I have learned them out of the Protestant Bible,
and common prayer book; where S. Paul says of a body after the resurrection,
it is sown a natural body it rises a Spiritual body. And yet this wonder full
body of Christ, exists in the Sacrament much more like a spirit, then does any
other glorious body according to ordinary providence; viz, whole in the whole
host, and whole in every part of it, as the soul exists in the body, an Angel
in the place he possesses, and God in the world. And as this admirable body,
has the proprieties of a Spirit, so has it the properties of life, being
living bread, and giving life eternal to those who worthily receive it, as our
Savior pronounces of it, and according to S. John, what was made in him was
life, divinity, Joan. 1.
and humanity, and soul, and body, and flesh, and blood in him are all life,
foe great reason had our Savior to say, speaking of them, the words which I
have spoaken to you are spirit, and life.

These are the chief arguments against the real presence which Protestants
use to draw from Scripture; others there are fittet for heathens, then
Christians, which they draw from natural reason, where to though I be not
oblidged to answer, in this treatis, yet because I am exceedingly desirous to
give all the satisfaction I am able to every one; I will breefly set the chief
of them down, and as breefly answer them, but because I suppose for the present
that I dispute against such as make profession to be Christians, I esteem my
self to have given a sufficient satisfaction to their difficulties, if I give
them clear instances in some article of Christian faith which they believe,
wherein they must solue the like difficulty, to that which they urge from
natural reason against this mystery.

Objection.
How can accidents exist without a suhstance, as here they must do?

Answer.
How can a humanc nature subsist without its propet personality, as in the
Incarnation of Christ it must do? unless Protestants with Nestorius will
grant that in Christ be two Persons.

Objection.
How can one and the same body be in many places at the same time, as they must
be if the real presence be true.

Answer.
How can one and the same soul, Angel, and God be in many places at the same
time, which they must be if their spirituality, and Gods vbiquity be true.

Objection.
How can the parts of our Saviors body so penetrate one an other that the
whole body may be contained in the least part of the host, or drop of the
chalice?

Answer.
How can the body of our Savior penetrate the door and pass through his
mothers womb, when they both remained shut?

Objection.
How should the body of our Savior in the consecrated host be distinguished
from others, when it is put amongst them?

Answer.
How should a drop of our Saviors blood he distinguished from the blood of
other men, if in time of his passion it had been mixed with them?

Objection.
If our Saviors flesh and blood be really present in the Sacrament, then cats
and Rats may eat them?

Answer.
If our Sauiors flesh and blood were truly in the passion, particles of his
sacred flesh being rent of, and drops of his blood shed here and there, then
dogs and cats might have as well eaten them,

Objection.
How is it possible that the whole bulk of a man's body should be so light, that
a fly should be able to crary it?

Answer.
How should the whole bulk of a man's body be so light, that it should mount up
like a flame of fire, into heaven? as our Saviors did in his ascension?

Objection.
If there be so many miracles, as you must hold wrought by our Savior, in the
real presence, why were none of them seen, as the other mitacles of Christ
were?

Answer.
If there were so many miracles wrought in the Incarnation of our Savior as
you must hold, why were none of them seen, as the other miracles of Christ
were?

Objection.
How can we possibly conceive a body with out any extention of parts, or local
form and figure?

Answer.
How can we possibly conceive a human nature subsisting without a human
personality?

Objection.
What difference will there be betwixt a body without all extention, and local
figure, and a spirit?

Answer.
What difference will there be betwixt the soul of a newborn infant and that
of a brute beast, which cannot actually understand? the one has a power to
understand, will you say, and not the other; the one has a power to be
extended, and have a local figure, say I, and not the other.

Objection.
If our Saviors body be truly in the Sacrament, then all wicked persons, and
grievous sinners who frequent it, receive his true body into their mouths, and
breasts.

Answer.
If our Saviors body was truly in the wilderness, then the Devil received it
into his arms and carried it to the pinnacle of the temple, and if it were a
true body in time of his Passion, then Judas the traitor kissed it, the hard
hearted Jews, and Barbarous soldiers tutcht it, abused it, scorgd it,
crucified it, and troad his most precious blood under their feet, is not this
as much disgraceful to his body, and blood, as now to be received into sinners
mouths?

Objection.
If there be nothing visible or sensible but species, accidents and forms of
bread, in the Sacrament, how shall worms be generated from the host
corrupted, or putrifyed, seeing they must consist of matter and form, and so
be produced of some material substance.

Answer.
If there were nothing but human nature in Christ as man, without human
personality, how could it perform the actions of a person, seeing all other
actions of men proceed from their persons, and not from their natures, as the
complete principle of them. You will say, the divine personality supplied the
place of human personality in Christ, and I say that divine power. supplies
the place of nature in this Sacrament, in producing a matter, after the species
of bread be corrupted, and the body of our Sauiout ceases to be under them.

Objection.
But how can an accident perform the office of a substance?

Answer.
But how can the personality of one person perform the office of the
personality of an other?

Objection.
God united the divine personality to humane nature, and so it subsists by it,
as supplying the want of its own.

Answer.
God unites a matter produced at the exigency of nature, to the accidents which
were of bread, which in the production of worms from a putrifyed host
supplies the want of their own.

These, to my best remembrance, are the chief difficulties, which according to
the principles, of natural reason, our Adversaries commonly press against us
in this mystery, in answer whereof, I have plainly showed, that they themselves
must answer as great or greater difficultyes, which may be opposed by heathens,
and Infidells against other articles of our faith which they believe, let them
therefore either desist to move any such heathnish objections as these, against
the real presence, or acknowledge that whilst they press these against it,
they give just occasion to an Infidel to press the like against themselves:
which when they have solued in other mysteries, they will have solu'd their
own, against this.

Before I end this controversy, I will sum up briefly what I have said at
large in this treatis, that the Reader may have a full sight of it at one View.
first, I have (according to my former method) cited the doctrine of the Council
of Trent. whence clearly appears that it conteynes nothing, gross and
Capernaiticall (as Protestants commonly are made believe) but a most heavenly,
pure, mystical, living, and ineffable presence. Secondly I have cited the
words of the Evangelists and S. Paul touching the Institution, which are not
only most clear in themselves (as I have proved) but are judged so to be both
by Martin Luther, in his first Tome printed at Iena, an. 1589. Concione 3. de
Confessione, and Sacramento Eucharistiae, part 2. page 329. where after he had
cited the words of the Evangelists, he says thus: Haec sunt verba quae neque
ipsi, neque etiam Satan negare poterit, in quae figendus pes est, vt firmiter
in iis consistamus. Sunt autem nuda and planissima, quae nullis
interpretationibus eludi possunt. Quod and panis sit Christi corpus. pro nobis
traditum, and calix Christi sanguis, pro nobis effusus, and iubemur illa facere
in commemoratione ipsius.

These are words, which neither they (he means Roman Catholicques) nor Satan
can deny, upon which we are to fix our foot, that we may stand immouuable
in them. For they are naked and most plain which cannot be shifted of by any
Interpretations. That bread is the body of Christ, which is given for us, and
the cup the blood of Christ, which is shed for us, and that we are commanded to
do them in remembrance of him. Thus Luther. which though he here affirms, to
prove his errors, of Consubstantiation, and Communion in both kinds against
us, yet withal he clearly, confesses that the words are most plain for the
real presence of Christ's true body, and blood in this holy Sacrament, which he
always held.

These texts also are so undeniably clear, for the real Presence, that
Zuinglius the first author of the Sacramentaries changed the word in all the
Evangelists, and S. Paul (...) in Greek, est in Latin, in these words, This is
my Body, this is my blood, into significat, thus, this signisies my body, this
signifies my blood, and so printed them in his Bible, dedicated to Francis King
of France, and printed at Tiguris anno 1525. as witnesses Conradus
Sclussenburgh a learned Protestant, in Theologia Caluinistarum Ie. 2. ar. 3.
fol. 43. And Zuinglius himself approuues of this his translation to* 2. de
vera and falsa religione c. 5. fol. 210.

And Beza. Translating, those words of S. Luke, qui pro vobis effunditur* which
is powered out for you, puts, them thus in greek, (...), etc. (...). Hoc
poculum quod pro vobis effunditur, this chalice which is powered out for you,
and in his Latin translation he puts them thus, hoc poculum etc. in sanguine
meo, qui pro vobis effunditur, which blood is powered out for you, referring the
word this, to blood and not to chalice, quite contrary to the Greek
construction, which not withstanding he confesses to have found, in all the
ancient Greek copies which he had read, and having noe other shift to avoid
the force of these words as they stand in all these Greek copies acknowledging
that they make quite against him, he is put to that desperate insolensie, as to
say, that these words, which (chalice) is powered out for you, have crept out of
the margent into the text, by negligence of writers, and so are not the word
of God* so Bezaes translation Greek, and Latin, printed, by Henry Steenen,
anno 1565. Thirdly, I have discovered clearly the sundry gross mistakes of
Scripture, in the words, it, take, eat this, do this in remembrance, etc.
Fourtly, I have showed the mistakes, in the parities brought, of I am a door, a
vine, a way, etc. Fifthly, I have laid open the mistakes, in the instances, of
other Sacraments, and figurative speeches alleged by the opponent in the old
Testament, and many such like misapplications.

The maine things where in I stand are, that the words of S. Luke are so
clear, that Beza has noe way to avoid the force of them, then by saing that
they crept out of the Margent into the text, though he confesses to have found
them, as he cites them, in all the Greek Copies which he had seen.

And secondly, that seeing these words, This is my Body which is given for you,
may most easily and connaturally be understood in a most proper sense, without
violating any other article of our faith, or plain place of holy Scripture,
that they must be so understood, unless we will take away all force from
Scripture to prove any thing, and destroy the fundame^tall rule not only of
Interpretation of Scripture, but of all human conversation, which is, that
every one is, so be understood to speak properly, when nothing constraynes to
the contrary, ^eeing therefore, I have clearly demonstrated, that in the
insta^ces alleged none of the figurative speeches, can be understood in a
proper sense, without the violation of some article of our faith, proceeding
according to true discourse, even confessed by our aduersarios, I convince also
that they have no force to prove, that these sacramental words are to be
understood figuratively.

THE SEVENTH CONTROVERSY Concerning Communion under one kind.
The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, delivered in the Council of Trent.
Sess. 13. cap. 3.
SEmper haec fides in Ecclesia Dei fuit. Statim post consecrationem verum
Domini nostri corpus, verumque eius sanguinem sub panis and vini specie vna cum
ipsius anima and diuinitate existere; sed corpus quidem sub specie panis, and
sanguinem sub vini specie ex vi verborum: ipsum corpus sub specie vini, and
sanguinem sub specie panis, animamque sub vtraque vi naturalis illius
connexionis, and concomitantiae, qua parts Christi Domini, qui iam ex mortuis
resurrexit, non amplius moriturus, inter se copulantur: Diuinitatem porro
propter admirabilem illam eius cum corpore and anima hypostaticam vnionem.
Quapropter verissimum est tantumdem sub altetutra specie, atque sub vtraque
contineri, totus enim and integer Christus, sub panis specie, and sub quauis
ipsius speciei part, totus item sub vini specie, and sub eius partibus existit.

This faith has been always in the church of God, that presently after
consecration the true body and blood of Christ did exist under the species of
bread, and wine, together with his soul and divinity. But his body under the
species of bread, and his blood under the species of wine, by force of the
words: but his body under the species of wine, and his blood vndet the species
of bread, and his soul vnde^ both, by force of that natural connection, and
concomitancy, whereby the parts of Christ our Lord, who is now risen from the
dead, not to die any more, are joined together, moreover also his divinity both
with his body and soul by reason of that admirable hypostaticall union with
them. wherefore it is most true, that as much is contained under either kind,
as under both together. for whole and entire Christ exists under the species or
kind of bread, and each part of it, and whole Christ exists under the species
of wine, and under each part of it. The same doctrine is confirmed. sess. 13.
can. 3.

Item sess. 21. cap. 3.
Insuper declarat quamuis Redemptor no^ter, vt antea dictum est, in suprema
illa coena^ ^oc Sacramentum in duabus speciebus insti^uerit, and Apostolis
tradiderit, tamen fatendum esse, etiam sub altera tantum specie totum atque
integrum Christum, verumque Sacramentum su^^i, ac prop^erea quod ad fructum
attinet, nul^a gratia, necessaria ad salutem, eos defraudari, qui vnam speciem
solam accipiunt.

Moreover ( the Council) declares, that allthough our Redeemer, as is above
said, instituted this Sacrament in his last supper under both kinds, yet it is
to be confessed, that under one only kind whole Christ, and a true Sacrament is
received; and therefore, for so much as belongs to the ftuict, that those who
receive it only under one kind, are not defrauded of any grace, necessary to
salvation.

Ibidem cap. 2.
Praeterea declarat, hanc potestatem pepetuo in Ecclesia fuisse, vt in
Sacramentorum dispensatione, salua illorum substantia, ea statueret vel
mutaret, quae sus^ipientium vtilitati, seu ipsorum Sacramentorum venerationi,
pro rerum, temporum, ac locorum varietate, magis expedire iudicaret. Id autem
Apostolus non obscure visus est inuisse, cum ait: 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. ^.
Sic nos existimet homo, vt ministr^s Christi, and dispensatores mysteriorum
Dei, atque quidem hac potestate vsum esse, satis constat, cum in multis aliis,
tum in hoc ipso Sacramento, cum ordinatis non nullis circa eius vsum, caetera
inquit, cum venero disponam. Quare agnoscens sancta matter Ecclesia hanc suam in
administratione Sacramentorum authoritatem, licet ab initio Christianae
Religionis, non infrequens vtriusque speciei vsus fuisset; tamen progressu
temporis, latissimeiam mutata illa consuetudine grauibus and justice de causis
adducta, hanc consuetudinem sub altera specie communicandi, approbauit, and pro
lege habendam decreuit, quam reprobare aut sine ipsius Ecclesiae authoritate
pro libito mutare non licet.

Further (the Cou^cil) declares, that this power has always been in the
church, that in the dispensation of the Sacraments, the substance being kept
inuiolated and entire, she might appoint and change, such things, as, she
judged to be expedient for the profit of the receivers, or the veneration of
the Sacraments, according to the variety of things, times, and places. And this
the Apostle seems not obscurely to have insinuated, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 6.
when he says: Let a man so esteem us, as Ministers of Christ, and
dispsnsers of the mysteries os God, and that he made use of this power is clear
enough, both in many other things, and particularly, in this Sacrament, when*
ordayning some things concerning the use of this Sacrament, he said, I will
dispose the rest when I come. wherefore our holy mother the church taking
notice of this her power in the administration of Sacraments, though in the
beginning of the church the use os both kinds was frequent. yet in process of
time that custom being now notably changed, being induced by just, and
important reasons, she has approuued this custom of communicating under one
kind, and has decreed that it be held for a law, which it is not lawful to
change, or reprove at ones pleasure without the authority of the church. The
like doctrine is delivered, in the first chap. of this session.

From these texts it is manifest, that the Council, was induced to command this
practice, first because whole Christ is under both kinds, 2. because in each
kind is the whole essence, and substance of this Sacrament, 3. because noe
sacramental grace necessary to salvation, is lost by communicating under one
kind. 4. because many important reasons toutching the honor and respect dew
to so divine a Sacrament, mouued her to it. 5. because there is noe divine
command to the contrary, as appearrs sess. 21. cap. 1. 6 because the church
has power to dispense the Sacraments as she finds most eo^uenient, so long,
as Gods commands, and their substance are not violated. 7. That it is not in
any ones power, save only of the church to change this costome.

The Protestant Position. Delivered in the 39. Articles of the English Church.
Art. 30.
THc cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people. For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordenance, ought to be ministered to all
Christian men alike.

This is proved by Scripture mistaken, as will presently appear.
Having therefore, as I hope, cleared this point of the real presence in the
just balance of an open and impartial eye, it will not be very difficult to
even an other as a sequel from this concerning communion under one kind, which
though it be not thought upon in these objections, yet this fit occasion, the
great difficulties which our adversaries raise against it, the earnest desire
which many not otherwise ill disposed, have to be satisfied in it, and the
request of others who have seen some part of this treatis have put me upon
necessity to say something but very succinctly of this matter holding my self
close to Scripture according to my former method.

This point therefore supposes the real presence, and is rather to be treated
against Lutherans, or such other Protestants as are convinced of that mystery
then against Caluinists or Suinglians who disbeleeue it, for were not our
Saviors body and blood really present there, as the practice of receiving one
only kind had never been allowed, so could it not have been defended. This
therefore supposed, I will endeavor to defend communion under one kind, and
answer whatsoever is pressed by our adversaries against it out of Scripture
mistaken.

Objection.
First they urge the institution of this Sacrament as having been under the
forms both of bread and wine, which institution is to be followed by all
Christians and so both to be received.

Answer.
The bare institution of a Sacrament draws with it noe necessity of
frequenting it, as appears in Priesthood and marriage instituted by our
Savior. which not withstanding impose noe necessity or command to receive
them, so that standing precisely in the institution, noe man will be obliged to
receive either both, or either of rhem.

Objection.
Secondly though the bare institution of a Sacrament impose noe command to
receive it, yet it imports a precept that when it is received or administted,
it be done in that manner it was instituted, as it appears in baptism,
Priesthood and other Sacraments. Seeing therefore our Savior instituted this
Sacrament both in the consecration and communion in both kinds, at least
whenever it is received, it must be received under both.

Answer.
This objection inuolues many difficulties and is first to he vndeestood that
Sacraments are to be received and administered as they were first instituted in
such matters as belong to the substance and essence of the Sacrament, not in
other accidentary circumstances of time, place, persons, precedences,
consequences, etc. as was the institution of this Sacrament after supper,
sitting upon the ground, given to priests only, in a private secular house etc.

Secondly there is something particular in this Sacrament which is in noe
other, even concerning the substance of it: for the very same entire substance
being here put under each kind makes that woesoeuer receaues either of them,
receaues the whole substance of this Sacrament and consequently receaues a true
Sacrament instituted by our Savior; and so that which is able to sanctify him
who worthily receaues either of them.

Thirdly concerning the substance of this Sacrament all that can be gathered
from the bare words of the institution, is that it is to be consecrated and
received by Priests such as were the Apostles who were Priests, then made when
it was first instituted under both kinds, but here is noe president given about
the lay people, because none then received it. That the whole substance of our
Savior is here received I suppose for the present, neither is it much
questioned by such as grant the real presence, nor can be possibly doubted of
by any who believes that our Saoiour dies not more, and so both flesh and
blood, and life, and soul, and divinity are all united together weresoeuer
he is: hence therefore follows that lay people receive as much of our Savior
(seeing they receive him wholly and interily) as Priests do.

That he who receaues our Savior thus under one only kind receaues a true
Sacrament is as clear as the former for who can without absurdity deny that
under one kind is exhibited an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual
grace, which is the complete definition of a Sacrament according to our
adversaries: for here the forms of bread only containing under them our
Savior by way of meat, signify that he confers a spiritual grace nourishing
and feeding our souls to eternal life and thus much is signified by the
English ministers when they distribute the bread to the people saying: the Body
of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy body and soul to eternal life, etc. and
containing his body represented as separated from his blood, and so as dead by
force of the words of consecration are an outward visible commemoratiue sign
of his sacred death and passion. and seeing that both bread is composed of many
grains, and wine of many grapes united together, the mystical unity of
Christians receiving this Sacrament is sufficiently signified hy the species of
either of them. if then here he an outward visible sign of an inward
spiritual grace both exhibitiue, commemoratiue and significatiue, here must
needs be a true Sacrament even according to the pttnciples of our adversaries.
and what I have said of the form of bread, is by the same reason verified of
the form of wine. but not only in their principlcs, but in all good Theology
there must be a true Sacrament under each kind: for certainly seeing that a
different grace is conferred by each of them, the one of spiritual meat, the
other of spiritual drink (which how it is to be understood, I will hereafter
examine) each will be sufficient to sanctify and help the soul to eternal
life. If it should be replied that in neither of these kinds alone is exhihited
a complete sign either of our spiritual refection, or the death of our
Savior but only a partial or imparfect sign of them, which notwithstanding
are completely significd under both together. I answer that if by a complete
sign be understood a most full and express representation of these two
particulars, I grant that there is not under one only kind so full and express
a representation (and in this sense not so complete a sign of them) as under
both together. but then it must be prouued (this most full and express
representation under both being exhibited to lay Christians by the consecration
and communion of the Priest in the dread full sacrifice of the mass) that the
substance of this sacrifice requirs that they should be allways so fully and
expressly represented in each particular communion of the people. but if by a
complete sign be understood a sign sufficient to signify both our spiritual
food and union, and the death of our Savior, I deny that there is not a
complete sign of both exhibited under each kind. This distinction may be much
illustrated by an instance from baptism, certainly the mystery of the trinity
was more expressly, fully and completely signified by that ancient coustome of
a threefold dipping the child in the water, and the words of baptism then by
the same words and putting water once upon the child, and yet this latter is
judged sufficient even by Protestants. for who can doubt that the forms of
bread sufficiently give us to understand that our Saviors is the food of our
souls noe less then the bread of proposition in the old, and the bread
multiplied by our Savior in the new Testament; and his calling himself the
bread of life in the sixth of S. John prefigured and signified sufficiently that
our Savior was to be the bread of our souls: and who seeing a bodyly before
him void of soul and blood as our Savior is here represented by force of the
words, gathers not presently that it is dead though he see not the blood which
issued from it: and the same is of the blood of our Savior under the form of
wine, for this alone is noe less sufficient to represent the death of our
Savior then was tbe blood alone of the paschall lamb sprinkled upon the
posts of the Israelites by the Jewish priests to prefigurate the shedding of
his precious blood and sacred passion: nor is the blood of our Savior under
the form of wine less sufficient to represent the spiritual exhiberation and
conforting of our souls the^ was the wine in Cana of Galilee, and that
sentence spoken of by the Prophet (wine producing virgins) able to fore
figurate the same blood so comforting: as also the species of bread or wine
alone to signify the unity and amity which is to be amongst Christians both
in regard of Christ and themselves, as I have showed. Hence therefore appears
that seeing in each kind apart both the death of our Savior, and our
spiritual meat and drink and union respectively are sufficiently signifieds
each must necessarily contain a true Sacrament, and not only the part of a
true Sacrament: and seeing in each a true Sacrament is received, each alone
must confer that grace which is signified by it, and so sanctify the soul of
such as receive it, and consequently may be received fruitfully and sauingly
alone for so much as belongs to the bare institution: for if our Savior
instituted each species apart to confer saving grace, then who receaues
either devoutly receaues that grace for which our Savior instituted it, and so
we are put in the state of salvation by reeeauing one unless thete be some
other command produced which obliges all to receive both, which shall here
after be examined.

Objection.
Some may happily object that this answer subsists not, for according to this
doctrine the Priest also receaues a true Sacrament and the spiritual graces
and fruits of it when he receaues the host only, and yet even after he has
received the host; he is obliged to receive the chalice according to Roman
Catholics, therefore though it should be granted that lay people by receiving
under the species of bread only, receive a true Sacrament with the saving grace
signified and conferred by it, yet they may be obliged to receive the other
kind as Priests are.

Answer.
There is first a great difference betwixt the Apostles and lay Christians, for
they were directly and expressly obliged by our Savior in time of the
institution to receive the chalice even after they had received the true
Sacrament and the grace of it under the species of bread. whence may probably
be gathered that all Priests consecrating have the same obligation of receiving
both: but noe such command was directly and expessely given to lay people none
having been there. Secondly Priests consecrating and sacrificing are obliged to
receive of each part of their sacrifice, and so though precisely standing in
the essence of a Sacrament, there be no divine obligation, yet in regard of
consummating and participating of their own sacrifice they are bound to receive
both as the Apostles did, which has noe place in lay people. The answer only
concluds that standing precisely in the institution, seeing lay people receive
under one kind a true Sacrament with saving grace, it cannot be thence
convinced that they are bound to receive more; so that if there be any
obligation of receiving both it must rise from some other head and not from the
bare institution, whereof we treat in answer to this objection now taken from
it alone.

Objection.
It may be yet further objected that our Savior here instituted a full and
complete refection not only by way of meat, or by way of drink only, but of
both together, and therefore such as receive one only kind receive but one
part of this heavenly banquet and want the other, which seems quite contrary
to the institution and intention of our Savior.

Answer.
Our Savior instituted this celestial banquet in so ineffable a manner that
the very same substantial thing was to be both our meat and drink, to wit,
himself and that so abundantly that either both to geather, or each a part are
so suffizing a repast, that they communicate strengh and life to all such as
worthily receive them: and though both being received make but one complete
refection by reason they are both taken at once by way of meat and drink, as
it happens in other ordinary refections, yet each of them received apart, or at
different times, is also a full and complete refection of the soul by reason
that each communicates saving grace sufficient to salvation, and this evidently
appears in common feasts and banquets, for when many dishes are eaten and
different sorts of wine drunk at the same time or meeting, they are esteemed
but one meal or banquet, and yet if at different times one should feed now
upon one, then upon an other of these dishes apart, or drank but one sort
of wine one day, and an other of them an other, then such eating and drinking
by reason of the diversity of times would be counted diverse sufficient
refections: and if it were possible to find in other meats and drink what is
found in this Sacrament, that as well the one the other alone could preserve
and confer life, and that one could live with drinking without eating, or
eating without drinking, then either of these a part would become a full
refection all therefore that can be gathered from this objection is only that
our Savior in the first institution gave a most plentiful and abundant
banquet, whereof each part in it self was sufficient to confer life and
satiete to his Apostles, which in succeeding ages being received either
jointly, or apart, was to be a sufficient refection for Christians. But from
the institution under both kinds followed not (which is cheesty pressed in
this objection) that our Saviors intention was that these two kinds should be
such parts of this heavenly feast that both of them are essentially required to
it, for then he would not have given each of them force to confer grace
sufficient for salvation, but would have had that grace necessarily dependant
upon the receiving of both together. Now that the receiving of our Savior
under the form of bread only conferres life and salvation is out of all
question Joan. 6. He who eats this bread shall live for ever, and that
perfectly and entirely as appears by these words: As I live by my father so
he who eats me shall live by me. for our Savior lives by his father not
partially, bu^ wholly and perfectly.

Objection.
Further one may reply that as corporal meat and drink have different
effects, the one of nourishing and strengthing the other of comforting and
exhilerating, so proportionably this divine meat and drink must have the like
different spiritual effects correspondent to each of them. whence follows
that he who receaues one only, is deprived of the grace corresponding to the
other, and so the people will be deprived of some grace corresponding to the
chalice, to wit, that of spiritual consolation, and exhilaration of the soul
in the service of God, which Priests have by receiving both kinds.

Answer.
First I answer that it is sufficient for the defense of the Catholic Roman
faith that lay people in receiving under one kind, are not deprived of any
grace necessary to salvation, which they should be were they obliged by virtue
of Christ's institution to receive both. Council. Trid. sess. ^1. c. 3.
And which our adversaries press against us. seeing therefore the same
habitual iustifiing and saving grace is received by one kind as well as by
both, though he who receaues both were supposed to receive extensiuely more
then they which receive one only, yet this has noe greater difficulty then
that Priests being accoustumed and permitted every day to say mass receive by
virtue of oftener communicating more habitual grace then lay people who
promiscuously have noe such practice or permission, they being by acts of
obedience to the holy Church, and humi^ity proportionable to there own estat to
supply the want of that extent of graces which are conferred upon Priests by
virtue of their daily receiving this Sacrament, noe wrong being done them so
long as both in this and that of communicating under one kind, they are
deprived of noe grace necessary to salvation, and by other acts of virtues and
good works may if they will, (being assisted by the grace of God) exercise and
supply that defect wherein by reason of the Sacrament they fall ^hort of
Priests. I say there is noe wrong done them, because Christians are obliged to
have respect not only to their own parricular spiritual profit in increase of
grace by the Sacrament, but also to the reverence which is due to it, they must
be content to want that ^ncrease when it cannot be obtained but by some
irreuerence offerred to this divine Sacrament. Thus though both Priests and lay
men might have more degrees of grace by celebrating and communicating two or
three times a day, then by once, yet because this inuolues a want of reverence
to the body and blood of Christ, it is but once a year generally amongst
Catholics permittrd to Priests, and never to lay people, neither by
Catholics nor Protestants, the same would follow if all lay men were licenced
promiscuously to communicate every day, and noe less, were they permitted to
receive under both kinds as I shall show here after: whence follows that as
out of the respect which they are bound to bear to this heavenly mystery they
are obliged to refrain from communicating every day, and upon noe day to
receive more then once: so are they to abstain (the Church so commanding) from
receiving the chalice. Secondly concerning actual auxiliary graces, which are
supernatural pious thoughts and inspirations to good, conferred by virtue of
this Sacrament and proper to it, some doctors hold that there is a different
actual grace corresponding to the chalice from that of the host, the one of
strenghning proper to meat, the other of exhilaration proper only to drink.
yet the common tenet of doctors is contrary, and so it will only come to a
school Question not necessary to be treated here, wherein the more common and
negative opinion seems to me more pious and honorable to this Sacrament, for
it will be sufficient to save the proper effects of these two kinds that there
be actual graces corresponding to meat and drink, the one of corroborating,
the other of exhilerating, as the primary, not as the only actual fruits of
this spiritual food and drink, so that by the host by reason of its
inestimable 'and illimitated virtue be communicated to the receauer certain
actual graces strenghtning him in time of tentation as the primary effect of
that kind, and yet the other of exhilerating in time of sorrow also, as the
secondary and less principal of the sacred host. and the same discourse holds
proportionably of the chalice, so that each kind conferres these different
graces, but in a different order and manner. and by consequence he who receaues
either has the very same actual graces communicated to him noe less then he
who receaues both, and lay people are not deprived of any species of actual
grace due to this Sacrament, which Priests have. Now that this doctrine much
conducing to the honor and glory and grounded in the boundless perfection of
this Sacrament, is clear tough to such as only consider that this spiritual
banquet under each species contains noe less then Christ himself. who is not
only the food, but also the drink of our souls, and so the holy Scripture
speaking of him tells us, Eccies. 24. v. 29. Mar. 5.6.
he who eats me shall yet hunger, and he who drinks me shall yet thirst,
and if we may hunger and thirst after justice, and the same justice be borh
able to satisfy our hunger and quench our thirst, that is, be both meat and
drink to us whenever we receive it, why should we deny these effects to the
fountain of iustici our dear Savior whenever he is worthily received under
either form in this Sacrament. and if the material manna had the taste,
sweetness and strength of all other different meats, why should we not
attribute to this spiritual and divine manna the strength sweetness and
perfection both of all meats, and drinks also whenever it is rightly
received? And if speaking of divine wisdom Solomon tell us that all good came
to him together with it, Wild. 7.11
why should we limite that wisdom of God more then is necessary in this
Sacrament. In a word, if some corporal meats have also the virtue of drink*
and some corporal drinks the force of meat to nourish, why should we deny
this to the best of all meats and drinks the body and blood of our Savior?
for if the least drop of his blood or action of his body was sufficient to
satisfy for the sins of infinite worlds, why should we frame so pore an
opinion o^ them both in this Sacrament that whenever they are truly received
they have not power under each kind both to nourish strenghen, exhilerate and
confer spiritually all the fruits and profits correspondent to those which
are found in any, or in all other meats and drinks together so that not only
habitual justifying and sanctifying grace necessary to salvation, and actual
Sacramental graces correspondent to that of meat by way of spiritual
nourishment in the host, and of drink by way of spiritual exhileration in the
chalice, but both these graces are conferred by each kind apart that proper to
meat primarily by the host, and to drink primarily by the chalice, but yet
secondarily and by way of a superabundant virtue and efficacy in this divine
refection the host exhilerates and com^orts, and the chalice nourishes and
strenghteneth correspondent to all corporal meats and drinks and conferred
separatly by them are jointly received by each of these apart: and thus as that
of the hymn of corpus Christi is most true: dedit fragilibus corporis
ferculum, dedit and tristibus sanguinis poculum: he gave the food of his body
to the infirm and the cup of his blood to the sad, whereby are designed the
primary effects of the host by way of strenght^ning, and the chalice by way of
exhilerating so it is also true which is affirmed in the same office: Panem de
caelo praestitisti eis omne delectamentum in se habentem: thou have given them
bread from heaven having all delight and comfort in it: whereby seems to be
assribed to the sacred host the essect of delighting and exhilerating such as
worthily receive it, and noe less those other versicles which follow in the
same feast: cibauit illos ex adipe frumenti, and de petra melle saturauit eos:
he has fed them with the^ fattnes of wheat, where the delightful nourishment
of the soul is expressed: and sati^ted them with honny from the rock, which
expresses the sweet feeding of the soul by the sacred chalice. much more might
be said of this particular, were it to be disputed in the schools but in this
occasion I judge noe more necessary seeing the question it self is not
necessary for the defense of Catholic faith in this point. Thus far I have
answered the difficulties which can be drawn from the bare institution
abstracting from the command of our Savior expressed either in the
institution, or else where concerning this Sacrament, which I will now answer
very breefly.

Objection.
Our Savior says: drink ye all of it, therefore he commands all Christians
to drink of the cup in this Sacrament.

Answer.
Our Savior says John 13. If I have washed your feet your Lord and master,
you must also wash one another feet, therefore all Christians are commanded by
our Savior to wash one an others feet: or thus our Savior Marc. 16. Goenig
into the whole world preach the Gospel to all creatures. and Matt. 28. Go and
teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the father, etc. therefore he
commands all Christians to teach the Gospel and baptize all nations: or thus to
come something nearer to this matter in the drinking of a cupp. Luc. 22. our
Savior says before the Sacrament was instituted: and he took the cupp and
said: take and divide amongst you, etc. therefore all Christians are commanded
to take and drink wine which is noe sacrament, yea before they receive the
sacrament, as our Savior commanded the Apostles to do here. or lastly thus to
instance in the institution it self Matthew. 26. our Savior says: Take and
eat this is my Body: therefore he commanded all Christians to take the host
into their hands, and then eat it, as he did the Apostles. many such like
instances might be given whence (if we stand to the sole and bare word of
scripture it will be as easily deduced that all Christians are commanded many
things which Protestants say they are not bound to do, as from this command:
drink ye all of this: given to the Apostles, can be drawn that all Christians
are commanded to dtinke of the chalice because the Apostles were then commanded
to do it.

If it should be replied that in the other commands alleged is not found the
word (all) drink ye all of this as we find here, and therefore are not so
general to comprehend all Christians. I answer that the word (all) as appears
hy S. Mark: and they all drunk of it: only signifies all the Apostles there
present, none excepted, for our Savior said not: let all Christians drink of
this, but drink ye all of this. If it should be demanded why should our
Savior say: drink ye all of this more then eat. ye all of this; adding the
word (all) only to the chalice and not to the host, but only to show the
universal necessity of drinking. I answer first that (all) cannot possibly be
added. for that reason, for Protestants confess that there is as universal
necessity for all Christians to eat the bread comprehended in these words:
take eat this is my Body, without the word (all) as of drinking the cup in
these: drink ye all of this. Secondly I answer that the reason of adding the
word (all) more to the chalice then to the host, was because our Savior having
broken the host into different pieces gave to each Apostle one and so there was
noe necessity to command them all to eat of the same particle, but having
given but one cup amongst them, it was more necessary for the full declaration
of his mind (which was that all the Apostles there present should drink of
that cupp,) to express himself in these terms: drink ye all of this.

Secondly I answer to the maine objection that if we stand ptecisely in these
words of Scripture, it can never be convinced that any precept is contained
either in these take eat: or in these: drink ye all of this; for they are
capable to signify a mere inuitation or entreaty as great persons ordinarily
are accoustomed when they have other inferiors at their table to say, eat or
drink of this or that, not commanding but inuiting: and it belongs to
Protestants who stand so strictly to the bare express words of Scripture to
convince by the sole express words the contrary.

Thirdly if we either by universal tradition of Christians, or by some other
express commands in scripture of communicating, grant that even in these
words, eat, drink etc. a strickt command was given, seeing some commands,
oblige all Christians, others all Bishops and Priests, and others the Apostles
only, we can notwithstanding give a reason why these words: drink ye all of
this, bind the Apostles only, and extend not themselves to all Christians. for
the declaration of this. when the circumstances are such that the command can
have noe place but for that present time when it is given, it is clear that
what our Savior spoke to the Apostles is given to the Apostles only; as when
our Savior said to S. Peeter: putt up thy swod into the scabbard; or to the
three Apostles: rise let us go etc. and a thou sand such like.

Secondly: when the common tradition of Christendom tells us that such
commands as were given to the Apostles were never esteemed to oblige their
successors.

Thirdly: when the matter commanded is common to the Apostles and all other
Priests and not limited by any circumstance mentioned or insinuated in
Scripture, to the Apostles only (if the general and continnuall practice of
Christendom be not contrary) it is to be understood to oblige not only the
persons of the Apostles but all Bishops and Priests in succeeding ages, such as
are the precepts of teaching the Gospel,, Baptizing absoluing from sins
etc. and of consecrating sacrifising and receiving this blessed Sacrament.

Fourthly: when the matter of the precept in it self may be common to all
Christians as was the washing of one an others feet, the abstinence from blond,
and the receiving of both kinds, and has noe limitation to the Apostles or
Priests only prescribed in the Scripture there can be noe other rule to know
which precept obliges all Christians, which not, save the constant and general
tradition of the Christian Church. For by this only me know (as well
Protestants as Catholics) that the precept of washing of feet binds not
though it be universally and strictly inioineyd in Scripture without any
limitation of time or persons, and noe less though all Christians are of
themselves capable to receive both kinds, and the command be given to the
Apostles to teceaue them, yet this command by the churches perpetual
tradition, or permitting many lay Christians to teceaue in one only kind, and
by the Protestants coustome of not communicating little infants, show clearly
that this precept is not to be extended to all Christians without exception.
and if Protestants notwitstanding the word, all, limitate it only to such as
are arrived to the years of discretion, without any ground in the bare words
of the text, to exclude little children, only because their own practice
approues it; why may not Roman Catholics limit it to the Apostles then present
having both a ground in the text, because the words were spoken to them only,
and the universal tradition of the Christian Church permitting many lay
persons to communicate in one only kind, and little children either in one, or
neither, as I shall here after demonstrate.

Objection.
The second precept alleged by reformists for communion under both kinds, is
in these words: do this in remembrance of me, which being to be understood of
something commanded to be done not then, but for ensuing times, as I have
already showed, are not to be limited as spoken to the Apostles only, then
present, and so seem to be extended to all Christians. especially if they be
limited to Priests only, there will be noe command at-all in the institution
obliging all Christians to receive either both, or either kind of this
Sacrament.

Answer.
These words: do this in remembrance of me. according to all that which is
commanded in them, cannot be extended to any more then, Priests, for here is
evidently commanded the blessing, consecrating, offering, sacrificing and
administering of this Sacrament, for it is to do what our Savior then did,
which according to Catholics comprehends all these particulars, and according
to Protestants some of them, and if the consecrating and administration of this
Sacrament were not commanded in these words there would be noe command at all
for them in the whole institution, nor very probabily in the whole new Testament.

Secondly if we stick closely to the bare words, noe man can convince from them
only that all Christians are obliged to receive this Sacrament under both, or
either kind, for the clergy men might have been obliged to consecrate and
administer this Sacrament, though the layity were not obliged to receive it, as
they are bound to administer Priesthood and marriage when they are justly
required: though noe man have any absolute command either to be a Priest, or to
mary, and consequently are not bound to receive those two Sacraments.

Thirdly all that those words import as they stand, may be satisfied probably
if we say that not every Priest or lay man in particular is obliged to
consecrate or communicate by force of them, but that they conteyne a precept
given to the church in general that what our Savior here commands, be done as
certainly there is a command given to the church to confer Priesthood,
absolution and extreme Unction etc. and yet noe Bishop or Priest has in
particular any such absolute obligation by reason of his Priesthood only
neither is any in particular bound to administer them by a positive divine
precept, given directly to them, though accidentally they may have a strickt
obligation according to different circumstances to administer the said
Sacrament.

Fourtly: though it should be granted that these words: do this etc. contain
a precept obliging all Christians arrived to years of discretion to
communicate sometimes, yet this touches only the receiving under the form of
bread, if we stand to the express words of the institution being said after
the consecration of the host and before the chalice. And the precept recorded
by S. Paul after the chalice is not absolute to consecrate and receive that,
but so often as it is drunk, to do it in remembrance of our Savior: do this
as often as you shall drink in remembrance of me, said our Savior.

Lastly: though from the sole force of these words: do this in remembrance of
me, considered as they stand in Scripture, noe forcible argument can be drawn
to prove a positive precept in particular binding every Christian, to receive
sometimes this Sacrament under either or both kinds, and though the general
doctrine of the church be that there is noe divine precept obliging more to
receive the host then the chalice, and the coustome of the primitive church was
to give to some the chalicc noe less without the host, then to others the host
without the chalice. and that some late Learned Writers affirm that there is
noe such precept contained in holy Scripture; yet because S. Thomas and the
common stream of doctors after him grant a general precept of receiving this
Sacrament to be contained in them, and that S. Paul seems to give sufficient
ground to think that this command: do this etc. was to be extended to the
actual receiving of this Sacrament by the laity, by mentioning drinking in the
conditional command of the consecrated chalice, and deducing from the
institution what preparation all Christians should make to receive worthily
this Sacrament, as appears v. 27. to the end of the chapter: and mouued by
this authority I grant that all Christians are here commanded sometimes in
there lives to frequent this Sacrament, yet so that lay people satisfy this
precept by receiving one only kind, or both, according to the order prescribed
by the holy Church, as she is mouued by different times or circumstances now
to ordain the receiving of both, now of one alone, to some the sole host, and
to others the chalice only; for seeing this precept was given before the
consecration of the chalice, though it induce noe more neccssity of receiving
the host then the chalice, yet it shows evidently that if the host alone be
received, this precepte is satisfied and by a manifest paritie and equality
betwixt the two kinds that if it be sufficient to satisfy this precept to
receive the sole host, it will also be sufficient to receive the chalice
without the host, the one containing nos less the whole essence of this
Sacrament, then the other, as I have already declared.

So that in this command: do this in remembrance of me. the word, this, seems
to signify (according to S. Thomas now cited) whatsoever our Savior then did,
as necessarily appertaining to the essence and substance of this Sacrament; and
though this absolute preecpt was given before the chalice, yet the ground of it
being the very same in the host and chalice, it is equally to be applied to the
receiving either of them; yet disiunctiuely only that is, that this Sacrament
is to be received by every one either under each or both kinds, as the church
shall determine,

Objection.
The maine difficulty therefore comes at last to that text, Ioh. 6. unless
etc. which as it delivers an absolute necessity of receiving this most holy
Sacrament, so seems it in express terms to impose the same necessity of
receiving under both kinds, making mention of eating the flesh, and drinking
the blood of our Savior, as necessary to salvation. Verily, verily I say unto
you, unless you eat the flesh of the sone of man, and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you.

Answer.
I am not ignorant that Catholic doctors give different answers to this text
which I leave to be perused in their particular treatises of this point. I
answer breefly and clearly that in this text is comprehended a necessity both
of eating and drinking that is, there is a general command given to the whole
gencrality of Christians to receive the body of Christ by way of eating, and
his blood by way of drinking, and consequently of receiving under both kinds,
which must always be performed by the general body of Christians, that they
may have life in them, and that this may be performed there is a particular
necessity put upon every particular Christian to concur to the execution of
this general command, not that every one in particular is obliged both to eat
and drink really this Sacrament, but that some eating, others drinking, others
doing both, each particular conferres to the performance of this command of
eating, and drinking the body and blood of Christ: whereunto the generallity is
absolutely obliged: so that this whole command is to be performed by all as
jointly and vnitedly considered and that it may be thus jointly done by all,
each particular is obliged to some part of it, thereby concurring partially to
the whole performance. Matthew. 28. v. 19. Marc. 16. v. 13.
Thus when our Savior commanded his Apostles to teach and baptize all nations,
he gave a general and universal command to them and their successors to
perform this work jointly amongst them, not commanding each one in particular
to preach and baptize the whole world, for that neither was nor could, morally
speaking, have been done, but that this might be done by all, each one in
particular was obliged to perform his part, and to co^curre to the conversion
and instruction of all nations, so that though noe one was bound by virtue of
this command either to convert all nations, or any one in particular: each one
was obliged to labor toward the conversion of some part or other of the
world, so that by the labors of each, at last the whole work might be
accomplished. Thus our Savior sent his disciples saying: go and cure all
diseases etc. that is each one curing some, John 10.9.
all might be cured amongst them. thus after his resurrection he foretold what
cures and miracles should be done by his disciples, not that each should do
all these miracles, but that amongst them such miracles should be done: and
thus the holy Evangelist affirms that the Apostles of Christ preached every
where, not that each preached every where, but that all of them together were
spread over the whole world. and in the same manner may it now be said that
Christians eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, not that each does
both, but that it is done amongst them, by reason that each in particular is
obliged either to both, or either of them: and so the whole precept will be
performed amongst them. Neither seems the context of S. John to exact more
then this; for in what goes immediately before, the doubt which the Jews had
there, to which our Savior answers in this text; was not whether it was
necessary to salvation for every one both to eat the flesh, and drink the
blood of Christ, for he had as then made noe mention at all of drinking his
blood, but they only doubted how his flesh could be really eaten. how can this
man, say they, give us his stesh to eat? John 6.
so that our Saviors answer to this doubt of theirs, was fully sufficient by
telling them that it was not only possible, but necessary to salua^ion to eat
the flesh and drink the blood of the sone of man, that is, that those two
actions should be really and truly done amongst such as were to have eternal
life. but seeing their doubt was not (supposing the reality of this eating and
drinking the body and blood of Christ, amongst such as were to have eternal
life.) whether it were necessary that every one in particular were both to eat
and drink (for they never so much as dreamed of this question) it is noe way
necessary to affirm (by virtue of this context) that our Savior defined there
that it was necessary for every one in particular to perform both: but it was
sufficient that both these actions were truly and really so to be accomplished
in his church, that the generality was to do both, and each Christian in
particular to concur either by performing one, or both to the accomplishment
of this iniunction. for if each in particular had not been obliged to concur
to the performance of this command, the whol^ church would not have been bound
to correspond with it, seeing their is noe more reason to bind one then
another to the performance of it, as in the command of teaching and baptizing
the whole world by the Apostles, each particular was bound to perform his part,
seeing that our Saoiour had commanded it should he done amonst them: and there
was noe reason that one should be more obliged to do it, then an other.

And though there be many other commands given by our Savior to the church in
general which oblige not each particular Christian to the performance of any
part of them, but only the gouuernours of the church to see that by some or
other they be put in execution, yet this precept is of an other nature binding
the whole community of Christians to the whole and each particular to some part
of this command. For seeing there is noe more reason why one Christian should
be more exempted from it then an other, the concurring to it falls equally
upon all; for though Priests when they consecrate and sacrifice have each in
particular an obligation to communicate, yet according to a probable opinion,
they have noe obligation in particular proceeding from any divine precept to
consectate, or sacrifize, but all their absolute obligation to communicate is
taken from this and other like commands, which we have treated; so that though
noe particular Priest were bound by divine precept to say mass, yet they are
bound to communicate by reason of these precepts, which could not be unless
every Christian were obliged in particular to concur to the performance of
this general command with an equal obligation.

Objection.
If it should be said that the church may sufficiently complie with the
general command by providing that it be still kept in execution by some
particular persons as she complies with many others.

Answer.
In answer first that if should one stand merely to the bare letter of
Scripture in these precepts, this might be said, but if we take the sense of it
according to the common strain of doctors, every particular will be obliged
by them. especially seeing that S. Paul extends this matter of communion to
each particular.

Secondly as it was not in the power of the Apostels to exempt any of the twelf
from concurring to the conversion of all nation commanded by our Savior and to
have i^ accomplished by the rest which they should have appointed, because each
of them in particular was bound to labor in it by divine precept, where in the
church cannot dispense so (seeing we have the same authority of doctors and
tradition for the obliging each particular by this command: unless you eat,
a^ each Apostle by that: go and teach all nations, etc.) it may be denied that
the church has power to exempt any one from this precept, by having it
performed by other Christians appointed by her authority.

Thirdly had this Sacrament been left free, as Priesthood and marriage were,
without any divine precept that every Christian csometimes in their lives
receive it, the church neither would nor could have obliged each Christian in
particular to receive it once a year, as she obliges none to receive
Priesthood or marriage because they were left free by our Savior.

Objection.
If it should be here objected that in the command of teaching etc. each
Apostle in particular could not convert all, and if each had been bound to
teach and baptize all, the command could not have any convenient sense, but
each Christian is able easily both to eat and drink this Sacrament and so
there is no parity in the command of teching with that of communicating.

Answer.
I answer first that this command is not instanced as like in all things, but
to this end that seeing this precept of teaching etc. must he understood of all
in general and each in particular, and that there be such commands in Scripture
that though this of eating and drinking this Sacrament might have been so
understood that each Ccristian is bound both to eat and drink, as being a
rhing very feasible, yet this Sacramental precept may be understood as the
other must be, and if it be possible to understand it so, our adversaries will
never be able to convince thence the necessity for every particular to receive
both kinds, and yet there will be a necessity by virtue of these words to
receive one.

I Answer secondly that there is as great a necessity to understand this
precept in the foresaid manner drawn from the truth of Scripture, as there is
for understanding the command of teaching drawn for the force of nature. That
which follows the text in the ensuing verses makes this matter quite out of
question, for though our Savior here declared the necessity in the plural
number: Nisi manducauerith etc. unless you eat etc. of eating his stesh and
drinking his blood as belonging to the generallity of Christians, and the
words, in vobis, Gal. 3.1. James 4.1 1. Par. 5.3. 1. Cor. 1.10 Act. 25.2. Act.
17.22
in Greek, (...), you shall not have life in you, signify, according to the
Greek phrase, very familiarly in Scripture, amongst you, which is referred to
the whole congregation of Christians, and not to each patricular. Yet when he
expressed himself in the singular number: Qui manducat hunc panem, qui
manducat m^ etc. he who eats this bread, he who eats me etc. and addessed
his speech to particular persons, he attributes eternal life to the sole
eating of him, and that heavenly bread as appears in the said text: he who
eats me shall live by me; he who eats this bread shall live for ever etc.
and hence it is clearly deduced not only that these words: unless ye ^ate etc.
do not evidently include ea necessity for every particular* person to
rereceaue both kinds, but that they cannot possibibily include any such
necessity, without a contradiction betwixt this text and the text following now
cited; for if he who eats the flesh of our Savior has eternal life, as
those textes affirm, then it can not be true that unless each particular both
eat and drink he shall not have life eternal, and hence also appears a
necessity of understanding these words, that though all in general be bound to
receive both amongst them, yet none in particular is bound to receive both: but
each is partially to concur to accomplish this command as each Apostle was
that of teaching and baptizing all nations.

Objection.
Some happily may answer with Calvin that though eating be only named in the
text now cited, yet drinking also is there included, and to be understood as
being connected with it in the former text: unless you eat etc.

Answer.
That more is understood then is expressed in any place of Scripture, is not
upon light conjectures to be supposed, but to be prouued by solid and
conuincing arguments, otherwise each light headed nouelist might at his
pleasure frame to himself certain apparent congruities to extend the words of
Scripture, and to make them import more then they signify in themselves, and
so multiply Synecdoches wheresoever it comes to his purpose. Seeing therefore
I have showed that there is noe necessity to strech these textes beyond the
common and usual stgnification of the words, by giving at least a probable
satisfaction to whatsoever they allege to prove the contrary, let our
aduerfaries make good that there it a necessity of the drawing these words
beyond their natural signification, or that more words are supposed then are
expressed in the text, and we will yield to this explication.

But this discourse of our Savior: is so far from giving the least ground to
any such like, improprieties (the common refuge of our Adversaries when they
eannot avoid the sorce of the express words, and proper sense of Scripture)
that it rather confirms the proper and native signification of these words: he
who eats this bread shall live for ever: when he says: as I live by my
father, so he who eats me shall live by me. whence is (at the least more
probabily then Protestants can prove the contrary) inferred that as our Savior
lives totally and compleately by his father without the addition of any thing
else, so Christians live by worthily eating this heavenly bread without the
addition of drinking, or any other action necessary to give life as a part of
this Sacrament.

But that I may make the exposition which I have given of these words, yet more
plain and forcible, I will propose an instance of a command of this kind given
to the Israelites even in matter of a Sacrament, Exodus 12.
where they are in general commanded by families to celebrate the passover by
taking killing and shedding the blood and sprinkling it upon the posts of
their doors, rosting and eating the paschall lamb etc. not that every one in
particular was obliged to perform all these actions, but some to one, and
others to others with decency and proportion, though absolutely speaking, every
one in particular must have concurred with the rest to the performance of them
all, and yet the whole familly by concurring partially were obliged to the
performance of all. and happily this mystery being a figure of the Eucharist,
the only command of eating without any mention of drinking may give some
advantage to the coustome of eating alone amongst Roman Catholics, but this
only by the way as a congruence. And yet to come nerer to our present Question,
when our Savior in the command given in the institution: do this etc.
commanded that what he had done, as substantially belonging to this Sacrament,
should be done in his church, that is, that this mystery should be celebrated,
the host and chalice consecrated, the body and blood of our Savior vndloodily
be sacrifized and received, yet noe Christian dare affirm that all these
actions here commanded were to be performed by every Christian in particular,
for then all Christian men, weomen and children were to perform the office of
Priests, but that every one was to concur to the performance of this precept
by doing what belongs to his degree and calling: and seeing all these actions
now mentioned were not to be performed by each Christian, how can it be ever
prouued that each was both to eat and drink, seeing that by performance of
either of these actions separately, each might partially concur to the
accomplishment of that precept, as they may also to this: nisi manducaueritis:
unless you eat the flesh of the sone of man and drink his blood, you shall
not have life in you: that is unless you concur each in particular to the
performance of this command either by eating alone or drinking alone, or
performing both together, each respectively to his calling, office and order
prescribed by the church, you shall not have life amongst you, that is these
actions are necessary that life may be found in the Church of Christ, or
amongst Christians. for this is a command which must be fulfilled amongst them,
and all are bound in particular to concur, one way or other, to the
fulfilling of it, seeing there is noe reason that one should be more obliged
then an other, and so if any one were not obliged, none in particular would be
bound to fulfill it, and then every one in particular might lawfully abstain
and consequently there would be noe performance of this command amongst
Christians, which would make the command to be void and of noe effect, quite
contrary to the express words and intention of our Savior.

From this whole discourse may appear what an unworthy and base esteem our
adversaries frame of the most sacred body and blood of our Savior, not
thinking that either of them (as they are in this Sacrament) is fit and capable
to confer saving grace to such as devoutly receive them, which cannot bu^
derogate insufferably from that infinite worth and dignity which all Christians
have ever conceived in them. for as it is a most certain and received tenet
that not only the shedding of the least drop of his most precious blood, but
the least action or motion of his most sacred body was abundantly sufficient
for the redemption of the whole world, and a million of worlds more: why should
they now call in Question the sufficiency of the same body and blood received
apart each of them to communicate ineffab^le favors and graces (all grounded
in his sacred passion) to the worthy receauers of them.

Objection.
If they answer that they doubt not of the worth and power of each of these,
but of the will of our Savior whether he ordained that they separately or only
jointly should confer grace, or commanded that always both should be
received?

Answer.
I answer that seeing noe less the body then the blood of our Savior as
separately taken in the Eucharist is abondantly in it self fit and able to
sanctify the soul of him who dewly receaues it, and that there is noe clear
text in Scripture which conuinces that one of them alone can not sanctify, or
rather that there be most clear texts which prove that one alone can do it:
and that there is noe express command given in Scripture to all patticular
Christians to receive both and the coustome both of the primitive, ancient,
late, and modern church is evidently to the contrary, I cannot see what can
have mouued ou^ adversaries to think that one kind suffices not, save a low
and mean esteem they have of the virtue and force of our Saviors body and
blood considercd separately in themselves in this Sacrament.

The second defect of respect and reverence which our adversaries show to the
sacred blood of Christ in this particular is the little care they have how much
of that divine chalice and how often it be spilt upon the ground, sprinkled
upon the cloarhes of communicants, cast out of the sacred vessels, abused,
lost, trod under foot by a thousand indiscretions, irreuerences, neglige^ces,
mischances by reason of the great multitudes of people of all most all ages,
sexes, conditions, who not only once or twice a year, as amongst the new
reformers, but each month, forttnight and week communicate through out the
whole Roman Church, as daily experiences teach, and especially in the former age
in Bohemia where leave having been granted for the Catholics to receive both
kinds for their comfort, they found not withstanding all the diligences which
morally could be used, so many and great inconveniences in this kind both to
the communicanrs and Priests that they quicly grew weary of it, and were
compelled to leave it of. But our adversaries either not believing it is his
precious blood, or little regarding what becomes of it, if they believe it,
will and must have the use of the chalice, though it be affected with a thosand
irreuerences, to satisfy their wilful, and ungrounded importunity. But Roman
Catholics bear both a tender love to this most precious blood of our
Savior, and so endeavor all they can to preserve it from all irreuerences and
prevent all occasions as much as is possible of indangering the least drop of
the consecrared chalice to be spilt or lost; and frame a most high esteem of
his sacred body as contained under the forms of bread to be alone sufficient
to feed them to eternal life. Imitating in both these the care and esteem of
the primitive church, which both imposed very heavy and severe penances upon
all such as permitted any the least quantity of the sacred chalice to be spilt,
and was accoustomed to give this Sacrament sometimes in form of bread only
both to hermites in the wilderness, Dion. Alex. ep. ad Sabi^a. Beda Hist. lib.
4. c. 14. Prat. Spir. c. 79. Enas. li. 4. c. 35. Euag. Matisco. 2. c. ^
pilgrims in their iournies, sick persons in their beds, laymen in their
houses and children in the church: and in form of wine only to little infants
in their cradles, which clearly conuinces that the primitive church had noe
belief or knowledgement of any absolute necessity or divine precept to receive
always both; which not withstanding as it read as diligently, so understood it
more clearly and observed more punctually the laws and comma^ds of Christ, then
our adversaries now do.

Some there are who being convinced of the real presence, and that there is
neither necessity nor command in Scripture of receiving always both,
notwithstanding for the precedent places objected, say that every particular
Christian is obliged sometimes in his life to communicate under both at the
same time, and thus they esteem themselves both to agree with those places of
Scripture now cited which affirm that by eating alone eternal life is
acquired, and avoid those inconveniences which happen to the blood of our
Savior amongst such multitudes of Christians so frequently communicating by
granting that this Sacrament ordinarily may be received under the forms of
bread only: and agree with the practice of the primitive Christians who though
they often received under one privately, or when the other could not
conveniently be had: yet at other times they received publicly under both* and
on the other side conform themselves both to the institution of our Savior
and those other precepts of receiving both by doing it sometimes in their lives
when the precept obliges. This opinion though it seem fairly to compose all
difficulties, yet the newness and vnhardnesse of it, where there nothig else,
render it suspect of superficiality and falsehood, for how is it possible that
each Christian should have so weighty an obligation, and neither any doctor in
the modern Roman Church, so much as dream of it, nor any amongst her present
adversaries once press it against us, or think of it themselves. or if we
look to the late five hundred years before us where in it has been the
coustome in many particular churches to communicate publicly under the forms
of bread only without the least reflection or practice of any such precept, 3.
part qu. 150. ar. 2. cor.
as S. Thomas witnesses, those churches always communicating the laity under
one kind only, or if we ascend to the primitive times, there is noe step nor
impression to be found of any such precept, for then they not sometimes only or
ever by way of divine precept, for so much as can be gathered from the authors
of those times, but frequently in public celebrations of those mysteries
communicated under both. and those childeren which communicated under one only
kind, we never read to have communicated under both, though they died in their
childhood, which not withstanding they should have done, had the Christians of
the primitive times believed any such need, as is here conceived of sometimes
communicating under both. how, I say, is it possible that this opinion should
be true and solid seeing neither modern nor ancient, nor primitive times, nor
friends nor adversaries of the Roman Church so much as once mention it? but
beside the newness it has other reasons enough to convince it of falsehood,
for first when the primitive Christians communicated little infants presently
after baptism under the forms of wine, only they never are read to have given
it under both if they came to be in danger of death when, they had acquired
strength enough to receive both; which notwithstanding they had been obliged to
do had there been any divine precept obliging all Christians to receive both
sometimes or at least once in their lives.

Secondly the same difficulty may be pressed against this new hatched opinion,
of children arrived to the age of six or seven years who being accoustumed in
the primitive Church to consumate the particles or relics of the sacred
hosts, raceaued under the forms of bread only, for there is not a step
imprinted in antiquity of conferring both kinds to them when they came to die
about that age. The like is of hermites who lived perpetually in the deserts
and had the coustome of taking with them the most blessed Sacrament under the
forms of bread only.

But that which discouuers most clearly the non existency of this new fangled
opinion, is that it has noe ground in holy Scripture. for when our Savior
says Ioh. 6. he who eats this bread shall live for ever, whosoever holds
this opinion must say that he who receaues devoutly under the form of bread
only, receaues grace and spiritual life in his soul; suppose therefore that
still perseuering in that grace received he come to die before he teceiue under
both kinds, certainly he will be saved; which shows evidently that the
receiving of both kinds before death is not necessaty to salvation necessitate
medij (as the school speaks) that is, so necessary that salvation can noe
more be acquired without it, then it can be without faith, or the grace of God.
neither can communion under both kinds be said to be necessary to salvation
necessitate praecepti, or by divine precept: for these words of S. Ioh. c. 6.
nisi ma^ducaueritis carnem filij hominis etc. being a mere declaration of a
truth, cannot properly be said to be a precept or command and rather seems to
include necessitatem medij then precepti. and whatsoever command may be deduced
from those words, or pressed from any other place of Scripture, I have already
showed to be of noe force, to put a necessity upon all Christians to receive
under both kinds, either all ways when they frequent this Sacrament, or at
any time in their lives.

What I answer to this opinion will easily prevent the forging of an other of
the like nature that might happily occur to some quaint nouelist, that though
there should be noe necessity of ever receiving both kinds at the same time,
yet these words of S. John: Unless you eat the flesh of the sone of man and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, import a necessity of both
eating and drinking at the least at several times, now doing the one and then
the other, which being done, each Christian may be truly said both to have
eaten the flesh and drunk the blood of the sone of man, and so sufficiently
to have fullfilled this declaration of our Savior. This imagination, I say, is
wholly cut of by what I have answered to the former opinion, (to omit the
nouelty of this invention) for the community of Christians, comply sufficiently
with this command, if some receive under the form of bread, and others of
wine, this being amongst themselves to have both eaten the flesh, and drunk
the blood of the sone of man, though each in particular do not both of them,
the command being given not in the singular but in the plural number.

Now that I may convince even from the confession of our Adversaries, that
communion under both kinds is not necessary to salvation.

1. First whatsoever Luther holds in some places, (as he is most unconstant in
his assertions) yet in very many others, he clearly defines, that communion
under both kinds is not necessary to salvation, nor was ever commanded by our
Savior. De capt. Babylonica, c. de Eucharist. in Declar. in sermon. de
Eucharist. a se habito. de formula Missae. In assertionibus. Artic. 16. Epis.
ad Bohemos Tomo 2. Germanico. fol. 100. In alia editione Tomo 7. fol. 360.
libro de vtraque specie Sacramenti: Si veneris ad locum, in quo vna tantum
species ministratur, accipe tantum vnam, quemadmodum ibi accipiunt; si
praebentur duae, duas accipe, nec quidquam singular infer, nec te multitudini
oppone. If thou come to a place where one only kind is administered, receive
one only; if where both, receive both, and induce noe singularity, nor appose
thy self to the multitude. Thus Luther.

2. The same is held by Melancthon, in loc. com. edit. 2. nu. 1551. sol. 78.

3. And in the English Statutes. In the first Parliament under K. Edward the 6.
page 818, In case of necessity communion under one kind is permitted; neither
is any way condemned the use of those Churches where communion under the form
of bread only is practiced.

Which clearly prove that, those English Protestants held not communion under
both kinds necessary to salvation.

And here I make an end of this whole treatis, which (had the spirit of
Christian humility, and obedience perseuered in the hearts of Christians) need
never have been begun; and was undertaken for no other end, then to let the
miflead spirits, of our age and country see, how little reason they either had
in the beginning or now have, to disobey the precepts, and contradict the
decrees, of their noe less tender, then powerful mother the universal
Church; that being noe other, nor better then a weak pretense of Scripture
mistaken the common plea of all sectaries against the general consent of
Christendom. For this mistake of a few curious and disquiet Nouelists, the
mystical body of Christ must be rent in pieces, Kingdoms and Provinces swinne
in each others blood, Churches, and Religious howses, the monuments of
Christian pyety, rased and defaced; cities sacced and pillaged, contries
dispeopled and desolated, castles burned, families ruined, parents bathed in
their own tears, their children half famisht, like those of the Israelites,
crying out for bread, and none found to give it them; and that I may shut up
all, in those sad lines of Vincentius Lirenensis Commonitorio 1. c. 6. speaking
of the Arrian beresie and giving noe less a true description of those, then a
presage of our times, after he had declared how the whole Roman Empire was
shaken, the west and eastern Churches either by fraud or force, dangerously
infectcd, and all things both sacred and Profane, distempred, and distracted,
he uses these words, Tunc temeratae coniuges, depullatae viduae, prophanatae
virgins, dilacerata monasteria, disturbati clerici, verberat^ Leuitae, acti in
exilium Sacerdotes, oppleta sanctis ergastula, carceres metalla. Then married
women were abused, widows dispoyled, of their purple mourning garments,
sacred virgins profaned, monasteries torn in pieces, clergy men displaced,
Levites beaten, priests sent into banishment, dungeons, prisons, and mettle
mines filled with Saints. O unhappy, and accursed mistake! what mischeefs have
thou already wrought, and art still a working in the bozom of Christendom! how
have thou hoodwinkt the eyes, bewitched the ears, clowded the brains, and set
on fire the hearts of mistaken Christians, who are so deeply besotted, with
thee, that like one in a frenzy, they can neither believe, nor endure to hear
that they are mistaken: and yet are not to be deserted as wholly desperate and
incurable, there is still a sun which can dart a beam of light into their
souls, to discover these cymerion clouds; a never erring truth to correct these
mistakes, and a most provident wisdom, to lead them to the certain way of
salvation. Dear contrymen, I have only exposed before your eyes (and more I
cannot) a clear looking glass wherein you may behold, the foulest, grossest,
and most dangerous of your mistakes, and beholding, loath them, and loathing
leave them, though you leave the whole world, and your own lives with them, for
being once discouured, left they must be, or God will leave you.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ANgels have been worshipped in Scripture. page 34.35. Angels endued with
supernatural graces. 16.17.18. How he Arc is called God. 293.
B.
BEza. Translates in all the Evangelists and S. Paul, for is my Body, signifies
my Body. 514. Beza says that these words, which is powered out for you, as they
stand in the Greek, are crept out of the margent into the text. 214.215. How
our Saviors true body is broaken. 200.201.102.103. Christ never said, this is
my Body, that is to say, a co^memoration of my Body. 215.216.217. Nor could say
so. 218 c 219. etc. S. Paul calls the consecrated elements, the bread, and cup
of our Lord. 253.255.256. Why the consecrated Host is called bread. 265.266.
etc. The Host is called noe otherwise bread after consecration, then wine was
called water. Io. 6.196. Bread taken, but not given by our Savior. 193.194.
Natural bread cannot be really the Body of Christ. 213. and 257. True natural
bread cannot be the Body of Christ, as his true flesh is called bread Io.
6.281. ad 285. The Apostles did not eat bread remaning bread, but bread made
the Body of Christ as in Cana of Galilee, they did not drink water remaining
water, but water made wine. 150.251.
C.
How the Chalice is the new Testament. 231.232. etc. Whole particular Churches
above 400. years ago communicated publickely under one kind. How
Circumcision is called the covenant. 287.288. Commandments put shorter in one
place of Scripture then in other. 114.115. The division of the Comwandements
more reasonable according to Catholicques then Protestants. 118.119. Noe
Commandment left out of the Roman Bibles. 112.113. Council of Trents Doctrine
of, worshipping of Saints, and Angels. 1.2.3.4. and how tbey pray to God for
us. ibidem. Concerning Images. 69.70.71.72.73. Concerning Iustisiccation.
137.138. to the 143. Concerning merit of good works. 162.163.164. concerning
good works. 52.53. Concerning Purgatory. 179.180. Of the real Presence.
189.190. etc. Concerning communion under one kind. 317.318. to 322. The second
Council of Nice concerning Images. 83. Communion in one kind supposes the
real Presence. 323. How the cup is the fruit of the vine. 257.258. etc.
D.
^he Divinity of God never pictured by Roman Catholics. 72.73. Do this etc.
Signified nothing to be done in time of the Institution. Do this etc. cannot
be extended to lay men. 347. to 350. Doulia, is indifferently taken in
Scripture for the worship of God, and of creature. 33.34.35. Drink ye all,
signifies not all Christians. 34. to 346.
F.
FAith only Justifies not, prouued by Scripture. 143.144. etc. Faith joined
with other virtues the disposition to the first justification. 138.139. and
153. The flesh, Io. 6. cannot signify the flesh of Christ. 303.
G.
Some GLory may be given to creatures but not that which is proper to God.
26.27.
I.
IF all worship of Image, weere forbidden, one place of Scripture would be
contrary to annother. 110.111. Image put for Idol. 105. a graven Image
signifies a false God in the Protestant Bibles. 119. The name of Jesus is as
much worshipped by Protestants, as the picture of Jesus by Catholics 28.
What an Idol properly is. 8.81. What in Image properly is. 80.81. The
difference betwixt an Image and an Idol. 82.83. How Images are to be
worshipped. 124.125. Graven Image scarce ever put in Protestant Bibles but in
place of words which signify Idols, or false Gods. Image Worship for
Idolatry. 105.106. Image added to Scripture. 95.96. and 98.101. etc. The
worship done to the Image redounds to the person represented, proved by
Scripture. 132.133. Justification not acquired, but increased by good works.
152. What relation Images have to God the Fader, and the holy Ghost. 75.76.77.
K.
In one Kind is a true Sacrament conferring grace. 326. to 3 n0. How these
words, unless ye eat etc. Io. 6. declare the necessity of receiving both
kinds. 351. to 355.
L.
LAy people are deprived of noe grace necessary to salvation, by wanting one
kind. 328.329. and 334. How one kind is a complete refection. 332.333. How
the actual sacrament all graces of both kinds, are given by each apart. 335.
and 340. Noe lay man is bound some limes in his life to receive under the form
of wine, either ioynly with the other kind, or separately. 397.398. How the
Lamb is called the Passover. 289. to 293. Latria, is always used in Scripture
(when it is brought for religious worship) for the worship dew to God only.
32.33.34. How eternal life is a gift of God. 171.172. Luther thought the words
of consecration most clear. 313.
M.
Mediator and Advocate of 2. sorts. 60.91.62.63. Merit of good works takes
not a way humility. 175.
P.
The Hebrew word Phesel, Exodus 20. falssly translaeed Image. 84.85. Phesel
translated Idol in some Protestant Bibles, Isay 44. 85. Protestants pray as
much to sinners on earth, as Catholics to Saints in heaven. 58.59.
Protestants worship bread and wine, as much as Roman Catholics worship
Images. 129.130. Protestants themselves esteem it not necessary to salvation
to communicate under both kinds Divisions amongst Protestants, and not amongst
Catholics in matter of the vnderst^ding Christ words. 243.244. Protestants
bear little or not reverence to the blood of Christ in this Sacrament. 367.
Protestants frame a most mean opinion of the Body, and the blood of Christ.
365.366. Noe Scripture against Purgatory. 182.183. etc. Proofs out of
Scripture for Purgatory. 187. Six mistranstations in Ex. 20.4. in the
Protestant Bibles. 91.92.93.94.
R.
REligion and Religious taken in 2. senses, in Scriptu^re. 21.22.23.24.25. That
which our Savior gave his Apostles in his last supper could be noe remembrance
of his Body. 222.223. etc. How any thing may be a remembrance of it self.
227.228.229. How the Rock is called Christ. 295. to 296.
S.
SAcraments according to their essential parts are to be received, as they
were instituted, whenever they are received. 325. The bare institution of a
Sacrament induces to necessity no receive it. 3. Saints and Angels prayree to
God for us, are herad only trough the merits of Christ. 58. and 62. The worship
of liuing^Saints as much forbidden in Scripture, as of Angels. 35.36.
Whensoever by praires we come to the Saints, we come mediately, but truly to
Christ. 56.57. Iintreating the Saints to pray for us is not a necessary means,
but a profitable help to salvation. 1.2.3. and 65. Saints endowed with
supernatural graces. 16.17.18. Saturday commanded to be Kept holy. Ex.
20.116.117. The words of Scripture are allways to be understood properly,
when noe other article of faith compells us to the contrary. 315.416. The
Scriptures allows of praying to Saints departed, and Angels. 66.67.68. Noe
text in Scripture says expressly that we are justified hy faith only. 149.
etc. Scripture mistranflated. 78.79.80.81. and 88.89. and from 95. to 127.128.
Scripture either mistranflated, or misinterpreted, or missapplied, or misused,
or augmented, or altered, or rejected, and generally mistaken one way, or
other by Protestants. per totum. The seventh day not Sunday, but Saturday, and
the Jewish Sabbath. 116. All Service is not dew to God only. 29.30.
T.
What is meant by new Testament. 235.236. etc. Testament in my blood, is not
to fay, sign of my blood. 239. Threskia, signifies not worshipping but
Religion. 45.46.47. Perpetual tradition teaches, that some always received
under one kind. 370. Objections drawn from natural reason against
Transubstantiation breefly answered. 306.312. The torment of dearh, or of
trial of malefactors touches not souls of the just. 158.
W.
WHat the word this signifies, in, these words, this is my Body. 107.108. etc.
Words have two significations, ancient, and now in use. 30. civil and
Ecclesiastical. 31.32. Words of Scripture are not to be extended beyond their
ordinary signification, without necessity. 361. to 364. When words spoaken
to the Apostles are to be extended to others, and how far. 334.344. The
words of consecration wholy true according to Catholics. 245.246. The word
est, is, cannot be signifies. 301. Which are works of the law. 149.150. etc.
and 156.157.158. etc. All Good works and words are the gifts of God. 164. God
works which are fruits faith are pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ,
according to English Protestants. 167. The difference betwixt worship and
serve. 123. To worship God is not to worship him only. 6.7.8.9. worship of
3. kinds. 9.10.11. Religious worship strictly taken dew to God only. 11.12.
Taken in a large sense, may be given to creatures which are indewed with
supernatural graces. 12.13.14 n 15.16.17. etc. Creatures commanded to be
worshipped. 108.106. S. John is as much forbid to weep by an Angel, as to
worship. 36.37. The worship which the Roman Church gives to Saints and
Angels cannot be given to God without blasphemy, and sacrilege. 25.26.
Creatures may be worshipped with the worship of Doulia. 19.20. The worship
of Latria given in Scripture to God only. The Angel Revel. 22.89. might forbid
S. John to worship him out of humility, as S. Peeter did forbid Cornelius,
Act. 10. page 25.26.37.38.39.40. etc. S. Paul forbids noe worshipping of
Angels, but what makes them equal with Christ, or superior to him. 48.49.
Heathens worshipped as Gods, the material Idols which were before them.
84.85. etc.
FINIS.

