Solace for SAINTS in the SADDEST TIMES. From the Consideration of the happy
temperature and Lovely composure of all Times and Providence, as to Gods glory
and their good. Held forth in a brief Discourse on the first Words of the
CANTICLES. By JOSHUA SPRIGG, M. A. sometimes Lecturer in Aldermary, London.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY Honored good LADY, the Lady Willougby, Wife to the
Right honorable the Lord Willoughby of PARRAM.
Madam,
WHen I determined to publish this Discourse, Your Honor came first to my
thoughts as in dedicating it to whom I could only acquiesce.

Not that Your Honor had any special title to it, by hearing it or desiring
it; but my hope is there may be more providence in it then my own, who am
ambitious to seal up some testimony of the high esteem I have of Your Honor,
to whom I am obliged, as by so much Worthiness of Your own, so by many favors
received.

Madam, I question not but you have your part in Afflictions as a Daughter of
Adam, and not the fewer as a Daughter of Abraham. You may have need of a
Cordial, and then Providence will be remarkable in sending This to you; and I
desire you may see your interest in this Consolation: if you be strong and feel
no sinking of Spirits, it is through the Experience of this Truth which is here
described.

Madam, I have honorable thoughts of you, and great desires on your behalf, and
therefore shall no longer by this intertainment keep you from swifter
enjoyments then while I commence this suite for you, That, as not a few have
born away the fruitfulness of your Disposition in the sweetness of their own
spirits, so your Honor may be abundantly satisfied and refreshed from the
gracious presence and appearance of the Lord in all his dispensations. In this
most humble tender of himself accept, Madam,

Your Honors most affectionately devoted, as much Obliged Servant, JOSHUA
SPRIGGE.

A WORD TO THE READER.
THis Discourse being delivered some years since (when the public affairs
appeared most perplexed and dangerous) is now published upon the very same
account and occasion it was first Delivered, with some hopes it may be some way
serviceable, (through the presence of Christ with it) to demulce and assuage
some to a quiet and peaceable Comportment with the present administration, by
discovering and setting before them a new and blessed face and Image in every
(even the worst) state of things.

The ground and matter I work upon being those first words of the CANTICLES; my
project rises by rendering the title of the book not only to the form of words
but to the subject matter of it: which (viz. the matter) being all variety of
dispensation to the Churches, may teach us a new Arithmetic to cast up Times
and Things by.

The condition of many a Man is like a good Old Instrument that is hung up by
the Walls, as of no use for want of tuning only: or like a Lesson that is so
musical, that only skill is wanting to make admirable Music of it: where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is Music.

I have followed the Analogy or Resemblance (of Divine workings and providence
to a Song) but in some general Parallels only, it might have been prosecuted
through many more particulars.

The Discourse had not the success to be Well-understood when it was
delivered, it may have the greater blessing to empty down upon the Reader.

The Order and Parts of the Ensuing Discourse.
1. Introduction, by showing the occasion of this discourse, viz. a project to
comfort Saints in every appearance of things, and the fitness of the subject
for such a purpose.

2. Explication. 1. The ground and matter whereupon the Project stands, viz.
the Comparing the name of this book of Canticles with the subject matter of it.
2. An inquiry into the subject matter of the book of Canticles. 3. A report of
the subject matter, what it is, viz. A Prophetical History and Historical
Prophecy of all the times of the Church.

3. The Observation. That this is a Song, yea the Song of Songs.

1. The Remarkableness of putting such a name on such a thing, showed in
respect of the several sad Notes that are in this Song.

2. The proof of it yet to be a Song, yea the Song of Songs. 1. By the matter
of it. Variety it self. 2. The form Unity.

4. The Application and improvement of this truth.

1. Information, All Gods administrations to believers, public and
particular, are as a Song; yea secondly, a Song of Songs.

1. A Song, the Analogy opened in several particulars. 1. A Song consists of
measured feet. So all Gods administrations are foreseen weighed, and measured,
though not always the same measures, and the reason of that difference
assigned from the several times and ages of the Children.

2 It is a Song of Songs. This applied to Christ's administration in three
respects.

1. The variety that is in it.

2. The Rhyme or ending of all: One thing rhyming to another, and in the end
all sounding alike, even Love. 3. The Elegancies and glorious contrivances that
are therein.

2. Dehortation, 1. Not to look with such dismal apprehensions on Christ's
administration, public or private, however it appear, seeing it is a Song. 2.
Not to be weary and impatient.

3. Exhortation, 1. To sing this Song, (i.) with lightsome hearts, walk with
God through all providence. Motive, 1. The burden of the Song is Love. 2. the
Contrivance is Gods, for the glory of his dearest Son; and his Spouse the
Church. 2. Exhort. so to observe this Song (i. the workings of Christ for us)
as to be turned into such a mind and such actions as please Christ.

4. Direction, To reconcile us to every Administration. To that end let us. 1.
Compare the parts together. 2. Cover the uncomely parts with cleanly notions.
3. Consider our acceptableness to God in every change and condition.

CANT. I. I. The Song of Songs.
MY design, in choosing this Text, is, to occurr and prevent (if it be not too
late) that weakness which the unbelieving fears of the people of God may bring
them into, of the like dangerous Consequence, as the losing of blood and
spirits. The Cure of fear is Faith; but for as much as to the exercise of Faith
Men had need have clear and composed spirits, therefore have I pitched upon
this Subject.

Saul was often troubled with an evil spirit (a sickly, hair-braind, raging
spirit) and that which did him ease, was David's playing upon a Harp before him.
And Eliahs spirit being muddied, as it were by passion, cannot Prophecy til
the mud was settled again by a minstrel. 2 King 3. 15. The spirit of the world,
either carnal love, or fear, or any other passion, is like the evil spirit that
troubled Saul and Eliah -- and faith is as Prophefying; Now when the hand of
the Lord; whereby we believe comes upon us, the other hand, whereby we are
troubled is taken off us; the spirit of faith comes not but the spirit of the
world must be cast out, as Hagar and Sarah, the bondwoman and freewoman,
could not live together; and you see music was the instrumental means in those
cases. Therefore I have chosen a Subject of this nature, in the discoursing
whereof, if the Lord Jesus, the wise charmer, make me by his spirit to charm
wisely, I hope it will be in some measure conducible to the end proposed. A Song
of Songs, which was Solomon's. So that I desire you to bear me witness, I do it
not out of respect to the time of the year, It being a festival time when this
Sermon was preached.
which is with unreasonable superstition preferred by too many; but to the
times of the Church, the occasions and necessities of the Saints, which call
for all the help of this nature that we can make, I mean to hold up their
spirits in the present carriages or miscarriages of things; and the truth that
this Text travells of, bears no small proporrion of conducibleness to this end;
and were it but clearly understood, strongly believed, and effectually applied
to you by the spirit of Christ, it would be like a bundle of mirrhe between
your breasts, the virtue whereof is, that is preserves from corruption and
infection, and a cluster of Camphire which makes men vegetiores et firmiores,
as Pliny observes.

Here therefore, I shall not spend time about the division of this Text into the
Title, and the Author of the Book. But the Notion or Observation I shall
present to you at this time, and press upon you, is, from comparing the name of
this Book with the subject matter of it: The name is, A Song of Songs, The
Subject matter, what is that? There are diverse opinions of this, chiefly three:
Some make the Subject to be the mutual and reciprocal makings out of
affections and fellowship, between Christ and every Believer. 2ly. Others
between Christ and the Catholic Church, or general Assembly, from the
beginning to the end. 3ly. A third sort of Interpreters, make it a brief,
compendious Prophecy of the mutual carriages and aspects, of Christ and his
Churches, (the particular Churches of the Gospel, as well as the Church of the
Jews,) from Solomon's time to the end of the world. And though there be (as a M.
Cotton of Boston in New England.
reverend Divine well observes) a holy and useful truth in the two former; yet
this latter might be convinced to be the more adaequate scope and subject of
this Book (by many Arguments, if it were our business now) which does
exceedingly commend this Book to us, as being a Prophetical history, and
Historical Prophecy, giving us a brief and delightful view of all the acts and
Monuments of the Church, (of particular Churches in their several and
successive times,) and this book is called a Song. This is that which is
remarkable, that such a Subject should make a Song. You will say, wherein lies
the remarkableness? Herein: If this be a complete and a perfect Prophecy (as
it is) of all times, then it must record as well the evil times of the Church,
as the Halcion days; and the defections of the Church, as well as her
perfections; Gods chastening dispensations, as well as his affectionate
embraces; his frowns as well as his smiles; his placking up of Churches, as well
as his planting of them, the calling off the Jews, as well as the calling of the
Gentiles. And that this should be fit matter for a Song, seems strange I
believe: As if one should write the story of Gods dealing with England from the
first Reformation to the present, or to the end of the present agitations, and
call it a song; you would think it an unfit name: though we have had much mercy,
yet you would think that the Denomination should rather follow deteriorem
partem, and it should be more proper to call it the Lamentation of England,
(that is fallen from such a height of peace and prosperity) then a Song, yet
are there as sad times as these recorded in this book, yea, and worse, (not
only these but others, worse I say;) for here Solomon by the spirit of
Prophecy touches the very tops and eminent points of all times that should
succeed from his own, yet this he, by the holy Ghost, calls a Song, yea, a Song
of Songs.

1. to show you this in some particulars, that there are very doleful notes in
this Song. 2. That yet it is a Song. 3. What use we should make of this.

For the 1. to instance but in a few things, in the beginning of this
Prophecy: First, you have the blackness of the Church, through the defection
of Solomon, who kept not his own vines (his own v. 5. I am black.
wives from Idolatry;) and yet this is one particular that goes to this Song.
2. You have the division of the Kingdom, the revolt of the 10. Tribes, from the
house of David, (for Rehoboams stifness and folly) v. 6. My mothers children
were angry with me. 3. You have the sad estate of the faithful, dispersed
through those 10. Tribes in that revolt: in what distress were they to avoid
Idolatry, and to enjoy the pure Ordinances of God, while they could not enjoy
their Consciences without exposing themselves to one of these great evils,
either the wrath and persecution of Jeroboham, if they should not go up to the
Calves but to Jerusalem, or else they must forsake their habitations of a
sudden; perhaps to their undoing! This was a sad strait, yet this is part of
the Song. v. 7. Tell me, oh thou whom my soul loves, where etc. Then, 4ly You
have the sad estate of Judahs falling away from God, (as after 3 years of
Rehoboam they did) then God sent Pharaoh Shishack King of Egypt, to yoke them.
2 Chronicles. 12. 8. This you have, v. 9. and so I might run through the next
Chapter. In the 16. v. of this 1 Chap. you have a commendation of the House and
Worship of God, that it was pure and green, yet v. 1. of Chap. 2. I am the rose
of Sharon, whether you take it of Christ or the Church; though Josiah had made
the bed green by his Reformation, yet Christ comes not to his spouses bed, but
rather calls his Church abroad. Sharon was an open field under Lebanon, where
the beasts did feed; Or take it of the Church, she was the Rose of Sharon.
There was no fence nor culture, weeds might grow up with her, or the beasts of
the field might crop or tread her down; and so it was you know: Josiah, how
fair a Rose, but how soon cropped by Pharaoh Necho; and the succeeding Kings were
placed and displaced by the Babylonians and the Egyptians, at their pleasure;
and at length the Kingdom was laid waste by the Babylonians; yet this is part
of the Song, and such is the composure of the whole book.

But I may not instance in any more; but as it is in the world, there are hills
and valleys all over the earth, so is it in this history; as you have hills of
eminent prosperity, so there are valleys of dark adversity; yet this is called
a Song, and that most properly, yea, A Song of Songs; as we might show in 4.
respects, viz. the Author, the Matter, the Form and the End; but the Author,
and the end, I shall decline for brevity; it may be, I may touch upon them in
the use. The matter and form of this most excellent Song, is expressed in these
two words, Variety and Unity; variety is the matter; there are various things
spoken of various conditions, yet these are made up into one; unity is the
form. 1. Variety is not repugnant to the nature of a Song, to have for its
subject, Gods various dispensations to the Church, and the Churches various
affection, condition and conversation toward God. Good and Evil days, though
they disagree in themselves, yet may make up a Song together: Here in this Song
is all the variety that may be; all that was or will be, since Solomon's time,
to the worlds end, is here couched together. Though a deluge of darkness and
ignorance hides the particulars of Gods great works from our eyes til they are
done, (as the waters did the old world,) yet the tops of the Mountains may be
seen here.

2 Here is Unity in this variety; all those several and various (Yea we may
think contrary) passages, conditions and times, serve to make up one complete
piece of poesy or invention, and one glorious piece of administration; for
there is such a contexture of them, and they are so disposed, that in stead of
fighting one against another, and contradicting one another, they do mutually
illustrate and set off one another. The Painters colors, should he shake them
and mix them all together in a pot, he would lose them all, they would fight
one with another, and would either be no perfect colors, or but one, but being
laid on a table by the art of the Painter, they serve for excellent use, and
are exceeding beautiful. So it is here, the miseries and mercies, the
defections and perfections of the Church, being laid and disposed by so skilful
a pensil, as is the hand and wisdom of God, make up a sight exceeding glorious.

Now what Use may we make Use.
of this, that God has composed the affairs of the Church into a Song;
certainly the Song is not its own end; God did not express them in this form,
for the form sake, as if he were more delighted with a Song then Prose, or as
if we should be taken with the expression, and look no further: There is a
truth that lies under the expression; and this outward expression; (I mean the
form and words of this Song) is but a weak shadow of the inward truth. Adam put
names upon the creatures, according to their natures, and God gives outward
forms to the creatures, agreeable to their ranks; the most excellent outward
form to man, because he has the most excellent inside, therefore he has
received a more comely and beautiful outside; and the Angels, because they come
more near to pure Intelligences and to the understanding of God, then men,
therefore, if they have any outward form (as some think it is necessary they
should (none being absolutely simple but God) yet it is very subtle and
spiritual. So The Observation.
then, Gods meaning in expressing those things, the affairs of Christ's Kingdom,
in all times, by the name and in the form of a Song, is to tell and teach us,
what a notion we should have of these things themselves, clothed with this
form, and called by this name, that the series and substance of them is as a
Song, or is that analogically in a way of resemblance, that this form of words
is properly. Therefore is the description of these things, a Song, because the
things themselves are so: As, therefore is the picture beautiful, because the
face, in imitation or expression whereof it is made, is beautiful. I shall show
this analogy between the affairs of Christ's Kingdom (contained and transacted
successively and orderly) and a Song, in some particulars; and herein Ishal
take in other considerations, besides what the Hebrew Songs do afford, for so
this subject will give me leave, which is a Song of Songs, what ever thing is
delightful or admirable in any Song, (I mean in the Songs of any language) is
in this.

First, Then the universal and common nature of all Songs requires, that they
be of measured feet, of strict numbers, every line consists of so many
measures, therefore they are called metra: All Poems are not alike for feet and
measures; every language differs from others and has variety in it self, and
your Lyrick poems (such as David's Psalms and this book is) have a greater
liberty then other kind of verse, their feet and measures being very much
arbitrary, more or fewer in a verse, as the composer should choose, but numbers
there are in all, though somewhat latent from us. Now what would the Lord teach
us hereby, but that all the affairs of his Church are foreseen in his Counsel:
all their times and changes, mercies and miseries, the administration of
Christ's Kingdom, is a set form, even as a Song is; it cannot vary a Title from
the Counsel of God, no more then a verse can without lameness or hobling. Known
to the Lord are all his works Acts 15. 18. Ephesians. 1. 11.
etc. He works all things according to the Counsel of his will. Gods will,
which has an infinite variety in it, is determined by his Counsel, (q) So for
particular believers, all the transactions that concern their souls, are a
known, certain, and unvariable form: Christ has set how many temptations, and
how long; how many afflictions, and how long; how much knowledge and holiness;
what ever befalls them, from the beginning to the end of their days, their sins
cannot hinder any good determined from coming in its order, place and time, nor
can bring any evil upon them unseasonably or uncertainly, but as the feet and
measures of a Song, succeed orderly, whereby the integrity thereof is
preserved, so it is here, God has not left himself room to insert one blessing
more then he purposed from eternity (nor needs he) nor left himself liberty to
crowd in one Cross, more then went to the making up of the Song: But as Lyrick
verse has a greater scope for variety and uncertainty, then other Poems; so
does the Lord show a great liberty in his administrations, both public and
private, it is verse, as if it were not: God observes numbers, as if he
observed them not, he conceals his art from us, at least wise. He is not bound,
that this part of the Song that is now singing, should have the same measures
that was 2000, years ago, or to deal with his Church, or particular believers,
now, according to the same Tenor that he did formerly: Because he did not spare
Israel for those sins that are rife amongst us, shall we say he cannot spare
us? I might instance in many things, wherein God has vindicated his liberty
already; and for particular believers, there is a manifest difference professed
by the Lord himself and his penmen, in his carriage to us and former
believers. We are come not to the Mountain Gal. 4. 1. Heb. 11. 40. Heb. 12. 18.
etc. Better things are reserved for us: We are not children in nonage, but
heirs grown up, and so we have more love and grace, and are less snib'd then
they: God is not bound to lead us about in the wilderness, as he did them; Nay,
he has promised to shorten his work in righteousness. Romans 9. 28. So that,
though Christ spins a long thread of patience, yet at length, and even on the
sudden, he will cut the thread: agreeable to Esa. 10. 22. The consumption upon
the earthly, Antichristian Church State, shall overflow of a sudden, as the
deluge of the old world.
this, some think that this last division that is going upon the seventh
Thousand of years, shall not be above 700 years, yet as much and more shall be
done in this space, then in any 1000. before; for as all things draw nearer
their Center and period of their motion, they make more speed. Thus the times
and things of the Church, and of each particular believer, are a Song, both as
they are contrived and acted by Christ.

2. It is a Song of Songs; herein, I shall take in some Considerations, not
essential to al Songs, or the Songs of all languages; though the Hebrew has a
resemblance of all the delightful properties of any kind of Song (the Hebrew
and our English have greater store of these properties I shall mention, then any
language) I shall instance but in 3. things. 1. The Variety that is in some
Songs. 2. The Rhyme. 3. The Elegancies. First, it is the commendation of a
Song, if it be of a delightful, pleasing subject, and variety is a great
commendation, and bestows much delightfulness upon a subject, when the
invention is copious and various, when there be various persons and various
parts acted by those persons various times, tempers, conditions; as this is the
snare of Romant's (invented stories) they have such a pleasing variety of
passages and accidents, as steal away too much time and heart from those that
read them; why, here is all the variety in the world, in Christ's and the
Churches actions, sweetly tempered and subdued to a delightful harmony, all is
an exchange of love, between Christ and his Church, but here is sometimes
amantium irae, and then redintegratio amoris, sometime Christ making love to
his Church, and slighted by her, then the Church as much in love with Christ
and as little satisfied; sometimes the husband casts his wife into prison, and
then fetches her out and sets her upon a throne: My beloved, the variety of
conditions that the Church appears in, as in several dresses, is like Joseph's
Coat of many colors, commends the mystery the more (being subdued and tempered
as before,) even as many flowers of a various color and smell, bound up in a
posie are more delightful, and do catch the sense more then any single flower;
or as many colors curiously disposed by a skillfull pensil, make up a lovely
picture, which one color alone would not do, and as that is the chief
instrument which has most strings, and that the best music that is played upon
most strings, and that the best lesson that has most division, so is it here:
The mystery of Christ's Administrations to his Church, were not so beautiful,
were it all of a color, were it all plain work, though all prosperity etc. No,
but a ground work of black, sets off the brighter colors with a greater grace,
so does the Churches Adversity, the Churches Prosperity, and her straits
enlarge her mercies, the Long suffering of our Lord is Salvation.

So for particular believers, there is a variety in their conditions outward
and inward, and this is the excellency thereof; there is hope and fear, comfort
and discouragement, health and sickness, temptations and inlargements, sin and
grace; and the groundwork being laid in these black colors, sin, and
desertion, and affliction etc. the light, and life, and love of Christ are
illustrated hereby; sin abounds, grace super-abounds; Romans 5. 20. 21.
they are cast down and laid low with temptations, raised high with
consolations. That ship mounts up nearest to the heavens that has its
vicissitudes of descending very low, by reason of unequal waves. Jam jam
tacturos tartara etc. jam jam sydera summa; their prayers are the better, their
love the sounder, their faith is more exercised. Thus you see, how Christ's
administration is as a lovely Song, the subject whereof is variety it self; and
this the Lord would have us to consider, when he calls it a Song of Songs, and
would have us delighted with it as he is, and if we could but get up to the top
of some mountain to see all the variety, and how it is ordered and disposed
beautifully, it would inamour us: what variety of dispensation has there been
since God made Adam, and put him in paradise! We see man up and down, and up
again, what then is the variety of the whole mystery, which though we cannot
see distinctly and particularly, yet the Lord has given us an abstract of it,
(q) in the Prophesies, though a deluge hide the particulars! And thus the Lord
would have us to look upon one time and passage with another. If you look upon
a most beautiful picture, and look upon one color of it, especially if it be
the saddest and darkest, there is no beauty in it; but set the whole variety in
your eye, and then it is delightful; So let your eye be upon the Churches
beauty, as well as her blackness; look on the issue God gives out of temptation,
as well as his action in leading into temptation.

2. There is Rhyme in some Songs, and herein the Hebrew does Symbolize with the
English more then the Greek or Latin do; Rhyme is when one line answers
another in sound, as well as in number of feet; Thus God makes one time or age
to Rhyme to another, one Christians heart, condition, temptations to Rhyme to
another; our Chastisement to Rhyme to our sins, that such a sin is suited in
the Chastisement; returns of mercies to Rhyme to our prayers, Rhyme makes the
Song the more pleasant, though the matter be but ordinary, and this commends
the administration of Christ, that it is all harmony, all Rhyme (q) crosses and
mercies, sins and duties altogether, All work together for good, Romans 8. 28
through the love of Christ, the love of Christ makes the same ending of all
his dispensations, they sound all alike, and that sound which ends all, is Love.

3. Songs do, in a more eminent manner, glory in the Ornament of all manner of
ellegancies, then prose. As Metaphors, similitudes, tropes and figures, and
most amiable resemblances, taken from Jewels, spices, and vineyards, Orchards,
Gardens, Winesellars, and the chiefest beauties, and greatest varieties of all the works, both of God and man; the Songs in Scripture are the elegantest parts
of Scripture, Moses and Deborahs Songs etc. Agreeably, the Administration of
Christ's Kingdom is full of elegancies, and they that have spiritual eyes, and
ears that can try words, do admire them: what elegancies in bringing Israel
out of Egypt! it is said, he bare them upon Eagles wings; Deuteronomy. 32.
Especially now in these latter days; this part of the Song that is now
fulfilling abounds herein. What high strains of providence and neat
contrivances! Every other work is an elegancy. The actions of our enemies are
nothing but Ironies; they speak evil against us, but it is intended against
themselves; The wicked is ensnared in the works of his own hands: the Bishops
made Ciphers, instead of making the Parliament so. Look abroad amongst the
Turks and Indians, where Christ has no visible Church nor people, and there is
no such needle work of providence, and so it has been from the beginning. Gods
name therefore has been great in Israel, only in Israel; The Lord Psalm. 76. 1
Psa. 99. 2.
would not have us think, only, that things are administered in a just way, but
in the most comely, excellent and heroical way. That which the wise Ladies of
Sisera's Mother, are supposed to say of Sisera's prey in Deborah's Song, may be
said of the administration or providence of Christ's Kingdom, the whole piece of
it. It is a prey of diverse colors, of diverse colors of needle work, of diverse
colors of needle work fit for the necks of them that take the spoil; Christ is
not content to provide things wholesome, but through the inlargedness of his
heart, he makes all toothsom for his Church; we have not only meat but sauce.
For this way he has chosen to make known his manifold wisdom, and to unfold
it. Ephesians. 3. 10. And beloved, that particular believers do not observe so much
in Christ's private administrations to them, is long of their eyes. There are
Christians, that should another write the history of Christ and their mutual
carriages (which are transient, and little heeded by themselves, perhaps) they
would admire them, and be exceedingly delighted therewith; how Christ governs
their spirits, answers their prayers, subdues their corruptions, exercises
their graces, the lively and lovely touches in all these, could they be
described by a pen, would even proceed to a ravishment of the heart of whoever
should understand them. The elegant ways that Christ has to fall off, and come
on in his love, his chastning and cherishing love.

Therefore let us not look with Use.
such dismal apprehensions upon Christ's administrations, public or particular,
It is I, says Christ, be not afraid; so I say it is a Song, therefore be not
afraid, Christ's heart was in love, in the original invention of it, and so it
is in the immediate and particular acting of things, it is a love-song, a
marriage-song, for so they were wont to have Songs at their weddings in former
times, and when the Churches marriage with Christ is solemnized [who is now
espoused] then shall this Song be sung with understanding and unspeakable
delight. Use. 2.


2. Be not weary and impatient, we do not use to be weary of hearing a
delighful Song; Songs have that advantage above prose, that they steal away the
ear with a great deal of pleasure. Certainly, if you did but hear the melody
of this Song, and did discern the curiousness of the composure: I mean, could
you perceive the sweet, spiritual strains of Divine working in and
Philosophers say, If we could hear the music of the spears we might live upon
it.
for the Church, and particular believers, we should not need to crave your
patience. Why beloved, if you do not understand nor admire it your selves,
through your dullness and heavines, yet give the Lord leave to sing out his
Song; have that civility and respect to him: Christ is taken with it, therefore
there is great worth in it; The long suffering of the Lord is salvation: if it
were not a lovely Song, Christ would never doaze himself with singing of it.

3. Let us sing this Song, as we find the Church singing some parts of it. Rev.
5. 9. and 14. 3. and 15. 3. You may see there what the Song is, and who they
are that sing it, such only as are redeemed from the earth, [i.] either such as
are truly sanctified, or more strictly such as are redeemed from the earthly
Kingdom of Antichrist and indeed none but such can see a beauty and a glory in
the administrations of Christ, none but such can rejoice in them. Therefore I
call only upon such; you that are the Lambs wife, sing this Song with lightsome
hearts, observe all the ways of Christ with your spirits, how he walks toward
you in outward and inward things, what strict measures and proportions he
observes in your temptations, that they be not above your mastery; and in your
comforts, that they be not too strong for you neither; observe the variety and
change that is in your hearts, temptations, conditions, conversations, in
Christ's discoveries, and manifestations of himself to you, and Oh how amiable a
sight it is to see brethren live together in unity; but more admirable to see
contraries etc. This is the glory of Christ's scepter it reconciles the Wolf
and the Lamb, the Lion and the Kid.
how harmoniously these work together, for your good and Christ's glory, when he
makes himself the more welcome to you, by keeping from you sometimes; observe
what music his hand makes by touching contrary strings (q) he strikes a base
and a treble together: many times the public note is high, and thy particular
low; a spiritual mercy and an outward cross strike together, or an outward
mercy and an inward temptation: Observe how certain and unmovable your
happyness is: the whole Song would be spoiled and run lame [q] if one
particular, that God has determined, should miscarry: therefore your sins and
infirmities shall not be able to hurt you: nay these together with your
afflictions, are part of the Song; I am black but comely, I speak not this,
that you should slight sin, or not watch against it: no, he that has tasted of
the grace of Christ, will not sin that grace may abound, though he loves that
grace well.

Let us sing this Song with lightsom hearts, with grace in our hearts; David
had Songs of pure adversity of his deep waters, but here is more sweet then
bitter in our conditions, whether public or private.

1. Remember the burden of the Song is Love: so God loved his Church (and so
thy soul) must be brought in at the end of every staff, yea at the end of
chastning: Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten.

2. The Angels have begun the Quire, when Christ was first manifested, glory to
God in the highest.

3. It is a Song worth our admiration, for it was penned by the best wit that
ever was, even the wisdom of God himself. It was framed for the glory of his
dearest Can we not without such affection read the tragical fiction of some
one dying for a dear friend, or the passages between two passionate lovers,
the several hard fortunes they ran for one another, with one another; and have
we no affections for these more real parts and transactions?
Son, and his spouse the Church, in whom he so delights. We love to see such
passages acted in a story or a show: why should we not much more be taken with
this real Song? If the invention of the Father himself, could contrive a sweet
and glorious piece, then this is such. Can we he delighted [says one] to hear a
heathen Poet sing a fabulous story of Hercules, their great Champion, going
down to Hell, and bringing thence the Lady Proferpina, and shall we not take
more pleasure in hearing of Christ's descending into the grave for us, and
recovering his Church out of the hands of Death and Hell.

I have one thing more to commend unto you, and that is that you would so
observe and sing this song, I mean, be so taken with the workings of Christ for
us, and in us, as to be turned thereby into such a mind, and into such actions
as please Christ. Historians, and Poets tell us wonderful effects of Songs and
Music upon hearers; how Amphion with the music of his Harp, drew stones and
trees together for the building of Thebes. Oh now that my discourse this day of
this Song, or rather your real sense of the sweetness of it, might draw you
together as materials for the new Jerusalem, that your bodies, your spirits,
your purses, your prayers, your word and deed might all be ready for advancing
the honor of Christ and your own happyness, in the present designs! You will
say, should we give all for a Song, then we were fools indeed? My beloved, it
is such a Song, as God the Father, and Christ, and the Angels sing, and are
delighted with continually, and to hear how the Saints shall sing it one day in
the kingdom of their Father, will be a torment to those that are shut out of
this Quire, and provoke their howling. To reconcile you to the present
administration, I name but 3 things.

1. Compare and lay together I am black but comely. v. 5.
one passage with another, one string makes no music.

2. Cover the unpleasant and uncomely parts, with cleanly names and notions, as
we do in our bodies, put most honor upon those parts that have least in
themselves: thus the subjection of Judah to Pharaoh is set forth by an heroical
expression. v. 9. of this Chap. A company of horses in Pharoahs Chariot: a
Magnificent expression of servitude, not Asses but Horses, not Jadesina Cart,
but Horses in a Chariot, yea a Kings Chariot.

3. Consider your acceptableness to God in every passage, time, change or
condition: Christ loves you as well in your night gown; as in your curious
dress, as in the verse forementioned. I have compared thee O my love, to a
company of Horses: I have compared thee; Thou have sold thy self thither, but I
have put glory upon that condition, for thy sake: I have compared thee, O My
Love, My Love still, though a slave, a Captive to Pharaoh!

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Novem. 12. 1647. Joseph Caryl.


