A TESTIMONY TO An Approaching Glory.

BEING An account of certain Discourses lately delivered In Pancras, Soperlane,
London.

By JOSHUA SPRIGGE.

Esaias 61. 11. For as the earth brings forth her bud, and as the garden
causes the things that are sown in it to spring forth: so the Lord God will
cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1648.

The Preface to the READER.
THere are three Vanities my soul is afflicted to behold under the Sun: Men
professing and desiring an end, but denying the means: Ministers not knowing
their own Doctrines and Principles: And Christians not owning their own
Prayers and Hopes when they are showed them again.

For 1. what have been the Gaspings and pantings of precious souls always,
but after the Kingdom of God to come with power in their hearts, their lusts
to be conquered, their minds renewed, the new creature to wax strong and
vigorous in them, etc?

And 2ly, what has been the glory of our modern Orthodox Divinity, but that
The Father himself loves us, That the enmity is on the creature's part, not
God's, according to these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not himself to the world:
and Romans 5. 10.
if when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son,
etc. That Christ is the gift and effect, not the cause of the Fathers love.
That the work of Redemption (or all that fell from or between Gods electing
men to their glorification, was but the excursion or extravagancy of Grace, but
the Prodromus or praeludium to glory.

And lastly, what have been the Prayers and Expectations of the Saints, but the
coming of Christ and his Kingdom, the pouring forth of the Spirit, the times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, to be all taught of God, the Lord
alone to be exalted, the coming down of the New Jerusalem from God out of
Heaven, etc. But what a vanity is it for men to be in with the end, and out
with the means or way conducing thereto? What an unnatural thing is it in
Ministers to espouse the forementioned Doctrines to themselves, and to be shy
of all their kin, nay not to know their own espoused, except it be in such a
colored clothes? And who has bewitched these Christians, that they should not
know the Returns of their own prayers: yet thus stands the matter with us, as
I have with wonder observed, and the evidence of these things may appear by the
sequel.

For first, the Lord Jesus as 1 Cor. 15 45.
a quickening spirit dwelling within us, informing, enlivening, acting us, is
the only Physician of value both for Conscience and Conversation, the Joh. 4.
25.
Messiah who when he is come, will tell us all things, the 1 John 2. 20, 27.
Unction that will teach us all things, and Phil. 4. 13.
through whom alone we can do all things, Acts 7. 37.
that Prophet raised up unto us out of our selves, who will be heard, that
Isai. 12. last.
Holy one of Israel in the midst of us, that is, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Gal. 3. 1.
crucified among us, and that is Col. 1. 27.
in us the hope of glory, Gen, 3. 15. Gal. 4. 4.
the feed of the woman, that lies hid and buried in the woman (the earth the
natural principle, or man) a long time, even till the due times of the Father
when he is pleased to call him forth, and Gal. 1. 15, 16.
to reveal him in us, that Isai. 9. 6.
to us a child is born, unto us a son is given.

This is the Deli^erer, the Savior, the Word that is Romans 10 8,
nigh us, the (...)
engrafted word that is able to save our souls, that is Heb. 1. 2
appointed heir of all things, whom r when the Lord brings into the heart of
man, he says, Let all the Angels of God (all Angelical Legal appearances,
Ministrations, Operations of man, or in man) worship Him.

It is Isai. 45. 5.
He that girds us even while we do not know him. He Joh. 1. 9.
is the light that lightens us even while our Religion and knowledge of him is
but worldly and legal, while our language is the language of Ashdod, and not
pure. He it is that gaspes and Romans 8 9, 21, 22
groans in the creature (even while it is in bondage to corruption) after
liberty. He vv serves with our iniquities, and is pressed under them as a Cart
with sheaves: And when he Rev. 11. 17.
takes to himself his great power and reigns, then is there peace; yea, Isai.
9. 7.
of the increase of his government, and of peace there is no end. When the Lord
Psa. 68. 1
arises in us, his enemies are scattered, and all our lusts flee before him.
Though they compass us about like Psalm.
Bees, in the name, power and unction of this Jesus we destroy them; and Phil.
3. 10. Matthew. 14. 2.
mighty works show forth themselves when he is risen from the dead in us.

This Heb. 1.
character of the Father's person is that Coin or d
Money of Solomon that answers to all things, and can fill us with the Ephesians. 5.
19.
fullness of God. Joh. 5. 21, 26.
All life and power does he carry along with him and in his own person: for he
is 1 Cor. 1. 24.
the wisdom of God, and the power of God. 1 John 5. 12.
Whosoever has the Son, has life, and whosoever has not (knows not,
acknewledgeth not) the Son in him, has not life.

And therefore it is that the Apostle comforts believers with the Phil. 1. 6.
10. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
day of Christ, the 1 Pet. 1. 13.
revelation of Jesus Christ, and the 2 Pet. 1. 19.
day star to arise in their hearts. And Heb. 10. 37.
he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

This is that Joh. 14. 16.
other Comforter, the same that walked in flesh among us, but another because he
now dwells Joh, 14. 17.
in us, as well as with us. And this was the Joh. 16. 7.
end both of his coming and going away in the flesh, that he might come thus in
the Spirit. This is that coming to which the Law and the Prophets bear
witness, and whereof the whole Scriptures testify; Mat. 3. 11.
I indeed baptize you with water, (says John the Baptist in the name of the
whole Law, but there is one comes after me, who baptizeth with the holy
Ghost, and with fire. The Law leads us to Christ by the experiment of its
weakness through the flesh, and the vanity of all things till we come to him.
What went ye out for to see? A reed shaken with the wind? This is all that we
see in Ordinances, and our own performances, till we see Christ, and Christ in
the flesh Joh. 14. 2.
bears witness to himself in the Spirit. What go ye out for to see Christ
crucified at Jerusalem? Psalm. 68. 12.
She that tarried at home divided the spoil.

It is power over that that is evil, and unto that that is good, that is in
the desires of us all, and without which religion is but a Bawble, and as the
Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
what advantageth it me to have fought with beasts at Ephesus, if the dead rise
not? So may I assume, If the principles of the Gospel are not to rise in our
hearts, they are not worth the contending for. Who would go against the
stream, and expose himself to lose his friends and all to vindicate or to get
a Notion only? Men and their Opinions shall perish, but the word of the Lord
endures for ever: and, he that does the will of God abides for ever.

Behold, I show you a mystery, the death of Christ is but one, and the
resurrection of Christ is but one: the death of Christ is in us, and the
resurrection of Christ is within us. It is without us, and Objectively
propounded to us, that it may awaken and work within us. That blood of Jesus
Christ that cleanses us from all sin, is shedding in us day by day: For so
as that place given in to me, 1 John 1.
If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of his Son Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.
(i.) What is not this light? we die to it, we judge it, and so are cleansed
from it. And who is he that thus dies to evil and darkness? Surely none but
he in whom the Son of God is come. And he in whom the Son of God is come, his
death is the death of the Son, and so precious, as it is written, Psalm 116. 15.
Preticious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. This is that
Sacrifice of God, even a Psa. 51. 17.
broken heart, which is by no other than the appearance of the son of God in
us: For if it be not upon this. Altar, and by this Heb. 9. 14.
eternal Spirit, it is but as the Isa. 66. 3
cutting off a dog's neck.

We are ignorant of one of the main points of the Gospel, while we know not
that Christ is in us, as well as we in him. We were in him in his flesh upon the
Cross; he is in us in the Spirit, and so is the Scripture verified, Joh. 15.
I am in you, and you in me.

This mighty One was shut up in us long before we knew him, and Gal. 3, 23.
we are shut up in weakness and bondage unto the revelation of him: and when
we know the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made comformable to his death, then are we Ephesians, 1. 13.
sealed by the holy Spirit of promise; then do we bear in our bodies the
Marks and the dying of the Lord Jesus, and his life is manifest in our mortal
flesh.

This sealing of the Spirit has been the longing expectation of Christians of
old, though we have had a wrong conception of it, (as the Disciples had of
Christ's Kingdom) thinking the sealing of the Spirit to consist only in a
ravishment of heart, and ecstasy of joy, but rising we know not whence, nor
how. When as this joy in the holy Ghost full of glory, and this riches of
assurance, is no other than the pleasant Heb. 12. 11.
fruits of righteousness, springing from the death of the Lord Jesus, and the
perfect work thereof in us, or from our suffering in the flesh: For 1 Pet. 4. 1.
he that has suffered in the flesh (a text that I open in this book) has
ceased from sin, says the Apostle Peter: And, Romans 6. 5.
if we hvae been planted in the likeness of his death (says the Apostle Paul
to the Romans) we shall be in the likeness of his resurrection. And, Heb. 9.
28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, (says the Author to the
Hebrews) and to them that look for him, shall he appear, (...), the second
time without sin unto salvation.

To conclude this point, what God has joined, we have severed, and pulled
asunder the links of that glorious Chain, Romans 8. 29. 30. God multiplies not
acts vainly and superfluously. In every act of God, as it is in him, is all but
not as it comes forth from him, and is apprehended by us. All is done in Christ
to God, and it appears in Christ first to faith, but not fully to enjoyment
(though in order to it) till Christ be revealed in us. All was done to God from
the foundations of the world: And in all those acts the Scriptures attribute to
God the higher we go, into the greater infiniteness and comprehensivenesse
do we ravell. Election contains 1 Pet. 1. 2.
sanctification of the Spirit, and faith in it; but in the manifestation and
bringing down of things to us, the latter act still gathers up and comprehends
the former; yea swallows it up as the Rational life contains the Sensitive
in it self eminently; so the Spirit comprehends the Letter, and the Mystery
comprehends the History.

Those that know Christ in them only immediatione virtutis, not suppositi,
know not so full and glorious a proportion in him to their end. It is and must
be confessed that God is, and subsists otherwise in Himself, or in the blessed
Trinity, than in men. But this hinders not the immediatenesse of his presence
and dwelling in men. But this shall suffice to be spoken to the first point, to
co^vince that many desire the end in terms, but in deed deny it, and to hold
forth some light that they may do otherwise.

As God has not left himself without witness to his glorious Truths in all
Ages: so neither in the present Age, as in the assertions before instanced may
appear, though by quarrelling Truths that stand upon the same foundation, the
Assertors themselves make it manifest that either they know not what they hold
in the premises as it may fall out with Disciples (for Christ's Disciples John
14. 4, 5.
knew whether he went, and knew the way, as the Lord himself tells them:
though they knew not that they knew so much,) or else they let it slip again,
which is that the Apostle warns the Hebrews of, Chap. 2. 1. (saying, Therefore
we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest
at any time we should let them slip.) Both which proceed from the receiving
these things by or from the conviction and evidence of Reason, or the letter
only, (a light far below the spirit and experience thereof,) and so they know
them but darkly, and as though they knew them not, and cannot see to the end of
2 Cor. 3. 13.
them: whereas did they know them in Spirit, they would know them more
certainly, and their capacity withal would be enabled and enlarged steadfastly
to behold them, and take in more and more of their glory, without being dazzled.

For want of which they expose themselves to that exprobration of the Apostle,
Gal. 5. 7.
Ye did run well, who has hindered you? And that serious caution of the Apostle
belongs to them, 1 Cor. 3 10, 11.
No other foundation can any man lay, than that is laid, but let every man take
heed how he builds thereon, viz. with unsuitable stuff, lest his work be burnt,
or how he pull down that that is suitable, lest he be found a fighter against
God. For if that old Simile of theirs be proper, That even as the Seaman draws
his vessel to the rock, not the rock to him: so we do not draw God to us by
prayer, or other means, but our selves are drawn to him. Then what blasphemy is
it to say, that Christ came to reveal, to declare the love of God to us not to
purchase it?

Again, it has been said by them of old time, that Christ is not the cause,
but the effect of the Fathers love: If this be truth, then the love of the
Father, and our peace, was not purchased but preached by Jesus Christ: for the
cause cannot be purchased, but is declared by the effect.

Thirdly, if also as it has been said of old time, Our redemption by the blood
of Christ, were but the extravagancy of grace; for my part, I dare not say what
may be gathered and inferred from thence (and yet both Premises and Inference
have my heart exceedingly,) but sure it is much modesty to contain within this
inference, That if we be begotten again from the dead, (or recovered out of the
horrible pit of sin) to the lively hope and enjoyment of of this glorious grace
(which was before this redemption, and all or any the works or acts of God, and
is through all and in all) and live therein. This is only that that fully
answers the aim and end of God: as without this, or on this side hereof to rest
in the knowledge of any plot or mystery of the way, or of Christ, without
reaching together also the mystery of the n Father, is no better than
Negromancy, or the smoke of the bottomless pit, it is to dwell in the borders,
and flourish, and not in everlasting life.

And lastly, if as has been said, all the enmity be on our part, and we are to
be reconciled to God, not God to us, then all that language of Atonement and
Purchase, etc. is to us, and for our sakes (according as it is said, Romans 5. 11.
We have received the atonement, not God: and we are redeemed and bought Rev.
to God, not of God) and is spoken to man and his Conscience, who was made
under a law; and as we grow up in the knowledge of the truth, becomes resolved
into a mystery, namely of suffering in the flesh, and so ceasing from sin.

But indeed not only may some choice sentences of some few be brought in to
witness to these things, there are none that hold the Principles of religion in
so great bondage and obscurity in the very letter, but a testimony may be drawn
out of their own mouths, as the Apostle Paul does toward the Athenians, out
of their own Poets. For if the nature of God be one and unchangeble (as all men
will confess) if Jesus Christ be the same Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday to day and for ever (as the letter of the Scriptures affirm,) we
need seek no further evidence of these things. Then God is true, and every Man
a liar.

The law of liberty is in Jam. 1. 25.
James resembled to a glass. This law of liberty is the power and Spirit of
the Lord Jesus in the heart of man, reflecting the glories of the Lord there,
and changing us into the same appearances, according to that Scripturtures, 2
Cor, 3. last.

Now as in a glass such as the face is that looks therein, such is the image
or species that is seen there, whether the face be black, or whether it be
beautiful, whether it come toward the glass, or go from it, so does the
image in the glass (for the glass has no form, no image, no species of its
own, but is wholly representative of the object that looks therein:) Even so is
the apearance or representation of God in our hearts, according to the work of
God in our spirits: for if thou do well shall thou not be accepted? But if
thou do evil, sin lies at the door. In the one the spirit of Adoption
shows God as a Father, in the other the spirit of Bondage shows him an angry
jealous God, according as it is written again, Psa. 18. 26.
With the froward thou will show thy self froward, and with the upright man
thou will show thy self upright. The witness, evidenoe, or representatio^ of
God in the spirit of man, being always according to truth, is various and
changeable, according to the changeable capacity and condition of the creature,
but God all the while through all these changes remains in himself
unchangeable, being cbangeable only in his appearances to us, and in us. For
he is not only the unchangeable glass wherein all changes are truly
represented, and the unchangeable eye and light wherein and whereby they are
according to their true state seen and discerned, but is the unchangeable
Father of these differing and changeable lights and appearances that are thus
seen by us, and represented in us, according to another text in James, chap. 1.
17. Every good and perfect gift comes down from above from the Father of
lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Yet what pity is
it! not only the ordinary sort of Teachers, who take for Doctrines the
Traditions of men, but even those who have separated themselves to a more
diligent enquiry after truth, and seem to be of a choycer taste, yet are dazzled
with the light they carry in their own Lanthorns.

But were this infirmity, shall I call it an iniquity (surely it is both,
according to its respective subjects) found only in the teachers, it were not
so great, though a very great mischief. But where shall we find almost a Saint
that knows his own prayers, or is not afraid to meet his own dear hopes in
the things we are speaking of.

It may not be forgotten what a spirit of prayer was powered forth upon the
people of God in this Kingdom some 6 or 7 years past, how our hearts were
drawn forth in requests, for the Spirit, for the kingdom of Christ, for his
coming in the spirit, for his Truths, to open and empty themselves upon us:
these with that fervency and uncessantn^sse, as served to some in stead of
prophesies of these things shortly to be to their great comfort, and
encouragement to expect the^. And now is all that truth we expected, come to a
new form of government, whether Presbyteriall or Congregational? Is this all
the new light we looked for, to see to cast our cities and counties into
Classes, and Provinces, or to put new names of Pastor and Teacher upon our
Ministers, instead of the old names of Priests and Deacons? I say, is this all
that coming of Christ in spirit we wanted, desired, expected? Has this
mortified our lusts, quickened our hearts, beautified our ways that we are at
rest? Are these the changes that speak the day of Christ so notable, so
terrible, that it is said, Who may abide the day of his coming? Shall the
Refiners fire, and Fullers soap find only a few superstitious Ceremonies to
purge out of our Parish Assemblies? Is this the shaking of heaven and earth, to
shake men out of an Episcopal Prelacy into a Presbyteriall? Or say it were out
of a Presbyteriall form into a Congregationall, which is but a step further:
may not, have not these changes been made, salvo nomine with good credit and
advantage to the makers? O my brethren, these are but the delusions of your
adversary the Devil, wbo if he cannot content you with his old trash, he will
turn merchant of reformation, and cheat you with the superficies of it; and he
does it by some such slights as these; either he draws a veil, and casts a
mist before our eyes, that we can see no further than the letter, and so think
when we have attained that, we have the prize: or if he can not blindmen so
far, but that they see a mystery, and glory in spirit under the outward form
and letter far surpassing it: then he tells them, as once the Jews, when the
second Temple was to be built (the type of our Jesus his second appearance)
Hag. 1. 2.
The time is not yet.

But be not deceived, the kingdom and government of Jesus Christ is not
outward, formal, and shadowy, but Luke 17. 21.
inward, real, and powerful. It is in Spirit, and within you, not in the
persons of men or Ministers without you: it is that that shall destroy Heb. 9.
last.
sin out of the world, and all the fruits of sin, and shall replenish the
subjects of it with holiness and happiness.

And this Kingdom comes not with observation, how else should Luke 17. 20.
it come as a snare on all those that dwell upon the earth?

The first and second appearance of Christ are not so much distinguished in
time, as in excellency and glory. And that of Christ's second appearance, which
is now but as a cloud of a hand-breadth, shall cover the heavens.

All things make for this appearance of Christ: the symptoms of it are upon
the world, witness Hag. 2. 6.
the shaking of heaven and earth, the confusion and unsetlednesse that dwells on
the face of all our affairs, the security of the world, their 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
scoffing and enmity against the Spirit, and Christ's second appearance. But
above all, the Isa. 1. 30 2. 6. 3. 1, 5, 7, 12, 14.
wants and disappointments of the children and the bride in the hitherto
provisions and appearances. Therefore lift up your heads, O ye Saints: for the
day of your redemptio draws nigh.

Now as concerning my publishing these discourses, the world has been witness
of many hard speeches against me: let the world now bear witness of the
Cause: I thank God it is with me a light matter to be judged at man's day. I
confess, that in much infirmity of the flesh have I delivered this Testimony,
but I obtained this grace of the Lord to be faithful.

And here you have them in no better dress then as they were delivered, weigh
not words but the thing, and consider the scope: If any prejudicately stumble
at the truth, at his own peril be it, I may perhaps be clearer in the
expression of some things in this Preface, than in the Discourse, which being
compared together may be helped. One thing I must add in this place, That
whereas I say, page 126. That a man can be under but one administration at a
time, either of flesh or spirit; my meaning is, That in that degree that a
spiritual administration takes place, the fleshly administration gives place.
In that measure that Christ's second appearance dawnes on us, we are drawing
from under his first appearance. Besides this, I know nothing liable to any
dangerous mistake with the unprejudiced.

But the time is short, and I have little satisfaction in publishing,
disputing, or wrangling out these things, I desire to be enjoying them; and as
I enjoy, to forget and press forwards. The Lord Himself will shortly preach
Himself with clearness an^ authority, and all that cloud of Envy that is
upon his appearance, shall not hinder him. Even so come Lord Jesus. Amen.

The Table of the Sermons.
SERMON, I. The foundation of a Christian, all laid in his being nothing in
himself. John. 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man comes
unto the Father but by me. page 1 SERMON. II. Something of the mystery of the
^ather, and of Christ. Ioh. 18. 25. Hitherto I have spoken to you in parables,
the time comes when I will speak to you no more in parables, but I will show
you plainly of the Father. page 33 SERMON. III. The Truth as it is in Jesus. John
17. 19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified
through the truth. page 66 SERMON. IV. On the same Text. SERMON. V. The dying and
the living Christian. Romans 14. 8. For whether we live we live unto the Lord, or
whether we die we die unto the Lord. SERMON. VI. On the same Text. SERMON. VII.
Solace for Saints in the saddest times. On Canticles the first.
ERRATA.
Page 39. line 9. for the [use] of a parable, read the [nature] etc. p. 102. l.
1, 2, 3. for so] in each line read see. p. 114. l. 10. for fulfilled r.
satisfied. p. 118. l. ult. for eternal title r. external. p. 119, at Reas.
for this Reason r. the Reason. p. 122. l. 19. for enquire r. enquired. p. 126.
l. 9. for first read next. l. 13. after fleshly supply appearance.

In the first Sermon on Genesis there is bitterness for betternesse; I know
not the page.

THE Foundation of a Christians ALL Laid in his being Nothing In Himself.
GENESIS 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took him.
YOU have here the Phoenix of his days, one that does make the Holy Ghost (as
it were) to make a digression, (a digression in the story:) you have a word
here that is like a Star in the mids of the Clouds; you have a Chapter before
and after this, that you are ready to say when you read it, What profit is it?
nothing but a Chronology and a Genealogy, a descent of persons; but here is
that which is enough to take up the meditation of a whole Chapter, Enoch walked
with God, etc. Of all the rest it is said, that they lived so long, and begat
so many sons and daughters, but when the Holy Ghost comes to Enoch, he says
first, of him in the 22 verse, and Enoch walked with God after he begat
Methuselah etc. and not contented to give such a touch, the Holy Ghost records
again and moreover, that he walked with God and was not, for God took him.

That which I do design, and which I hope [if the Spirit of God so design) may
be for good unto your hearts, out of these words is this, viz. to hold forth
unto you, a chief Character of a Christian; if so be that they were Christians
from the beginning, (as they were, for they all dyed in the Faith; as it is
said in the 11. Hebrews,) and that is this, that he is one that is not; it is a
strange Character to show you what a man is, by telling you, he is not. This is
the very main thing of a Christian; the most essential thing that can be
affirmed of him, that he is not, Enoch walked with God, and was not etc.

First, for the meaning of the words, there is no great difficulty in them; the
Phrase is common of walking [that walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit] but what is the meaning of this, he was not. It is one thing in the
Letter, and another in the Spirit, it has both a literal and mystical meaning;
he was not, that is, he was translated; so we find in the 11. Heb. 5. where it
is said, By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was
not found, and so it follows in the Text, he was nor, for God took him. But
there is also a Spiritual meaning of it, and that is this, Enoch was not, that
is, he in himself was not; but his own being, excellency and glory was past
away, he was nothing, but what he was, he was in Christ: Christ was to him his
life, his person, and his all; in the Original it runs thus, Enoch walked with
God, and was not he; according as the Apostle says in the Epistle to the
Galathians, Nevertheless I live, yet not I, etc. So it is said here, Enoch
walked with God, and not he, for God translated him in the Spirit, translated
him into Jesus Christ, and so a Believer is one in Jesus Christ, he is nothing
in himself, his self is past away, he has got a new self. God is his self,
Christ is his self, Now that same former sense of God translating him
literally, that was but an outward signification to the world (as it were) of
that which was Enochs real glory, Enoch was past out of the flesh into the
spirit, out of himself into God, when he was upon earth; and God to signify
this to the world, takes him from the sight of men, and translates him locally;
This was a Figure of that which was done in the spirit before, and it is far
the greatest to be translated in the spirit: If a man were carried into heaven,
if he were not translated inspirit, he would have no joy in heaven, for flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; and therefore we are said to be
translated out of darkness into light, and out of the Kingdom of Satan, into
the Kingdom of his dear Son. And thus having made way, I shall come to observe
something out of the words.

First, here is the translation of a Saint, and then here is the Author, and
Principle of that translation. The translation of a Saint; the point that I
would observe from thence, is this, That every true Christian, he is translated
out of his own being, into a being in God, and this is the death of a
Christian; Enoch walked with God, and he was not, he is dead unto the world,
and he is dead unto the Law, he is dead unto his own righteousness, and unto all
created glory and excellency, but he is alive unto God: a true Christian, he is
not, that is, he is not in himself, his self is past away, he has got another
self, a new self, and that is God, instead of his old self, instead of his
rotten self; you shall see this in the 7. Romans the latter end, So then with my
mind, I my self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin. Mark
you there; The flesh, a Believer counts none of himself; as it is in Romans 8. 9.
You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you;
and so in the 6. Chap. of that Epistle, How can we that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein; Sin is said to be condemned in the flesh, in the 8. Chap. 3
v. That which I desire chiefly to bind my self unto, is this, to show unto
Believers, that if so be they be true Believers, they have a being in God, and
in the Spirit, yea, an entire being, and they are to have no being at all in
the flesh, I say, if so be they are true Believers, they have an entire being
in God, and the Spirit, and are to account themselves to have no being, no
interest at all in the flesh. There are they that speak of a fleshly, and a
spiritual part in Believers, and this same spiritual part they look upon as
that which should be encouraged, that to which all the promises belong, but
many times they cannot find this same spiritual part, and so can have no
comfort, as in time of tentation; (and I beseech you consider that, for it will
be a sufficient argument against the going on in such a kind of apprehension as
that is, of a spiritual part, and a fleshly, and the like, (taking this
spiritual part to be grace in the act; for when they find not grace in the
act, they cannot take any comfort at all, then they ^ake up themselves in the
same heap and dunghill with the world,) but if God made out this to you, that
you have an entire being in the spirit, and that it is possible for a Saint to
retreat into the spirit so wholly, as to gather himself entirely, and to gather
up all his interest into the spirit; this would be much to the relief and
comfort of a poor soul.

Now I must show you what are the fruits and consequences of this, and then
come to show you the way that God brings his people to this.

First, I will show you the benefit of a Christians losing himself in the flesh;
this is the benefit of it, he loses sin, by losing that being in flesh, that
is the freehold of sin: and when a man is once gone out of the flesh, he is
gone out of sins Territories, out of sins Dominions, and he loses his sin by
this means, and that in a twofold sense. First, sin cannot be charged upon
him, as you shall see the Apostle for it, in the 7. Romans So then it is no more
I, but sin that dwells in me. Pray mark it: Why not I? But because I am gone
out of the flesh, I am gone out of the fleshly principle, I do not own my self;
I have a being out of my self; I have a being in the spirit, and there can no
guilt or sin follow me; the avenger of blood cannot pursue him further then
flesh, for being in the spirit he has got hold of the Horns of the Altar. Will
you condemn the Son of God? The heir of Glory? Is Christ a Sinner? Can the Son
of God be under the wrath of God? Why, he is ceased to be in himself, he is in
Christ.

And then secondly, Sin it cannot rule over him, he loses his sin that way, He
that is born of God keeps himself, that the evil one touches him not, he that
abides in him sins not: and diverse such places in the 1. Epistle of John,
for it is only the flesh that the Divill has a title unto, and that sin has
a title unto; sin has title indeed to the Old Adam, and to all the Sons of Old
Adam; as they are natural, and as they are flesh and blood, they are the slaves
and vassals of Sin and Satan; but the new creature, he has nothing to do
withal: It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. You may
understand it this way also, when the Devil comes to tempt a Saint that lives
in the Spirit, he does as good as come and bid the Son of God to fall down and
Worship him.

2. As he loses his sin by this he is set free from death by this means, set
free from condemnation, the wrath of God cannot seize upon him, This is my well
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. God cannot be displeased with his well
beloved Son. When a man is once in Christ, there is nothing issues out from God
but love, nothing but smiles, and good words, and good wishes; this is the
benefit of a man being in Christ, of a man not being in himself, of a man
ceasing to be in the flesh; he loses his sin, and does escape death and
judgment. And therefore it is, that this same Enoch here, (as a pledge to all
other that walk in his steps) he was translated that he should not see death it
self, because death is as it were an Emblem of the punishment of sin (an Emblem
I say; for if the damned had no worse punishment then the death of the body, it
were no punishment, but death has a form of punishment,) therefore Enoch was
translated that he should not see death, because he was not, that is, he was
not himself, he was in Christ, who is the Resurrection, and the Life.

Yea a 3. benefit: whatsoever tribulation rejoice in it, if he be not; and this
is indeed the very sum of his comfort, the sum of his happiness, that
whatsoever estate and condition he seems to be in outwardly, yet he has a
retreating place, in which he can look upon all these things that befall his
flesh, and can rejoice in them, and be above them; when a man shall see that
these afflictions that are upon him are for physic, not for punishment, he can
withdraw from them all, and he can be a Spectator of them, and not suffer at
all; he is active in all, he does withdraw himself from under all; it is true,
says he, this is upon my flesh, but yet he does possess and enjoy an other
state, and another life* and another personallity in the Spirit; he is in
Christ, and as I am in Christ, there is no condemnation toward me, I am sure,
there is nothing but love toward me, this is the highest comfort that can be,
for a man to be able to withdraw himself from all sin and misery, as if he had
no part in it, though it be upon him; this is that the Holy Ghost speaks in the
91. Psalm 1. 2. it is spoken expressly there, He that dwells in the secret
place of the mosthigh shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; and that is
he that dwells in the spirit, this is fulfilled many times in the literal
understanding of it, that the Saints do escape when Common Calamities are in
the world, but there is a fulfilling this in the Spirit; when the spiritual
Being of a Believer can stand and look upon his fleshly Being, as if the
sufferings thereof were not upon him, but upon another person, and this is the
Experience of the Saints; I am persuaded I speak to the Experience of some
Saints. And thus a Christian evades all, shifts all; charge sin upon him, he
shakes it off, it does not belong to him: Lay afflictions upon him, he escapes
them all, and is indempnified; not that a believer does therefore take boldness
to sin, because of this; No, there is none does more abhor Sin, then this
person I now speak of; and the discovery that God makes to such persons, is
directly contrary and destructive to Sin.

Now the next thing is to show The Meant
you by what means God makes a Christian not to be himself, and in himself, and
that is by God revealing another self within a Christian; by this does God put
a Christian out of himself, by substituting and revealing another self in that
Christian. What is that? A Spiritual self, that is God himself in Jesus Christ,
he becomes a new Principle in that same soul, a Principle of life and of
action; a Principle of righteousness and of strength. It may be thought to be
done otherwise, but we shall find, though God carry the work under another
form and appearance, yet this is indeed the virtue and power that does the
deed, and turns a man out of himself; it is Gods discovery of himself to the
soul; we may think that God does it by the Terrors of the Law, as there, when
the Commandment came I died, and I through the Law am dead unto the Law etc.
Romans 7. 9.
we may think, God does it by discovering the vanity of our hearts, and the
weakness of our Principles, for that they cannot make their party good with
Sin, but notwithstanding we are overcome: all this is true, but the soul is not
carried forth powerfully and effectually to part with it own self, till God
do pawn himself to the soul, to be instead of himself, till God say to the
soul, forsake thy self, and I will be unto thee instead of thy self; I will be
thy Righteousness and thy strength; I will be instead of the Law; til then it
is impossible that the soul should part with self, and should not be. So that
it is by the glory of God appearing in the soul, that the soul is crucified and
turned out of it self; even as it was with Christ; he knew if he dyed, and went
away in the flesh, he should come again in the spirit, and that he says
himself, and discourses of it in the Gospel according to St. John 12. 24. If
the seed fall into the ground etc. He that loves this life shall lose it; but
he that hates this life, shall have life eternal. Upon this account did Christ
yield up himself cheerfully to death. Therefore it is said, that Jesus Christ
by the eternal spirit offered up himself; it was by the eternal spirit, that
reveals the glorious design of the Father in his death, that Christ was brought
to yield himself unto death. Now the degrees by which this death of self is
accomplished, are these three.

First, God does make a discovery to the soul of the rotteness of old self, and
of the bitterness of that self, that is tendered to us of Gods self; this
discovery is made to us, and God does together therewith reveal himself in us;
he reveals himself in us; and shows himself to be our Righteousness and our
Strength. The soul sees it self possessed of God, and sees God dwelling in him,
and now the soul knows it cannot be found naked. Now says the soul, I may part
with my self when I will, for I have a better self.

And secondly, Hereupon the soul has all its life in God, and his heart is set
upon God; he sees God within him, and now his eyes are turned to this Emanuell,
God dwelling in his flesh; and now he admires not the things he did before; he
did admire other men, and their enlargements and abilities; he admired their
affections and expressions in prayer, he admired such and such acts of piety
and charity (which a man may do and seek himself all this while;) he admired
the flesh, but now he has no confidence or delight in the flesh; he looks
wholly upon God, and admires him, and admires that ever God should dwell with
man, that God whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; that he should take up
such an heart, that he should become the righteousness of such a creature.

3. Hereupon follows passion and action, 1. The soul hereupon has all its
comforts from God, and directs all his courses to God; and he says now, Ashur
shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses; we have made mention of other
names, and other Lords, but now by thee only we will make mention of thy name,
even thine: so he has sweet delight and acquiescence in God. 2. The soul does
all to the glory of God; if a man live in the flesh, he will be acting in the
flesh; but if a man live in God, and live in the spirit, and live in that
unseen righteousness, and upon that invisible strength, then all his
application of himself is unto God, and so he walks not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, and all his waiting will be for this God; if at any time he
is insensible of his presence, he waits upon God, he says not, if it werethus
withme, I should behappy: as Martha said, if thou had ^^n here, my Brother
had not dyed; (she considered not, that Christ in the spirit had power now to
recover from death, as well as keep from death) but the soul says; if God will
shine upon me, I shall be comforted; if he hide his face I am troubled; it is
not I will do this, and I will do that, but God will do this and that; and it is
not, if I had such means, I should have power and get ground over my
corruptions, but if God arise, his enemies shall be scattered: And such a soul
is dead to the Law, and the Righteousness of the Law, and dead to the workings
of it, and sees that the Law cannot give strength; it is God, that of his
grace, is strength to the poor soul, and thus the soul has entertained God as
his guest, and let the Sodomites come and compass about Lots House, he minds
them not; the soul sees nothing in comparison, but his soul pants, as the
Heart, after the water brook; and this is the condition of a soul that is not.

Now if you ask me the reason of this, why a true Christian is one that is not:
I answer, this is the reason of it, because God is all, and he will be known to
be all, he will have his people to know so, and will have it held forth that he
is all; and therefore there must be a dying thus, and a withering, and
decaying, and a going out of a man's self. I know no other reason but this, why
God did ordain that same state of nature, before the state of grace; why he
revealed Adam before Christ; but only this, that so God might make it knwon to
us, that he is all in all. For howsoever God was all in all, and would have
been all in all, and could not be otherwise; for was there any thing before
God, or is there any thing, whereof it may be said, it is besides God? But yet
God had not been manifested to be all in all, so as he is by causing the
Creature to dye to its self; as if God had created light, and never created
darkness, light had been light, but light is known by darkness: So God would
have been all howsoever, but he is known to be all by this same form of the
creature dying in himself, dying in those abilities which are Gods; for we have
nothing but what is Gods, and what he gives us, and is to us; but God hereby
holds forth himself to be all to us, after lower and darker forms; when removed
and corrupted, we see still another and higher blessedness in God; and it is
likewise for to give us our taste; he that has tasted the sower, is fit to
taste the sweet; he that has seen the fading of the flower, is better prepared
to see a living activity; so we have known God in nature, we are hereby
prepared to admire Gods discovery in the Gospel.

Now before the Use of this point, there is only one thing more I will mention,
and that is this, That the death of a Believer is into God, as I may so say,
even as the seed that dies as a seed, but it dies into a flower that is better
then the seed, so does a Believer do, that is the term of his death: (So now I
have explained all that I think of to you;) now the Use is this.

1. It serves to discover and disgrace the Religion of most men that are not
acquainted with this same dying to themselves: you have many, especially in
these times, that do come under this search and trial, and will be found too
light, and there are two sorts: some who have advanced a Reformation from that
same knowledge which is come abroad in these times, they have set up a form of
Religion in their Families, and it may be they are fallen into a form of
Communion with Christians; others are such as are only state Reformers, and the
time-Reformers: Now both of them, although there may be graduall difference,
yet both of them discover themselves, that they are of the earth by this: they
are to be known by their conceits of themselves, by their magnifying their
duties, and their forms they are in. As a Christian cease to be, so do all
things cease to be anything to him, and he does no more admire an high form in
Religion, then he does admire himself; all things are crucified to him, as well
as he is crucified to them. But many are like the multitude that Christ spoke
to, in the 5. of Mat. They will be very Zealous and Jealous, lest others should
destroy the Law, who preach the Gospel purely in the spirit; and why are They
zealous of the Law, but because they think they can keep the Law; they know
only some lower forms of the Law, (but if they knew the Highest forms of the
Law it were all one,) for they are censorious of others, and will persecute
others, if they will not come up to their form: whereas you shall hear a
brokenhearted Paul say, that Circumcision it nothing etc. Paul saw that a man
might be a circumcised Jew, and yet ly down in hell with an uncircumcised
Gentile: but others by their censoriousnes of others, manifest, that they are
not ceased to be in the flesh: the truth is, he that does know God, and does
worship God in spirit, has such low thoughts of all manner of outward forms,
that he does neither judge himself nor others, in the least kind by them, for he
sees that which is so much beyond, and he is pressing toward that still; he
takes heed how he rises up in the morning and blesses himself, or his
neighbor, in his form: for he sees much uncircumcision of heart in the best
form.

The next is a Use of direction to poor creatures that see and subscribe to
the truth: That true Christianity begins in self-denial, and are saying, what
may we do, that we may be after this manner, that we may not be in our selves:
that the next word will tell you, God took him: Enoch had been as other men, but
that God took him; he had been in the flesh, and had confidence in the flesh,
and had been some body in his own eyes, if so be God had not took him; so
that this you are to wait for, till God take you up: you cannot bring down the
spirit, a man cannot make an hair of his head white or black, a man cannot make
a thought, a man cannot mould one desire or affection in him, it is beyond his
power; this is according to that I spoke in the opening of the point, somewhat
toward this, namely, that it is God revealing himself and his own glory to the
soul, that engages the soul to forget his own kindred, and his fathers
house: Come faith God, thou shall be married honorably; I will marry thee my
self, forget thy self, forget thy sins, so indeed the death of a Christian is a
sweet death: and as the Psalmist says, Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints. God comes and takes that place that before Self had;
and therefore you have the death of a Saint expressed in this manner, Into thy
hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. God is there to receive the soul, or else
the soul would never be content to go out of the body, and so it is here
spiritually.

And the 3. and last Use is this, A Hint or Discovery to what end death is
ordained, that formal death that we look upon with so much fear, and with
such a sad reflection upon our selves, when we think of our selves. I must ere
long dye, and be among the dead. This is our Ignorance, what is death? What is
it for? It is but an outward form and signification of that work, that God in
the spirit of a Saint does every day; for what is the life of a Saint, but a
continual dying into the hands of God, his Righteousness expires into the
Righteousness of God; God increases in him, and himself decreaseth; he has
less thoughts of himself, and his own strength, and has higher thoughts of
God; he does less know himself after the flesh, and according to outward
appearances, and he more judges of himself as he is in God, and as in Christ
Jesus; so that a Believer dies daily, and when God has finished his whole
work upon Mount Sion, then he will withdraw the form of death; when he has
brought his people to dye to themselves and to the world, as he will in the
latter days, then death shall be swallowed up; for as we see how men are when
they are dead, they mind no more relations; a Child no longer observes his
Father when he is dead, cease to act to the relation, and cease to act to
the objects of this world; strew fine sweet flowers before a dead corpse, the
corpse smells them not; and bring good cheer before dead corpse, the corpse tastes
it not; so shall Saints be to sin and this world: And thus I am persuaded God
would not have continued death in the world, since he has reconciled the
world, but to teach the world. And what are all these changes when a soul is
gone to God before, is it any terrible thing for such an one to dye? It was the
speech of one of precious memory in this City, when he was dying; says he, I
shall but change my place, not my company; he walked as Enoch did: So it is with
us in all our changes that befall us, they are but the outward forms and
significations of that which is doing every day, therefore we are not to judge
according to the sight of our eyes, not reckon our selves by our duties, and
our graces and performances; not reckon by that power we see in our selves to
resist sin, or act in duties, but look to an invisible presence of the spirit
in oursouls, that can never be taken from us, which Mothes cannot corrupt, and
where Thieves cannot break through and steal.

SOMETHING OF THE MYSTERY OF THE FATHER AND OF CHRIST.
JOHN. 16. 25. Hitherto have I spoken to you in Parables; the time comes when
I will speak to you no more in Parables, but I will show you plainly of the
Father.
THese are the words of our Savior a little before his suffering, when he
spoke not upon his own life, but upon the life and comfort of his Disciples,
whose hearts were full of heaviness: and much ado he had to keep them up from
sinking; therefore no question but Jesus Christ did groan in Spirit, and did go
down deep, that he might bring up something from the bottom to refresh their
hearts; and tobear them up against that hour that was coming upon him, their
Lord and Master, and upon them, in being deprived of him: and therefore we
find him here very copious, as well as very sweet, bestowing the whole 14. 15.
and 16. Chapters upon them.

Among all the comforts Christ does minister unto them, this is one, and a
chief one, That they should see him again, and he would hide himself from them
but a little while: Not only his going away was for their advantage, but he
would come again to them. This he tells them often, especially here at the 17.
verse of this Chapter. A little while, and ye shall not see me; and again, a
little while, and ye shall see me.

And to let pass the rectfying of their understandings concerning these
promises, and these undertakings of his; he tells them what he will do for them
when he sees them again, and what shall be their condition in that day: At the
22. verse, in general he tells them, Their hearts should rejoice, and no man
should take their joy from them: And particularly; verse, 23. In that day you
shall ask me nothing, (says he) verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name, he will do it. They shall have all their
Petitions; It shall be a day of grace and favor, such as Herod's birthday was,
when he promised he would give Herodias his Daughter the half of his Kingdom:
but this is not restrained to half of the Kingdom; for we know, the spirit
himself is promised to those that ask him; and the Spirit is the Kingdom of
God, it is God, and his Kingdom and all.

Another benefit, and advantage of that time when he would see them again, is
this, that I have read to you in the Text; I will show you plainly of the
Father. Hitherto have I spoken to you in Parables, the time comes that I will
speak no more in Parables, but will show you plainly of the Father.

Multitude, but he spoke not in Parables to his Disciples; or if he did, he
opened the Parables to them; as its said, When be came into the house, he
opened the Parable of the tares; and so he did other Parables.

very portions of Scripture, which have the form of Parables; but the whole
Preaching and Ministry of Christ, as Man; and not only so, but the whole
Ministration and Appearance of God in the Flesh of Christ, may be called a
Parable; and thus were they Parables that he had spoken to them in? I have
spoken to you hitherto in Parables; but the time comes when I will speak no
more to you in Parables, but I will show you plainly of the Father. And this
plain showing of the Father, is when Christ comes in the Spirit. While a
Believer knows Christ only after the flesh, he knows the love of God, and the
Covenant of God, and the things that concern his peace, only in a Parable: but
when God comes to do those things in him, in the Spirit, which were done to him
in Christ, in the flesh; Why then does God show himself unto him plainly. This
shall suffice in brief to have opened the words unto you.

The parts of the Text are these two.

1. Here is the casting up (as it were) of the Dispensation or Administration
of Christ in the flesh: It is cast up, what it amounts unto; and that is a
speaking to the world in Parables.

2. Here is the glory of Christ's appearing in the Spirit, in the heart of a
Believer, and that is a plain Demonstration, or showing of the Father.

In this latter are these two things.

1. Here is the Object of Divine Discoveries, and that is the Father; I will
show you plainly of the Father.

2. Here is the Quality of the Spirits Discovery: it is a plain Discovery.



That the Preaching and Administration of Christ in the flesh, was but a
speaking to us, as it were, in Parables.

Hitherto (says Christ) have I spoken to you in Parables: The time comes when
I shall no more speak to you in Parables. If we enquire what a Parable is, we
shall find that the Use of a Parable does agree with the Nature of this
Discovery, or Appearance of God in the Flesh of Christ; for to this shall I
confine my Discourse.

A Parable is this; when there is a latent sense under patent words; When there
are words outwardly sounding one thing, and a sense under those words, that is
not conceived by the Vulgar understanding: This is a Parable: It is a Riddle;
It is a dark saying. And certainly the Wise man in the beginning of his Book of
Proverbs, or Parables, (as he calls them) wherein are the Treasures of the
Gospel; He calls the Gospel there, Parables. Prove. 9. 6. Now that Christ in
the flesh, is such a Parable, may be made good unto you, thus.

There is one thing does appear outwardly, and runs into the senses of men. And
there is another thing held forth under that, which few do perceive, but those
that are singularly taught of God: That which is visible and obvious, and runs
into the senses of men, is a Carnal transaction. A Bargain between God and
Christ: The doings and sufferings of Christ in the flesh; and by these doings
and sufferings, our Life, our Justification and our Peace. This is the outward
form, (as it were,) this is the Parable. Now what is that which is held forth
under this Parable?

There are these two things that are veyled and hid under this Parable, which
most men do not set their eyes upon.

And the first is this; The Love of the Father: This is scarce eyed by most
men, but they think that the work of their salvation proceeds from the kind
heart of Jesus Christ; and so they look upon his Humane Heart and Affections,
as the Root and Original of their Redemption: Whereas Christ tells us in this
Chapter; I say not, that I will pray for you, for the Father himself loves you;
As who should say, though I should hold my peace, the Father himself loves you.
Now this is that which few men see in and under this Parable.

Christ Jesus in his dying for man, was set up by God in the place of God, to
show us the great love that God did bear unto man: I say, he was set up by God
in the place of God, and that not to show (his own) love only, but to show the
Fathers Love; and therefore we find these names given unto Christ, and these
things spoken of him; That he is the brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the
express Image of his Person: And we saw his Glory (says John) as the Glory of
the only begotten Son of God.

The Apostles and Spiritual men saw the Love of God held forth through the
doings and sufferings of Christ. And therefore it is said, (I beseech you mark
it) in the 5. of John; The Father judges no man; but has committed all
judgment to the Son, that men might honor the Son, as they honor the Father. He
that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father that has sent him. God is
he that must inherit all honor and glory to eternity: but he has for the
present set up Christ Jesus, to make himself known unto the world. It was not,
that Christ should make himself known, or that we should lie down in the
Discovery of Christ, but that by Christ, the Father might be known, and
discovered to us, and his love; and therefore, it is said; That this is life
eternal, to know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. The meaning is not, as if it were not enough to know the Father; but that
there is no knowing of the Father but by Jesus Christ, whom he has sent for
that end. So that Jesus Christ has fulfilled his Ministration when he has
made known the Father, and then is the Kingdom delivered up by the Son, yea, by
all the Sons of God: when once they come to know God by Christ, they deliver up
the Kingdom from Christ unto God, even unto the Father. This is the first thing
that is hid under this same Parable. Christ bears the name, but God does the
thing; Christ says, I came to do the work of him that sent me. God says unto
Christ; thou shall make me known unto the world.

But the second thing that is hid under this Parable, is, the doing of the like
works in the Saints, as were done in Christ Jesus. This is that which they
only see and receive, that are delivered from the delusions of Antichrist.
Antichrist cries up Christ in the flesh; cries up that same man Christ Jesus,
that dyed for our sins and rose again for our Justification; but he knows not
Christ in the Spirit; he knows not Christ, and him crucified, in the Saints; He
knows not the power of his Resurrection in Believers; He knows not the
exceeding greatness of that power which wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, working in us: in both these respects, is Christ's Ministration
in the flesh, a speaking in Parables.

First, because the Gospel seems to run thus, as that Christ has done this
and that for us, whereas indeed it was God in Christ; God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. before end. And whereas the Gospel
seems to deliver to us a History only of what Christ Jesus has done for us in
the flesh; It does indeed hold forth the Model and Platform of that salvation
that is carried on in the spirit, and is revealed in the breasts of the Saints;
I say, that is wrought and revealed there sutably and agreably to all those
steps and stages, to all those points and periods you shall find in the Letter.
The same things are done in the Saints in the Spirit, that were done in, and
upon Christ in the flesh.

And now I have opened this point unto you; if you require any reason for it,
why God did speak to us in a Parable, and why he shows us things as in a
glass; why he shows us rather the Image of things, then the things themselves;
because of our childishness.

It was the manner of the Heathen to put wisdom into Parables, to put their
wise Observations into fables, into pleasant tales and stories, for these two
reasons.

First, that they might hide wisdom from the Vulgar.

2. That they might the better insinuate it into their Children, and those that
were ingenuous.

And these two Reasons may be given, why God teaches the world by Parables: It
is for their weakness sake; It is to take them and lead them by the hand, to
speak to them in childish things, in things within their own sphere and
understanding. So God has done to us in the flesh of Christ. You will believe
a man loves you, if he will dye for you; you will believe a Creditor will be
reconciled to you, if he pay the debt himself: Why, behold thus does God
satisfy man. 2. Rea. God does this to hide these things from the profane of
the world: I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid
these things from the wise, and have revealed them unto babes etc. And
therefore if you observe it, Christ did commonly speak to the Multitude in
Parables: they had Parable upon Parable, they had rind upon rind, one shel upon
another, that they could not easily come to the kernel. And the Reason is
this, that wicked and profane men may scoff and jeer at the Letter and
Parable, but God does keep the truth from that contempt and obloquie. The
outward Court is given to the Gentiles to be trodden down: God makes it not
much matter; men may tread down outward forms, and God may let them profane
them; but there is a place where none come that defile, and that is the Spirit,
the truth, as it is in Jesus: Gods Truth is Himself. We know that precious
things have covering upon covering, they have lappings one upon another^ Jewels
have Caskets to put them in; though the Casket fall into the dirt, yet the
Jewels will be kept clean. So profane and wicked men may preach and receive
the Gospel in a Parable, in the outward Letter. But what have thou to do to
take my word in thy mouth? the word in the Spirit; for it is that hidden
wisdom that is prepared for our glory; as the Apostle says. 1 Cor. 2.



Examine your selves by those two things spoken of before. Do you discern God
under the form of the man Christ Jesus? Do you see God coming forth unto you
in Christ? And then do you find the Gospel to be realized in your hearts and
spirits? Do you find these transactions to be transacted over again in you? The
death of Christ in you? The life of Christ in you? The Resurrection of Christ
in you?

Now a further thing I aim at, is this, and this specially; The plain showing
of the Father by the Spirit, Hitherto have I spoken to you in Parables; the
time comes when I will speak no m^re to you in parables, but will show you
plainly of the Father.

I shall only speak, at this time, of the Object of Divine Discoveries, and that
is the Father; The time comes that I will show you plainly of the Father: So
that the point is this.

the whole and entire Object) of the Discovery of Christ and the Gospel, is the
Discovery of the Father unto us.

This our Savior plainly intimates here, in saying; The time comes that I will
show you plainly of the Father. For if there had been any thing else that they
had needed to have known, he would have mentioned that also; This is life
eternal (says Christ, John. 17. 3.) to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent; to know thee by Jesus Christ whom thou have sent;
as I told you before, for we cannot know the Father but by Christ.

But more particularly and expressly in John 14. 8. says Phillip there;
Lordshew us the Father, and it suffices us; pray mark: As Pilate, and other
wicked men, (as Balaam, and the High Priest) many times spoke things, that they
knew not all that was in what they spoke. Sodoth Phillip here; he speaks more
truth, then he is aware; Show us the Father, and it suffices us; It is most
true, and Christ never contradicts him; he never says no, it would not suffice
to know the Father. The Father is the whole object of divine Discoveries. The
Fathers Love; as in the 6. of John 29. This is the will of him that sent, that
of all those he has given me, I should lose none. The Fathers Person: No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, in the bosom of the Father,
he has declared him. This then I say, that which was the scope of Christ's
coming down from Heaven, must needs be the adequate scope of the Gospel: But
to declare the Father, was the scope of Christ's coming down from Heaven; to
declare the Fathers Person, as well as the Fathers Love. Therefore he is called
the express Image of his Person: God did not send the Image of his Person, but
that we should know his Person by that Image. Many take up the Image and the
Picture, and they never know the Person; as when they take up Christ in the
flesh; for indeed Christ in the Spirit is one and the fame with the Father;
know thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? as Christ
discourses in that 14 of Ioh. 9. 10, 11. Have I been so long time with you?
And have thou not seen me Phillip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father.
And therefore are these expressions in Scripture, of believing in God by
Christ, and coming to God by Him, and through Him: Jesus Christ Himself in the
flesh, is but a form in which the Father does present himself unto the world:
But what is the Father, you wilsay? Ans. The Father here is God in Himself,
bringing forth all things within Himself, possessing all things with in
Himself. God as he is, this is the Father; you know that is the expectation of
the Saints to see God as he is; Jesus Christ, and all that God is to man in
Jesus Christ, it is in a form descending, or in a condescending form;
Righteousness is such a form, Sanctification is such a form, Redemption is such
a form; All these are but forms in which God descends unto us; they are not
God Himself as he is. And there shall come a time when these forms shall vanish,
when as the Saints shall hear no more of Righteousness, or of Sanctification;
for Righteousness what is it, but a relative word that relates to sin? when sin
shall be no more, righteousness shall be no more; Sanctification is a relative
word, that signifies peculiarity and separation. This refers to common things,
and unclean things; but when there shall be no unclean nor common thing, but
God shall be all in all, and all things shall be in a form or appearance,
suitable to the form wherein they were in God, then the notion of
Sanctification shall cease; so then the Father is the journies end of a
Christian. That which is first is last, and that which is last was first: The
Father is first of all. There was a time when God lived only in Himself, and
possessed all things in a divine form in Himself. His own Diety was his Heaven,
and was all unto him. The time comes, when these things that are brought forth
in a distinction from God in proper beings of their own, shall be returned and
married to him, and united to that Original whence they sprang, and live in his
life, and shine in his glory. And so the Father, who is the first, shall be the
last also. The end must find the beginning; as the year is discribed to you, by
such an emblem of a Snake, taking his tail in his mouth, the end running into
the beginning; all things came from God, and God by all things shows Himself.
All things are Pictures and Emblems of God, and especially Christ Jesus; and
the Saints they show forth the virtues and the praises of God, but all these
things they must, they do wheel about, until the end does find the beginning,
and so God shall be all in all: When God has made known himself by his Son
unto the Saints, then shall God cease administering any longer to the world, as
he has done by our flesh, and by the man Christ Jesus; but God Himself shall
be all in all. So that by the Father here I mean not a Person in the Trinity,
but rather the whole Trinity considered essentially and originally as
containing in them that state and appearance of things which was their first
and Original glory, which is said in Scripture to be in the form of God, which
this present state and appearance waits to be clothed withal, and to be
swallowed up in, so as to subsist, act and live in that, and not in their own,
yet their own not to be destroyed by this, nor mixed or confounded by this, but
clothed upon with this; and so of Christ it is said, that he shall come in the
glory of the Father: Christ is not destroyed, but is still, and keeps his
distinct being, but this being lives, acts and appears in the Glory of the
Father.

the world; as a King may lend his Kingly Honor to some Leiutenant in another
Country (as suppose in Ireland) that so that Country may be Conquered for him,
and Governed for him; but when it is done, we know all derivative power and
authority, and names whatsoever, do yield up to those from whom they receive
their Commission, when they have done, that for which they had their
Commission; and so it is in this case.

unto him, above and before the mafestation of it in the sufferings of Jesus
Christ. He may see it in God Himself, though by Christ. Do not think you know
as much as you need to know, and as much as is the interest of your life and
happiness to know, in knowing the flesh of Christ, in knowing the man, Christ
Jesus; for unless you know God in his appearance under that form; you mistake
Christ, and make him an Idol: I am nothing (says Christ,) the flesh profits
nothing; He that sends, is greater then he that is sent, Christ says so
himself: If God be greater then Christ, then Christ himself is but a Medium,
through which you come to be acquainted with God, and in which you must not
rest: There is no comparison between that which is infinite. If so be that
Christ himself; if the man Christ Jesus were eternal life, he would not have
said; The Father is greater then I. No, know the Father by Christ is eternal
life. Take heed of being offended, when you shall hear such like Doctrine as
this; that the sufferings of Jesus Christ in the flesh for us, were, as it
were, but a Parable in which God spoke to us; and that Gods Heart was not set
upon the very having of a little blood for the sins of his people; but that
herein he premeditatedly, if we look upon it in the Original contrivance,
would commend his love to us, and herein if we relate to the lapsed estate, he
considers us poor creatures as we are, and speaks to our childishness and
weakness; who being made under such a Law, and having incurred the curse,
could not see how there could be reconciliation without bloodshedding. Be not
offended, when as you hear that there is a greater work done, in the Spirit, in
the Saints, then was the offering up the flesh of Christ: That there is a
greater Sacrifice offered up to God, when as the old Adam; man's own
Righteousness and Strength is crucified, and is offered up unto God; I say, a
greater Sacrifice, then the very Sacrificing of the flesh of Christ him self;
that is, if you take the Sacrifice of Christ without the Mystery; for that
Sacrifice was indeed the root, as well as the figure of this same Sacrifice.

2. And in the second place; If so be you need be warned of Idolizing the
Humanity of Jesus Christ; we had need to warn you of Idolizing other forms.

There are two sorts of forms, wherein God appears to the world: There is the
Humanity of Christ, which is the first and the Highest, and the most immediate
Form and Appearance of God; and there are Ordinances in which God appears, as
it were at the second hand, and by reflection; as when the Sun appears in the
Rainbow, or when it makes another Sun like it self in a watery cloud, which is,
but the Sun by reflection; so Ordinances are but the shadow, as it were, of the
Image; Christ is the Image of the Fathers Person, (he is but the Image,
neither) but the Ordinances are but shadows of the Image, therefore take heed
of Idolizing forms; your interest lies in knowing the Father, not in knowing
any form whatsoever; and take heed of censuring and judging spiritual
discoveries. Those that should have told the Disciples, that there was a better
thing then the presence of Christ with them in the flesh; certainly they would
have given much offense to them: Take heed of being offended, if we say, there
is a higher thing then Ordinances, then fasting, then praying, yea, we may say,
there is a higher thing then believing, and that is seeing the Father, and
knowing the Father without a form, manifesting and revealing himself in his own
immediate light. Now this I desire you to wait for and seek for, and to press
toward this point, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because every form has weakness in it, and therefore you cannot rest in
the knowing God in a form.

2. Every form has some unlikeness in it, which comes to pass through our
mistake: and certainly your great Clarks do so criticize upon the Letter of the
Scripture, that they are by the Letter many times led out of the way, and from
the mind of the spirit: and those that look upon Christ, and calculate all the
actions and sufferings of Christ with an eye of Reason: What a strange thing do
they make of the Gospel? They make it a notional thing. Every form has
weakness, and an unlikeness in it; you will never see God as he is, till you see
him without a form, till you see him in Himself.

3. I shall show you what are some of the actings of that state of Believers,
when they shall come to be past form: Christ tells you some of them here, John
16. In that day (says Christ) you shall ask me nothing: There is one; But what
then? Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you; This
is another. This is a Believer that is come out of a form, that is gone beyond
this form, when he goes to God, not in the name of an outward Mediator only,
but he goes to God in the same Spirit, in that inward unction that is upon him;
for that I conceive Christ means here; whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
my name. Now every Believer has the name of Christ upon him, and has the name
of the new Jerusalem upon him, and has the new name upon him; his name is the
Christ of God, the anointed of God; the annoynting that is upon you shall
teach you all things; now then is that man past forms that goes to God, as
Christ himself would go to the Father, if he were in distress* He goes in the
same unction that was powered upon Christ Jesus: So he does not formally make
use of the name of Christ, as a man would use the name of some great man, and
say; I beseech you Sir, that you would do this favor for me, for such a ones
sake, but he goes to God, as a woman comes in her husbands name, right or
interest, to a great King, her husband being a Favorite of that King; the woman
does not make use of another name, but she makes known to the King what she
is, and under what relation she stands; and so does a Saint come in the same
anointing of Jesus Christ to the Father; for God in raising up Christ, does
show to us that he will raise up all that are his, as he raised up the man
Christ Jesus; not raise them out of the grave of earth only, but out of the
grave of Self, out of that same base being they had in Self, and corruption,
unto that glorious being in God.

4. And then another thing is this; At that day you shall ask in my name, and I
say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself
loves you. Alas, while we are weak, we know not the Love of the Father to us,
but think that Christ Jesus does procure the Love of the Father, whereas Christ
does but manifest and declare the Love of the Father; and therefore says
Christ; I say not, that I will pray for you, for the Father himself loves you.

Now having exhorted you to contend toward the knowing of the Father, and
living in the Father, and not living in any form, (for all forms are to cease,
forms are not our perfection: The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath.) Let me give you this caution. Let no man think, there is no use of
Christ, and no use of Preaching, or Ordinances of Prayer etc. No, this cannot
be inferred from the Doctrine: This only may be inferred, that this is not that
glorious rest where a Christian is to sit down; forms are but helps, but God
does by forms, bring us to know himself without a form; and no man knows the
Father, but he that knows him by Christ whom he did send, therefore you cannot
cast away those forms: The Scriptures will last so long as there is ought of
them to be fulfilled. But that which we are contending toward, in all these
means, is the knowing of the Father, and then we shall see that simplicity and
unity that is in the truth; then we shall see all those knots loosed, and dark
ways opened; then we shall see that all those things of Christ coming, and
dying, and suffering for us, were but Parables.

Now this is the sum of the Gospel, that God loves Believers, and is their
Righteousness and their Strength: and Love, and Faith, and All, not thus
resolved, is but a Parable that does cloud the Father: They were not ordained
to cloud the Father, but they do through our weakness cloud the Father from us:
They were ordained, that they might infinuate and convey, according to our
capacities, the knowledge of the Father into us, but as I said before, in all
forms there is weakness; and forms shall be done away, as time hastens to be no
more, and God be all in all.

THE TRUTH as it is in JESUS.
JOHN. 17. 19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be
sanctified through the Truth.
THese words are an enforcement of that Petition which Christ put up for his
Disciples, and for all Believers to the end of the world; that Petition you
have in the 17. v. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth.

The Reason by which Christ enforces this Petition, follows immediately. As thou
have sent me into the world, so have I sent them into the world. And therefore
Father (says he) sanctify them through thy truth, as if he should say;
Behold, they are sent out into the world, as I was sent out into the world;
they are sent out into a sinful world, into a lewd world; they are sent forth
upon the same errand and design that I am sent into the world, viz. to show
forth the virtues and praises of God; and therefore sanctify them (says he)
through thy Truth, thy word is Truth; And for their sakes I sanctify my self
etc.

Here is a further Enforcement of his Request: The meaning of it I shall give
in a Paraphrase; It is as much as if Christ had said, behold my Sanctification
is levelled at their Sanctification; their Sanctification is the end, and my
Sanctification is but the means: It is for their sakes that I sanctify my
self, that they may be sanctified: My own sanctifying of my self is not for my
own sake, it is for their sakes; and therefore I lose my end in all that I do,
I lose my end in dying and suffering, if they be not sanctified. That Is the
scope of the words in general. Now we come to open them particularly to you.

1. What is meant by this same sanctifying, for their sakes I sanctify my
self. Was Jesus Christ common or unclean, that he speaks here of being
sanctified? Had Jesus Christ any sin in him that need to be removed, that he
speaks here of being sanctified? No, there was no sin in him, neither was there
any guil found in his mouth; and yet Jesus Christ is said to be sanctified, not
only in this place, but in other places, as Heb. 2. He that sanctifies, and
they that are sanctified are all one, says the Apostle, when he speaks of
Christ that did sanctify himself.

Therefore, it is needful to show you what is that sanctifying of Christ that
he means here; what it was, and by what it was.

First, it may be taken either particularly, for the sanctifying of himself by
his Cross, by offering up himself: Thereby he did sanctify himself, by offering
up himself; he was crucified in the flesh, that he might live unto God in the
spirit: Christ did lay down the glory of the first Adam, in which he did appear
absolute and complete before his sufferings, but he laid down that glory and
that righteousness, he laid down that same body of his, that so he might be
renewed again in the Glory of the Father.

2. Or else secondly, this same Sanctification may be meant of the whole, as of
the death of Jesus Christ. It may be meant of all that befell him from his
Cradle to his Cross, of all that was done in him, or done by him, or done upon
him: All this was the sanctifying of Christ; And it is called a making of him
perfect. It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, to
make the Captain of our salvation perfect through sufferings.

And so by temptation he was made perfect, as well as by his Cross; and so
Sanctification here may be as much as Qualification; this did qualify Christ
for the end for which he was designed and ordained, which end was to reveal the
Grace of the Father, and the salvation of man, in and by that grace; and all
that was done unto Christ, it was a sanctifying of him, or a completing of
him, thus to be the Author and the finisher of our Faith; to be a complete type
and pattern, and a complete Covenant and Witness unto us. Now having explained
those words; for their sakes I sanct^fie my self.

There is but one word more that needs to be explained, and that is, thy Truth;
For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be sanctified through the
Truth. What is meant by this word, thy Truth?

This same word here thy Truth, is a relative word, and I conceive it may
relate to this same Type, Pattern, Image or Representation. These two, you
know, are members of a distinction, Image and Truth, Shadow and Truth. So by
the Truth, in this place, you are to understand that which answers unto the
shadow, Type or, Representation.

And so you have the meaning of these words: Thus says Christ; Therefore am I
come into world, and have done and suffered these things before the eyes of
men, to the end, that the like things may be done in the spirit, in all my
members; whereof I have exhibited to the world, a map and description in my own
body and person: For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be
sanctified through the truth.

So then, you may observe these things out of the words.

1. That Sanctification is a large notion in Scripture; its a large notion; for
the meaning of our Savior, speaking of his sanctifying himself; and of his
members being sanctified, is not to defix the thoughts and apprehensions of the
hearers, unto that same grace that we commonly call Sanctification, in
distinction from Justification; but Sanctification is that, in this place, that
comprehends the whole Mystery of God in a Saint, which is called here by the
name of Sanctification; even as it is said, By one offering has he perfected,
for ever, them that are sanctified. It were far from pure Divinity, to
understand them that are sanctified, there to be meant of inherent
Sanctification, only or properly, that is, of the Grace of the Spirit working
in us holiness; but he has perfected them that are sanctified, that is, them
that are separated by the Fathers Love, them that are called in time, them that
are led by the Spirit, and so it may comprehend the whole Election and
Vocation, and Justification, and Sanctification, and all; and so we are said to
be chosen, through Sanctification of the Spirit. But I shall not open these
places any further.

2. Next observe, here are two Sanctifications: here is a typical
Sanctification, as I may so say, and here is a real Sanctification: Here is the
Sanctification of Christ, and here is the Sanctification of his members: For
their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be sanctified.

I should be too long if I should observe all the particulars that the words
will afford, and insist upon them; therefore I shall pick out these two things
only; and the first I shall speak of but briefly; and the second is that I do
chiefly intend.

The First is this;



For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be sanctified through the
Truth.

That which is for another sake, (mark it) or for the sake of another thing to
be don, that is not to be rested in it self; but Jesus Christ's Sanctification,
his dying, and his rising, it was for another things sake; and therefore it is
not to be rested in, nor to be gloried in, in it self; For their sakes I
sanctify my self.

Jesus Christ is unto his seed, as the First Adam was unto his seed. He is a
common Root, and our salvation is transacted in him, as in a Figure, As our
destruction was wrought in Adam, as in a Figure. As destruction and death did
seize upon us all, in a Figure, in Adam; so does life and salvation await us
all (all the elect) in Christ Jesus. It does descend upon them all, as in a
Figure; for so the Apostle does parralell the First Adam and the Second Adam
together, Romans 5. where you may read it at large.

Now, that I say these things were done in a Figure; I will give you my meaning
of it thus, and the proof of it also.

Adam lost all his by a Covenant, and so Christ restores all his by a Covenant;
but we know that a Covenant, although it does give me a title in Law, unto such
or such an estate or commodity; yet this same Covenant is not the very
possession it self. So this same Covenant, of which Jesus Christ is the Copy,
as it were, and is the common person with whom it is made; This Covenant gives
our Faith the First Hold, and First Title, but it is not the very possession it
self: In possession the salvation it self is wrought, or rather revealed in us.
As we do not inherit sin and death from the first Adam, merely by Covenant, in
which we were involved; but we participate of the nature of Adam, and we so
come to have an evil conscience; we have the very same Nature that Adam had,
and the same trembling conscience that Adam had: so in this case, we have the
very Death and Life of the Lord Jesus working in us.

So that you see the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, are not to be
gloried in in themselves, or as they rest in the man Christ Jesus; but we are
to wait for the like things to be translated in us, and upon us; and that is
the next thing I come unto: For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might
be sanctified through the Truth.

This is that the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 21. If so be that ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus; That ye put off
concerning the former conversation, the old man, and be renewed in the spirit
of your mind, and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness. etc Where he shows, what the Truth is in Jesus; even the putting
off the old man, and the putting on the new man, which is created etc.

This is the Truth; this is the work in the Spirit, done in every Believer,
conform to that work wrought in Christ in the flesh. This is our sanctifying
through the Truth; and so you have the Apostle holding forth the Saints
suffering, from Christ's example; as the Ministration or Token of their
salvation, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Even hereunto were ye called, because Christ suffered
for us, leaving us an example etc. Mark ye, Jesus Christ is our example: Christ
in the flesh, and what was done in him in a visible way in the flesh, that is
wrought in us in an invisible way in the spirit; and it is said. 1 Pet. 4. 1.
Forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, let us arm our selves
with the same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from
sin. Mark it here: The Apostle does not say we have ceased from sin, by Christ's
suffering in the flesh for us, but be does admonish us here of a personal
suffering, if we would cease from sin.

What this same suffering in the flesh is, I shall tell you in a few words. It
is to have our life in the flesh extinguished; that, as the Apostle says, I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: It is to know nothing by our selves:
This is to suffer in the flesh; as the Apostle says, I know nothing by myself;
He did not act at all: to be dead unto the Law, and to be dead in our first
relation unto God; this is the suffering in the flesh.

We are first in the relation of Mercenaries, by the Covenant of Works, and
have a kind of stock of our own to trade withal. Now to suffer in the flesh,
is to cast awaythi same confidence of our own, to to despair of our abillities,
and to see our selves able to do nothing. For while we are in the flesh, the
motions of sin which are by the law, do work in our members to bring forthfruit
unto death. Romans 7.


I will give you one more Scripture to prove this, and that is, Ephesians. 1. 17.
where the Apostle prays thus for the Ephesians: That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your understandings being
enlightened, that ye may see what is the hope of his calling. And at the 19.
verse. That you may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power, which he
wrought in Christ Jesus when he raised him from the dead. Pray mark it; The
Apostle does directly and expressly assert, that there is the working of the
same mighty power in Believers, that wrought in Christ when God raised him from
the dead. And the Apostle Romans 8. says in general: That as many as God did
foreknow, he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son; That is,
God did predestinate them to be carried on the same way that Christ was, and so
the same things to be done in them, that were done in him.

Col. 2. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of
Christ,

Here lies the Objection, if so be we are circumcised in Christ: If all
Believers are circumcised in him at once; as this Scripture seems to hold
forth, by the putting off of that same body of his, by that very circumcision
of his* Why then, you will say, our Sanctification tarries not for the
appearance of the like things in us.

I confess this Objection lies plain in appearance against what has been
spoken.

But I shall answer to you thus, and show you how we are circumcised in Christ
by his circumcision; and how it is, that notwithstanding we are actually and
personally circumcised by the circumcision of the Spirit, and by real
circumcision.

1. First, then we are circumcised in Christ foederally, as in our root and
common person; we are unto God circumcised in Christ, as in a Figure. Pray mark
it, it is, I say, as in a Figure: for thus we are to look upon Jesus Christ;
not as one that came to excuse the Old man from dying, or to set us up in a
state of salvation without working any thing within us. Nay, he came to reveal
the Kingdom of God within us, and to set it up within us; but he first gave us
a pattern of the Kingdom, and first transacted all our salvation in a Figure,
before he transacted it within us by the Spirit; and this transacting our
salvation without us in a Figure. bears its use and proportion toward the
effecting of the work of Sanctification within us by the Spirit. For thus God
has hereby caught us by guil, (as I may so speak) even as when we stood in
Adam, Adam falling cast us all down. So now, God he comes and reveals a second
Adam, and this same second Adam God sets up as our common root, representing us
all; and this is that Covenant that God proclaims from heaven. Look what is the
fat^ of the second Adam, that shall be the fate of all the seed; if he stand, al
shall stand; if he fall, they shall al fall. Now Jesus Christ comes and stands in
our stead, and was made under the Law, and he dies and suffers, goes away in
the flesh, suffers in the flesh, and is not overcome of death or Hell, or the
pains of death, but rises again. Here Is our salvation transacted in a Figure,
and set before us: As it did fare with Christ, so it shall fare with us; we
shall as certainly come to glory, as he did. Here is the Type, here is the
Original Pattern, here is the forerunner, here is the draught or copy of the
Covenant written in broad Characters upon the person of Jesus Christ. This is
the use of Christ's dying, and suffering, and sanctifying himself; and so we are
said to be sanctified in him, as our root, representing us. What proportion
this bears to the transacting of our salvation within us, is this. Hereby we
are brought to God; hereby our weak hands are lifted up, and our feeble knees
are strengthened: Hereby we are caught (as it were) with guil, and God does hold
forth our salvation, as in a Parable, to us: But if so be the work rest here
(let us suppose an impossibility,) we are but in an ill condition, if we be not
circumcised also together with Christ, really by the spirit, as well as
circumcised in Christ foederally and typically, and representatively; it will go
but ill with us.

We may see what is to be done by looking upon the History of Christ; but til
we find the same things done in us in the mystery, in some measure, we can have
little comfort: We may see the end of the Lord with us, even the same end he
made with Christ Jesus; but we must follow his steps also, as the Apostle Peter
says; He has left us an example, that we should follow his steps.

1. Now the use I shall make of this, is to confirm that Doctrine I have
formerly delivered to you; that Doctrine that needs confirming again, and that
need be whetted upon us, because we are exceeeding dull of hearing spiritual
truths; the Doctrine is this, namely:

That the whole History of Christ will profit you nothing, nor all that you
know, except you find experimentally the same things done in you by the Spirit.

I desire to commend this Doctrine to you again and again; That the History of
the Gospel is but a Parable (as it were,) that holds forth to us the story of
things done, and not only so, but holds forth a glass of things to be done by
the spirit within us.

I beseech you therefore be not offended, when as we say, that Christ according
to the History of him only, and according to his Ministration in the flesh, is
but a form in which God does appear to us, and in which God does give us a Map
of our salvation. Thou know it not to be thy real salvation, except it be
revealed within thee in the Spirit. Jesus Christ is called the Image of the
Invisible God: God comes forth to be seen in the flesh of Christ, as in an
Image, as in a Representation; it is not the naked appearance of God, but it is
an Image of God. Now we know the Image serves in the absence of the lively face
of the living Person; and so do all these same transactions of Jesus Christ;
they serve until the Kingdom of God be come to us in the Spirit. A Map serves
until a man knows the Country, and so do these same Transactions of Jesus
Christ, they serve as constant Monuments unto us; Monuments, I say, and
Pillars, and Memorials, and Types, of that same salvation that is to be wrought
and revealed within us by the Spirit; and therefore as Christ says, we may be
bold to say after him; The flesh profits nothing: if you only know Christ, as
dying and rising without you, it will profit you nothing, unles you know him as
dying and rising within you. Error in this is the root of the dead faith,
whereof the world is full.

This is the root of that formal profession, of that form of godliness which
men do advance so far in, and glory so much of, and shroud themselves under,
unto the persecuting of the power of godliness, to the persecuting of the
Spirit. This setting up of the History of Christ, being ignorant of the
Mystery; Any man is capable of remembering the story of Christ, and telling and
rehearsing it, if he has but common reason, and can say, as well as another,
that Christ dyed for him, and can throw himself upon Christ, and hang upon
Christ.

This is not Faith; this is not Salvation: We have not known how to put a
difference between the precious and the vile; We know not how to shake off the
pretenders, and knock off their fingers that would pretend to eternal life:
Through the ignorance of this truth; we have counted it enough, if a man has
had the knowledge of the Story of Christ, and has said, he casts himself upon
Christ for salvation. But harken what James says; Faith without works is dead;
Harken what Paul says, Romans 8. 3. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death.

He does not say, that such a proposition of the Gospel did set him free: He
does not say, that the hearing, that Christ dyed for the sins of men, does set
him free. No, there was the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, as well as there
was the Law or Letter, the outward Covenant; is it that entailes life upon
Jesus Christand his seed? There is an outward Covenant, and there is an inward
Spirit. The outward Covenant is this; I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed: This is the Covenant that God made with Christ, that he made with Abraham
of old; I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Now then they that are of
the seed of Christ, are in this Covenant, as all that were Abraham's seed, were
in that outward Covenant; but may not any man pretend to be of the seed of
Christ, and to be of the generation of Christ? And do not thousands profess
themselves so to be? Do not thousands in the world say, Lord, Lord, and press
to enter into Heaven? We cannot put a difference between one or other, except
we know this truth; for they say they are in the Covenant, and they say they
are of Christ's seed; and what hold they forth for this? They hold forth the
confession of Christ, and say, that he dyed for their sins, and rose for their
Justification, and this they believe, and upon this they lay their souls for
salvation. May not the veryest Hypocrite do so, as well as the truest Saint. But
here is that which puts a difference, when the Spirit of Jesus Christ brings
this Covenant to the heart of a poor creature, when the Spirit of Adoption,
the Spirit of Sonship, revealing God as our Father, revealing God in Union
with us, our Righteousness and our Strength, he does indeed seal us to the day
of Redemption; he sets apart Christ's sheep. This distinguishes them from the
other: So that if you lay your salvation upon an historical Christ, you will be
deceived. If you would have that in which you may confide, you must have Christ
revealed in you in the Spirit; you must have the same spirit of Faith that was
in Christ, and the same Spirit of Power that wrought in him; you must have the
same eternal Spirit, by which you must offer up your bodies, offer up your
flesh to God as a Sacrifice, yea, your selves, and your own Righteousness: This
is true salvation; Here is salvation manifested unto life. But you will say to
me; Is not this a wronging of Jesus Christ? Is it not a giving away from
Christ? And a giving it to grace and Sanctification within us?

witness, the Covenant, the common Person, in whom our salvation is transacted,
as in a figure: Christ in the Spirit, is the real Truth and Principle of
Righteousness and of Life; he is the real salvation within us: For what is
Christ Jesus in the Spirit, but the Manifestation of God, the coming forth of
God; and unto this must we attribute, and in this we must fix and pitch our
salvation; this is the Savor of life unto life, Of his own will begat he us.
Does not the Apostle there take away from Christ? And yet elsewhere Christ is
said to be the everlasting Father. This same Will of God brought forth, is
nothing else but Christ Jesus in Spirit; Christ Jesus is the outgoing of the
Fathers Will, the Manifestation of the Fathers good Pleasure. Therefore he is
said to dwell in the heart of every Believer. If you confine Christ's dwelling
to a local Heaven, you are ignorant of that which is the greatest joy that can
be; Christ dwells in thy heart; if the Will of God be revealed in thee by the
Spirit, Christ is in thee, for he is nothing else but the outgoing of the
Fathers Will, and the Manifestation tion of the Fathers good pleasure; this is
Christ. So that if we give to Sanctification, we give to Christ; For this is
the Will of God, even our Sanctification; Christ is made unto us Righteousness
and Sanctification.

But I desire a little further to examine that same, before I let it pass; it
is said, it is a giving to Sanctification, and not to the blood of Christ; I
say no.

For 1. I do not here take Sanctification, as it is commonly taken, as to be
such and such particular acts of the Spirit: I know that our life lies not in
this or the other act, or in any particular act. Our life lies in union with
God through the Spirit.

2. I give it not only to the Sanctification of the Spirit, but to the
Revelation of the Spirit. There is the Revelation of the Spirit, as well as the
Sanctification of the Spirit, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 1. 17. That God
would give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation etc.

3. There is the Spirit of grace, as well as the grace of the Spirit, and to
this I give all, and the Spirit of grace is Christ Jesus; and so to him I give
al: and what do I give to the Spirit? I give the Manifestation of salvation to
life, and that is all.

4. This is the sum of all I desire to commend unto you: That we are not
justified, we are not sanctified, by Christ's dving, by Christ's suffering in the
flesh only; that is not the complete Ministration of our salvation: (There
indeed we see our salvation as in a glass, and it is transacted as in a figure,
as in the history,) but then are we actually sanctified; when as God does send
that same Spirit of Adoption into our hearts, revealing unto us the Love of the
Father, and revealing unto us our Reconciliation; that Reconciliation that was
held forth to us on the Cross, but which is dispensed unto us, by our being
offered up upon the Cross as Christ was. For the Apostle Romans 8. does in two
places speak so expressly to this purpose, that no man can wave it, or put it
by. verse 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, and the
spirit is life, because of righteousness. Here is the Death and Resurrection of
Jesus Christ: If Christ be in you, (and there is no salvation without it,) then
the body is dead; the body of your own Righteousness, and your own Strength,
and wisdom is crucified in conformity to the death of Christ; Christ's death was
but the figure of the death that must pass upon the flesh of every Believer;
and therefore though we may say, I am crucified with Christ etc. We cannot take
any comfort till the body be dead in us. And the other place is the 4. verse of
Romans 8. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc. Pray
mark it: You dream of a Righteousness of the Law fulfilled for you: that is
true too; Christ fulfilled it for you perfectly; but there is a fulfilling of
the Righteousness of the Law in you. And the Apostle shows what that is, when
you are crucified to the fleshly principle, and walk in the spiritual
principle; though you walk not in perfect obedience, yet spiritually it is done
in you: The Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit.

So then look after this, that you be sanctified through the Truth, that is,
that you, in very deed, be sanctified according to the pattern of
Sanctification in Christ Jesus. Let me mind you again of that Scripture,
Ephesians. 4. 21. If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as
the Truth is in Jesus, that ye put off the old man, and be renewed in the
spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the new man, etc. Look that this be
done.

Bondage? To charge this upon us, when as we are bid look, that it should be so
and so with us.

great interest that these things should be done in you, but it is not expected
that they should be done by you: According to the working (says the Apostle)
of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ Jesus when he raised him from
the dead, and set him etc. It is Gods mighty power that works in you; it is God
that crucifies you; it is God that quickens you. Christ offered up himself by
the eternal Spirit; it was not by the resolution of his flesh, that he gave
himself to dye, as many a Valiant Roman has done for his Country; but it was
through the eternal Spirit; and therefore, that which you are to do, is to wait
upon God.

And herein comes the use of the doing of these things in the man Christ Jesus
before your eyes: It is to strengthen your faith and expectation of having
these things done in you, by the same power and spirit. And therefore if you
ask me what use you should make of Christ's Death and Resurrection, and these
things: I say, look upon them as the earnest of your salvation; look upon them
as the very sealing of the Covenant between God and you. God reads over (as it
were) all the Covenant before us, and seals it in our presence; and this is the
scope of the Manifestation of Jesus Christ: It is but to manifest the life to
us, to show what God will do upon your flesh: So what God did to Christ Jesus,
and so how he carried him to glory, so how he was tempted, and be not you
discouraged, though it be so with you. See how the Disciples were dismayed,
when Christ wrapped up himself, for a Moment, in the grave, as in a cloud of
darkness; They said, we thought this bad bin he that should have redeemed
Israel.

See what an end the Lord made with him, the same end will the Lord make with
you also.

THE TRUTH as it is in JESUS.
JOHN. 17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth. Verse, 19. And
for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they might be sanctified through the
Truth.
THis same Portion of Scripture that is read to you, is an Enforcement, or part
of an Enforcement of one of those savory Petitions, which Jesus Christ put up
at his departure out of this world for his Disciples, and in them, for all his
elect: The Petition is this; Sanctify them through thy Truth.

This Petition he does in part explain, and he does enforce and urge it with
Arguments.

1. He explains it in part, that part, thy Truth, he explains it thus, thy word
is Truth.

Now before I go any further: By the word here we are not to understand this
same Letter, (for we know this same Letter of the word, is taken up by every
one to defend his opinion, and therefore this is not the meaning of thy word is
Truth:) But the meaning is this; That that word that was with God, and that was
God; that word is Truth.

I conceive this same truth being a relative notion, is here to be taken in
opposition to form* Thy word is Truth: The meaning is this; That thy word, it
is not only a form and an appearance in which thou do make out thy self unto
the world, but thy word indeed is the very Truth, (that is) it is thy self, and
so Christ desires that his Disciples may be sanctified, not by planting the
knowledge of the literal word in their minds; but by ingraffing the nature of
the Divine word in their hearts, that is, by ingraffing God himself, by God
himself becoming one with them. This is the only means of Sanctification; This
is the true Sanctification by the word; The ingraffed word which is able to
save our souls.

Now having explained his request, he enforces it, and the first Enforcement of
it is this, from the title, and the reason that may be pleaded, why they should
be sanctified, why the Members of Christ should be sanctified: Why says he:
There is as much reason why they should be sanctified, as there is why I should
be sanctified: For as thou-hast sent me into the world, so have I sent them
into the world. Mark it I pray, and you will see that it is not such a wringing
of the nose that will cause blood; when we make a necessity of the same things
to be wrought in us* as were wrought in Christ Jesus. For as God has sent
Christ into the world, so did Christ send these his Disciples into the world,
that is, as God did send Christ into the world to make known himself, so Christ
Jesus, when he has fulfilled his Ministration in the flesh, he sends out
Believers; I say, he sends out Believers upon the same design to make out God
and his glory to the world. So that then this is a sure and satisfying ground,
why the same glory of the Father must work in Believers, that wrought in
Christ, because that Believers are sent out upon the same errand and design
that Christ was sent about; As thou have sent me into the world, so have I sent
these into etc. Believers hold forth God in a spiritual discovery to the world,
that is, they hold forth that glory of the Fathers working, and discovering it
self in them in a spiritual way, which Christ held forth in a fleshly way: My
meaning is; Believers are not lift up upon a material Cross, as Christ was, and
do not suffer without the gate, as Christ did; but their Old man is crucified
spiritually, and they are raised and quickond by a lively hope spiritually.

This is the Reason that Christ says; As thou have sent me into the world, so
have I sent them into the world; Therefore, sanctify them with thy Truth, thy
word is Truth: And for their sakes (says he) I sanctify my self. This is (as
it were) the making up of the Reason, and the meaning of it is this; says
Christ, Herein does thy design come to its period and perfection, even in the
Sanctification of my Members. Herein thy design (Oh Father) is come to the
birth, and is brought forth; for while this design works only in my person, it
is not at its term and period, till it come to work in their persons; for I am
but (as it were) an intermediate form and person, in whom thou do discover
thy self for the present, with relation to the like discovery in them, through
the spirit, afterward; And therefore (says he) For their sakes I sanctify my
self, that etc. As who should say; If it were not in relation to them, there
should be no such thing as my dying, and suffering, and rising again; It is but
in relation to their Sanctification, that the same glory may work in them in
the Spirit, conformable to this pattern of mine in the flesh. And thus you have
the meaning of the words; For their sakes I sanctify my self, etc.

That which I shall insist upon at this time, is the last word of the Text,
Through thy Truth: So that the Observation that I would ground thereupon, is
this.



It is called an Image, in 2 Cor. 3. ult. we all, as in a glass, behold the
Glory of the Lord; (there it is equivalently called an Image; for your face in
a glass, is but an Image of your face;) but it follows more expressly: And are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory.

But still I desire you to carry that along, that a Believers crucifying is not
a fleshly crucifying, as Christ's was, but his Old man is crucified by
spiritually discoveries. This is the Truth, and the other is but the form.

Now I must explain my self here: You will ask me, whether that same work of
God, that is wrought in the hearts of Believers, be their eternal life, their
happiness and salvation? Whether that be their Righteousness; for there is a
great prejudice against Doctrines of this kind; as if we did take away from
Christ, and give to that work of God within us, that honor that is due to
Jesus Christ.

Manifestation of that grace that was given us before the world began. If you
ask me then what is our happiness and our life; I conceive that God alone is
our happiness, God in union with us. Mark it; not only God loving us, for love
is but an expression to us. Love is a sweet thing among the creatures, and we
know what love is from one to another; but the Love of God to us, is but the
making out of a kind of spiritual Union that is between God and a Believer; So
that to say, that the Love of God placed upon us is our happiness, is too weak,
and too low an expression: but this is our happiness that we are in God, and in
Jesus Christ; and that the Father and the Son is in us, and is our
Righteousness and our Strength in Union with us; This is our happiness and
eternal Life.

Now I say, all the Dispensations of God are but to make out these things unto
us.

Give me leave to illustrate it to you, by going a little about. This was our
Lot and Portion, from the beginning; God was our Portion, and God did maintain
our Lot, as Psa. 16. And God was become in Union with the creature: This was in
the beginning of the Creation, and this was in the Person of Christ Jesus, as
an Earnest of the whole; but this same Union, and this great happiness, that
the creature might be sensible of it, and that it might come home with the
greater advantage, (as it were) and we might have the more lively taste of it;
therefore did God ordain all those intervening administrations: therefore he
makes the first Adam as a figure of Christ, and therefore he bestows but a
little grace on Adam, or makes him mutable that he might fall, that the Love of
the Father might be the more manifested to us, which we could never have seen,
nor admired so much, if we had not been thus led about unto it. And this is the
end of Christ in the Flesh, and Christ in the Spirit; and so I shall come to
show you the difference between Christ in the Flesh, and Christ in the Saints;
for if we give glory to any other then unto Christ, we shoot beside the mark;
we give it to Christ still; but there is Christ in the Flesh, and Christ in the
Spirit; both these agree to make out the Father; and here is the difference of
that work of God within us, from that work of God in Christ. This latter is the
Truth of the former; Sanctify them through thy Truth, that is, do thou act
those things really in them, which are done in a figure for them upon me: There
is the Truth. I desire to clear up this to you by some fami^^ar experience.

You know that Jesus Christ is said to dye for our sins, and rise again for our
Justification. Here is now Christ in the Flesh; here is his Ministration. Why
now, hereupon salvation is preached unto men, and it is told, that God is
reconciled, for he has sent his Son. There is nothing to be done; Justice is
fulfilled; God is reconciled; he would not else have slain his Fatlings, and
made a feast for us. Therefore believe: Here is the outward dispensation; but
now a poor soul, notwithstanding all this, lies under the guilt and weight of
sin; and such a grievious sin comes to his mind, and not only one, but
multitudes of sins lie upon him; whereby he cannot believe or take comfort in
these glad tidings. Do ye not see that there is need of another Ministration?
Is there not need of the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, as well as
a Proposition of the Gospel? You come and show a poor soul the Proposition of
the Gospel; That whosoever believes in Christ Jesus shall have eternal life
etc. And God so loves the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should have eternal life. Yet all this while the
poor soul lies dead, til not only the Letter, but the Spirit of the Gospel
comes and appears to him: Till Christ appears, not only in the first Court,
that is his own flesh, or the Letter of the Gospel; but in the inmost place of
all, that is, in this man's conscience; for we may allude to that place, Heb. 9.
24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us.

Pray mark it; Jesus Christ did not suffer in Heaven, but without the gate; he
suffered in the world, but he is entered into Heaven. These words are spoken
figuratively; its true, he went up visibly, to his Disciples, into Heaven,
(that is) a place remote from their sight, a Cloud received him out of their
sight. The true Heaven (and that Heaven where Christ does appear to the comfort
and relief of a poor soul) is the conscience of a poor sinner, and that is
called Heaven, because as Heaven is the place of God, so is the heart of man;
the heart of man is the place of God. He is said to be the searcher of the
heart; he sits there, and wounds, and heals there; there is Gods true place. It
is not in the understanding of a man, in the notions there, but it is in the
heart of a man, thither it is that Jesus Christ is gone. Christ in the Spirit
is in the hearts of his people, that is Christ's place, for that is the Fathers
place, for he is in the Father, and he goes to the Father; as it is said, Touch
me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.

Now you know that the Father, though he be without us, he is within us; he can
neither be said to be without us or within us, inclusively nor exclusively, for
he fills all things, and is comprehended in nothing. So Jesus Christ is within
us; the Father is in the hearts of men, and so is Christ, and that is the
Heaven where he appears now; for do but consider this, that which follows in
the 25. verse. Pray mark it. Now once in the end of the world has he appeared
to put away sin. That which is rendered, the end of the world, may be
translated, the end of the age, or the end of that Administration. That which I
note from thence, is this; that Christ's sufferings put an end to one world,
that world was at an end when Christ had suffered, that is, God had dispatched
the outward discoveries of salvation, and now he would discover it within us;
now all that was to be done by him, was within us. He went into the holy place,
he went into Heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for us; and there it
is that Jesus Christ speaks a word for a poor soul: There it is that Jesus
Christ sits, as King, in our conscience. Christ may offer himself long enough
in the Letter, in the History of the Gospel; but if he appear nor in the
Spirit, and sit in our consciences to quiet them, we shall never have any true
understanding of the word aright. Christ sets us free by making us Sons, and
the Son abides in the house for ever. Pray mark it; unless we be made Sons, we
cannot abide in the house for ever; we do not abide in the house for ever, by
having an eternal title by Christ, but by a real Sonship within us: That same
which makes Christ a Son makes us Sons; and so you have it cleared unto you by
that instance, that this is the truth; and the other, in comparison of this, is
but the form, but the Representation or Image, but the Emblem of this Truth;
and so what is it unto us in matter of Sanctification, to say, Christ has
taken hold of our nature, and purified it, and separated it, and sanctified it:
what is this to the sanctifying of us, if our persons be not taken into that
same Union, and be not sanctified with the same Spirit that Christ is.



If so be it might be no offense, I should give you my own experience for the
confirmation of this point, (for we can speak nothing, but what we have heard,
and what we have seen:) Now I must confess, and profess unto you, that God has
made real this Truth unto me, not by study, not by notion, not by outward
discovery, but by an inward experiment: For this I have found, and I trust more
have found it besides my self, (though it may be they cannot tell what to call
those things that work within them, nor how to express it, (it may be) but this
I have found, that all outward administration has been weak, and unable to
produce those fruits and effects which the Scripture makes mention of: it has
been as the Law; What the Law could not do, in that it was weak etc. And look
into your selves, whether you have not found it so in your selves, that you
have had some corruption that has troubled you: Some masterful lust you would
be glad to get the victory over, and ye would account him a Messenger, one
among a thousand, that could show you how to effect your desires

I am sure, it has been so with me; and when I have seen such words as these
in the Scripture; Sin shall not have Dominion over you, for ye are not under
the Law but under Grace.

I have considered with my self, and have done as I have been directed to do,
and I have told my self thou art under grace, and I have pleaded this to God,
Lord I am under grace, I am under the Gospel, and why should sin have dominion
over me: and thereupon I have studied the promises, because it is said; There
are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by them, we might
be made partakers of the divine nature.

I have looked upon Jesus Christ dying for me, because the Scripture says, The
Love of Christ constrains us, etc. When all this while I have been like Siseras
Mother, wondering in my self, why do his Chariot Wheels stay, etc? Why am I not
set free from my lusts? Is the Gospel a broken Reed? Does it tell us things
that we must make up by imagination, rather then feel the real operation, and
experiment of them within us?

The last Scripture I was much exercised in, in relation to these things, was
this, in the Epistle of John; He that abides in him sins not.

Hereupon I enquire what this is, to abide in Christ, and sought to make it out
to my self by my own Reason, and to find it out by the Letter of the Scripture,
and all the account I could give of it, did relate to the creatures action: I
thought we must be still commanding our selves, and putting our selves on to
abide in Christ; and we must call upon one another to abide in Christ. And thus
was I exercised in a continual toil and perplexity, and never could see my
desires all this while, I could not find my corruptions slain by all these
means, til God was pleased to hold forth this discovery to me, which I do now
desire to hold forth to you, viz. that it is not the flesh of these things, it
is not the historical knowledge of these things, it is not the saying you are
under grace; it is not being under the form of the Gospel that can change
your hearts, set you free from sin; but it is the Spirit, that, when he comes,
does chase away all Clouds, as the Sun on the earth. It is Christ in the
Spirit, who is the truth within you, represented by that History without you;
and yet all these things are the making out of God to you; they are not your
happiness, or your life; for our happiness lies not in any action, be it in the
greatest action; not in the mortification of sin, nor in vivification, but our
life lies in Union, that hidden principle within us, that is God. And if ever
you would have this Union, and that which is your hope made out to you, and
would have the enjoyment of it in this life, you must wait upon that Jesus that
came down from the Fathers Bosom, and lived in the flesh; you must wait upon
him, to come and live in your spirits, not only to bring you forth in the
participation of his nature, but to fill you with the fullness of God, for so we
have warrant to expect, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God. Now
this the Lord show you to be a Truth: There is a twofold Truth; there is a
mediate Truth, and an ultimate Truth; there is a Truth manifesting, and a Truth
manifested: Now the Truth manifested, is Union; That they all may be one, as we
are one.

This is the Truth that God would manifest to us by these things; by coming to
us in the flesh of Christ, and in the Spirit.

Now the Truth manifesting, is the Appearance of Christ in the Spirit, suitable
and conformable to that outward Appearance of Christ in the flesh, without us,
for our sakes: And you will never have the Love of God, and your Union with God,
manifested to you, unless it be manifested to you by the Spirit, and except God
work the same works in you, that he wrought in Christ. And thus I have
discharged my self of this same Testimony.

There are but two or three things that I shall speak by way of Use; and the
first is this.

Consider that which our Savior speaks, John 16. 5. says he there; It is
expedient for you that I should go away; and pray mark it here. These times
from Christ's departure, are the times of the Spirit.

And pray mark that in the first place; the Spirit is the power of the fleshly
administration; he is the power within us, of that fleshly, or administration
without us. The Spirit is often called power, in the Demonstration of the
Spirit and Power.

^. Observe this, that there is but one Administration upon the world at a
time; there is but one Administration upon a Person at a time: So that, if you
be under that Administration of the Spirit, you are past from under the fleshly
Administration. This is clear from hence, that Christ says; It is expedient
for you that I go away, for except I go away, the Comforter will not come. A
seed of corn does not grow up in the ear or the blade, except it dye in its
own first form; and so it is here,

That which I would infer from hence, is this; That you must go quite through
the fleshly Administration, before you can come under the spiritual
Administration. You must see the Original of the Administration, and the end
of it, that is the Father; the Father sent the Son, and he sent the Son to
reveal the Father: And it is not in the Death of Christ you are to see it, it
is not in the Resurrection of Christ you are to see it. He brings you to the
sight of this, by the power of these things working within you.

And to confirm this to you, I desire you to consider; That when as the
Scripture speaks of Christ, and when Christ himself speaks to the Father, you
shall find that the Dialect is exceeding different: When Christ speaks to the
Father, look into the 17 of John, 11. And now, says he; I am no more in the
world, but they are in the world; keep through thine own name, those whom thou
have given me.

When the Scripture speaks of Christ to men, it says; That God has given him
power over all flesh, that he should give life to whomsoever he will.

And so the Scripture exalts Christ; but when Christ speaks to the Father, he
does quite divest himself, and says, Father I have kept them through thy name,
I have manifested thy name unto them. verse 6. Mark ye, Christ had made this
discovery to them, that all the power he had, was of the Father: And now, says
he, Father, I come to thee, keep them through thy name. It was before, by Gods
name, that Christ kept them, but now it breaks forth more clearly, that it was
through the Fathers name; and so I conceive that this is a kind of resignation
of the Kingdom to the Father.
It is true, the Administration was to go over and over again, that is,
Believers are first trained up under a legal Administration, and trained up
under an Administration of Christ in the flesh, before they come to the
Administration of Christ in the Spirit; but as Christ himself, when he is going
out of the world, says; I have done all that I came to do: So after a time,
Christ leads us from a knowing of him after the flesh, as representing things
to us to know him within us, as a quickening Spirit. Consider how
much it concerns you, not to shut your eyes against this, but examine it, and
try it, because the truth is, you will make slow advance til you are past
through the fleshly Administration, and are under the Spirit. Look into the 28.
Isa. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand
Doctrine, them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts.

Pray mark it, There is a question, and there is an answer; Whom shall I teach
knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine, there is the question;
The answer is, them that are weaned from the milk, etc.

This same milk, and these same breasts are the foolishness of God, whereby he
had made out himself to us according to our infirmity; they are the fleshly
Appearance and Discoveries of God; these are the breasts, and this is the milk:
and till we have proceeded further, we are in the flesh: And as you will count
it a shame for an old man to lie sucking at the dugg, so you are in an uncomely
posture to be always sucking the breast, and always under rudiments, and to know
no more of God then he holds forth in an Image without you. This is not your
interest to rest here; and therefore I beseech you to wait upon God, for the
humble he will teach in his way. And although I have met with some objections
against this, and more may be raised from the Scripture that may seem to make
against this, yet they are made clear to me; therefore wait upon God to clear
them up to you. If be this taken from me, I profess I know no hope that I have
of my calling; for what is our hope, but the hope of the high calling? God calls
us to fellowship with himself, and has manifested this by his Son. Weigh these
things in the Balance, and consider that Christ comes in Clouds, and not in
clear Discoveries at the first; the Lord give you understanding in all things.

THE Dying and the living CHRISTIAN.
ROMANS 14. 8. For whether we live we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord.
HERE is the Unity of Believers in their principle, and the Destruction of
Believers in their Forms. All Christians, in what form soever, whether they be
bond or free, it is to the Lord, there is their Unity; but there are bond, and
there are free; there are Jews; those that are under the Law* there are those
that are without Law; there are such as do live to the Law, and such as do dye
to the Law; there is their Destruction.

I have already observed this point unto you.

God is in all forms, not only in distinct forms, but in opposite forms:
Whether we live we live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord.
He that regards a day, and he that regards not a day, the Lord is in the
light, a^^ in the principles of the one as well as of the other. The Lord is
guide and leader of him that observes a day, and of him that observes not a
day. This seems to be a contradiction, a Paradox; God is but one, the Truth is
but one; it is true, but there are several steps and degrees of this Truth: We
shall never come to be all one, and the Name of the Lord will never be one
among us, until God is come forth in his most spiritual appearance, and
until he has brought us all to acknowledge that appearance, but in order to
Gods making out himself in his spiritual appearance, in his naked discovery,
and with an open face, he does manifest himself in forms, and under vails; and
he does put off one form after another; put off a more gross, and put on a more
fine; put off a more thick, and put on a more thin, and spiritual, and subtle
vail. God is in all forms, but comprehended of no form; if he were comprehended
in any, then he would not be in a diversity of forms; There Is the great mistake
of Christians; and this same dark principle, is that which makes us so to clash
one against another: We know not the mind nor the manner of the Lord; we think
if he be in our form, he can be in no other form: God is in a variety of forms
and appearances, that so, no flesh may glory in his presence.

God will not be tied to one form always, for then that would be looked upon as
more then a form.

I have already gone through three things in the handling of this point, which
for the help of your memories, I will only name to you; the expounding of it,
the bounding of it, and the grounding of it.

For the bounding of it, tha^ is the only thing I shall now remember you of. Is
God in all forms? Then every superstitious wretch will take sanctuary here. I
answer thus far; That whatsoever form any man does conscientiously take up,
that is a form of Scripture-cognizance, and does walk in it to the Lord, being
persuaded it is the Lords mind. He has acceptance with the Lord: For this is
the bound the Holy Ghost sets in the Text; He that regards a day regards it to
the Lord. Is a man sincere in what he does? Does he it to the Lord? Does he
take it up because he thinks it is the Lords mind? And does he serve the Lord
and not any lust? Not a lust of honor, and the applause of men? Or the profit
and commodity of this world? Or the preferment of the time? Why, if he does it
to the Lord, who art thou that judge him? The Scriptures hold forth unto us
several forms (as God has put on several forms in his appearance to his
people, and the Scriptures are the records of all these) and direct us unto
them, Now, whosoever in the sincerity of his heart, takes up any of these, and
walks in them as unto the Lord, he is accepted of him.

Now the Use I made of this shall not be repeated; but there is one Use more
behind. I exhorted you the last time, that you should hold it forth, that you
do observe all your forms unto the Lord, and every one bring forth his proper
fruit; whether you be in forms, or whether you be above forms: Thus the holy
and happy man is described in the first Psalm; He brings forth his (own) fruit
in his season. Look what season and administration you are under, see you bring
forth your proper fruit: Those that are in forms, see that your forms be
advantage ground to rise up to the Spirit; Those that be above forms, let them
bring down the glory of God, and the Spirit, upon all forms wherein they
converse with men; and as God has brought them forth in the Spirit, so let
them bring forth every action and form wherein they walk in the Spirit.

Let there be no strife among you, for you are brethren. Let us not judge one
another, as the Apostle says here, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not. If so be that Christians do not judge themselves in their forms, why
should we jud^ them? And if so be that we do not judge one another, why should
we think that we are judged one of another; for there is the quarrel many
times. Such a man cannot walk in a different form from me, but I think
presently he condemns me, and accounts me fleshly and carnal: It is a sign
that thou judge thy brother in his form, that do think that he judges thee
in thy form; For such as we are our selves, such we judge others to be; Let us
not judge one another, for God has received him that eats, and God has
received him that eats not. Where is the unity of the Spirit, that the
Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4. Is there no unity, but where there is uniformity?
Because we have not still one form, have we not therefore one Father, one Lord,
one Baptism, or one common condition of suffering? Does not the world hate you,
if you be Saints? And does it not hate them also that walk in another form, if
they be Saints? Let us not judge one another; the strangeness that is among
Christians, because of forms, is sad to behold; How we are loosened one from
another, and how we are lost one to another; if we once strike out of that path
wherein we have walked one with another; Is not this a denying, a crucifying of
the Lord of glory? Is not this a disowning of Christ in one another? Is not
this a knowing one another after the flesh? If you do good to them that do good
to you, what reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? So if you
love them that are in the same form with you, what thank is it? Every man loves
him that will say as he says, and that will build up that which he builds up.
The Apostle says, That he that offends against a weak brother, sins against
Christ: And is it not so; He that judges his brother, does he not judge the
Lord in his brother? He that judges his brother by a form, that overlooks the
appearance of the Lord in his brother, and sees his deficiency in such a form;
why does he not now subject the Spirit (as it were,) and subject the divine
excellency of Christians and Saints, to fleshly evidences and trials? It must
make out it self in this fleshly form and appearance, or else there is nothing
of God, nothing of the Spirit!

The Reason why we agree not in several forms, is not because the forms
differ, but the fault is in our hearts. God gathers up all forms, and embraces
them in love, and it is because we look not upon our brethren in their several
forms, in the Spirit of God, and of Christ, that we do not embrace them too.
The Devil carches away the spiritual Image and Appearance that is under every
form, wherein all forms agree, and he fixes our eye upon the very outward form
wherein the difference consists; and so nourishes strife and discord among
brethren.

That which the Apostle said of the Law, the end is glorious; the end of Moses
Administration was glorious: I may assume here, the true face, the true Image,
and the true and spiritual Appearance in and under every form is glorious, and
it is God, and it is one and the same, but the outward figure does differ. He
that has the Spirit of God, and in that Spirit looks upon all forms, he
embraces them all, he reconciles all, he walks with all, with Jew, with men
under the Law, with men without Law; and does not stumble, nor is an offense.

All Saints are one body. Now as in the body there are several members, and
each member differs as in a figure; so in usefulness too, yet are all useful
in their places: So it is in the several seize and administrations that
Saints are under; each does differ from other in spirituallity, and power, and
glory. The Scriptures are a Record and Register of all those several
administrations that God has brought his people under; of all the several
forms in which God has appeared to them; and the Scripture bears witness to
every of these, and there is none of these but were useful in their time, in
their order and place, and the one does lead unto the other in a way of
ascending still; and as the hand cannot say unto the foot, I have no need of
thee; so neither can the highest administration say to the lowest
administration. I have no need of thee; for there are still those that are
benefitted by the lowest administration, as well as there are some that are
raised up to the highest administration. The Nurse in a family (where there are
children) is useful in her place, as well as the Steward of the house, that
looks to all the estate. Milk is useful to babes, as well as strong meat to
men: Therefore, as the members of the body do all of them do their office in
their several places, without disputing and murmuring: (The hand says not,
because I am not the head, therefore I am not of the body; nor the foot,
because I am not the eye to see the way, therefore I will not carry on the body
in the way;) So should it be in the Body of Christ. Let us every one in that
station and calling wherein we are set in the body, minister to the Lord;
whether as Nurses to give to the children, or whether as Stewards to provide
meat for strong men: If we had a right understanding of things, there would not
be these breaches among us, because we walk not all in the same way, are not
all in the same form. It is the beauty of the body to have variety of parts;
The manifold wisdom of God is seen in it, his word is purified seven times, and
he brings forth the same truths in more spiritual and higher appearances, and
higher, and higher yet; the same Lord is fulfilled over and over. They that are
yet in the low bough's, may come to the top bough; But here is the Resolution of
all; Those that are yet below, being not able to comprehend that which is above
them, and that which is more capacious then themselves, they cannot bear
witness to it, nay, they cannot bear with it. But still take this for a certain
truth, the higher you go, and the more God draws you up, the more able you will
be to comprehend and reconcile all underappearances, and all lower
administrations, and to discern them all in the Unity of the Spirit, and of the
appearance and breaking forth of God. But so much shall serve for that Use and
that Point.

Now I come to the next Point, and that is the difference between men in their
forms, or rather the amount; of their difference, what it amounts to. We have
it in these words, Whether we live, or whether we dye.

Who is he that dies? It is he that is in bondage to outward observances, that
depends upon fleshly forms.

Who is he that lives? Why, it is he that is free. You know, ye often meet with
these distinctions in Scripture, Circumcision and uncircumcision, Jew and
Gentile, bond and free, quick and dead.

Liberty is the next thing to life, What good does a man's life do him, if he be
not a free man? (I mean spiritual Liberty or Liberty in the Spirit;) and
Bondage it is next to death. But upon other Considerations, is it here called
living and dying.

But it may be said, is not the Text abused to interpret it thus allegorically,
or to make a Metaphor of it, should it not be taken literally?

Whether we live, (that is in the body) we live to the Lord, or whether we dye
(that is, go out of this body) we dye to the Lord?

I answer, besides, that such an interpretation is to make the Apostle here
speak impertinently, as being quite from the business he has in hand. You
shall find also it is cross to the Letter of the Scripture; for that is not
death that men call death, and that is not life that men call life; For God is
the God of the living and not of the dead; in that sense, Abraham is alive,
though dead. The Scripture calls not them dead, nor God the God of the dead, in
that sense, but the living, and all things live to God.

Again, he says not, they dye in the Lord, though that be to be taken
spiritually, but they dye to the Lord. And if you ask, why should they be
called dying Christians, dying Saints? The Apostle will tell you, when he
says, To be carnally minded is death,. Romans 8. 6. That which is translated
carnally minded, signifies to savor carnally; to savor God and our life
carnally, this is death; but he that is in bondage to forms, savours God and
life carnally, ergo it is death, and he is a dying man. That he savours
carnally, appears from hence; That he does relish better, and savor more the
weakness of God in an Ordinance, then the strength, and excellency, and glory
of God in the Spirit, and in his own proper appearance. He is more taken; his
heart goes out more after a sight of God in flesh, then to see him in Spirit;
is not this to savor life carnally? For to think that a man's life is bound up
in any form, or in flesh, is it not a carnal savor? And yet do not many
Christians do so? Do not they think that God and an Ordinance do nourish and
feed, and administer strength to you, but not God without an Ordinance. The
Apostle says, We have this treasure in earthen vessels. Now if a man counts
not this to be treasure except it be in an earthen vessel, is not this
carnal? It is true, while we do receive God in any form it is mercy, but to
say, God cannot be meat or nourishment without a form, this is to savor our
life carnally. How many Christians are troubled and assaulted with doubts,
concerning their good estate, that have a load lying upon them, and Clouds of
darkness before them; that hanker after an Ordinance to come and dispell these
Clouds! O if I could receive such an Ordinance, a Sacrament in such a manner;
This would solve all objections, and give them full assurance: when as they
have God, they have his Promises; The word is nigh thee, says the Apostle in
this Epistle, Chap. 10. even in thy heart. But behold, except this God will
come to them in flesh, they can make no use of him; they cannot see how God
should do it in Spirit without a form; this is to savor life carnally,
therefore they linger in their desertions and temptations, and are not helped
out of them, because they stay for God to come to them in such a way, and see
no salvation for them in himself, for then they would depend upon him.
Agreeable to this Scripture is another, viz. Romans 8. If we live after the flesh
we shall dye. Now there are many sorts of flesh, says the Apostle; There is
one kind of flesh of men, another of beasts, another of birds, another of
fishes. There is flesh of fishes, that will carry a man swimmingly like the
Spirit; and there is flesh of birds, that will soar aloft like the Spirit; there
is high-raised flesh, but if we live after the motion or principle of any thing
below God, we live after the flesh. Even if we live after the motion of Graces
themselves, not resolving our graces into God. If the sparkling and turning of
our graces themselves be the wine, that does cheer and refresh us; yea, the
flesh of Christ, if we stick in that vail, (and stand not in the naked Spirit
of Christ, before God, passing through Christ's flesh, both in him, and in our
selves, as he has past through it,) we are not yet past out of the flesh.

I say not, that they that have the use of forms are dying Christians, but they
that depend upon them, they that cannot have life from God, unless he present
himself to them in the flesh.

They that fall short of God are in a dying condition, but those whose life is
bound up in any form, they fall short of God. He that attains not God, loses
the Race, He that attains not the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, loses the Race, and he dies. He that is in bondage to outward
observan^es, and depends upon them, falls short of God, that is, of the glory of
God; He has God under a vail in his form, but not God in his glory; He sees
God veiled, not his open face, not as he is, He hears of God in a Parable, he
sees him not plainly; even the flesh of Christ is a vail, and till we are past
through that (through the Mediatorship, and through the fleshly state in our
selves,) we appear not in the open presence of God.

The end of forms is death. The end of Christ's fleshly state and appearance was
death; either we must lie and dye in form (I mean not eternally,) or we must
dye to form.

There Is no coming to a higher state but by dying to the former state, Christ
was Crucified in flesh, before Justified in Spirit; He that endures to the end
shall be saved: He that passes through all things, forgets, and dies to
imperfect discoveries, to fleshly appearances, (let them be never such
spiritual flesh,) he only is in the way of this salvation here meant.

The fleshly form (as it is in Saints) has in it the seed and principle of the
spiritual appearance, and genders it by dying; God that commanded light to
shine out of darkness. God brings forth glory to his people by affliction,
tribulation and dying. Their comforts go away in the flesh, ere they come in
the Spirit. While the flesh lasts upon them, the Spirit is not broken forth.
While the form or fleshly appearance is any thing to us, and we promise our
selves any thing from it, God is not all in all; while God is not all in all,
our comforts are not brought forth in the Spirit, and so are not made perfect.

In all fleshly appearances there is Enmity to God, therefore God is Enmity to
them, and is the death of them. This Enmity is discovered in the disputes that
we have about faith; Whether it justify as a Condition, or as an Instrument
only; and about the Spirit, whether the Spirit be in us by presence or by
influence only, which are mists that arise out of the bottomless pit, and
argue, God is not all in all there, and so that soul is not perfected.

The Scripture in 1 Zeph. 2. etc. paralels the dispensation Christians are
under, I will utterly consume all things from off the Land, says the Lord. I
will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the Heaven, and the
fishes of the Sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked, and I will cut off
man etc. and v. 4. I will stretch my hand upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
etc. (upon Professors;) And I will cut off (ver. 5.) them that worship, and
swear by the Lord and Malcham. This is the condition of our times, light is
broken in upon us, and we see that Ordinances are nothing without the Lord;
every one will confess that; that the Letter is a dead Letter without the
Spirit, and the Ordinances are mere forms without Gods Appearance in them; and
therefore our design is to couple the Lord and Ordinances together, and we
cannot endure to hear of the parting of them: Swear by the Lord and by Malcham;
even as you see men now adays do, so we may have but Ordinances, we are well:
This is that which I was speaking of before, that we do promise our selves
something from the fleshly form and appearance, and so like the Israelites, we
are hankering after the fleshpots of Egypt; though they had as good meat in
the Wilderness, yet the fleshpots ran in their minds. So, though God offer
himself, and though Christians tell you (for what they tell you, God tells
you,) they tell you they cannot find God in such and such forms, but find him
abundantly good in the Spirit, and they find that he recompenses the want of
all forms in the Spirit; though he be gone out of the Temple, yet they find him
in their hearts; they press you to wait till God appear to you in the Spirit:
Oh (say you) I can never believe it, that God should do it without an
Ordinance, or that God should strengthen you without an Ordinance. God (think
you) with an Ordinance can strengthen me, and deliver me, and save me out of a
temptation, not otherwise: this is to say, that the Ordinance or fleshly form,
does add something to God. If you will confess God to be all in an Ordinance,
you must confess him to be all without an Ordinance, to be sufficient of
himself.

I desire not to be mistaken; I do not judge those that find God in Ordinances
and outward forms, Let them wait upon God, and let them receive and partake of
the benefit of the Ordinance, and let them bless God for it, and be faithful
to their own principles, and let them be sweet to others; but when we do find
God in a form, and in an Ordinance, to say, he is not to be found and enjoyed
any other way, this is not a right Spirit. Nay, when we find not God in an
Ordinance, yet we will keep to it, as if God were not to be enjoyed any other
way. This is the greatest unreasonableness that can be, to put no worse a name
upon it.

Now I have done with the Reason of the point.

I should show now who are the living Christians, and how they are in a more
living condition that are free from the bondage of outward observances, that do
not depend upon any fleshly appearance or administration, but see a fullness and
sufficiency of God in the Spirit, and enjoy the same; for else, for men to have
a notion and principle of it, and not to enjoy God in the Spirit; they may come
from a sad outward Religion and forms, to no Religion, nay, to Atheism; and God
will judge the free as well as the bond. They may be free from Ordinances, and
yet may be as fleshly to God, as if they were under the Jewish observances.

But the Use that I would make of what has bin delivered, is first a Use of
Admonition unto those that are still in forms; and secondly, a word of
Instruction to us all.

1. It is for Admonition to those that are in forms; We say not, that the Lord
is not within you, nor that which you do, you do not to the Lord; but the holy
Ghost says of you, you are dying Christians. While thou can only see God in
a fleshy Image and Representation, thou art in a dying condition: For it is a
sign, thou see not God in his glorious and Spiritual Appearance; for if thou
did, thou would say as they in the Mount at Christ's transfi^uration; Oh it
is good for us to be here: Let us look no more for God in forms, and fleshly
administrations; at least, you would desire to have your portion in fleshly
Representations; (not but that, that man, who has God broken forth in him, in
spirit and power; may suffer others in those forms, and not lose his own
enjoyments;) You are Christ's, and you are Christians, but you are in a fleshly
and dying estate, and you may be put shrewdly to it, that do depend upon a form
and fleshly administration: When it cannot be had, what will thou do? Thy case
is much as a man's that is kept up by Cordials, and by means that the Physician
uses to him, and not to be compared with him that is in a way of recovery, that
is past the danger of his disease in whom nature is growing strong, and is
overcoming the malignity of the disease by little and little. When the other
wants the Physician, it is as much as his life is worth; and the Cordial, if
it be long a fetching, the man begins to faint; he has not his strength within
him, but without in Cordials; So is the cases between him that lives upon
Ordinances, and him that lives upon Christ in the Spirit. Christ is never in a
journey, or to fetch a great way off, therefore I say, you are in a dying
condition that depend upon forms.

2. Use is of Instruction, to give us light in what the Lord is now doing, and
in the consequence thereof.

You have heard that forms cannot dispense to us the spiritual Discoveries of
God, but by their going away in themselves; then God has sent out the Spirit
of Elijah among us, and God is contending with flesh; and God is come into his
Temple, to sit there as a Refiners fire; and he is bringing down all our forms;
But how? He is destroying them in the flesh, that he may give us them again in
the Spirit.

This is that account upon which we may converse together, and speak together
informs; as yet, not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit; not accounting the form any thing, Ministers not reckoning themselves
to be anointed above their fellows, and so making themselves Lords over Gods
Heritage. No, it was only Christ Jesus was anointed above his fellows, in that
Administration, wherein he was to be of public use to the body, but the
anointing runs down from the head to the skirts of his garment, etc. The
anointing is upon you all Christians; it is the divine appearance within us
anoints us above the world. The Lord has a quarrel with all flesh, and we
shall hear God speaking in one another more purely; and he will turn to us a
pure language, when he has made us a poor people. Poverty and Pureness shall
go together.

And then we will go no more forth to Malcham; and when God has silenced, and
stopped the mouth of all flesh, and he alone is exalted; then he will give you
Judges, as at the first, and Counselors, as at the beginning; and we shall all
know the Lord, and be able to speak to one another, as at the beginning.

Think not your Religion will not be, if the flesh of it be destroyed; we shall
know it more in the Spirit, and see the anointing discovering it self upon the
Body of Christ.

THE Dying and the living CHRISTIAN.
ROMANS 14. 8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we
dye unto the Lord.
SUch is the Nature of Man, such our darkness and blindness, such our
unacquaintedness with spiritual things, that we are even shie, and startle at
that that is our great interest.

The Disciples, when Jesus Christ came walking unto them on the Sea, after he
had bin a while absent from them, took him for a Spirit, and cried out for
fear. Jesus Christ, the Lord, that Spirit, that quickening Spirit; He has bin
absent from us a while; namely, during the Apostasy, during the reign of
Antichrist, and he is now visiting us, and is coming to us in his own
appearance: (When Christ who is our life shall appear, When he shall break
forth from under the Vail:) Now we know him not, and are exceedingly afraid;
yea, we cry out for fear, we cry out of destroying Religion, pulling down
Ordinances. This is the very case in the Text here. There were some in the
Apostles days, that were still in the flesh, I mean, that were in that gross
flesh, that were under that same thick Vail of the Jewish Paedagogy, and they
were offended at others, from whom God had taken that Vail, and that did not
walk in those Observances: they did judge them, very like they judged them to be
irreligious men; What not observe a day, that God himself has instituted? Not
observe distinction of meats that God himself has founded? What audaciousness
is this to throw down the Ordinances of God.

On the other hand, those that did see ground perhaps in the Letter for what
they did, for the casting off the yoke of these outward Observances, yet not
walking spiritually in this liberty, despised them that were still under these.
When any thing of a form is received by our nature, by our flesh, there is a
miscarriage in it. If God appear in our forms, we judge those that are above
them. If God lead us above them, we are ready to despise those that are under
them, remaining all this while in deed and in truth, under a form our selves,
though we appear in this distinction from others, for uncircumcision is a form
as well as Circumcision, and it shows it self so to be by this uncircumcised
despising of others for forms sake, in whom there may be as much or more power
then in our selves.

In this Chapter the Apostle states the Controversy, and gives us a Rule to
administer toward the one and the other. Let not him that eats despise him
that eats not, and let not him that eats not judge him that eats, for the
Lord has received him. Peradventure the one of them is in a better state then
the other, yet they are both of them in the Lord, they are the Lords. The one
is a Living Christian, the other a Dying Christian, yet they are both the
Lords: For says he, Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we dye,
we dye unto the Lord. And so we come to the words, whence we have observed;
That God is not only in different forms but in opposite forms, such as are
regarding a day, and not regarding it.

We have observed likewise what the difference of Christians does amount unto:
those that are in bondage to Forms, and those that are set free from those
forms; the one is a living and the other a dying man. For whether we live, we
live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord.

I spoke of the dying Christian the last day, and showed you in what respect he
is a dying Christian that is under Ordinances or that depends upon them (for
every conversing in Ordinances is not a depending upon Ordinances:) First, It
is a dying condition for he savours life Carnally, they savor their life
according to the weakness of the flesh, and not according to the power of the
spirit, according to the carnality of the form and not according to the
spirituality of God. Therefore it is that men do put the Ordinances with God, as
those that swore by the Lord and Malcham; they left not out the Lord, but would
join Malcham with him too, they savor life carnally: and secondly they fall
short of God, they fall short of the glory of God, ergo, they are dying
Christians. They see God in his weakness, but they see him not in his strength:
and thirdly, they must pass through death, for every form is raised up that it
may dye, and not that it should live for ever: it is raised up for a
Ministration to Minister to some other thing, and therefore must have its
period. Every form is but a way, yea the body of Christ is but a way, Through
the new and living way that is his flesh: And I might have added another
Reason, and that is this, That Jesus Christ, the end of his appearance in the
flesh was death; He was manifested in the flesh and brought down the love of
God and the glory of God in his flesh: he spoke the things of God to us in
fleshly signs and parables, and the end of that State was death, and so
likewise must the end of every State of Christians in the flesh and in Forms
and Ordinances be: The Comforter could not come except Christ did go away. An
higher appearance of God cannot come but it removes a lower appearance of God,
as a grain of corn does not rise up but by dying and rorting in its first body,
as the Apostle speaks. But it shall suffice to have spoken thus much concerning
the dying Christian.

But now what is this same living Christian?

Whether we live we live unto the Lord.

Who is it that lives? why the Lord lives, and only the Lord, they shall
swear, The Lord lives: and, As I live says the Lord: There is none lives but
God, so that whosoever lives, it is by the Lord living in him. The Apostle
says so much, when he says, not I, but Christ lives in me.

This same living th^^ of the Lord in us does relate unto the dying and burial
of the Lord in us. The Lord he is buried or obscured in us, and then he rises,
as it is said, I am he that was dead and am alive, and behold I live
forevenmore, and as it is Ephesians. 4. He that ascended is the same also that
first descended into the lower parts of the earth. And this is the great
Mystery of godliness; God manifest in the flesh, and justified in the Spirit;
first manifest in the flesh, The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, etc.
And so the Word comes, and at length carries up flesh with it into spirit.

Indeed we are but the grave, as it were, of the Lord Jesus. This whole
Creation, as it is known after the flesh, and as it is enjoyed by us, and as we
converse with it carnally, and as it is carnally received by us, it is but the
Tomb, as it were, where the Lord is interred; it is but the grave, the
sepulcher wherein the Lord is buried.

Why then, what is the living of the Lord, the Lords Resurrection, the Lords
sprouting forth out of this same grave, this same sepulcher?

Answ. It is this, it is the Lords appearing and the Lords discovering himself,
and the Lords coming forth and putting off his Veil and covering, putting off
his grave-cloaths (as I may say,) this is the Lords living.

For the more profitable handling of this, take these things.

1. That the Lords death is the creatures life. The burying or obscuring of the
Lord Jesus is the life of man, and the life of forms, and the life of flesh.

2. And in the second place the resurrection and appearance of the Lord is the
death of man, and the death of forms, and the death of flesh. While the Lord
Jesus hides himself, while he breaks not forth in his glory the creature is
something, and Forms are something, and they grow up and flourish as the grass
does by the showrs. But when the Lord Jesus comes forth in his Spirit, and
appears, then the grass withers, and the flower fades, so we find it in
Esaias 40. 6, 7. The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh i^
gross, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field. The
gross withers, the flower fades; because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it: surely the people is gross. What is the meaning of the Spirit of the
Lord blowing upon it? The meaning is this, when the Lord comes forth in his
Spirit, and reveals himself in his glory, then the glory of flesh passes away,
as when the Sun appears in the firmament the stars take their leave: we know
that as flesh is enmity unto spirit, so spirit is enmity unto flesh, and
therefore it is said, that they lust the one against the other.

In the third place take this proposition, That as the obscuring of the Lord
Jesus is the life of the creature and the life of that flesh, and the
resurrection of the Lord Jesus is the extinguishing of the Creatures life. So
thirdly, this is, and has been the design of God, and his glory from the
beginning; to come forth out of this same grave, and from under this same Vail
(under which he has lain hid, and been covered) by several steps; and
therefore every step of Christ's appearance, is, comparatively with the former
darkness; a state of life, and a gradual Resurrection.

When Christ did come forth from under the Jewish Ceremonies, when the body was
come, then was Christ raised in some sense, and then did Christ begin to live
and flourish; and those that saw this, they lived, in the Apostles sense here,
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord.

Here was a graduall Resurrection in this, though not a complete Resurrection.
There was a thicker Vail taken off of Christ, and a thinner vail put on: so
that Christ then coming forth under a thinner Vail, is called by the name of
the highest and last appearance of all; It is called a (Living,) not but that
Christ did still lie under a vail, as the Apostle says, Through the vail, that
is, his flesh. And the New Testament Ordinances, though they are finer vails,
yet they are vails to the Lord; yea, I may say, that the very graces of the
Saints, as we look upon them in a kind of fleshly form; as we look upon them in
their particular names and circumstances; so they are a vail to the Lord Jesus;
yea, Christ is said to rise when he comes into the world; I am come, that you
might have life, and that you might have it more abundantly, that is, more
abundantly then they had under the Jewish Ordinances, because that was a
grosser vail: In this sense you may understand, That I am the way, the truth
and the life, etc. If you understand it in the flesh, it is in comparison of
the former, a lively appearance of God; Not that this is the highest appearance
of God, for to you that look for him, he shall appear the second time without
sin unto salvation. So that, I say, Christ is coming out of the grave, and
every step is a step to life, a step of the Resurrection, a degree of life. Now
then from these things, if you ask me who is this same living Christian, I
shall answer you, first, in a Subordinate sense, secondly, in an Ultimate sense.

In a Subordinate sense, he is a living Christian, in whom the Lord Jesus has
passed through many forms and vails: He that is not in bondage to those same
gross, and thick, and dark appearances of God.

But now in the Ultimate sense, the Truth is, that while we are on this side,
that same highest and brightest appearance of God, till he comes to be all in
all in us; we cannot be said to be living Christians, though in respect of
former and darker appearances; the present appearance of God to us, may set us
up in a higher degree of life, yet in comparison of that which is to come; the
very best and highest of this state is but a death; while God administers to us
under any form, under any vail, there is so much of darkness, and there is so
much of fear and enmity against God: and therefore (I pray mark it) those
disputes among us concerning faith; whether the act of faith does justify us;
or whether it be an act of God that does justify us; I conceive that herein
faith is perverted, and we do make a quite contrary use of it then ever God
appointed; he ^ath set up faith, as a light in a dark place; and behold we are
ascribing that unto faith which is due only unto God. And hence is that other
dispute; Whether God does dwell in us only by grace, and be with us only by
influences and opperations, as he is in other creatures after their kind:
Whence arise these questions, but out of the smoke of the bottomless pit? and
out of enmity against God? That grace, and the influences of God will step into
the place of God himself, they will step into the place of the Bridegroom.
Christ himself in the Spirit, is the grace of the Spirit. So that while God
appears unto us under any form, (even grace that is the purest vail,) yet God
is not all in all: we find faith would be something, and grace would be
something, and this is through the flesh.

Now there is but one thing more to do, and that is a little to explain as far
as we can, what this same resurrection in a man, what this same putting off of
the vail is; what the state of a Believer is in such a condition.

I shall express it to you by these two things; By the purity, and by the
strength of it.

The Purity lies herein, that the Lord, he is all in all: Here is the Purity of
that state; Ordinances they are not, Graces, they are not; the Lord is all in
all; the Lord is all in graces, nay, the Lord is all in himself; he is
sufficient to the soul: The Lord is that which Ordinances were, and that which
Graces were, that the Lord is; as you shall see, Rev. 21. 22. And I saw no
Temple there, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it.
Mark it; what are all Ordinances, but as the Temple was under the Law? The
Temple was that same form, wherein God appeared unto his people. It was a
figure to them of the body of Christ, in which the fullness of the God head, was
to dwell, and does dwell: When Jesus Christ came, who was the body, the Temple
was no more. So, the same comparison we may make between the flesh of Christ,
or Christ in the flesh, and Christ in the Spirit; What was the flesh of Christ
but the true Temple, the body, the substance of that figure and shadow that was
amongst the Jews? Thus it was in relation to types that went before; But what
was it in respect of that which was to come afterward? I will send you another
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, etc. That this Comforter may come, this
same presence of Christ must be removed, It is expedient for you that I go
away, and destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up again the third day; But
when he was raised again (I beseech you do but mark,) did Christ let his body
be of that use to his Disciples after he rose again? When Mary came, and fell
at his feet to kiss them, says Christ, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended
to my Father. The same with that which Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 5. Though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him so no more. Mary
(says Christ) my body is no longer a Temple, but your hearts and spirits must
be the Temple; I am not yet ascended, etc. Thou must know nothing in me as
before; Thou must know God in me; I am breaking forth into the glory of the
Father, and shall not appear in the flesh any more.

Christ in the flesh met with many an unbelieving soul, that went unbelieving
away from him; but Christ appearing in the Spirit, opens the most unbelieving
heart. This is the first thing in this same living Christian; nothing but
Purity it self; nothing but God himself, is his repast, is his delight.

2. But then secondly, This estate may be described by its strength and power
also. It is that which, I confess, is a stumbling block to the world, (and it
may well be so) to see men boast of such seize above ordinances, and yet
to have so little sign of them in their walking and conversation; to see them
carnal still, to see them dote upon the world still, to see them still as proud
and passionate as ever. My beloved, you have not so learned Christ, if you be
living men; if you have the living principle in you, your life is not to
discourse in another sphere and dialect then most men do; it is not to be able
to contradict, and throw down the forms of the world. This is not this same
living man; No, where the Lord Jesus is broke forth in Spirit, where he is
risen from the dead; Mighty works will show forth themselves in that man; It is
a state of power and of glory, and therefore says the Apostle, phil. 3. That I
may know him, and the power of his Resurrection. Oh, there is power in Christ's
Resurrection! All these Scriptures belong unto that state, He that is born of
God sins not, for the seed of God abides in him, neither can he sin,
because he is born of God; He that abides in him sins not. You have these
Scriptures in the first Epistle general of John; To them that look for him,
the second time shall he appear without sin unto salvation. Oh, if Jesus Christ
does but put up his head in our Horizon, he chaseth away much darkness, as the
Sun when it peeps toward day, but when Jesus Christ is fully risen, there
shall not be the least Cloud, the least corner hid from him; he will detect all
corruption there, and divide between the joints and the marrow. There is no
such purifying in the world, as by the presence and appearance of the Lord
Jesus in the Spirit; he purifies, while in him we see the Love of God in the
flesh; but when Jesus Christ is risen in you, he makes you purify your selves,
as he is pure; he fetches up all from the bottom. This takes you off from I
dollizing, not only the forms of your Religion, but the forms of your content
in outward things. Let not that man say he lives in the Spirit, that is buried
in any creature. Let not any man say he is above Ordinances, that is not above
the forms of this world. If he do not weep, as if he wept not, and rejoice, as
if he rejoiced not, and buy, as though he possessed not, and use this world, as
not abusing it. Considering, that the fashion thereof (these forms as well as
others) passes away.

This is a state of power, his prayers are made with spirit and life, he enjoys
God in every thing that he does, and is in Heaven in all he does; he wants no
command to tell him he must do thus and thus; he would naturally do those
things, whereby he might show forth the virtues and praises of him that has
called him, for he is a living man; who needs stir up life, to live, in a
living man? Life will show it self; If you be living Christians, the Spirit of
God will work in you, and it will be like fire consuming your flesh, and every
day carrying you forth to the honor and praise of God.

This is a living man, and this is he in whom Christ is risen.

But one Question more, and that is, of what part or principle in a man are
these things spoken; Does this life break forth in the flesh, or is it a life
in the Spirit only?

I answer, that this life is not in any part or principle in a man; It is not
in the soul, it is not in the body, it is not in the Spirit, but a a man is
taken up into this life; It is when we are removed from our selves, that we are
in the Spirit; Enoch was not, for God took him. The Lord takes us into this
life; we take not the Lord into our principle; we are not comprehenders of this
life, but we are comprehended: Here is the mistake; we see men that hold forth
such a doctrine and principle as this, and we see flesh, it may be, in them
still, and they see flesh in themselves still. Do but consider therefore that
same place, 1 John 3. beginning compared with the 6. verse; Now are ye the Sons
of God, but it does not yet appear what ye shall be; but when he shall appear,
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Compare but this with the
6. verse. Whosoever abides in him sins not.

We are the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear; our flesh is a vail, and
while we are in the flesh, let us act never so spiritually, yet we fall short
of this life; Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: But if at any
time, we are taken up into the communion of this life, it is by being taken out
of our selves; therefore, says Paul, Whether in the body, or out of the body,
I cannot tell. I conceive, God gave Paul an earnest of that which he will make
known to his people in the latter days; and made it known to Paul in a visible
and sensible rapture: and whosoever in the latter days, is taken into the
communion of this life, must be spiritually dissolved as Paul was; for as
Christ crucified in the flesh, is but a fleshly pattern of our being crucified
in the Spirit. So Paul being taken out of the body fleshly, is but an Image of
the Believers being taken out of the body into the Spirit; and so when we are
taken up into him, He that abides in him sins not. But when we go to make
out God in our flesh, behold we cannot make out the glory of this appearance in
us; when we come to live in a fleshly principle, I say, we find shortness, and
death, and darkness, and make out the things of God, in visible and audible
shapes, as it were; but God makes out himself to us, when he takes us out of
our selves into himself without any form; Did you see any shape, says the Lord
to the Israelites, when the Lord talked with you? So when the Lord takes a man
into this communion with himself, he takes him out of the flesh, off from
Ordinances, administers not to him in the flesh; and thus indeed it is, that
only when we are taken out of our selves, can we apprehend or speak of this
same life in God. A Believer, when he is taken up into God and Christ; he sees
that which he cannot make out by all his parts, and all the helps that he has;
he sees that freedom from sin; he sees, as it were, that omnipotency with him;
when he is taken up, he sees himself perfect, as God said to Abraham, walk
before me, and be perfect. Here is that which he cannot make out to the world.
Well may men say; Do not we see that you are a man; I am so, but you cannot see
what I am, when I am taken up into God. God is the subject and recipient that
comprehends us, we cannot comprehend him.

know the things that concern your peace. O, what a sad thing is it, that men
should run away from life! This is an evil heart with a witness, to depart
from the living God. This is darkness with a witness, when the Creature will
comprehend God, and will not be comprehended by God; when we will say, There is
no other enjoyment of God, then what we can make out in the flesh; No other
state then what may be visible to men. Oh, take heed of this, and take heed of
despising those that bring you the glad tidings of peace; How beautiful rather
should even the feet of those be, though upon the Mountains, that bring these
glad tidings, that say unto Sion, thy God reigns.

Christ has been long in a Sepulcher, he is now rising, and you have the
Testimony hereof brought to you by men like your selves, and we are not able to
make out the glory of it to you: This flesh is not the subject and recipient of
this glory; this flesh is laid by, But what we have seen and heard, we declare
unto you; And therefore, we beseech you not to depart from the living Lord.
Every man would be a living man in his health: Every man would be a living man
in his trade, would drive a free trade, and will you only be content to be dead
creatures in respect of communion with God? I beseech you, gird up the loins of
your minds, be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is yet to be
brought unto you by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in Spirit, as well as
believe that grace that is already brought by the Manifestation of Jesus Christ
in the flesh. Do but consider, that God has always entertained his people with
a long expectation of things, ere he has given them. It was but in the
Apostles days, that the first fruits of the Spirit were given. The Israelites
were in Egypt 400 years, before they came to the Land of Canaan. This was but
a typical Canaan, and not worth the waiting so long for as the spiritual
Canaan.

Then again consider, Gods promises have been first sown, and dead in the earth
of man's unbelief, before they have been performed; witness, Sarahs womb barren;
witness, the children of Israel in Egypt made slaves and bondmen; what
likelihood was thereof their being a Kingdom of Priests unto God? Nay, from the
beginning of the performance, there is usually an Apostasy that comes before
the full accomplishment; was it not so when God began to perform his promise to
Israel, of leading them into Canaan? Did not they fall back in the wilderness?
Was it not so in Abraham when Isaac was born, and growing up to his Fathers
hope? Then Isaac must be sacrificed. So, I conceive, it is here; the Spirit
began to be sprinkled in the primitive times in gifts, and since that, what an
Apostasy has there bin? So that the Spirit is yet to be poured out; and now
after the Apostasy is to be the harvest. And so I am persuaded many Christians
enter into Ordinances, in the Spirit, and fall back into the flesh; there
remains therefore a Restitution, a latter day, a latter rain; as Job speaks, at
the latter day I shall see God in my flesh; and is not the Lord putting up his
head in our Horizon? Therefore think not the promises of life and salvation
have given down all they have travailed with.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
LEast my meaning in any thing be locked up from the Readers understanding, I
thought good to add the key of this distinction.

1 There is a twofold Administration of the Kingdom of God, viz. outward and
inward; the outward in signs the inward in truth.

2. As the outward and the inward Administration are contradistinguished the
one to the other, so they are distinguished, and differ gradually in
themselves. (i. e.) The outward Aministration, or Letter of the Gospel, excells
that of the Law. So likewise in the inward Administration or Revelation in us.
The first Appearance of Christ in us, is swallowed up of his second Appearance
in us: The Kingdom of the Father excels the Kingdom of the Son; and the state
of the Resurrection of Christ in us, the state or likeness of his death.

And therefore, when it is said, that Christ in Spirit dwelling and working in
our hearts, reveals the Father plainly, whom we saw but as in a Parable in his
flesh, or without us. I desire ye should understand also, that the first
Appearance of Christ within us does not give a full and perfect testimony and
witness of the Father, for then the Apostle would not have said of such that
they see darkly; and there would be no expectation of a second Appearance; and
upon this account it is, that in that discourse on John 16. 25. I speak of
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Faith, and Love being forms or glasses
which must all be resolved into God, at length, that he may be all in all.

And the same thing I desire may be carried in mind for the understanding of
those discourses on John 17. 19. That as the inward Appearance and Working of
Christ is the truth of the Outward, and the outward is but a Form serving
thereto; so the second appearance of Christ in us is the truth of the first
appearance, and the first appearance is but the way unto the latter.

And when as in those discourses on Romans 14. they are held forth as dying
Christians that stick in Forms and things outward in the flesh of Christ, I
desire Saints may be aware that there is the flesh of Christ within them, or a
fleshly manifestation or appearance of Christ in flesh in them, which is that
that they are not to satisfy themselves withal, but are to wait till they be
brought forth with Christ in the glory of the Father, till faith and
Righteousness and al those Forms and Vails be broken up into one single view of
the Father or God al in all, till childish things, thoughts and language be put
away, and we see God face to face as he is; till God himself be a place of
broad Rivers and Streams in his own Name, and not under another name; till he
make all things new, and bring forth all our enjoyments of him in a new light
and a new glory. So much as we are short of this, so much are we under death,
though we may be past from outward forms, and have the life dwelling in us. And
they that shall deny this to be possible in this life, must deny the new
Jerusalem, to come down from God out of heaven and the express letter of
Revelations Chapter 22, verses 3, 4, 5. where it is written, And there shall be
no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his
servants shall serve him; And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in
their foreheads; And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle,
neither light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever.

And they that say this body of ours hinders, err, not knowing the power of
God, and what that flesh is that cannot inherit, which is not this body (which
is in its self, neither good nor evil) but the subject of two Inhabitants, two
Men, and so is good or evil, as it is ruled by the one or by the other; the old
or the new man; Self or Christ: the old man may be and is destroying in Saints
daily, while the body remains.

These things are hinted in the precedent discourses more generally, and
obscurely; I add this only for explanation.

FINIS.

