CHRYSOMESON, A Golden Mean: Or, a middle way for Christians to walk by;
wherein all seekers of truth, and shakers in the faith, may find the true
Religion independing upon man's invention, and be established therein.

Intended as a Key to Christianity. Intended as a Touchstone for a Traveller.
Intended as a Probe for a Protestant. Intended as a Sea-mark for a Sailor.
By BENJAMIN SPENCER, who worshippeth Unity in Trinity, and most earnestly
prays that people may come to unity in verity, at home and abroad.

In a Christian Dialogue between PHILALETHES, And his friend MATHETES seeking
satisfaction.

Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people,

Isa. 57.14. Anima non purgatur abluendo sed respondendo,

Tertul. de Resur. Carnis. (...), varietas grata est.
Et quae non prosunt singula multa juvant.
Moreover I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have these
things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.15. Inquire I pray thee of the former
age, and prepare thy self to the search of the Fathers, for we are but of
yesterday, and know nothing,

Job 8.8, 9. LONDON, Printed for B.S. the Author, and are to be sold by William
Hope, at his shop next door to St Bartholomewes Church, on the North side of
the Royal Exchange, 1659.

The explanation of the Picture of the Church.
GEntle Reader, here behold
A shadowed Church of antic mold;
Where Christian people meet to advance
God, in his holy Ordinance.
In the outward Court you see
In a circle, each degree
Of Sects both old and new, of late
Troubling both our Church and State.
The ancient Chiliast pretends,
That Christ will shortly make amends
To him with bags, and fatting farms,
Whoever suffers wrongs or harms.
The Jesuit with his naked knife,
And box of poison always rife,
Stands ready Magistrates to kill,
That will not buckle to his will.
The common Papist his sight takes,
By spectacles the Jesuit makes;
And whether he reads verse or prose,
He must put them upon his nose.
The Brownist craving a new fashion,
Prays for through reformation:
His broom to give the Pope a fall,
Sweeps down the windows, Church and all.
The Familist and Adamites,
Share in carnal foul delights;
But unless they leave that vice,
They Will miss the blessed Paradise.
The Antinomian spurns Gods law,
As if it were not worth a straw;
Yet law is good, if rightly used,
Liberty bad if it be abused.
The Antisabbatarian,
No sabbath day endure can,
But thinks it much unto his praise,
To hammer out all Holy days.
The Anabaptist fire spits
In zeal, but dipping cools the fits
A while; but yet he cries anon
Against Paul, more baptismes then one.
The Arminian with his double face,
Maintains universal grace,
Doubting that if it be not so,
Whether he shall be saved or no.
The Leveller makes much ado,
Having but little to take to,
Hopes to make equal poor and rich;
His silver bell makes humors itch.
Socinians finding now fit season,
Offers their cup of faith in reason,
Which if to cool your heat it fail,
He fans you with a Foxes tail.
Independents break the band
Of discipline; to none will stand
But their own fancy. Read the text,
The Devil did so first, and Adam next.
The Quaker shakes like shudd'ring ducks,
While joints and mouth convulsion plucks:
I fear it is some dissembling evil,
If not possession by a devil.
The Seeker blindfold gropes about,
To feel some new Religion out:
But since he has the old truth lost,
He Will find but error to his cost.
The regular Priest caught in the larch,
Can hardly get orkeep a Church;
In chambers fain to preach about,
Hoping to drive these hornets out.
But there is an eye above,
Fixed on the Church which God does love;
And an ear that hears the cry,
Of others foolish blasphemy.
Also a fist wrathfully bent,
To avenge the innocent,
And to beat in pieces, all
Sects and Schisms, great and small.
Therefore repent, both all and some,
Methinks I hear the Bridegroom come,
Who lest we fall to Anarchie,
Will bring in the fifth Monarchy;
Let no man dream of any more,
Since Daniels vision showed but four.
I will dash them one against another. Ier: 13.14;
Thine eyes shall see thy teacher's: Isai. 30.20.
I harkned but non spoke aright: Ier. (...)
depiction of church

To all his true Christian friends, living and dwelling in the famous City of
London, or Countries adjacent, or dispersed elsewhere; especially to those that
have been, and are his Parishioners and Auditors; B. S. wishes temporal
blessings, internal graces, and eternal glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord
Amen.
Dearly beloved in Christ,
I Am so much engaged to you, that I owe you even my own self, who because I
cannot always continue with you, I Dedicate to you this child of my old age to
be your servant, whom if you please to entertain into your house, I hope it
will do you faithful service; for it is neither given to flattering, lying,
nor faction, however it may be to filching that from some, which they have
taken from others, and so made up a pack for your profit that shall open it. I
could offer its service to particular friends, by the complement of Dedication,
if I thought it might honor them as much as their acceptance I know would
honor it, or not engage them as sureties are for Apprentices, to answer for the
slips of it in a captious world. I commend it therefore only to your service,
and will answer (to my ability) for the faults of it my self; only I desire
you would be pleased to accept it as a love token, though no requital of your
favors, from one disabled by the malignancy of these latter times, to show
himself so thankful as he would, and holds himself obliged to be,

Your faithful servant in Christ, Benjamin Spencer.

To the grave Governors of St Thomas Hospital in Southwarke.
Right Worshipful,
IF I should not remember you, I should forget my self: you were my first
patrons, under the wing of whose favor I lived about fifteen years, till the
people came to be oppressed one by another, and the children behaved themselves
proudly against the ancient, Isa. 3.5.
and the base against the honorable. I suffered in the crowd among others, by
some trivial, and other false accusations, which if they had been of any
weight, and proved true, the supreme authority at that time sitting, would not
by Order have given me three parts of my Living, whereas other men had but a
fist. I know my troubles came not upon me by your means, nor the detaining of
that allowance from any disaffection to me: but being loath to stickle with
some that overawed you at that time, by whose means I and mine have suffered
much hardship. However hoping that this lame child of mine, shall find
admittance into your Hospital, love, and favor, I commend it and my self to
your service.

Ben. Spencer.

To the right Worshipful, Sir John Jacob Knight.
Noble Sir,
IT was your favor to make me your Chaplain at Bromley, when I was so
flieblown by some of Baalzebubs swarm, that I resolved upon privacy, rather
then public imploiment. But by your goodness I was brought to light again,
and have found a little Zoar to secure me in the common combustion, yet not
without some envy, though I have nothing about me worthy envy, save the love of
my friends, the effect whereof is by envy so much obstructed, that my next
remove must be like Lot, to a cave, or my grave. In the mean time, Sir, I pray
except of this poor mite of my thankfulness, which is an abstract of my
labors bestowed on my loving Parishioners of Bromley, to whom you commended
me, and them to me; for which benignity I shall for ever rest,

SIR, Your Worships devoted in Christ to serve you, Benjamin Spencer.

To the worthy Society of Mercers.
Right Worshipful,
I Beseech you take it not amiss, since you have deserved more at my hands,
that I prefix you before this Christian Dialogue. It is my due thankfulness
that urges me to it, not that I think so worthily of this small tract, to
present it to the view of so many judicious eyes, but to show how much you have
endeared me, and I stand indebted to you, not only for a Lecture which I enjoy
by your favor, but for your candor and ingenuity, in wishing me more and
better places then I am worthy of; for which I must ever hold my self,

Your Worships obliged Servant, Benjamin Spencer.

To the Worshipful, Mr George Price, Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
WHen I call to mind the memory you kept of me after a long time, between your
hearing of me preach at St Thomas Parish in Southwark, when you were high
Sheriff of Surrey, and your presentation of me to Eshur, from which nothing
could have separated me (since there I enjoied the happiness of so Noble and
ingenuous a Patron) but only a sequestration, or the want of convenient
dwelling: I could do no less then show my thankful remembrance of you, nor
more honor my self then by prefixing your name among other of my most
deserving friends, on the front of this child of my old age, which I know will
be welcome to you, how meanly soever attired, because you have been so nobly
respective to my relations upon my mere motion, to let them succeed me in the
enjoiment of your love and favor; for which I shall ever rest,

Your Worships really deserved Servant, Benjamin Spencer.

To the right Worshipful, Sir Stephen Lennard, Knight
Right worthy Sir,
FIrst love can hardly ever be requited. Your affection to me was the more
heavenly, being you loved me before I knew you, and not only made me your
Rector of West Wickam, but prosecuted your act, so far as friends and law could
prevail. But it was either my unworthiness or unhappiness, that could not
overcome the influence of a malignant planet, which struck me without giving me
any reason why, by which I am disabled to serve you that have deserved so much
of me, not only in preferring me to the utmost of your power, but also
accepting (at my request) my son to be your Minister, who (I do hope) will
prove faithful in his Stewardship, and thankful to all his wel-wishers,
especially to so Noble a Patron as your self; to whom I shall ever rest,

Devoted in all Christian duty, Benjamin Spencer.

To the Worshipful, Mr Eliab Harvey.
SIR,
I Cannot forget your love to me, though I use not many visits, but must needs
name you among the rest of my worthy friends, since you not only endeavored my
preferment to St. Lau. P. but also suffered for my sake an affront by
Melastomos, a barking blackmouthed creature in that place, who deserved a whip
more then a whistle, for questing upon a false sent. I did not weigh his wrong
done to me, for it was then in fashion (and too much still) to blast poor
ministers, but it grieved me that one of your estate and dignity speaking only
in my behalf, should be abused by a pesant. But some dogs will bark at a true
man sooner then at a thief, by whom a good man cannot live unenvied, nor die
unslandered. From such virulent tongues, and violent hands, God keep you and
yours, and preserve you to his everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, which
shall ever be the prayer of him that is,

Your Worships endeared friend to serve you, Benjamin Spencer.

To his very good friend, Mr Thomas Tomlins.
SIR,
YOu being not only my Auditor and Parishioner, but also a great incourager of
my studies, and a liberal contributor to this poor labor of mine, do challenge
from me an especial remembrance among the rest of my well-wishers, though I
know you neither desired nor expected any nominall acknowledgement of your
favor to meward, but gratitude required to make you as exemplar as you are
good. And none will grudge this to you but the spirit of envy, which
unwillingly makes good men happy: which happiness may he increase, that has
prospered you in all your enterprises, and make it a step to eternal glory,
through Jesus Christ; so prays he that is,

SIR, Yours engaged to serve you, Benjamin Spencer.

To the Reader in general.
Courteous Reader,
THe outward figure of this book, is like the dish called an Oleo, a Mess of
all together, which I have so composed on purpose to give content to every
appetite, at least to some. If any do nauseate the whole Mess, let such
consider whether the fault be in the platter, or in their palate. I have formed
it in way of a Dialogue, because it is an inquisitive age, and also because
such kind of writing comes off more quick and home to the understanding, then
long discourses, which oftentimes wearieth the Reader, and confounds the
memory. The matter of it is universal and general, that people may find in it
something of every thing that obviously comes into their ears or mind; for all
which with their appendences, I refer thee to the Table at the end, but rather
to the diligent reading of the book it self, whose Errata in the Printing, are
set down at the end also. The quotations of Scripture I desire thee to search
and read, because I have omitted the words of the Text, lest the volume swell
too big. Let me entreat thee to read and judge favorably, Greg. Naz.
though I had rather my friend should use his liberty, then my enemy flatter
me. The end why I wrote this tract, is because I have beheld with a sad heart,
the tares of division sprung up too thick in this our field, or Church, of late
years, by which is bred many heresies in Parishes, and many schisms among
Ministers. I know that there be pieces more accurately written upon many things
discoursed of in this book, but they be dispersed in diverse volumes, and many
know not where to find them. Here therefore I have collected many, and directed
thee to more. So that I hope this my poor pains may stay some that stagger, and
recall some that wander, and so help to nourish Christian communion which is
almost lost. And this is all he aims at, and prays for, who is, and ever
(by Gods grace) will be,

Thine as thou art Christ's, Benjamin Spencer.

These Books following are printed, and to be sold by William Hope, on the
North side of the Royal Exchange, at his shop next door to St Bartholomews
Church.
THE Faith, Doctrine, and Religion, professed in this Realm of England, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging. Expressed in Thirty Nine Articles, by Thomas
Rogers. The Balm of Gilead: Or, Comforts for the Distressed. Also his Devout
Soul, and Free Prisoner, by Jos. Hall, D. D. and B N. The New Covenant, Or,
The Saints Portion, by John Preston, D.D. Bethel: Or, A form for Families, in
which all sorts of both Sexes are so squared and framed by the Word, as they
may best serve in their several places, for useful pieces in Gods building,
by Matthew Griffith. The Holy Lives of Gods Prophets, by J. H. The Abridgement
of the Body of Divinity, of that Famous and Reverend Divine, Mr William
Perkins. A True Relation of the Unjust, Cruel, and Barbarous proceedings
against the English at Amboyna in the East Indies, by the Netherlandish
Governor and Council there. Godly Meditations upon the most holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, by Christopher Sutton, Doctor in Divinity, late one of the
Prebends of the Collegiate Church of Westminster. A Fountain of Tears, by that
Reverend divine, John Featley, D.D. Chaplain to his late Majesty. Some
Sacramental Instructions: Or, An explication of the Principles of Religion, by
T. B. B D. Pastor of M. O. London. A Triumphant Arch Erected and Consecrated to
the Glory of the Feminine Sex, By Monsieur de Scudery, Englished by I. B. Gent.
The General History of Women, Containing the Lives of the most Holy and
Profane; the most Famous and Infamous in all ages, exactly described, not only
from Poetical Fictions, but from the most Ancient, Modern, and admired
Historians to our times, by T. H. Gent. Heroic Education, Or, Choice Maxims
and Instructions, for the most sure and facile training up of youth in the
ways of eminent learning and virtues, by I. B. Gent. Gerardo the Unfortunate
Spaniard, Or a Pattern for Lascivious Lovers, Originally in Spanish, and made
English by L. D. Poems, By Francis Beaumont, Gent. Colloquia Plautina viginti,
Ex totidem M. Plauti Comoediis excerpta, and Annotatiunculis marginalibus
illustrata, Opera Alexandri Rossaei.
A CHRISTIAN DIALOGVE between PHILALETHES and MATHETES.
Mathetes. REverend Sir, I have presumed upon your goodness and long
acquaintance, you being a lover of truth, and of all those that love it, to
design this day to wait upon you, and to give you the trouble to satisfy some
questions whereby my mind may be established in this wavering world, wherein
several societies of Christians do all lay claim to truth as theirs only,
with as great fervency as the two women pleaded before King Solomon for the
child, which could not possibly have two mothers: So surely there is but one
truth, and but one right and true profession of it.


Philalethes. I hope your Religion is not now to seek?


Mathe. Not altogether, but I confess I would be glad to find satisfaction more
fully about that religion in which I was born and bred, that so I may not
believe implicitly, as because my parents were of this or that religion, but
that I may be able to render a reason of mine own faith.


Phila. Your endeavor is good, but I fear you are troubled with the staggers
or vertigo, a brain giddiness bred by the inordinate motion of spirits in the
ventricle of the brain; so I believe your mind is made light and frothy by some
evil notions unwarily received, or by a multitude of good notions not well
disposed, like unto good meat that being not well digested will breed a disease
as well as vicious diet; this may be some cause of your wavering.


Mathe. I think, Sir, you say right. For I confess to you that I have met with
some spirits that have made me in such a maze, and brought me into such
alabyrinth, that I have turned Seeker of what I had, and a Shaker in what I
held; yet I find my first tenets in the Protestant Religion to be the best, but
I want confirmation: For some tell me that I cannot prove there is a God, or
that man has asoule immortal more then other creatures, and that it comes
only by generation, and has no existence after death: And when I endeavor to
confute them by Scripture, they bid me prove the Scriture to be the word of
God; when I seek to prove that by Scripture, they say it cannot bear witness to
its self, for that is to prove the same by the same: If I fly to the
tradition of the Church, they ask me what Church is the true Church: Or if I
offer them the sense of Scripture to prove what they demand, then they ask me
who shall be judge whether that be the true sense or no: If I say our Church of
England, Gabr, a porta. Bicl. in can. miss. lect. 23.
they deny her to be true: If I say the Church of Rome, others prove her and
her Pope too Heretical: If I say the reformed Churches of Geneva, Helvetia, or
Scotland, they tell me they are schismatic; so that I am in a great straight
with Job, to know where wisdom is to be found, Job 28.12.
or where is the place of understanding?


Phila. You need not seek far, the word is near thee from whence such reasons
may be deduced, that will answer all these opinions: But if men will not hear
these reasons, I must tell them they have no faith, but either humane or
divelish, not divine faith which believes that there is a word of God, and
believes God upon that word. But I will not anticipate; tell me therefore what
was the first thing which troubled you.


Mathe. Even the same with which I troubled my self being a child, or
something else troubled me by casting into my mind, what that God was, of whom
my parents had told me? whether he was before the world? what he did then
before he made it? And I have met with some of as little wit as I my self then
had, or else of deeper reach, either to bring us into some form, which yet we
have not had, or else to bring us all to confusion, and then out of that chaos
to raise up a Church of their own framing, and boast of it as did
Nebuchadnezzer, Is not this great Babel which I have built?


Phila. As these thoughts came into your mind for want of knowledge of God at
first, so do these scrupulous queries come into it, for want of subjecting your
self to that knowledge which God has offered to you of himself: For the soul
of man being rational and discoursive, will run into many vagaries, and grow
extravagant without rule, and so miss God, wherein stands man's eternal
happiness.


Mathe. Is there a way then for a man to attain eternal happiness?


Phila. Yes. First, if there were no eternal happiness, God had made man in
vain with so vast a mind, which no finite thing can satisfy; and then there
must be a way to this happiness, or else that happiness is ordained in vain
also for man.


Mathe. Some think it is not necessary to know any more happiness then nature
shows and dictates to us.


Phila. Nature shows in part, that felicity which is necessary for man to
know, but not fully, but as in the wrong end of an optic glass, which makes
things appear farther off, or less then they are, or else shows us a false
felicity, as in a magnifying or multiplying glass, wherein it appears bigger
or more then it is; all which shows there is an happiness, though nature
mistakes it, or cannot perfectly show it, though it be necessary for us to know
it.


Mathe. How prove you it is necessary for us to know it?


Phila. 1. Because I have a soul capable of such a knowledge, nor is an
industrious soul quiet till it find either it or something like it, wherein it
may find a rest and content: Therefore the spirit of a man is the candle of God
to search hidden secrets, Pro. 20.27. yea, even the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
and by desire a man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all
wisdom. Pro. 18.1. 2. Because man is made for it, God intended him for
happiness: For as the world was made that God might be revealed, so God was
revealed that man might know him, which is felicity. God sought to bring man to
it first by obedience, wherein he failing, thereby showing the mutability of
created nature, God next set before him the object of believing (viz.) his
promise of Christ, to know whom in God is life eternal, John 17.3. and
felicity. 3. Because man is a future, not only a present creature; for he has
a soul which will be existent after death in joy or sorrow, and therefore
necessary for him to know felicity, and to avoid misery.


Mathe. How prove you that he has such a soul.


Phila. From our immortal desires to live either in memory or posterity for
ever, which argues the immortal nature of the soul, though it be deceived in
the choice of it by placing immortality where it is not. So Absalom set up his
monumentall pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18. and some call their lands after their own
names, Psa. 49.12. and men desire tombs, which argues a desire of perpetual
life. No creature has this desire but man, for things without life desire to
preserve themselves in their particular being, Secundum numerum pronunc. Vid.
Scor. Did. 94.
and beasts desire the continuance of their kind only for the present time, but
man desires a perpetual being included in no bounds.

2. Because it has a kind of infinite apprehension; comprehending singular
things, and universal things, and the kinds of all things, which argues an
immortal nature.

3. Because God has made a perpetual covenant with man, Numb. 18.19.
and therefore the soul has a continual being in or out of the body, else is
the Covenant ended. But, God is not the God of the dead, Mat. 22.32.33.
but of the living, for all do live to him, therefore he calls himself the God
of the Patriarchs after their death, Exodus 3.6. so some in scripture are said
to be gathered to their fathers in peace, though slain, as 2 Chronicles. 35. as
good Josiah. But it is meant to the spirit of the Fathers which were at rest
and peace with God, bound up in the bundle of life, 2 Samuel 25.29. among the
spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.

4. Because men undergo loss and cross, and death without cause joifully,
which were madness if the soul were not immortal, and expected after death
some felicity to enjoy, 1 Cor. 15.19. But many love not their lives that they
may find them hereafter, Mar. 8.35.

5. Because God in the last judgment may show himself just, as Genesis 18.23.
for in this world good men suffer, and evil men flourish, Psalm. 37. Psalm.
71.2, 3. so Jer. 12.1. yet it is but to fat them for the slaughter, Jer. 12.3.
Therefore the soul is immortal that every man may find the justice of God at
last.

6. The learned heathen did acknowledge this, Arist. Cic. Tusc. 1. (...).
calling the soul the first motion, as if it were the beginning of motion; so
by their letting an Eagle fly aloft when the bodies of their Heroes were put
into the funeral fires. It is true, that the Scripture says, the soul that
sins, that shall die, but the meaning is, not that the soul shall be
dissolved in his essential life, but in the relative life to Godward, by
whose goodness and mercy it obtains an eternal felicity.


Mathe. But how can I prove that it has any existence after the death of the
body?


Phila. Because it is distinguished in this by all wise men from the souls or
life of bruits; for the spirit of a man goes upward, and the spirit of a beast
goes downward, Eccles. 3.21. And again, Eccles. 12.7. the dust shall return to
the earth, and the spirit to God that gave it; which returning to God signifies
the souls immortality, Psallus.
that is, as God always is, so the soul is subsisting with God; for if the
soul be immortal it cannot wax old, Phocylid.
but must live ever; so that you must deny the soul to be immortal, or else
grant that it never dies. But the old Chaldeans and Egyptians shall rise
against such Christians, whose precept was, that a man should make haste to the
light and splendors of the Father, and to seek Paradise, which is the splendid
and clear region of the soul. Trismegistus confirms the perpetual being of
the soul; Cic. Tusc.
Pythagoras says as much, and Tully from him. Epictetus says, we are the
kinsmen of God, and return from whence we came. Plat. in Phaed. Comment. Mo^.
Zill. Hisp. in Plat.
Plato is more clear then any: And St Paul himself makes use of Aratus in the
Acts, saying, We are Gods offspring, Acts 17.28.

But beside, Christ gives us greater light in the point, John 3.36. saying, He
that believes in me has life eternal, and to the thief he said, This day
thou shall be with me, when as that day both their bodies were dead. 1 Cor. 5.1.
So St Paul says, We know when this earthly house is dissolved, we have a
building of God in the heavens: He does not say when this house shall be
repaired as at the resurrection, but so soon as it is dissolved. So in the
fifth verse, says he, When we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord, and therefore are willing to be absent from the body, to be present with
the Lord, therefore he desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And St
Stephen prays God to receive his spirit. But beside all this, if we believe
that any who were raised from death in Scripture, were truly dead, then their
soul upon departure from the body, had a subsisting, or else were dissolved
into nothing, and if dissolved into nothing, then they were newly created,
rather then reunited, and so cannot properly be said to be raised, but the
soul was re-created, and re-infused, and so being a new something brought out
of nothing, into which it was dissolved, we shall doubt whether they had their
own souls again. And again, if the soul were dissolved at death, in vain did
Christ warn us not to fear them that kill the body, or him that can damn the
soul; For what damnum or damage can there be to him, that after death has no
soul to feel either sorrow of loss, or pain of sense.


Mathe. I pray, Sir, what think you of the soul, and how come we by it, and
then let me know what principles are left to lead it to felicity?


Phila. You propound too fast, one of these three is enough at once, and
especially the first to know what the soul is, since Christ says, it has been
with us ever since we were born, and yet we know not what it is. But I suppose
he means that we know it not by any perfect knowledge we have of the
essence-thereof; for it is hard to know that by which we know any thing, yet we
may know it by its operation; for no doubt it is an immateriall or spiritual
substance, which gives man (next to God) life, sense, motion, and
understanding. How we came by this soul at first in our first parents, must be
understood from God, who gives beginning to all things; but how we have them
since, may be a question; for though he made our first parents by creation, yet
he makes us mediately by generation of our parents; but whether soul and body,
is a question too, and yet we say one man begets another, and if the whole man,
then body and soul, but if the body only, then is but half the man begotten
by the parents: Some think all souls were at first created, Plato.
and are reserved as in a treasury, I know not where, and infused at man's
generation, or when the body is apt to receive them, but then it is not the
form of man, nor does work in the forming of man's body from his conception if
it be not infused till the body be apt for it, which they count forty days
after the conception: Others, Hilary.
that God creates it of nothing, ex tempore, upon every occasion of the females
conception; but then say others, God is put to a new creation every day:
Zanchius.
Some say that God gives it essence and substance, but the parents give it a
beginning of being and existence. Many, or most of the Fathers did judge that
it was created of God immediately, and infused, yet Saint Augustine makes a
stand at it, Aug. in epist. act Hieron. 28. de orig. peccato.
because he finds not how original sin can be conveied, if the soul come not
by the parents to the child by propagation; for if the body come only from
them, mere matter is not capable of sin, neither is the body alone a person,
and so no person of man is tainted with original sin in conception, as Psalm.
51. In sin my mother conceived (not my body only) but me; and if God make the
soul of nothing and then infuseth it, then it being of it self pure by his
creation, how can it stand with Gods justice to pour it into a tainted body;
and if the body as mere matter cannot be sinful, nor the soul neither being
newly set out of Gods hand, then mere uniting cannot make them so, and then we
shall find no original sin at all. These opinions being not plainly concluded
by the Scripture nor the Yet in Saint Hieromes time the Western Church was much
inclined this way.
Church; therefore as we are to hold that which Scripture, reason, or
experience holds forth to us most evidently; so where such evidence is not,
we are to hold that which is most probable, which if we will not do, I see no
reason but we must be content without reason. Now the Scriptures do not plainly
evidence that the soul is immediately created of God, and so infused, but
rather offers it as a thing not altogether from God, nor altogether from man,
as you may see by diverse phrases in Scripture, as in Genesis 1.27. Be fruitful,
and multiply, and fill the earth (viz.) that is, with mankind, and persons of
men as other creatures were to do, ver. 22. of that Chapter, or else Gods word
is not so effectual in man the more excellent creature, as it is in the
beasts, all which he intended by his resting from creating, that they should
ever persist of themselves, and multiply their kinds: Of which God gave the
first instance when he framed Eve the first woman out of the first man; and yet
is not said to breath into her as into Adam, a breath of life, silently
arguing, that by his power concurring, her whole substance was taken from Adam,
upon whom he had first and originally breathed Spiraculum animarum.
the breath of souls, as the original text reads it; yet other texts show us
also that God has an especial hand in it, as Job 10.8, 10. and Psalm. 139.13,
15. Thy hands have made me: Thou have covered me in my mothers womb. And Jeremy
brings in God asserting, that he formed him in the womb, and Zach. 12.1. It is
said God forms the spirit of a man within him; he does not say creates it of
nothing, but he brings that into act, which was there in the seed, Arist.
but potentially, as Aristotle held not much amiss, though he leaves it
doubtful whether it be mortal or immortal; so that we see both God and man
has an hand in the generation of the whole man together.


Mathe. I pray make that a little more plain?


Phila. The Philosophers say that the Sun and man begets man; so we may say God
and man do propagate man's soul; God so far as to make it immortal, and man so
far as to make it sinful; not that there is any separation in their
generation, as if the body, of the body, and the soul of the soul, but the
whole of the whole, through the special and mere immediate act of Gods
providence, then any in other creatures generation; for generation in man sure
is of persons, not of parts: Of which persons God in regard of the soul is the
outward efficient, and makes parents the procreating cause; the material cause
is spiritual matter of the parents souls, which God blowing upon by his power,
lights one flame by another, without any division or diminution of that
spiritual lamp, which is fed with the oil of animal spirits. And thus it may
be as well propagated as united, God concurring in his spiritual power upon
the soul, to which at first he gave being, and making man the instrument to
produce it in the seed.


Mathe. I pray give some places of Scripture to prove the production, and some
reasons drawn from thence, for many places seem against it.


Phila. Some seem against it, but are not so, as Exodus 21.22, etc. that a man
if he hurt a woman with child, and her fruit depart from her, and yet mischief
or death follow not, i. upon the mother, then the punishment shall be but a fine
or mulct; but if mischief or death follow, then he shall pay life for life.
Now if this mischief or death be understood of the woman, this place argues
nothing to the souls production by propagation. If it be meant of the child,
then it must have life, and how a reasonable creature can have life without the
form of it, viz. a reasonable soul, I know not; therefore the judgment surely
was to be made upon the child quickening, and so life was to answer for life;
but whether the soul be not infused before, even at the conception, is still
questionable. So Numb. 27.16. he is called the God of spirits, yet is he not
also the God of our bodies? yes sure, as 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your
bodies, for they are Gods. But Eccles. 12.7. seems to make a greater
difference, for the body is said there to return to the dust, but the spirit to
God that gave it; yet this proves only the souls immortal estate after death,
not any immediate creation of it, except he relates to Adam, whose creation was
immediate of dust, and his soul immediate from God, but our bodies are not so,
and the question still remains, whether the soul be not conveied by Gods
special concurrence in propagation. So Isa. 57.16. it is said of God, I will
not always contend, lest the souls that I have made, fail before me; but
that is meant by the general life of all creatures: Beside, who knows not
that God makes us, we teach our children so to answer us in their Catechism,
because God did it originally, and does it still by his benediction of
parentall seed, yet we know also that the parents beget the children. So Ezekiel.
18. it is said, all souls are mine; but that is, all persons. So Zach. 12.1. It
is said, God forms the spirit of man within him, which no man will deny; but
the question is still of what, whether of nothing, or of the parents substance
corporal and spiritual: Indeed that place of Zachary intends the first man's
forming, as we see by his alleging Gods stretching forth of the heavens, and
laying the foundation of the earth, which was at the creation; or if he means
the souls of men since the creation, then by forming cannot ^e understood
creating of nothing. But you will say that God is called the Father of Spirits,
in opposition to the fathers of our flesh; but the opposition is not made there
between God and man, or soul and body, but between natural life, and casual
correction, and spiritual; but be it meant of God and natural parents, yet it
proves nothing to the souls production, for he is the God of our body, as well
as of our spirits.


Mathe. But if the soul be of a spiritual substance and nature, how can it be
propagated in generation?


Phila. Because it is not propagated after a bodily manner, though the whole
man begets the whole man; for the soul consisting rather of power then parts,
the propagation of it is by promotion, rather than decision; nor is the soul
so spiritual as to be simply simple, for only God is so, but has a spiritual
composition, though not elementary, which the God of spirits can blow up to a
flame which kindles presently upon fit matter by virtue of his first word given
to the nature of man, saying, increase and multiply, and by his continual
assistance to man's generation.


Mathe. But generation of souls argues a corruption of souls, and so it is not
immortal.


Phila. It follows not; for the corruption of the soul in propagation is
only a mutation from power to act, and so is not corrupted by putrefaction, but
advanced by perfection; it is the same as it was, but not in the same manner as
it was, and so the soul propagated is not corrupted; nor is the soul
propagating corrupted, for it is neither divided nor diminished, no more then
the flame of a lamp is by lighting another.


Mathe. But if it pass in propagation, then if conception fail, a soul is
lost in the emission of seed for want of conception.


Phila. Not so, for the soul is never procreated but in conception, namely,
when the seed of male and female meet in one together, with the efficient power
of God concurring with all natural causes for the production thereof;
therefore when conceptions fail, the soul continues as it was; so in
unlawful copulations with other creatures (God not conferring his power) no
rational creature is brought forth, but the soul remains without
communication of it self.


Mathe. But if the soul be so traduced from the parents, then from one of them
or both, and I see not how one soul can be divided, nor yet how one soul can
be made out of two.


Phila. It cannot be from one, for the seed of neither male nor female alone,
conteins the matter and form of the creature to be produced, but two do make
one, two in number and sex, being united make a third; and this is Gods
ordinance in nature, that mankind should be distinguished into two sexes, and
by their uniting again the whole kind should be preserved; neither is the soul
divided because it consists not of parts but powers, and therefore the
propagation of the soul is not done by decision, Zanch. de tribus Elohim. p.
2. l. 3. cap. 7.
but by operation, whereby the same power is effected in another, which the
soul has in it self; yet it is neither annihilated nor diminished, because
it is a spiritual nature, as we understand God to beget his Son, and
communicates to him his whole essence, and yet the Father retains his whole
essence. And this need not trouble us, since we see the forms of other
creatures are indivisible, as well as man's soul, and yet they beget their like
without any division of their essential forms: And for the making of one soul
out of two, you are to conceive how two in act may make one; for man and wife
is not only one flesh carnally, but their very souls do so cleave together
like Jonathan and David, that they would become one, which because they cannot
do, they by the assistance of God conspire with the fitness of other causes to
produce another creature like themselves, Athanas. de var. p. 16.
as flint and steel smote together begets fire, which is the next creature that
a fervent motion can beget.


Mathe. When do you judge the soul to be thus traduced?


Phila. At the first conception no doubt, and uniting of the male and female
seed, the corporal parts whereof, although they must have a time to ferment or
concoct before they can mix to make a perfect conception, yet no doubt the
spiritual parts being more quick and active, do move in a less time, and are
conceived at the first meeting of the parents seed, and so become the form of
man from his very beginning, which if the seed should want, the generation
comes to nothing, because it wants a form to inform and dispose the matter
toward quickening.



the essential form of the creature and the prime act, it must be perfect at
first as well as in the process, or else it cannot give perfection to the
other parts of the creature, because it is not perfected in it self.


Mathe. But all this that you say, does but yet probably set forth that it is
so, but does not directly prove it.


Phila. You say true; for indeed the generation of mankind is more wonderful
then any other creature, as in Psalm. 139.6, 14. David confesses the knowledge
too wonderful for him: But when I conceive how that some main points of
Christian Religion depends upon this opinion, I had rather speak something
against reason, then any thing against Religion.


Mathe. Make that forth, namely, that the production of humane souls by
propagation, has ground in Christian Religion.


Phila. If it be found in Scripture, or by just consequence drawn therefrom,
then it may be founded on true Religion: And that it is so, I find, 1. By Gods
institution, Increase, multiply, and fill the earth, Genesis 1.27.
i. not with bodies only, but with persons of men consisting of soul and body,
or else other creatures had power to preserve their own kind, and not he who is
the best of all. 2. We find that God so ordered nature in the creation, that
every thing in nature should persist by themselves, and multiply their kinds,
that he might make no new creatures after that he ceased from all his work
which he had made. 3. So we read that God took Eve out of Adam, yet no mention
is made of a new soul infused into her: Nor can I understand less in Gods
promise, That the seed of the woman should break the serpents head, but that a
person should come of the woman's seed who should do it, which person must
consist of a soul as well as a body, or else Christ redeemed mankind by a body
without a soul.


Mathe. Was not Christ's soul cr^^^ed immediately of God?


Phila. No otherwise then ours is, and that ours is not, we have proved in
part, and will prove it farther, and next, that Christ's soul was not. First,
that ours is not, is plain from the description of Adams begetting Seth after
his own likeness, Genesis 5.3.
if by likeness and image we understand the spiritual form rather then the
bodily frame, as it is said, When God made man after his image, Genesis 1.27. So
when God said to Abraham, I will be the God of thy seed, it must be understood
of an informed seed, not a seed inanimate; for God is not said to be the God of
a senseless, no more then of a livelesse or dead substance, Mat. 22.32. To this
purpose also I conceive that the Scriptures say so many souls came of Jacobs
loins, which if some say it is figuratively spoken, yet I know not how a man
may be said to be a father of that to which he contributeth the least and more
base part of substance: Nor is that of Zachary the Prophet to be neglected,
which says, Zach. 12.1.
The Lord forms the spirit of a man within him; for it shows first the Lord
to be the external efficient, without whose immediate act of providence, the
soul cannot be traduced, and the word forming (which is not creating) shows
the manner of it as done by his power, yet not created only, as not propagated
only, but formed within man of the spiritual matter of the parents informing
their seed. in this regard it is said of David, Psalm. 51.5.
Ps. 51. in sin my mother conceived me, not my body sure, but my whole nature.
So when our Savior says, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, John 3.6.
he means the whole man, and if so, then the soul, which if immediately
created of God, cannot possibly be called flesh, nor properly fleshly (that is)
sinful; beside, if the soul be not propagated, how may original sin be
possibly conveied, for by one man sin entered, and by him therefore it must be
conveied to his offspring; for the doing whereof propagation is the most apt
and likeliest way, because every like begets his like; so sinful man begetting
man, propagates with him a potentiality of sinning from the first man's
privation of original righteousness and inclination to evil; but this cannot
be, unless the soul be derived from the parents, for the body is not the
subject of sin, but the whole man; for if the soul be immediately created of
God it must be good and pure, and if so, then he cannot justly cast it into an
evil condition without a first guiltiness; Genesis 18.25.
nor can the soul but unwillingly unite with the body to become sinful. But
surely I understand not if the soul be immediately created, how it can be
corrupted or made sinful; for from whence should the corruption arise; from
the soul it cannot being created good; from the body it cannot, being mere
matter, neither capable of virtue or vice, because it wants intellect, will and
affection: If you say it arises from union, how can that be if the soul be
created good, and the body be incapable of evil: If you say it comes by
imputation, you make God to do and undo, to give good, and take it away again
without cause, and so an unjust, at least a vain work, to give goodness to the
soul, and presently to take it away again by infusing it or uniting it to the
body, by which it should become sinful. I know some will say God may impute it
to man for Adam's fall, as well as righteousness to us for Christ's merits; b^^
friend, the case is much unlike; for imputation of righteousness is a work of
mercy, which is to be done without cause; but the imputation of sin is a work
of justice which cannot be done without some cause; but if the soul be created
pure, and the body untainted with sin, both because it is mere matter, and sin
of a spiritual nature, which cannot taint mere passive matter, then can there
be no ground for imputation, and so it cannot pass but by propagation.


Mathe. But how prove you Christ's soul not immediately created?


Phila. Because he was to take man's nature body and soul, that both by him
might be redeemed: Therefore he took whole humane nature of the blessed virgin
as was promised; The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, and Romans
1.3. He was made of the seed of David according to the flesh. Beside, if
souls, and so his soul were immediately created of God, then Adams sin must
be imputed to him (as he was man) as well as to us, and so he should be a
sinner; but sin was not imputed to him, but only reputed his: And then if it
came not by immediate creation, then it came by formation in the woman's seed,
as ours by propagation: And if we understand it not thus, that it was
immediately formed in the first conception, i. when the holy Ghost separated
that part of the blessed Virgins seed for his Manhood to the soul, whereof the
divinity was immediately united to the body. This dilemma will trouble us,
namely, that either his divine nature was united to a bruit body, or else the
body subsisted by it self our of the Divine nature.


Mathe. But if Christ's humane nature were thus formed or propagated, I see not
yet how he can ever the more escape the taint of original sin.


Phila. I suppose you believe that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and so
the matter of his humane nature was sanctified and purged from that stain.


Mathe. I believe he was conceived by the holy Ghost, yet I know not how to
believe that that conception was sanctifying or purging away of sin from his
humane nature, nor his humane nature from sin, but only a separation and
consecration of that part of the blessed Virgins substance to that holy work
and endowment of it, with all graces sit thereunto: For there can be no
sanctification without a Mediator, and there is but one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5.
by whose blood all are cleansed from sin; yea, the holy Ghost cleanses none
but by his blood; so that if Christ's nature did need sanctification, then it
also needed a Mediator, and then he must be a Mediator for himself, which he
could not be; for a Mediator is not a Mediator of one.


Phila. You say true, and have almost wound your self out of this labyrinth:
For indeed the holy Ghost in this conception did not cleanse Christ's nature
from sin, but did separate that substance which was not sinful, from a sinful
person; for a person only is sinful, substance is not. Now Christ did not take
her person but substance, only leaving the accident of sin, which adhereth only
to a person; and so though Christ's nature were in Adam, and so in the Virgin
who was of that sinful line, yet his person was in neither; for he was the
eternal son of God, who in that instant that the humane nature was conceived
or separated by the holy Ghost from the blessed Virgin Mary, did assume it into
himself to be one person; and thus his nature could never be tainted with
original sin; for his humane nature before that was never a person, and when
it was a person, it was propagated not after the ordinary and natural way, and
so without sin: Nay more, the substance of his humane nature though it were
sinful, subsisting in the blessed Virgins person, yet so it could not be
Christ's, because personality cannot be imparted, but it was made his by
separation from her by the holy Ghost, and his own immediate assumption, and so
great is the mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 1.16. The not conceiving this
rightly, made the Marcionites and Manicheans say, Christ had no true body; and
Apollinaris to say he had no humane soul.


Mathe. I thank you for these solutions; but yet one thing stichs, namely, how
the soul can be said to be immortal, if it be propagated?


Phila. Consider that mortality proceeds not from generation, so much as
malediction of God for Adams sin, who if he had not sinned, his body might have
been as immortal as the soul; so that the propagation of the soul does not
make it merely mortal, but the act of Gods immediate power in the production
of it makes it immortal, because whatsoever is so produced cannot be dissolved
but by the same power by which it first took life, though the body may, because
it is bred only by the power of nature; beside, the soul is not made of any
corporal matter, and therefore is not corruptible though congenerate with the
body.


Mathe. Now being somewhat satisfied about the soul, I pray tell what
principles are there to lead it to felicity?


Phila. Some principles there be which God has given to nature, and left in
nature to seek felicity; but as some know what happiness is, so others make no
use of those principles.


Mathe. I pray what is felicity?


Phila. Man's sovereign and chiefest good, consists in the enjoiment of God,
which confers to man concurrence of all good, without any contrarieties, which
is opposed to that misery into which he is fallen by the first man's sin,
namely, blindness of mind, fondness of affection, stubbornness of will,
inclineablenesse to all evil, way wardnesse from all good, for which cause we
are subjected to vanity, corruptibilitie, all miseries of body and soul,
temporal and eternal, death and damnation. Now man's felicity is an estate
contrary to all these: After this many learned Philosophers searched, but could
not find it, and why? Because they knew not God from whom it proceeds, and is
the giver of it by redeeming man from all misery, and from death to life by his
free grace in Christ, which is life eternal and true felicity to know aright.
John 17.3.


Mathe. What principles lead thereunto?


Phila. Not the principles of nature only; for they teach no further than there
is a felicity, but not what it is, which made the Philosophers in such a
labyrinth about it; some placing it in pleasure, some in poverty, Vid. Varro.
some in knowledge, some in riches, some in honors, as many people do now:
For as some aim at no end or mark at all, but like foolish children shoot their
arrows up in the air; some aim at a bad end in which can be no happiness;
some at a seeming good which is not good in it self; some at felicity in
general, but go blindly and lamely about it, wanting right leading principles.

The principles are such therefore as God has revealed, who is in himself the
chiefest good, and therefore can best ordain the way whereby man may enjoy
him. This way is set down in the holy Scriptures; for which Scriptures sake the
world was made, that so in time that might be revealed, (...).
which in God was hidden at the beginning, namely, that Christ should come and
redeem mankind from the wrath of God, the slavery of Satan, and the dominion of
sin and death, which rightly to know and believe, leads to life eternal.


Mathe. How may one attain this knowledge?


Phila. By right understanding the holy Scriptures in its propositions and
consequences. Now the Scripture tells us that the first man sinned, and so
incurred the wrath of God upon himself and all his posterity, Romans 5. yet he
so graciously promised him that the seed of the woman should break the serpents
head, i. ruin the policies and works of the Devil, wrought in and against
man. Now from whence comes this? does God intend to put up this wrong, and
pass it over? then how can his justice be satisfied? or if infinite justice
must be satisfied by some suffering for that sin, then who must undergo it: If
we look upon God as absolutely one without distinction, then the offended must
mediate with himself, and so put up this offense; yea, the Father God must be
the sufferer without any mediator. Gnostics, or Patrispassiani.
But this cannot be; for a mediator is not of one, but God is one, Gal. 3.20.
yet infinite justice must be satisfied by an infinite person. The scriptures
therefore declare, that in the Godhead there be three persons, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. Now though we cannot so well apprehend how the essence divine can
mediate to it self for man, yet we may conceive how one person can mediate to
another, and so that the Son who lay hid in the bosom of the Father before all
time, did consult and mediate with the Father about it. We must therefore
understand first, That God made man as perfect as a creature rational could be
made, saving only that he gave him not immutability, which is a portion beyond
created nature: For the very Angels that stood once, were yet mutable in
themselves, and they that stand now are not immutable in themselves, though
they be in their estate, and the reason is, they that fell chose to stand by
their own natural power, without dependency upon God; they that stood chose to
stand by dependency upon the Archangell the Son of God, the first born of every
creature, Colos. 1.15.
and of whom the whole family of heaven and earth is named, Ephesians. 3.15. these
were the elect Angels. Now as they stood by love, so man must be recovered by
faith in him, Aug. Servans hos, salvens illos.
that is the same Archangell and Son of God, Jesus Christ, who is the head of
men and Angels, Col. 1.18. creating both; but preserving them, and saving us
from all the bitter effects of sin, and leading us to eternal selicity, by
grace on earth, to glory in heaven. This is the way to felicity; first, To know
God, Then secondly, my self and miserable condition, and thirdly, The remedy
in Christ.


Mathe. How come men to wander so much in the seeking of it?


Phila. The reason of it is; first, The sin of Adam and Eve, who sought to find
the chief good in that which God the chief good prohibited. Man's soul is
troubled with a vertigo ever since, and running round in a maze, is not able to
find the right object, and if any time we come near it, yet like the Sun
coming to his vertical point in the tropic, we turn back to the old course.
Some men know nothing of felicity, yet they aim at something they fancy to be
good for them; yea, at a kind of immortality, as in writing, building, or to
practice Arts or Arms, or purchasing and conquering; all which are but shadows
of felicity, and may keep our names alive, while the soul may be damned as the
body is dead. Some are worse, that place their felicity in carnal delights; as
in cating drinking, Phil. 3.19.
and wantonness, which ends commonly in bitterness, shame and death. Now
though that felicity is thus divorsed by man's mistakings, (...)ing round in a
large circumference of man's vain apprehensions, yet by serious consideration it
may be reduced to one centrall point; for when we have wearied our selves, like
Noah's Dove we must return to the Ark at last for rest and safety, for only in
God the soul takes rest, Aratus.
for as we are the offspring of God, Acts 17.27, 28. so he is not far from any
of us, and we may find him by nature if we would grope after him: but
especially by Scripture which teaches us to know God in Christ; for none can
come to the father but by him, otherwise we know not felicity at all, or not
rightly; for as no man can divide a circle till he have found the center; so
neither the circumference of true felicity, till we fix the foot of our
affection in God, like one foot of a compass: And as a man may find the center
of a circle though he sees it not; so may one find God in the circumference of
his works, though he never saw him, and felicity in Christ though he never yet
knew it before.


Mathe. The knowledge of God being man's felicity, it is not amiss to prove
there is a God; for he that comes to God must believe that God is: therefore
I pray you prove to me there is a God.


Phila. I suppose you urge not this question because you doubt it, but because
you would have reason to satisfy others therein; Therefore, that there is a
God fit to be known of all men, I shall prove by reason; for though Scriptures
be enough to prove it to us that believe, yet not to them who believe not;
therefore reason in this point is needful; for many will not believe unless
their understanding be over-powred by miracle, or revelation, or by some
extraordinary energeticall operation of God upon the soul, they will not
believe except their reason be convinced of the truth of Scriptures, that they
are of God, and of divine revelation; otherwise he thinks that his faith is but
implicit, or folded up in other men's belief, or a weak yielding to antiquity
or authority of Laws and Customs, without examination of their analogy and
agreement with pure and primary reason; and I believe if pure reason were not
clouded by idleness, ignorance, or wilfulness, it would prove a more
impartial judge of truth, than the Pope himself, who believes the Scripture
by the ground of antiquity, and forces his conclusions drawn therefrom, upon
men's consciences by his own authority; which men being made his vassals, yield
to any thing for quietness sake, though themselves have no satisfaction
therein. From whence it is that most Christians profession of Religion, is but
either forced by fear of authority, or voluntarily resigned up to another man's
judgment, or settled upon ones obstinate wilfulness, neither which is saving
faith: For though we give some assent to Scriptures at first being moved by the
authority of the Church, to whom we owe respect and reverence, as the people of
Samaria first believed for the woman's sake, John 4.42.
yet at last they believed for Christ's sake: So people within the pale of the
Church, first hear the voice of their mother the Church, but at last they
believe it for God the Fathers sake, whose voice they find speak in Scripture,
which is the foundation of true faith, being the last principle into which
faith can be resolved.


Mathe. Are there any other reasons to prove God beside Scriptures?


Phila. None better then Scripture to them that believe it; but because many
believe not the Scriptures; as the Heathen deny the whole Bible, and the Jews
half of it, namely, the N. T. therefore reason must be found to convince such.
The heathen know not the true God, and the Jews know not God in Christ, and so
one worships a false God, and the other the true God but in a false manner: And
we need not scruple at reason in this point, because God gave reason before
Scriptures, and holy Reason before holy Writ to diverse men which lead them to
Religion; and therefore though it be well proved to us out of the Old
Testament, that there is a God of the Jews, whom the very Heathen feared, 1 Samuel 4.7, 8. And also out of the New Testament, that to us there is but one
true God, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 8.6.
by whom are all things, and we by him: And beside, we know that nothing can
testify better of the truth of Gods being, then the truth of Gods writing; yet
for other men's sakes who believe not the Scriptures, and yet by reason may be
induced to believe them, it is good to urge reasons.

Now the first reason to persuade men that there is a God, is; Because it seems
written in the minds of all nations by a natural impression or mental
presumption, which forces rather to worship any thing for a god, then no god
at all; Romans 2. Cic. de Not. De. lib. 1. p. 198. Cic. lib. 1. Tusc. and. pa.
112. Romans 1.2.
which shows the first Commandment written in their hearts, that they shall
acknowledge a god, though what god it is they know not, and so they worship
diverse things for gods which are not so. From hence it is that some have
worshipped Sun and Moon; some worshipped Beasts, Serpents; some the Images of
Men; some Crocodiles; some Devils under strange shapes of Satyrs, whose upper
part was manlike, and the under part like a Goat; the Egyptians worship
Shor-apis.
an Ox head; the Bramenes of India, worship the first thing they meet in the
morning, as the god of the day: Orteli Cosm.
So in Baida they worship a piece of a red clout tied to a crosse-stick like a
banner; some worship a Cross as the god of rain: This may be some old
traditions of the Cross antiquated. I would they that understand their
language, would bring that God to them whom they ignorantly worship, as Paul
did to the Athenians, it would prove a happy voyage. I know the Papists use
some endeavors among them to little purpose, till they have convinced their
understanding, and so they do but draw them from one superstition to another,
and can give as little reason for one as the other; yea, I believe the subtle
Indian observing the Idolatry of the Papists, think their own Religion to be as
good as the Papists.


Mathe. How comes men to be so sottish?


Phila. Through ignorance, and immoderate passions of love and fear: For as
through ignorance some worshipped Fortune, and Vices, as contumely and
impudence, as did the Athenians, Clem. Romans l. 5. Recog.
others Flora and Priapus, as did the Romans, some worshipped Nymphae and
Hymen, and Mons Veneris, which words signify the secret parts of women's
bodies, fo which they made gods and goddesses, as some inamoured Gallants do of
their mistresses. And thus the Devil has taught men to debase themselves even
unto hell, Isa. 57.9. So by fear men worshipped Serpents and Crocodiles, and
other hurtful creatures; as the Indians do the Devil for fear he should harm
them; others worshipped the Images of both under certain shapes called
Telesmes, which were made to defend them from something they feared. So Love
erected strange Idols: As those that passionately desired to preserve the
memory of their friends, did after their death set up an Image of them, which
in process became a sanctuary for offenders; Dioph. Laced. in Antiq.
as did the Image of Synophanes son, which he set up in love of his memory, to
which Image his servants offered incense, and did fly to it for pardon of their
offended master, and upon relief would offer it gifts of thankfulness. From
hence came superstition, the end whereof was, Cicero.
that their friends might be superstites or survivors when they were dead; that
is, kept in memory after death. So Ninus set up the Image of Belus his father,
in his new built City Niniveh, which became a sanctuary to all kind of
offenders, and in process of time came to be religious worship, Sophocles.
which even some heathen Poets confuted. From Belus came Baal, so often named
in Scripture, signifying (Lord) as Baal-Sephon, Exodus 14.1. the Lord of the
watch Tower, and Baal Berith the Lord of the Covenant, Judge. 8.33. and
Baal-zebub, the Lord of flies, Dan. 3.1. And it is very likely that
Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, Dan. 2.38. was to be a memorial of himself,
because Daniel had told him that he was the head of Gold; but God crossed his
purpose by the delivering of the three children from the fiery furnace. However
his Babylonians set up their god Bell, which is very likely that they had
brought from the Assyrians by conquest.


Mathe. But in what times did this false worship arise?


Phila. Certainly it arose first in Cain's posterity, of whom it is said, Genesis
4.26. Then began men to call on the name of the Lord, where the Hebrew word
huchar, signifies to profane, as Number. 30.2. And Jewish Rabbis so take it, R.
D. Kimchi.
though the Chaldee Paraphrase does not; for they say that then they began to
call men by the name of gods and lords, and placed the souls of their famous
men in the stars, and called the images here on earth by the name of god, and
began to give them divine worship. This being a profaning of that true
Religion which was held in the family of Sheth, you find in the fifth of
Genesis, men are ranked into two sorts, sons of God, and sons or daughters of
men; but when these sons of God of the line of Sheth, married with the
daughters of men which were of Cain, and became infected with their Idolatry,
god drowned the world.

Yet this Idolatry ceased not, but after the flood it began again in the race
of Nimrod, Belus, and Ninus, who were all I dolized by their followers, placing
their souls among the stars, and erecting their Images here upon earth, to
which when they did sacrifice, they believed that thereby the souls departed,
Elat. in Symp.
were called to their Images, and took cognizance of their cases, and then like
patrons solicited them before the gods or spirits of the stars above, whose
dwelling was not with mortals, as said the Chaldean Astrologers to
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.11. ^esiod.
For the souls of these men they thought to be preserved to be Tutelaries and
Patrons to defend their States, Cities or Countries, yea, their houses; which
spirits or demons they called Lares or Penates, Cicero de Not. Deor.
of all which we find some footing in holy Scriptures; but among heathen
writers many thousands.


Mathe. I pray show me some instances of them?


Phila. First I have showed you those before the flood, and some after it. Now
as their languages were divided, so their Colonies were collected, and then
dispersed themselves about the world, which division of languages, and
dispersion to remote places, occasioned diverse Religions. The next you find are
Penates, the household gods of Laban the Syrian, Genesis 31.30. whom some think
that Rachel stole, that her father might not enquire of them to follow Jacob.
The next you find, are those that were found in Isreal's travels toward Canaan,
Numb. 25.3. Israel joined himself to Baal Peor, Psalm. 106.28.
and did eat the offerings of the dead, i. of those sacrifices that were
offered to the Idols of the dead men whom the Midianites worshipped for gods.
The next you read of, is Michals Teraphim Images set, in his house to worship
in the shape of a man, which by the help of a spirit gave them answers, Zach.
10.2. Judge. 17.
The next are such as the Jews borrowed of the heathens in their apostasy from
God; as Moloch, Vid. Aben Ezra, in Genesis 31. Levit. 18.21. Amos 5.26.
whose tabernacle they took up and carried about as their Priests did the Ark
of God; and Chiun and Rempham, and Ashteroth, which were types of the Sun and
Moon, as was Tamuz, also taken for the Sun, for whose departure to the winter
Tropic, they foolishly wept, Procopius in Esa. 18.
Ezekiel. 8.14. and at his return as wantonly rejoiced. You may take them all in a
sum, 2 Chro. 33.3. Manasses worshipped the whole host of heaven, i. their
superior gods, and set up altars to Baalim, i. their inferior lords or Idols
representative: And thus you see they had gods many, and lords many, 1 Cor.
8.5. as you may find them reckoned up by Rabshecheth, 2 Kin. 18.34. upon
several nations, Rab. Jarchi in 2 Kin. 17.
and more particularly in 2 Kin. 17.30. where their Idols be named, and
signify birds and beasts, as the Jewish Doctors say. So you read of Nisroch
the god of Niniveh, and of Rimmon the god of Syria, 2 Kin. 5.18. and in the New
Testament of Diana of the Ephesians. 2 Kin. 18. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Origin contra Celsum. lib. 6. fol. 76. col. 3.
Thus their sin robbed the true God of his titles (Lord and God) Genesis 1.2.3.
chapters, and gave it to the creatures; as Jehovah to Jove, turning the glory
of the invisible God, into vain similitudes, Romans 1. Which may teach man to
bewail his woeful estate, as Henoch did three hundred years the fall of Adam;
by whose fin his progeny is ignorant of that God with whom he was familiar; so
it may teach Christians to beware of Idolatry, lest we apostate as the Jews
did, whom God forbad all such worship, by commanding them to have a God, and
him for that God, and none but him: Exodus 20.3.
So Christ in his Gospel says as much, that we must have a Mediator, and him
for that Mediator, and none but him: And therefore to abhor papistry, which
sets up the old heathen Religion, by teaching that Saints are to be our
mediators, and their Images may be worshipped, which if they be not animated
by the souls of Saints, they do worse then the heathen to worship them. If
they be, yet it is but heathenish to trust to their mediation, as the heathens
did, who by this did but prove there was a God to be worshipped, but knew not
who, nor how. And therefore as the heathens set up the images of men departed,
to be the protecting patriots of such Cities and Country; so have the Papists
set up Saints for diverse places, as the Lady of Lauretta instead of their
Minerva, and St Dunstan for Vulcan; and many others.


Mathe. What other reason is there to prove a God?


Phila. There needs no other, nor can there be any more demonstrative, than
practice from natures principles, among all men of all nations, in all ages,
who believing there was one, but could not find him, did adore the creature for
him; and lest they should miss him, they multiplied their gods as the stars of
heaven, and the species of things in the earth, and yet doubting whether they
had him or no, they would make use of other men's gods as well as their own,
Genesis 31.53. The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor be witness. So Jonah 1.5.
The mariners cried to their God, and Jonah was roused to call upon his God: So
the heathens were wont to close their prayers, thus, All ye gods and goddesses,
Ser. in Georg. Giraldus Syntag. 17. Theophylact in act. 17. (...). Lucian in
Philop. Herodot, lib. 8.
help us. And the Arabians built Altars, to the unknown God; and so did the
Athenians, Act. 17.23. From whence the Countries adjacent to it, swore by him
that was unknown at Athens. Beside, though God allowed no such worship, yet he
suffered avenging Angels to punish Atheists; as they that neglected the
oblation made to Geryon, were struck with some disease, as says Diodor.
Siculus, lib. 5. Lucian who barked against Christ, was devoured by dogs. So one
Artabanus a Persian General contemming Neptune, was drowned by an inundation,
with a great part of his army. These things God suffers, to show that though he
love no false gods, yet he likes not that they who have no Religion, should
contemn any Religion.

But another reason that proves there is a God, is this; because all things in
nature are bounded in place and operation, beyond which they cannot pass, be
their apperites never so large; as the Sun, though it soften wax, it cannot
soften clay, because it is limited by the nature of the subjection which it
works. Indeed one thing is bounded to another, Prosp. lib. de provid. p. 181.
from the center to the highest heavens, 2 Esdras 4.14, 15. Therefore there
must be some principle who set these bounds, or else all nature by vastness of
desire, would be in an uprore and confusion, one thing striving to exceed
another: Claudian in 4 Consul. Honorii. 186. Arist. lib. 1. de anima. c. 2.
top. 1. p. 786. (...). Arist. lib. de mundo. top. 2. top. 2. p. 1572.
And therefore Anaxagoras said there was a thing called a Mind, which infinite
Spirit gives limits to all things in the world; this name he gave to God. And
Aristotle says, there is a certain infinite thing, which is the beginning of
all things, and contains all things. One called it a mind, the other nature,
i. such a Nature as does naturate all things else, and limits all things in
nature; therefore he calls God (...). Hom. in Him. Dion. Halic. Antiq. Romans lib.
2.
circumspection: And I conceive upon the same grounds the Greeks worshipped a
god called ( Jupiter (...)) Jupiter the limiter: And so did the Romans worship
(Jovem terminalem) the bound-setting god; all which shows, that God is the
bounder of nature, and that which boundeth nature, is God. And indeed if there
were not such a limiter as God is, man's appetite natural, sensitive and
intellective nature could never be satisfied? for all the labor of man is for
his mouth, Eccl. 6.7.
and yet the soul is not satisfied with good, why? because such a man looks
not in using the creature upon the chief good which is God: For the righteous
eats to the satisfying of his soul (because he makes Gods glory the end of
his eating) but the belly of the wicked wants true content: Nor could man's
sensitive appetite be ever satiated, Pro. 13.25.
not the eye with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, nor the heart by having
what it desires. Alexander hearing Democritus pretend more worlds, grieved
that he had not conquered one. Nor can our intellectual appetite, or our
desire of knowledge be satisfied in the search of things, since the place of
wisdom is not found either in height or depth, and that the son of Syrach
says, Job 28.14. Eccles. 24.21.
that he that eats of wisdom shall have the more hunger; for the more we
know, the more we see something we know not; so that to read much is a
weariness to the flesh, and that increases knowledge increases sorrow,
therefore there must be something above all natural science to satisfy this
desire, or such desires are given in vain.

Again, there must be a God, because there must be a cause of things, for
nothing can make, or beget it self, without something that was in actual
being before, which must be a self essence or being, and that is God, or
nothing, and of nothing comes nothing.


Mathe. The being of a Godhead being so evident and plain, how came Atheism,
or the denying of a God into the world?


Phila. By neglect of natural principles which manifests a godhead, to resist
which is not only foolish but impious. So Romans 1.21. when they knew God they
did glorify as God. 2. By setting wit above wisdom, and disputing against
principles, which may not be denied, though being prime truths they cannot so
easily be proved, no more then we can give reason why fire should burn rather
then water, though we know it does so, and he that will not believe it, because
one cannot prove it, should even be burnt to convince him. 3. By mistakes of
men, who writing against the heathen gods, have been thought to deny all
Godhead. So Diagoras rather denied the Athenian gods, than denied the true God.
So Theodorus said, that he was misunderstood, because he delivered his words
with the right hand, but his auditors took them with the left: Morn. c. 1. de
Relig.
And Protagoras rather voided the disputing of the question, then denied a God
to be.

I believe there have been as bad if not worse Atheists then they: As those
that fall into Antatheisme, making their belly their god, Phil. 3.19. or their
pleasures, Eurip.
2 Timothy 3.4. and some pretend there is neither God nor Devil, heaven nor hell;
like the Poets Cyclops, Arnob. lib. 8. cont. genti.
who will not leave their impudence til they be thunderstruck, or be transfixed
by the darts of the divine wisdom and vengeance.

Yet there are some closer Atheists, who say that policy first brought in
Religion. And this too many children have by rote, by reading Poetical
Tragedies, and some other books, and so suck in that while they are children,
which they ruminate on too much when they be older: As Euripides brings in one
Siphysus, relating that men being full of vices, the wiser sort were fain to
make Laws to bridle their exorbitancies, but yet could not suppress their
secret evils; at last a crafty man told them, the way was to put into the
peoples head that there was one called God, Lue. in Treg.
who heard, saw, and understood all things, This man was a close and cunning
Atheist; like Lucian who brings in a carping Cynick, and an Epicure, disputing
against Jupiter, as if he had no hand in it himself: And I believe there be
many who will not deny God in public, Tull. de Not. deor. l. 1. Sen. lib. 2.
not. Q. c. 24.
who yet are content among weak and witty men to consent to it. Some learned
Romans thought Religion but a witty invention to keep men in awe; and it may
well be said so of their Religion, and such as their Numa set up by the help of
the Nymph Aegeria. But these men understood nothing of the Jewish or Christian
Religion, set forth of God, and his Son, Jesus Christ: Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2.
c. 2.
And therefore as the Romans refused to receive Christ as God in open Senate in
the time of Tyberius, so God gave them up to worship Simon Magus a conjurer,
for a god, in the time of Claudius. Let no man therefore think Religion a
fiction, lest he think God also a figment.


Mathe. As there is a God, so I pray tell me is there no more but one.


Phila. If there be any God at all, he can be but one for these reasons. 1.
Because whatsoever is God, must be the chiefest good; from which word good, the
word God is derived. Now there cannot possibly be two chiefs or superlatives,
nor more then one superior; from whence the Great Turk takes his Axiom, one
God in heaven, and one Sultan upon earth; yea, the Pope would have but one
Catholic Bishop, and one Catholic King, which is but a tyrannical
usurpation: For God that is one above all, in heaven and earth, never gave any
such dignity to any, either in heaven or earth, but only to the Son, who is one
with the Father. 2. Whatsoever is God must be the first of all things. Now
there can be but one first, and so but one god; for what is first is but one.
Now nothing cannot be first, for then nothing must be second, and so
consequently no world, no creatures. But such seconds there are, and therefore
there must be a first thing sprung of it self, making all, but made of none,
no, not himself, i. not the subject matter of himself, and so framed of some
other being; but this one arises from himself, and can be resolved no farther
then into himself. 3. If there were more gods then one, then one must differ
from the other in some essential property, and so one God must have that which
the other has not, and so one or both are imperfect, and so there can be but
one God.



Mathe. Whether do we Christians worship this one true God?


Phila. Yes, we do. For we worship him that made the world by his word, and
does govern it by his wisdom, and preserves it by his providence, whose
glorious presence is far above all heavens, yet has his influence upon all
things here below, by his Vicegerent, Nature, whose power he inlargeth and
restrains at his pleasure; but a more rare influx upon man's soul, by
qualifying of it with rare gifts of Art and Science, but most divinely upon
souls refined from the drossie world, by the operation of his holy spirit
informing the mind with divine light, inspiring with good desires, encouraging
in good actions, preventing our doing evil, furthering us in doing good,
convincing us of sin, affrighting us for it.

Now this God we know to be a true God, because he is the same who has been
worshipped from the beginning by the wisest, holiest, and best knowing men;
yea, by the Jewish Nation, who had the greatest evidences to show of this true
God by his miracles, oracles, prophecies and promises, by which the very
heathen have been convinced, and became their proselytes.

2. Because the heathen gods have been forced to confess him the greatest: As
when King Thulis of Egypt asked Shor-apis their Oracle, Suidas.
who was the greatest, it answered God, Word, and Spirit. This is that Trinity
whom all true Christians worship in unity.

3. Because we find all other gods but counterfeits of this our true God, and
imperfect representations of his attributes, or divine properties. As their
Baal a lord, a counterfeit of this Lord of lords. Baal-Zephon, of our watching
Lord, that neither slumbers nor sleeps. So their Baal-peor, a counterfeit of
him who gives the power of generation. Baal-zebub a representation of him that
is God of Hosts and Armies; of all manner of flies, which for sin he sends to
infest the nations, and at his word are driven away. So Baal-berith, a
counterfeit of our God, who keeps Covenant with his people: For the Devil is
but Gods ape. God had sacrifice and altar, so had he. God had a Temple at
Jerusalem, he had another at Delos. God would have his Altar-fire always
burning, and Satan would have always his Vestall fire glowing. God had his
mercy Seat, so the Devil his Tripodas. So Apollo counterfeits Gods wisdom,
man's his power in battle: Diana his purity, Mercury his declarative word,
Jupiter his thundering voice, Saturn his peaceable providence, Venus his love,
Ceres and Bacchus his plentiful provision, Proserpine the spirit of Nature in
the earth, Neptune Gods power in the Ocean, Plato Gods power even in hell. All
which are but lame expressions of Gods properties by some seeming show, whereof
the Devil has drawn men from the true God; so that the heathens worship they
know not what, but we know what we worship, and that salvation is from our God,
who is infinite, almighty, invisible, inscrutable, the only wise and good God,
in whom, from whom, and by whom are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.


Mathe. Some are content to acknowledge a God, and one God, but yet only as one
person. Therefore are we bound to believe persons in the Godhead, or not?


Phila. You are bound to believe God as he reveals himself. Now he has
revealed himself to be a divine essence, subsisting in three persons, that is,
a Unity in Trinity.


Mathe. I pray first unfold the terms, and then prove God to be a Unity in
Trinity.


Phila. First for the terms, you must not look to find them in Scripture, yet
it disalloweth them not, for they express the sense of them. For 1. The
(essence) of God is expressed, Exodus 3.14. in that name (I am that I am) for
essence or being is that which is. 2. (Subsistence) signifies only the manner
of Being, as humane nature is man's essence or substance of man, and his person,
is his manner of subsisting in that nature. So 3. (Unity) signifies and shows
the divine nature cannot be divided, diversified, nor multiplied. 4. The word
(Trinity) shows the manner of the divine nature subsisting, which the
Scriptures deliver to us of God, as in the 1 of John 5.7. There be three that
bear record in heaven, Vbi unus ibi unitas, ubi tres ibi Trinitas.
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one: Where by
the (WORD) is meant the Son, who is so called also, John 1.1. to signify his
divine and spiritual generation, like a word expressed by the mind. So 5. The
word (Person) signifies to us that God is (in his subsistence or manner of
being) an intellectual substance, neither divided, nor communicated, nor
sustained, in or by any other, which is the property of a person. This word is
found, Heb. 1.3. where Christ the Word or Son of God, is called the engraven
image of Gods person.


Mathe. How came these words into use?


Phila. They were formed by the Doctors of the Church, for the more easy
confutation of heresy, by a shorter way of disputation and demonstration of
this mystery of the sacred Trinity, which in many words could not have been so
well molded into a form of dispute, without much trouble to the memory and the
understanding. As in all Arts there be proper terms, which include in them the
sum of the science in short words; and therefore we are not to stumble at
terms which serve to explain, or maintain holy mysteries; for whatsoever is
not against the truth, is for it.


Mathe. But how prove you that God is Unity in Trinity?


Phila. That God is a unity in himself, none can doubt who believes that God
is one, and that there is but one God, as is already proved: And that this
Godhead has a Trinity of persons in it self subsisting, we are to believe it
upon Scriptures, which do first intimate to us more persons in the Godhead then
one, as Genesis 1.1. which says, (Elohim bara) that is, Elohim plu. Bara sing.
if translated word for word (The Lords he created) to which answers John
1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God. And ver. 2. All things were made by him, that is, the Son; and yet Genesis
1.2. The spirit of God moved upon the waters; so that there were three in this
work, i. God the Father did it by the Son, through the Spirit. So Genesis 1.26.
God said, Let us make man, which argued a consultation of persons. So when God
appeared to Abraham in the plains of Mamre, Genesis 18.1. yet it was in three
persons, ver. 2. though Abraham speaks to them as one, saying (my Lord).

The Poets shadowed out this by three prime gods, Jupiter.

The Poets shadowed out this by three prime gods, Neptune.

The Poets shadowed out this by three prime gods, Pluto.


Mathe. But may they not be more then three persons?


Phila. No, because the Lord God never expressed himself by more then three, as
appears, first, By his commanding Moses to bless the people but thrice in the
name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.24. The Lord bless thee and keep thee, intimating the
protection and providence of the Father. 2. The Lord make his face to shine
upon thee, and be gracious to thee, i. in pardoning thy sin, by the gracious
redemption and favor of the Son, well expressed by St Paul, 2 Cor. 4.6.
calling it the light of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 3. The
Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace, i.
the joy of the Holy Ghost, and peace of conscience in gods promise, which the
Holy Ghost seals to us, Ephesians. 1.13. So the Seraphins pronounced God thrice,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Esa. 6.3. So we see in Christ's baptism, 1. The Father
speaking from heaven. 2. The spirit descending; and 3. The Son suscepting
baptism, Mat. 3.16. And our Savivour affirms but three persons, John 16.36.
saying, when the Comforter is come ( i. the Holy Ghost) whom I will send, i (I
the Son) who proceeds from the Father ( i. the first person).


Mathe. Is there any reason to prove this?


Phila. As much as any reasonable man can desire; and that is the impressions
of it upon his works and his gifts, and in the minds of men.

1. He has given three principles of all bodies, airie, watery, Chemists say,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
and earthy matter, and three kind of lives or souls, the vegetative or growing
life or soul to plants: The sensitive, with vegetation to bruits, the
rational, with both the former to men; but especially the Image of God in the
first man, argued the three persons immortality, wisdom, and freedom. So to
the rational soul three principal faculties, the Understanding, the Will,
and the power of acting. So Arts which are Gods gifts, some of them shows his
unity; as Geometry draws all lines from one point; and Arithmetic from a
unite draws all numbers; so Astronomy, all motions from the first mover; so
Music, a rare gift of God, arises from unison, and three concords and
discords, arguing a unity in Trinity.

2. But above all these three Arts by which we express our souls (which have
an impresse of the Deity) sets forth the Trinity, as they proceed one from the
other. For Grammar is the fountain of them by letters which makes words. Logic
of words frames sense, and Rhetoric by help of both, makes an oration. So
the Son is the word of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from them both;
and therefore the Cabalists said, that before God revealed himself in his
operations, he was like a dark solitary letter, Aleph tenebro^ sum.
of which we could make nothing. But now we know by his word and his works, not
only that he is, but what he is.

3. He has imprinted this Trinity in the minds of men, as well as the unity of
the Godhead: Which made some learned men say, Pythago. Trismegist. in Pimand.
Dial. 4
that all things are terminated in (THREE): Others, that one begat one, and by
reflecting on each other, begat a third: Not that these men did apprehend the
Trinity as we do by Scripture, but this argued them to have a confused
knowledge of it, as Caiaphas had of Christ's death, when he said, It was
necessary one man die for the people; Aquin. Non e ^^titia, sed ex officie.
so prophesying as he was high Priest that year; so these spoke by natural
instinct.

Another that may be urged to prove the three persons in the Godhead is, Bonum
diffusivum.
Because God being the chief good, is of a diffusive nature, and so must
communicate himself by some subsistency that is capable of the whole divine
essence, communicated everlastingly from one to the other; John 10.30.
therefore Christ says, I and my Father are one; that is, in the essence
communicated, not the personality: So he says, I am in the Father, John 14.10.
and the Father in me, that is, by mutual immanency in the same essence: So he
says, I came forth from the Father; that is first, By his divine and eternal
generation, and by his temporal mission into the world: John 16.28.
So he says, all that the Father has is mine, therefore I (said he) shall
take of mine and give it to you ( i. the holy Ghost.) John 16.15.
By which is understood the communication of the divine essence one to another,
and the communication of gifts of men. A similitude of this divine reflection
and procession, God gave in the first marriage. He made Adam one; then he
joined him to another made out of himself; of these two he produced a third,
i. children.

Beside, he makes all things but by a threefold virtue; his Power, Wisdom,
and Love, a representative of the three persons. Nor is there any more then
three principal efficient causes; from whom, by whom, and through whom a thing
is, Romans 11. And so all things are from the Father, by the Son, through the
Holy Ghost, who receives and gives a procession to things; so that there is
but one God the Father, 1 Cor. 8.6.
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, and we by him; and one Holy Spirit,
and we through him.


Mathe. But this is hard to conceive right, and dangerous to conceive wrong. I
desire a rule or two to direct me aright in the conceiving hereof.


Phila. 1. That you are to believe the divine essence to be one, yet the
persons to be three, and every person to be God and Lord, and yet but one God,
because but one essence, as there is but one humane nature, though diverse
persons therein.

2. That these persons are not before one another in time, but in order, nor
greater then another, but coequall.

3. That these three persons communicate the divine essence one to another, but
not their personality; for the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father;
(...), not (...).
yet Esa. 9.6. the Son is called the everlasting Father, but not in regard of
his person, but his essence which is all one with the Father.

4. That in those works of the Trinity which are wrought toward us, though one
person be entitled to it more then others, yet all of them has an hand
therein, though one more especially. As the Father creates, yet so as by the
Son through the Spirit. The Son redeemeth, yet so, as sent from the Father, and
conceived by the holy Spirit. The holy Spirit sanctifies, yet so, as through
the Father by the Son, breathing his holy graces into us.

5. That the Father is the fountain of the personality, but not of the essence,
for therein they be coeternall.

6. They all flow from one and the same essence, as the light of the Moon, and
that of the air is from one Sun, and as three rivers from one fountain.

7. That they have a mutual emanency one in the other, and an eternal emanency
one from the other; for they be each in each; Aug. de Trin.
Christ is in the Father, and the Father in him, and the holy Spirit in both;
so they be all in each: For the Son is in the bosom of the Father, and the
Father in the Image of the Son, the holy Spirit in the breath of each, and they
both in his operations. 3. All in each, for one is possessed of the other. 4.
All in all, the whole essence being in every person: And yet 5. But one in all
because all three are but one God. And take heed of thinking therefore 1. That
there is no God. 2. That there be no persons in the God, but only relations,
Socin. Patrisp.
offices or dispensations. For so we may count the Father to suffer, not the
Son, for our redemption. 3. That they be only like one another in substance,
Arri. Eunom. Tritheit.
but not of the same substance, or of an unlike substance, but of one and the
same substance. And take heed of thinking they be three gods, for there is but
one God in essence, though three persons in subsistence; one God in being,
though three persons in the manner of that being. Nor may you like the
Mahometans, acknowledge one God without persons; or like the Indians, deny the
Son of God, Mahom. Indians.
because then they say God must have a wife. These people only understand
carnal generation, not spiritual; and in what they know naturally, therein
they abuse themselves, Jude ver. 10.
and speak evil of what they know not: For they perceive not how the soul
begets children, namely, the thoughts and words without female conjunction.
This high knowledge of God should teach us to admire him whom we cannot
comprehend, and therefore to serve him in faith, fear, and reverence, Psalm.
2.11. especially in his Temple and service; Psalm. 138.
and so say with Job, O Lord, what I know not do thou teach me, so that in thy
knowledge I may find felicity. We must not think this knowledge to be
superfluous, since it is life eternal to have it, John 17.3. Mat. 16.18.
and that Christ so much approved St Peter for acknowledging it. I know all men
cannot apprehend this alike; yet if we desire that Christ would show us the
Father, John 14.8. and that we may have his Spirit, he will not deny it to him
that asks him; especially if we lament for the loss of the excellent
knowledge, no doubt he will reveal so much of it to us, as shall acquire
eternal life.


Mathe. What means has God given us to know him by?


Phila. Two means; his Works and his Words. His Works, Natura, naturans, and
naturata.
and the book of Nature, naturated by the power of God. His Word is the book of
Nature naturating, i. of God himself, without which revelation man cannot
apprehend God at all, or very darkly. The reason whereof is, 1. Because Adam
seeking curious knowledge beyond the light which God gave him in nature, he
lost that light of God which by nature he had, and despoiled himself of that
image and character of God, which God had impressed upon him, and so fell into
false conceptions of God in his generations, and by himself into a more
obscure apprehension of him in his time. 2. This dark knowledge of God in man,
arises from the depravation of his affections, which desires to know God
sensibly, as men behold Princes, which cannot be in this world, 1 Cor. 15.
no more then flesh and blood can inherit heaven till it be mortified by death,
and fermented in the grave, and refined at the resurrection. Moses desire was
exuberant to see Gods glory in visible appearance: For though God was pleased
to be represented by Angels in shapes of men in the Old Testament, yet he has
no shape; For to what will ye liken me says God? 3. Men being not read in
Scriptures, are oftentimes driven (by some accidents in the world, and change
of times, and strange events above or beside reason) to think that either there
is no God, or else that God is not just. Psalm. 37.36. Psalm. 73.1, 2, 3. Wisd.
1.1, 2.
4. Because we find all things fall alike to all, and a natural succession of
things to be as they were always; so they think we are all born at adventure,
and all things come by nature or fortune. 5. It comes by the devils craft,
deluding men with vanity, and making them not to think of God, and so bold to
perpetrate horrible sins, through blindness and hardness of heart, whereas if
they did but consider Gods ways and footsteps in Scripture, in making all
things, and in disposing them to their several ends and orders; the rare
knowledge given to man above other creatures; the peace of his mind when he
does well; the terrors of his conscience in doing ill; the impression and stamp
of Elohim upon his Magistrates, whom he calls Gods; the strange vengeance
following wicked men, to them whom temporal Judges either do not, or cannot
punish. Besides, prodigious signs in heaven of future calamities: So to see
monstrous births, terrible earthquakes, which though they have natural and
second causes, yet why they are not always, or oftener, or not at all, or in
this place more then that, must needs be the rule of some superior power. But
yet nothing of all these leads us to the knowledge of God, like the Scripture.


Mathe. Why so?


Phila. Because the Scriptures are the word of the true God, of whom, nothing
can testify better then his own word and truth; therefore Christ says, Search
the Scriptures for they testify of me. Secondly, because they clearly set
forth God in his nature, attributes and works.


Mathe. How prove you the Scripture to be the Word of the true God?


Phila. Because it alone does treat primarily of that God who is Trinity in
Unity, three persons in one Godhead, and of their relations one toward
another, and their operations in and toward man. 2. Because it is the most
ancient truth, as the true God is the ancient of days. Now what is most
ancient and first is true. Moses writings are most ancient, upon which the rest
of the Bible is a comment, and the New Testament is a perfect complement, and
is therefore called grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ, John 1.17.
because he brought to man by the Gospel, the love and favor of God; and
brought the truth prophesied into fact and performance. But this Moses is the
ancientest writer, Eupolem. Masius.
whom some call Musaeus; some Trismegistus; as some have thought, the Egyptian
Serapis to be a monument of Joseph. Sure enough he was the oldest writer of
divine Revelation, if not of any other. He lived in the time of Cecrops King of
Athens. Aug.
The oldest writing the Greeks have, is the wars of Troy, which fell out in the
time of Isreal's Judges, which was three hundred years after Meses. Acts 7.27.
It is true, the Scripture says he was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians; but their learning consisted rather in the hieroglyphick emblems,
then in letters: And though there were Magicians and wise men among them before
Joseph's time, Psalm. 105.21.
Genesis 41.8. yet they are said to learn wisdom of Joseph; and might also of
the Patriarchs being in Egypt four hundred years, who had by tradition the
sciences from Sheth; which afterward might be called the learning of the
Egyptians, who at that time had the Israelites in bondage, and so took the
name of learning to themselves. But these books of Moses are most clearly
divine and authentic, declaring an history from the Creation, for two thousand
years forward, with excellent revelation of divine oracles, which teach men to
know the true God. 3. They be the word of God, because it treats of those
works which are proper only to God, and of which none can give evidence but the
spirit of God, and such as are inspired therewith. As of the creation of the
world, the preservation and destruction of it, the restoration of it again;
the qualifying of the Church with divine Oracles, and religious services,
typical and spiritual, moral, ceremonial, judicial, honoring it with
unparalleld miracles, declaring man's eternal redemption, and by prophecies, of
the state of the Church to the worlds end.


Mathe. This proof being taken only from Scripture, will not suffice some, who
believe them not for their own sakes.


Phila. It is true; such therefore may be confirmed of the truth of them from
profane writers, who testify of their truth and antiquity, if they had rather
believe such then the Scriptures themselves, the Fathers or Ecclesiastic
writers. For many profane Authors attest what is written in them: as Homer,
and Plato, and others, Homer. Plato. Ovid. Hieron. Egypt. Berosus. Epolemus.
Plut. in l. ratio brutorum. Vid Eusebius. l. 9. c. 34. de prop. Evangel. Lactan.
l. 4. c. 6.
speak of the Creation; others of the long lives of the Patriarchs (as Ephorus
and Alexander the historian) before the flood; others of the drowning of the
world; others of the Tower of Babel, as Alydenus; so Damascenus of Abraham's
travels; Plutarch of Noah's Dove; so Pliny of Moses miracles; Diodorus Siculus
of Moses; and Strabo with much reverence, as well as Dionys. Longinus. The
Sybils prophesied of man's Redeemer. Suetonius in the life of Nero, speaks of
Christ's miracles; and Pliny of the wise men's star; Macrobius of Herod's
massacring the infants of Bethelem.


Mathe. All this proves only the historical part to be true.


Phila. If we believe the history to be a divine truth, we cannot well doubt of
the doctrinall part being interserted one with another, and both of them
equally attested by divine miracles, both of Moses, the Prophets, and Christ
and his Apostles, which miracles being from the divine power, would never have
been produced to attest false doctrines in Scriptures; therefore the
Scriptures, in doctrine, as well as in history, is the word of God. But beside
the rare modification of them shows them no less: For though they transcend
reason, yet they deliver nothing contrary to right and pure reason, nor any
thing contrary in nature, though things above nature. Again, the doctrinal part
of them is agreeable to the nature of God is who Goodness, Righteousness, Love
and Truth, and Holiness; yea, they discover to man all his secret corruptions,
which is the property only of God to do; nor does it in any thing contradict it
self (being rightly understood) though written by diverse men in diverse ages;
and therefore surely were indicted by that one eternal Spirit, who is Unity in
Verity, as well as Unity in Trinity. Farther, it shows man a way to be saved
from sin and damnation, without annihilating the Justice of God, or making his
mercy degenerate into fond pity for want of satisfaction to his justice; and
this surpasses the wisdom of Angels and men; yea, the effects of it are
divine, for it brings rest to a troubled mind, which no book else can do; and
satisfies man's knowledge in things worthy of faith, and affords as much and
more reason why we should believe them, then any book beside: Therefore the
wisest and soberest men of all ages, have consented to it, and thousands of
godly Martyrs have sealed it with their pious lives and constant deaths. Vid.
Martyrol.



Mathe. I pray give me some proof, that the Scriptures have as much reason,
and more to be believed, then other writings.


Phila. 1. Because we can find no just exception against the Writers, in regard
of their abilities, or their integrities; and upon the same ground we believe
all other Historiographers. But if you say you know not whether those are the
Authors of the books, that are entitled to them, as Moses and Paul, I say you
have as much reason to believe that, as that any ancient writer is the Author
of his own book. 2. We may rather, and ought rather to believe them then
others; not only because of the excellency of their matter, as I said before,
but also because the Authors of them had no self interest in writing these
books, as either of gain or glory, favor, or the friendship of men; nay, they
were content with labor and travel, poverty and persecutions; scorns and
infamy; misery and death: Therefore certainly they be the Word of God, Cyril.
10.
and so to be believed. To call the Authors of them into question, were to
outdo Julian the Apostate, who would not deny that; Luc. Philo.
and scoffing Lucian, who did not deny Paul to be the Author of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians, twelfth chapter, though he scoffs at his professed
ecstasy. Indeed, they may challenge as much belief of their authors in this
point, as any writing, both because they have been so successively delivered,
continually so mentioned, and generally so acknowledged by all parties.


Mathe. Does God declare himself in all the books of Scripture alike.


Phila. No, but in some more historically, as in the five books of Moses: In
some more my stically, as in the Prophets: In some more clearly as in the New
Testament; but in all instructively both for faith and manners perfectly and
sufficiently.


Mathe. Why are some called Canonical, and some Apocryphal books?


Phila. They are called Canonical, which are the rule of faith, and manners,
namely, for us to believe and practice, and they are numbered by the Church to
begin with Genesis, and to end with the Prophet Malachy, for the Old Testament:
And the New Testament begins with St Matthew, and ends with the Revelation of
St John. And all these are the subject of our faith, but not all for our
practice.


Mathe. Why so?


Phila. Because many precepts in it are temporal, as the Ceremonial Law; some
for the Jews particular state only, as the Judicial Laws; the equity whereof
we may observe, though not according to the letter, as we are bound to observe
the charity, which is the end of them, though not the exact severity. So many
holy men had dispensation in those times, which is not competent with us;
Abraham to make his half sister his wife; Jacob to have many wives, which is
not competent with other ages, Mal. 2.15.
and therefore reproved by the Prophet. So neither are those actions imitable,
which many were agitated to by zeal and fervor of spirit, for Gods cause; as
that of Moses, to excite one brother to slay another; nor that of Phineas in
transferring Zimri and Cosbi; for what actions are exorbitant from common Law,
are not to be made exemplar.


Mathe. What may we judge of those that are called Apocryphal books?


Ph. We are to think them as helps to understand Scripture in many places,
especially Solomon, Wisd. and Eccl. Judith, Tobie, Esdras, Mac.
and to know the State of the Jews before the Prophet Malachies time in their
captivity, and after it also. And so neither to contemn them, nor yet to build
our faith upon all things there written (as the Church of Rome injoineth people
to do under penalty of a curse) as we are to believe the Canonical Scriptures;
Conc. Trid.
but to try what analogy they hold with truth, and so make use of them, as in
Heb. 11.35. takes an instance of faith from the mother of seven sons, 2 Machab.
7.7.


Mathe. Some make doubt of the Scriptures Canonicalness, because they say there
be more books in the world then we have inserted in our Bibles, and all that we
have in our account Canonical are not thought to be so.


Phila. You need not trouble your self with that, but rather make an holy use
of that we have by building our selves up in our holy faith, and thank God that
he has reserved for us by his Church, a copy of sacred writ, sufficient for
our salvation, which is written that we may believe, and the rest lost or left
out, John 21.25.
that we may not look after more then is necessary. The Jews reckoned but 22
books of the old Testament, we find more, Joseph. cent. Appion. Vid. Council.
Lao. de lib. Canon. Magd. cent. 4. fol. 838. c. 4.
yet they contained as much as we have; but their compiling differed from ours.
And these were consigned by Ezra the scribe, after the return from Babylon in
the time of Hagge, Zachary, and Malachy, all in Hebrew: Which tongue though it
be a good sign of Canonical Scripture, yet it is not the only sign (for many
of the Apocryphal books were so written at first, as Ecclesiasticus seems to
be by the Preface a book of great worth, and next sure to the Wisdom of
Solomon: So Tobit and the fourth of Esdras) but rather the consignation of the
Jewish Church, and their continual receipt of them for such. Atha. in Synop.
So some write of more Psalms of David then 150. but if we should admit of
more, I fear it would encourage many self conceited men to make Psalms too,
under pretense that they had the spirit of God as well as David; as did some in
the Council of Laodicea, Conc. Lao. ut supra. c. 59.
and urged for it, Joel 2. your sons and daughters shall prophecy; which
Council excludes, or at least omits, the Epistle to the Colossians, and the
Apocalypse; yet it reckons 14 Epistles of St Paul's, of which that to the
Colossians must be one, or else there is but 13. Kirstonius in Arab. notes on
the Evangel. Calv. vid. Bod. method hist. c. 7.
And why the Apocalypse was left out, it may be was because more lately written
and divulged; except the Council were of their minds, who reckoned it
Apocrypha; or theirs who slighted it, as Ambrese did Persius the Satyrist
because of its obscurity. We read also of the Gospel of St Thomas and St
Bartholomew; all which is nothing to us so long as we know that our old
Testament, and the Jews, agree together still, and are the same they were in
the time of Christ: And for the New Testament we have those that have been
generally received as Orthodoxall by the Church, and for 1300 years together,
consigned as Canonical by the Councils, as Nice, Laodicea, and Carthage.


Mathe. But whether have not the Jews corrupted the old Testament?


Phila. 1. Aug.
They would not certainly out of envy to the Gentiles, rob their own posterity
of the truth. Philo.
Beside, they held it as a sin inexpiable so to do, Polanus leb. 1. cap. 37.
and would die an hundred deaths rather then change one jot of them. They know
also that the world was created for the Scriptures sake, and therefore the
world would be turned to a chaos, ere they should be altered; and so they were
faithful trustees, Romans 3.2. But

2. They could not do it; for there was so many Copies dispersed, by reason of
their dispersion over the world, that it was impossible to corrupt it. Bellarm.
Beside, certainly God would not suffer that to be corrupted, by which he meant
to save the world; and therefore Christ said, Luke 16.17.
that not one iota should perish till heaven and earth passed away, Mat. 5.18.
And

3. They did not; for then they would, above all other places, expunged, or
altered those that related to Christ; as Esa. 7. ver. 14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, Gnalemah Bethulah.
not a young woman; for that had been no wonder, nor worth the world (Behold.)
So Esa. 9.6. To us a child is born, and a Son is given, called Wonderful, etc.
Nor did they deface his passion, though they deformed him, foreprophecied so
clearly, Esa. 53. Bellarm.
Which words in their own language do more forcibly convince the Jews, then
the Vulgar Latin does; as in Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, Nesheku Bar.
i. embrace Christ, not Discipline: And therefore certainly the Old Testament
was not corrupted by the Jews.

4. Our Savior never charged them with corrupting the Text, but only with
misunderstanding, or mis-interpreting; nor any of the Fathers in their writing
against them, Just. Mar.
except one, for wronging the Septuagints translation: So that it is void of
corruption, however in the reading there may be some variation, yet no
deprvation of the Copy.


Mathe. But methinks they deliver things impossible, and some things
contradictory, and some things in them seem doubtful, in regard of difference
of text and margent in the old Testament, and diversity of readings in the new.


Phila. Not things impossible to him whose word it is, who to his works
requires our faith, more then our understandings, else his works did not exceed
magitians. 2. Nor is there any contradictions in them, if you observe the rule
of contradictions, which must be a assertion of the same thing at the same
time, according to the same part, notion or apprehension. You must know
therefore that there is a vast difference between Scriptures and other books:
For they do not omit somethings out of mis-knowledge, as other books do, nor at
all contradict themselves; but sometimes things are omitted for mystery sake;
as Moses, a most accurate describer of Genealogies, leaves out the Father and
Mother of Melchisedeck, that he might be a type of Christ to Abraham, and all
others. For Christ considered simply as God, had no mother, and simply as man
he had no father; not that Melchisedeck had no generation, though not in the
Genealogy. Heb. 7.3. (...). Vid Arab. caten. c. 31. fol. 67 etc. 30. fol. 66.
at a.
For we may find in some Eastern writings, that he was the son of Heraclim, the
son of Phaleg, the son of Eber. So sometime that is set before, which is done
afterward to stir up our diligence to search, as 1 Samuel 16.21. Saul
entertaineth David, and loves him, and chap. 17.55. Saul enquireth whose son
he is. So there is great difference between Moses Genealogy from Shem to
Abraham, and of Lukes from Abraham to Shem, in which we find two Nachors, Genesis
11.
and two Canaans, Luke 2.34, etc. So Heber to be the son of Nachor, whom Moses
sets down for the son of Selah, which differences may be reconciled by
comparing the Hebrews account with the Grecists or Greek Jews, who very
likely have made the mistake. So by the Genealogy of Matthew, Jacob is Joseph's
father; and by St Luke, Heli is his father; but Jacob was his natural father,
and Heli his father in law, Mat. 1. Luke 2.
by having Mary to his wife. The doctrine of Scriptures also seems to vary, but
does not, and is reconciled by distinguishing, as St Paul says, faith only
justifies; and St James says, works justify, that is faith only justifies
by applying Christ's merits to the soul, but faith alone justifies no man's
christian profession, but that is justified by works in the sight of men, and
faith it self is also approved by them. These differences do vindicate the
Scripture from any politic or crafty design, that the authors had to impose
upon men a sounder belief by continuing all circumstances most precisely
without any appearing difference. 3. R. Moses, B. Maimon.
As for any diversities of readings in the Text and Margent of the Old
Testament, there be ways and books of directions enough to reconcile them, the
marginall notes being put down by the members of their great Synagogue,
Manasseh B. Israel, his Conciliator vet. Testam. R. Isaac, Jacob, and Elias
Levits, a modern Jew.
who made the consignment of the Canonical books, such as was Daniel, Ezra,
Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi, and that not because the Text was doubtful, but
for some mystery.


Mathe. But we find diverse books rejected by some Churches.


Phila. If they rejected them upon reason, no doubt other Churches found as
great reason to receive and hold them, and I know not why one reason should not
prevail with you to hold them, as well as the other to doubt of them. I know
Ecclesiastes is condemned by some, as a book maintaining Epicurisme; but it is
rather Solomon's recantations in the beginning, crying down all for vanity; and
in the end, concluding the sum of man's duty. Others takes the Canticles for a
love-ditty, made to Pharaohs daughter; but many of the expressions of it are
not competible with womanhood nor beauty, Cant. 7.4. It is rather a spiritual
song, full of Antiphona's, and Responsories, betwixt Christ and his and his
Church. Rab. Abr. Aben Ezra. in cant. cap. 1.
The Jews that best knew their own Canon, say, that it is abominable to think
that this book treats of venereall matters. Indeed it is the rarest and most
excellent, not only of many which Solomon made (to whit) as some say 1005. but
also the best of any other in sacred writ, because it contains in it doctrine
of all sorts. Porphyr.
So some say the Prophecy of Daniel is but an history written after the things
there written, were done (namely) in the time of Antiochus, but indeed the book
was delivered to King Alexander by Iaddus the high Priest, 150. years before
that time. Others refuse the Epistle to the Hebrews, because it has not the
name of the author set to it: They may as well reject the Book of Judges and
Ruth. But this Epistle was always received in the Greek Church; as for the
Latin Church it makes too bold with Scripture to put in or to dash out of it
at her pleasure. So some have questioned the Epistle of St James, and Peter's
second Epistle, and John's third Epistle; yet upon debate they have been
received, and therefore now the less to be doubted.


Mathe. But some regard Scripture, not to be the word of God, the more for the
Canon: John 1.1. 1 John 1.1. John 6.63.
For they say the Word of God is God himself; and that Christ the Son of God
is the Word, and that Gods word is Spirit and life, not the letter; for the
letter kills.


Phila. You may easily answer these thus. Ask them from whence have they these
arguments against the written Word, but in the written Word; If they allow not
the written Word, from whence they have these to be the word of God, their
arguments against the written Word are nothing. If they do allow it so to be,
then they make God to fight against himself. We know that a word of God there
is, that may be called himself; As 1. The Word essential in the divine mind;
Genesis 1.
as when God said, i. the Trinity said or determined, Let us make man: This
word cannot be any thing but God, nor divided from God, no more then thoughts
can be from our minds. 2. Hence is the Word personal; and so Christ is the
word begotten before all worlds, by whom the world and all things were made,
and he is called God. 3. Hence is the Word prophorical, or enuntiative, which
God gives by his spirit diverse ways to men; as by visions, dreams,
inspiration, and by an audible voice, this is not called properly God, though
the fountain of it, the holy Spirit, be God.

The first of these words is immanent, and consultative. The second is emanent
and generative. The third is proceedent and communicative, and therefore
communicates Gods will declaratively to certain men who spoke and wrote as
they were inspired by that divine spirit, whose writing the Scripture is, and
is as improperly called God, as God may be called the Bible. The fourth is the
word operative, or efficacious, Gods spiritual benediction of it to us. But
these men must pretend to some hidden way to make the world wonder a while, and
at last to smile at their simplicity, who are not content to hear God speak in
his word, but must turn the word into God himself, and so make him or it a
kind of Idol.


Mathe. But men doubt it, because their translations are differing.


Phila. Either the Scriptures must be translated, or else are never like to be
known to the world abroad. 2. They must be translated as every language will
bear, or else they will not be well understood. Vid. Preface to Ecclus.
Now being so done by the Church, they must not be suspected by the children,
that their mother the Church would put poison in their milk, or else they must
try by learning the first language, Hierom. in lib. cont. Helvid. Aug. lib. 15.
de Civitate Dei. cap. 13.
whether it so or no; and in the mean time receive them thankfully as they be
and as doubts arise, inquire for satisfaction: And if this rule be not kept, we
shall believe either many, or not any, and be of many religions, or of none.
Truly it is a lamentable case that children should suspect parents (and more
for the Church to give them cause to suspect) her: Deuteronomy. 17.
For God commands the Jews to sit down silent upon the definitive sentence of
the Priests, and no doubt so must we upon the Churches, unless we mean to
believe our selves more then either Church or Scriptures. The variety in
translation, makes no considerable difference in the sense; but like descant in
Music, makes the ground plain note seem more grave and full, or like the
variation of the compass, makes the Pilot more studious to steer his course.


Mathe. Of what antiquity is the translation among us Christians.


Phila. Long before printing. Bed. lib. 1. hist. cap. 1.
Forbid tells us it was in five languages of the Britains. And Vphila Bishop
of the Goths, translated it for his people. Such Copies were among the
Armenians, Russians, Socrat. lib. 4. c. 33. Eccius cap. de miss. Lati. Agrip.
de vanit. scientiarum
Ethiopians, Dalmatians, and Muscovites. And these translations were allowed by
the Nicen Synods decree, that no Christian might want a Bible in his house. So
Chrysostom exhorts people of his time, Hom. 9. in Epist. Colos. and rightly
calls them the physic for the soul. And therefore we were better to lay out
money, then want health, and sell our cloak then want a Bible, and have as good
opinion of the Churches translation, as of a Physicians prescription, or an
Apothecaries composition. In this case we must believe our selves, or some body
else, and why not the Church thy mother, and thy nurse. It is a great judgment
of God upon men, when they suspect the learned (whose lips preserve knowledge)
and believe the ignorant, and so the blind leads the blind. I know some say the
Apostles were ignorant men; so they were at first, but after Christ and the
Spirit had taught, I think they were the most learned men in the world. In vain
do men therefore preserve idiots before him to whom God has given the tongue
of the learned; or to suspect antiquity, and trust novelty, and love to hear no
more then they know already, and so bring the Scriptures into question, the
Churches doctrine into suspicion, and the true knowledge of God to be
disregarded. For we have little reason to mistrust the Churches translation,
except she be notoriously proved to be a deceiver, and a patroness of
adulterous faith, or maintain opinions contrary to the truth, of which the
Church of Rome was guilty, and from which the Protestant Church is refined, of
whose fidelity if we now doubt, we must either fall to Atheism, or back
Papisme, or be overrun with Barbarism.


Mathe. But how shall we find the sense of Scripture?


Phila. If you mean in things necessary to faith and manners, Esa.
their sense is plain to an ordinary capacity, as was prophesied. If you mean
the sense of difficult places, there if we use diligence, and yet fall into
error, there is no danger in it, because it is not necessary, and therefore he
that erreth, and he that erreth not, may both be saved, holding the points
necessary to faith and fact. If men therefore would look upon Scripture, not as
the tree of knowledge with the eye of curiosity, but as the Tree of Life,
affording all things necessary to their salvation, John 15.26.
the saving sense would soon be found; especially if men when they read would
pray for the spirit, who can best explain his own writing; Mat. 11.25.
for they are indeed spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.12. So if they would lay
by carnal thoughts and self opinion, and receive it with meekness, as a
little child, or a new born babe purged from the corruption of our natural
birth by repentance, and preparedness to believe the Gospel, for no other end
then for gods glory, and one souls happiness, not desiring so much to
increase, as to better conscience.


Mathe. But if I doubt of thesense, who shall be judge?


Phila. If the Scripture be a perfect rule to judge, there needs no other judge
of it; And if it be not a perfect rule, who can one trust to judge in matters
of faith, having no perfect rule to judge by. The sense therefore is found by
analogy, and lying parallel with other parts of Scripture, and with those
axioms collected therefrom, and generally agreed upon. Therefore if any sense
that I gather from it, run contrary to the Lords Prayer in matter of devotion,
or to the Commandments, in matter of action, or to the Creed in matter of
faith, I may suspect it; so if that sense cross any other place of Scripture
evidently, that sense may justly be thought to be adulterate: Surely S. Paul
aimed at some such thing, when he bad Timothy hold fast the form of sound
words, which if men do, they may hold both peace and truth. For as a natural
man finds out a truth by reason, so does a Christian find out saving Truth,
true Religion, and a true Church by the Scripture, which is the perfect rule
for that purpose, and so it may be a judge of those things now, Romans
as well as it shall be at the last day; and as well as man's reason nature or
by art may be a rational, though not a personal judge of other things.


Mathe. What need have we then of Preachers?


Phila. 1. To remember people of what they have been taught. 2. Heb. 2.1. 2
Pet. 1.13.
To stir them up to do what they have not practiced. 3. To confirm and
establish them in what they have believed, Acts 8.14. and cap. 14.21, 22. 4. To
convert those that are not converted. 5. To edify and build them up farther in
the knowledge of God, and Jesus. Christ, Acts 20.32. 6. To explain difficult
places of Scripture, 7. To confute the adversary to truth. Isa. 54.13.
For though it be prophesied they shall be all taught of God, which, John 6.45.
Christ makes good and expounds it, ver. 46. not that any one has seen the
Father, that is, immediately taught of the Father, but by that more clear
medium, the Son of God and his Ministers, which the world never knew before,
which ministry must stand to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.
till the mystery of God be finished, and the number of the elect be
accomplished. It is a great presumption for men to think themselves above
Ordinances: They may be in higher forms of knowledge, and holy experience, then
some other Christians, but so long as they are in Christ's school, no doubt but
there will be something to be learned, Ephesians. 4 13.
whether they be scholars or masters, till we come to the measure of the
stature of Christ.


Mathe. How do the Scriptures set forth God to us?


Phila. By his attributes or qualifications, which both the nature of the
Godhead, and natural reason will acknowledge to be in him, whereby it
apprehends him; for God being infinite cannot be fully apprehended nor defined
by us; but his nature is known by way of eminence; as whatsoever good I find in
the creature, I attribute the same to God in the highest degree. 2. By way of
negation, and so whatsoever deficiency I find in the Creature, I deny any jot
of it to be in God. 3. By causation, because when I see the creatures, I cannot
conceive they made themselves, but were caused by some being far above
themselves; and thus even natural men are led unto God. But the Scriptures set
him out more clearly to us in his essence, and his attributes.

1. That he is an essence most highly perfect, therefore called Jehovah, I am
that I am, signifying that he is Being in himself, of himself, Exodus 3.14.
and by himself, and so is the principle of all beings, in whom all things
live, move, and have being, and so he is justly called Essence. And that this
essence subsisteth in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who in
heaven bear record to the Scriptures truth. 1 John 5.7.
And in regard of this plurality of persons, God is called Elohim, Lords.

2. The Scripture sets him forth to us by diverse attributes, by which we have a
clearer apprehension of him to our capacity, which cannot in any one word
apprehend his nature. Now some of these we find in the creatures, others not;
for some of them cannot be communicated to any but himself.


Mathe. Which are his incommunicable attributes, and what use can we make of
them?


Phila. The first is simplicity of essence, by which we know he is uncompounded
without parts, matter or form. 1 Timothy 1.7.
The second is his infiniteness without measure, quantity, Psalm. 145.3.
or determination of time and place, or quantity, virtue, power. 3. He is
eternal without beginning of time past, or end in respect of time to come. 4.
1 Samuel 13.23.
He is immutable without alteration or corruption, change or shadow of change.
Jer. 23.28.
5. He is unmeasurable without circumscription of place, without increase or
decrease, within and without every place, 1 Kin. 8.27.


Mathe. Of what use are these to us?


Phila. 1. If God be purely simple, then we know thereby that God is but one,
and full of all perfection; that he is true and sincere in his promises, nor
can deceive any; from which consideration arises the certainty of our
salvation. It teaches us also to avoid hypocrifie, and embrace sincerity,
oneness, and singleness of heart and soul, and to strive to be like God,
only without mixture of sin in our affections. 2. If he be infinite, then to
admire his greatness and his goodness, his love and his mercy, and to love
him infinitely for it. By his eternity I have assurance of an election before
the world, and everlasting life after it, in him who has neither beginning nor
end. His immutability calls to us for unchangeablenesse in our faith, hope, and
charity, by any crosses or afflictions which are all sent from God that is
immutable in his love and promises. So his immensity and ubiquity ought to
confirm us in his providence, because he is a God not only near, but a God also
afar off, and to avoid sin because we are always in his sight, especially
hypocrisy, because he is within us, as well as without us, and also to fly
superstitious worshipping of Saints or Angels, since he himself is near to all
that call upon him.


Mathe. Which are his incommunicable attributes?


Phila. Those whose shadows we find in our selves, as life, wisdom, will and
power, which are to be conceived in God, absolutely, abstractively and
essentially, as that he is life it self, wisdom, freedom, and power it
self; not as they are in us finitely, imperfectly and mutably, but they are
spoke of God for our capacity sake, without which terms we can understand
nothing of God.


Mathe. Why? what do we know of God hereby?


Phila. 1. By life we understand Gods most simple and infinite activity, by
which he does please to act himself and all things else. And this argues him
to differ transcendently from all fained gods, and creatures, which have their
life only by his communication of life to them, yet not as the eternal Son who
has life from the Father by immanency in him, and by emanation from him, but
by participation, John 5.26. John 1.4.
not of himself, but of some virtue from himself. Therefore as God the Father
has life in himself, so has he given the Son to have life in himself, and
this life is the light of men, and through the energie of the spirit, quickneth
all things that has life: For as God made the Sun to be the center of light
natural, so he has ordained Christ to be the center of life natural in the
creation, and also the center of spiritual life in regeneration, by which we
come to be partakers of the divine nature, and so finally of life eternally. 2.
By his wisdom we understand, and is signified unto us, that God knows and
understands all things infinitely, and most simply, plainly and distinctly at
once, not successively, or discoursively, and therefore praescience and
foreknowledge, and remembrance, is improperly attributed to God, saving for our
understanding. This attribute teaches us that all wisdom in the creature,
comes from God; Jam.
not to fear any troubles in the world, raised by Satan, or wicked men, but
resolve to endure with patience, because they are permitted by the wise God for
ends best known to himself: for he knows of them, sees and smiles at the
madness of men, who like foolish children desire of their fathers, knives and
daggers, which having got, they wound others, and themselves worst. 3. By Gods
will, is signified Gods infinite free approbation, or disallowance of what he
wisely knows, to be approved or disallowed; so that he neither begins to will
what once he would not, nor can be hindered to do what he will. Now this will
has diverse terms in Scripture, according to the diverse objects of it. As 1.
Truth, because he wills constantly what he wills, Romans 3.4. So goodness,
because he is willing and propense to do good to his creature. So Love, because
he is willing to approve what is good, and to be well pleased with it. So
hatred, because he is not willing to allow evil, but is most willing to punish
it, because he does detest it. So his justice, because he is infinitely willing
to do right, as to reward the good, and punish the evil. So his mercy, because
he is infinitely willing and ready to pity the miserable, Jer. 33.11. So his
wrath, because he is inclinable in his will to punish sinners. So his purity
shows his will is bent to love holiness, but to hate all filthiness both of
flesh and spirit. 4. His power shows that he is infinitely endowed with
efficacious faculty to do whatsoever he will; for there is no limit to his
power but his will. Therefore we cannot doubt of his promise, or despair in
adversity, Psalm.
since his will is to help, and his power follows his will.


Mathe. How may we consider of God before the world in which he revealed
himself to man?


Phila. God before the world lay hid both in his essence and subsistence, yet
being a Trinity coessentiall in Unity, with afflux, but determined in time to
show himself to be Unity in Trinity, by emanation, and by energeticall
operations in nature, grace and glory; the Father appearing as the fountain of
nature, the Son as the fountain of grace, and the Holy Ghost of glory, both in
giving the earnest of it, and then working us to the consummation of it; so
that God is to be considered absolutely in essence and unity; relatively in
subsistence and coessentiality.

In consideration of which subsistency, I conceive that the world; by these
divine persons was contrived, the being, preserving, and translating of nature;
which nature consisted of intellectual creatures, as Angels, and of rational
creatures as men, and of bruits, as the sensitive; of vegetatives as plants,
and of other entities and realities that have neither of the former faculties.

Now those things that wanted those faculties of Will and Understanding, they
needed nothing but his providence to preserve them in being, or to change them
as they waxed old. But as he determined to make natures intellectual and
rational, consisting of will and understanding, so he determined, that either
he must be made absolute to stand by their own innate power, which none can do
but the Creator, or else they must be forcibly supported by his power, to stand
against the natural liberty of their will; and this had been to stand whether
they would or no, which had not been an estate competible to an intellectual,
rational, and voluntary service, requisite to such a creature.

Therefore the most wise God intended before the world to make Angels and men,
Bern. Non in tuto, sed in cauto.
not in a secure but cautionary estate, not in absolute steadfast glory, but in
designation to it, i. conditionally they kept their created estate; but
foreseeing that this cautionary estate must necessarily depend upon the
freewill of that creature, and that freewill would sway them to depend on
themselves, or somewhat else beside the Creator for happiness, he consults how
some of them at least might be saved to glorify him, and be glorified of him.

This consultation was concluded by the eternal Son of God, by an eternal
covenant with the Father, 1 Pet. 1.20.
that those intellectual and rational creatures, which shall depend upon his
grace and favor, shall be preserved in their estates, as they were created, or
else redeemed if they fall from it. This stipulation is accepted of the Father,
and he is set as the first born of every creature, Colos. 1.15.
not that he was first created himself, as Arrius thought, but set so in
regard of excellence of priority by eternal generation, Colos. 1.16.
and of superiority, the whole family of heaven and earth depending upon him
for creation, and the creature intellectual and rational for adoption. So
Romans 8.29. he is called the first born among many brethren. Now the Covenant
being made, and the whole family of heaven being created by him and for him, he
is first proposed to the Angels for their worship and dependency. Lucifer and
his accomplices and faction, Heb. 1.6.
liked independency better, and chose rather to stand by their own created
perfection. From whence arose the battle of Michael and his Angels, Revel.
against the Dragon and his Angels, which St John saw had been, and would be to
the end of the world, in a mystical sense, and that in time he should be cast
out of the heaven of the Church, as he was once out of the heaven of the
blessed. The other Angels stood by, depending on favor and grace, and doing to
him as to their chief Lord, suit and service; and these are called the Elect
Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21.
because God in his Son elected them to be conserved by him. These Angels are
at his disposition, and therefore are said to be sent forth as ministering
spirits to the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.24.


Mathe. Whether are all Angels of one and the same degree?


Phila. No, for they have diverse names given them, Col. 1.16. thrones,
dominions, principalities and powers. So Angels and Archangels, Cherubins and
Seraphins, which argues diverse degrees or offices. Trithem. Cor. Agrip.
Some learned men have written, that God has committed the ordering of the
world to seven chief Angels, especially as he has subjected natural bodies to
the seven planets in chief. Indeed we read of such in Scripture, Dan. 10. Luke
1.
as Michael and Gabriel, who saluted the blessed Virgin Mary. And St John in
Rev. 1. wishes the Church welfare and peace from the seven spirits before Gods
throne, which does not lead us to worship them, but only that we may wish
health to the Church from God, Drus. and Beza Not. in N. T.
and all the instruments he uses to that purpose.


Mathe. What determined God of man before the world?


Phila. Surely as the Son of God did stipulate with the Father to be the
conservator of Angels; so also that he would redeem mankind if he fell. This was
the mystery hid from ages, Col. 1.26. and Romans 16.25. from the beginning of the
world, and performed toward the end of the world, when Christ in due time died
for the ungodly; which St Paul tells Titus, was the hope of eternal life, Tit.
1.2.
which God who cannot lie has promised before the world began. If you ask to
whom God could then promise it? I say it was promised reciprocally of the
Father to the Son, by acceptance of the Sons offer of himself, to satisfy
for those that were elected, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
1 Pet. 1.1.


Mathe. What use may we make of this knowledge?


Phila. To labor to know God, who knew us before we were, and gave us so full a
perfection in Adam, as a creature was capable of; and foreseeing that we being
left in the hands of our own will, we would choose our own way; yet he before
the world by an eternal covenant with his blessed Son in his bosom, ordained
a means to save us by a full and plenteous redemption, that so if we could not
be happy by obeying, yet we might by believing; if not by justice, yet by
mercy; if not by our deserts, yet by Christ's merits, by which we attain so
great honor, that those Angels that never sinned, Heb. 1.14.
are yet made our servants to minister to us. And the rather we should
endeavor to know him, because now he may be known, though in former time he
hid himself, yet now he has revealed himself, not only by his attributes in
Scripture, but also in his Son, Heb. 1.2.
by whom we may apprehend him by operations in himself, and toward us.


Mathe. What are the operations of God in himself?


Phila. They be such as concern the three persons among themselves in relation
one to the other, as the Father begetting the Son eternally, Opera ad intra, or
divisa.
the Son giving from the Father procession to the Holy Ghost, and the Holy
Ghost receiving this proceeding, and returning the glory thereof to the Father
and the Son, so glorifying themselves in themselves. This operation never had
beginning, nor never shall have ending, because God can never cease to be what
he is in essence, nor as he is in subsistence. Now these operations
distinguishes one person from another, because in these what the one does, the
other does not: The Father is not begotten, but the Son, and the Holy Ghost
proceeds from both; for Christ sends him from the Father, John 1^.5.
John 15.26. And this is part of that glory, which Christ says he had with the
Father before the world was.

But beside this, God may be said to have other operations in himself, Opera
ad extra, or indivisa.
which are common to all the three persons. And these are said to be either
internal or external.

The internal are such as his praescience and predestination, Interna.
by which he decrees all things to their proper ends, and man also; and this is
an operation wherein the whole Trinity has an equal hand, wherein is
contained the whole counsel of God, 2 Timothy 2.19.
which is the firm foundation on which every thing depends, and by which he
knows among men who are his. And by this determinable counsel, Christ was
delivered into the hand of wicked men, and men are predestined to the
adoption of children in Christ Jesus according to his will; and so by him we
obtain an inheritance, Acts 2.23. Ephesians. 1.5.
being predestinate according to his purpose, Ephesians. 1.11.
who works all things after the counsel of his own will. And so he has
saved us and called us to an holy calling, not according to our works, but his
purpose and grace which was provided for us in Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9.
before the world began. In whom those that he foreknew, Romans 8.29.
them he predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, which are
called elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father. 1 Pet. 1.2.
By which we may perceive that God was never sedent nor cessant before he made
this world, but had both his personal and internal operations, by which also
he did in time produce his external works of creation and providence.


Mathe. How is predestination to be understood rightly?


Phila. 1. Predestination and election are much of one likeness; only election
argues, that God chooses one and not another, and predestination argues, that
God ordains some to glory, and passes by others, though all taken out of the
same nature and lump; and though both these are in the divine mind at once, yet
election relates more to person, and predestination more to the means, by which
those persons should be made happy: For predestination is a decree of God, Mat.
24.24.
causing in time such effectual grace in those that are elected, that it will
infallibly bring them to glory; and therefore it is said, that the elect are
not to be seduced, for it is Gods pleasure to give them the Kingdom, Luke
12.32. who has chosen them in Christ before the world, that they should be
unblameable before him.

2. You must know that predestination looks upon all men in the same condition;
as Isreal's father was an Amorite, and their mother an Hittite, even of those
Nations whom God cast out of Canaan: But that in predestination there is such
grace prepared, that makes the elect become both holy and happy.

3. You are to conceive nevertheless, that this grace prepared for the elect,
does not impose any necessity, or violent constraint upon their wills, Abul. in
3. Reg. c. 12. Cant. 1.4. Aug. de lib. arbit.
but causes a free endeavor to virtue, by a sweet persuasion of the heart, to
make Gods will ours, who makes us by his divine motion, of unwilling man to
become willing. Nor does Gods passing by others (called reprobation) or not
electing) exclude such from all possible means of happiness; but it permits
them by the freedom of their own will, to neglect, or abuse the means, which
is the just cause of their damnation; Hos. 13 9.
for man's perdition is of himself. God destinates none to sin, but to
punishment for sin; and therefore predestination is not in Scripture applied to
the reprobate, because predestination in Gods is of the means, i. grace, and
the end, i. glory: But reprobation is of the end, i. punishment, not of the
means, i. sin; for predestination does direct a man to that, which by nature he
cannot attain; but reprobation destinates no man to aim at sin, to which nature
of it self is too prone (when God passes by it in his election) but only
preordains men to punishment deserved by sin: So that as predestination
necessitates no man to good works, so Gods not predestinating some, does not
necessitate another will to evil works, no more then a Kings choosing one for
his favorite, does necessitate him to do virtuous actions against his will, nor
another to be traitorous with his will: For the decrees of God takes not away
the liberty of man's will.


Mathe. But surely as predestination causes salvation, so Gods preterition or
rejection of men, causes their damnation.


Phila. Wicked men are not damned because they are not predestined, but
because they live and die in sin: For rejection in God, is only a denial of
election, which may stand with a possibility of avoiding sin and damnation: So
all men in Adam were not elected, yet all men in Adam had a certain power to
stand; so that as predestination is not a bare ordination of a man to eternal
life, by such a sufficient means as makes the event possible, but it provides
to make the means efficacious: So reprobation excludes no man not elected from
all means of salvation necesarily, but permits them to be lead by their own
will; so that predestination of some, 2 Timothy 2.19.
does not damn others by necessity of consequence, but in the infallibility of
Gods prescience; as Joseph did foresee the seven years famine, but did not
cause it.


Mathe. But why does God looking on all in the same condition, predestinate one
and not another, unless it be out of some foresight of ones virtue, and the
others vice?


Phila. Nothing can be said to this, but only Gods secret will and wisdom.
For men cannot be elected out of any foreseen virtue, for an eternal cause
cannot depend upon an external or temporal effect caused thereby, but upon
the eternal counsel of Gods most free will and favor. So rejection is not
moved in God by the foresight of man's sin, though his punishment be determined
thereupon, otherwise God may reprobate all as well as some, because he foresaw
all would sin.

Therefore these operations depend upon Gods secret will. It is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, Romans 9.16.
but in God that shows mercy; for neither predestination is not in the power
of the elected, nor reprobation in the power of the rejected, but in the will
and wisdom of God, who is the potter, and we clay, he is our father, and we
his children, and we ought not under pain of cursing, say to our Father, what
have thou begot.

Therefore God in his electing of us, must be understood to do it either before
man's fall (which the Scripture best approves, calling us elect before the
world) or else after man's fall by the first offense. Now in what estate of Man
soever God did it, he looks upon all men all alike, and so no reason can be
given why he should elect one and reject another: For if he looked upon man in
his nocency, Calv. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 22.
we can find no reason of predestination; if in his innocence, we can find no
reason of reprobation; therefore it is best to sit down with admiration at the
unsearchable wisdom of God, as St Paul did, Romans 11.32. and to rest content
with Gods will, as Christ does, Mat. 11.25. And no man can be reprobated, that
does so, except he neglect Gods revelation, or his own duty in purifying
himself, 1 John 3.3.
as God is holy that has called him, 1 Pet. 1.9.


Mathe. Is not this partiality in God?


Phila. No; for God being a most free agent, may (as the potters do) make
several vessels to honor and to dishonor without acception of persons, for
there was no persons when God elected men.


Mathe. But God gives grace to the elect, but prevents the reprobate of it.


Phila. It is true that he predestinates his elect to the means, as well as the
end, and gives them an influx of grace, by which they are voluntarily lead to
will and do of his good pleasure. But in reprobation or rejection of men, God
neither destinates them to sin, nor prevents them of grace, nor gives any
influx of evil into the soul, but leaves men to themselves: So that the
predestinate are like the air warmed and enlightened with the Sun; the
Reprobate like the air left to it own coldness and darkness without the Sun.


Mathe. But methinks this doctrine of predestination leads men into
licentiousness, because if predestined, they shall be saved however they
live; and reprobation leads to despair, because how well soever they live, they
are damned.


Phila. Though predestination be the free grace of God, yet it leaves not men
to live as they list, but rather leads them to make it as sure to themselves by
a good life, as it is a sure foundation in God; for whomsoever he
predestinates, he sanctifies them, Romans 8. And therefore there is a
conditionate decree joined with the promise of salvation, i. if we repent and
believe, we shall certainly be saved: so that we may more safely say, that
those that live licentiously and repent not, are not elected; for men
predestinate lay hold upon the absolute decree by the conditionate; and yet
they know that this conditionate decree may be published to all, and yet no man
saved by it; but because a conscionable performing the condition, is a sign of
election, they will not neglect it; nor does rejection of it self leave men in
despair, saving in their own ill grounded opinion. Therefore

1. You must conceive that there is no absolute decree casting off men from all
grace which may possibly lead them to happiness: As the Angels not elected had
grace possible to stand. Adam was not predestined to stand, yet he had grace
possible to stand.

2. You are to judge, that by this decree of reprobation, is no cause of man's
sin; for he only permits what he is not bound to hinder. God foresees evil
will be done, but he causes none, only he prevents it not, he commands the
contrary, he threatens it with punishment; neither of these is a cause of sin,
no more then not giving an alms to every beggar, causes him to steal; or a law
against stealing makes men thieves.

3. Aug. de praed. Fulgentius. Calvin.
Know that God denying election to some men, does not therefore damn them for
his pleasure, but as he permits them to sin, so he resolves to punish them.

4. Consider that this denial of election to some, does not produce any
sinful actions as sinful; for though the natural act of sin (as it is a
real being) must needs flow from him, in whom all things have being, but the
obliquity of man's will which cleaves to the action, is not of God, nor caused
by his decree of non-election, but of permission.

5. Nor does God by this decree of reprobation, overpower the will of such a
man, though no doubt he that made the will can overrule it; but leaves it to
its own deficiency, by not creating the heart anew, as Psalm. 51. For he that
believes not the word, it is not caused by Gods constitution in not electing a
man, but by man's proclivenesse to infidelity.

And seeing this work is secret and internal in God, we must remember Moses
saying; secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
and revealed things to us. And therefore let us always look to Gods revealed
will, which insures us salvation upon faith and repentance, and by these try
their estate, and find their election by the effects thereof; a posteriore.
and be content to know God (as Moses) by his back parts, as the Father by the
Son, and the Sons redemption by the spirit, that he has given us.

2. Be not too eager to know by some other way, and thy assurance of salvation
by some extraordinary revelation, lest you fall into some dangerous temptation:
As 1. To despair if you find it not. 2. highly to presume if you find it. 3. Or
else sullenly to neglect all good works till you have found it, but live
holily, Psalm. 50. ult.
and trust God to show it you in his time. Must we not all live by faith and
hope, in this world? yet if we could have the certainty of election, we shall
think faith and hope needless. We are saved by hope, but hope seen is no hope,
Romans 8.24. Be content with adherence and cleaving to, and holding fast by him:
This is a certain sign of election; Psalm. 42.11.
and for assurance, leave it to God to give it thee as a comfort and crown of
all thy labors, as he did to Henoch before he was translated. Heb. 11.5.
So when thou have endured the staggerings of David, the sufferings of Job, and
the buffetings of Paul, then God will tell thee his grace is sufficient for
thee. Let others boast they have it, do thou use all diligence for it, and let
patience have its perfect work, James.
that when you have done all, you may find it at last.

3. Do not dispute with God why he would not elect these but those, but rest in
St Paul's rule, Prosp. de vocal. Romans 9.
that God was willing this way to reveal his goodness and justice. If God has
ordained any to life, it was graciously; if any to punishment, it was
judicially, and what you cannot comprehend, do not reprehend, lest God reprove
thee, as Job 38.2. But know God is just in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

4. Labor to answer the temptations that arise from predestination and
reprobation. 1. From predestination; as thus: I am elected, then I may live
dissolutely, and despise ordinances, as being above them. Not so; for God did
insure Ezekiah fifteen years of life, will he therefore not eat, or be
careless of himself? God forbid. So neither must we; for then election is not
a decree absolute, but dissolute. 2. From the conceit of thy reprobation, thou
shall be abetted in that conceit, thus. It is true, thou art called, but many
are called which were never chosen, thou can not prove thy self to be one of
the few; yes, if I come in at the call; for I dare not think that God will
deceive me, by inviting me to bread, and giving me a stone; or giving me a
stomach and means to starve me. Beside, I am bound upon my allegiance to God,
to believe that if he has called me, then he has elected me till for my
offending him, or to try me he withdrawes the comfort thereof from me, by
making me to suspect my self, by examining me how I came in, not having on a
wedding garment.

2. Another temptation may arise in thy heart, saying; God by his revealed will
would have all men to be saved, but by his concealed will many are reprobated.
Now consider therefore God has not two wills, but in his word he expresses his
well wishing to all, that they may be saved; but foreseeing they will not all
be saved, he positively determines that all shall not be damned, and therefore
resolves to give the Antidote of his saving grace to some, without preventing
any of sufficient means to be saved, though he give them not the same efficacy
to the means, to draw them to faith and repentance, as he does to the elect.

3. Another temptation to know thee desperate, is this: That though God offers
the means of faith and repentance, yet he intends that the major part of men
shall not believe nor repent: In this case bid Satan avoid; for I have not to
do with Gods secrets; I am content to believe, that he would have me do what he
bids me do; and therefore (come of it what will) I will trust God, and exercise
my self to keep a conscience void of offense, toward God and man; and so in
well doing I will commit my self to him as to a faithful Creator, and hope to
find my name at last in this book of Gods secret internal operation, through
Jesus Christ whom he hoth sent.


Mathe. What are those works of God called external, wherein the whole Trinity
have also an equal hand.


Phila. These are the executions of his internal purposes, or operations in
his secret decrees. For as God purposed before time, so in his beginning to
measure time, he produced a world of visible and invisible creatures, Polanus
lib. 1. c. 37.
all which were made for the Scriptures sake (though written afterward) that
the will of God expressed in Scriptures, might have an evident declaration by
the works made before they were written, Mat. 5.
and before one jot of this word fail, heaven and earth must vanish. Now with
the work of creation began time, which God pleased to make the measure of his
works, and the beginning of his own revelation, Psalm. 90 2. Egyptians monas
solitaria.
who was God from everlasting; yet but like a solitary unite, or a point which
by creation was deduced into lines, or like the top of a Pyramid, which from
one small point, spreads in the basis to a great circumference: Or as indeed
the Jewish Cabalists say, God was at first before creation, a dark letter, that
could not be spelled nor read, but by himself, and so was a God that lay hid
as in secret, Isa. 45.15.
as says the Prophet; but by creation and the work of redemption, became lucid
and apparent, by communicating himself in his wisdom and works. And this time
began 5605. years ago, reckoning backward from the present year, 1656. by
common account of Astronomers, who differ somewhat among themselves. The
Scripture account is best, which reckons the worlds age to be about 5721. But
no Astronomers do so differ, as to give occasion to men to think the world to
be eternal, or without beginning; or that it was before Moses account, as the
Zabii, who pretend that one Janbosher was Adams Tutor, and our Praeadamites,
who dream of a world before the world, and so would make us think to no end,
that the world will have no end, as well as no beginning.


Mathe. Where were all these things before the Creation?


Phila. They were in God, as notions in our mind by representation, or as
flowers in their roots in the winter, invisibly; or as Idea's in our minds
before they be brought into act.


Mathe. But now God being an internal mind, and pure act, why not the world
eternally produced, God being neither sedent, nor cessant?


Phila. Because if the world were coeternall with God, it must be a Deity, and
then the visible creature might be worshipped, as well as the invisible God;
nor then can the world have any end, but must be a perpetual motion of
generation and corruption; which were easy to believe, if we had not an
infallible revelation to the contrary; for great learned men have thought so.
Osellus Lucianus. Aristotle.
But the holy Scriptures tell us that the world was made, Genesis 1. and that
Wisdom was before the earth or heavens, Prove. 8.23. And as they were made, so
they shall perish, Psalm. 102.26. As it did in 1656. by a Dropsy, so at last by
a burning Fever, when Gods determined week is finished, in whose account a
thousand years is but as one day; 2 Pet. 3.7, to the 12.
when the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Beside, we never did find any
authentic writer mention a world before Moses account: Therefore let us not be
wise above what is written, but rest in Scripture, which says, God in the
beginning made heaven and earth.


Mathe. Why may not one think, that this world came by a revolution of things,
or else by some fatal necessity, or else by chance?


Phila. Because there is no reason to ground such thoughts upon; for till
something was made out of nothing by creation, there were no things to be the
subject of revolution; or if there were, yet revolution runs to confusion,
without a disposer to order those things. Nor by fatal necessity; for who
should determine or impose that fatality, but God, who has done what he
pleased both in heaven and in earth, and for whose pleasure all things are, and
were created. Rev. 4. ult.
Nor did the world come by chance; for no man can impute erection, or making
things to chance, but rather destruction, as death, not birth. Every house is
builded by some man, but he that made all things is God, Heb. 3.4. For God
first made the common matter of all things included in the first words of
Moses. Genesis 2.2.
In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and the Earth was
without form, and void; which the Poets called Chaos, and the Philosophers, The
first matter. Chehn. Vabobu.
This was made by the effective word of God, who is Being it self, Heb. 11.3.
who gave this fusion by his word, which Chaos or fusion, had no power in it
self to produce any thing, no more then an egg can make it self a chick,
without some heat added thereunto. Therefore the Spirit of God moved or coured
on the waters, Genesis 1.3.
who by its virtue made a perfect digestion of this heap, bringing that into
act (which was before only in possibility) by giving it life and form, as an
Hen by sitting on an egg produces a living creature. Omnia sub uno igne
genita sunt Trisme.
For as he first made the universal matter, so next he made out of that,
first, things more general, as the elements; then things more imperfect, as
things without life, before things with life, that the things that had life,
might feed on them which had not, as beasts on the herbs, and Adam on the
fruits.


Mathe. What did God make first?


Phila. The Mahometans say, the first thing that God made was a pen: A simple
conceit; it may be their Prophet put in that, to make them believe God have him
a transcript of his mind for them. This pen surely was his wisdom and power,
by which he did express his mind by his works; and his first work was light,
not to give him light with whom is no darkness, but to give light to his
works, that they reflecting one upon the other, might all glorify him whose
light is the life of men. John 1.
By this light contracting or dilating it self, the evening and morning was
measured, till God on the fourth day made the light to know its center, the
Sun, as he did make every herb before it grew in their center, the earth, Genesis
2.5. From whence come such diverse occult qualities, though many of them grew
upon one turfe.


Mathe. When were the Angels created, and in what numbers?


Phila. Their number no doubt is innumerable, as Dan. 7.10. a thousand times
ten thousand ministered to God. And they were no doubt created with the third
heavens, Philo in Peri-Cosmo. Job.
their habitation and that was made the first day, Genesis 1.1. And therefore Job
calls them the morning stars, and the sons of God shouting for joy at the
beginning. And the Apostle calls them Angels of light. 1 Cor. 12.
And of these no doubt some were superior, some inferior, as may be perceived
by their several names in Scripture, Isa. 6.2. Genesis 3.25. 1 These. 4.16. Colos.
1.16.
Seraphims, Cherubins, Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Principalities, Powers,
Dominions; none of which he made to help him in creating the world, as Simon
Magus and Cerinthus, and other heretics have taught, and so brought in the
worshipping of Angels, confuted by St Paul, Col. 2.18. But surely God made them
the first witnesses of his works, and to administer to the Church of God, and
has employed them in the highest matters of the Church, except in matters of
his own prerogative (viz.) the justification and sanctification, and the
donation of grace, and the like: And so the Law was given by the ministration
of Angels, Gal. 3.49. Dan. 12.1. Zach. 12.1. Drusius. Zeza in Rev. 1.4.
and Michael the Archangel stands for the Jews, Dan. 10.21. And Zachary tells
us there were seven eyes set upon one stone, i. some say, seven spirits
watching and guarding the new Temple, of which Zorobabel laid the first stone.
So Gabriel is sent to instruct Daniel in the Vision, and to Zacharias about
John Baptists birth, Luke 1.
and to the blessed Virgin Mary concerning Christ's conception and birth. So
Raphael accompanied Tobias, and Jerechmiel instructs Esdras. Tobit 5.4.
These were elect Angels, not only by predestination, but eminence.


Mathe. But all the Angels continued not in their created estate, how came
that?


Phila. In their fall appeared first the effect of Gods foreknowledge and
decree; for many of them kept not their first estate, and so brought in the
first mutability. Their sin was pride, rebellion, and envy. Pride in seeking to
stand by their own created perfection, Heb. 1.6.
without dependency on the grace of the second person, Col. 1.15.
whom they were to worship as Gods first born. The chief of these is shadowed
out in Scripture under the name of Lucifer, and his glory by Nebuchadnezzer,
and the King of Tyrus. Isa. 14.12.
He drew to his faction many others who liked not the said dependency. Zanc. de
laps. Angel.
And to this they were moved by envy say some finding (either by diligent
inspection into Gods work, or else by revelation) that Gods first born would be
a medium of uniting a more inferior creature then an Angel to himself, 1 Timothy 3.16. seen of Angels.
and that all the Angels of God must worship that glorious Union. Upon this
they fall into rebellion; against whom stood up Michael and his Angels, and by
the power of the highest drove them down to these lower regions, where they are
reserved in chains of darkness (in a dim and uncomfortable knowledge of God)
against the judgment of the great day. In the mean time he rules as a Prince
in the air, especially in the hearts of the disobedient, for whom is prepared
the blackness of darkness for ever.


Mathe. How do you gather that this was their sin?


Phila. Because he not only continues in the same, but also has endeavored
to draw men into the same sins of pride, envy, and rebellion, as our first
parents to be as gods, and to envy to God their obedience, and to rebel
against Gods commandment. Beside, we see that he has always kept up the same
sin among men, by making men to set up Idolatry; some to aspire to be
worshipped, and called Elohim, or Lords; some to debase God to the image of
creatures, Genesis 4.26. vid. R. Kim.
Romans 1.23. Some to root out Gods revelation of himself to man, by raising
persecutions against those that profess it; but especially against Christ and
the Gospel, which declares the manhood with God by Christ's birth, and man's
redemption by Christ's death. And this argues his first sin to be rebellion
against the truth determined, to be in due time manifested to the world. Indeed
Christ says he did not abide in the truth, nor indeed could abide it. He did
not abide in God who is truth it self, nor in true obedience in which he was
created, nor in the truth determined concerning Christ to be man's Redeemer. And
indeed this seems to be truth from which he fell, especially, 1. Because Christ
calls this Truth, by way of eminence before Pilate, saying, I am come to
witness the truth, i. of Gods purpose and promise. And he calls the Jews the
children of the Devil, because they went about to destroy him, and Judas a
devil, because he fell from him who was the Truth: And because both refused to
stand by his grace and favor, as the Devil also did, who has ever been an
opposer of this truth from the beginning, as by preventing Adam of the
sacramental shadow of the tree of life; and Cain of the comfort of true
sacrifice, both which were types of Christ: And since that he made the Jews to
despise the figures of him, Number. 21.56.
in the Manna and Rock-water, 1 Cor. 10.9. so he has raised up many since
Christ's coming in the flesh, to deny his Divinity, or the truth of his
Humanity, Saviorship, or justification, power, wisdom or holiness. And thus
like the devil, they love not that truth which was the actual fulfilling of
all the types, law, prophecies and promises, in which regard it is said, John 1.
that Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. And I think the rather this was the
main sin, because neither he nor Judas never repented of it, whom Christ called
a devil; for it is a sin cannot be repented of, because committed directly
against the method of God, Christ, and the Spirit of grace, which is the only
cause and means to true repentance. So that he still setting himself like the
Highest, by designing to himself man's obedience and worship, Mat. 4. shows
his natural pride. 2. In seeking to destroy man's body and soul by tempting
him to misbeleeve or disbeleeve his own redemption by Christ, he shows his
innate spite and envy. 3. In striving to cross Gods proceedings in nature, or
grace, shows his rebellion from the beginning.


Mathe. But does one devil do all this mischief in all men and all parts of
the world at once, this would argue a kind of infiniteness?


Phila. No sure, for men are led aside by their own corruption, and tempted of
concupiscence, to which the devil joins himself not only the Prince of
Devils, but some of his crew who are most fit to improve that temptation of a
man's concupiscence; Drusius quotations in lib. munus novum.
as we see one undertakes to seduce Ahab by becoming a lying spirit in the
mouths of his Prophets. Which was one of Pythons train, whose way is by lies to
delude people. And the Scripture seems to intend some such thing, by giving
certain names to them, as to some principal heads, as Beelzebub, whom the
Jews thought to be the Prince of Devils; his name signifies a master fly,
Jupiter Muscanius. vide Clem. Alex. in protrept. (...).
or the Lord of flies. Some say from his buzzing temptations, which like flies
swarm about us. Others say because he drove away flies when the people
sacrificed to him. He is called the god of Ekron, because they worshipped him.
So we find that God forbids consulting with familiar spirits, Deuteronomy. 18.11.
which in Hebrew is Schoel, Aug. in 2. lib. de doct. Christia. cap. 23.
and translated Python, whom some writers take to be the head of that rank and
order. So we read of Belial, a spirit of rebellion, a vessel of wrath and
ruin. So of one Asmodeus a convincer and punisher, Tobit 3.8.
that strangled Sarahs seven husbands. So of Satan, who works deceits with
Witches and Magitians, and inflicts many miseries on mankind, Revel.
as on Job, c. 1. We read of another called Abaddon, the master of misrule and
confusion. So of one Astaroth, the chief head of all devilish accusations, and
so is all one with Diabolus, the devil. So we read of Mammon, who tempts to
rapine and covetousness; not that these only use such temptations, for no
doubt they officiate one for another, and each faculty is employed by each to
man's ruin, as the good Angels in their offices to man's good. And it may be
questioned whether these names signify rather their persons or their
faculties; as Belemoh their beastly nature, and Leviathan their vast increase
in evil, and Serpent, their crafty folds, windings, and subtilties, which
Angels as they are dispersed in the world, so they disperse their venom
through the world.


Mathe. Do they retain nothing of their created nature but evil?


Phila. Yes, but they turn it all into evil. They have their first knowledge
and power, but yet no farther then God permits them to use it; for they are
reserved like prisoners in chains, by which they are confined. For 1. They know
not God with any comfort, nor know his intentions, nor his determinations, whom
he means to save or condemn; for then it were in vain to tempt the one, and
needless to tempt the other. Nor 2. Have they any certain knowledge of future
events, but make collections either from the stars or prophecies of Scripture,
or from men's temper, or their actions and endeavors; and therefore their
answers in Oracles were dark and doubtful; as when he told the Pope he should
die at Bethelem, Sylvester.
it proved at a Monastery so called. He told a King of England that he should
not die till he had been at Jerusalem, it proved that he died in a chamber so
called. Yet they believe and tremble, because they fear justly they shall never
enjoy the mercy they believe, and because they do already feel partly the
judgment ordained for them. Again, they are stinted in their power, they
cannot do what they would. Job was hedged in, and till God opened a gap, the
devil could not invade him; and when they are suffered to invade man, yet are
they subjected to the power of Christ and his Ministers.


Mathe. Are not these Angels in hell as yet?


Phila. No, for had they been fixed to that sphere of punishment, upon the
fall, they could neither have tempted Adam, Aug. lib. 8. de civ. dei. c. 22.
Jude 6. and v. 17
nor us upon earth; but they carry their hell about with them (viz.) the seat
of damnation, and the sense of Gods eternal displeasure.


Mathe. Where do you think Hell to be?


Phila. It is hard to say, because the Scriptures do not plainly declare it,
only it says, such a place there is prepared for the devil and his angels,
called an Abyss and bottomless pit, but whether it be under the waters, where
the old Rephaims or giants, buried in the deluge, of which is spoken, Pro.
21.16. a man that wandereth from the way of understanding shall remain; or in
any subterraneous fires, Pro. 21.16.
which break out in diverse places of the world; Surius. Hecla. Aeina.
which fires I take to be not subtle enough to torment such spirits. But that
there is a place of torment to which they are reserved, is typed forth to us by
a place under the waters, where the dead lie sighing: Which place of hell is
naked before God without any covering, which is called also, Job 26.5, 6.
Abaddon, Prove. 15.11. the place of destruction. And such a place seems to be
under the earth; from which Esaias eloquently says, Esa. 14.9.10.
that the hell from beneath is removed to meet the King of Babylon after his
ruin, saying to him in an upbraiding manner, art thou become like one of us?
So the vallie of Hinnom is a type of it, from which hell was called Gehenna,
after the captivity, from the detestable use of that where they burnt their
children in Tophet, to the Idol Moloch; for which, God made it a place of
abomination. First, by the burning of 185000 of the dead Assyrians there, whom
the Angel slew, 2 Kin. 19.35. prophesied of therefore Esa. 30.33. and there
likened to hell. And 2ly. by King Josiah, who made it a common lay-stall. Jer.
7.22.
And thirdly, by buring the bodies of the Jews there, who were massacred by the
Babylonian army, when Jerusalem was taken, till no place was left to bury
there, therefore afterward called the vallie of slaughter, Jer. 19.6. all
which, together with the burning of Sodom, with fire and brimstone, argues
such a dreadful place to be reserved, but where it is, or whether yet it is
till all these lower places be dissolved, is doubtful.


Mathe. Where are these evil spirits?


Phila. About the earth and the air. Therefore St Paul calls Satan the Prince
of the power of the air. Hieron. in Ephesians. 6. O ig. in Number. cap. 22. 2 Pet.
2.4. Jude ver. 6.
And all the Doctors for the first 400. years, held the same opinion. Indeed
the devil durst adjure Christ not to torment him before the time, whereby it
seems they were not as yet cast into hell; but as St Jude says, and Peter
also, they were cast downward, and are reserved in chains, or for chains of
darkness to the last judgment, when they shall be confined by the divine
workman, when the mystery of God is finished to their terra damnata, the Abyss
of blackness of darkness for ever.


Mathe. What does or can this knowledge profit me?


Phila. Very much.

As 1. Ovid. rudis indigest moles.
Since God first made a rude Chaos, as a subject to work upon, though he could
have made all rightly formed at first; but to show how he intended to work upon
us whom he foresaw, would make our selves a deformed lump, namely, that his
spirit must move upon us, and that he would call light out of darkness, that
we might become children of light; for the Creation was a type of our
recreation, and the first Adam, of the second, and making all so excellent as
he did, (...).
was a prototype of what he meant to do by his personal and declarative word,
by whom, and for which all things were created.

2. Out of light he made the highest heavens, the place of the blessed for them
to dwell in, a light never to be extinguished, that we might know there is a
rest for the people of God, and therefore not to set up our rest here, nor mind
things below, but above, to have our conversation in heaven, and seek another
City, whose builder and maker is God.

3. He began with light, not that he needed it, but to teach us not to do the
works of darkness, but walk in light, and to begin our works with the light of
true understanding, not with blind affection or rashness.

4. Because some of the Angels of light fell, because they would not stand by
the way God had determined, as by his grace, power, or order, but rather by
their own devise, and so fell from heaven. Take heed of desiring to be
independent, which God has granted to nothing in this world; for all depends
on Gods power, or love, or grace, or order, Jude Ep.
that he has set, except such as will fall by envy, pride, or rebellion, into
destruction, especially men if they go in the way of Cain, or the gainsaying of
Corah; or love with Balaam the wages of unrighteousness, they must needs fall
with the apostate Angels.


Mathe. What order did God observe in creating the world?


Phila. 1. He made the general and more imperfect creature as the elements
under the name of heaven and earth. 2. Things composed of them; some with life,
as trees, herbs, beasts, birds, fishes; some without life, as stars, meteors,
stones and minerals, with which when he had furnished the world like a fair
house, then he made man, and put him in possession of all. 3. He made some in
actual being, Homers Chain.
as the vegetative and chief sensitives; some only in potentiality of being,
as those many creeping things which heat and moisture is apt to produce. 4. In
this great work he has ordained certain midling natures, by which as by
certain links of a chain, we may be led to the highest natures. As 1. Water and
earth is coupled by slime, air and water by vapors, fire and air by
exhalations; So crystal is a middle nature between water and the harder sort
of precious stones; So Quicksilver between water and metals; Coral between
roots and stones; so some vegetals are of a middle nature, between a plant and
a living creature, as the Mandrake and the Zeophytes; so some sensitives, as
the Amphibions are creatures of a middle nature, between fish and flesh; such
are Crocodiles, Seals and Sea-Morses; so Estriges are a middle nature between a
beast and a foul; a Bat between a creeping thing and a bird; an Ape between man
and beast; Hermaphrodites between man and woman; a man between a bruit and an
Angel; an Angel a middle nature between an intellectual and rational
spirit; Christ a mediator uniting God and man together.


Mathe. Whether had God no coadjutor in this work of Creation?


Phila. He had none. For God is the sole cause of creation; and Being is the
first effect of creation, and nothing can come between the first cause, and the
first effect, but a mere nothing, and therefore God had no instrument or
coadjutor to assist him: No not Angels; for they can do nothing in an instant,
as God does in creation, by an efficacious word only; which does distinguish
him from all false gods, and heathen vanities, as Jer. 10.11. your gods that
made not the heavens and the earth shall perish.


Mathe. Of what did he make the world?


Phila. Of nothing, and that not of nothing privatively, as an Idol is said to
be nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. i. has no divinity in it: Nor of a
comparative nothing, as Esa. 40.15. The whole world is nothing in comparison of
God; but he created all of nothing negatively and simply, i. he had nothing to
make all but his word only. And he only can bring a thing to nothing, when he
pleases to substract his divine influx, as Psalm. 90.3. So he can only turn one
substance into another, without natural preparation, as water into wine, John
2.
and Lots wife into a pillar of salt, Genesis 19. Therefore Satan to try Christ's
divinity, would have him to turn stones into bread. So God only can give forms
to things; Genesis 1.2, 3.
to which purpose his spirit was said to move upon the waters. So he only gives
life, preserves and restores it. Therefore to God we attribute three creations.
1. To make all of nothing. 2. When he makes that good which was perfectly evil,
Genesis 1.1. (...).
Psalm. 51. Create in me a new heart. 3. When he shall restore all men at the
Resurrection.


Mathe. In what form did God make the world, and into what parts?


Phila. Certainly round, so Psalm. 93.1. He has made the round world so fast,
that it cannot be moved. And this roundnesse is sphericall, not like a round
trencher, but like a ball, as appears now by experience, though thought
otherwise in former times. The parts in general are heaven and earth, the one
including the other. For the earth and sea making one globe, hangs in the
air upon nothing, Job 26.7. Not as the Poets think, weighed with its own
weight: But because as Job says, God stretched out the North upon the empty
place. By North, Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. Thahava.
understanding not so much the Northern part, but that magneticall vigor, which
God has impressed upon that vast circumference in which the earth hangs;
which vigor figuratively, is called the North: because though it attracted all
the parts of the Chaos, to the center of the North and South Poles, yet the
North Pole has the more magnetic virtue, which virtue is of such power in
both Poles, that if the earth could be remembered from them, yet it will thither
again like a needle removed from the Load-star. Thus God has hung this huge
globe upon no basis, nor sustentation, for the sea runs in the earths channel,
and the earth hangs merely by a magnetic attraction, and meridionall
projection, without any prop at all.


Mathe. Whether might not the world have been made better?


Phila. Not in respect of the total, though in regard of some parts; for every
part was good, though not one part so good as another; but all being made, God
saw that it was so very good, as it could not be mended. So in respect of some
particular men it were better they were born Noble, or rich, yet in regard of
the total corporation of men, in which all cannot be alike, it is better for
them to be as they are. It is sufficient that God makes all good, though not
all in the same height of goodness.


Mathe. To what use is the heaven and the stars?


Phila. For the nourishing of the inferior creatures in the air, earth, and
sea, by their influences. For God therefore has included the inferior globe
in the heavens, upon whose highest extreme circle, he sits, Psalm. 68.32. and
by his providence in nature nourishes this great egg, causing a perpetual
generation and production of creatures therein. The stars serve to give light,
to measure time by their motion, to divide seasons, to give life to plants, as
say some of the Hebrew Doctors, that every herb has its mazal or star.


Mathe. Have they not power in men's Nativities and Fortunes?


Phila. The Scriptures deliver to us no such thing, save what is said. And it
is fit we rest therein, and not to thrust our selves into things of
uncertainty, as Colos. 2.18. some did about the worship of Angels; for what
power can they have more then over the body of man, as to incline his mind to
this or that, since man is endued with free will, and subjected to education,
which is more powerful then stars; as we see in some, Socrates.
marked out by nature, to some vices, which good tutoring preventeth. Therefore
surely as judicial Astrology is doubtful, so it cannot be lawful. 1. Because
it imputes that to the stars, which God has not endowed them withal. 2.
Because it has no evidence of divine writ. 3. The authors of it were men of no
sound judgment or Religion, as the old Egyptians, Chaldeans, Babylonians, or
Arabians. Nor does God any where in Scripture commend it to his people, either
for knowledge, or practice; and yet were it fit for them, surely God would not
grudge it them, as the devil insinuated to Eve about the tree of knowledge.
But we find it forbidden under the names of a planetary, or an observer of
times, as if one day were good, and another bad; Deuteronomy. 18.10.
and God has denied his people to consult with Astrologians, and punished them
for being furnished with sooth-saiers from the East, and proclaimed himself to
be one that frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes the Diviners mad,
and charge his people that they should not be afraid of the signs of heaven,
as the heathen were. Hor. Ode, babylonios tentare numeros.
And indeed some of the ancient heathen Poets have thought it ridiculous to
cast figures, or to try nativities. And the Primitive Christians in token of
their conversion to Christ, burnt their books of curious Arts. Beside, some of
great knowledge in it, yet will not practice it, and they that have done it
have run into high presumption. As he that supposed that Christ's disputing so
young with the Doctors, was caused by the Planet Jupiter, being in his
ascendent, and Libra the cause of his justice and righteousness. Thus they
make Jacobs star subject to Planets, which if he were, he had needed no other
star to be created purposely for his nativity. Beside, Mat. 2.
it renders the providence of God but vain to be depended upon, if the
influence of the stars necessitates us to good or evil. Also it makes void the
cross of Christ, if a man could be exempted from it by the benignity of his
stars. So it prevents our devotion, and waiting on God by faith and hope, which
God requires in all those that are in covenant with him. Besides, stars are
things merely material, consisting of light and heat, and not things
spiritually animated by either Angels, as Trithemius, and others thought, who
counted seven elect Angels to be the praefects of the seven planets. The old
Poets like the heathen before them thought, Philo. Biblius. Diodorus. Plat. de
defect Orac.
that the souls of their great Heroes were placed there, and so called them
after their names, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, and then worshipped them for
gods, and called the days of the week after their names, and so made their
superstitions more permanent.


Mathe. Why do we still retain these superstitious names to our days and
months?


Phila. By custom, that ancient Tyrant, which loves no alteration, although
for the best; otherwise we might find out twelve Apostles to name the months
by, and the first six Deacons (if Nicholas be not liked) to name the days, and
as many noble martyrs to name the days by, and as many images of notable men,
actions and things named in Scripture, Duhartas.
to configure with the celestial constellations on the sphere; better then
Icarius Dog, or Europa's Bull, Hercules Hydra, or Theseus Trull. Since the
whole world was made for the Scriptures, I conceive it would conduce much to
the honor of Christian Religion, as it did to Rome to call some months by the
name of their Emperors, as July and August. But how much more if some parts of
Scripture were turned into the text Latin and Greek of Poets, and Orators, and
read in schools instead of the more vain profane authors; surely it would be a
means to state verity in the place of vanity, and so season tender years, that
so they might read those profane books in riper years, and not be infected.
Thus heaven and earth might meet together in one symphony without discord: And
to add one thing by the way: Certainly as this being done would make Religion
more settled in men's minds; so if the memorable Feast of Christ's Nativity had
been fastened to the Lords day, which by the account of some Chronologers,
happened that year to be the 25. of December (on which Christ was born) the
celebration would have been more certainly continued; and yet this change could
have altered no more the calculation, then the difference of Astronomers among
themselves, about the Epoche of Christ's birth, some of them differing from
others Mercator Christianus. Jos. Scalig. Sethus Calvisius against the Quarte
decemani.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. years. Or then the alteration of Easter has from the time of
Constantine the Great, who in the great Council of Nice, caused that Easter
should be generally kept upon the Lords day, and not on the 14. of the month
Nisan; and therefore made a new December novall, or Golden number, differing from
the Roman. This constitution continued not above seven years. But the
contention between the Latin and Greek Churches about it lasted 200. years.
Then about the time of Justinian the Emperor, one Dionysius Abbas drew the
Paschall tables, which were confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon, that none
should keep Easter but according to the Roman account and statute, but should
be accounted an Heretic; and this held till the year 1582. yet they finding
that the Equinoctium went back from the 21 of March, to the eleventh, the
Romans corrected their Calender, and so there is sometimes 28 days difference
between them and us, as 1557. and sometimes 25. days, as in the year 1565. So
they reformed their Paschall tables, and appointed the Feast of Easter
(according to the Council of Nice in Pontus, 322.) to be celebrated the Sunday
after the first full moon that should happen after the Sun entered Aries, we see
still difference between us and them, but yet all conclude it on the Lords day.
And indeed the very just day of either the Nativity or Resurrection, is not
much to be stood upon, so the Feast be kept, 1 Cor. 5.8.


Mathe. God having made the world, what did he next?


Phila. He made man of the earth, and woman of man, and then made them Lords of
all he had made, as Isa. 45.12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it.
And this we know by Scriptures, the ground of that most excellent science,
called Divinity, which leads us to the knowledge of God that made us; Plutarch
in the life of Theseus, speaks of some such people, called (...).
least we should imagine our selves sprung up of our selves, though many will
give more for a Parrat then a Preacher, and to a Painter for the picture of
their face, then to one that can delineate their souls; I suppose the reason
is, because Divinity is no flattering science, it shows our moules and spots
where they are; As Alexanders Limner did, who drew his finger upon his face
which he laid there to hide a skar. It is the corruption of man, that will
make more of him that shapes his body in cloths (though he deform it) than of
him that shows him the God that made his soul and body. Like Crates, Laertius.
who gave in his Testament ten talents to his Parasite, to his Harlot one, 2
Talent is 375. l.
to his Cook ten pound, to his Physician a groat, and to his Philosopher, but
three half pence. And why so little to the best science? but because rich men
know not the want of philosophy, Diogenes.
though Philosophers know the want of money. They think with Laodicea they be
happy enough, but consider not that science, which shows them how to live when
they are dead.


Mathe. Does God immediately make all men?


Phila. He made the first man immediately by himself, and the first woman of
the man, but all other mediately by them two, 1 Cor. 11.12. as the woman is of
the man by creation, so the man is of the woman by generation, by the special
concurrence of Gods providence. It was impossible he should make himself, any
more then the world could: For if it were nothing before it was something, how
could something come out of nothing: Nor could any creature make him, Pythag.
ex nihilo nil fit.
he being above them both in eminence and excellence, consisting of an heavenly
and earthly nature; his form is a reasonable soul, his body upright, beholding
the heavens; Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.
this body is more curiously made then any other creatures, Psalm. 139.14, 15.
like unto rich Arras work. The anatomy of it convinced Galen of a Godhead. It
was made in number, weight and measure; in weight, that the earthy body might
balast the light and nimble soul; in number, by the four qualities or
temperaments, of hot, cold, moist, and dry; in measure, because at first each
of them kept their several proportions, though since the fall, one invading the
other, breeds several diseases. A rare body it was, being composed of so mean
a matter as earth, showing thereby the most excellent skill of the workman.
Lecham is Lechem.
But now our flesh is become the bread of worms, as Herod Agrippa's body
proved, not giving glory to God, Acts 12.23.


Mathe. Wherein does it appear more excellent then other creatures?


Phila. Surely as Adams body was more excellent then other men's, being Gods
immediate work; so no doubt our bodies are more excellent then the common
creature. Adams body was so, because it had in it potentially all the rare
qualities which are dispersed now among many; as the beauty of Absalom, the
swiftness of Asahel, the proportion of Eliab the son of Jesse: So that his
body exceeded others no doubt, as much as Gods tables exceeded Moses
workmanship; and as Christ's miraculous wine exceeded the natural, at the
wedding. But yet men's are exceeding the creatures in posture, shape, and
compact, and in being, an epitome of the whole world. Also because many of the
better sort of creatures and parts of the Fabric, are set forth by the parts
of man; as the finest gold likened to his head, cant. 5.11. the purest wheat to
his kidneys, Deuteronomy. 32.14.
and the center of the world, in which all the lines of the circumference meets
is called by the name of his heart, Mat. 12.40. Again, all manner of measures
are taken from the dimensions of his body, as the inch, foot, palm, cubit.
Beside, God has expressed his attributes by the parts of man's body; as head,
hand, heart, ear, eye, mouth, foot. Lastly, because it pleases God to make it
his Temple; and also Christ to take it into the divine Nature, an honor not
vouchsafed to Angels. This was Gods love to him, that he made last, as if when
he had made man, he had left nothing more to do but to make himself man. O
Lord what is man that thou should so honor him?


Mathe. What are the most considerable parts of his body?


Phila. Every part is considerable, but Gods wisdom is admirable in all, as in
making some members radical, and some official in great variety, and yet in
sympathy one with another. The radical is the Liver for the natural spirits,
the Heart for the vital, and the Brain for the animal. The official members
are inward or outward; the inward as the Veins to convey the natural spirits,
the Arteries to convey the vital, and the Sinews to convey the animal
spirits. The outward are the eye, ear, hand and foot, all which work for the
body, as well as the mouth eats, and stomach digests for the good of the body:
And for all they be diverse, yet are they sympatheticall and helpers one of
another. For as one feels, the other grievs or joies; so do they one assist and
supply in the defect of another; as the blind man's eyes are in his fingers, and
the deaf man's ears are in his eyes, yet none can say to the other, I have no
need of thee. This teaches both sympathy and unity in the body politic and
mystical, and order too, not to intrude one upon another office, but to
supply and help as need requires.


Mathe. What useful contemplation may one make of the other particular
members, that I may the more glorify God, and esteem more preciously of every
part?


Phila. When I consider the head, I look upon it as a most excellent part,
because God has placed all the senses there, and but one sense all the body
over beside, and that is feeling. 2. That it is super-eminent in office, as
place, and directs the whole body, and is the most honorable part, and
therefore we uncover it when we give honor and worship to any, as our reason
does lead us; and therefore the name (Head) is given to that which is eminent
and chief, as Deuteronomy. 28.24. thou shall be the head, and Psalm. I will make thee
(that is Christ) the head of the heathen. Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Cor. 11.23.
So Christ is the head of the Church, the man is the head of the wife, and the
head of Christ is God. So the eyes though two for ornament, and for the help of
each other in case one should be deficient, yet they look both but upon one
object at once, because both the optic nerves meet in one, to teach us when we
lift up our eyes to God, to be intentive upon him only, and not give him a
squint-eied devotion. It has a guard of five tunicles, beside the brow, and so
sets forth the care of God to his children, whom he keeps as carefully as one
would the apple of his eye. Before the fall it let in no evil, but now it is
sins broker, an evil eye by envy, an adulterous eye by lust, a covetous eye by
desiring; yet it is not the cause of sin, but the occasion, and so contracts to
the inward eye many diseases; as the murderer may be said to have a bloodshot
eye, and the lustful a pearl in his. The ear is the sense of discipline, and
the gate of faith, which comes by hearing. Before the fall it was the gate of
life, 1 Cor. 15.
now the portall of death, by letting in evil words to corrupt good manners.
The tongue is called man's glory, Psa. 16.9. because by the good use of it, we
bring honor to our selves, and glory to God. It is made single, to teach us
that we should not be double-tongu'd. It was once like the pen of a ready
scribe, Jam. 3.6.
to set forth the praise of God; but now a world of iniquity, James 3.6. It is
like a dung-fork, casts abroad mire and dirt. It is forked in a tripple manner,
like serpents tongues when they be angry, and kills three at once, the
slanderer, the hearer, and the reporter. So the hand is a most rare instrument
that guides all others. The tongue of the dumb, who speaks by signs. It is the
counting table of the ancients, and is yet in use in many Countries. Of old
they used to account on the left, till they were 100. years old, and then on
the right, because they were in the years of wisdom, in whose right hand are
length of days, Prove. 3. It has been the instrument of divine worship, in
oaths or vows, Genesis 14.22. I have lift up my hand to the high God. So the
heathens worship of the stars, was, when they kissed their hand, which Job
renounceth, Ose. 13.2.
Job 31.27. Lastly, it is the instrument that feeds the mouth, or else we
should feed like beasts, yet the sloathfull man will not bring his hand to his
mouth, i. not use this excellent instrument to get his living. So the foot is
an instrument of supportation, to uphold and carry the body, and answers to
the affections which are as feet to the soul; my foot stands right says
David, Psalm. And Solomon bids us to look to the foot when we enter into Gods
house, that is, to the mind and affections. It also puts us in mind of our
moral and spiritual going, in the conversing with God and man. So Solomon
says, the wise man considers his steps, Pro.
for the way of the wise is above, to keep him from hell beneath, because as
Psalm. 116. he walks before God in the light of the living, that every part of
a man may be a document, as well as an useful ornament, if it be well
considered of. But the breasts of a woman are more considerable then man's,
because it is the vessel of nourishment to a child; placed near the Liver for
the better concoction of the milk; and near the heart, to excite the mothers
affection the more to the child, and child's affection the more to the mother,
whom she may justly adjure upon just occasion, by the paps which they have
sucked, when she so lovingly embraced them, which no bruit can do.


Mathe. What contemplation yields the inward parts?


Phila. The Lungs by which we breath and speak, being placed near the heart,
shows that speech is the interpreter of the heart, and therefore we should
not breath out one thing, and think another, but every man speak truth to his
neighbor, and not practice equivocations, and mental reservations. So the
ribs show the care of God to defend the vital parts, comprised in the heart
and the liver; well expressed in Scripture by Abner his smiting Asahel under
the fifth rib, and Ioabs smiting him, and also Amasa, in the same place; and by
the soldiers piercing Christ there about that rib where hangs the Pericardia,
out of which issued water and blood, to all which pectorals, John 19.34. Vid.
Syria-Paraphra.
if we add the breast plate of righteousness, the spiritual heart will be the
safer. So the bowels may mind us of the bowels of compassion which Christ had,
Mark 6.34. when his bowels did yearn at the peoples want of provision, so the
word signifies; for he was a merciful High Priest, Heb. 4.15. So the hungry
gut should put us in mind of fasting, till we feel that part complain, and
remember us what affliction of soul we should suffer for offending God. But as
one is called a blind gut, so the belly is said to want ears to hear this
doctrine; such like the Cyclops, know no God but their belly. So our kidneys
which are the most secretly enclosed, should teach us to walk sincerely with
God, who searches the reins, Psalm. 139. lest we like hypocrites, have God near
in our mouths, but put him far from our reins, Ier. 12.1. For want of this, we
see what man is come to, as appears in Psalm. 5.9. and Romans ^.13. His throat is
an open sepulcher, seet swift to shed blood; his right hand is a hand of
falsehood; a woman's beauty is like a jewel of gold in a swines snout. We find
the proverb too true; the properest man at the gallows, and the fairest woman
in the stews: So that we may cry out, O most excellent soul, what a vile
lodging have thou gotten? The five senses that have their beginning from common
sense, which can judge of all objects absent, as the five do of the object
present, are all worthy our consideration, as to behold how every organ of
sense has his proper object; the Eye, colors, the Ear, sounds, the Tongue,
meats, pleasant, or not pleasant; the Nose, odours, or evil savours, the
Nerves are especially the seat of feeling, as well as the means of motion, and
therefore they being in every part, the sense of feeling is in every part, and
the other four are in the head only, and though they be so near in seat to each
other, yet one invadeth not another, nor can do as the other. These since man's
fall are become brokers, to set our hearts to sale to the devil, and the
world, for the price of a few momentany delights, and so the precious soul
would be ravished out of Christ's hands, but the spirit of God interposeth, and
by the word of God insureth us of the interpellation of the Son of God, by
which he has promised to marry our souls to himself in righteousness and
everlasting glory. So the heart of man is the seat of passions, a choice
vessel that is first formed in generation, and first reformed in spiritual
regeneration. And as it first lives, so it dies last. So the life of grace
first begins there, and is last left there. This is that which God strives for
against the devil, the world, and the flesh, as Michael did with the devil
for Moses body, Jude 9. But when we answer Gods request, who cries to us,
Myson give me thy heart, then the battle. cease. This heart before the fall
was like the holy land, upon which God set his eyes day and night; or like the
Ark from which God gave his Oracles, for the answer of the heart is from the
Lord; or like a throne where God rules by his scepter of righteousness; or
like Moses Tables, wherein God writes his Law. But since the fall that man set
up Idols in his heart, God has turned it as Iehu did the house of Baal, into a
draught house, so that now as it is full of all uncleanness, so out of it
proceeds by nature nothing else, Mat. 15. It was once wise, now a foolish
heart, and full of darkness, Romans 1. It was once more inclinable to the right,
but now the left hand, Eccles. 10.2. which makes us do all things sinisterly.


Mathe. Whether was man's body immortal before the fall?


Phila. Not essentially, for so only God is immortal; nor by the gift of
creation, as the Angels and the souls of men are, but potentially only, and
upon condition if he had continued in obedience, which he not doing, his body
cannot be made immortal now, but by the gift of a new creation, which will be
at the resurrection. So that his body was immortal naturally, so long as he
kept the condition of immortality. It is true, his body might have died before
the fall, for it was as possible to die, as he was possible to fall. But this
possibility would never have been reduced into act, if he had not fallen: For
as the Angels could not die, neither was it necessary they should die; so Adam
might have died, but it was not necessary that without sin he should have died,
so being corrupted by sin, it was necessary he should die; but not before he
fell: For we see by the relics of immortality left in Adam, that the Fathers
before the flood lived a mighty great age; as Adam to 930, years, and
Methuselah lived 969. which was not so many moons as some think; for then they
had hardly reached the age of man, and so the world would have been a long time
peopling; and though Adam might well beget Sheth about twelve years after his
creation, because he was made at first a perfect man, yet if Adam begat not his
third son till he was 130. moons old, surely then Sheth began too young, who at
105. years from his birth, begat Enos, which by the moons account was but
eight years and five months. But sure their age was measured by the years of
the Sun, i. twelve months to a year. And it is no more wonderful, then that
Isreal's cloths should last forty years in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29.5. And the
manna in the golden pot many hundreds of years. Joseph's bones 215. years;
Joshua 24.32. And the mummies of Egypt are kept by art so many 1000. years, in
full proportions, as when alive. What could not God have done to the body of
Adam, if he had not sinned.


Mathe. Whether is man's soul immortal?


Phila. Yea, and it may be proved-first, from the opposition that is between
the life of a beast, and a man. A beasts life perishes, because it ends in the
sensitive faculty, whose organs being destroyed, their life is at an end; for
they cannot work beyond the sensitive faculty, because they want reason and
understanding, Psalm. 32.9. Be not like the horse that has no understanding or
reason; and you may see they have none, because all creatures of the same kind,
work alike in all they do, as the swallows build all alike, and the spiders
weave all alike, and beyond it they cannot proceed; but man's operation is
diverse one from another. Beside, the desires of the creature is not to any
eternity, but to the present preservation of it self and it kind; but man's
desires reach higher. So the delight of a beast is merely in things sensual,
and therefore it acts only by the body, because life is settled only in the
blood, Levit. 17.11. but man can delight in things beyond all sense natural, 1
Pet. 1.8. as to believe in Christ whom they have not yet seen. And indeed if
man's soul were not immortal, then it might desire things beyond it self, and
so all its desires should be frustrate, which is contrary to the end of natures
operation, who has made nothing in vain; and therefore whatsoever the soul
does naturally desire, without sin, is to be had either here or hereafter; and
therefore if the soul have a defire to be happy, and free from misery, or to
have a being when the body is dissolved, certainly it flows from the
immortality of its nature. A shadow whereof appears in man's desire to live in
memory, or in posterity, in buildings or purchases, Psalm. 49.12. and 2 Samuel
18.18. 2. We find the soul to be incorporeall; for it can comprehend things
not only singular, but universal, and the kinds of all things. 3. It is
immortal that it may receive the justice of God, which it has not here; for
here the wicked flourish, Ier. 12. as Dives did, Luke 15. thou had thy
pleasures, and Lazarus pains. 4. Beside, it appears also by Gods covenant with
his people, it being everlasting, they must also be so, or else the covenant
cease to be; but they never cease to exist, as Mat. 22.32. all live to God,
he is God of the living, of those souls that are bound up in the bundle of
life, 2 Samuel 25.29. with the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.


Mathe. How is the soul united to the body?


Phila. By Gods divine concurrence in generation, which being man's form, does
by its two faculties of sense and vegetation, in forty days prepare the matter
to receive its quickening power, and so body and soul make one person; the
soul being so united to it, as that the body can neither live nor be called
man without it. And her being in the body is wonderful; not as a man in his
house, which will stand though the man go out; nor as a spider in the web, who
setting in the center of it, feels the touch of every cord. But as the light
diffuseth it self through the whole air, and is neither corrupted nor
divided; so is the soul whole in the whole body, and whole in every part of
it; and as the Sun has diverse operations in diverse parts of the world, making
spring in one place and harvest in another; so does the soul work diversely in
our body by attraction, decoction, quickening and making us to grow. And by this
union, does only animate that body in which it is, nor can it any other as some
learned have thought: Pythag. and the Jews, as John 1.21.
For every body of the same kind is determined to his own soul, nor can receive
any other; nor can the soul animat any other body but its own to which it is
determined; therefore when separated they long for their own bodies, Rev. 6.10.


Mathe. What is the Image of God in man?


Phila. Some qualities that have analogy, and bear some likeness with God, and
that was holy knowledge, righteousness and dominion. For you must know that
this image was not Gods personal image, for that is Christ, as Heb. 1.1, 2.
but his essential Image, and therefore says he, let us make man after our
image, not my image, i. the image of God in Trinity; but by regeneration he
shall be conformed to his personal image, that is, unto Christ, as Romans 8.
those whom he foreknew, them he predestined to be conformed to the image of
his Son. 2. That this image consisted not in bodily shape, for God has none;
nor to his perfect image, but that he was made according to Gods image
formally, that is, to the example that God purposed in his mind; nor was he
obsignated and sealed with the holy spirit, by the grace of perseverance, for
then he could not have fallen. But he was created in holiness negatively, as
being no way guilty of vain knowledge, nor injustice, nor to slavery subjected.
Therefore St Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.
that he was made but a living soul ( i. possible to live ever, and to get
children to the same image, but could not convey to them any quickening grace to
make them certain of ever standing) but the second Adam was made a quickening
spirit to perform that.


Mathe. To what end did God make man thus?


Phila. Surely that he might glorify him by having respect to him that made
him; like a circle, which is a most perfect figure, because it returns to the
point from whence it was first deduced. All good men are like this; but those
that run strait on from, and return not, are in the way to hell. God cries to
us to return, O Shulamite, return, because he being a most wise spirit, thought
fit among all the creatures, to have one kind of understanding creature, that
might return to him by praise and honor of him, not passively as the common
creature sets forth his praise occasionally, but actively and directly to give
him the honor due unto his name, with our heart, tongue, and life.


Mathe. If the soul has no existence till by generation, and by Gods
concurrence it be united to the body, what existence has it after death, when
it is separated from the body I conceive not.


Phila. God having an immediate act in the souls production, though by
propagation it cannot be dissolved but by that power who gave it first a
beginning. Now though he for sin dissolveth the body (which consists of
natural principles) for a while, till he reunites it again to the soul at the
resurrection, in a greater perfection, yet we read not that he does so to the
souls, but they live to him who is not the God of the dead, but of the living
souls, which cannot die, though congenerated with the body, through Gods
powerful efficacy, the parents mediating the union. And therefore as it is a
spiritual being, it may very well exist after separation from the body, and
live, and understand, though not as it did in the body by conversion of it
self to the fantasy, which then it has not; nor by any formerly received
species kept in memory; for then the souls of children departed should
understand nothing; but the soul separated understands as Angels do know a
new thing presented to them. By which we may see plainly, that souls separated
know not what is done here on earth, Aquin. p. 1. q. 89. art. 8.
further then God pleases to reveal to them; and who can prove God does any
such thing continually by way of reflection upon them.


Mathe. How fell men from God being made so righteous?


Phila. Solomon says they found out inventions, i. Adam and all his successors
did; yea, and Eve first, who was called Adam of God, as well as he, Ishab.
Virago.
Genesis 5.2. But her husband Adam called her woman, Genesis 2.23. and afterward
Havah Evah, the mother of all living, Genesis 3.20. Her first invention was to
open her ear too wide to the Devils subtle counsel, who had fallen himself
first from God, and from heaven the place of blessedness, and cast down into
these lower regions, where finding man to be Gods favorite, he was very
industrious to bring him to destruction with himself. And for this purpose
makes the serpents body the organ of his speech, and tempts the woman,
supposing her to be inferior to the man in understanding, but far more
inclinable to curiosity. His temptation of her was to eat of the tree God
forbad, Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 13. c. 20.
and set apart as a token of his prerogative, and their obedience; she
consented, and gave to her husband, upon which St Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.
the man was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression. That is, the man was not deceived immediately by the serpent,
but the woman was; nor did the woman deceive him, but gave it him, for she had
no mind to make him transgre sse, for she was so persuaded by the serpent, as
if she had not transgressed in eating thereof her self; so he was tempted by
her, but not deceived by her, nor the serpent: For the serpent left that work
to the woman, knowing how prevalent she might be with him, being his only
companion. This tree whose fruit was forbidden them, was called the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, Moses Barcephas, translated by Masius.
not that it had any such virtue to increase knowledge; for the tree was
natural, not metaphysicall; but it is called so from that unhappy effect which
they should find after the eating of it: Junius.
For as Adam in his innocence knew good, and might have obtained it, and knew
evil, and might have avoided it; so after his fall he knew the good he had
lost, and the evil he found; the good of obedience, the evil of disobedience;
not but he knew good before by prudence, but not evil by experience till now.
Their sin therefore was not a precacious carnal knowledge one of another, as
some think; for we find a command for it (increase and multiply) but no time
set of abstinence or continence, by breach whereof they might offend God. Genesis
4.1.
And we find also in Scripture, that they had no carnal knowledge of each
other, till they had sinned, for had Eve conceived in the state of innocence,
no doubt but the children had been innocent also, which had been so conceived.


Mathe. What was it that most prevailed with Adam to do this?


Phila. 1. Persuasion of the woman filled with unquiet vanity. 2. It may be the
false understanding of Gods threatening, who had said, the day on which thou
eatest thereof thou shall die, and perceiving Eve had eaten, and yet was not
dead, he was the more easily persuaded to eat; But God meant they should become
mortal, not die presently. 3. A loathnesse to displease her, or sad her spirit
that was his only comfort. 4. His own ambition of a farther knowledge in
himself did betray, and overpower his understanding, so that he did not look
seriously into the evils incident, and the sorrows emerging from that act, but
affecting the supposed glory to be obtained by tasting, he was driven on and
transported by the gentle gale of persuasion, and so turned from the Creator to
the creature, and so fell under Gods infinite wrath to be poured eternally,
upon body and soul.


Mathe. How did he escape it?


Phila. Natural death he could not, for justice must have its course, he
having brought himself under the power of death, yea, his soul too, but that
God himself provided a plaster so soon as he was wounded by the serpent. For
since he could not stand by the Law, he propounds to him a promised seed of the
woman, who should loose the bands of Satan in which they were tied, purposed of
God upon the foresight of their fall, that so they might live by faith, since
they could not by works. Not that God did hereby abolish man's duty, but showed
that his duty was insufficient to justify him in his sight, whose infinite
justice he had offended. So that now all he did in pious practices, was only a
fruit of his faith, not a cause of his justice, Romans 5.18.
to show his gratification, not justification; therefore did God show forth his
intent of this way of worship and religion, from the beginning: And therefore
as he forbad them the tree of knowledge, to show that none could come to
felicity by seeking curious and unnecessary knowledge, so he barred them of the
tree of life, lest the carnal knowledge they had got, should lead them into
farther presumptuous error, as to eat of the tree of life, in hope that might
bring them to eternity, as they hoped the other tree should have made them
wise, and so abuse that for nutriment, which God set rather for a Sacrament.


Mathe. How was the hope of Gods promise continued?


Phila. By Covenant, Types, Promises, Prophecies, till the fullness of time
came.

1. By Covenant. This covenant did not appear plainly at first, saving to Adam
in the promise of Christ, Genesis 3.15. called the seed of the woman. For we find
no covenant made by God with any of the Patriarchs about Religious worship,
till Abraham, though they that were of the line of Sheth were called the sons
of God, because they professed that true Religion constantly, which they had
received from Adam by tradition. But these mixing themselves with the daughters
of men, i. the lineage of Cain, God was displeased so, that he drowned all the
world, save Noah and his family, which were but eight persons in all. This time
was called an obscure or dark time, Scaliger in Proleg. in Eusebius. Varro de re
rustica.
and it continued even after the flood, till the time of Moses, who first gave
the true light of Gods proceeding with man. It is true, that there were many
good men before and after the flood: But as the flood obliterated the memory of
some, so the confounding of languages left few worthy memory, but some of the
generation of Shem the son of Noah, who preserved the first Language and
Religion, i. the Hebrew tongue and sacrifice as is supposed.

These Patriarchs that descended of Shem, Genesis 8.
the last of whom was Abraham, after the confusion of languages, and dispersion
of the people collected in Shinar to build the Tower of Babel, they traveled
(save so many of them as were at Shinar, which Nimrod made his own seat) to Vr
of the Chaldees. From whence God called Abram, Genesis 12.1. to travel to Canaan,
who by faith obeyed God, Heb. 11.8.
not knowing whither he went. He sojourned a while at Haran, and then came to
Canaan, Genesis 12.5. after his father Terahs death. With this Patriarch God
afterward renewed the first promise of the blessed seed, that was made to Adam;
for in Genesis 12.2, 3. he tells him that he shall be a blessing, and that to all
the families of the earth. To confirm this promise, he first promises him a
son, Genesis 15.4. and then makes a covenant of Religion with him, and seals it
with circumcision, Genesis 17.10. After this he more plainly discovers the
promised seed to him. First in the sacrifice of Isaac, commanded and prevented
by accepting a Ra^^^ in his stead. Next by showing a Type of Christ's persecuted
Church in Ismael mocking Isaac; and then by banishing the bondmaid and her son,
who must not part the inheritance with the son of freedom. Then again by
showing him in a vision the captivity of his seed in Egypt, a type of the
Churches thraldom to the world, for which God will judge the world, Genesis 15.14.

To this Patriarchs son Isaac, God continues the covenant; and so to Jacob his
son, of whom came the twelve fathers of the Jewish nation, who together with
their families going to Egypt in the famine, were enthralled after the death
of Joseph, whom they had sold thither (who proved an happy steward for them, as
well as the Egyptians) his benefit being forgotten by the following Kings of
Egypt, they envied Israel, and kept them in subjection and slavery; which was
a type of Christ's Churches future troubles, as Moses their deliverer foresaw,
Heb. 11.26.
which made him endure affliction with them, rather then enjoy the pleasures of
Pharaohs Court. By this Moses God renewed the covenant with those people of
Israel, after he had brought them out of Egypt, Exodus 19.5. adding thereto the
ten Commandments, and other Laws and Ordinances for the forms of their
Religion, Heb. 9.1. All which did but set forth Christ to come in his
holiness, righteousness, and sufferings, together with that equity and piety
which his Church should practice under the Gospel. Now the same covenant that
God made with them at first, was continued to them till Christ abolished the
outward letter of it by his coming, and set up the spiritual substance of it
in the hearts of men. This was prophesied before Christ came, Ezekiel. 11.19. and
that the Gentiles should be his people, which before knew him not, Hos. 2. Romans
9. This is the old and new Commandment, 1 John 2.7, 8. and must find obedience
and operation on the hearts of several men to the worlds end, as it has from
the beginning.

2. Gal. 4.
The Types were shadows of Christ; and they were Chronologicall, Personal, or
Sacramental, and when those shadows were past, our beloved came (as the
Church desired him, Cant. 2.17.) and the dayspring from an high did visit us,
Luke 1.78.
as said old Zacharias.

The first Chronologicall shadow, was the number 6. and 7. For the six days
had a relation to six ages, Chronology shadows. Rev. 10.7. Isid. l. 3. c. 4.
Beda and Rabanus, in Genesis 1.2. Isid. Etym. lib. 5. cap. 59.
in which the mystery of God shall be finished; and as Christ was Alpha, the
beginning of the creation of God in the first day and age, so will be the Omega
in the latter end of the sixth age, which began with his Gospel, and shall end
with his glorious appearing to judgment. The seventh day signified an eternal
rest, to which our Joshua, Jesus, should bring us, Heb. 4.8, 9, 10. when all
Sabbaths of days, months and years shall be passed, being but shadows of
things to come, the body whereof was Christ, Col. 2.16, 17. Which body as at
his first coming put an end to all Jewish rites of the Law; so at his second
coming he shall put an end in the seventh age to all Christian service, and
nothing shall remain of all, but love to God and Christ, and we shall be like
Angels, neither give nor take in marriage; Clem. Alex. in strom. 6.
therefore this seventh age is said to be without mother or issue.

2. The Personal shadows was, first, Adam; 2 Personal shadows.
and therefore Christ is called of Paul the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45. and they
were like in many things. As 1. In being Gods image, Genesis 1.27. in the image of
God created he him. And Heb. 1.2, 3. Christ was the engraven image of his
fathers person. 2. Woman was taken out of his side while he slept; so the
Church framed out of Christ's death. 3. He was in Paradise, and Christ in glory
in the heavens, and the dresser of his Church. 4. He was Lord of all the
creatures; so God put all things into subjection to Christ, Ephesians. 1.22. that he
might recover the dominion that Adam lost: Thus naturally he signified Christ
directly. 1. Ex Congruo. 2. Ex Congruo. Adam. Leo. in ser. 18. de Pass. 3 Ex
Renato.
2. He was like Christ oppositively; for Adam was but a living soul, Christ a
quickening spirit. In Adam all die, in Christ all shall be made alive. Both were
of one flesh, but not of one fact; Adam was a sinner, Christ only a surety. 3.
Adam shadowed Christ in renovation, in supernatural holiness, derived from
heaven; so that as in his created nature he shadowed him forth as God, so in
the state of renovation, or reuniting to God, he shadowed forth him that was
God and man, united by whom, the image lost is recovered with great advantage.
Therefore Paul exhorts to put on the new man in righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4.24.
that being we have lost the shadow of glory in nature, we may recover that by
grace, which is far more substantial, Origin.
invisible, incorporcall, incorruptible, and immortal.


Mathe. What profit is there in this knowledge of shadows?


Phila. Very much; for as the shadow of the dial directs to a substantial
knowledge, namely, as to know the degrees of the Sun in heaven, so does this
show us certain degrees of the Sun of righteousness in the Church.


Mathe. Then pray go on, and show me the rest of them.


Phila. As the first personal shadow of Christ was Adam, so the second was
Abel, who was the third from Adam. Abel.
He signified Christ in his innocent life, and his death: He never did his
brother wrong, yet he killed him, and therefore Christ himself called that
murder the blood of righteous Abel: So though Christ did so many good works
among the Jews, yet they would have stoned him, and though they could not
convince him of fin, yet they crucified him, whose blood notwithstanding,
speaks better things then the blood of Abel, for that cried for revenge, but
Christ's for remission.

The next is Henoch, the seventh from Adam, Henoch.
and so a sabbaticall person, pointing out him in whom mankind must only rest
as on the sabbath. His name signified, Taught or dedicated; so Christ was
taught of God in the humanity, for he increased in wisdom and favor with
God, Exodus 21.6.
Luke 2.52. and was dedicated to God as a perpetual servant Arias Mont. and
Pagnin.
Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. mine ear have thou bored, so the word (erithus) signifies,
though the Apostle turn it, and a body thou have given me, to show how his body
was to be given as a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 3.2. Again,
Henoch was a Prophet, Jude 14. so was Christ. Henoch walked with God, so did
Christ. Cat. Arab. c. 20. fol. 27. a. Rabanus in Genesis 5. Jacob Brocard. in Genesis
5.
Henoch sorrowed three hundred years for Adams fall, and Christ wept often, but
never laughed that the Scripture mentions. Henoch was taken away of God, and
so Christ from death. Henoch was no more seen, nor shall Christ till he comes
to judgment.

The next was Melchisedeck after the flood. Melchisedeck in his generation.
Heb. 7.3. (...). 1 Council. Ephe.
He signified or shadowed Christ in his generation, name, and office. 1. In his
generation, being without father or mother or kindred, without beginning of
days, or end of life: So said, because his generation was very obscure, nor
committed to letters, or the Genealogy in those times. So Christ had no father
as man, nor mother as he was God; yet the Council did rightly style the blessed
Virgin Mary the mother of God; that is, of the hypostaticall union, not of his
eternal generation; she was the medium of uniting the manhood and Godhead
together, but no beginning of his subsisting in the Godhead, which never had
beginning of days, nor can have end of Being. Yet who was this Melchisedecks
father, is hard to say. Some say he was Shem the son of Noah. But others say,
of one Heraclim, the son of Phaleg, who married Salathiel, Vide Epipha. and the
Arabic. Catenam.
the daughter of Gomer, by whom he had this Melchisedeck.

2. 2 In his Name
His name signified the King of righteousness; and as King of Salem it
signified peace, so Christ was both King of righteousness, that was his name,
Jer. 23.6. and the King of peace, Isa. 9.6. because he wrought it, Isa. 53.5.
by suffering chastisement for us, he made peace through the blood of his
cross, Col. 1.20. In which regard St Paul calls him our peace, Ephesians. 1.14. and
our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. So that as in his generation, so in his name
he shadowed Christ also: For as Melchisedecks parents were unknown to that
time, so were Christ's in his time; for few believed his father was God, or that
his mother was a virgin. And as Melchisedeck seemed to be without beginning, or
end of days, in respect of any express account given of it: So Christ had no
beginning in his divine nature, nor no end of his Mediatorship; for his Godhead
and his manhood making one person, never to be dissolved, he is a Mediator
without end, yea, he lived while his body was dead in the grave, which he
raised again by the eternal spirit. And thus what was spoken of Melchisedeck
respectively, was fulfilled in Christ simply and fully. So Melchisedeck was
called King of righteousness and peace, in regard. 1. That he stood
unchallenged of injustice, in that time when the four Kings made war against
the five Kings his neighbors for injustice and rebellion after twelve years
subjection. 2. Genesis 14.4.
He was called King of peace, not only because he was King of the City Salem
(afterward Jerusalem) signifying peace, but because he was in peace when all
his neighbors were at wars round about him. But Christ was King of both
righteousness and peace radically, universally, and effectually in himself
and in all believers.

3. In his Office he was a King and a Priest. King of that City Shalem, 3. In
Office.
which afterward was possessed of the Jebusites, and called Jebushalem, a
disordered place, after which it being inhabited by Israel, and King David, it
was called Jerushalem, the vision of peace, and so a type of heaven. He
appeared like a King by his munificence, when he brought forth bread and wine
to Abraham's wearry troops, Genesis 14.18. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 106. Isid. de Eccl. off.
l. 1. c. 18. Cyprian. Basil. Jerome.
signifying Christ's Sacrament of Bread and Wine, given to all the faithful to
refresh them in their battles against spiritual enemies. 2. He was a Priest to
the most high God, and so no idolatrous Priest. He showed himself a Priest in
blessing Abraham, and in receiving tithes of him. So he shadowed forth him that
was to be both King and Priest after his own order, not of Aaron, but of
Melchisedeck, Heb. 5.6. The next shadow was Isaac, whose name signified
laughter, Isaac. Luke 2.10.
and Christ was the joy of all people. He was begot and born in Abraham's old
age; so was Christ in the latter days and old age of the world. Isaac was
freely offered up by his father; Heb. 1.1. Beda in Genesis 22.6.
so Christ was freely given of God for the world. Isaac carried the wood, and
Christ carried his cross. Isaac died not, John 19.17. Heb. 11.9. Clem. Alex.
paedag. l. 1. c. 5. Greg. in 6. Hom. in Ezekiel.
but Abraham received him from the Altar in a similitude, i. of Christ. For as
he died not on the Altar; so neither did Christ as he was the only begotten Son
of God. For his divinity could not die; but was like the escape goat that went
from the sight of men into the wilderness, or the land of sequestration, while
his humane nature like the Ram that died in Isaac's room, was caught in the
thorns of our sins, signified by that crown of thorns put on his head. Genesis
22.4.
Isaac was delivered the third day after that he was voted to death; so Christ
was raised the third day after that he died. The place of his deliverance was
called by Abraham Jehovah jireh (The Lord will provide in the mount;) so God on
mount Calvary provided for us a sacrifice and a Savior also. These were
shadows of Christ before the Law.


Mathe. What other shadows of Christ were under the Law?


Phila. The first Personal shadow under the Law, was Aaron, whose name
signifies an high mountain. So it is prophesied of Christ and his Church, that
in the latest of days, the mountain of the Lords house shall be established on
the top of the mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and all Nations shall flow unto it. So in the sixth age God did fulfill it by
setting up Christ, who being lift up, drew all men to him; for this little
stone, Dan. 2.34. grew into a great mountain, and filled the whole earth; that
is, with his doctrine and Church. He the highest for eminency, and his Church by
universality. Aaron was chief Priest; so was Christ, but yet of a Kingly line,
which Aaron was not. Aaron took not this office upon himself of his own will,
but was called of God; so was Christ consecrated of God, Heb. 5.^.
and appointed to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck. Aaron was
washed, and Christ unspotted, holy, harmless, and undefiled, and separate from
sinners, Heb. 7.26. He was anointed with holy oil, and Christ with the holy
spirit, by which he was a sweet savor to God. The next shadow is Joshua, whose
name in Hebrew, is all one with Jesus in Greek, Joshua.
as appears, Heb. 4.8. in these words, If Jesus (that is) Joshua, had given
them rest. It signifies a Savior, Mat. 1.21. Now this man did type forth
Christ. 1. Because he lead Israel to Canaan, and was their Captain, as Christ
was the Prince of our salvation, and therefore calls himself, Joshua 5.14. the
Captain of the Lords host, i. of all those that fight under his banner of the
cross, and are not ashamed of their profession. 2. He typed forth Christ by
circumcising all that were to enter into the land; so Christ does all
Christians by a circumcision spiritual, putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, whose efficacy lies hid in Baptism,
Col. 2.11, 12. which takes off the shame of our natural Egyptian bondage. 3.
He presented Christ, who will one day dispossess the earth of all wicked
persons, that the meek may possess the earth promised, Mat. 5.5. And as Peter
says, we look for a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; and in the mean
time by the power of his death, does slay those Canaanites, Origin. Josh. Lect.
and in Trop.
Perizites, and Jebusites, that are within us in part till he come again (as
God did once from mount Paran to Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.2.) from his holiness and
happiness to divide the people, Hab. 3.3, 6. Jude 14.
and then shall our spiritual enemies be trod down for ever.

The next was Sampson, Sampson.
a word derived of Shemesh. (His Sun) Indeed he shined more brightly then any
of the deliverers; so did Christ the Sun of righteousness above all, Mal. 4.2.
2. He was a Nazarite of Nazar, because he was separated from common things, as
the Razor and Wine, Number. 6.3, 4, 5. So Christ was, Heb. 7.26. separate from
sinners; Romans 12.2.
so are all in Christ separate from the common course of the world; for Christ
was not called a Nazarite from the Town Nazareth, where he lived, (except by
mistake) but from his calling ceremonial, to answer to Sampson his type. For
it is not to be found in the Prophets verbally, that Christ should be called a
Nazarite, but in his personal type Sampson. Judge. 13.15.
And therefore St. Matthew rather alludes to the common mistake of the people,
that he should be called a man of Nazareth, rather then to his ceremonial
office, a Nazarite, according to our English translation; but in the Syriach it
is Naisareth, of Naisar, to observe or keep, as indeed the Nazarites did their
vow with all strictness. And so from the City the place of his dwelling, the
people fulfilled a prophecy, unwittingly, as well as Caiaphas; and the
soldier that pierced his side fulfilled that of Zach. 12.10. Yea Pilate
himself calls him in his superscription, Jesus that Nazarite in the Greek;
Nazarenus in loco, and in merito, 1. sanctue vel mundus quia pecetum non ficit.
Isid. Etym. lib. 7.2.
he meaning the City: But the Spirit that guided him intending the office
ceremonial of Christ, of which Sampson was a figure prophetically spoken of in
the book of Judges, and made good in Christ conceived at Nazareth.

Again, the Spirit came not upon Sampson till he was a complete man; so Christ
did not show himself till thirty years of age, and after John's Baptism.
Sampsons first victory was over a Lion; so Christ's over Satan that roaring
Lion, Mat. 4. Vid. Aug in Psalm. 70.
that seeks whom to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Then next he overcomes the Philistines.
First with the Jaw bone of an Ass; So Christ by the despised simplicity of
preaching, overcame the world, 1 Cor. 1.18, 21. though the Preachers of it are
derided and ridden of the world for it like Asses. Secondly, he rising from
sleep, carried away the gates of Azza upon his shoulders. So did Christ rising
from the grave carry away the gates of hell and death, and lead captivity
captive. Thirdly, he was taken in Dalilahs lap; so was Christ in the bonds of
poverty and weakness, as the name Dalilah signifies. Sampsons lock was cut
off, and his strength decayed: But Christ herein exceeded; for he laid down
his strength willingly, by which he made the soldiers before fall backward,
John 18.6. and this out of love to his Church, though an adulteress. Sampson
was flouted, Christ was mocked. But at last Sampson at his death pulled down
the house of Dagon upon their heads, Judge. 17.30.
and so slew more at his death then in all his life; and so did Christ when he
cried it is finished on the cross, and bowed his head, then was sin, death and
hell quelled at once, though not triumphed over till his resurrection.

The next type was Iehoshuah the High Priest to Judah, Iehoshuah.
after their return from Babylon, at the rebuilding of the Temple, Zach. 3.1.
He is likened to a branch, and a stone, verse 8, 9, 10. and Christ is called
the branch, ver. 8. and a stone laid before Jehoshuah; so is Christ the corner
stone laid before the Priests, upon which they must build the Church. Satan
stood on the Priests right hand, but was reproved; so he thought to get the
upper hand of Christ, but was vanquished. Iehoshuah was a brand pulled out of
the fire; so was Christ, when he satisfied the consuming fire of Gods wrath,
saying, It is finished. He was clothed in filthy garments; and so was Christ
with our sins, that knew no sin in himself. Again, glorious garments were
given him, and those taken away; so Christ having satisfied for our sins,
mortality is put off, and glory and immortality put on.

The next type of Christ was Cyrus, though an uncircumcised King, Cyrus.
whom God calls his shepherd, Isa. 44.28. and cap. 45.1. his anointed. We are
to observe, 1. His Name. 2. His Country. 3. His Office.

His Name was Cyrus, Compounded of Caph and Rosh
which in Hebrew signifies (as an Head) and so he was a political head of
Isreal's return from the captivity of Babylon, which he decreed in the first
year of his reign, Ezra. 1.1. In the Persian language it signified (as a Sun)
to show how he should outshine all those shepherds with whom he was bred. Just.
hist. lib. 1.
This name was put upon him by Gods secret ordinances 100. years at least
before he was born, Isa. 45.3. Hisichyus, Jo. Wolphius in Ezra.
however the Persian might give him that name in relation to the Sun whom they
worshipped. But God gives it from the rising of the Sun, that they might know
the God of Israel who had named him so long before, Isa. 45.56. And in his very
name he shadowed out Christ, who was and is the head of his Churches
deliverance from captivity of Babylon, the confusion that Satan, sin, and death
has made, yea, he was that Sun of righteousness that did arise with healing
in his wings, as says Malach. cap. 4.

2. He was by Country a Persian; which word Persia is derived of Paras (to
divide) as Daniel expounds Peers, cap. 5.28. in relation to Cyrus the Persian,
who then with his Uncle Darius the Mede, besieged Babylon, who did afterward
divide that Kingdom between them, yea, the Jews from the Gentiles, by sending
them home to their native Country. In this he was also a type of Christ, who as
by the power of his Godhead, divided languages at Babel; so by his Gospel has
separated believers from infidels, so at last he will divide his sheep from the
goats, who took him by faith for their Shepherd, and expects his coming as a
King, to divide the eternal inheritance among them.

3. By his Calling, Cyrus was both a Shepherd and a King. First a Shepherd in
his forlorn estate, while he lay hid and secret, and God calls him Cyrus my
Shepherd, Isa. 44.28.
Isa. 45.1. and yet his anointed also, and one that shall perform all his
pleasure, in building Jerusalem, and laying the foundations of the Temple, by
sending back the Jews thither. 2 Chronicles. 36.23. John.
So was Christ the true Shepherd and King also, of whom David in that kind was
also a figure, though Christ's Kingdom was not worldly nor temporal, but
spiritual, and so to be continued for ever in our hearts, till his eternal
Kingdom shall take place at the end of this world.

That this great King, Cyrus, in his releasing Israel was a figure of Christ,
it appears farther, in that God did in his joint reign with Darius, reveal
to Daniel, whose name signifies (the judgment of God) the coming of the
Messiah, whose death should put an end to all the Jews typical sacrifices,
and should release the Israel of God from all legal bondage, Dan. 9.21, 24.
and sinful servility, and Satan's vassalage. This message is revealed by
Gabriel, whose name signifies (Man-God) in relation to his emploiment
concerning Christ that was God and Man. The time set for the accomplishing this
great work is seventy weeks, that is, seventy sevens of years according to Gods
account, a day for a year, Number. 14.34. And so Ezekiel. 4.5, 6. this seventy sevens
was to begin with the decree of Cyrus, for rebuilding the Temple, Dan. 9.25.
and the whole sum of this seventy sevens, is 490. years. About the end of
which time, which he says shall be 62. weeks (the Messiah shall be cut off,
Dan 9.19.
but not for himself) that is, after seven weeks, (viz.) 49. Clem. Alex.
strom. 1. Dav. Chyt. in John 2.
years have been spent in building Ierusalems walls and the Temple, there
remains the other 72. weeks, which is 434. years, at the end whereof, Christ
by his death introduces everlasting righteousness to them that believe upon
it, saying on the Cross, It is finished; that is, though sacrifice continued
afterward till the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman armies, yet all
sacrifice did now vertually cease (Christ having offered up himself a
sacrifice for all) to signify which the veil of the Temple at that time rent
miraculously. Heb. 7.27.
I know there be many contentions among Writers, about the seventy sevens of
weeks, upon mistake of Gabriels speech to Daniel. Others mistake it by cleaving
too much to the Olympic computation. But the Olympiad years are very
uncertain; Onuph. Com. lib. 1. faslor. Pluts. in initio Number. Po.
some counting an Olympiad every fifth year, some every fourth year. As for
those that conceive the seventy sevens ended with his birth or baptism, they
are confuted, because that put no end to sacrifice, for Christ bid the Leper
offer for his cleansing. Nor did the desolation of the Temple, put an end to
it; for the Apostles had preached it down long before, even from the death of
Christ, Beda de natura rerum, cap. 9.
which they durst not have done, but that they knew Christ had put an end to
all before.

But beside, this man was a type of Christ by his edict sent forth for building
the Temple; for so Christ our great Shepherd, Beda in Ezra, cap. 1.
our Head, our Sun, sent out his Apostles to build Temples to himself of
living stones: Yea, he did figure out by his bounty toward the Temple, what
other Kings should do to Christ's Church, even offer their riches and glory to
it, Isa. 60.6.


Mathe. What Sacramental shadows were there of Christ?


Phila. The first was the tree of life in Paradise, Genesis 2.9. which was a sign
and Sacrament of life, and termed of some writers, Ju. and Ties mel. in Annot.
Rabaaus.
a visible Sacrament of invisible wisdom. This was not forbidden Adam to taste
of, for none is excepted but the tree of knowledge, as Eve her self
confesses, Genesis 3. Lomb. lib. 1. did. 17. Beda in Genesis
yet there was great difference between the eating of this tree, and the rest;
for in this tree was a sacrament, in the rest but only an aliment or
nourishment. And what was this sacramental tree a sign of, but only of Christ,
who is the true life of them that believe; and a tree of life to all that lay
hold upon him, Pro. 3.18. who is the wisdom of the Father, and is made
wisdom to us. This is the best tree in the Churches garden, which is Gods
Paradise. And we shall find it so, if Christ be so planted in our conscience,
that we forsake him not for that nice and curious knowledge, which is but a
cloak for our own evil dispositions and corruptions, as all schism and
heresy is. By this tree Adam was taught that life was Gods free gift before he
sinned; how much more now is it since we have sinned. And if Adam had
representative sacraments, in the state of innocence, how much more have we
need of exhibitive sacraments, to convey grace to us in the estate of nocency,
although the Swenkfeldians, both old and new, say we need neither Sacraments
nor preaching.

The next Sacramental shadow was Sacrifice. Sacrifice.
A thing done by men (by Gods appointment) as being of the more worthy Sex, and
first created, to signify him that was the first born of every creature; and
that the chief Sacrificer of all our oblations to God our High Priest, Jesus
Christ. This rule St Paul followed, 1 Cor. 14.34.
who forbids a woman to meddle in Church matters, by speaking in the Church,
being not the first in the creation, though chief in transgression, 1 Timothy
2.12. Some think that before the Law, only the oldest of the families or
Prophets did facrifice. But there is no certainty of Scripture for it, since
that Abel the younger, sacrificed as well as Cain the elder brother. Genesis 4.3.
Fenestel. de sacerdot. Romans cap. 11.
Indeed the heathen did commonly offer sacrifice by their Kings, as the Romans.
And the Egyptians did not commit their holy mysteries to every one, but to
those who were to come to the government of their Kingdom, or to those of
their Priests, Clem. Alex. strom. 5.
who were most approved for lineage, learning, and elevation, so that they were
more religious, though no less idolatrous, then Jeroboam, who made any one a
Priest, as many do among us, the more shame. But after the Law God restrains
this to one trive, namely, of Levi.

This word sacrifice, signifies a thing sacred or holy, and had diverse names.
Mincha, a gift or oblation. Gnolah, because it ascended, as in fire. Zebach,
killed, i. if it were a thing had life. Misbeach, because laid on the Altar.
Karhan, drawing near to God. Now as Christ the Son of God, was signified by the
tree of life; so as he was the son of man, he was typed by sacrifice, whether
animate or inanimate. For 1. He was the only meritorious oblation. 2. He was
laid upon his cross, as upon the Altar, in similitude to the Altar of
sacrifices; but he offered himself by the eternal spirit, by which he was
separate to the work of our redemption. Now that all Sacrifice was but a type
of his oblation of himself, it is said that he was the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world vertually, and so Christ is, yesterday and to day, and
the same for ever, Heb. 13.8. Virtually for them before he came in the flesh;
Actually when he came in the flesh, and so efficaciously for all believers
past, present, future; for sacrifice did not only represent him, but did
exhibit him to all that in faith did expect him, though veiled, as we believe
upon him though under the Gospel revealed. For it is true that God printeth an
effectual operation upon things sacramental. Iamblicus de mysterits in cap de
Virt. sac.
And so God did no doubt upon the Jews sacraments till Christ came in the
flesh, by whose meritorious sacrifice we are saved, even as they, Act. 15.11.

The next shadow of Christ sacramentally, Passover.
is circumcision, which was first commended to Abraham, Genesis 17. and to his
seed till Christ came and abolished it, and placed Baptism in the room of it,
which being once settled, Gal. 5.2.
Christ profits them nothing who are circumcised; for baptism is the Gentiles
circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. In Christ they were circumcised by the
circumcision made without hands, which is putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, being buried with him in baptism,
and raised again by faiths operation. By which we see what circumcision was in
it self, even cutting off the foreskin of the male-kind his generative part,
and also what it signified in Christ, even the casting away the sins of the
flesh.


Mathe. What need Christ be circumcised, who had no sin?


Phila. Surely not for his own sake, but for ours. For by circumcision he
becomes bound to keep the Law, and so became surety for us, that he would
satisfy all for us in respect of precept and punishment; For whosoever was
circumcised, was bound to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. He underwent it also to
excuse or exempt us from that hard Sacrament, and yet to convey us the grace of
mortification by a more easy Sacrament, even by baptism. Also that thereby
his righteousness might be conveied effectually to all Abraham's seed by nature
or grace, that believed upon this Christ the promised seed; of whose
righteousness, Romans 4.11.
circumcision was to them, and baptism is the seal to us, Romans 4.23, 24.
to whom the same righteousness shall be imputed, if we believe in him that
raised up Christ, who as he was circumcised, was typed forth by circumcision
the seal of that righteousness promised to come upon man by the promised
seed, Christ. This was the first exhibiting sacrament that God gave to mankind.
He gave a representative sign of the Rainbow to Noah, that he would never
drown the world again, which was a temporal grace: But this conveied to
Abraham and his seed, the promise of internal and eternal grace, and
whatsoever is attainable by faith. It is true, that many other people were
circumcised, but to them it was no seal of covenant, but to Isaacs people only
of whom it was promised, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Some writers
tell us of the Egyptians and Aethiopians, that they were circumcised, but know
not from whence they had it. So writes Herodotus, that lived about the time of
Nehemiah. Herodotus in Euterpe.
But if they had it, surely, it was taken up from some of Ismaels scattered
progeny, the son of Abraham by Hagar; which circumcision the Hagarens, who call
themselves Saracens, do practice at this day; but it is to them no seal except
of family only.


Mathe. What was the next shadow sacramental?


Phila. It was the Passover, called in the original Pesach, a transition,
because the destroying Angel passed over the houses of the Israelites in the
plague, Exodus 12.12. This Passover was a sacramental Feast appointed of God,
Exodus 12. In the very term it signifies Christ, in whom our sin was past over,
and our punishment also, and both laiod upon himself. This Feast was to be
kept in the month Abib, which God appoints to be their first month in the year,
whereas before they began it in Tisri, about the autumnall equinoctial. But it
must now begin in the vernall, to type forth him, from whose reign in our
heart, we are to begin our time of spiritual birth, as the Church did her
ecclesiastical account. The meat of this Feast was to be a Lamb, or an He-Goat
of a year old; the Lamb typing forth Christ's innocent nature, the Goat our
corrupt nature. So it was to be set apart on the tenth day of Abib, and slain
the fourteenth day at evening. So Christ came to Jerusalem about that time, as
if to prepare himself to be that oblation, and preached there, Rabanus.
and was betrayed by Judas, and taken by the Jews, and crucified on the
fourteenth day, about the eighth and ninth hour, Jos. Scalig. de emenda temp.
Joseph. de bello Jude. lib. 6.
which was the time passing between the evening sacrifice and the Sun set, and
then he died on the Cross. After which in the evening, began their paschal
Feast, without acknowledging Christ to be their spiritual Paschal Lamb, the
oblation for sin by his innocence, Bed. in Exo. 12.
nor the He-Goat by taking our sinful nature upon him. This time both in
regard of the month and hour, had a special relation to Christ. For the name
of this month (Abib) signifies an ear of corn, not only because in this month
the green ears of corn appeared, but also because in this month they were to
offer the first fruits of corn to God, Lev. 23.14. the green corn relating to
Christ, who in this month, was to spring up fresh and green out of the earth,
by his resurrection, and to become the first fruits of the dead, which by that
resurrection of his should be all raised. This was prophesied of, Psalm. 72.16.
There shall be an handful of corn in the earth, upon the top of the mountains,
whose fruit shall bud like Lebanon, and shall flourish from the City as grass.
John 12.24.
This was effected by Christ's death upon mount Calvary, after which he was
sowed like corn in the ground by his burial, and after he was thus mortified,
then by his resurrection he multiplied in the hearts of men, who believed upon
him to be the fruitful seed of eternal life, and the Sun of excellency, both
which the word Bar in that Psalm signifies, as well as in Psalm. 2.12.

Their celebration of this feast also was typical. Lact. de vera sapien. l. 4.
c. 8.
1. In slaying the Lamb, to show that there was no deliverance from infernal
Pharaoh, the Devil, but by the blood of Christ the immaculate Lamb. 2. In
dashing the blood of it on their door-posts, it signified the sprinkling of
Christ's blood upon the conscience, Heb. 9.14. cap. 10.22. to purify it from
dead Egyptian works, and to guard our souls from the destroying Angel. The
rosting of this Lamb, typed forth the wrath of God, which Christ was to
undergo, which made him in the garden sweat blood like roasted flesh, and to cry
out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. So their eating of it in one
family, typed out the one true Church united to Christ. So the calling of
another family to them, Rabanus.
if one were too little, showed the calling in the Gentiles to partake of
Christ, because they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40. In that
they were to eat all of it, the inward appurtenances, as well as the outward
parts, it showed that the divinity and humanity of Christ, must both by faith
be fed upon, and that the meanest things of Christ, must not be rejected,
because every part and parcel of him in his rudiments, principles, as well as
in substance, is profitable to salvation. Again, if any thing remained of it,
they were to burn it, that showed, that if there were any thing in Christ which
we could not as yet digest, Rabanus.
as in the great mystery of his Incarnation, Resurrection or Ascension, we
should with all submissive reverence, commit it to the Holy Ghost who in his
time and by his divine light shall reveal it unto us.

This Sacramental service no doubt did also foretype how we in aftertimes
should receive Christ in the Sacrament. As they with unleavened bread; so we
should keep that feast, not with the leaven of malice and wickedness, 1 Cor.
but with sincerity and truth. So they with bitter herbs, we with remembrance
of our bitter bondage under sin. They with their loins girded, staves in their
hands, shoes on their feet, so we with all readiness to pass from the state
of sin, to the state of grace, as God shall call us.


Mathe. What was the next exhibitive Type of Christ?


Phila. Manna, with which God fed Israel forty years lack a month in the
wilderness,, Exodus 15.12, etc. of which every one might take an omer full for
a day, and on the sixth day two omers, because on the Sabbath day none of it
fell from heaven. This Moses called bread from heaven, and Psalm. 78.24. the
wheat of heaven, and bread of Angels by the Septuagint, but in the Hebrew,
bread of the strong ones, as if given from Elohim the strong God in Trinity.
But the people gave it the name Mannah, or man, Exodus 16.15. by saying Manha,
Is it a gift, or this is a gift; for Man or Mannah signifies a portion, or a
gift; and so it was indeed to be acknowledged the free gift of God, as Christ
is, upon which we are to feed by faith in our travel in this wilderness of
sin, till we come to the land of everlasting rest. Therefore Christ calls
himself the bread of life, that came down from heaven; John 6.33, 35.
and S. Paul calls this manna spiritual bread, 1 Cor. 10.3. For indeed, that
sensible bread did signify spiritual bread, Aug. de utilit. paenit.
and whosoever did in manna understand Christ did eat the same spiritual bread
with us, which is better then their manna, so far as substance is beyond a
shadow. And therefore though called heavenly food because it came down from
heaven, yet it must give way to him that came from an higher heaven than that
did. Ambrose de sacrif. l. 5. c. j. Bern. de coen. dom.
For the sign considered severally from the thing signified is but earthly, but
with it is heavenly. So in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the bread
sacramental is not that which goes into the body, but the eternal bread
which sustaineth the substance of our soul; for the natural nutriment
perishes, but the Sacrament is bread not for the belly, but the blessed soul.
They were to gather it every day, to show that we must gather always something
of heaven. It began first to fall on the first day of the week, but none on
their seventh, to type forth to them, that the true manna would appear on the
first day of the week, as indeed he did (as Chronologers do account) in his
birth and resurrection; and ever since the heavenly manna of his word falls
upon that day, whereon if men neglect to gather it, God may justly famish them,
and deny to them the bread of life.

The measure for each to gather, was an omer for a day, the tenth part of an
ephah, which was the quantity of forty three hens eggs, a competent portion.
Therefore God so ordered it by his divine providence, that he that gathered
much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack, Exodus 16.17.
Romans 12.3.
Now as manna represents Christ, so does the omer the capacity of every
believer, to whom God has given a measure of faith: For the filling of which
measure or capacity, every believer must be stirring betimes, as the Israelites
did before the sun of persecution arise, which dissolves the sacred custom of
Gods ordinances; which if men would do, the little they get should be enough,
because God accepts their will for the deed. 2. This manna may signify our
temporal estates, and the omer the measure of getting; and so St Paul applies
it, 2 Cor. 8.14, 15. namely, that there should be such an equality, that the
abundance of some, Pro. 22.2.
the want of others, might be supplied, and yet not levelling every man's estate
in the quantity, but by communicating to others the portions of charity. Thus
they did in the primitive times, till those frivolous words of ( Mine and
Thine) came in, Chrysostom. in Hom. oportet sis reses esse.
which has vexed the world with so much wranglings, whereas before men lived
like Angels, now like devils.

Again, whereas in the sixth day they were to gather double so much, it figured
that in the sixth age of the world, which now is, the gifts of God, should be
doubled; and also that in our latter age, we should labor the more for Gods
grace, because our sabbath of rest draws nearer to us. And farther, in that
God made that to stink which was gathered over and above, either out of
distrust that they should not find it the next day, or out of sloth to save
their labor in going out. We 1. Ought not to distrust the sufficiency of
Christ, who is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. yet
nevertheless we must seek him daily, 1 Timothy
though without distrust. 2. It teaches us moderation in seeking after the
world, Mat. 6.34. care not for the morrow, Jam.
i. by unnecessary carking and afflicting the soul; for what is too much does
but stink, canker, and corrupt, and causes God to smite them sudden, as Nabal,
and the rich fool in the Gospel.


Mathe. I pray show me the next.


Phila. It was the Rock water, Rock.
set down, Exodus 17. which flowed forth when Moses struck it with his rod at
Gods command, Exodus 17. and Numb. 20. The first rock was to be smitten, the
latter only to be spoken unto, and not to be smitten, to show that God could
work as much by a word, as by a stroke of his rod, which it may be was some
cause of Moses and Aarons staggering, because the rod was not commanded to be
used now, Aug. q. 19. Rabanus. Rupertus.
by which he used to work wonders, before time; or possibly that God would be so
kind to them upon this second murmuring for water, as he was before at
Rephidim, Exodus 17.

That these Rocks signified Christ, is plain, from 1 Cor. 10.4. saying, they
drank of that spiritual, which was Christ; yet no more Christ then the element
of bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ, save only to faith, Aug. in
Joh. tract. 45. fide manente, signa sunt mutata.
whereby the rock was Christ to them, as the Sacrament is Christ to us. Which
Christ is well called a Rock, because upon him the Church, and every faithful
one, is built so strong against all storms and tempests of temptation, Mat.
7.24. as Peter was shaken, but fell not finally, Mat. 16.18. Ber. in ser. 61.
because he trusted to a better rock then himself, who is now in heaven, in
whom only is steadfastness. So the smiting of it, Orig. in Exodus Raban.
signified Christ smitten by that wooden rod of the Cross, out of whom flowed
the fountains of the Tew Testament, even those holy mysteries, by which we have
the grace of washing in the font of regeneration from sin and uncleanness,
Zach. 13.1. and the gift of the Holy Chost conferred upon us, John 6.35.
which in us will quench all evil thirst, and flow up to a well of
everlasting life.


Mathe. I pray declare the next shadow.


Phila. The next was the Brazen Serpent, Brazen Serpent.
commanded to be set up for the peoples cure, when they were bitten by the
fiery serpents, Numb. 21. That this signified Christ, see John 3.14. where our
Savior likens his own lifting up upon the Cross, to Moses lifting up the
brazen serpent in the wilderness. The occasion of these serpents was Isreal's
murmuring for ordinary bread, and speaking slightly of manna, calling it light
bread. This St Paul calls a tempting of Christ signified by manna, 1 Cor. 10.
and represented by Moses and Aaron, the chief magistrates, civil and
ecclesiastic, against whom they banded themselves. Actuarius de medic. compos.
in cap. de rabiosa cane.
The serpents signify Satan, whose sting is sin, who like the asps, seems to
give a small wound which breeds a kind of pleasure, but kills certainly, though
fools make it but a sport to do wickedly. The cure was a brazen serpent on a
pole in the camp, upon which whosoever looked when he was stung by the Sharaph,
or fiery serpent, Beda in Number. 21.
was presently cured. Which did mystically teach them to fasten the eye of
faith upon Christ, in whom whosoever believes shall not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.14, 15. And thus as the sin committed by a tree, was
cured by the Lord of life, that hung on a tree; so the serpents sting is
overcome by one that had no sting, no venom, gall, nor guile.


Mathe. Are there no shadows and types of Christ his Church under the New
Testament, as well as of himself?


Phila. Yes, for the type of both was Noah and his Ark, Moses and his
Tabernacle, Solomon and his Temple.


Mathe. I pray declare how.


Phila. First, we find Noah's name to signify a Comforter; so was Christ to
be, Isa. 61. Secondly, a Comforter to them that mourn; his office was to preach
righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. that is, of the righteousness of Gods judgment in
drowning the world for sin, and the righteous grace of God in saving some.
Again, Anselm. in Romans 14.
the righteousness of man in a civil sense, and moral behavior, which
cannot save him from Gods wrath, and the righteousness of man by faith, which
lays hold of the ark of Gods salvation. And as he was a preacher, so he was a
builder, i. of an ark, by both which he endeavored to edify the old world,
and make it Gods Church, but they would not, and so he built an ark as a type
of it only wherein he saved himself and his household, only because the spirit
of Christ speaking in him was rejected by the world. The ark signified the
Church of the faithful, 1 Pet.
who are like the wood thereof, of a mounting nature, above all the waters of
the worlds temptations. So in regard of their juncture, it signified that unity
by which the Church is combined; the length, breadth, and height, the
dimensions of Christ's love to the Church, Ephesians. 3.14. The door but one,
signifies that one entrance into the Church by Baptism, as 1 Pet. The window
signifies the light which God gives to his Church, whereby to see and
contemplate his judgments upon the wicked, that die not in the unity of the
Church. The three rooms the sacred Trinity, in whom all things live, move, Acts
17.28.
and have being, but especially the godly who are effectually baptized into
those names which are three in one, as the three rooms in one Ark. The diverse
creatures in the Ark, show the mixture of the Church visible, consisting of
reasonable and unreasonable, clean and unclean, wheat and tares, good and bad.
And in that there were seven couples of clean, and but one couple of unclean;
it shows that reprobates have little to do in Gods true Church, and though
some, yet are they nothing in comparison of those that are out of the Church
visible. So Noah being Master and Lord of all these, might well type forth
Christ, under whose feet God has put all things in subjection, Psalm. 8.


Mathe. What signification of Christ and his Church, had Moses Tabernacle, and
Solomon's Temple?


Phila. Very great and lively.

For 1. Moses Tabernacle was a type of the Church Catholic, as it is militant,
wandering in this world, and discontinuing from the Lord. Bed. de tab. lib. 1.
c. 1. Chrysostom. in Psa. 5
And by Solomon's Temple the Catholic Church triumphant in heaven; which
Churches though two in number, are but one in Christian faith. Both these, viz.
Tabernacle and Temple typed Christ. First, the Tabernacle did, because Christ
is said to dwell or pitch his Tabernacle as the Greek word signifies in Joh.
1.18. so did the Temple too, Beza in John 1.18. (...).
and therefore he said, dissolve this Temple, and I will build it again in
three days, meaning the Temple of his body, Joh. 2.19, 21. well so called,
being the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2.9. even as the
Tabernacle and Temple was sometimes filled with the glory of God, Exodus 40.34.
and 1 Kin. 8.10.

And as these typed out Christ, so they did the Church, both in the whole body,
and the members of it. 1. In the whole, called the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.
and Rev. 21.3. Now Jerusalem is called the Tabernacle of God, because he meant
to dwell with men, by the Gospel ruling in their hearts, as once he did in the
Temple of old Jerusalem. 2. In the members of it. Therefore Ephesians. 2.21. they are
called a Temple, and ver. 22. an habitation of God by the spirit, and a Temple
of the Holy Ghost, Haymo in Rev. 21.
1 Cor. 6.19. whose greatness though the world cannot contain, yet he is
content to dwell in a contrite heart. But beside, if we consider the place
where Moses received the platform of the Tabernacle, it will be more clear.
Moses received it in Horeb, which signifies a dry desert, as Sinai or Seneh a
bush, in which God at first appeared to him. The dry desert signified the
world, wherein the Law of God is given. The burning bush the fiery afflictions
of the Church in this land of thorns.

The man Moses that was faithful in all the work of the Tabernacle, having
received it from God, did well represent Christ, who received from the bosom
of his Father, what things he delivered for the rearing up of his Church; and
so was as Moses, a Mediator between God and his people. Exodus 35.30, 34.
The chief workmen typed out the Apostles that had their gifts by infusion, as
Bezaleel and Aholiab, of Judah and Dan, signifying praise and judgment, and
were indeed Arch-builders, as 1 Cor. 3.10. and so to be esteemed of all men.
Those that were subordinate to them, might prefigure out inferior ministers,
of which every one must prove faithful, 1 Cor. 4.1. So the people offering,
typed forth those in after times under the Gospel, that should freely give
themselves first to God, and then of their goods liberally for the upholding
Gods Church and service, so often prophesied of, Psalm. 45.12. Psalm. 110.3.
Psalm. 72.10, 11. and Isa. which was fulfilled by the Eastern Magi, Mat. 2. and
by the Primitive Converts, Acts 2. And so also by the many indowments of the
Church given by Princes and others who believed the Gospel.

Besides, the time of setting up the Tabernacle and Temple, had relation to
Christ's coming; Exodus 24.
for as that was set up by Moses in the seventh month, and the Temple by
Solomon in seven years, 1 Kin. 6.37, 38. and in the seven sevens of years, the
second Temple was finished. So after seventy sevens of years, Dan. 9.25.
from the Angel Gabriels speech to Daniel, Christ the Messiah came from
heaven, and took up an earthly temple of our nature, laid it down by death for
our sins, and raised it up again for our justification, upon which doctrine he
has built his Church, of which the Jewish was but a shadow.

This may further be understood by the triple division of this Tabernacle and
Temples rooms, which were three. Fist, the Court. Secondly, the holy place, and
the most holy. The most holy place was divided from the holy, by a veil. Heb.
9.3. Heb. 10.20.
This veil typed Christ's flesh, which like Moses veil, hid his glorious
appearance from our dull sight. But when his flesh was rent upon the cross,
the veil of his divine power appeared by renting the vail of the Temple,
making as it were a way for us to come to the mercy seat; Heb. 9.5.
for within this veil it stood.


Mathe. What signification had the matter of the utensils of that house to the
Church, Christian?


Phila. Very much, being shadows of things to come, Col. 2. Rab. Maurus. in
Ex. l. 3. c. 10.
For the matter of the boords and pillars being either Shittim wood,
incorruptible by nature, it typed forth Christ's body, which never saw
corruption, and the body of believers too, to whom sin shall not be imputed,
and from whom at last all corruption shall be removed, 1 Cor. 15.53. The silver
sockets may figure faith, which joineth Christ and the Church together. The
coverings, Christ's protection, under which the Church does always shroud her
self.


Mathe. And what may the rooms signify?


Phila. Surely the most holy place might well figure out the heavens; for in
them is the true mercy seat, and glorious cherubins, Orig. in Exodus Bed. de
tab. l. 2. c. 13.
into which Christ entered once for all, to appear before God for us, Heb. 9.12,
24. In type whereof, the High Priest in the Law entered once a year; but Christ
once for ever to take possession for us, till the veil of the earth rent, to
give way to our bodies at the resurrection to take possession of the heavens
most holy place.

The holy place signified the Church on earth, Orig. in Lev. 16.12.
who must here offer up prayer and praise in the name of Christ, till he come
again, and our sacrifice of obedience, taught us by word and sacraments, which
requires us to offer our selves a living sacrifice to God, Romans 12.1. for which
he has made us Priests, as well as Kings, Rev. 1.^.
to suppress our rebellious corruptions. In regard whereof the Church is
called holy, as the heavens is the most holy. Between which there being no
receptacle for souls named, you may conceive Limbus patrum and purgatory, to be
papisticall inventions. The outward Court, where all the people assembled,
might well signify that part of the Church visible on earth, which have not
yet attained to that true measure of holiness which others have, yet are in
the Churches pale by admission into it by circumcision and baptism, and so are
in the Churches suburbs, which is trodden even by profane people, Rev. 11.2.
but none enters into the holy state of the Church, but the upright and worker
of righteousness, Psalm. 15.


Mathe. What signification have the adjuncts and vessels of these rooms?


Phila. The utensils and vessels in general, may well signify holy persons,
or holy gifts. 1. Holy persons whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, as 2 Timothy 2.20,
21. In a great house are vessels of gold and silver, Raban. on Exodus
wood and stone, some for honor, and some for dishonor. If a man purge
himself from them of dishonor, he shall be a vessel of honor sanctified, and
meet for the masters use, and prepared to every good work. Which vessels may be
sometime captived, as those of the Temple by Babels King, and Romes Antichrist,
yet they shall still remain Gods vessels, and be returned to their right use by
reformation in due time.

2. As they be taken for gifts, they set forth those divine graces by which God
is served in his Church, which graces may sometime be captived like Gods Ark by
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. but yet shall be received and returned to Gods
service again by true zeal and repentance.


Mathe. I pray declare the signification of the particular utensils?


Phila. Those in the Sanctum, or Holy place, were, The Altars, the Laver, the
Table for Show bread, and the Candlestick. 1. The Altars, which were two; of
redemption, which was that on which creatures were offered by fire, and
signified our redemption effected by the bloodshedding of Jesus Christ, Genesis
4.4. Number. 28.3. John 2.29. 1 Pet. 1.18. Exodus 40.6. Lev. 23.24.
who was slain virtually from the beginning of the world, and actually in the
last age of the world he was slain for redemption of his people. This Altar
stood at the door of the sanctum without side, to show that none can have
fellowship with the holy God or his people, that makes not entrance into the
Church by the sole sufficient sacrifice of Christ. Next was the Altar of
perfume, for perfume was offered thereon every morning; it stood near the mercy
seat, but a veil of the most holy place was between, Exodus 30.6, 7. signifying
the prayers and intercessions of Christ for us, as may be collected from Ephesians.
5.2. where Christ is called a sweet smelling savor; for so he was in his
death, and in the devotion of his life, Heb. 5.7. for he was heard for
himself, of him that is able to save. And so he is for us by his mediation,
making our devotion acceptable by the sweetness of his intercession, as Rev.
8.3. who is the one only Mediator betwixt God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5. either for
redemption signified by the bloody Altar covered with brass; or for
intercession signified by the Altar of perfume which was covered with gold,
typing that in heaven, Rev. 8.3. And therefore it is profane Idolatry to set up
any other, Chem. contra Trid. Co.
as the Papists do in their Rosary, and also in their Manual of prayers,
chapt. 1.11. and in many other of their tracts to that purpose.

Also these two Altars may well set forth a Christians offering up of himself
to God by a reasonable sacrifice, Romans 12.1. as also our devotions in prayer
and thanksgiving, related to by Malachie, cap. 1.11. In every place incense
shall be offered to my name, Tertul. adv. Marcion. Hieron. in Mal. 1. Rupert on
Malac. Justin Martyr Came. Triphon.
even a pure offering, i. of prayer and praise, such as St Paul intimates, 1 Timothy 2.8. willing the Gentiles to lift up pure hands in all places, and to give
alms, which is a sacrifice of a sweet smell, Phil. 4.18. and very acceptable to
God, as was that of Cornelius, Acts 10.4.


Mathe. What might be signified by the Laver?


Phila. It was made of brass for endurance to hold water; and of glass, Exodus
30.18. Exodus 38.8.
that the Priests who were to wash therein before they went to the Altar, might
discern their cleanness or foulness. It was called a molten sea, 2 Chronicles.
4.6. This might signify the Laver of our new birth, Ephesians. 5.23. and Tit. 3.5.
namely Baptism, wherein we are purged by the blood of Christ, through the
eternal spirit; and also our faith, by whose operation, hand and heart, head
and foot, affection and action, is to be cleansed, Jam. 4.8. when we draw near
unto God, and that we may lift up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. and look to our feet
when we enter into the house of God, Eccles. 4.17. And to monish us hereof, the
Church thought fit in ancient times to set the font for baptism at the
entrance of the Church, as this Laver stood at the entrance of the Holy place,
that as they, so we might be cleansed before we offered our selves to God at
the Altar of prayer, or praise, and to examine our selves by the glass of the
word, Jam. 1.23.
as the Priests by the Lavers glass placed in the foot thereof, observe their
spots or their purity. And as our selves, so our devotions are to be washed and
cleansed also, as the sacrifices were in the Temple in the ten Caldrons; 1 Kin.
7.38.
so our devotions to the equity of the ten Commandments, though for the
perfection of them, we trust only upon the Lamb of God, by whose merits we come
boldly to the throne of grace. This Laver and Solomon's sea, 1 Kin. 7.23. was
answered by the sea of glass, Rabanus in Rev. and Bale on that place.
Rev. 4.6. and the glass of one, and the crystal of the other, might well
represent the clear word of God, which God has joined to the Sacraments, by
which through his spirit, Aug in John, tract. 17. Bed. in Romans 10
the Sacraments are made efficacious: And thus we are made clean by the word
also which Christ has spoken to us.


Mathe. What signified the Table of Shewbread?


Phila. This table with the bread and frank insence set thereon, prefigured
diverse things in the New Testament. Orig in Lev. 24.
The table might the holy Scripture, and the bread of proposition the
Ministers, because the table was never to be removed, but the bread was every
seventh day, Bed. l. 1. c. 7.
and new set on upon the Sabbath. So the Ministers having finished their
course, are taken off by death, and others come in their place. But more
properly the Table of the Lord, named 1 Cor. 10.21. by St Paul, and is never
called an Altar by the ancient writers, but only because there is a
sacramental seal of Christ's body broken, and his blood shed, though the
Papists love to call it so, the more easily to make people believe that Christ's
very flesh is there present.

The bread for number being twelve great cakes; Tremelius on the Ephab, Exodus
16.36.
and in respect of their order being six in a rank, one against the other,
seems to represent Christ's twelve disciples, whom he sent out two by two.
This order of setting them, is found by the Hebrew word, Grerec, which
signifies the order of martial ranks. So these being preserved for the
Priests eating, it shows, 1. Who has right to the holy bread of the Lords
Table, even such as are called to be holy Priests to God, as none might eat of
these but the Priests only. It is true that David and his men did so, but it
was in case of great necessity, wherein charity dispensed with the Law, and in
some cases the Communion cannot be denied to some not prepared, according to
the strict order of the Sanctuary; as Judas was not, and yet received the holy
Supper; yet examples are no rules when they vary from common Law.

Also it shows, that God will provide for those that serve at his Altar and
Table, in despite of the envious world, Psalm. 23. 1 Cor.

The frank incense, which with the bread was taken off, and was offered to God,
signified the thanksgiving which we are to offer to God for all his benefits,
Hieron in Eccl.
especially for feeding us by his Word and Sacraments, for which our prayer
should be directed like incense. Psalm. 142.2.



Mathe. What means the seven fold golden Candlestick?


Phila. No doubt Christ and his Church, and that in respect of the matter,
form, and use of the Candlestick.

1. In regard of the matter, it was beaten gold. The gold shows the
pretiousnesse of Christ and the Church, both of one metal, Heb. 2.11. The
form showed also Christ to be the middle and chiefest shaft or stock, into the
which the rest are ingraffed; for he is the Vine, and the Church are his
branches. This Candlestick was beaten out by the hammer; Haym. in Rev. 11.
so was Christ and his Church by diverse strokes. God smit the Shepherd, and the
world scattered the flock by persecution. Or if this hammer be taken in a good
sense, it signifies the Scripture, which is Gods hammer says the Prophet, to
which Christ was conformed, Psalm. 22. and by which the Church is, and must be
framed by Christ's ministers, as this Candlestick was by Bezaleel and Aholiab,
Exodus 31.
driven out to and fro till she has attained her perfection in Christ's
juncture; as the children of Israel was in the wilderness driven up and down
to 42. stations, and the Church from Abraham to Christ, Mat. 1.
was through forty two generations, the true number of the Bowls, Knops and
Flowers of this Candlestick, Exodus 25.

The use of this Candlestick was to support the lamps of oile-Olive, to give
light clearly and continually. Greg. Mor. lib. 18. cap. 32.
This light signified Christ who is the true light that enlightneth every man,
Joh. 1.14. and also Christ's true disciples who are the light of the world, Mat.
5.14. Christ is the light enlightening, his disciples the light enlightened.
These lamps may also signify the word, which St Peter calls a light set in a
dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. which word of prophecy, is neither legal or
evangelicall; which two like two olive trees seen of Zachary, cap. 4. feeds
these lamps with oil.


Mathe. What were the adjuncts of the most holy place?


Phila. You know that I told you before, that this most holy place signified
the heavens; the adjuncts were the Ark and the golden Censer.

The Ark was made of Shittim wood, overlaied within and without with gold. In
this Ark were put the tables of the Law, and so might well type forth the
glorious humane nature of Christ, Bed. de Taber.
in whom was hidden all the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3. And he indeed did
only keep the Law of God entire. The cover of this Ark was called by the
Septuagint in their translation, (...).
(The reconciliation) and so St Paul uses their Greek word, Romans 3.25. But in
Heb. 9.5. this cover is called the Mercy Seat. This may well signify Christ
also, whom God has set forth to be our reconciliation, Greg. Mag. in Ezekiel.
lib. 1. hom. 6.
who covers all our sins committed against the holy Tables by his glorious
merits, and all our sins by his love, and so make us a blessed people, Psalm.
32.1.

This mercy seat was shadowed by two golden Cherubins with stretched out wings,
and from one end to the other; and their faces bending downward as looking into
the Ark, as desirous to behold the great mystery of man's redemption, signified
hereby, 1 Pet. 1.12. Here God promised to make declaration of his mind to
Aaron, Exodus 25.22.
and we can have no comfortable answer, nor apparition of God, but by Christ
the mercy seat.

Two other things were set by this Ark of Testimony or before it, namely,
Aarons rod that budded, to convince the peoples rebellion against him, Numb.
16.17. Isa. 53.2.
This rod might as it was a dry stick signify Christ, who though he seemed as
contemptible, Orig. in Ex. c. 25.
yet brought miraculous fruits to mankind, enough to prove, that he was chosen
of God, though rejected of men. As also the flourishing fruit of the Gospels
discipline, in the hearts of men by Gods powerful blessing, though the
ministry seems to the world as foolishness, Bed.
yet it shall prove as the scepter of Christ.

The reservation of this rod of Aaron showed, that the ministry of Christ our
High Priest, will ever and anon be quarrelled against by those who shall think
themselves holy enough for the ministry, til God stop their murmurings by some
extraordinary work, and shall cast away the rod of their presumption, as things
of no value, as he has done that of Rome, and many other Heretics and
Sectaries, making the true ministry of the Gospel flourish above all, as he
has done the Protestant Religion in the hearts of people, beyond all the
feined miracles of Rome, which is the right Epistle of recommendation to the
truth preached, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Thus Aarons rod signified Christ and
Gospell-ministry. First, Christ who seemed in the promise but a dry stick, but
in the Prophets as this rod blossoming; but in the Gospel as this rod bringing
forth ripe fruit. Secondly, the Ministry of the Gospel in doctrine and
discipline. First, in discipline, as 1 Cor. 4.21. shall I come to you with a
rod. Secondly, in the doctrine, which at first works on the affections
invisibly, next in the tongue it blossoms by good words, and lastly, in the
life by laudable deeds.

As for the pot of manna which was here reserved, it showed not only how God
had fed their fathers in the wilderness, and so stirred them up to
thankfulness, but was as ready to do as much for them if need required.

The last thing there, was the golden Censer, Levit. 16.12. and Heb. 9.4. This
vessel pertained only to the High Priest (all the other were of brass, Number.
16.39.) and then to be used when he entered into the most holy, once in a year.
Lev. 16.2, 12, 13.
This no doubt signified the meritorious obedience of Christ, through which all
the prayers of Saints is offered and accepted of God. Rev. 7.2. Haymo in Apoc.
v. 1.
We find him therefore set forth by an Angel coming up from the East (called
also the Angel of the Covenant, Rev. 8.3.) having a golden Censer full of
odours to offer up with the prayers of all Saints. The cloud of this incense
may signify the cloud of prayers offered up by the cloud of faithful
witnesses, Heb. 12.1.
which being dissolved by the Sun of righteousness, falls down in drops of
grace and blessings upon the Church. So the fiering of the odours with those
coals which were taken from the Altar only, signifies that one only spirit of
God, which can only set our devotions on a flame. And Gods revealing himself
in that cloud of incense, may well mind us of the assurance the faithful have
to meet with God in their prayers, when they meet with one heart in devotion,
to glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6.


Mathe. How was the hope of Gods promise continued, beside by Covenant and
Types?


Phila. I told you by promises and prophecies.


Mathe. Which are they?


Phila. Those that concern Christ's Nativity, Death and Resurrection, and
Ascension. The first promise of him was in Paradise, The seed of the woman
shall break the Serpents head, i. his crafts and policies to hinder man's
happiness. And this Christ did by acting contrary to Satan, as setting up
humility against pride, and truth against falsehood; the one was seen in his
birth, Luke 2.7.
and the other in his answer to Satan's temptations, Mat. 4. For this seed of
the woman was Christ born in the fullness of time, Gal. 4.4. A full time
indeed; for now was the scepter departed from Judah to Herod, who was but a
Proselyte, and a stranger sprung from an Idumean and Arabian woman, and so old
Jacobs prophecy fulfilled, Genesis 49.10. that then should Shiloh come, i. one
sent to save, or the son of the Secundine to show his virgin-birth. A full
time it was also in regard of the world of men who were now grown ripe, and to
a full age to take possession of Gods promises of Christ in whom they were to
be made heirs, though before they lived under Tutors and governors of legal
ceremonies. Yea, a full time too in respect of the course of heaven (if
Astronomers may be believed, who say that the stars were now come to their
proper periods and stations, and so there might have been a full end of all.
But God (that Christ might be fully known) grants the world a new lease, and
makes Christ the Landlord of these last times, by giving him the heathen for
his inheritance, etc. Psalm. 2. by their believing his Gospel.


Mathe. But before you proceed, make it appear to me, 1. That the Scepter was
not gone from Judah till now. 2. What necessity of Christ to be born of a
Virgin?


Phila. I answer, That you are rightly to understand Judahs Scepter. For, by
Judah must be understood, not only the whole body of the Jews, but also the
Tribe royal assigned by Jacob to regality, which before, nor a great while
after was not so. For at first from Adam to Moses, Genesis 9.25.
the fathers of the family executed Princely and Priestly office among their
own people; as Noah cursed Cham, and Abraham banished Hagar and Ismael, Genesis
21.10. Judah judged Thamar to be burned, Genesis 38.24. But in Moses this
prerogative did cease, and was transferred to Moses and Aaron, being of the
Tribe of Levi, Moses was as King, Deuteronomy. 33.5. and Aaron as Priest. So Joshua
was a Duke, and Captain General. Aug. de eivit. Dei, l. 18. c. 22.
After him succeeds Judges, which for the time they held, exercised absolute
authority, and their state lasted about 329. years. In the interegnum or space
of time between one Judges decease, and another election, matters were judged
by the great Sanedrim, or seventy Elders, and so was at that time
Aristocraticall. Then from the surceasing of Judges, began Kings, of which Saul
was first, and David next, by Gods especial appointment, Zepper leg. mosaiea,
l. 3. c. 6
whose race held it as Kings, till the Captivity of Babylon about 520. years.
From the Captivity of Babylon to the coming of Christ, was about 536. years,
wherein the Jews state was much confused: For sometimes they were ruled by
Deputies, settled among them by the Persian Monarchs, who had conquered the
Babylonian, whose last Monarch was Belshazzer, Dan. 5.30. And Darius the Mede
succeeds, Dan. 6.1. and 9.1. and after him, Cyrus his Kinsman, and Lieutenant
General of all his forces, as appears, Dan. 10.1. that he was King of Persia,
to which he translated the Kingdom of the Medes. This great Potentate
according to the prophecy of him, Isa. 44.28.
sent the Jews back from captivity to build Jerusalem, and the Temple by his
Edict, Ezra 1.1, 2. They were conducted by Zorobabel, and others, Ezra 1.2.
together with Nehemiah, and Seraiah, and Mordecai. The successors of Zorebabel
by appointment of the Persian authority, was Mesullam, Hananiah, Berechia, and
Hosadia, all of the seed of David. After their time as the Persian Bear had
devoured the Assyrian Lion, Dan. 7.4.
so the Grecian Leopard tramples down the Persian Bear. This Leopard was the
Greek Monarchy, especially Alexander the Great, showed by the horn in the
forehead of that Goat pushing the Persian Ram, Dan. 8.5, 6. which having done,
his Empire was divided into four heads, as that beast had four heads, and the
other four horns, which sprung up after the foremost horn was broken off,
together with a little blaspheming horn, 1 Match. 1.10.
thought to figure out Antiochus Epiphanes, as the other four horns figured
Alexanders four Captains which divided his Empire. Funcii Chronolog. Seder Olam
minus.
By Alexander and his successors, were appointed ten Deputies more over Judea;
and they were also it is thought of David's lineage. But by the Tyranny of
Antiochus, the land was much confounded, 1 Mac. 2.1. cap. 3.1.
so that the government devolved to Mattathias a Priest, and his son, for their
zeal to the Law and their people. Yet was not the scepter of government gone
from Judah, that is, from all Israel; for these had the scepter of government
among them, though not residing in one man of Iudahs line principally.

But now Daniels fourth beast with ten horns, the Roman Monarchy had trampled
all the rest under, and the Jews were now become tributaries to Caesar
Augustus, and by favor of Anthony, Herod the son of Antipater, is made govern
of of Judea, but Augustus made him King, and the Senate confirmed it. Now was
the full time for Shiloh to come, and set up another Kingdom that never should
have end. For he began with death, where all Empires do end, and rises again
in despite of death, and so reigns over the quick and the dead, which
Kingdom is everlasting, and never shall end, as God promised David.


Mathe. But what necessity is it that Christ should be born of a Virgin?


Phila. I say, First, It was so: And secondly, It must needs be so. First it
was so, you may see in the Prophet, Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive,
and if he had meant a young woman, Betuloth the Hebrew word given of Rebekah,
signifying one ripe for marriage, or Ishah, a virago, a match for a man, as was
given of Adam to Eve might have served, Alamoth is writ with clausum, so Ja^ob
called him Sbiloh, the son of the Secundine, which belongs not to a man. 1 John.
and not Alamoth a covered virgin. And indeed such an one she must be, that he
may be of woman's seed, not man's. Nay more, that he may be a fit Redeemer. For
if we suppose man a sinner, against an infinite God, either he must be
subjected to infinite wrath, or satisfy that wrath some other way. If a man
doubt that he be a sinner, and so deceive himself by conceiving, that sins are
nothing but man's properties and inclinations, which beasts have, and yet sin
not; let him consider that mere nature will do nothing to destroy it self,
Prove. 1.
though depraved nature will. An horse drinks no more then will do him good,
but man will. In vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird; yet men are
caught by that they know, and which they wilfully offend. This argues
something of sin, by which we remain not in the honor of our creation, but
became worse then the beasts that perish.

Now for this sin all men must suffer eternal wrath, except God can be
satisfied. Now Angels cannot, for they be not of our kind, or if they were,
they be so many several personalities as there are Angels; and as the sin of
one taints not another nature, except there be a personal consent; so neither
can one merit for another, though there be consent. And for the other creatures
irrational, they cannot, because they are of less value then man's nature. The
blood of bulls and of goats and sheep, Heb. 10.4, 5.
and birds, though sacrificed, yet that was not to satisfy, but to show what
man deserved, and in reference to a more full satisfaction to be done in due
time: For which cause God dispensed with such sacrifice for a time, Heb. 9.22.
for man's relative instruction, that without bloodshedding could be no
remission.

Therefore this redemption must be made by a man, because that man had
offended; so in the old law a brother must redeem. But he must be more then a
man too, for no man that is merely a man, can redeem his brother out of Gods
hand of justice; Psalm.
so then he must be one that is equivalent with God, that the sword of justice
must be exercised upon, Zach. 13.7. Awake Osword against him that is my fellow:
Therefore if he must be a man, then he must not be begotten by the ordinary way
of generation, by man and woman; for then he is a sinner in the first
conception, Psalm. 51. and so had need of a Redeemer himself. Nor by a man
only, for nature has denied conception, breeding and bearing to a man. Then he
must of necessity be made of a woman without a man, and then she must needs be
a virgin; and though this Virgin her self came of a sinful line, yet sin
being but an accident, is left, and the substance of her was only taken, and
immediately united to the divine nature, by the power of the Holy Ghost, so
making both natures one person, by which he becomes so meritorious a Redeemer
for all mankind.


Mathe. What Prophecies are there of his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension?


Phila. Not to trouble you with heathen oracles, or the prophecies of those
twelve Exotic women, the Sybils, though such be enough to confute the
heathens, who deny Christ, and have been used by some ancient Doctors to that
purpose; yet because I would that your faith should neither be diabolical, nor
historical, but divine, I shall only commend Scripture to you.

Therefore as his Nativity was prophesied by Jacob, Genesis 49.10. under the name
of Shiloh, and fulfilled, Mat. 2.1. in the days of Herod the King. And the
place of his birth prophesied by Micah, Mic. 5.2. Thou Bethelem Ephrata, out of
thee shall come the Ruler of Israel, i. the Israel of God in a spiritual sense
and government, Romans 9 6.
for all are not Israel that are of Israel by nature, no more then they are
Jews that are so outwardly, by Nation or Country, Romans 2.28. Which prophecy of
Micah was fulfilled, Mat. 2.1. when Jesus was born at Bethelem. And the
condition of his Mother, prophesied by Isaiah. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, fulfilled also, Luke 1.27. The Angel Gabriel was sent to a Virgin
called Mary, espoused to Joseph, but not carnally known by him, Mat. 1.25. yea,
his very name, Immanuel, was foretold by Isaiah, which was the name of union,
God united to man, Isa. 7.14.
and so the believers, as it is said, should call or apprehend him, Mat. 1.23.
But in regard of the effect of his redemption, his Mother should call his name
Jesus, Mat. 1.21. and so she did, Luke 2.21. And thus as Isaiah said, cap. 9.6.
To us a child is born, and to us a Son is given; Luke 2.7.
so to us he was born, Luke 2.11. that was wonder by his wisdom and miracles,
the everlasting Father by his divine essence, not subsistence, and the Prince
of peace by his reconciliation of God and man. And this birth of his was not
only sanctified by circumcision on the eight day, Luke 1.21.
as Isaacs figure was, Genesis 21.4. but also it was graced by a star, foretold by
Balaam, Number. 24.17. and fulfilled, Mat. 2.9. which conducted the wise men out
of the East, to Jerusalem, and then to Bethelem, where they worshipped him, and
offered precious things to him, which was foretold, Psalm. 45.12. the rich among
the people shall do thee homage, and the daughter of Tire shall be there with a
gift. And Kings shall bring presents to thee, Psalm. 68.29. And the Kings of
Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts, Psalm. 72.10. And to him shall be given of
the gold of Arabia, Psalm. 72.15. and all this was fulfilled, Mat. 2.11. when
those great wise men of the East did worship him, and offer to him gold,
incense, and myrrh.

So also was his death prophesied of. First, by God himself, Christ's death.
Luke 22.53.
in Genesis 3.15. saying to the serpent, thou shall bruise his heel. And this was
done by the power of darkness, when he was betrayed into the hands of sinners,
and cut off from the land of the living, Isa. 53.8. and made his soul an
offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. After sixty two weeks said Daniel, shall Messiah
be cut off, but not for himself, Dan. 9.25, 26. that is, if you mark the
verses, the Angel allots seven weeks for rebuilding of the Temple, which is
forty nine years, reckoned of the Jews but forty six years, John 2.20. because
they reckoned not the first three years when the foundation was but laid by
Cyrus his edict, and the work stayed again by Artaxerxes Longimanus, Ezra 4.7.
till they had got a second Edict, Ezra 6.1. from Darius Nothus. Then the
Angel allots to the former seven weeks, sixty two weeks more, which is about
434. years; in all, 483. or thereabout, in the end whereof Christ suffered on
the cross, to make an end of sin, and finish transgression, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.

This scourging, wounding, and piercing, was foreseen also by Isa. 53.5. he was
bruised for our iniquities, and chastised for our peace. And says Zach. 12.12.
they shall look on him whom they have pierced, for a soldier pierced his side,
as well as others did his hands and feet when they nailed them to the cross.
So his very carrying of his cross, John 19.34.
was typed out by Isaac carrying the wood to sacrifice himself upon: Genesis 22.9,
10.
And as Abraham stretched out his hand to slay his son; so God loved the world,
that he gave his Son, John 3.16. and he himself became obedient to the death of
the cross: Numb. 21.9.
And as Moses lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness for the curing of
the people, upon a pole; John 12.32. John 14.
so was Christ lift up on the cross for the saving of us who were bitten by
Satan and sin also.

So also his Resurrection had a type; as Isaac taken from the Altar, and
restored safe and sound to Abraham the third day after that he was assigned to
death, Genesis 22.4. of whom it is said that Abraham received him again in a
figure, Heb. In what figure, but only of him that was to come of his seed, in
whose death and resurrection all nations should be blessed. So Jonah the first
Prophet, who lived in the time of Jeroboam the second, 2 Kin. 14.25.
and the first Prophet sent to the Gentiles, to Niniveh, who because he
diverted to Tarsus, was swallowed of a great fish; in whose belly he remained
till the third day after; and for so long time the grave swallowed Christ, but
then he arose, and so his flesh saw no corruption, Psalm. 16. and that might
well be without a miracle, if the body be not accidentally corrupted before it
be dead, as in violent deaths, commonly men are not. Now Christ lay not in the
grave above 40. hours, and commonly dead bodies corrupt not til about seventy
hours, and this shows that he rose within three days, and so saw no
corruption, as the Psalmist said, Psalm. 16. which is expounded plainly so by St
Peter, Acts 2.31. And as Isaiah had also foretold, that the dead men should
live, and with Christ's body they should come, so they did, Mat. 27.52, 53. Thus
Christ conquered death in his own Kingdom, as said Hosea, 13.14. and death had
no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. because he was now swallowed up into
victory, 1 Cor. 15.55. And thus as God spoke to the great fish, and it cast out
Jonah on the dry land; Jon. 2.10.
so the temple of Christ's body, which the Jews destroyed, he rebuilt in three
days.

And for his Ascension, as it was prophesied, so it was accomplished. Eliah was
a type of it, 2 Kin. 2.11. being taken up in a fiery Chariot; so Christ was
taken up out of his disciples sight into heaven, Luke 24.51. as was prophesied
in Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended up on high, and led captivity captive. So he
was taken away, his disciples, beholding it at first, Acts 1.9.
but after a cloud took him out of their sight. And now he sits on Gods right
hand foretold, Psalm. 110.1. and averred in Mark 16.19. And from him the Holy
Ghost like a most gracious rain from heaven, has fallen upon his Apostles,
Acts 2.15, 16. and upon many thousands of believers, as was foreprophecied,
Joel 2.18. and typed forth by the spirit of Eliah resting upon Elisha, 2 Kin.
1.13, 5. Even so God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts,
baptizing us with the Holy Ghost, and as blessed fire from heaven, giving some
the gift of tongue, Acts 2.4. others to prophecy, some to teach, others to
learn and increase in faith, and the love and knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ.


Mathe. Now as you have showed the Promises, Types, and Prophecies, and history
of Christ's Conception, Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, show me also
the mystery of godliness intended thereby, in relation to Christians. And
first of all I desire to understand rightly his Conception, for therein lies a
great mystery, wherein our understanding is easily lost, if we be not rightly
directed. For how can one person in the Trinity be conceived, or become
incarnate without the other two, seeing the divine nature is not divided, but
is in each person totally.


Phila. The divine nature cannot be divided for substance, but in the manner of
subsistence it is distinguished. For it is after one manner in the Father, i.
unbegotten. After another manner in the Son, (...).
because in him it is begotten, i. communicated by divine generation. After
another manner in the Holy Ghost, because proceeding from both, John 15.16. Now
we are to believe that the humane nature is assumed by the divine nature, as
considered only in the Son, as he enjoieth it, being the perfect image of the
Father, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. and so being the natural Son of God, was most fit to
be the son of man, and so thereby restore the sons of men, by adoption to be
made the sons of God: Yet we are to believe that all the Trinity had a hand in
it; John 1.12.
for the Father wrought it by the holy Ghost, but the Son only assumed it; as
three folks may make one garment, and yet but one of the three wear it.


Mathe. But the Conception is applied to the Holy Ghost, and so I am apt to
believe that the Holy Ghost was his Father.


Phila. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost effectually, not materially; he
caused it to be, but gave not any matter out of himself to the nature of
Christ; so that he was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost uniting the
natures divine and humane together, Bernard. Damascen.
not by generation, but by institution, and benediction, and operation, not
spermatically as other fathers beget children. So it is said, Romans 11.36. all
things are of God, yet not of his substance, but by his power; so that we are
to believe that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, in regard that his humane
nature was produced from the blessed Virgin by his power, and united to the
divine, but assumed by the Son, the second person, upon the Holy Ghosts
preparation of the Virgins seed, and carrying it to the place of conception,
which Luke 1.42. is called the fruit of her womb, that is, the whole man or
humane substance without the accident of sin, which follows only generation,
not this wonderful conception. Therefore our sin was to him imputed, not by
nature imparted, and death therefore seized not upon him by necessity, but he
gave his life voluntarily, and it was taken away violently by others sin, not
his own.


Mathe. What necessity was there, that Christ should be conceived in so holy
manner, and what are the effects of it?


Phila. He must be conceived on his mothers part, that he might be a man, and
so fit for a surety for us; yet by the Holy Ghost, that so the substance might
be separated from the accident of original sin by his power, who in the moment
of conception united it to the second person, with whom it made but one person,
which was no person before, though it consisted of a soul and body; and so
though it came from Adam, and was originally in Adam, yet it never sinned in
Adam, because it took not personality from Adam, though it did nature; which
nature was made so holy by this union, that it needed no other sanctification
as other men do, who are to be sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, through
the operation of the Holy Ghost; which not being warily observed, has made
many heresies. For the Marcionites and Manicheans, not well understanding the
conception of his manhood, supposed that Christ had an incorporeall body, and
only passed through the blessed Virgins body. And Apollinaris thought Christ
had no soul, because he understood not how he could take sinful flesh, as
Romans 8.2, 3. and not be sinful, and so he determined him to be but half a
man, and that his divinity supplied the place of the soul. Others stumbling at
the conception of the Holy Ghost, say, that in this Christ's nature was
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, which cannot be but his humane nature by the Holy
Ghost, was separated in respect of the substance of it from the blessed Virgin
Mary, and in the same moment of conception, was united to the second person,
and was holy in it self; for if it needed sanctification, it needed
justification. Now the effects of this conception, and personal union, are
many. As 1. A communication of those properties to Christ's person, which are in
themselves only proper to either nature, Mat. 9.6.
as to say, the Son of man can forgive sins, which is proper to the divine
nature; so to aseend where he was before; so to say when he was on earth, that
the Son of man is in heaven, John 6.62. and his blood is called the blood of
God, though proper only to man. 2. Effect of this union was a reception of
gifts in his body and soul; for his body received the highest degree of
perfection, that any body could attain unto, though it was not much revealed
till his resurrection (save in his transfiguration) after which it became
impassible, and now shines in heaven, far brighter then any other creature
does, or can do.

So upon his soul was poured knowledge, and love, beyond the measure in any
creature, by virtue of this union: For his knowledge was such by the light of
nature, that he knew thereby all things that could be known by it, not only by
experience of some things, but by reasoning he could tell all those things he
had no experience of; for his own sufferings he could tell all that we suffer,
Heb. 2.18. And in this wisdom he did grow and increase, Luke 2.52. and by
this knowledge he knew more then any man. Beside this, Christ had a knowledge
of infusion, or revelation, by which heavenly are understood by the light of
grace. By this he discerned spiritual things more clearly then any man, Isa.
11.2. for the spirit of wisdom and counsel, understanding and knowledge, did
rest upon him. Again, he had the knowledge of vision to see God as the blessed
do in heaven, yet exceeding them all, he being the cause of bringing men to
this blessedness; and also, because his soul is more near to God by this
union, then any others are.

And as knowledge was poured out on him by this union, so was divine charity
more then upon all men, either just or good, Romans 5.6, 7. As for faith or hope,
he had them not, farther then as to depend on God, and expected those things he
saw by the knowledge of vision; for he both saw God, and enjoied him. But faith
is an evidence of things not seen, and hope argues no present possession of
things hoped for.

Next he had the grace of office by this union of both natures, for hereby he
was made a fit mediator between God and man, to reconcile us to God; yet so, as
that the actions of the divine and humane nature, were not confounded, but each
nature performed what was proper to it self, by the assistance of the other.
As the humane nature was given as a sacrifice for us, but the divine nature
made it acceptable, being offered up by the eternal spirit, which therefore
might be rightly called the Altar which sanctified the gift, rather then the
cross, which only bore his body crucified.

Lastly, he had the grace of honor and worship due to his humane nature, as it
was united to the divine in one person; for alone, and separated, it cannot
lawfully have divine worship given to it, but so far as it is directed to him
that is God and Man.


Mathe. What does the knowledge hereof profit to a Christians life?


Phila. A Christians life consisting in the meditation, comfort and practice of
what Christ has done. This union may move us first to admire the work it
self; And secondly to consider the glory of God therein; And thirdly, what
comfort redounds to us thereby.

1. To admire this work, in which both mortality and immortality meet in one
person. That the same person is uncreated and created, without beginning, and
yet takes a beginning, a man in nature, and yet God manifested in flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. In his divine nature he makes man, in the humane nature he delivers man.
Aug.
The Son of God becomes the son of man, not by changing what he was, but
assuming what he once was not, taking what was ours, yet not diminishing what
was his; for in this union, the divine majesty did not consume the humane, nor
the humane diminish the divine. This high mystery is rather to be believed then
argued, namely, that it was, then how it was.

Next we are to consider the glory of goodness and wisdom in this work. 1.
His goodness, who not only gave nature to us in creation, and grace to us by
participation of his Image, but gives himself both to us and for us; in nature
to us, in death for us. Then consider Gods wisdom in contriving a way to save
mankind, who by sin against God was lost, and coming so in debt to God, none
ought to pay it, but man that had offended; and yet none could pay such an
infinite debt but God. Upon this the attributes of God seem at variance. His
wisdom would save him, his mercy would damn him. His wisdom moderates and
finds a way, whereby what man could not pay in nature, he might in person: For
God assumes manhood in the unity of the person, and so satisfies himself,
upon which the attributes are reconciled, Psalm. 85.10. mercy and truth met,
righteousness and peace kissed each other. For the offense which was infinite
in regard of the object, God was satisfied by the infiniteness of the
subjected surety, Christ. Again, this union teaches us, in practice to be like
him in our selves, and to one another. In our selves to partake of him that
has stooped so low to partake of us. If he of our properties, then we should
desire much more to partake of his graces. So we should desire to be like him
one toward another, not pleasing our selves, but rather our neighbors, for
their good to edification, Romans 15.1, 2. that the same mind may be in us, which
was also in Christ, Phil. 2.4, 5.

From this union we may receive also much comfort: As that our nature is taken
into the society of God in Trinity; by which our nature is not only highly
honored, but comforted in all distresses, because he took our whole nature,
with all our infirmities, sin only excepted; and therefore as he can help us
because he is God, so he will because he is man, and so one of us. So it will
encourage us to pray, and to made our wants known unto God, who certainly will
deny us nothing fit for us, because Christ in our nature pleads for us; yea,
how can we despair of glory, since he became the Son of man, that we may be the
sons of God.


Mathe. I conceive then that this Conception of Christ by the holy Ghost, was a
production of humane nature from the blessed Virgin Mary, and uniting of it to
the second person assuming it. But had she no part in this conception.


Phila. Yes, but her part was more spiritual then natural. For she first
received the blessed message by the ear from the good Angel Gabriel, as a
counterpoison to the first temptation that Eve received from the devil. 2. She
conceived it in her heart, to be the blessed will of God by faith. 3. She
resolved to be obedient to it, though she knew not how it could be. 4. She
contributed of her natural substance to that divine and effectual operation
of the holy Ghost, by whose power she was overshadowed, and that part of her
substance conveyed to the vessel of conception, in regard whereof Christ was
called the fruit of her womb, Luke 1.42. So that as Adam was asleep while Eve
was formed; so blessed Mary was as it were overclouded, while the humane nature
of Christ was by the Holy Ghost united to, and assumed by, the Son of God.


Mathe. It is hard to conceive this point. 1. In regard of the manner how he
was conceived by the Holy Ghost. 2. In regard of what she conceived. 3. In
regard of Christ conceived, whether according to the divine essence?


Phila. Therefore you are to understand and believe, that in regard of the
matter conceived, it was Christ man, but in regard of the person conceived, it
was the second person in Trinity, the Son of God, Luke 1.35. whom Isa. calls
Immanuel; not that the blessed Virgin gave the divine nature to Christ, though
she was a mean of uniting the two natures; but the Son of God received the
humane nature in her womb. 2. In regard of the manner how by the holy Ghost, it
is not utterable, farther then the production of the substance of humane nature
from her, and uniting of both natures in one person, i. Christ, which he did
not as a father, though as a divine agent: For he did it not materially, by
giving any thing out of himself, but effectually according to divine
appointment. 3. In regard of Christ conceived, Bern.
whether according to the divine essence? It is true, that every person in the
Trinity has the whole divine essence, but in a several manner of subsisting:
For the first person has it as the Father, the second as the Son. Now Christ
is said to take the humane, not according to the essentiality of the Godhead,
but the personality, and subsistence of the Son, or second person, or else he
could not be a mediator between two, because the essence of God is but one,
Gal. 3.20.


Mathe. Whether did not sin cleave to this conception, for it is said, he was
made sin for us.


Phila. He was made sin for us. 1. By imputation, because our sins were charged
upon him. 2. Because he was made a sacrifice for sin; so some sacrifices were
called sin offerings, Lev. 4.34. but he had no sin in his nature; for he was
not in Adam in respect of propagation, by which original sin is conveyed, but
in respect only of humane substance; so that though he was from him as others
are, yet not by him as others are; for he came into the world by this
wonderful conception by the Holy Ghost, and a woman without man. Which woman
though a sinner in her personal subsistence, as coming by generation from
Adam, yet her mere natural substance simply considered out of that
subsistence, cannot be called sinful; which substance was only taken of Christ
into his person, and the accident of sin left, cleaving to her own person; of
which Christ clears her, as being her Redeemer. And this appears more plain,
if we consider, that neither actions, nor affections, though called sinful, as
they proceed from the person of man, yet are not sinful in themselves, much
less is mere substance; so neither can a part of man's substance be sinful, if
not the total, but his person only: And thus Christ's nature stands clear of
being infected with original sin in it self, though separated and consecrated
by the Holy Ghost for Christ's assumption thereof. So that the old Heretics,
the Manicheans and Marcionites, had they rightly apprehended this conception,
might have avoided the error of thinking that Christ had only an incorporeall
body, from which only passed through the blessed Virgins body, thereby to avoid
the stain of original sin. Nor Apollinaris need not have denied Christ an
humane soul, and feign the Deity to supply that place, to avoid the same
taint. Nor the Papists need not say (to avoid Christ's sinful conception) that
the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin; for then her parents must be so too,
and theirs also, and so up to Adam, which is absurd to think. Nor need some
think that Christ's humane nature by this conception was sanctified, or cleansed
from original sin; for if it had ever been sinful, it could not have been
sanctified from sin, without the blood of the covenant, Heb. 9.22. and Ephe.
1.7. and so there must have been another Mediator beside himself, which St
Paul denies, 1 Timothy 2.5. there is but one Mediator, even the Man Christ Jesus,
the High Priest who is in himself, holy, innocent, and undefiled, and separate
from sinners, Heb.


Mathe. But if Christ's humane nature came from the blessed Virgin, and from
Adam, he could not avoid the taint of sin, no more then he could death.


Phila. We are to consider, as I said before, that sin cleaving not to
substance alone, but to persons, and considering that he took no person of the
Virgin, but her substance, which was immediately united to his Godhead in
subsistence, and only so made a person, it will follow, that though his
substance, yet his person was never in Adam, and so never sinned in Adam, and
so never tainted with original sin. For as it could not be propagated by his
manner of conception, so neither could it be justly imputed to his person,
which was both God and man. And for his death it was voluntary. Death did not
by his own power prevail over him, but he laid it down, John 10.17, 18. Nor
did death fall upon him as a sinner, but as the surety for sin.


Mathe. What effect works this conception for us?


Phila. 1. It hides the impurity of our conceptions from Gods anger, because
this satisfies Gods justice for original sin; for the righteousness hereof
is imputed to us, and by it is constituted holiness of nature, for in this he
was qualified with all habits of grace and virtue, which by his spirit he
powers also upon us. For this purpose he took an humane body, because
sacrifice and offerings would not satisfy, Psalm. 40. and Heb. 10.5. 2. This
conception works a spiritual life and conception in us. For our nature in
him being conceived and quickened by the holy Ghost in the womb, from thence
proceeds the power of our regeneration from him that is the original of
spiritual life in our nature; for the spirit that formed him in the womb, does
beget us again to live in him, and so does justify us before God, from the
evils that cleave to our nature.


Mathe. He is oftentimes called in the Gospel (even by himself too) the Son
of man, how then shall I conceive his conception to be more then humane?


Phila. His Conception and Birth are full of wonder, yet may be discerned with
distinction; for it seems a new creation: For as he was the Son of God, no
woman was his mother, and as he was man, he had no father. He is called the Son
of man, because he took our nature of the blessed Virgins substance. Yet he is
called the Son of the most High, Mat. 1. because he is the second person in the
holy Trinity. Which title is given to the nature assumed, because it had no
subsistence but in his person that was the natural Son of God: In which regard
the blessed Virgin is called the mother of God, not of his deity, but of this
union of God and man; yet his person was not circumscribed in her womb, though
the humane nature was. But as his body is heaven locally, and is in the Word
substantially, and in the Sacrament mystically, and in the heart of a believer
spiritually; so it was in her body naturally.


Mathe. How am I to conceive of the birth of Christ?


Phila. He was born three ways; of his Father, of his Mother, and in the mind
of man. Of his Father eternally, of his Mother temporally, and in man's mind
spiritually. For three things have relation to his birth, Deity, Flesh, and
Spirit. Of his Father he is born God for ever; of his Mother flesh once; and in
man's mind he is born Spirit figuratively often. In respect of his divine nature
he had a Father without a Mother; in regard of the humane nature, he had a
Mother without a Father; in respect of his spiritual nativity, he has both
Father and Mother, i. they that do his will. Paul says, God was manifested in
flesh; 1. From the bosom of his Father, in whom he was concealed. 2. From the
shadows of the Law, in which he was prefigured. 3. From the womb of his Mother
in which he was covered. This was the greatest and the most gracious work
(considered in all the consequences of it, as his death and resurrection, which
without this could not have been) that ever God wrought, who for these
humiliations, gave him a name above all names, Jesus, the Savior. Phil. 2.9.
Which name although others had as well as he in the Old Testament, yet they
were but figures of him; yea, the name Jehovah signifies but essence, i. God,
as he is the author of being; but Jesus signifies God, our well being, a
Savior, then which there is no other name of salvation given, Act. It was the
name of the eternal Word incarnate; it contains in it the whole economy of
the work of redemption, wherein the attributes of God are united; wisdom,
justice, peace, Psalm. 85.
mercy and truth. This was well called his great work of a woman compassing a
man. And wonderful great it was in effect: For in the Creation God made man in
his image, and so earth was honored; but in Christ's birth God made himself in
our image, and so heaven was debased. In creation God made all without
resistance; he spoke but the word and they were made. Heb. 12.
But in redemption he suffered contradictions of sinners against himself. In
this work he did both speak work and suffer; speak graciously, work
wonderfully, suffer unworthily. In creation the Word made flesh, but in Jesus
our Redeemer, John 1.3.
the Word was made flesh, John 1.14. In the creation God took man out of the
earth, and placed him in Paradise; In the redemption he took man out of hell,
and placed him in heaven, through Jesus the Savior.


Mathe. What were the effects of his birth?


Phila. Many. For among the heathen voices were heard, saying, that the great
God was about to be born. At Rome a woman was seen about the Sun, having a
child in her arms. And the Sybil told Augustus the Emperor, that that same
child was greater then he, and bade him to adore him: He would never after be
called Lord. The Temple of peace fell down at his birth, because he brought
better peace to the world. The Oracles were all struck dumb by the birth of
this eternal Word. Jupiters Oak in Dodona was shaken; the Caldron, smitten
with the rod in the hand of Jupiter. The Tripode in Delphis, Nazi. in Julian.
annotat. Nomi.
the Laurel and fountain of Daphne, and the ramfaced image of Jupiter Ammon,
could utter nothing; so that one effect of Christ's birth, was Gods glory, and
Satan's confusion. But further, another effect was, the good man's peace and
salvation: For he was born to bring both to pass. 1. His salvation, being he
was born to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, by which three offices he could
effect all that belonged to man's salvation: To deliver as a King, to instruct
him as a Prophet, Acts 4.12.
to purge him from sin, as a Priest. 2. To bring him to peace with God above
him, and to peace about him with Angels and men, to peace within him in his
conscience, and to peace below him; for hell cannot hurt him though it would,
all which may be gathered from the Angels song, Luke 2.14. But to the wicked it
brought judgment, even to make them stumble and fall, Luke 2.34. because he
brought light, and men loved darkness rather, John 3.19. Beside, nothing about
his birth, but had some effectual signification; for he was born at Bethelem,
the house of bread, to show that in effect he should be the bread of the
household of faith. So born in the fullness of time, when the Church was at the
lowest ebb, and no hope on earth was left for it, to effect faith in the
Church, that God could help, when all help in man was past. So he was born
poor, and thereby not only made us rich, but also taught us with him to trample
upon world pomp and glory, since by lying in the manger, he procured us an
heavenly mansion. And the very publishing of his birth unto the wisemen and
simple shepherds; to Gentiles and Jews; to Anna as well as Simeon, showed that
his birth should take effect on Jews and Greeks; learned and simple; male and
female, and all should be one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.21.


Mathe. I pray tell me, how could Christ suffer being God and man? 2. Why he so
suffered, and what is the effect of it upon us?


Phila. For the first Quere how Christ suffered; We understand, that though the
sufferings of Christ belonged to his whole person, and so is attributed to both
natures, yet only to the humane nature sensibly, and to the divine relatively.
For the divine nature cannot suffer being immutable, nor die, being immortal;
yet as his person consists of both natures, his sufferings belonged to both.
For the word divine was not severed from the humane nature, neither in his
birth, nor suffering. Nor was the nature inviolable hurt by the sufferings of
the nature passible, no more then the beams of the Sun that shines on a tree
is wounded by the Axe that felleth the tree. And thus we are to understand
those phrases, Acts 20.28. that God redeemed the Church with his blood, and 2
Cor. 2.8. the Lord of Glory was crucified.

2. The reason why he suffered for us, as it was not casual, but by divine
providence, the drops of his cup were measured by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God.

And this was so. 1. That the Scripture might be fulfilled, Luke 24.26, 27. and
God found true of his word, just in all his ways, not sparing his own Son,
being but surety for us; how can wilful sinners expect to escape Gods wrath.
2. That he might revive the pattern of patience almost decayed and lost, and
leave it to us to imitate, 1 Pet. 2.21. That we might be consecrated by
affliction, as he the Prince of our salvation was. 3. That he might deliver us
from the bondage of the ceremonial Law, Gal. 3.13. Also that he being made
sensible of our sufferings, might become a more merciful High Priest to us,
and more apt to succor us in temptations, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. Beside, he
suffered that he might reconcile us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. by being made an
expiation for us, and condemning our sins in his flesh, Isa. 53.5. and Romans
8.3. For if one died for all, then are all dead to that fault for which he
died: so that our disease of sin is cured by the mediation of his passion, and
by the special virtue of his Ordinances, operating in us by the Holy Ghosts
application of Christ's sufferings to us. Lastly, that we might, being sprinkled
with his blood, enter within the veil, namely, into heaven, the Holy of
Holies; from whence for sin we are shut out, as well as out of paradise.


Mathe. What use may we make of this?


Phila. 1. It teaches, that those sufferings have relation only to the Son,
not to the Father, nor to the Holy Ghost. 2. To wonder at this gracious work,
that the Son of God should be condemned by the sons of men; that righteousness
it self, should be condemned by the unrighteous, that the God of order should
be corrected with rods; that the nower of God should be weakened; salvation,
wounded, and life killed. Also to think on the hatefulness of sin, that brings
God to suffering; and to be pitifully affected with the sufferings of such an
eminent person; yet to wax strong in faith, because such an one has made
satisfaction, 1 John 3.7. and to be ready to suffer from wicked men, because he
did so, Heb. 12.3. and 1 Pet. 2.18. And farther, to distinguish rightly for
whom he suffered. It was not for all, but for all the elect; therefore Mat.
26.28. it is said, his blood is shed for many; for Christ will not know some,
Mat. 7.23. Nor did he pray for the world, but for those that God gave him out
of the world. So he gave his life for his sheep, not for goats, nor swine; for
his righteousness extends to all them that believe, Romans 3.22. As those were
only cured that looked on the brazen serpent, and turn from transgression in
Jacob, Isa. 59.20. and are ruled by the voice of this Shepherd, and are
conformed to his Image by afflictions; and that dedicate their lives and
services to him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5.15. All which should make us. 1.
To be affected with his love which was never paralleld. The just died for the
unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. whereas few or none will die for a just man, Romans 5.7. but
he for us which were ungodly, yea, his enemies, Romans 5.10. and never sought to
him for any kindness, much less thought of such a kindness, that Piety would
be scourged for impious man; Wisdom derided for fools ^ Truth denied for
liars; Justice condemned for unjust men; Life to die for dead men. 2. To be
ready to suffec for him, or for one another, 1 John 3.16. And 3. To plead his
sufferings before God against our sins, and satan's accusations, and not to
fear, but that seeing such a price is paid for our reconcilement, that God
will save us being reconciled, Romans 5.10. And 4. Being this sweet Passover is
sacrificed for us, to purge away the old leaven of malice and wickedness, and
all corruptions, and become a new lump, full of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor.
5.7, 8.


Mathe. How can the suffering of one satisfy for the sins of many? and how is
it just in God, to punish the righteous for the unrighteous?


Phila. His suffering is a sufficient satisfaction for all, because of the
dignity of his person, God and Man, which made his sufferings of more value,
then if all men and Angels had suffered; and though his death were but
temporary, yet it is more then all men's suffering eternal damnation. 1. That
it stands with Gods justice to punish the just, if he be surety for the unjust;
as a man may justly exact money of a surety which he never had.


Mathe. Was death all that Christ suffered for us?


Phila. No, his whole life was a cross and martyrdom: For his sufferings were
privative and positive; the privative concerned both natures; his divine,
because it was voluntarily deprived of that glory, joy, and felicity which it
had; for it was eclipsed while he dwelt upon earth, John 17.5.
in a veil of flesh, and by the darkness of men's hearts, who did not
apprehend his glory. So to his humane nature did justly belong all joy and
happiness, because he did perfectly keep Gods Law, yet he did want it in the
days of his flesh, for he was of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. And this he
suffered to bring us to perfect glory, and to teach us to hate sin, which
darkens the beams of Christ's glory, and to be content to have our lives hidden
in Christ, as his was, till he be revealed in glory, and we with him, Col. 3.3,
4.

He suffered also positively, and that, 1. In regard of evil imputed to him;
for Gods justice charged all man's sins upon him, as if he himself had been
guilty of them all, 2 Cor. 5.21. he was made sin for us, and bare our sins in
his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. and therefore God cannot require us to
answer for them also; but we may live comfortably in holiness, 1 Pet. 2.24.
and die in assurance of happiness. 2. He suffered positively in regard of
evil inflicted upon him, from his conception to his resurrection, and all for
us. For the malediction of the Law, laid upon us not only death, but a wretched
life, and therefore he suffered both, yet not sickness, nor the pains of
diseases, which are not common to all the nature of man, but special
judgments upon some particular men. But he suffered all the common miseries of
man's nature, which did concord to the free execution of his office of
Redemption. As 1. By the humility of his incarnation, to be made a man. Luke 2.
Phil. 2.
To come of mean parents, and to be born in a stable, and made of no account
and reputation; and this to expiate the arrogance of our first parents, who
would be as God, therefore he is put beneath the lowest condition of men. So he
hides the glory of his eternal birth, by a temporary, to purchase for us a
spiritual and heavenly birth; so to teach great men not to be proud of their
birth, but seek the new birth, which is true honor and glory; and to comfort
the poor, whose children have poor provision at their birth, and Christ had
less then they.

Again, he was mightily debased from his birth to his death; as by being forced
to fly from his native Country to Egypt, to abolish Adams sin which exiled
him from Paradise, and to repurchase heaven for us; and to comfort those godly
by his example, who suffer banishment.

Again, for thirty years together, he lived obscurely under Joseph, as if he
had been the Carpenters son, and so reputed, no man acknowledging him either as
the Son of God, or the King of Israel, or the worlds Savior, but was as a root
springing out of a dry ground, Isa. 53.2.
despised and rejected of men. What need Gods children therefore be
discontented if the world regard them not? Christ was so used. But these were
but private sufferings, the more public began after his baptism. As 1. By
being tempted of Satan, Mat. 4. in the desert, where he overcame the arch enemy
of mankind, in a single duel. This was he led to by the spirit of God, not by
any lust of vain glory in himself, that he might make our pilgrimage in this
world safe and secure, and that he having experience of his temptations, might
have sympathy of ours, and be the more ready to help us, Heb. 2.17. and show us
a way how to put the devil to flight, even by quoting Scripture as he did,
which is indeed the sword of the spirit. It teaches us also to beware of being
led into temptation by our lusts, but let the spirit of God bring us to the
combat, and he will bring us off with honor, as Christ was. For he leads us not
by seducement of deceit, nor allureth us by inticements to evil, or by
persuasions to venture upon any sinful way, but does actuate us to combat
with those temptations, which he foresees are laid for us, that our virtues
may be improved, and God glorified by such probations of us. So it may justly
comfort us in all temptations, that Christ having overcome the devil in our
behalf, has merited victory for us.

His next suffering was extreme poverty, and want of the comforts of this life,
Mat. 8.20. he had not where to lay his head. He lived upon alms, and borrowed
an Ass: And this was to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. yea, to make our selves poor
by our liberality to others, 2 Cor. 8.9. and not to place our felicity in
worldly things, nor seek great matters for our selves, but be content with the
meanest estate; Christ was as poor as any man. Beside, he had infirmities like
us, sin only excepted, Heb. 4.15. He hungered and thirsted though he was the
bread and water of life, and was weary, though the way to life: He was subject
to anger, sadness, fear and sorrow; and this was that he might merit strength
for us, and we be enabled in him. Further, he suffered extreme disgrace from
the Jews; for they denied his divinity; his birth by a Virgin; nor would
receive him as their King and Savior, John 1.11. They reproached him also
unjustly, and accused him of blasphemy against God, and of seducing the people.
Against the Magistrate with treason and sedition; against his own soul, as if
he had been a conjurer; so with gluttony and drunkenness, and a favourer of
sinners; by which means the people were offended in him, Mark 6.3. All this
fell upon him by the imputation of our sins, who were guilty, though he was
innocent, and therefore he spoke but little in his own defense. Also that he
might deliver us from eternal shame, and merit for us eternal glory, and that
we might be ashamed for his sake to suffer all reproaches, Heb. 12.3, 4.
Beside, he underwent many dangers of being cast down the clift of Nazareth
headlong, and of stoning by the Jews. All which he suffered as the fruits and
effects of our sins, and to save us from everlasting destruction. But above all
this, he suffered his enemies to consult his death, to be betrayed by Judas, to
be denied by Peter, to be forsaken by the rest. And this he suffered for our
perfidiousnesse in Adam; our forsaking God, and denying his truth, and
believing the devil. Farther, a bitter agony seized upon him in the garden,
Mat. 26.38. not for fear of death, but of the tyranny of sin, death, and the
devil, which they had got over mankind.

Next, the great ingratitude of the most part of mankind; the dispersion of
little flocks; the scandal they might take at his death; the sad ruin of the
Jews, which he foresaw, and the wrath of God for man's sin, of which now he
began to have a sense, as being surety for us. And all this he suffered without
any perturbation of sinful passion. And this was done surely to expiate our
sinful fears, and doubts, and to encourage us in any terrors that arise from a
troubled conscience, though they put us into great agonies.

But these were not all his sufferings. For he suffered, 1. By the consultation
of his adversaries the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who when they should
have been preparing for the Passover, they were consulting how to take away
the true Paschall Lambs life; and would have done it at that time, but that
they feared the people more then they feared God. 2. He suffered by the treason
of Judas, one of his own disciples, whom he made steward of his family, and had
washed those feet that were so apt to shed his blood. And this he suffered, 1.
That the Scripture might be fulfilled that foretold it, Psalm. and Joh. 13.8. 2.
To beware of coverousnesse, which will make a man even to betray Christ at any
rate. 3. To fore warn Ministers of all others, to take heed of being corrupted
this way, lest they become like salt that has lost his savor. 4. To teach us
to beware of sin, under what pretense soever. For it is likely that Judas did
not intend to have Christ killed, but only to get the money, supposing that he
would make an escape; which may be argued from that that he was so troubled
when he saw he was condemned. Also to beware of the smallest beginnings of sin.
For at the first, Judas his sin was but discontent, that he loft the gain of
Mary her ointment, and she justified in her deed. By this the devil entered his
heart, that he resolved to sell the anointed, because he could not sell the
ointment.

His next suffering was by being apprehended by wicked hands, to unloose the
hold of sin and Satan from us; and in a garden to expiate the sin committed in
Paradise. Then bound to unloose the bands of wickedness, and the works of the
devil. Then toffed from pillar to post; from one High Priest to another. Then
abused by the soldiers and Jews, Luke 22.
who buffeted that face which the holy Patriarchs and Prophers longed to
behold, Cant. 8.1. And scoffed at his prophesying, which never failed. But it
is no wonder, if they that had scorned the Prophet of the Lord, did also scoff
the Lord of the Prophets. This was done to him to expiate our sin of mocking
God, as if he could not see, and our losing of his glorious image; yet he would
not die in a tumult, but was solemnly brought before the Judge, and there
falsely accused, to free us from his that accuses the brethren: And received
sentence of death unjustly, to save us from the sentence of Gods condemnation:
So he was charged with sedition and blasphemy, to free us by his atonement
from the guilt of high treason against God. To all which he answered not,
saving to the High Priest, that he was the Son of God, because he conjured him
by the name of God to tell him. And to Pilate, that he was a King, though his
Kingdom was not of this world, that he might leave the Jews without excuse,
and take away the occasion from Pilate, of justly condemning him; and to
fulfill the Scripture, Isa. 53.7.
that he was like a sheep dumb before the shearer; and to comfort his people
that they have a King in Sion, though he regards not worldly glory.


Mathe. Methinks he does not answer very plainly to Pilate and Herod nothing at
all. I pray what was the reason?


Phila. He said he was a King, but such an one that meant not to stickle for
worldly glory, which seems strange, because God had promised to give him the
throne of David, Luke 1.32, 33.
and that he should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, but that is meant
not literally but spiritually, which teaches not to expect that true Religion
should stand in outward glory, but pray that the eyes of our understanding
being opened, we may see wherein consists the glory of Christ's Kingdom, Ephesians.
1.19. Col. 3.2.
and therefore to employ our selves about heavenly things, and not earthly
things; for our trading consists in such commodities, as appears, Phil.
3.20. for he never promised any great earthly possessions to his followers, as
that Impostor Mabomet did, but exhorted them to seek the preferments of his
spiritual Kingdom. 2. He said he came to bear witness of the truth; which
though Pilate scoffed at it, saying, what is truth, yet it was a truth; for not
submitting to which, the Devil was cast down, and all men are damned that will
not believe it (viz.) that all creatures that are capable of eternal
happiness, must attain to it by dependence upon the Son of God; by which we
are informed what poor entertainment truth finds in the world, that Christ is
fain to descend from heaven to avouch it Therefore let us receive the truth
with all respect, and stand for it to the death; for so we shall prove our
selves of the truth, and to be his subjects.

Now he would say no more to Pilate in his defense, lest he should seem to
endeavor to prevent the sentence of death. By which silence he satisfies God
for our lavish tongues, and that he might meritoriously plead for us in heaven.
Nor would he confess himself the Son of God to Pilate, because Pilate was
incapable of the doctrine of the Trinity; and also because it was no time now
to reveal his Deity, but to die in his humanity. This filence did so amaze
Pilate, that he sought to save him, or at least to put his condemnation over to
others. And therefore first offers to the Jews to judge him by their law, John
18.31. which they refusing, brought to pass what Christ had sortold (viz.)
what death he should die, namely, the Roman death of the Cross; by which we
may see that all the policy of men cannot disappoint the purpose of God in his
childrens sufferings. Upon their refusing, Pilate sends him to Herod, who set
him at naught with his men of war, because he would not speak to Herod, nor
show any miracle before him, Luke 23.8, 9, 10
thereby showing how little he esteemed of Herod's greatness, that would not
feed the lightness and vanity of his mind, by casting his pearls before such a
swine. This scorn of Herod and his soldiers he suffered, that we might be
esteemed of God, and his holy army of Angels. Herod finding no fault in him,
Luke 23.15. yet he sends back to Pilate, and in scorn of his claim to a
Kingdom, puts him on a white robe, proper to the Princes of Galilee. But what
he did in jest, God ratifieth in earnest, approving him to be his King, Psalm.
2. and the pure Immaculate Lamb of God. Now Pilate seeing he could not way
shift it off, matcheth Christ with a most notorious offender and murderer
called Barrabas, and offered them their custom, to let them loose a prisoner
at that Feast of the Passover, which should be one of them two, supposing they
would have chosen the most innocent of the two. But they mad with envy at
Christ, refused the Lord of Life, and chose a murderer to be given them, for
which they themselves forty years after, were murdered at the siege of
Jerusalem; for they preferred a robber before him, who thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, Phil. 2. This was to expiate our fin, who preferred the
Devil that was a murderer from the beginning, before God blessed for ever. In
which sin they continue to this day, that choose the company of wicked persons,
before Gods children. Next Pilate uses another most unjust policy, who finding
no fault in him, yet would have him scourged in the common Hall, and also
mocked by the soldiers, in hope to make the Jews relent when they beheld the
man who was of their own nation, so hardly used by Gentiles. But nothing would
soften their flinty and adamantine hearts, but the blood of this innocent Kid.
These scourges he suffered, 1 Pet. 2.24.
to deliver us from the eternal scourge of God, and to sanctify all his
temporal scourges to us; and to teach us to suffer patiently, if we be beaten
undeservedly. Pilate at last being overcome by the clamors of the people, and
their threatenings, that if he let Christ go, he was not Caesar's friend,
condemns him to be crucified, which was lamentable, yet comfortable; for now
did God give sentence upon our fins, and condemned sin in Christ's flesh, Romans
8.3. and therefore we need not fear condemnation at the last day of judgment.


Mathe. I read that he suffered many things beside, but I desire to know the
meaning of them.


Phila. Pilate having condemned him; he was scorned and scoffed by the
soldiers, with a painful crown of thorns, a reedy scepter, and a purple robe,
and saluted King of the Jews in jest. But God made it all good to him, when he
made this rejected stone the head of the corner. In the mean time it did argue
the blindness of the world, who cannot judge of the glory of Christ's Kingdom,
and therefore make a scorn of it, because it consists much in tribulation. But
this suffering was that he might expiate the scorns and injuries that we have
done to God, and spitting in his face by foul blasphemies. And stripped he
was, to restore unto us the garments of righteousness, which in Adam we had
lost. Clothed in red to sulfill the prophecy, Isa. 63.1. which has relation
to his blood, as well as his robe. Crowned with thorns, to merit for us a crown
of glory. A reed he had, to show that by that weak scepter he could break the
serpents head. They took off his purple robe again, which showed that one day
his Kingdom of grace should take an end, 1 Cor. 15. And his own garments were
put on again, which showed that at last he would be clothed with his own
righteousness as with a cloak, far more glorious then all worldly ornaments.
Next they carry him out to be crucified, and make him carry his own cross till
he fainted under it. In this he answered to Isaac his type, who carried the
wood, Genesis 23.6.
upon which he should be offered. Also to show, that he took the curse of the
Law upon his own shoulders. It is true, that they compelled Simon of Cyrene to
carry it; but this was that God will send us some help in afflictions; and that
we must be content to bear a part in Christ's cross, for as Christ's afflictions
are theirs by imputation; Col. 1.24.
so theirs are Christ's by sympatheticall affection. Beside, I believe he
suffered some grief at the women's lamenting him; and therefore bids them not
weep for him that was dying, but the Jews that were living, upon whom and
their children, horrible destruction should fall, according to their own vote,
His blood be upon us and our children: For if it be thus done in the green
tree, what shall be done with the dry; if judgment begin at the house of God,
where shall the ungodly appear; for if such suffer from men, how much more
shall the wicked suffer from God. Next he comes to Golgotha, where he was to be
crucified, signifying the place of a scull; not because Adams scull was found
there, as some write; for I suppose his scull was as hard to be known, as Moses
body of late pretended to be found: but rather it was so called from the sculs
and dead bones of malefactors there executed, whose stench no doubt was offense
to him, but to us a blessing; for he thereby justifies us in the place of
condemned persons, and so delivers us from the place of eternal judgment.
Thus he suffered without Jerusalem, as one unfit for men's society, and like the
sinoffering for the people was burnt without the camp. Lev. 6.30.
This teaches us, that here we must look for no abiding City, Heb. 3.14. and
therefore we must be content to go to him without the gate, Heb. 13.13.
bearing his reproach; that though we be cast out of earthly Jerusalem, yet we
may possess the heavenly, through him that has delivered us from the
defilement of the dead things of this Golgotha, and presents us pure to serve
the living God. Now being there he was offered wine mingled with myrrh, Mark
15.23. by some well-wishers it may be to make him less sensible of pain; but
he would not drink that, which might any way diminish his pains, which he
desired to suffer to the utmost: However, it was changed by the malice of the
Jews and soldiers, into vinegar mingled with gall, Mat. 27.34.
of which he tasted, but would not drink. By this cup he paid for our
inordinate appetites and gluttony in the forbidden fruit; and shows how
little comfort we must look for in this world, which commonly adds sorrow to
sorrow, gall to vinegar, as we have added sin to sin. All this being suffered,
they nailed him hand and foot to the Cross. And this to show, 1. That he was
the Messiah promised, John 2.28. Also that by this accursed death, he might
derive the curse of the Law upon himself, that we might have the blessing,
Gal. 3.13. Also that we might be so fixed to his Cross by love, that we might
not serve that sin, which by his Cross he has abolished. And further, that
the hand writing of the Law might be cancelled, Col. 2.14. that our sins might
be no more remembered: so that Christ is to be considered as a propitiatory
Sacrifice, Priest, and Altar. Priest he was everlasting, Heb. 7.24. A Sacrifice
he was in his manhood, not Eucharisticall, but expiatory, offered up whole like
the Holocaust for sin, which was burned up to ashes by the fire of Gods wrath.
And his Godhead was the spiritual Altar, called the eternal spirit, by which
he offered up himself, Heb. 9.14. yet the Cross might be taken as a material
Altar, upon which his body was laid; for though the Altar sanctifies the gift
as it is the utensill of Gods instistution, yet he that sanctifies himself,
may sanctify the Altar too by his own oblation; the fruit whereof made a
blessed atonement by the sweet savor thereof, Ephesians. 5.2. for all those that
are crucified with him, by crossing their own corrupt natures, and that look
upon Christ by faith, as on the brazen Serpent that cured the people, John
3.14. and also to consecrate themselves to God, as a living sacrifice to his
service, Romans 12.1.


Mathe. I pray show me the reasons why he was crucified in such a manner.


Phila. He was crucified naked, to satisfy for Adams losing the garment of
innocence, and might uncloath us of mortality, (of which the skins given to
Adam for clothing was an Emblem) and cloth us with his merits; also, that he
and we might enter into heaven naked, as Adam did into earthly paradise; so to
comfort us, that when the world and death strips us naked of all we have, to
suffer it joyfully; for we shall find a clothing from heaven, 2 Cor. 5.4. when
mortality shall be swallowed up of life; and therefore to be content in the
mean time, Lignum mortis. Lignum vitae.
that the world be crucified to us, and we to the world. Again, he was fastened
to the wood, that death might be driven out of the world by a tree, as it came
in by a tree, and life brought back to us again. He was laid on the cross, as
Isaac on the wood; and nailed as foretold, Psalm. 22.17. they dug my hands
and my feet; also, that all bills and bonds of law against us, might be nailed
with him to his Cross. 1 Pet. 2.14.
Then he was lifted up that he might carry our sins from the earth, and conquer
the spirits that rule in the air, Col. 2.15. He was crucified with his hands
spread, as reaching them out to embrace both Jews and Gentiles, that are not a
gainsaying people. His blood was shed on the Cross to answer all the
sacrifices of the Law, without which there had been no remission, Heb. 9.18.
whereas it is now an universal medicine for all our souls languishing, 1 John
17. and obtains for us eternal redemption, Heb. 9.12. Beside, he was
crucified between two thieves, 1. Because it was foretold that he should be
reckoned among the transgressors. 2. Esa. 53.12.
That he might sanctify the death of repenting malefactors; for his death in
effect was to be divided among sinners, of whom at last he would be Judge,
while some stand on his right hand, and some on his left, as the bad and
repenting Thief hung. Now while he hung on the Cross alive, he suffered,
beside the pain, 1. The division of his garments, and casting lots on his
vesture, as was prophesied, Psalm. 22.19. 2. To show that his very enemies
should partake of his graces. 3. Into four parts, to show that his good grace
should edify the four parts of the world. So the not dividing his other coat,
showed that his righteousness should be applied whole to every believer. And
the casting lots for it, argued that no man had his merits by their deserving,
but by the mere gift of God, Col. 1.12.
who disposes of the Lot. To all which misery, they added derision, Mat.
27.39. wagging their heads, and upbraiding him with his words of destroying and
building the Temple in three days; Yet it was truth in his sense of his
resurrection, ut praedixit sit revixit.
and mocking at his miracles, saying, he saved others, but himself he cannot
save. Others mocked at his trust in God. Others at his prayers, as if he called
upon Elias to save him; which he suffered, that we might know the
abominableness of our sins, that heaped such contempt upon the Son of God. Also
that we might be delivered from the scorn of this world, and enjoy the comfort
of our repute from God and a good conscience, Heb. 12.3.
without reviling the world again. Nay, more, they blasphemed God, as if he
could not deliver him, as the wicked said, Psalm. 22. with whom they join issue,
and so condemn themselves to be of the wicked crew, even like thieves, who also
did the same. But beside all this, he suffered great torments both in body and
mind. In body, by hanging on the Cross by his nailed hands and feet; so that
his heart might be rightly said to be melted like wax, Psalm. 22.15. This was
undergone to satisfy for our despising the threatening, and the power of God in
punishing those sins we had committed in the body; also to free us from
eternal torments, and to sanctify whatsoever pains we suffer in the body by
diseases, or from persecutors. So he suffered anguish in soul, when he cried
out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; which some writers take to be
meant of his descending into hell: for now God seemed to desert him, by
deferring his deliverance, and by withdrawing from his humane nature, the
divine support of comfort, that he being sensible of them, we might be
delivered from them, by his meritorious suffering them. Yet we are not to
conceive, that the divine nature of the Son did forsake the humane, but that
the union was obscured or eclipsed; nor that God the Father forsook him quite,
but permitted his humane nature as surety to feel what was due to the
principal. And this first confutes those that think he suffered not in soul,
though the Prophet say he made his soul an offering for sin. And if not in
soul, his bitter cry argued more impatience then the Martyrs had. It also may
comfort men in their distress of mind, since Christ was forsaken for a time;
and surely it should work in us a fear of sin, that made God thus to deal
with his only Son, whom he spared not, being only the principal; how terrible
will he be against unrepenting sinners, whom he will forforsake for ever; and
to make us consider with commiseration, those that are troubled in mind; a
wounded spirit who can bear. No wonder if many of them cry out they be damned,
of whom we are to judge charitably, since Christ complains of Gods forsaking
him, through fear, whom yet he calls his God by faith. Lastly, he through
pain suffers thirst, and they to add to his misery, gave him vinegar, and
so they fulfilled the Scripture, Psalm 69.22. and he completed our redemption,
saying, it is finished.


Mathe. But did he only suffer on the cross without any glorious testimony of
his roialty and Deity?


Phila. No, God left him not without witness. For Pilats superscription,
(Jesus that Nazarene, that King of the Jews) God would not it should be
altered, being a plain affirmation of his glory, which otherwise Pilate might
possibly have done as well, as to crucify him at their importunity. Now in
that God does thus acknowledge his name Jesus upon the Cross, he thereby
testified that he accepted him for our Savior, as Jesus signifies, Mat. 1.22.
and will not deny those that believe on him; yea, God exalts him in that name
which the Jews despised; so that he will honor those whom the world
reproacheth; yea, he will have him now known to be that King, his first born,
higher then the Kings of the earth; and at this time of his disgrace too, to
show, his Kingdom stands not in outward observation; nor is his roialty lost,
by outward abasements: for even now like a King he paid the
blood-roiall-ransome for his elect, even among the Jews themselves, of whose
repenting people he was King, by whose power they were converted, Acts 2. This
title was written in the three general known languages, to show that every
tongue should confess to his glory of Jesus, Phil. 3.11. when the Gospel
should be preached to the nations. This title Pilate would not alter in one
tittle, to show that we should not lose one jot of the faith of Christ, and
indeed whosoever does it, or suffers it to be done by Heretics, or Sectaries,
are worse then Pilate himself. Again, God honored him, by making nature
suffer an eclipse of darkness, as if to show the Sun of righteousness did now
set, and that the Jews should be left in blindness, and all others that did
not believe in him. Also, that nature abhorred the fact, and that God hereby
did threaten the sins of men, as Joel 2.10. and that he that now suffered was
more then a man, for whose sake such a miracle was wrought. Next he was
glorified by one of the malefactors conversion and confession; which showed
Christ's power and mercy, and justice; his power, that he did and could work on
him in the midst of his anguish; his mercy, that he would save one at the last
gasp, that none may despair; and his justice, that he would save but one, that
none might presume upon late repentance. Lastly, he was glorified by the veil
of the most holy place rending of it self; which showed that God did now abhor
the Jews Temple, and dissolve their religious rites, and utterly rejected
them, for rejecting Christ his Son. And that now we have free access to the
mercy seat, Heb. 4.16. Aequaliter pater arca calestis. Helv.
Yea, heaven is set open to us, which before was shut against sinners, of Jews
and Gentiles, but now open to both.


Mathe. But what necessity uas there of Christ's death?


Phila. First, to satisfy Gods justice, who determined death to be the wages
of sin, Romans 6.23. Christ therefore being man's surety, Romans 8.3.
and taking on him the similitude of our sinful flesh, God condemns sin in his
flesh, by putting him to death, and satisfies his justice for all the elect by
one; who though he was but one, yet being both God and Man, his death is of
infinite price to make satisfaction to Gods infinite justice; who had told the
first Adam, that if he eat of the forbidden fruit, he should die that day. And
that day he became mortal; Romans 5.12.
for then death began to seize upon him and all his posterity. But Christ
coming in Adams, stopped the issue of spiritual death, by the merit of his
death. And this he did also to fulfill the prophecies of himself, Esa. 63.7.
that he should be lead as a sheep to the slaughter; as also to ratify the New
Testament, which was as his last will whereby he grants by covenant with God,
all the blessed Legacies of spiritual and eternal happiness to his Church:
Heb. 9.15.
which Testament is of no force without the death of the Testator. Also that he
might destroy the power that death and the devil had over us, Heb. 2.14. even
to bring us under eternal death; which death though he never suffered himself,
yet prevents it in us, by the worthiness of his person suffering external
death for us that believe upon his precious death, which is of more value for
one hour, then the eternal death of all men in the world. And so by this
means he has given us an antidote against the reigning power of sin, that it
shall not have dominion over us, Romans 6.14.
but that by the virtue of his death we might die to sin, Romans 6.2. and that he
might purchase life for the world of his elect, who by the doctrine of his
death, receive the seed of eternal life, and become the seed of Christ, Esa.
53.10.


Mathe. But how did Christ die, in his natures, or in his person?


Phila. Herein you must beware what you conceive: for if you think he died in
both natures, divine and humane, or in his whole person as God and man, you
err from the faith, and profane his divinity: therefore you are to believe;
that though the flesh of Christ only died, in respect of the nature that died,
yet this death having relation to the eternal word by union, the Lord of life
and glory, may be said relatively to suffer, in which respect his blood is
called the blood of God, Acts 20.28. Therefore though death made a separation
of his humane soul from his humane body, yet both ever subsisted in the divine
nature, firmly united. For if there had been a new manner of subsisting, then
Christ must be conceived to have two persons as well as two natures.


Mathe. How shall I reconcile St Paul, who says, Christ was slain toward the
end of the world, Heb. 9.26. and St John says, he was slain from the
beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8.


Phila. He was actually slain toward the end of the world, namely, in the year
of the world, Scalig.
3982. and in the 34. year of his age, and on Friday the fifth day of our week,
which that year was the fifteenth day of the Jews month, called Nisan, which
that year was the seventh day of our April, as some account, yea, at the ninth
hour of that day, the time of the evening sacrifice, Mat. 27.46. But he was
flain from the beginning of the world in Gods determination, Genesis 3.15. for all
that believed on him to come, to whom his death proved as efficacious, as the
composition of a surety does enlarge a debtor out of prison, though the debt be
not paid a long time after. Thus Christ was slain from the beginning, in type
of Abel slain by Cain, and in all the sacrifices offered for sin, which were as
evidences to the faithful of things not then seen.


Mathe. But the Evangelists take notice of many occurrences in his death, of
which I can find no great reason nor mystery infolded, as that no bone of him
was broken; and that his side was pierced and the like.


Phila. No doubt but every particular consequent of his death, has some
mystery in it. Exodus 12.46.
As 1. In that a bone of him was not broken, to show that he was the true
paschall Lamb sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.6. answering to the Jews Passover,
which was so to be handled, Exodus 12.46. So his side was pierced with a spear
by a soldier, John 19.34. First, to fulfill Scripture, Zach. 12.10. they shall
look on him whom they have pierced. Also to answer to Adam, whose side was
opened when Eve was formed: so was Christ, when the Church Christian was to be
framed. So the water and blood that issued from that wound, was both miraculous
and mystical. 1. Miraculous, that the water contained in the pericardium about
the heart, was not dried up with the anguish that he endured, and by the heat
of the heart in that extremity. 2. It was mystical, showing the difference
between him and his forerunners. Moses showed a bodily deliverance of Israel by
water of the red sea; Joshua by Jordan. John the Baptist showed a spiritual
deliverance by water in baptism; but Christ was he that came by water and
blood, 1 John 5.7, 8. By water of sanctification to wash us from the stain of
sin, and by the blood of expiation, to make atonement with God for the guilt
of sin. So the earthquake showed his divine power, by which he made the earth
do him homage, though man would not; whereby the senseless creature condemned
the stupidity of men. As also it foreshewed how the doctrine of his death should
shake all worldly ordinances. So the renting of the rocks, showed how the
doctrine of his death should rent the hearts of men; the godly hearts by sorrow,
the wicked by horror; yea, the confession of the Centurion, that he was the Son
of God, showed Christ's power, that though his Disciples forsook him, yet he
raised up pagans to acknowledge him.


Mathe. Why was he buried?


Phila. First, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Esa. 53.9. and that being
buried, might be known to be dead; and also might overcome death in his own
den, and might bury our sins with him from the sight of God, who are buried
with him by baptism, Col. 2.12. and might take away from us the horror of the
grave: yea, no doubt also to teach Christians to bury each other decently, as
those that have a part in Christ's death, and in the hope of his resurrection.
He was buried in a known place, that his burial might not be doubted of: and
near to the City Jerusalem, which signified the vision of peace, that men may
know our rest came by him, who bore the chastisement of our peace. He was laid
to rest in a garden, because troubles arose from sin committed in a garden. And
his sepulcher was in a rock, to show that our stony hearts must be dug
before Christ can lodge there. And it was a new sepulcher; to show that his
rest place is only in that heart that is made new. And in this no man was ever
laid, lest some should say it was some other man that rose; or that he rose by
virtue of some holy man there buried, as 2 Kin. 13.21. So he was buried another
man's sepulcher; to show that no grave belonged to him, because he was no
sinner; and that therefore he was buried for other men, not for himself; and
that graves are properly made for sinners, not for him that was their Savior.


Mathe. But why is the Evangelist so diligent to give notice of all the
circumstances of his burial?


Phila. He makes mention of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus now, because they
do now a more worthy work then ever before; to show that God will honor them
that honor Christ; by which we may be encouraged in well doing. Now was that
prophecy fulfilled, that he made his grave with the wicked and the rich. The
wicked was Pilate, whose leave was craved; and those malefactors that lay
buried not far off. And the rich were these two Senators, who show more
Christian courage for Christ now dead, and insulted over by his enemies, then
when he triumphed by his miracles. So should we to his members, in the depth of
their adversity. They are the most noble Christians that will show themselves
to the Church, friends in her tribulation; and to Christ professors in
persecution. This argued the powerful working of God, in these who hid their
profession for fear of the Jews, and now are more bold then the best of his
Disciples. It is dangerous censuring of men: for though some seem good, and are
not, so others seem bad, and yet are good: even as some are wiser then they
seem, so others seem wiser then they are. But you will object, that if they
were so zealous, they need not have asked Pilates leave to do so charitable a
work. Now the Evangelists set this down, to show that there might be the less
doubt made of his death, because the Judge gave leave to bury him. Also, that
though they knew God could mollify the heart of Pilate, of himself to command
his burial, yet Joseph thought fit to show his respect to authority, by asking
his leave. Zeal without discretion, is like sacrifice without salt, not
accepted with God. Having obtained leave, they perform it hastily, because it
was the preparation to the sabbath; to teach all men to do their necessary
occasions before that, yea, that our outward solemnity, though it favor of
charity, yet must not obstruct piety. Also they did it openly to take away all
suspicion of fraud in his burial. And they did it costly, to teach us that we
must spare neither labor nor cost, to serve Christ living or dead, in himself,
or in his members. He was wrapped in fine linen, to argue his innocence; and
with spices, to show the sweet memorial of the blessed; and what a sweet odor
should arise from his burial in the hearts of all believers. But yet he was
not imbalmed, not only because the time was too short to do it, but because we
should know that his body needed nothing to preserve it, but Christ's own divine
power; and also to prevent any cavil, as that he was thereby preserved from
corruption. Now it is noted, that this was done after the manner of the Jews
buryings, to show us that customs may be observed, Mat. 27.59. Heb. Goler.
being not forbidden in Scripture. It is said, they rolled a great stone to the
mouth of the sepulcher, not only to secure his body from any vile usage, but
that the glory of Christ might the more appear in removing this stone when he
rose: yea, the women being there, had a mystery in it, namely y^^ show how God
can make the weakest strong enough to stand against the enemies of Christ, by
an open profession of him; as the watching and sealing up of the sepulcher, did
but the more manifest his resurrection by those soldiers, being witnesses that
he rose in spite of all their power and policy. So his lying in the grave
three days, was to answer to Jonas his type in the whales belly, and to make
good the prophecy of Hosea 6.2. after two days he will revive us, and the
third day he will raise us, and we shall live in his sight. But you will say,
he did not lie in the grave three whole days and nights; yet according to the
Jewish account, he might be said so to do; for a day is reckoned by evening and
morning. Now the former evening, and Good Friday on which he was buried, made
the first day; then Friday evening, and the Sabbath following, made the second
day; and the Sabbath evening, and the next morning of his Resurrection was the
third day. It may be you may think it strange, that Christ would lie in the
grave on the Sabbath day: but this he did, to show the work of redemption was
finished; and therefore he rested the seventh day, as God was said to do, after
the six days work of creation. Also to show, that with him was buried the
ceremonial part of the Sabbath, namely, the seventh day formerly appointed.
And surely the first Christians so understood it, and therefore they kept their
holy meeting afterward upon the first day of the week, Rev. 1.
which St John called the Lords day. Now in all this time Christ's body
corrupted not. First, because he was without sin, which is the cause of
corruption; and therefore he was preserved by the power of God, Psalm. 16.10.
Beside, men that die violent deaths, are not so apt to corrupt, as those that
die of diseases, by which they are partly corrupted before they are dead,
otherwise a dead body may possibly be without corruption sixty hours, and
upwards, and Christ was dead not much above forty, and so might justly be said
not to see corruption. By all which he gave us a pledge of an eternal sabbath
of rest; and that our bodies after death should rise incorruptible. And this
doctrine of Christ's burial, is full of comfort and instruction. Of comfort,
because that now this storm of Gods anger is allaied by our Jonas, being cast
into this whales belly of the grave, which by his body is fanctified for us. It
teaches us also to bury our sins with Christ, Romans 6.4. and there let them lie
as dead carcasses, separated from us for ever, and grow loathsome, and at last
wear out of memory in respect of either by affection or practice, and we may
live to newness of life, by virtue of Christ's resurrection.


Mathe. But before I enquire of you the mystery of Christ's resurrection, I pray
resolve me what you think of Christ's descending into hell, which is an Article
of that Creed, commonly called the Apostles, and in that of Athanasius; but not
in the Nicene Creed, nor in any other that I know.


Phila. You put a Question of great controversy, yet of more then needs, if
the phrase of hell were rightly understood. For in the Old Testament it has
two names given to it, namely, 1. The congregation of the dead, Pro. 21.16.
according to which translation it may be understood for the grave; and if it
be translated word for word with the Hebrew, then it may be taken for the
depths of water, In caetu Riphaim or Gigantum.
in which the rebel giants of the old world were drowned; which Job calls
Sheol infernus; or the low place, Job 26.7. and so does David, Sheol.
Psalm. 16.10. which is translated the grave. Afterward about the captivity, it
is called Tophet or Gehinnom; Gebenna.
which are only words borrowed from that execrable place in the vallie of
Hinnom (where the Jews burned their children in sacrifice to Moloch, i. the
devil) to express hell, which they believed to be a place of torment. This
term or word held long among the Jews, and Christ used it as the vulgar
expression in his time. Mat. 5.22. yet Luke 16.23. he uses another word as it
is in the Greek text, namely Hades, which there signifies hell; for it is
said, Hades.
the rich man was in hell in torments. But it is taken oftener for the grave,
and the condition of men deceased, as Genesis 42.38. Job 7.9. Psalm. ^^.^. Pro.
23.14. Acts 2.31. 1 Cor. 15.55. and most plainly Rev. 20.13. death and Hades,
i. the grave shall be cast into the lake of fire. Now see how Christ may be
said to descend into these; for into the grave he had descended, and therefore
it need not be said again in relation thereunto, that he descended into hell.
If taken for the waters, what should he do there, 1 Pet. 3.19.
except you will suppose that he went to preach to the rebellious spirits that
were there imprisoned for their disobedience in the days of Noah. But how he
went, and when, and wherefore: how whether in soul or body, or both: then in
what time; whether before he rose, or afterward: and why; whether to preach for
their conversion, or to confirm their damnation, would be resolved: or whether
he went thither to suffer any thing, or to triumph: surely not to suffer for
us; for on the cross all his sufferings were finished: nor to triumph, for
that he did upon his cross, Col. 2.14, 15. Beside, we are to consider where
Hell should be, if Christ descended locally thither: for we conceive it to be a
place ordained for the devil and his angels, and wicked men. Now if the Devil
and his be not yet confined thither, what should Christ descend thither for,
either to confirm damnation, or to triumph over them that were not there. Now
that they are not yet confined to the place appointed, is plain, because St
Paul calls him the Prince that rules in the air; because yet they have
great liberty in tempting men. Also because the devil besought Christ not to
torment him before the time. And because both St Peter, 2 Pet. 2.4. and St
Jude, ver. 6. say, that they are as yet only reserved in chains of darkness,
to the judgment of the great day. Just. Mart. Iren. l. 5. c. 26. Hieron. in 6.
cap. Ephesians. Drusius. Aug. lib. de civit. dei. l. 8. c. 22, 23.
And so held the fathers of the first 400. years after Christ. St Peter in his
second Epistle the second chapter, the ninth and seventeenth verses, says so
of wicked people. Therefore some writers of great account have said, that from
the earth to the firmament, is not a mere empty space, but full of spirits,
which were cast down from the high heavens into these lower parts of the air,
as into a prison, till the last judgment, together with other wicked of their
society. Now descension cannot properly be applied to the air, but rather
ascension. Therefore by Christ's descending into hell, we may as I judge, safely
understand, those inward sorrows which he suffered in his agony in the garden,
and on the cross, which pressed him to cry so bitterly, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me: which internal sorrows, were as near infernal
sorrows, as the innocent surety of our salvation was capable; of which no
mention was made in the Creed, but only by this Article: or that by the
efficacy of his death he did pierce into hell, i. wheresoever the cursed
spirits have their residence, despoiling them of their power, and confirm their
damnation, and to signify the deliverance of his people from their captivity.
Ephesians. 4.8.
And it seems to me that David intended this sense, Psalm. 16.10. thou will not
leave my soul in hell, i. in sorrow and anguish; nor suffer my body to know
corruption. All which should work in us sorrow for sin, which put Christ to so
much; and make us to descend in all humility under the hand of God, as he did,
that with him we be exalted in due time. Also to shun despair, since God can
bring us from the sorrow of hell it self, as he did our blessed Savior.


Mathe. But I pray tell me the benefits obtained by his resurrection.


Phila. It is said, Phil. 2.9. that for his sufferings God has highly exalted
him; so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and earth,
and under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father. Now this exaltation, consists, 1. In his
Resurrection. 2. In his ascension. 3. In his session at the right hand of God.
4. In the outward and inward adoration of the intellectual and rational
creature. 5. In his coming to judge the world.


Mathe. Four of these I agree to, but the bowing at his name I doubt of, as I
do also of many other gestures which have been used in the Church assemblies.


Phila. I know this outward gesture has been much controverted. But when I
consider that God allows of outward visible, as well as of the invisible
worship, and that St Paul says, we must glorify God in our bodies, as well as
in our spirits: and that this posture of bowing the knee, is founded upon the
glory of God in Christ, Phil. 2.10. It may be practiced by Christians, yea,
Chrysostom. ad popu. Antioch. hom. 61.
and ought to be at certain times of devotion, as a token of the same, and to
testify our submission to Jesus Christ, whom God has so highly exalted, and
assigned him this worship as a part of his reward for suffering, Theodo. in
Phil. 2.
that by our humility he may be exalted, who was exalted for his humility, even
to have him honored in his name, when absent, in reference to his person. I
know that many objections are made against it. As first, that all things that
are here spoken of, have not knees, as Angels below and above. I answer, nor
have they tongues, therefore shall not they confess him? The meaning then is,
that all in their several manner shall willingly, or unwillingly be subject to
Christ, whom God has exalted by manifesting him to be the eternal son of God.
So that as we that have knees are to bow them to the person that owns that
name Jesus, so shall all others do first or last willingly, or forcibly to the
same person and his power. For the bowing to the name as a word, or at the
naming thereof always, I do not understand the text intends it; but that
Christians in old time did use to uncover their heads at divine service, when
this name was pronounced, in sign that they did acknowledge his deity, Zanc.
in Phil. c. 2.
against the blasphemy of the Jews and Arrians, who would not acknowledge his
Godhead, is plainly to be found: Hiero. in Isa. 45.23.
and that they bowed the knee also, which the Jew in pride would not do, which
in time did degenerate to superstition. Yet sure as it may be superstitiously
used, so it may be irreligiously neglected, since that Christ has said, he
that honoreth the Son, honoreth the Father, and that he will have all men
worship the Son, as they worship the Father; and that God has included his own
name in Jesus. I am, Isa. 43.11.
and beside me there is no Savior; and therefore being Jesus the Savior, he
must be Jehovah too, our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Upon this ground I believe
our Church has injoined this gesture, as may be seen in the 52. injunction of
Queen Elizabeth, and in the eighteenth Canon. But antiquity is antiquated, and
the Church authority disalowed, and so Gods worship disanulled.


Mathe. Now I pray declare the manner and the benefits we have by his
Resurrection and Ascension, and his session in heaven, and his coming to
judgment.


Phila. First, ye are to know that only Christ's body can properly be said to
rise, because that only died, although the soul and it were never disunited
from the person of the Son of God, though the soul was divided in death from
the body: of which rising there was testimony enough, both of Angels and men.
The time of his rising was the third day, neither sooner nor later. And that
first to fulfill both his type of Isaac, who was taken alive from the altar the
third day, after he was destined for death, Genesis 22.4. which receiving was in a
figure, Heb. 11.19. i. of Christ's resurrection; and also of that prophecy,
Hos. 6.2. the third day he will raise us, for by him we shall all be made
alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. Again, he rose this day as it were to give a new
beginning to the world. He died the day of the week that Adam was created, and
rose the first day of the week, on which God began the world, by which he
enlightened Heaven and Earth, with the grace and joy of his resurrection. Also
he rose with the sun, to show that he was the true Sun of righteousness that
was to rise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. to enlighten the new Christian
world, after so long a night of dark legal shadows, spoken of, Cant. 2.17.
and Romans 13.12. bringing life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.
2 Timothy 1.10. The manner of his rising was admirable: As first by his own
power, John 2.19. dissolve this temple, meaning the temple of his body, and I
will raise it up again the third day. So John 10.18. I have power to lay down
my life, and I have power to take it up again: this he did as he was God. He
did it by himself from the Father, through the eternal spirit. Again, he rose
by such a way as never any man did before, namely, as the Prince of life, as
the first born of the dead, as the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.
He never saw corruption, nor ever was to die any more, as Lazarus and others.
He rose in the same body that was buried, Luke 24.39. and in despite of his
keeper, as the Church shall do in despite of all opposers; and with an
earthquake, to show how he will shake the world, first by the power of his word
preached, and next by the power of his last coming to judgment.


Mathe. What benefits have we by his resurrection?


Phila. Surely very many; as first, the confirmation of our faith in Christ,
that he was the Son of God, because he raised himself from the dead, and that
we are justified from our sins, or else why is our surety let out of the prison
of his grave, but that Gods justice is fully satisfied, Romans 4. and the last
verse. Again, it causes a twofold resurrection in us; first from sin to a new
life of grace, Romans 6.4. Secondly, of our bodies from the grave, 1 These. 4.14.
so it gives us an hope of heavenly inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. The reason
whereof is, because Christ sustained our persons in himself, and so we have
our part both in his death and resurrection, Romans 8.11. Therefore this doctrine
ought ever to be remembered, 2 Timothy 2.8. not only in our head, but in our life,
by standing up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14. lest if we have no part in the first
resurrection, we lose also our part in the second. And remembered it ought to be
the rather, because it may comfort against the most sad afflictions, Esa. 26.19.
from whence Christ can raise us. So against the fear of Gods wrath, because it
is fully satisfied; from which baptism a type of the ark, and of our rising
with Christ above the deluge of Gods justice, does now save us, 1 Pet. 3.21.
and against the power of death, Romans 8.11.
which by virtue hereof is so subdued, that it shall not always suppress us.


Mathe. For what end or purpose did Christ ascend into heaven?


Phila. To fulfill what was foreshewed in legal types and shadows of him. As
the high Priest of the Jews entering into the most holy place, Heb. 7.26.
which was a type of heaven, as he himself was of Christ. So to show that he
fulfilled all things on earth, which concerned our redemption and
reconciliation; and therefore now ascended in triumph, leading captivity
captive, as Abraham did the forces of the four Kings; Psalm. 68.18.
and as Barack did the Midianites, and so enter into his glory prepared, John
17.5. through the gates of heaven, intimated, Psalm. 24.7. and so demonstrate,
that Angels and principalities and powers, were made subject to him, 1 Pet.
3.22. Also that in Heaven he might make intercession for us, Heb. 9.24. who yet
are in this world, as in the outward court of the most holy place, where the
Jews stood, when the High Priest entered to make an atonement for them, he
being sprinkled with blood, having the holy censer with sweet incense in his
hand, by which means he has opened a way for us into heaven, Heb. 10.10. as he
had promised, and now performed it, John 14.2, 3, Ephesians. 2.6.
by carrying our flesh into heaven, as a pledge that we should all follow that
believe in him; also that we might place our mind, where our treasure is, and
not misplace them on earthly things, Col. 3.1.
nor to dream of his bodily presence in this world, as if we would know him
still after the flesh. This doctrine of Christ's ascension should make us to
forsake sin and satan, and not be subject to that slave which Christ has led
captive. So to be willing to die, that we may go to the place which Christ has
entered for us; and therefore not to mourn immoderately for the dead in Christ,
who are seized of heaven already.


Mathe. What is meant by Christ's sitting on Gods right hand; for I conceive not
God to have either right or left hand, nor how Christ is tied to any such
posture.


Phila. You are to understand that sitting so, imports in Scripture, abiding
or habitations, as Luke 24.49. sometime judiciary power, as Solomon was said to
sit on the throne of his Father, though he was not always tied to that
posture, 1 Kin. 2.30. So by right hand is understood power and help, and glory,
Psalm. 44.3. Sometimes therefore as man is said to be helped by Gods power, and
protected when he stands on his right hand, Psalm. 16.8. or holds by his
right hand, Psalm. 73.23. So one is exalted, when one is said to be on Christ's
right hand, Psalm. 45.29. which is spoken of the Church. So Christ by his
sitting, is understood to rest in felicity from all his labor and pain, and on
Gods right hand having dignity imperial, and power judicial; so that we are
to understand by his sitting on Gods right hand, that he does not only rest in
joy and felicity, but has obtained the highest dignity above all men and
Angels, Ephesians. 1.28. and that he is copartner with his father in his Kingdom,
and therefore he has power over all things in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18.
not that God the Father cease to rule, but that he pleases to administer his
Kingdom by his Son; yet he also makes Christ's enemies his footstool, Psalm.
110.1. till which time Christ must reign by and in the Kingdom of grace, 1
Cor. 15. but then he shall deliver up this Kingdom to God the Father, i. the
rule which he exercises now by Gospel means, shall cease when his enemies are
subdued, and the elect fully gathered and glorified: not that his Kingdom by
which he is equal with God shall cease, for of that his Kingdom shall be no
end; but of that Kingdom by which he governs by means and holy methods, of
Word and Sacraments, and mysteries of godliness. Now then, who can be ashamed
of Christ's service, who is so great a potentate, but rather to submit to his
government with all reverence and conscience of his greatness and power, that
so we may show our selves worthy subjects and servants to him, lest we cause
that blessed name to be blasphemed, by which we are called. And who can choose
but trust in him for provision in all wants, and deliverance in all temptations
of satan, or any adversity, since our Savior has an universal power by
sitting at the right hand of God.


Mathe. Whether is this the uttermost degree of Christ's honor and exaltation.


Phila. No; for he shall come from thence to judge the world; In which we are
to consider many things for the terror of some, and the comfort of others.


Mathe. What need, or why must there be a judgment day?


Phila. First, for the confusion of wicked men, who have mocked at it, 2 Pet.
3.3. whom he confutes in that chapter; first, of being ignorant that the world
was made by the Word of God, and that he destroyed once by water, Genesis 7.11. in
the 600. year of Noah's life, and that the world which is now, is reserved for
fire unto the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men foretold by Isa.
66.15. Dan. 7.10. Mal. 4.1. and threatening a fire that shall consume the
wicked, both root and branch. Secondly, he shows the reason why God deferreth
it; not that he is slack in his purpose, but because he would not have them all
to perish by a sudden surprise, but that Jew and Gentile might have a time to
be called to salvation, and then it shall come suddenly as a thief.

Secondly, there must be such a day, because judgment is not fully executed in
this world; for oftentimes the best men are here oppressed, and the worst are
exalted; but a time must be, when God will reward every man according to his
works. Judgment begins in this world with the house of God, but it will end
with the wicked, 1 Pet. 4.17. So that this day will declare the justice of God,
which now lies hidden, Romans 2.5. and is himself censured by men, but then he
shall overcome in judgment, which in part he has showed by the fiering of
Sodom, and will complete it by being revenged upon the sins of all men, as well
as theirs.


Mathe. When shall this day be?


Phila. As some have thought it would never be, so others have been too bold to
set the time, and so have made people careless of their calling; and some
seeing it did not come, to fall away from Religion; of these St Paul warns to
take heed, 2 These. 2.1, 2, 3. and says, that the Kingdom of Antichrist must
first come and be destroyed also, whereas it seemed some thought it would be in
the Apostles age, by mistaking some Scriptures, as John 21.21. that St John
should tarry till Christ came. Others thought it would be 400. some 500. some
1000 years after Christ's Ascension. Others have thought 2000 years after
Christ's Nativity, because they say the world was 2000 years before the Law, and
2000 under the Law, and 2000 years under the Gospel, but for the elect sake
those days shall be shortened. But the account is false: for before the Law was
more then 2000 years from the Creation, and less then so under the Law: and
therefore who can believe what they set down for the future. As for the
shortning those days for the elects sake, that is spoken of the troubles that
fell upon Jerusalem by the Roman army in Vespasian and Titus their time. But
that there shall be such a day, the Scripture tells us, Acts 17.31. and God will
have it known by preaching of it, Acts 10.42. both for the consolation of his
people in all their troubles, and to leave the wicked without excuse, that they
had no warning. And that this day shall be the last day of the last times,
wherein men shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. Which last times are not
they spoken of, Heb. 1.1, 2? for they were the last times of the fourth and
last Monarchy foreseen by Daniel, wherein the stone, i. Christ, should crush to
dust all those Monarchies, and set a Gospel Kingdom. But these last times are
the latter times of the Gospel profession, wherein men shall give heed to
spirits of error, and doctrines of devils; such as popish heathenisme in
worshipping Images, Saints, and Angels, which is nothing else but the renewing
of their old superstitions, under the color of Christian Religion. But it may
be that some may wonder why God should defer the day of Judgment, so long
after the death of so many faithful Patriarchs and Prophets, and holy Martyrs.
But they consider not that God has respect to his own glory, in raising and
altering things in the world, as the Monarchies thereof, and the rising and
fall of Antichrist; the rejection and calling of the Jews; the full coming in
of the Gentiles to Gospel profession; the gathering of the elect by the means
of Gospell-preaching, who must have a time to be born and live, and hear
instruction, and perform the works of righteousness. Nor do they consider that
the deferring thereof is for the trial of the elects faith, patience, and
devotion in prayer, like the Saints crying under the Altar, Rev. 6.10. How
long, Lord, holy and true, do thou defer thy judgment? Others it may be will
object, that seeing that God has determined this day, why will he hide it from
us? The reason is no doubt, because he would have us watch, and be prepared
like the wise virgins with oil in our lamps, and like him that expects a
thief to come suddenly, as Christ tells us, Mat. 24.43. But some will say, it
is no wonder that we know it not, being that Christ himself says he knew it
not, Mark 13.32. To which it may be answered, that he knew it not, so as to
make us to know it; as God is said to prove Israel that he may know; that is,
that he may make them to know, Deuteronomy. 13.3. for God knew before what they would
do; or that he knew it not as he was man in the estate of his humiliation; or
that he knew it not without revelation from his divinity, but now he is
glorified, he as man knows the day and hour. But it may be some will be so
curious to ask, where shall this judgment be? Some think in the vallie of
Iehosophat, from Joel 3.2. but that place has only relation to those nations
that afflicted Israel, and so is but an allusion to this great assizes at the
judgment day: yet it is probable that Christ may judge where he was judged;
but we have no certain proof from Scripture where it shall be, but that he
will come in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and those that have
pierced him, and thither the elect shall be caught up to meet him; 1 These. 4.17.
even in the air, where the devil now rules, Ephesians. 2.2. as a Prince, but shall
then be judged with the rest of his crew to hell, to which place they are not
as yet committed.


Mathe. What may be the signs of his coming to judgment.


Phila. Some take the preaching of the Gospel to all nations; but this was
done in the Apostles days, Col. 1.6. Others say the security of men; Mat. 24.
but that is no sign that has no distinction; for men have ever been so, and
ever will be so. Others say the want of faith, love, wars, and plagues, and the
rising of false Christ's and Prophets; but these appeared before the destruction
of Jerusalem (whatsoever may hereafter) for Mat. 24.34. it is said, that before
that generation pass, all these things shall be fulfilled. But in the
succession of ages, there has been always several monitory signs of that
day, ever since the Apostles days. As first, the rising up of many
Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. 2 These. 23.
Then a general apostasy of men from the truth of Religion, as in the time of
Arrius, who denied Christ to be begotten of the substance of the Father, and
that there was a time wherein the Son was not: which heresy was generally
received and abetted by Bishops, and some Emperors; Socrat. l. 2. c. 18
few or none opposing it more openly than good Athanasius, excepting the
Council of Nice. The next sign is the discovery of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.4. by
Gods witnesses, namely, the Scriptures, or some faithful expounders thereof.
The next sign is the reviving and publishing the everlasting Gospel, and
profession of the reformed religion from superstition, prophesied, Rev. 14.6.
which has been set on foot by the Protestant religion in these latter times.
The next sign will be the fall of spiritual Babylon (which in all likelihood
is Rome) by the martial power of Princes, Rev. 17.16, 17. The other signs will
be a general corruption of manners. Then the calling of the Jews, great
alterations in heaven and earth, but how is not set down. But at last shall be
seen the sign of the Son of man coming in the clouds, Mat. 24.30.
but what kind of sign this will be, is uncertain. Some say it will be the
appearance of the Cross, and instruments of Christ's passion; Lyranus.
as the spear and nails that pierced him, and the other altogether. Others say
that a sword shall suddenly fall from heaven, to signify to all true
believers, Lactant. l. 7. c. 1
that the Captain of the Lords host is coming. Others think that Christ shall
appear with his Cross carried before him, Damianus de moribus Aethiop.
and a sword in his hand as ready to be revenged on the ungodly that have
crucified him, and of the enemies to his Cross. Others think the sign of the
Cross shall be carried before him in the clouds, Chrysostom. in Mat. Muscul in
Mat.
as a testimony that it was he that was crucified; or that it shall be the
fignall of his triumph against the devil, and the world, whom by it he has
conquered, Col. 2.15. Others say that this sign shall be the body of Christ
appearing with all the marks of his wounds about him; Dr wilket. Calv. Pet.
Mart.
but whether they shall appear in his glorified body, I know not. Others say
that this sign of the Son of Man shall be his celestial power and glory, with
all the eyes of the world to him, and this is likely to be the sign, even
himself in glorious appearance, as Luke 21.27. and Mark 13.19. who names no
sign but himself.


Mathe. But how shall men be tried?


Phila. No doubt but by sufficient law and evidence. They that have sinned
without law, shall perish without law, Aug. in Romans
i. those that have sinned by nature without the law moral; shall be judged by
the law of nature, with the law moral; and those that sinned in the law, shall
be judged by the law. Beside, there shall be sufficient evidence to judge them
by; for we read of books that shall be opened. Rev. 20.12.
As first the book of nature, and herein the creatures that we have abused,
shall testify against us, Jer. 17.1. Next the book of Scripture which we have
disobeied, Luke 12.48. Thirdly, the book of Conscience, which as a thousand
witnesses shall convince us, when it shall be awakened, which is now asleep.
Then the book of Gods remembrance for the comsort of good men, Mal. 3.16. and
the terror of the wicked, when God himself shall be a swift witness against
them. Lastly, the book of life, full of the names of Gods children, Phil. 4.3.
and also, Rev. 20.12. yea, rather then fail, the heavens and the earth shall
declare our iniquity, and stand up against us, Job 20.27.


Mathe. What shall be the last issue of this day of judgment?


Phila. The godly shall have the possession of, 1 These. 4.17. where they shall
have, First, the vision of God which is the very life of the sonle, as the Sun
is of plants. Secondly, their own natures perfected; 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Cor. 3.18.
their faces shall shine like the Sun; their bodies active like spirits; and
shall have health without the least weakness; their souls full of knowledge,
and their heart of perfect holiness; their company Angels, and the spirits of
just men; Heb. 12.23.
among whom shall be perfect love and amity. Secondly, the wicked shall be
thrust into hell among the devils, where they shall be deprived of the
comfortable sight of God, and heavenly glory, excepting so much as Dives saw to
the increase of his own grief. Also a worm of conscience shall ever be gnawing
upon them by a remembrance of their sins, with the unspeakable torments of fire
unquenchable, and the horrid presence of devils; of which horrid troubles they
shall never find ease nor end, so that they shall loath the life they have, and
shall never find that death they desire. And then shall follow the creation of
new heavens and earth, not in substance, but in quality: for as the old world
was not annihilated by the deluge, no more shall this by fire; but they shall
be melted, and cast into a new mold, as St Peter does well express that,
though the inferior heavens shall pass away with a noise, (...). 10.
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth with the works
there in shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. Yet though all these things shall be
dissolved, (...). 12.
ver. 11. and 12. and melted, nevertheless we look (according to Gods promise)
for new heavens and earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness. In which also
the creature shall have a restitution (as appears Acts 3.21. and 8.23.) from
bondage to liberty, i. from the bondage of corruption and mutation, and the
service of wicked men's humors; not that all that ever was shall be so, but
every sort of creature that are then alive at the last day, which God made in
their several kinds at the creation, shall be restored, and for ought I know,
reserved at the pleasure of God, as the examples of his wisdom and power in
the creation. And last of all, then shall Christ deliver up his Kingdom to God
the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.
not his glorious and eternal estate, which he ever did and must enjoy with
the Father, but his temporal government which was delivered to him, with all
power by the Father, Luke 10.22. to rule in the Kingdom of grace by holy means
and ordinances; by which he having now subdued all enemies, fulfilled all
truth, and delivered his elect from all sin and punishment, and brought them to
eternal happiness, he gives up this Kingdom to the Father to rule them in
glory, not excluding him lse, but as the Father ruled by him in the Kingdom of
grace, so he now, in and by the Father in the Kingdom of glory for ever. Amen.


The end of the first Part.

A CHRISTIAN DIALOGVE between PHILALETHES and MATHEIES.
Part 2.
Mathetes. CHrist being thus plainly set forth in the Old Testament, how came
the Jews not to believe upon him?


Phila. 1. By their own hardness of heart, not believing the Prophets, but
also persecuting of them, and refusing to hear them, Jer. 6.17. 2. By the just
judgment of God, who therefore laid a stumbling block before, upon which the
father and the sons fell together, ver. 21. And Christ became to them a
stumbling, and a rock of offense; for though Isaiah had foretold them that he
should be as a root out of a dry ground, and they see no beauty in him to
delight the sense; yet they looked for him as one to come in outward glory, and
to be a worldly King and deliverer, which God intended not. 3. His birth was
poor and private, little taken notice of; so that he escaping with his parent
into Egypt, by the warning of an Angel to avoid the massacre of Herod, and
returning afterward into Galilee, and dwelling in Nazareth, they had easily
forgot that he was born at Bethelem, and out of Nazareth they expected no good,
John 1.46. neither any Prophet. 4. When he appeared among them, because he was
no sectary, as Pharisee, Sadducee, they all envied him, and slandered both his
doctrine, as if contrary to Moses, and his miracles, as if done by the power of
the devil: And so by their malice, and the unjust judgment of Pilate, brought
him to the ignominious death of the cross, so unwittingly fulfilling the
determinate counsel of God. 5. Acts. Epiph. l. 1. tom. 1. H. 15.
They set the traditions of the Elders above Scripture. 6. Some of them
abolished Moses Law, or his five books; so did the Nasorites. Some studied to
add to the Scriptures, as the Chasidim, after the captivity, Joseph. antiq. 1.
^^ c. 15. Luke 10.57.
and would be holier then the Law required. From these did spring the
Pharisees, some rejected all the Scriptures, save the books of Moses, as did
the Sadducees, and denied both Angels, Spirits, and the Resurrection, and
therefore confuted by Christ, not out of the Prophets, Jansen. concor. in Mat.
23. Eman. S^. in hunc locum. Maldonat. Ferus. Aug. in tract. 46. in Joh.
but of those books they held for Canonical, Mat. 22.32. Thus heresy crept
into Moses chair, as the Pope has brought into Peter's; yet Christ says,
because the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair, he bids the people do as
they say; that is, so far as they teach Moses: for by Moses chair is meant his
doctrine, not his office; and the people had a rule to try it by, for the Jews
kept the Old Testament entire.


Mathe. What punishment did God inflict upon them for this?


Phila. He took away from them Scepter and Myter, Kingship and Priesthood, and
the very face of a Commonwealth, about forty years after Christ's death, by
Vespasian and Titus with their Roman army, as was foretold by Daniel. Dan 9.26,
27.
The occasion whereof was, they having been conquered by the Romans, and
governed by their Deputies, and they carrying an hard hand upon them, they
rebelled, as Florus, (who succeeded after Faelix, Festus, and Albinus) was so
avaritious, that he took out of the treasury of the Temple, sixteen talents of
silver, and when the Jews murmured at it, he permitted the soldiers to slay
and spoil the Citizens of Jerusalem at pleasure, and scourged and crucified
Jews of noble birth. Here their refusing Christ, and choosing Barabbas a
murderer, began to be revenged, and the scourging and crucifying Christ, to be
retaliated, and his blood to fall upon their children. This was the ground of
that war, that ruined Jerusalem at last.

But not only this was the cause, but God gave them up to an obstinate mind,
for their malice against Christ, and the prophecy began to take upon them,
Zac. 11.9.
which Zachariah foretold; I will not feed you, that which dies, let it die,
and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest eat the
flesh of each other. Zach. 11.15.
The two staves of beauty and bands were broken, and the instruments of a
foolish shepherd were assumed. The Ecclesiastic offices were disposed
according to the pleasure of the Roman Deputies, Valerius Gratus, Pontius
Pilate, and Vitellius in the reign of Tiberius, in whose eighteenth year Christ
was crucified.

Again, to hasten their ruin, Caius Caligula succeeding Tiberius, would have
his image set up in the Jews Temple, which though the Jews zealous of their
Religion, would rather die then suffer, yet it excited the Emperors malice the
more; which though it was unjust in him, yet was it just with God to make him
an instrument to punish them who were more afraid to defile their Temple of
stone, then to destroy the body of Christ in whom dwelt the fullness of the
Godhead bodily.

After him succeeded Claudius, in whose time 20000. of them were slain by
crouding and treading one another in narrow places, for fear of Cumanus
soldiers, who came but to keep the peace, because they began to murmr much,
and the insolency of a soldier, which showed his privities in the porch of
the Temple.

After him succeeded Domitius Nero, Joseph. antiq. l. 20. c. 6.
in whose time a certain Egyptian feigning himself to be a Prophet, drew four
thousand men after him, whom Faelix Hensen killed and scattered, Acts 21.34. In
this Emperors days, Florus aforesaid much pilled and oppressed them. After
this Domitius, diverse contended for the Empire, as Galba, Otto, Vitellius, Vid.
Orati. Reg. Agrip. contra Rebel. in Joseph.
who were soon cut off, and Vespasian chosen Emperor. In whose time the Jews
refused to offer sacrifice for Caesar's happiness formerly and usually done.
Now began this calamity to grow apace; for 50000. of them were slain at
Alexandria, 10000. at Damascus. Joseph. de bell^ Jud.
Prodigious signs appeared both in heaven and earth, foreshewing desolation. A
comet like a sword hung over Jerusalem a years space. A clear light about the
Altar at midnight, and the great brazen gate of the Temple opened of it self.
Chariots of fire were seen compassing Towns. Voices were heard in the Temple,
admonishing people to be gone. The Jews notwithstanding were hardened; Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 3.
but the Christians there departed, as corn separated from the chafe, before
the fire of destruction came.

Vespasian with his son Titus, with an army of 60000. having first subdued many
of the Jews rebellious Towns, at last gave order to besiege Jerusalem, which
he left to his son Titus to subdue, and himself returned to Rome. Titus
besieged it at the time of the Passover, when the City was most full of
people; who being terrified by the sword of the Roman without, and the
seditious within, the City was brought to great misery by famine, and contagion
of the dead wanting burial: women were forced to eat their children. At last
the City was taken, and the Temple ruined: the people, some crucified, others
ripped up in hope to find gold in their bellies; others sold as slaves for thirty
a penny, as they valued Christ but at thirty pence; others carried captive, and
devoured by wild beasts, at the triumphs of Vespasian. Thus God rewarded them,
that regarded not his Son, so that destruction came on them to the uttermost;
for since that time they never had the face of a Church nor State, but are
scattered, and hated of all nations. And in token that their Religion should
not rise again, their Temple could never be rebuilt (though much endeavored)
no more than Apollos Temple at Delphos could, which after this was destroyed by
thunder and earthquakes, Theo. l. 3. c. 11.
as if God meant to put an end to Judaisme, and to Heathenisme, and to set up
Christianity. And though the Emperor Julian out of hatred to Christianity,
Sozom. lib. 5. c. 19, 20.
permitted the Jews to re-edifie their Temple; yet God by storms and tempests,
earthquakes, and fire flashing out of the earth resisted it.


Mathe. They being thus destroyed, and their Religion expunged, among what
people did God then plant his Church, and true Religion?


Phila. Among Christians of what Nation soever, (...)
of which you read, Acts 2.5. there were sojourners at Jerusalem, Jews, devout
men of all nations, which were not Jews by Country, but rather by profession,
and yet Jews by blood, but dispersed abroad called men of Israel, Acts 2.22,
39. yet others were there, and therefore ver. 10. called proselytes, and Act.
17.4. worshipping Greeks or Gentiles. Now these (...).
Proselytes were such as disclaimed heathenisme, and joined themselves to the
Jews. They were of two sorts. 1. A Proselyte of the Covenant, or of
Righteousness. 2. Of the gate, Deuteronomy. 14.21. The first subjected himself to
Circumcision, and to all the Law of Moses; and therefore was admitted to the
Jewish society and privileges, even to stand in the first Court of the Temple,
where the Lay People of the Jews assembled to worship. The second sort
subjecting themselves only to Noah's seven precepts, which were; 1. To renounce
all Idolatry. Schindler in Pentaglot. p. 1530.
2. To worship the true God that created all things. 3. Not to murder. 4. To
forbear all unlawful copulations. 5. To abstain from theft. 6. To do Iren. l.
3. c. 12 to do as they would be done unto.
justice, and judgment on malefactors. 7. To refrain from eating like
Canibals, flesh with blood, as any member torn from living creatures; of which
sort of proselytes, as is thought, was Naaman the Syrian, the Eunuch, and
Cornelius. These were not admitted into the Jews Court of the Temple, as the
other proselytes were, but stood in the Court of the Gentiles, which was
separated from the other, by a little low wall after the second Temple was
built. In this place they suffered beasts and birds to be sold for the use of
the Temple to sacrifice, and thought it a place fit enough for such proselyts
to worship God in among the unclean. Mark 7.11.
But Christ coming thither, drives out those market men, and calls even that
place his house of prayer, where these despised Gentiles were allotted their
place of worship. So beginning there to break down the partition wall between
Jew and Gentile, alluded to by St Paul, Ephesians. 2.13, 15.
making way for one to come as near the throne of grace, as another.

Here was the first sign of admission of the Gentiles to worship God in
Oratories, as well as the Jews in their Temple Court by Christ's acceptatiou.

Again, we find these Gentiles called worshippers of God, as in Acts 17.4.
that is, (...).
so far as they were lead by the knowledge of the Law and the Prophets, by
which they were lead to the hope of eternal life, and the expectation of
Christ; which knowledge made the Gospel find the more easy passage into their
hearts, upon the Apostles preaching and expounding the Prophets to them
concerning Christ's Death and Resurrection, or else we must suppose them to be
miraculously converted, so many thousands at once without their Will and
Understanding, and so could give no reason of their faith and belief. These
latter proselytes received the Gospel with great joy: and of these converts
Christ built his New Testaments Church, by the ministry of his Apostles through
preaching, which he confirmed by signs and wonders: Acts 15.10.
For when it was questioned, whether the Gentiles that believed (or should
believe) should conform to circumcision or not; it was concluded by St Peter,
that no such burden should be laid upon them, Acts 10.28.
because he had received no such order from God in his vision at Ioppa, from
whence he was immediately sent to Cornelius, an uncircumcised proselyte,
between whom and Jews, God put no difference, Acts 15.9. but purified their
hearts by faith, and gave them also the Holy Ghost, Acts 15.8, 9. to whom also
St James assented, Acts 15.19.

God therefore did most wisely dispose, that the coming down of the Holy Ghost
should be at that time when Jews and Proselytes were assembled from all parts,
round about Canaan, to celebrate the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem, that so
they being converted, might upon their return home, disperse the same to
others. These, both Jews and worshipping Gentiles, no doubt were the first
founders and dispersers of Christian Religion: and it may be the Apostle
thought they were no farther bound to preach to the Gentiles, but to these only
that came from the adjacent places from every nation. But God made it appear
otherwise to Peter, Paul, and Silas, who were by the spirit separated and sent
to that purpose to the remote Gentiles.


Mathe. What visible association were there of the Gospel people at first,
beside conversion of people?


Phila. The first was of the Apostles and Disciples, Acts 1.13, 14. together
with the mother of Jesus, and other women, after Christ was taken from them
into heaven. Unto these more were added, ver. 15. then the number was 120.
These being assembled in an upper room in Jerusalem, after prayer Peter stood
up and advised to choose one in the place of Judas Iscariot, which lot fell upon
Matthias. Acts 1.15, 26.
When they had thus filled up the number of the twelve Apostles, their next
meeting was upon the day of Pentecost, a Feast of the Jews, Levit. 23.11, 15.
called a Feast of weeks, or fifty days begun on the sixteenth day of Nisan,
or the second of the Passover, or the morrow after the Feast of the Passover,
which was the fifteenth, as the killing of the Passover was on the fourteenth
of the same month at even. On this sixteenth day they were to offer a sheafe of
their first corn, and the Priest was to wave or shake it before the Lord. Upon
which day Christ the first fruits of the dead rose out of the grave with an
earthquake. This feast ended with the offering of two waved loaves, as a sign
at the finishing of harvest at the end of fifty days. So Christ having
completed the harvest of man's redemption, and presented himself in both
natures, divine and humane, to God as intercessor, he sent upon his Apostles
the holy Ghost with plenty of celestial gifts, to feed and sustain his Church.
In respect of which candid gifts of sight, it was styled rightly Whitsunday,
and the Christians were clothed in white garments.

Their next association was in the Temple at prayer time, and at breaking of
bread in their houses, Acts 2.46. that is, in their private oratories, or upper
rooms set apart for holy occasions, of which there was no use when Churches
were built, except for devotion of the private family. Another meeting you find
Acts 4.23. where God shook the place where they were assembled, and they were
all filled with the holy Ghost. Another meeting you find, Acts 6.2. about
choosing the seven Deacons, of whom Stephen was one, who was the first Martyr
that suffered death for Christ, Acts 7.58. Then began persecution to wax hot,
by reason of Saul's being too zealous for the Law of Moses, Acts 8.4. and so the
Church was scattered; but he was converted, Acts 9. Then had the Church rest,
and multiplied exceedingly, ver. 31. and spread very far, and at Antioch they
were first called Christians, Acts 11.26. Then Herod Agrippa, to curry favor
with the Jews, Acts 12.2. killed James, and imprisoned Peter; but God smote
him in the midst of his vain glory, Acts 12.23.

The next special meeting of the Apostles, was Acts 15.16. the first Council
that ever was, who determined the great Question of circumcision negatively,
that it should not be imposed on the Gentiles. Other meetings there were in
diverse places, according as the Church increased, and was transplanted in
diverse regions, as Acts 20.7. at Troas.


Mathe. But had they any public meeting places called Churches, in those
times?


Phila. The first they had were those oratories which the Jews had on tops of
their houses, (...), or (...).
called the upper rooms, which though the Romans called caenaculum, or a
banqueting room, because it was like their feasting rooms on the tops of their
houses; yet neither the Jews nor Christians used it, but in religious
devotions. And therefore where Christ eat the Passover, and celebrated his
last supper, was held a place sacred, though appertaining to some private house
of some of the disciples.

In this place some say that Christ appeared to his disciples on the day of his
Resurrection, Nicepho. and Bed. de locis Sanct. to. 3. c. 3.
and on the eighth day after to Thomas, with the rest: and that here James was
made Bishop of Jerusalem, by the Apostles and the seven Deacons elected, and
the first Council held, Cyr. Hieros. cat. 16.
Acts 15. And Saint Cyril calls it the upper Church of the Apostles, where the
Holy Ghost descended also upon them, Acts 2. And it may possibly be the place
prophesied of (as being near to mount Sion) Psalm 50.2. out of Sion God
appeared in perfect beauty: in which Psalm the spirit also seems to refuse
carnal facrifices, which was Gospel-like doctrine. Also it is prophesied that
out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of God out of Jerusalem, to
which many people shall flock; and so they did, Acts 2.

And thus his foundations were laid in the holy mountains, and he has showed
that he loved the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob, Vide
Hier, in Epitap. Paulae epi. 27.
because he, i. Christ was there produced by the Gospels promulgation, which
never came from the Temple, though divulged from a place near to Sion: which
place was enclosed afterward, if we may believe antiquity, with a fair Church,
called the Church of Sion.

In process of time, as the Church Christian increased, no doubt they built
places of recess for the worship of God, as well as the Jews had Synagogues,
whose religion was estranged as much from the religion of the Roman Empire, as
the Christians was: and in these places they did ordinarily assemble, to
perform divine duties, unless they were hindered by necessity.


Mathe. I pray give me some instances of these?


Phila. We read, that as at first they had their upper rooms for oratories; so
afterward they had places of worship built in fields, Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib.
2. c. 16. (...).
where they heard the Scriptures interpreted, and had several classes for men
and women, and sung Psalms, and had distinctions of Bishops and Deacons. We see
also in Paul's Epistles, that he salutes some with their household only, as
Aristobulus, and Narcissus, Assyncritus, Romans 16. Oecume. in in Romans 16. and
Col. 4.
and Phlegon. But others he saluteth with the Church at their house, i. all
those that there commonly assembled. So he salutes Nymphas, Col. 4.15. and
Philemon, and Aquila, and Priscilla, Romans 16. which shows, their houses, or
part of them, dedicated to pious uses in common. So Theophilus, to whom St Luke
dedicates his Gospel, Hiero. in ep. 2. ad Galat. Clem. in Recog. lib. 10.
and Acts of the Apostles, did dedicate his house at Antioch to this purpose;
this was about thirty eight years after Christ. And Eusebius reports, that St
Mark had diverse Churches in Alexandria, in his history, lib. 2. cap. 16. So St
Paul at Corinth, as we may collect from 1 Cor. 11.22. saying, have ye not
houses to eat and drink in, or do you despise the Church of God. So Joseph of
Arimathea, and his Colony of Christians, built the Church of Glassenbury in
England, Hist. Angli.
which being burnt, was built again by King Henry the second his Letters
Patents. So Crescens caused a Church to be built at Vienna. So in 79. Eus. l.
3. c. 4.
there was a great Church built at Ephesus by St John, says Eusebius, lib. 3.
cap. 20. And many were built also in Rome by the Apostles means. Eusebius. l. 2.
c. 25
And surely the reason of this dedicating places to holy worship was, because
Christians being taught by Scriptures, that the majesty of God is most sacred
and incommunicable; so those things by which they worshipped, should not be
made common. And indeed therefore Christians were well admonished by an ancient
holy Writer, Clem. in epist. ad Corinth.
that we ought to do all things as God had expressed them to be done, in regard
both of times when, and persons whereby, and places wherein, that so we may be
accepted of him, all these we find in the first hundred years after Christ.


Mathe. I pray go on, and give me a further light.


Phila. We find Ignatius reproving Trajan in a Church, lib. 3. cap. 19.
as Nicephorus reports. And 117. the Emperor Adrian commands Christian Churches
to be built, Dion. in Adri.
and forbade to place the Images of the Roman Gods therein. And Ignatius
writing to the Magnesians, Vid. Epist. ad ad Philad.
charge them to meet in one place, to use one common prayer, with one heart,
as coming to one Temple of God, one Altar, and one Christ.

So we find Polycarpus receiving the Communion in a Church at Rome, in the year
169. And Theophylus Antiochenus, Eus. l. 5. c. 25.
in his Epistle to Autolycum, says, that as the sea has Islands that are
fruitful, so the world has Synagogues called Churches, wherein truth was
preserved, whereby men might be saved. And Clemens Alexandrinus distinguishes
the Church local and personal, lib. 7. strom.
and therefore certainly there were local Churches in his time.

After this we find these very places called by the name of Churches, and the
houses of God by Tertullian in his Apolog. speaking of Churches built upon
hills, Tert. de Idola. 203.
as Christ was crucified on a hill. And writing against the Valentinians, who
affected secret mysteries, he shows that the Christian Temples were open and
plain, and to the light, i. as I suppose built toward the East, Constit. Apost.
l. 2. c. 57.
as other authors write also.

But before this, King Lucius of England desiring of Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome, Beda. l. 1. c. 4.


Yea, further, the order of their Churches have been described by authors
worthy of belief, That offenders standing without the Porch, did entreat the
people going in, Greg. Thaum. or Neocaes.
to pray for them, and sets down also the places for the Catechumeni and
Fideles, they that were to be Catechized, and those that were to be auditors
and receivers of the Communion. And this order when it was left, Cypr. in
epist. 55.
was a sign of confusion coming into the Church; all sitting promiscuously, and
coming into the Church without discipline, it seemed to usher in Paganism; as
the pulling of them down, and the neglect of Church Service and Sacraments, and
Scripture, and turning them into shops and houses, warehouses and cellars,
Hippol. de conum. mundi, and Antichr.
was to be a forerunner of Antichrist, as Hippolitus propheceid, and we may
justly expect no less, having seen such signs since one thousand six hundred
and forty.


Mathe. But it seems not probable, that in he athenish times, Christians should
have any such privileges under persecuting Emperors.


Phila. 1. I answer as before, that they might be permitted as easily as the
Jews to have Synagogues, since the Jews Religion was as far different from
the heathens, as the Christians was, and for that the Christians were never
rebels against the Roman State, as the Jews had been. Beside, the Christians
had diverse intervals of rest between their persecutions; but they were
persecuted by Jews, Heathens, Saracens, and Christians erroneous.


Mathe. I pray declare how and when?


Phila. 1. You must know that Julius Caesar having made all the world quiet by
his latter conquests, Dan. 7.23.
and like Daniels fourth beast, had broke all dominion in pieces, yea, subdued
the State of Rome it self, and made himself the first Emperor; in whose
stead succeeded his adopted son, Octavianus Augustus Caesar, who after many
troubles and wars, Florus,
with competitors, settled the Empire in peace; in token whereof, he shut up the
Temple of Ianus, which from the building of Rome, 700. years before, was but
twice shut up, i. at the time of Numa, and at the end of the Carthaginian war.
In this Emperors forty second year, Natian. in Julian Annus. No^^i.
Christ was born, about which time the Oracles of the heathen were all silent.
Herod the son of Antipater, was now by the favor of Antonius made governor of
Judea, and by Augustus made King, and confirmed so by the Senate of Rome. This
Herod by the fathers side was an Idumean, and so as is thought of Esaus line,
who was prophesied to shake off the yoke of Jacob, Genesis 27.40. and so he did,
if Josephus says true, that he destroyed most of the seed royal of David, and
became a Jewish proselyte, in hope thereby to fasten the government more firmly
to himself. But the report of the wise men coming from the East, Mat. 2.
and enquiring for one that was born King of the Jews, much troubled him, so
that he massacred the young male children of Bethelem. The first persecution
for Christ's sake. Luke 3.1, 2.3.21.
This was the first persecution that arose for Christ's sake.

After Augustus succeeds Tiberius Nero, in whose fifteenth year, St John the
Baptist began to preach and baptize, and baptized Christ in Jordan, and was
beheaded by Herod Antipas, Mar. 6.27. In the eighteenth year of Tiberius,
Christ was crucified, and rose again the third day after, of which Pontius
Pilate was not ignorant, and therefore sent letters to Tiberius of it, and his
miracles, and that he was believed by many to be God; but the Senate would not
acknowledge him, Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2.
because he was worshipped as a God before they had approved him; and so
thinking themselves wise, they became fools. Romans 1.21, 22.


After Tiberius, succeeds Caius Caligula, in whose days Pontius Pilate killed
himself in prison, and Herod Antipas, and Herodias, Eus. l. 2. c. 7. Joseph.
ant. l. 18. c. 9.
that beheaded John Baptist, were banished, and died miserably at Lions in
France; which Caius did not out of hatred to their sin, but to make way for his
favorite, Herod Agrippa. This Herod by the Jews instigation, began to stretch
forth his hand against the Christians, by killing James, and imprisoning Peter,
Acts 12.1, 2. And beside this, Jewish persecutions.
we find little persecution, save what the Jews raised themselves against
Stephen, and some of the Apostles.

Next to him succeeded Claudius, in whose days Theudas and Judas were routed
with their followers, Acts 5.36. and the famine came foreprophecied by Agabus,
Acts 11.28. And in his time was the famous, and first Council held by the
Apostles at Ferusalem; in his reign we find no persecution from the heathen.

But after him followed Domitius Nero, the first persecuting Emperor, 1.
Persecution by Heathen Emperors.
by whom the furnace was made much hotter then before. He set Rome on fire in
diverse places, and then laid it on the Christians, and set forth Edicts to
persecute them to death. So wicked a man, that it was said of him, that if the
Gospel had not been an excellent thing, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 25
he would never have troubled those that professed it. He crucified Peter, and
beheaded Paul at Rome. And James the son of Alppeus was martyred by Aranus at
Jerusalem. Jacobus Justus.
This Emperor slew himself for fear of the Senates sentence against him.

Next followed Vespasian and Titus; 2. Persecution.
which Titus was poisoned by his brother Domitian, the second persecutor of
Christians. He banished St John to the Island of Patmos. Favia a Noble Lady to
Pontia, Protasius and Gervasius slain at Millain. Timothy stoned at Ephesus,
Dionysius Areopagita martyred at Paris: he was slain by one Stephen, steward to
his Empress. The Senate buried him by Pocters, and expunged his memory.

Cocceius Nerva followed by election, who recalled St John, and other
Christians from banishment.

Trajan adopted by Nerva, succeeds, and raises the third persecution, 3.
Persecution.
wherein suffered Simon the son of Cleophas, of 120. years old; he was scourged
and crucified. So Ignatius suffered martyrdom, by being devoured by wild
beasts, being allured by himself to come and grind him in their teeth, that he
might be found as fine flower in the house of his Father. Plinius secundus
Deputy of Bithinia, being troubled in his mind to see so many Christians suffer
innocently and patiently, wrote to Trajan that they were honest and virtuous
people, deresting murder and adultery, and such like, only in the morning
early they had meetings, where they sang Psalms to one Christ, who they said
was God. This mitigated the persecution.

To him succeeds Aelius Adrianus, by whom the Jews were all banished from
Judea and Jerusalem, given to other nations to inhabit, and called Aelia.
Chytr. Chron.
In his time Aristides and Quadratus writ Apologies for the Christian Religion;
and the Christians petitioned that they might not be put to death for the
clamors of the people, except they were found to be worthy of death for some
offense against the Law. Eus. l. 4. c. 9.
To which purpose this Emperor writ an Epistle to Fundanus, Deputy of Asia, and
would have built a Temple for Christians, but for fear the Heathen Temples
would have been utterly neglected.

Antonius Pius succeeds, being adopted by Adrian. In his time Justin Martyr
writ Apologies for Christians, Eus. l. 4. c. 13.
which were read in the Senate, and moved this Emperor much toward them, and
proclaimed his edict at Ephesus in their behalf.

Antoninus Philosophus, called Marcus Aurelius, succeeds Pius his Father in
Law, together with his brother Verus, for nine years.

There was now two Augusti ruling the Empire; but Aurelius outlived Verus, 4.
Persecution.
and raised the fourth persecution, which raged extremely, but the Christians
were undaunted, and wearied their tormentors. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna and
Justin Martyr, suffered in his time, Eus. l. 5. c. 1.
Photinus Bishop of Lions in France; and Blandina, that cried in her torments,
I am still a Christian. In this time the Christians were slandered with eating
men's flesh, and incestuous copulation: but had it been true, they could not
have been so willing to die, and so lose all those pleasures. He was admonished
by many good men, as Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis, and Melito Bishop of
Sandis, to mitigate his fury against Christians; but he did not, till being
refreshed by the prayers of his Christian Legion, when his whole army had like
to perish for the want of water: the Christians prayed, and there fell
abundance of rain, with thunder and lightning, which helped to put their
enemies also to flight. Eus. l. 5. c. 5.
This assuaged his mind, and he wrote to the Senate in their behalf; and the
Christian Legion after that, was called the thundering Legion.

Commodus his son succeeds him, a bad man. In his time Apollonius, a Noble man
of Rome suffered martyrdom.

After him followed Pertinax, murdered by the Praetorian band.

Next Didius Iulianus bought the Empire of the soldiers, and was slain in two
months.

Septimius Severus succeeds him, chosen by the Senate. He raised the fifth
persecution, 5. Persecution.
which raged much in Alexandria, and in Africa. In his time Leonides the Father
of Origin was beheaded, Eus. l. 6. c. 1.
who was exhorted by that his young son, to persevere in the faith of Christ.
One Potamiaena, a young beautiful Lady in Alexandria, was committed to
Basilides, a Captain, to see her executed, who did courteously defend her from
the outrage of the people; therefore she prayed for his conversion, and was
heard of God, for he turned Christian, and was a martyr also. Many of Origens
scholars also now were martyred. This Emperor was slain at York by the
Northern people.

Next followed Bassianus his son, who slew his brother Geta in his mothers
arms: he was slain by Macrinus.

Macrinus succeeds him, who chose his son consort in the Empire. He delaying to
come to Rome, Heliogabalus was chose, who lead an army against him, and slew
him and his son at Chalcedon.

Heliogabalus succeeds, a lascivious glutton, slain by the Praetorian
soldiers.

Alexander Severus, his adopted son, succeeds. His government was called
unbloody; yet in his time were diverse martyrs, as Agapetus, Hist. Magdeb. Cent.
3.
first tormented, then beheaded. So some Senators and noble men of Rome, as
Pammachius, Simplicius, Quintilius.

Mammea his mother was a Christian, and instructed by Origin, whom she sent
for. No Churches could be obtained of him for Christians to worship in, nor
hardly any place, without great difficulty: yet it is thought he would have
builded them one, but his Priests hindered him. He was very severe in punishing
heinous crimes in soldiers, therefore the German Legion killed him and his
mother.

Maximinus succeeds him, of mean parentage, but a giant-like man; Bucol. Indes
Chron. 6. Persecution.
he procured the death of Severus, and was saluted Emperor by the army,
without the Senates advice. He raised up the sixth persecution, especially
against the chief Teachers. Few names of the martyrs are found in this time,
because the book that Origin writ in this time, dedicated to the persecuted
Pastors of Caesarea is lost. He and his son were slain by his own soldiers,
at the siege of Aquileia.

Then Gordianus declared Emperor with his son, both cut off by the Mauritanians.

Then Pupienus and Balbinus, chosen by the Senate, which displeasing the
people, they associated with them one Gordianus of thirteen years old, Nephew
to the former. The soldiers killed Pupienus and Balbinus.

Gordianus had Philip set to be his Tutor, who got the soldiers to make him
general, and then slew young Gordianus.

Philip succeeds, and turns the first Christian Emperor, The first Christian
Emperor. Eus. l. c. 34.
and became so repentant, that he was contented after that he was baptized by
Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, to stand among the penitents, who made confession of
their sins. Decius a Captain of his army slew him.

Decius succeeds and his son. He raises the seventh persecution. 7. Persecution
The martyrs innumerable. Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Babylas, Bishop of
Antiochia, die in prison. Origin to avoid the defilement of his body by an
Ethiopian woman, offers incense before an Idol, for which he is
excommunicated by the Church of Alexandria, but received at Judea, where being
desired to preach, he only read, Psalm. 50.16. and wept, and so sat down, and
all the people wept with him. No age nor sex was spared in this persecution, as
appears by the martyrdom of Apollonia, whose teeth were dashed out, and then
her self burned. Eus. l. 6. c. 41.
Julianus an old man; Diosconus a youth of fifteen years. Many Captains and
Knights standing by the Tribunal, encouraged the weak, by professing
themselves Christians, so that the Judges were amazed.

This Tyrant after two years reign perished in the Scythian war, but his body
was not found.

Trebonianus Gallus, and Volusian his son, succeeded, and were slain by
Aemilianus a Captain, and he again slain by the soldiers, who had before chose
him Emperor.

Next follows Valerianus Galienus, 8. Persecution.
who raised the eighth persecution. Now was Lucius, Stephanus, and Sixtus,
Bishops of Rome, martyred, and Laurence the Deacon broiled on a gridiron to
death, in patience. Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, were devoured by wild
beasts. This Tyrant was taken captive by Sapor, King of Persia, and made his
footstool, which made his son Galienus more mild, and recalled those
Christians that were banished.

Claudius and his son Quintilius succeed. Claudius after great victory against
the Goths, in two years died. Quintilius being chosen by his little army, and
hearing that, Aurelianus was chosen also, voluntarily bled to death.

Aurelianus raises the ninth persecution, 9. Persecution. Eus. l. 7. c. 30.
but it took no effect: for as the Edict was proclaiming there fell a
thunderbolt so near the Emperor, that he was taken up fordead. He was after
killed by his Secretary, Mensth eus.

Aurelius Probus followed, who after many great great victories, employing the
soldiers in husbandry, Jup. hist.
saying, there was no need of soldiers, where there was no fear of enemies, he
was slain by them, and much lamented.

Carus followed, who was slain with thunder.

Numerianus his Son, slain by Aper his father in Law, Carinus his brother slain
in battle by Dioclesian; Dioclesian declared Emperor by the army, kills Aper
that had slain Numerianus. In the nineteenth year of his reign, 10. Persecution
he raised the tenth persecution. Now from the time of Valerian, to the
nineteenth year of Dioclesian, and his associate Maximinianus, the Church
Christian had great peace, and had great favor many of them with the Emperors,
and had some authority and offices committed to them. Eus. l. 8. c. 1.
Beside, they had liberty to build Oratories and Temples in Cites, whereas
before, they worshipped in private houses of their own, or in their burying
places. This liberty begat carnal security among Christians, Caemeteria.
and wicked contentions, and loss of charity, and therefore God suffered this
tenth persecution to awaken his people, so that both these, one in the East,
and the other in the West, made fearful havoc of poor Christians.

This was the tenth persecution, and it continued ten years, for it ceased not
from its first beginning by Dioclesian, till the seventh year of Constantine,
that is, all the time of Maxentius and Licinius.

Now were the Christian Temples pulled down, the Scriptures burned,
Christian-officers displaced, Bishops displaced, imprisoned, compelled to
sacrifice to Idols, if fortune could do it, and all that would not renounce
Christianity, were disfranchised of their liberty, and their offices and
places. John a Nobleman at Nicomedia, Eus. l. 8. c. 5. Eus. l. 8. c. 6.
tore down the Emperors Edicts, and suffered a cruel death. Peter, a chief
man in the Court, was whipped, and roasted, and basted with vinegar and salt,
whose patience encouraged many to suffer. Twenty thousand were burned in one
Temple by Maximinus. Dorotheus and Gorgonius, after torments were strangled.
The prisons were so full of them, there was hardly room for malefactors. Women
were hung up in trees by one leg. Some rent by bowed trees, some tortured many
days, singing Psalms joifully. Whole Towns full of Christians burned. Whole
Legions of Christian soldiers slain, because they would not sacrifice to
Idols, by Maximinianus.

In diverse Towns in France, Italy, and Germany, the channels run with blood. At
last these cruel tyrants being weary of killing, relented so far, as to be
contented to thrust out only their right eyes, and maim their left legs, and
condemn them to the mines. After two years exercising this cruelty, these two
wicked tyrants gave over their imperial offices.

Then the Empire remained to Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius Maximinus.
Chlorus chose his son Constantine, his associate under him; and Galerius chose
his two sons, Maximinus and Severus, to be Caesar's under him: and the soldiers
set up Maxentius the son of Maximinianus, to be their Emperor, against whom
Galerius sent his son Severus, who was slain, and Galerius chose Licinius in
his stead. Galerius Maximinus, and Licinius, drove on the persecution, which
Dioclesian began near eight years together; but Constantius Chlorus, and his
son Constantine, were very favorable to Christians. Maximinus seduced by
sorcerers, makes war against Licinius, is vanquished, and dies. Maxentius
dishonored the Ladies of Rome, and commits such outrage, that the people of
Rome send to Constantine into France and Britain for aid: he was afraid of his
charms; but he had a sign given him in heaven of the cross, with stars, that
gave these words, in hoc vinces, In this thou shall overcome. He put therefore
the cross in his banner, and overcame Maxentius, who was drowned as he fled.

Licinius sets out lamentable edicts against poor Christians, Eus. lib. 2. de
vita Constantini.
though Constantius Chiorus counted them the best subjects. They might not meet
or convent with Bishops, nor women with men, nor visit the imprisoned
Christians, so they retired to the woods and wildernesses. The Bishops in Egypt
and Lybia were cut in pieces. Many were set in ponds of water all night, and
then burned the next day. This Licinius made war with Constantine, who overcame
him, and sent him away to live a private life in Thessalia, where the soldiers
slew him. Rev. 2.10.
And now ended the time prophesied of the Churches troubles, by St. John,
saying, that she should endure tribulation ten days; for now the Church begins
to have great peace by the favor of Constantine, who though not baptized till
toward his end, Eus. de vita Constable. l. 4.
yet was a continual favourer of them, as was his father Chlorus.


Mathe. Was here an end of persecution?


Phila. Yes, of persecution of the Roman heathen Emperors: but now
persecutions arise from some Christians themselves, Persecution of Christians
by Christian Heretics.
as Paul prophesied, Acts 20.30. speaking perverse things to draw disciples
after them, not sparing the flock, these were Heretics.


Mathe. Were there not heresies before Constantines time?


Phila. Yes, many.


Mathe. I pray tell me first what heresy is; and then who those Heretics
were?


Phila. Heresy we count a chosen opinion contrary to the grounds of Christian
faith, and obstinately maintained by some that profess Christianity; and
therefore must not be Atheists, carnal Christians, Infidels, Turks, or Jews,
nor weak minded Christians.


Mathe. Who were the Heretics in chief before Constantine.


Mathe. The first was Simon Magus, In the first hundred years after Christ,
Simon Magus.
whom Peter and Philip confounded at Samaria, who though he were baptized,
because he professed himself to believe, yet disclosing his profane heart, by
offering money to buy of St Peter, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, he was rejected.
From thence he fled to Rome, where for his conjurations, he was worshipped for
a god in the time of Claudius, by those Romans that would not admit Christ for
God in the time of Tiberius. Eus. l. 2. c. 13.
This Magus taught men to worship images, especially his own, and his companion
Helena.

Next to him was Menander, Menander. Epiph. cont. haeres.
a Samaritan, and a conjurer; some think one of Simons disciples, who taught
that the world was made by Angels, and that he was sent to save the world, and
to baptize. The Apostle speaks contrary to him about Angels, Col. 2.18. and
also about baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. that there is but one Lord, one faith, one
baptism.

Next was one Ebion, Ebion. See Acts 15.6. First Council of Apost, abolished
circumcision.
who said Christ was only a man begotten of Joseph and Mary, and that the
observation of Moses Law was needful to salvation. This man and his followers
condemned Paul as an Apostate from the Law, who by his doctrine did establish
the Law, Romans 3.21. They also rejected all the New Testament, save the Gospel
of St Matthew, and yet that proves Christ not begotten by Joseph, Mat. 1.18,
23, 25.

So one Cerinthus pretended he received a revelation from Angels, that after
the resurrection Christ should have a Kingdom upon earth, Cerinthus.
and that his subjects should eat, drink, marry, contrary to Christ's doctrine,
Matthew 22.30. In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage
but are like the Angels.

Next sprung up the Nicolaitans, Nicolaitans. Acts 6.
who by a mistake of Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, to assoile himself
from jealousy of his fair wife, said, that for his part he could be content
any other should marry her; upon which they held wives in common, Clem. Alex.
strom. 3.
which thing Christ says he hated, Rev. 2.6, 15. these arose in the first
hundred years after Christ.

There was also about the next hundred year after Christ, In the second hundred
years Carpocrates. Epiph. cont. haeres. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. Eus. l. 4. c. 7.
diverse others. As, 1. Carpocrates, of whom came Gnostics, that professed
strange hidden mysteries. They worshipped gold and silver Images (as they said)
of Jesus. So of diverse Philosophers; these also forbad marriages, and allowed
fornication (as the Pope does also) and by their unclean lives, brought a great
scandal upon Christians.

Valentinus set up a plurality of Gods, masculine and feminine, Valentinus.
which it is very like he borrowed from Poetry, as Hesiod, Hesi. in theogon.
that writes of such a subject.

So one Marcus, one of his scholars, brings in a new form of baptism.
Marcionites.
In the name of the unknown Father, and in the name of the verity, the mother
of all things, and in the name of him that descended on Christ. These, and all
the Gnostics followers of Carpocrates, denied the resurrection of the body,
and said, that salvation belonged only to the soul, contrary to St Paul, 1 Cor.
15.

Cerdon and Marcion denied the same also: Cerdon.
and Cerdon said there were two Gods, one the author of good, the other of
evil. They denied also the verity of Christ's humane nature, Aug. index.
and the truth of his sufferings. Polycarpus called this Marcion the first born
of the Devil. He held a man might be baptized often. It may be he thought
himself to need it, by reason of his whoredoms in which he lived, for which
his Father excommunicated him out of his Church at Pontus.

Apelles and Lucianus his scholars, follow him, but not in all his opinions:
but they said, Christ's body was not made of the substance, Apelles.
or seed of the woman, as God said, Genesis 3.15. but of elements; and after his
resurrection, was resolved into them again; yet the Scripture says he had
flesh and bones when he appeared to his disciples, and so was taken up, Acts
1.9.

Tatianus the author of Encratitae, Tatianus.
who abstained from wine and flesh, and all sensitives, came next, and
condemned marriage, Col. 2.1 Tim. 3.1.
and St Paul's Epistles also, for they confute their errors.

Montanus, that persuaded women to leave their husbands, Montanus. Synods of
Asia condemned him, Eus. l. 5. c. 3.14, 17.
to become Prophetesses. He called himself the Holy Ghost, as did also
Macedonius after him, and forbad second marriage, contrary to Paul, Romans 7.3.

Many other there were, I only shall reck on the chief.

Some added cheese to their bread in the holy Supper, as the Artotiritae. In
the third hundred years more weeds appeared.


Some denied the writings of St John; as the Alogi.

Some met in stoves naked, men and women, called Adamiani,

Some denied Christ's divinity; as the Theodotiani.

Some magnified Melchisedeck above Christ.

Some would have no possessions, but approved voluntary poverty, and accounted
marriage an unclean estate of life; these were called Apostolici.

Some would not procreate children, yet fornicate; like Onan, Genesis 38.9, 10.
these were Origeniani.

Some said, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33.
if one denied Christ for fear of persecution, and yet held the faith in their
heart, sinned nor, yet Christ approves it nor, Luke 12.9. nor St Paul, 2 Timothy
2.12.

Novatus following, Novatus con. demned in the Councils at Rome, Eus. lib. 6.
c. 41. So at Antioch. So at Ancyra, tom. 1. Council. Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
was clean contrary: for he held that a man doing so, was never to be admitted
into the Church, upon what repentance soever; contrary to Gods word, Isa. 1.18.
He was excommunicated by Cornelius Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage: but his heresy continued longer then any before Arrius, coming in
under a show of zeal and holiness; and because they held as well as the true
Catholics, the divinity of Christ, and suffered for it under the Arrian
persecution which ensued. His followers were called Catharoi or Puritans.

Sabellius confessed one God, Sabellius.
but denied three Persons. So does the Socinians in a manner, also if they
think that the Trinity is nothing but a distinct manner of apprehending the
Godhead without personality. This Heretic Sabellius, was the disciple of one
Noetus, in the days of the Emperor Gallus, and in the year of Christ, 257.
and before him affirmed by Hermogenes and Prazeas, but nursed up by Sabellius,
Ruffi, l. 1. c. 29.
which opinion confounds substance and subsistence together; and so they
understood that the Father suffered when the Son suffered for us; because all
the three terms of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are by them given to one person,
and not only to one God, and therefore they were called Patrispassiani,
father-sufferers.

In the year, Nepotians.
264. an Egyptian Bishop, Nepos in Galienus reign, raised the opinion which
the Millenaries or Chiliasts hold now, that the godly should rise from the dead
before the wicked, and should live with Christ, So held Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis, in the first century of years.
on earth in all earthly pleasures, as Cerinthus held before in the first
hundred years after Christ. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, confuted Coracion,
who held this opinion in three days disputations at Arsenotis in Egypt before
many witnesses, Eus. l. 7. c. 24.
so that Coracion promised for ever to renounce that opinion.

Paulus Samosatenus (in the same Emperors reign) being Bishop of Antiochia,
Samosat. condemned in a Synod at Antioch. Eus. l. 7. c. 26. Socr. l. 1. c. 22.
taught that Christ obtained the title of the Son of God by his virtues, but
was not begotten of the substance of the Father: he renewed many of the old
heresies formerly named.

Next was Manes or Manicheus, of whom I shall speak hereafter.

After him Hierax said, Hierax.
the Father and the Son were two differing lights in substance: condemned
marriage as Heretics had done before, and excluded infants from the Kingdom
of heaven.

In the year 324. rose up Arrius a Presbyter, In the fourth century of years.
or Deacon of Alexandria, about the reign of Constantine, because he was not
made Bishop thereof after Achillas, infected the world by denying that Christ
was begotten of the substance of the Father, but that he was a creature, and
not coeternall with the Father: Eus. de vita Constable. l. 3.
against whom was called the Council of Nice by the Emperor Constantine, and
there condemned by 318. Bishops, and he was banished by the Emperor; yet
afterward it found great favorers, both by the Emperor Constantius, East
India and Iberia received the Gospel, in the reign of Constantine. See the
Eccle. hist. of Ruff. Theod. Sozom. and Socrates.
Valentinian, and Valens, and by the Kings of Goths and Vandals, and diverse
Bishops.

Constantine being dead, who built Constantinople, in the year 336. as a sit
place and seat imperial, between all that were subject to him, in East, West,
North, and South, and proved afterward to be the seat of the Eastern part of
the Empire, which now became divided among the sons of Constantine. Constantius
governs the East at Constantinople, and Constans, and young Constantine, the
West at Rome. But both these being slain, Constantine at Aquileia, after he
had reigned three years, and Constans in France by Magnentius, the whole Empire
came to Constantius again, who though a Christian, yet was an Arrian in opinion.


Mathe. What persecutions then arose among Christians themselves?


Phila. First from the Arrians, who deposed and persecuted Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, who were defended by his
brother Constans, who being dead, Theod. l. 2. c. 3. and 13. The first
persecution by the Arrian Christians.
Constantius sought the life of good Athanasius, who passed through the
soldiers, and all the Arrians (that had known him aforetime) undiscovered. One
Georgius an Arrian, was placed in Athanasius seat in Alexandria, who stripped
virgins naked, and brought them to the fire, threatening to burn them; of which
because they were nothing afraid, they dashed and deformed their faces. Thirty
Bishops of Egypt and Libya, were slain in this persecution. Fourteen
banished. Forty Christians in Alexandria scourged with rods, so that many died
of it. Paulus Bishop of Constantinople was strangled by the Arrians. Christians
were compelled by Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople (put into the seat of
Paulus) to communicate with him being an Heretic, or else to suffer as the
Gentiles had forced them before to sacrifice to Idols. This Emperor
Constantius died leading an army through Cilicia, but repenting then that he
had altered the form of the Nicen faith. Theod. l. 2. c. 32


Julian his Kinsman succeeds him, who was a Christian bred, but proved an
apostate from the faith, by the instigation of one Maximus a Philosopher. He at
first showed some favor to Christians, but at last s^t open the doors of
heathen Temples, and sacrificed to their gods: and though he set forth no
edicts to persecute Christians, yet he debarred their children from schools,
and the men from warfare, and offices in Provinces, and put them to heavy
taxations, and suffered his Deputies to spoil their goods; of which when they
complained, he mocked them, saying, Blessed are the poor, and they that suffer
for righteousness sake, Mat. 5. So he connived at any violence done to them,
so that in many places, Preachers and holy virgins were killed, their bellies
being ripped up and filled with grain, and so thrown to the hogs. Some had
their liver drawn out, as Cyrillus a Deacon, Theod. l. 3. c. 6.
which they champed in their teeth, which afterward fell out of their heads.
Some were anointed with honey, and so set to be stung with wasps, Soc. l. 3. c.
15.
as Arthasius. Diverse were broiled upon hot gridirons; as Macedonius, and
Tatianus, Miso, and Theodulus. This wicked apostate was slain by a dart, it is
not known from whence, and dying said proudly, It is sufficient that thou
Christ of Galilee have overcome.

Jovinian succeeds; a good Christian Emperor.

Valentinian, who had suffered the loss of his office in Court, in the reign
of Julian, succeeds Jovinian, and chooses his brother Valens his associate, who
proves an Arrian, and therefore banished and persecuted those who believed
Christ to be of the same substance with the Father, Theod. l. 4. c. 24
and put eighty men that came to him with petitions in the behalf of such true
Professors, into a ship, and set it on fire. He himself was burned in a
village fired by the Goths.

The next persecution we find, Persecution by Vandals, Hist Magd. cent. 5. c. 3.
was done by the Vandals, who were partly Pagans, and partly Arrians, who being
settled by the third Emperor of the West in Africa, did as bitterly persecute
the true professors there, as the worst persecuting Emperor among the heathen.

The next persecution arose by those of the heresy of Eutyches, The third
persecution by Eutychians. Evag. l. 1. c. 9.
in the time of Leo the Emperor. His opinion was, that Christ had only one
nature (namely) the Divine. It had many favorers, both Emperors and great
men, Patriarchs and Bishops. You may judge of their persecuting disposition, by
their cruel slaughter of Procerius, Bishop of Alexandria in the Church, whom
they haled through the streets, and chewed his intrails in their teeth; by
which we may discern what spirit possessed them. Evag. l. 3. c. 3.
Basiliscus the Emperor favored them, and persecuted true professors, and
condemned the Council of Chalcedon by his letters, which many hundred
Preachers subscribed through ignorance and cowardice. Anastasius the Emperor,
who succeeded Basiliscus and Zeno, was also a patron to this heresy, who
banished Euphemius and Macedonius, Bishops of Constantinople; Helias, Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Flavianus Bishop of Antiochia; in whose place was put the
Eutychian Severus, who slew three hundred Monks of Syria, true Professors of
the faith. After these, the Christians in general suffered much from others,
as the Longobards and Saracens, of whom Mahomet was Captain; who being provoked
by the Emperor Heraclius, his treasurer (requiring their pay for serving in
his army) calling them Arabian dogs, they forsook the army, and in few years
conquered Egypt, Syria, Phaenicia, and Palestina, and beat the army of
Heraclius also, and composed the Alcoran for their Religion by the help of some
Jews, and Sergius the Nestorian Heretic, that denied the personal union of
two natures in Christ: and also by the help of John of Antiochia, an Arrian
Heretic, who made it a medlie of the Pagan-Jewes and Christian Religion;
Saracen. per.
to the acknowledging of which, Mahomet ordained all whom he conquered should
be compelled by fire and sword; which proved a terrible plague to many
Christians.


Mathe. But what other persecutions arose from one Christian to another?


Phila. As they suffered from the Arrians and Eutychians, so they did afterward
from the Roman, when ambition and covetousness (...) made the Bishop of Rome
rich, potent and universal. Therefore you must know, that after the Empire
began to stand like Nebuchadnezzars image on two legs, the East and West part
much decayed, till Pope Leo the third perceiving the decay of the East,
proclaimed Charles the great Emperor in the West.


Mathe. How did the Pope first get to such an height, to proclaim the Emperor?


Phila. You must know that before the reign of Constantine, most of the Bishops
of Rome were Martyrs or Confessors, to the number of thirty, from Linus the
first Bishop, who began to govern the Church of Rome after Peter and Paul had
suffered. But after the reign of Constantine and his sons, the Bishops of Rome
grew in higher esteem more and more. First in being made Patriarchs, together
with the Bishops of Alexandria and Antiochia, by the general Council of Nice,
for the timely suppressing of heresies: But he got the start of them all, and
was accepted as the prime Bishop, both in regard of the antiquity of his See,
and also because his seat was in the most ancient imperial City, Rome. But he
began to encroach and usurp authority exceedingly, as others did who succeeded
him. But when I say such an one succeeded next, I mean not always the next in
person, but in regard of his office, though some came between: for my intent is
not to make an absolute direct chronology or catalogue of them, but to show
which of them was most active in advancing Antichristian Tyrauny; though here
and there some of them were of better condition. Therefore as Pope Zepherinus
before the Emperor Constantine, Popes pride begins to appear. Zepherinus
Innocent. Caelestius.
would have no Bishop condemned till his cause was heard by the Bishop of Rome;
So afterward Innocentius the first, the predecessor to Zozimus, writ to the
Council of Carthage, that no Decree could be firm, till allowed by the Chair
of Rome; whom Caelestinus followed, and urged submission of the Church of
Carthage to the Chair of Rome; and therefore they should receive Appiarius,
whom they had excommunicated, for appealing from his own Bishop to the Bishop
of Rome; but they regarded him not.

Faelix the third, did also excommunicate Acacius Bishop of Constantinople,
because he absolved Petrus Moggux the Eutychian heretic, without his leave;
upon which Acacius did as much for him.

But Gelasius his successor was more peremptory: Gelasius.
for he plainly declared, that the Church of Rome should be the Judge of all
Churches, but be judged by none; nor would be reconciled to the Eastern
Bishops, except they would excommunicate Acacius, and raze his name out of the
catalogue of Bishops. He also made bold to excommunicate the Emperor
Anastasius, for favoring the Eutychian heresy; which example was by his
successors put in execution upon Emperors without being heretics.

So Faelix the fourth excommunicated also Athanasius Patriarch of
Constantinople for heresy. And Bonifacius the second, Faelix.
upheld the authority of the Roman See, against the Church of Carthage and
Hippo, and maintained Eutalius appeal to Rome, against Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, and Augustine Bishop of Hippo, and a Council of two hundred reverend
Fathers; so much did Rome affect superiority. And by all these proud Prelates,
Vigilius had got stomach enough to resist the Emperor, and his fifth general
Council of Constantinople, though he came in not by the door, but by means of
Theodora, a wicked Empress, who had caused Silverius Bishop of Rome, to be
banished, who succeeded Boniface the second, and placed Vigilius for bribes and
base promises, in his Chair.

Pelagius the first, that succeeded Vigilius, was more crafty then peremptory:
for though he was vexed at Honoratus Bishop of Millain, because he ordained
Paulinus to succeed Macedonius Bishop of Aquileia, without his leave; yet he
put it as a contempt of the Emperor Justinian in his relation of it to Narses,
the Emperors general, hoping to creep into sovereignty the more securely,
under color of respect to the Civil Magistrate.

John the third, and Benedict the first, did not stickle much, because the
Lombards at that time much oppressed Italy.

Pelagius the second, was elected without the knowledge of the Emperor: but
that was excused by the Popes Ambassador, Gregory, because that Rome was so
strictly besieged, that no messenger could be sent unto him.

This Gregory the first, succeeded Pelagius, by the choice of the Clergy and
people of Rome: he seemed unwilling to accept it, and wrote letters to the
Emperor to refuse their choice; which were intercepted, and other letters sent
to desire the Emperors condescension. He first set up the style that the Popes
use still in their title (the servant of the servants of God) in opposition to
John the foster-Patriarch of Constantinople, Servus servorum Dei.
who usurped the style of universal Bishop, and called him the forerunner of
Antichrist; yet he basely flattered Phocas the Emperor in his Epistles, who
had murdered his Lord Mauritius, his wife and children.

This Gregory forbad spiritual men to marry; Marriage forbidden to the Clergy.
but was forced to recall it, because of their fornication and murdering of
young infants so begotten. But though this Pope did declaime against the title
of universal Bishop, and Fabianus his successor did not claim it, yet his next
successor, Boniface the third, did obtain it of Phocas, by absolving him the
murder of Mauritius, namely, to be Bishop of Bishops; and that the Church of
Rome should be the head of all Churches.

After him came Boniface the fourth, obtained of Phocas the heathen Temple
called Pantheon, because it was built to the honor of all the heathen gods,
and dedicated it to all Saints, and appointed an holiday to be kept in their
honor: so Idolatry crept in, which afterward was the cause of much
persecution; for he took it from the heathen gods, and by it made gods of the
Saints.

Theodalus succeeds him, and brings in Antichrist by an Ordinance, that none
should marry that woman that had been witness with him at Baptism, which was
never forbidden by Gods Law or Gospel.

So Boniface the fifth, who succeeded him, constitutes that no man who took
sanctuary for any crime, should be violently taken out from thence. Popes
usurpation over civil power.
Here was usurpation over the Civil power.

After him followed Honorius the first, in whose time some write, Parishes were
bounded and divided in England.

Then comes Severinus the first, who was confirmed in his Chair by Isacius the
Exarche of Italy. For then the choice of the Clergy, and the people of Rome was
not much esteemed.

Theodoretus was the son of Theodorus Bishop of Jerusalem: for as yet
spiritual men did marry. He was adverse to the heresy of the Monothelites,
who held Christ had but one will, as God and man, yet we find it otherwise,
Mat. 26.39. Not my will, but as thou will. Pope Martin was an enemy to the same
heresy, and suffered banishment for it by Constans the Emperor, and had his
tongue cut out, Hist. Magd. can. 7. c. 10.
and his right hand cut off: and now the Chair of Rome was void of a Bishop
fourteen months.

Eugenius first ordained Bishops to have prison houses, to correct the crimes
of the Clergy.

Next Vitelianus who admitted Organs in the Church to sing Psalms withal.

Next followed Adeodatus, in whose time the signs in heaven threatened
judgments for Idolatry. Plat. in vita Domni. 1.
And in his time the Saracens spoiled Sicily.

Domnus succeeds, who first brought the Church of Ravenna to be obedient to the
Church of Rome, and all that did not, (...).
were counted Churches of a strange head.

Agatho succeeds him, in whose time the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus,
assembled the sixth Council of Constantinople, and condemned the Monothelites.
This Agatho in his Epistle to this Council, Antichrist more plainly appearing.
maintained, that the Chair of Rome never erred, nor can; and that all that
will be saved, must hold Romes traditions, and receive her constitutions, as if
from Peter himself. He condemned the marriage of Priests, and sets up the
Mass.

Next follows Benedictus the second, in whose time the foresaid Emperor
Constable. Pog. gave away the power of electing or confirming Popes of Rome from
himself and the Exarche of Italy, to the Clergy and people of Rome, which
after proved hurtful to the Empire.

Sergius the first, refused to subscribe the Acts of the Council of
Constantinople, Plat. de vita Sergii.
which Justinian the second had called. He was a great Masse-monger.

John the seventh refused to give answer to the Ambassadors of Justinian the
second, who desired union between the East and West Churches, about the
marriage of the Clergy, and the equality of the Patriarch of Constantinople in
dignity with the Bishop of Rome, which the sixth general Council had decreed,
contrary to the Popes tenets and constitutions: but he liked better still to
deny such marriages, though contrary to Gods word, and to hold up his
superiority formerly given by the Emperor Phooas.

And after him Constantine the first, who suffered at Nicomedia his feet, to be
kissed by the Emperor Justinian the second, Acts 10.26.
though Peter would not suffer Cornelius who was but a Centurion, to worship
him on his knee. He also declared the Emperor Philippicus an Heretic, and
commanded his name to be razed out of the Role of Emperors, because he had
abolished the picture of the Fathers of the sixth general Council, Antichrists
impudence by persecuting Christian Emperors.
out of the Temple of Sophia. This showed Antichrists violence beginning to
work to some purpose.

After him comes Gregory the second, who excommunicates the Emperor Leo
Isaurus, for abolishing images, and draws away many Countries in Italy from
his obedience, forbidding them to pay tribute, contrary to Christ his masters
rule, who said, give to Caesar what is Caesar's. Mat. 22.21.


Gregory the second succeeded him in place and manners, and by a Council at
Rome, Func. com. in chro. lib. 8.
confirms worshipping of images.

Zacharias the first, follows, who set up Pipinus to be King of France, and
thrust Childericus the right heir into a Monastery, about 733.

Stephanus the second, follows, whom Pipinus releeveth from the siege of the
Lombards, and bestows upon him great dominions, which the Church of Rome
claims falsely, as the gift of Constantine. Yet for all his kindness, when he
came to be Godfather to King Pipins son, he suffered both him and his eldest
son, Charles, to kiss his feet, hold his stirrup, and walk his horse; and at
last was carried on men's shoulders.

Paulus the first succeeds him, and is as bad as he: and he threatens the
Emperor Constable. Copronymus with excommunication, except he restore the images
of the Saints which he had demolished.

After him succeeded Constantine the second, who had never taken holy orders.

After him succeeded Stephanus the third, who by a Council he called at Rome,
condemned the seventh general Council of Constantinople, convented by the
Emperor Copronymus, condemning the worshipping of images. He made Charlemain
repudiate his wife Berthra, daughter to Desiderius King of the Lombards, left
he should withdraw his affections from Rome.

Then followed Adrian the first, upon whom Charlemain bestowed more dominions,
after he had first rid himself of the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, anno
776. This Pope was a great patron to images, as now Irene the Empress of the
East was a patroness; and so was the Council she called at Nice. She was
deposed by her son; but she got his eyes put out, and so he died in prison. Now
the Eastern Empire began to fade, and wane, and declines to the West.

For Leo the third succeeding him, whom Charlemain confirms in the Chair of
Rome against all his enemies. For which favor Leo declares him Emperor of the
West (which none before ever took upon them) and crowned him. And afterward it
grew to a custom; that the Emperors received their Crown from the Popes of
Rome: But as yet it stood firm, that no Pope should be elected without the
advice and investment of the Emperor of the West. But this held not long:
Func. com. l. 9.
for Stephanus the fourth succeeding Leo the third, was elected without the
consent of Ludovicus Pius, son of Charlemain.

Paschalis the first succeeds him without consent of the Emperor also; which
he excused by Ambassadors, because the Clergy and people of Rome had compelled
him to receive it. The Emperor to avoid trouble, granted that Rome should
afterward choose their own Bishops. But Gregory the fourth following, would have
the Emperors consent; but others following did accept it without.

Sergius the second succeeds Gregory, who was the first Pope that changed his
Christian name, because it was odious (viz.) os porci, Hogs mouth. He put Agnus
Dei in the Liturgy.

Leo the fourth succeeds, who was a great builder, Edelwolphus King of England,
performing a vow at Rome, grants to Leo the 4th a penny in every house in
England, that kindled a fire in it.
a warrior against the Sarazens, as well as a Bishop. In his time the first
Cardinal called A^hanafius, was condemned for neglect of his calling, who was
a Presbyter; but the first Cardinal that we read of, except in the counterfeit
decretall Epistles before Pope Sylvester.

After Leo the fourth, succeeds Pope Joan, or John the eight, born in Mentz;
went to Athens in man's apparel, came to Rome, and was to the Popedom
advanced; proved with child, delivered as she was going to the Church of
Lateran; of whom Anastasius a Chronologer, who lived about this time, makes no
mention for shame of the fact, but passed it.

Benedict the third, honored much the funerals of the Clergy with his own
presence, and desired the Bishops might by the whole Clergy.

Nicolaus the first succeeds him, who suffered the Emperor Ludovicus the
second to alight and lead his horse by the bridle a full mile. He permitted
divorces without consent of parties, as the Anabaptists do, and or dained that
the Clergy should not be subject to civil Magistrates seats of Judicature. And
that none should receive the Sacrament from a married Clergy man: and that the
Emperor should not be present at Ecclesiastical meetings, unless some point
of faith were to be handled: and the common service of the Church to be in
Latin in all Churches, but dispensed with Sclavonia and Polonia. He added to
the Liturgy, the Hymn of Glory be to God on high.

Hadrian the second succeeds, who proudly commanded the King of France, Carolus
Calvus, to let Hircmanus Bishop of Laudunum, to appeal to Rome after his
condemnation by a Council in France, but he refused. However John the ninth
his successor crowned him Emperor, and after him Balbus, and then Crassus, all
three named Charles.

Hadrian the third, ordained that the Clergy and people of Rome should choose
their Pope, without attendance upon the Emperors allowance or leave: And that
after the death of Carolus Crassus, who died without succession, that the
imperial title and government of Italy, should belong to an Italian Prince,
which bred great contention and debate among the Princes, and much trouble to
the Chair of Rome, every Prince striving to advance him to it, that was most
friend to himself.

Stephanus the fifth followed, who ordained, that whatsoever the Church of Rome
appointed, was to be perpetually observed.

Pormosus succeeds him, who crowned the Emperor Arnulphus, and then Boniface
the sixth was next.

Then Stephanus the sixth, who offered great violence to the dead body of
Formosus, cutting off his fingers, and disanulling his ordination, yea, and his
crowning the Emperor Arnulphus, and set up Albertus Marquess of Tuscia in his
stead. Now Antichrist appears more then ever before, by putting down and
setting up Emperors.

Romanus succeeds him, and nuls the decrees of Stephanus.

Theodorus succeeds him, and allows them again.

John the tenth nuls the decrees of Stephanus the sixth, and allows them of
Formosus. How were these men led infallibly by the spirit?

Sergius the third, who again took up the body of Formosus after eight years,
and beheaded it. He loved Marozia, and on her begot a son, who was afterward
made Pope, and called John the twelfth.

Pope John the thirteenth committing adultery, was slain by the woman's husband,
but first deposed by a Council called by Otho the first Emperor.

Leo the eighth succeeds, who finding and being weary of the sedition and
insolence of the Roman people, resigned the choosing of Popes to the Emperor.

John the fourteenth succeeds, who first brought in baptizing of bells, and he
called the great bell of the Church of Lateran by his own name John.

Then Gregory the fifth, who after much trouble, by the advice of the Emperor
O ho the third, The seven Electors of the Empire appointed.
made a constitution of seven Electors, to choose the Emperor for the time to
come; which continues still, namely, the Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Tryer,
the Count Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh, and
in case of difference, the King of Bohemia.

Next followed Sylvester the second, Platina.
a great scholar, but a Magician. He enquired of the devil how long he should
live Pope: he did answer him, till he said mass at Jerusalem, which fell out
at a Chapel so called at Rome; where this Pope saying mass in Lent, was
stricken with a fever, of which he died.


Mathe. But yet we hear of no great persecutions?


Phila. True, Why no great persecution yet by the Pope.
because yet the Church was of one language, and none stands up against the
corrupt tenets of Rome.


Mathe. Why do you then reckon up this bedroll of Popes.


Phila. Because you may know how and by whom corruption crept in; which
corruption being contradicted by some whom God enlightened, then began
persecutions.


Mathe. I pray now go on.


Phila. I have not, nor shall trouble you with all of them, but with some who
have acted things very remarkable. Therefore after Sylvester the second, and
diverse other Popes, Leo the ninth called a Council against Berengarius, who
denied transubstantiation.

Nicolaus the second followed, who forced by a Council Berengarius to recant,
who did, yet afterward wrote against transubstantiation. He was poisoned as
other Popes before him.

Alexander the second followed, who denied to rule as Pope without the
Emperors consent. For which he was beaten in a chamber by Hildebrand in his
pontificials, and cast into prison, where he died. Hildebrand called, Gregorius
the seventh succeeds. He called the marrig^e of Priests, the heresy of the
Nicolaitans; and receiving Ecclesiastical preferments and offices from Lay men
(though Princes) symony. About this time William the Conqueror came into
England.
This was brought to pass by the thunder of excommunications, which made the
Emperor, Henry the fourth, travel to Rome in the hard winter, to get
absolution from the Popes curse.

Vrbanus the second excited Princes to war against the Turks, who had got
Jerusalem. This he did in a Council held at Cleremount in France, and by
diverse Princes recovered it for a while. But this war made Christian Princes so
weak both in power and purse, that the Pope more easily brought them all under
his girdle.

Paschalis the second succeeds him, who at the Church of Lateran had a scepter
put into his hand, and girded with a girdle, having seven seals and keys
hanging at it, signifying his power of binding and loosing; shutting and
opening; sealing and resigning, and judging. He excommunicated Henry the
fourth, the Emperor, and excites his son Henry the fifth against him. He took
up the corpse of Henry the fourth, and kept it above ground five years. Well did
the Bishop of Florence write in this Popes time, that Antichrist was born, and
manifested to the world; and therefore he was silenced by the Council of
Florence which this Pope called, and his book burnt. You see how persecutions
began now upon Emperors and Bishops. This Pope would not crown Henry the fifth
Emperor, unless he would give over his right of investment of Bishops by the
staff and ring; but the Emperor laid hold of him and his Cardinals, and
compelled him to do it; and the Pope solemnly divided the holy Host between him
and the Emperor, and wished that he might be divided from the Kingdom of
Christ, that broke the covenant made between himself and the Emperor: yet
afterward he recalled all that he done, and cursed the Emperor, who was fain
to resign his privilege for peace sake.

Next succeeded Gelasius the second, without the Emperors consent, Henry the
fifth.

Then followed Calixtus the second, who compelled the Emperor to yield to his
election; and ordained that the people should not put away any of their Bishops
for their life time.

Then followed Pope Honorius the second, in whose time one Arnulphus came to
Rome, and preached against the Clergies errors, pride and avarices, for which
they secretly drowned him.

Innocentius the third succeeds. In his time the people grew weary of the Popes
Tyranny, resolved to be governed by consuls. This Pope therefore made an
ordinance, that whoever laid violent hands upon any of the Clergy, he should be
excommunicated, and not absolved by any man but the Pope only.

And also Pope Eugenius by cursings and force, brought all the Senators of Rome
under subjection to himself, and to receive such into their society as he
thought fit.

Adrian the fourth, that was choked with a fly as he walked, made the Roman
people submit themselves absolutely to his government. Frederick the first
Emperor held his stirrup; yet he excommunicates the same Emperor.

Alexander the third succeeds, who would not appear at any Council. The
Emperor Frederick the first, called to decide the stickling between him and
Victor for the Popedom, and therefore Victor was chosen, but Alexander fled
into France, and in a Council at Claremount excommunicated the Emperor and
Victor. After Victors death, Frederick the Emperor led an army to Rome. This
Pope excited all Princes to persecute the Waldenses.
Pope Alexander flies to Venice. Otto the Emperors son follows him; but
encountering the Venetians, contrary to his Fathers command, was taken captive;
and so for his sons redemption, he was fain to go to Venice, and crave the
Popes absolution in St Marks Church; where kneeling down, this proud Pope set
his foot on the Emperors neck, saying, Psalm. 91.13. thou shall tread upon the
Lion and the Dragon.

In this Popes days, Thomas Becket Bishop of Canterbury, was slain in his own
Chapel by some of King Henry of Englands followers. But he purged himself
before the Pope; who because he found the Kings anger was the cause thereof, he
enjoined Henry that he should hinder no appeals to Rome; and that none should
be declared King of England without the Popes consent. Now England begins to be
chained by Rome.

In this age, which was about the 1200, years after Christ, it pleased God to
give more divine light to many men to see and discern Christ from Antichrist,
and to profess it openly and practically, as well as many other Doctors had
done in writing.

The chief of these was one Waldus a Merchant of Lions in France, who seeing
one of his company in their walking fall down dead, he laid it so to heart,
that he repented earnestly of his former life, and became very charitable to
the poor, and studious of the Scriptures; and also to instruct his own family
and others that came to him in those tenets which the Protestants afterward
held, and hold still. For which the Bishops that adhered to Rome threatened them
with excommunication; but they went on, and endured much persecution.


Mathe. I pray what were their tenets?


Phila. The same which the Protestant now hold.

As 1. That only Scripture is to be believed in matters pertaining to
salvation, and that it contains all things necessary thereunto.

2. That there is but one Mediator for man to God, i. Christ Jesus; and Saints
are not to be invocated as mediators.

3. They denied purgatory, and masses sung for the dead: rejected traditions as
unnecessary to salvation.

4. That constrained fast days, difference of meats, superfluous holy days,
variety of orders of Priests, Friars, Nuns, hallowing of creatures, vows and
pilgrimages, and humane ceremonies were to be abolished.

5. They denied also the Popes supremacy over all Churches, States, and
governments; and denied that any degrees should be received into the Church,
save Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

6. That the Church of Rome is Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. Also they
rejected the Popes pardons.

7. They allowed the marriage of Priests.

8. And they that hear and believe the true word of God, are the true Church.

9. And the communion was to be eaten, and not reserved for show or worship.

Many of them for these opinions endured persecutions by Pope Alexander the
third, who excited all Christian Princes to persecute them with fire and sword.
Third persecution by the Roman Christians.



Mathe. What other Popes persecuted good Christians?


Phila. Innocentius the third, who did excommunicate King John of England,
because he would not admit Stephen Langton to be Archbishop of Canterbury,
approved by the Pope, and brought him so far under his power, that he was feign
to resign his Crown to the Pope, and receive it back again from him for the
payment of a thousand Marks by the year.

Honorius followed, who excommunicated the Emperor Frederick the second, who
at his coronation had bestowed great gifts upon him; yet because he did but
expostulate with Thomas one of the sons of Innocentius the third (who fled to
the Pope) about his treason, this Pope excommunicates him.

Honorius the third succeeds, and the excommunicates the said Emperor also.

Gregory the ninth succeeds him, and he excommunicates the Emperor Frederick,
because going against the Turks, he returned into Europe to recover himself of
his sickness.

Innocentius the fourth likewise excommunicated the Emperor Frederick, and
deposed him, and gave away his Empire to William Count of Holland.

Then followed Alexander the fourth, who excommunicated Marfred King of Sicily;
and burnt the books of one William desancto amore, because he writ against the
order of begging Friars.

Next was Vrbanus the fourth, who gave the Kingdom of Sicily from Marfred, to
Charles Duke of Anjou, together with Apulia, to be held of him from the Pope by
a quitment; so Sicily became the Frenches: however all afterward destroyed by
the Sicilians in the time of Pope Martin the fourth.

Clemens the fourth succeeds him in place and manners. He made the said Charles
King of Jerusalem, paying 40000. crowns yearly to the Chair of Rome. He caused
him to slay Marfred, and the son of Conrade, who came into Italy to claim his
right and title.

Next followed Gregory the tenth, who interdicted the Church of Florence from
all divine service. And after him Pope Nicolaus the third, took from Charles
King of Sicily, whom his predecessors bad advanced, Hetruria, and the dignity
of being a Roman Senator, and did bring Flaminia, Bononia, and Ravenna, from
under the Emperors subjection, to himself.

Martinus the fourth succeeded, who took the said Charles into favor again, but
restored to him nothing but the title of a Roman Senator. He excommunicated
Peter the King of Arragon, for laying claim to the Kingdom of Sicily, to which
Nicolaus the third his predecessor had persuaded him.

Honorius the fourth followed him, and ratified the excommunication.

Nicolaus the fourth succeeds, after whose death the Popedom was void two
years and a quarter, by reason of the Cardinals dissentions about it. Who was
then the head of the Church? Caelestinus the fifth at last was chosen, who was
an Hermit. He decreed the Pope and all the Cardinals should ride upon asses;
but they counted him a but dotard. Cardinal Cajetanus warned him through the
hole of a wall to resign his place up to another; which he did, supposing that
an Angel spoke to him, and Cajetanus was chosen in his place, called
Bonifacius the eighth. He brought back poor Caelestinus from the wilderness,
to which he had retired himself, and imprisoned him till he died of grief. He
came to the Popedom like a Fox, but he lived like a Lion: for he persecuted
those that took part with the Emperor Frederick, called Gibbelines, even
Cardinals themselves. He did institute the first Jubilee at Rome, The first
Jubilee at Rome.
and promised remission of sins to all that would come thither. In celebration
whereof, the first day he showed himself in his Bishops robes with St Peter's
keys. The next day in Kingly apparel, with a naked sword borne before him, one
proclaiming, Behold the power of both swords, i. Civil and Ecclesiastic. He
did excommunicate Philip King of France to the fourth generation, because he
would suffer no money to be carried out of France to Rome. But Philip appealed
to the next general Council, and sent two Noble men to justify it to the
Pope; but they made a shift to take the Pope, and spoiled him of his riches,
and set him on a colt with his face backward, and made him ridiculous; of which
shame and sorrow he died as Rome.

After him Clement the fifth excommunicated the Emperor Andron. Paleologus,
because he would not suffer the Grecians to appeal from their own Church to
Rome. And also the Venetians, for preferring Azada to the estate of Ferrare,
and made Francis Dardalus, the Venice Ambassador, with an iron chain about his
neck, to lie under his table like a dog, to catch the offall till his fury was
over; yet he came but to pacify him, and obtain the Venetians absolution.
Also he ordained that the King of the Romans should not have the title of
Emperor without the Popes confirmation. He removed his Court from Rome to
Avignon in France.

Next followed John the 23. after the Popedom had been void two years and
more. He was exceeding covetous, and proclaimed them Heretics, who said that
in this world Christ and his Apostles had no possessions. He would not yield to
the Coronation of Lewis the fifth, Emperor, because he exercised his authority
in Italy, before he was confirmed by the Pope. But Lewis took his journie to
Rome, and was crowned by the Cardinals; and then he set up Nicolaus the fifth
to be Pope, and so then Rome had two heads.

Clement the sixth reduced the Jubilee ordained to be kept every hundredth year
to the fifth year. He by his Bulls commanded Angels to convey their souls to
Paradise that died by the way, when they went to war for the Holy land, and
gave power to all that were signed with the cross, to deliver three or four
whom they would, out of Purgatory; which deliverance must be believed rather
then acted.

Next followed Innocentius the sixth. He imprisoned Friar John, John de
rupescissa.
for that he prophesied of the fall of the Pope and Cardinals, who were like a
bird in borrowed feathers. Which Robert Grostead Bishop of Lincoln, had done
before in the days of Innocentius the fourth.

Next was Vrbanus the fifth, in whose days began the order of Jesuits.

Next followed Gregory the eleventh, who removed the Popes Court from Avignion
to Rome again, after it had been there about seventy years.

After his death there fell a great schism among the Cardinals. They of Italy
chose Urban the sixth, and they of France chose Clement the seventh. This
continued thirty eight years, in all which time were two Popes, one at
Avignion, and the other at Rome. The question is, which was Christ's right Vicar?

In this Urban the sixth his time, John Wickliffe appeared in England; who by
his writings displaied Antichrist in many parts of Christendom, and much shook
the Popes Kingdom in England, Bohemia, and Moravia.

Next was Boniface the ninth; who sold pardons, as if he had bought the keys
which he made to be despised.

Innocentius the seventh succeeded him.

Gregory the twelfth is chosen next by the Cardinals, and sworn to endeavor to
restore the Church Rome to unity. But he and Benedict the thirteenth at
Avignion, agreed to divide. The Cardinals got a general Council at Pisa, and
deposed them both, and chose Alexander the fifth, who was so liberal, that he
gave almost all away from himself, saying, that he was a rich Bishop, a poor
Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope.

Next followed John the twenty fourth, the other two deposed Popes being yet
alive, and executed jurisdiction, because the Council of Pisa was not lawfully
called. Now the Church of Rome looked like a Cerberus, hels bandog with three
heads. The Emperor Sigismund found no remedy to make up this rent, but by
calling a Council at Constance, where all three Popes were deposed, and Martin
the fifth chosen: for joy whereof, the Emperor kissed his feet. At this time
earnest suits were made for reformation of the Clergy, and against
superstitious Feasts and Fasts, and canonizing Saints; and against the
multiplication of Monks. Fair promises were made by the Pope to convocate a
Council: but little was done to his death.

This Council burnt John Huss, Jerome of Prague, and John Wickliffs bones.

Next followed Eugenius the fourth, who for his contumacy was deposed by the
Council of Basil, who placed Faelix the fifth in his room. But after
Sigismunds death, Eugenius goes on, and stirs up wars by the French to invade
Basil, and to break up the Council; and also Vdislaus King of Polonia, to war
upon the Turks, contrary to his covenant made with Amurath their King; to which
purpose he gave him a full dispensation to break his oath: but he was slain,
and his Army spoiled by the Turks.

Next was Nicolaus the fifth, and ruled eight years: to whom Faelix the fifth,
who was elected in the Council of Basil, was content to submit himself, and
he only a Cardinal.

Calixtus the third followed Nicolaus the fifth, who not prevailing with
Christian Princes to make war upon the Turk; yet he stirred up the King of
Persia to do it, and so diverted the Turk from Europe.

Then Pius the second followed, called before Aeneas Sylvius. He moved the
Christian Princes against the Turks also; but they were at wars among
themselves, and so could not answer his desire. He misliked the inhibition of
Priests marriages, and thought fit it were permitted.

Paulus the second succeeds him. He was as unlearned, as Pius was learned. He
(like some schismatics now) accounted humane learning heresy: and so they may
see their error is popish, while they condemn learning as if it were popery.

Next comes Sixtus the fourth, Innocentius the eight, Alexander the sixth, who
imprisoned and banished many Cardinals.

Then followed Pius the third, and next Julius the second, who by the Emperor
Maximilian, and the King of Spain, and France's aids, spoiled the Venetians of
many territories, yet he received them again into favor, and so discontented
the Emperor and the King of France, that they thought to depose him by their
Council at Pisa. But he called another Council at Rome, which disanulled all
they did at Pisa. He lived in wars all his time.

Leo the tenth succeeds him. He endeavored to suppress Martin Luther, but
could not.

Adrianus the sixth followed, and threatened the Duke of Saxony, for maintaining
Martin Luther.

Clement the seventh succeeds, who poisoned many, and was poisoned himself.

Paulus the third follows, whose authority in England was abrogated by King
Henry the eighth, who called himself supreme head in his own dominions, in all
causes, Ecclesiastic and Civil. He cursed King Henry the eighth of England
therefore, and interdicted the Kingdom; ratified the order of Jesuits, and
called a Council at Trent, where the Protestants would not appear, because
they said that Council was not lawfully called, and the Pope sat Judge, who
was the party they were to accuse of errors, and abusing the Church. He carried
the Council to Bononia.

Julius the third followed, who brought it back again to Trent, and sent in
Queen Mary's days, Cardinal Pool to absolve England from the interdiction of
Paul the third. But havoc was made in England of Protestants.

Paulus the fourth followed, who hated Charles the Emperor, who resigned his
government to his son Ferdinand, and died in a Monastery. The Pope approved not
this election; but Ferdinand esteemed not of his approbation.

Pius the fourth followed. In his time the Council of Trent called by Paul the
third, was dissolved, which had sat six years only of eighteen. But before
that, he sent an Ambassador into England to invite the Clergy to that Council,
but Queen Elizabeth would not suffer him to land. Nor would the Germans send
any. Scotland also revolted from popery. He massacred Protestants at Montalto
in Italy, to the number of eighty, because they met at an house to hear a
Sermon. They were drawn out one by one, and their throats cut, but none
recanted their Religion.

Pius the fifth followed, who with the Venetians, and the King of Spain and his
own aids, overcame the Turks at Lepanto, under the conduct of John of Austria.

Gregory the thirteenth followed. He founded a new College for Jesuits, and
gave it great revenues to bring up scholars to convert the Germans.

The Guises faction, and the Queen Mother, made an horrid massacre in Paris of
the Protestants, whom they called Huguenots, 1572. Which act this Pope
commended, and sent Charles King of France 40000. Ducats to set forward the war
against them. This Pope set forth a new Calendar.

Sixtus the fifth followed, who excommunicated the King of Navar and the Prince
of Condie, both Protestants. Now was Henry the third killed by a Friar.

Clement the eighth, absolved Henry the fourth, King of France, from the
excommunication of Sixtus the fifth, upon his abjuration of the protestation by
his Orators; which King was slain by a proselyte of the Jesuits called Ravilack.


Mathe. I desire to know how the Protestant Religion came in, and whether it be
ancient, and how it has been persecuted by the Pope his adherents, whether
Princes or Prelates, and by what heresies opposed: for the Papists still
upbraid us, that our Religion was begun by Luther, who began an innovation in
the time of Pope Leo the tenth. Against whom Henry the eighth of England did
write, and obtained the title from the Pope, of Defender of the faith.


Phila. You are to understand, that the substantial points of the Protestant
Religion, are the same which are grounded upon Scripture, and maintained from
the Primitive times by the Church Christian; but obscured in tract of time by
diverse heresies, and popish traditions, which like tares and weeds over-grew
the good seed, which yet still appeared in diverse places of the field of the
Catholic Church, plain enough to prove a visible being, both of the truth and
professors of it, till the Protestants made a more full declaration of it, by
refining the old truths from the dross of heresy, and popish superstition.


Mathe. I desire to have a more plain view of those heretics that turned from
Gospel truths. And secondly, how the Pope sell off, being that the Roman
Church did oftentimes excommunicate those heretics. And thirdly, how the
Protestants came to reform themselves, they being once in the bowels of the
Romish Church.


Phila. You know I have showed many already among the persecuting heretics;
yet it shall not be irksome to me, if it be not to you, to view them a little
better, especially the Manicheans who sprung up before Arrius; with which
heresy Augustine was entangled, but the Lord God that brings good out of
evil, converted him by the pains of Ambrose Bishop of Millain, and he became a
great light to Gods people, and a confuter of that cursed heresy.

Manicheus opinions were, that there were two beginnings; one evil, and the
other good; which is all one as to say there be two Gods. No wonder if their
patron Manes called himself the Holy Ghost, Maniches.
as Montanus did, if he proceeded from such principles. This Manes forbade
flesh and wine; neglected the old Testament; ascribed the sin of man not to his
free will, Vid. Aug. cont. Mani.
but necessity, because he said, man's body was made of the substance of the
Prince of darkness. He died a fearful death. Theo. l. 4. c. 4.
For as Arrius voided his guts at a draught-house, before he came to dispute
against the truth: so this Manes was sent for (being a Persian) by the King of
Persia, to cure his son, who died in his hands, and he was imprisoned, but
escaped; yet heard of in Mesopotamia, was taken and flead, Socrat. l. 1. c. 21.
and his skin stuffed, and set up at the gate of the City.


Mathe. Sir, lest it be too much trouble to you, and no great benefit to me, to
recite all the heresies, I desire only the chief of them, which do directly
oppose true Religion.


Phila. I intend so; and therefore first I will show you the ancient heresies,
and then the modern, that you may see how far the latter are raked out of the
former.

We find some holding God to be like a man, because Genesis 1.21. God is said to
make man after his image, Anthropomorphites.
but that in the soul and the endowments thereof, wisdom and righteousness.
The Author of this heresy, was one Ardaeus a Syrian.

Then followed the Messalians, called Euchitae, because they thought the whole
duty of man consisted in prayers, not hearing, by which St Paul tells us, that
faith is begotten, by which prayer must be offered up. They were also called
Enthusiasts, because when they were transported, they thought the spirit was
infused into them: Theo. l. 4. c. 7.
so that they needed neither holy discipline for the body, as fasting; nor
doctrine for the soul.

Apollinaris followed, who denied Christ to have any humane soul, but that his
divinity supplied the place of it. But then Christ was not perfect man.

Donatus Bishop of Numidia, held, that the Catholic was bounded among those of
his society in Africa; and that no baptism was rightly administered but by
them. The wildest branch of this heresy, was the Circumcilionists, who would
cast themselves down from clifts and rocks, and into fire and water, out of
assurance that it was martyrdom, and fruits of their faith. Our Quakers are
like them. Aug. con. Donat.


Collyridiani worshipped the Virgin Mary, and offered cakes to her, Epiph.
cont. haeres.
as the Jews did to the Queen of heaven; and as the Papists do adore her as a
mediatrix.

There were some also after these, that said, Joseph knew Mary after she had
borne Christ, because of the word in Mat. 1.25. (...).
(till) which word signifies never oftentimes. As 1 Samuel 15.25. So Mat. 28.20.
Samuel saw Saul no more, till the day his death, i. never. So 1 Samuel 6.23.
Michal had no child till the day of her death: and all the Fathers generally
hold, she was a perpetual virgin; and so have taken those words of the Apostles
Creed (born of the Virgin Mary) as if of one that ever was a virgin. Yea, some
of them have argued it from Ezekiel. 44.2. (...) (viz.) (...).
by way of allegory; that as the East gate of the Temple was to be shut up,
that no man might enter in nor go out there but the Prince: So was the blessed
Virgins body made the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and her womb only for the
ingresse and egresse of Messiah the Prince. And though that some of the
disciples were called Christ's brethren, as James and Joses, Simon and Jude, we
know that those were so called in Scripture, that were but Cozen germans; and
so these might be the sons of Joseph's brother or sisters; or of Mary's sister,
as James is said to be the son of Mary Cleophas. Danaeus de here is. fo. 224.
Epiph. de here is. fol. 166.
Or some might be the sons of Joseph by a former wife, if he were eighty years
of age before he was contracted to Mary, and so the more unlikely to know her
after the flesh. These heretics were of the same mind with Nestorius and
Helvidius, who succeeded them. But these were called from their opinion,
Antidicomarianitae.

After them sprang up the Seleucians, that said, that the Chaos of which God
made the world, was coeternall with God, and that Angels created the souls of
men; Aug.
and that Christ did not carry our nature up to heaven, as it is said, Acts
2.34. and cap. 3.23. Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 1.20. but that he left his body in the
body of the Sun. These received not baptism by water. They denied the
resurrection of the body, and said only that was performed by succession of
generation, which it may be they borrowed partly from Plato and Pythagoras,
Himeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.18.

Pelagius affirmed, that men by nature were able to fulfill the law of God,
contrary to Romans 8.7. And denied original sin, contrary to Psalm. 51.5. and
that it came not by propagation but imitation of Adams sin: and that children
need not be baptized for remission of sin; Aug. con. Pela.
and that the holy men that confessed sin, did it rather for example of
humility, then for any necessity or guiltiness.

Nestorius followed, who denied the personal union of the divine and humane
nature; of which the blessed Virgin was the medium or mean, and in that respect
only called the (...).
mother of God, because she brought forth him that was by union both God and
man inseparably: and Nestorius would have her called only the (...).
mother of Christ; and therefore condemned by the first Council of Ephesus,
and banished by Theodosius the Emperor, and his tongue rotted in his mouth.

Eutyches confounded two natures in Christ, humane and divine, by saying that
the divine swallowed up the humane, and so Christ had only the divine nature.
He was condemned by the general Council of Chalcedon, where sat 630.
Fathers, and the Emperor Martianus, and it was decreed, That the natures of
Christ, though united, yet were not confounded.

Next followed those that worshipped the cross, and diverse images; which filth
the Church of Rome has licked up, together with the worship of relics.

One Godescalcus a Dutch man, said, that by predestination men were forced both
to do good and evil.

About 1100. years after Christ, a kind of monomachy arose between the Greek
and Latin Churches, about the bread in the Sacrament; whether it should be
leavened or unleavened. The Greek Church was called Fermentarii; the Latin
Azymitae: the first did leven it, the other did not.

After this, one Petrus Abolandus a French man, said, the Holy Ghost was the
soul of the world, and not of the substance of God the Father.

Almericus also of France, said, that God was the essence of all creatures, and
that they all should be converted into God again.

The Paleneni about Tholouze in France, affirmed that a man might attain to
such perfection in this world, that he might be void of all sin; and that such
were not subject to any Civil or Ecclesiastic power; that they had no need of
prayer and fasting, or any exercise whereby grace may be increased. These laid
some grounds upon which the Anabaptists build now.

Others under a color of Religion and charity, made all things common, and
women also; These surely began the Family of Love. About 1600. years after
Christ, sprang up the Anabaprists: but before I come to speak of them, and
others following from their time, I must tell you according to your question,
how and when the Protestants came in, and how persecuted by Papists, and
opposed by heretics and schismatics.


Mathe. I thank you for your remembrance, and entreat you so to do.


Phila. You must take notice that the Protestant Religion has been maintained
in her doctrine from the beginning of the Primitive times. First, by the
Bishops of Rome themselves, for the first 300. years after Christ: Zepherinus,
and other Bishops following him, Rome; and that Boniface the third had got the
title of universal Bishop, they began to break out into strange opinions and
manners; as that the Chair of Rome was infallible, as you see in Pope Agatho
his decree, and excommunicating Emperors, and suffering them to kiss his
feet; as did Pope Constantine the first, and others. Condemning Priests
marriage, and setting up the the service of the Church in Latin, as did
Nicolaus the first: and that whatsoever the Church of Rome appointed, should be
perpetually observed, as did Stephanus the fifth: and setting up the Mass,
Purgatory, Pilgrimages, adoration of images, invocation of Saints, and
transubstantiation: and setting themselves above general Councils in
determinations of faith; so that no decree or Canon could pass without the
Popes approbation. They getting thus aloft, suppressed all that withstood their
tenets. From hence it came that the true Religion became eclipsed; yet some God
raised up in every age, who wrote against both their pride and errors; though
by reason of the over ruling power of the Church of Rome, they could not so
plainly appear, as in the time of Luther, and afterward.

For Basilius Magnus writes to the Bishops of the West, that if they held
themselves to be the head, yet they could not say to the feet, Bas. transmar.
Ep. 77. About the 4th century of years.
I have no need of you; which plainly reproved the Popes usurping supremacy, as
well as do the Protestants.

Gregory Nyss^n wrote against Pilgrimages to Jerusalem, Mount Olivet, and
Bethelem, saying, Hist. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 10.
and not pilgrimages from Cappadocia to Palestina, and that no rewards will be
given in the life to come, but for such things which are done by the command of
God; so the Protestants hold also.

So Hilarious the Bishop of Arls, opposed Leo Bishop of Rome, Rome had no
dominion over the Churches of France. For which though they accused him as a
usurper, yet he nothing regarded the Popes curses, but went to Rome, Leo ad
Gal. Epis. Ep. 77. and 89.
and to the Popes face maintained, that Christ did not appoint Peter to be head
over the rest of the Apostles; nor had the Pope from Peter any such power; so
hold the Protestants.

So the Council of Constantinople called by the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus, Germanus the Patriarch of that City, for allowing the worshipping
of images; which sin also the Protestants abhor.

Serenus the Bishop of Marsieles in France, brake down all images in the Church
of his Diocese, more then 1000. years past; so the Protestants.

So Albertus Gallus, and Clement, and Sampson, Scottish men, said, Hist. Magd.
cent. 8. cap. 10.
that the Pope of Rome was the author of lies; a disturber of the Christian
peace; a corrupter and a deceiver of the people, and for this suffered bonds
and imprisonment in France, by the procurement of Pope Zacharias. So the
Protestants hold.

So Claudius Thurinensis cast down images, Thurin, by Piedmont, and said they
might as well worship the Ass upon which Christ did ride: and said, that he
was not to be accounted an Apostolic Bishop, that sat in the Apostolic
Chair, but he that performed the Apostolic Office. So think the Protestants.

Theophilactus Bishop of Bulgaria, writ, Priests honorable, and a step to
Church government: So held St Paul, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. So the Protestants hold.

Berengarius a Deacon at Argiers, 1100.
writ against the popish opinion of transubstantiation, or conversion of the
bread and wine in the Sacrament, into the very body and blood of Christ. But he
following the opinion of Augustine and Joannes Scotus, he was condemned
unheard, by a Council called at Rome by Pope Leo the ninth, for an heretic.
Whose opinion the Protestants also do hold.

Radulphus Patriarch of Antiochia, refused to be subject to the Pope of Rome,
saying, that Antiochia was the ancient Chair of St Peter, and therefore had a
prerogative above Rome. So think the Protestants, if St Peter's being Bishop of
a place can give prerogative.

Arnulphus in his preaching, ^^us Tripart.
much reproved the Roman Clergy for their lewd lives; of the number of holy
days spent rather in lawless pleasures, then devotions; and against the
number of begging Friars, and the unchaste behavior of Churchmen. He was
drowned by them in the night, as is reported.

About this time sprung up Waldus; of whom you have heard formerly. His
opinions be these following.

1. That the Scriptures are only to be believed in matters of faith, and
contain all things necessary for faith and manners.

2. That Christ is the only Mediator, and that Saints are not to be invoked.

3. He held traditions not necessary to salvation; and denied Purgatory, and
Masses sung for the dead.

4. That constrained fast days, and making difference of meats; superfluous
holy days; variety of superstitious orders of Priests and Monks, Friars and
Nuns, hallowing of creatures; vows, and also pilgrims, and humane ceremonies,
were to be abolished; and that no degrees should be received into the Church,
but Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

5. They denied the Popes supremacy over other Churches, States, and
Governments.

6. That the Church of Rome is spiritual Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist; and
rejected the Popes pardons, and allowed the marriages of Priests.

7. And that they that hear the true word of God, and believe it, are the true
Church.

8. And that the Communion was to be eaten, and not reserved for show or
worship. For which opinions they endured persecutions of Pope Alexander the
third, who excited all Christian Princes to persecute them with fire and sword:
all which the Protestants hold, for which they also have been persecuted; as
shall appear.

Hildebertus also abhorred the pride of Rome, and said, that Rome if it had no
Rulers, or at least such as did not violate the faith.

Bernard, Abbot of Claravell, held free justification by Christ's merits, and
thought that all Christian people had conspired against Christ, and that those
were the chief persecutors that had the highest places in the Church. So
thought Protestants. Nichetes Bishop of Nicomedia, held against Anselmus Bishop
of Havelburgh, that the Pope was not the principal Bishop; and that the power
of binding and loosing was not given to Peter, but also to all the rest of the
Apostles even as they all received graces alike, on the day of Pentecost, Act
2. So hold the Protestants.

About 1300. years after Christ, 1300.
true Religion began to be much darkened by school disputations, by many that
followed school disputations, and Peter Lombards Sentences: as Albertus Magnus,
Aquinas, Alexander de Ales, and Scotus called Dunce, of the Town in Scotland
where he was born; but of a most subtle wit.

But God still stirred up some to maintain the cause of his truth. As Arnoldus
de nova villa a Spaniard, who held in his time,

That the devil had seduced the world from the truth of Christ.

That the faith then commonly taught, was the faith of devils.

That Christian people were led by the Pope to hell.

That the Cloisters had no charity, and falsified the doctrine of Christ.

That the Ministers did not well to mix Philosophy with Divinity.

That masses are not to be celebrated, nor that Priests ought to sacrifice for
the dead. All which the Protestants hold.

Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, a Master of the University of Paris, applied all
the texts of Scripture that make against Antichrist, to the Pope and his
Clergy; and proved the Friars to be false Prophets, and writ against their
wilful poverty, showing that Christ when he said, Mat. 19.21. Go and sell all
thou have, and give it to the poor, did not intend actual, but habitual
poverty; namely, that we should not impoverish our selves when no need
requires, but that in our affections we should be ready so to do, when the
confession of Christ and his glory shall require it, that then we be ready to
leave all for his sake. So say the Protestants also.

But this man was condemned for an heretic, and exiled, and his books burnt.

So Laurence an English man, and a Master of Paris, 1300.
and Peter John a Minorite, and Robertus Gallus a Dominican Friar, wrote, that
the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome was great Babylon, and that the Pope was an
Idol that had eyes, but would not see the abominations of his Church for
desire of riches. So the Protestants hold likewise.

Robert Gostred Bishop of Lincoln, would not admit at the Popes command, for an
Italian boy to be one of the Prebends of his Church, but writ to him that it
was a devilish sin to defraud the people of the preaching of the Word, by
setting those in place that could not perform the Ministerial office, but only
take the milk and wool of Christ's sheep. He prophesied in his sickness, that
the Church should not be delivered from Romes Egyptian bondage, but by a
bloody sword. So think the Protestants.

Marsilius Patavinus affirmed, that the Pope had not authority over other
Bishops, much less over the Emperor; 1400. lib. defens. pacis.
and that the Pope and the Clergy should be subject to Magistrates; and that
the head of the Church is Christ; and that he never appointed any Vicar to be
universal head thereof; that Bishops ought to be chosen by the Clergy; and
that the marriage of Priests is lawful, and that St Peter was never at Rome;
that the Church of Rome is a den of thieves; and that Popish doctrine leads to
eternal death. So hold the Protestants also.

Michael Cesenas, Provincial of the Gray Friars, writ against the Popes pride
and supremacy, and calls him Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, the great whore drunk
with the blood of the Saints: that there were two Churches, one of the wicked
very flourishing, wherein the Pope reigned; the other of godly men afflicted,
over whom Christ reigned. So hold the Protestants.

This man had many followers. The Pope cursed him, and burned many of them, as
they did also the Protestants.

John Wickliffe a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, in King Edward the thirds
time, wrote many learned books of Logic and Philosophy, Morality and Divinity,
and of the speculative Art. He discovered the error of the Papists about
Sacraments, and so made himself many enemies. But he had many friends and
followers beyond the seas; as John Huss, and Jerome of Prague. In whose defense
fifty four Nobles of Moravia writ sharp, reprehending the popish party, for
taxing Bohemia and Moravia with heresy. Mr Moor.
And many Nobles of England about the year 1385. did maintain Wickliffs
doctrine, namely Lord Montague, Lord Clifford, Earl of Salisbury, Lord
Latimer, and Nevill.


Mathe. What were the points of Wickliffs doctrine?


Phila. That the substance of bread and wine remained in the Sacrament of the
Altar, after the words of consecration.

2. That it is not found, that Christ instituted or confirmed a Mass.

3. That it is presumption to affirm, that the children of the faithful dying
unbaptized, are damned.

4. That in St Paul's time there were but two orders of Clerks, namely, Elders
and Deacons.

5. That the causes of divorcement for spiritual consanguinity, or affinity,
are not founded on the Scriptures.

6. That he which is in the Church most serviceable and humble, is Christ
nearest Vicar in the Church militant.

7. That if extrme or corporal unction were a Sacrament, neither Christ nor
his Apostles would have omitted it.

8. That whatsoever the Pope commands, without a clear deduction from the
Scriptures is to be accounted heretical.

9. That it is folly to believe the Popes pardons.

10. That it is not necessary to believe the Church of Rome, to be the supreme
head of other Churches.

11. That a Priest may preach the Word of God with authority from the Pope.

12. That the Church of Rome is the synagogue of Satan; nor is the Pope the
Vicar of Christ, nor of his Apostles.

13. That if any man enter into a private Religion, he is made thereby the more
unfit to serve God. The Protestants follow these positions.

John Huss, the Bohemian, follows Wickliffe in time and doctrine; for which
he was burnt by the Council of Constance, though he was promised safe conduct.
His great offense, was that he appealed to Jesus Christ; which they took for a
contempt of the Apostolic See. Some report of this good Martyr, that though
they burnt the Goose (for so Huss signifies) yet out of his ashes should rise
a Swan (so Luther signifies) that should trouble them worse then he had done.
So Luther did indeed.

Jerome of Prague died also, as did John Huss, about the year 1415.

Hieronymus Savonarala an Italian Monk, was a great adversary to the popish
Clergy, yet preaching nothing but the plain word of God, as touching,

1. The free justification in Christ through faith.

2. That the communion ought to be administered in both kinds.

3. That popish pardons were of no effect.

4. Denied the Popes supremacy.

5. Preached against the filthiness of the Cardinals and Clergy.

6. That the Keys were not only given to Peter.

7. That the Pope did neither follow the life, nor doctrine of Christ; and that
he attributed more to his own pardons, then to Christ's merits, and therefore
was Antichrist.

8. That the Popes excommunications are not to be feared; and he that does fear
them is excommunicated of God.

9. That auricular confession is not necessary. All which he stood unto with
two Friars, who were all three hanged openly, and then burned. And now began
the Art of Printing, which did ruin the Pope more then preaching.

Martin Luther was by the special providence of God called forth to fight the
cause of truth against the Pope, even out of the Cloister of Augustinian
Friars, in the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who much endeavored to
suppress him. 1. By convening the estates of Germany at the Town of Worms. But
before I come to his story, you may see that there was in every age some that
professed the Protestant tenets of Religion before Luthers time. I could reckon
abundance more, but I avoid prolixity, and reserve the reader to the Catalogues
and Martyrologies of Religious men.

I return therefore to Martin Luther, who being summoned, appeared at the
Convention at Worms, but would revoke nothing of his writings, which were
concerning, 1. The grounds of Christian Religion. The second contained a
reproof and detection of papacy, and popish doctrines and manners. The third
sort contained an opposition of those particular persons, who did abet and
maintain the Roman tyranny, and deface his writings: none of which he would
recant. He had safe conduct back again to his own Country, but the Emperor to
please the Pope, who had not yet confirmed him in his Empire, sent out a Writ
of outlawry against Luther and all his adherents, commanding Luther to be
apprehended, and his books burnt. Then followed another Convention at
Norinbergh, of the estates of Germany, to suppress Luther, to which the Pope
excited them by his Legate Cheregatus. But the estates found it dangerous to
proceed with rigor against him, but desired to reserse it to the next free
Council called in Germany, and in the mean time they would take care to
prevent disorders. But in the mean time an hundred grievances at least were
presented by the Germans to that Convention, and by them to the Pope: the
chief whereof were,

1. That many things were prohibited by humane constitution, that were not
prohibited of God, and many things rejected, which were of God commanded.

2. That the Popes pardons were insufferable, which persuading the people of
the power of them, was the cause of many abominations committed, because for
money they might be pardoned.

3. That Ecclesiastical men are free from the secular power whatever they
commit.

4. That Priests are suffered to have Concubines for money, and the chaster men
are compelled to pay money for them, and so may have them if they will. But no
answer came either from Pope Adrian, or Clement the seventh after him, though
he sent Cardinal Campeius to the next Convention at Norinberg. But Ferdinand
the Emperors brother, and Cardinal Campeius, the Duke of Bavaria, and some
Bishops, Joan. Sleidan. Comment.
assembled themselves in a Conventicle at Ratisbone, and ratified certain
Articles against Luther and his books. Afterward were two other Conventions at
Spiers: in the first many bills of complaints were put up against Monks and
Friars, and the privileges of the Clergy above the Civil power. Also against
holy days; and that the difference of meats and ceremonies might be free; and
that the Emperor would appoint a Provnciall Council (since a general could
not be had) in Germany for matters of Religion, or else suspend the decree of
Worms against the followers of Luther and himself: the last was granted. And
at the next convention at Spiers, was by a few Princes decreed; That such
Cities as had altered Religion should make no farther change; and that other
places should obey the decree of Worms, till a general Council: That all men
should use the mass that would, even where it was abolished: That Anabaptists
should be punished to death; and ministers should teach by the Churches
interpretations: That the doctrine of the Lords Supper should not be received:
That no Princes should receive strangers, that for Religion came to their
dominions.

This was resisted by the Duke of Saxony, and the Prince of Brandenberg, and
the Princes of Luneberg, and the Landgrave of Hesse, and some others, and made
protestation against it, and that name is given to all that decline the Romish
Religion. The name Protestants.
To these did cleave fourteen Cities, who appealed to the Emperor, and a
general Council, or a Provincial. They sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, who
handled them very roughly with threatenings.

Therefore the Protestants bound themselves in a Covenant at Smalcaldy, to
assist each other if any of them were pursued for Religion. This discontented
the Council of the Empire. The Emperor published a decree, that though the
confession presented to him at the Town Augusta was consuted (to which the
Protestants were not suffered to reply, The Augustane Confession.
but willed to return to the Romish Church) yet he would give them a space to
return. In which time they should keep peace, and alter Religion no farther,
but suffer every man to follow the Church of Rome that pleased. The Protestants
answered, they could not obey that decree with a safe conscience. Therefore the
Emperor set forth another Decree, wherein he confirmed the Romish Religion in
all points; and that his Court called the Chamber, should proceed against the
Protestants in judgment; and that no Protestant Prince should bear office in
his Court, and that all Papists should be taken into his protection against
their own Princes: therefore the Protestants and their Ambassadors met again at
Smalcaldy, and confirmed their league begun.

Vlricus Zuinglius after this, being Preacher of Zurick showed himself also
against the Popes pardons, and other corruptions, he was opposed by the popish
preachers. The Senate of Zurick appoints a public disputation. Zuinglius sets
out seventy Articles before hand to be disputed of. Faber Stapulensis, whom the
Bishop of Constance sent to dispute against Zuinglius, declined the
disputation, and referred it to a general Council. Therefore the Senate
proclaimed throughout all their territories, that the traditions of men should
be abolished, Helvetians convened at Lucerna, and decreed that no man should
deride the Mass; Luther should not be mentioned; that Images should not be
violated; and that all decrees of the Bishop of Constance should be obeyed; and
in 1625. appointed a disputation at Baden, Ecchius offered to maintain and
prove. He was opposed by Oecolampadius, Preacher of Basil, and others.
Zuinglius was not permitted by the Senate of Zurick, to be there, because the
Helvetians were his fierce and deadly enemies. It was concluded that all should
remain in that Religion they had hitherto kept, and should admit of no new
doctrine in their dominions, but should sollow the authority of the Council.

The Senate and people of Berne not content herewith (one of the chief Cities
of Helvetia) assigned a disputation there to be held,

1. That the true Church which is the mystical body of Christ rises out of
Gods Word, and continues in the same, and hears not the voice of strangers.

2. It makes no Laws without Gods word.

3. That the traditions of the Church cannot bind conscience, except they be
consonant to Gods Word.

4. That Christ has made full satisfaction for sin, and he that says there is
any other way to salvation, or to abolish sin, denies Christ.

5. That Christ is not received corporally in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

6. That the Mass offered up for the quick and dead, is contrary to the Word
of God, and disgracing the sacrifice of Christ.

7. That Christ is only to be invocated as Mediator between God and man.

8. That the Scripture shows no such place as Purgatory for the purging of
souls after death; and therefore all popish Ceremonies, as Dirges, Lamps and
Tapers, profit not the dead at all.

9. That pictures and images of Saints are not to be set up in Churches, or to
be worshipped.

10. That Matrimony is not denied to any order of men, but by the word of God
permitted to all men; and because fornication is forbidden, therefore single
life is not to be forced upon people. All which propositions were defended by
Oecolampadius, Bucer, and others, against all opposers, and therefore ratified
by the Senate; and it was decreed, that Masses, Altars and Images should be
abolished. In memorial of this Reformation, they caused a pillar to be set up
engraven with golden letters, with the time when it was done, namely, 1528.
many other Cities, as Strousbrough, Basil and Geneva, followed their example.

But many other Towns popishly affected, did side with Ferdinand the Emperors
brother, and Deputy in Germany, to suppress this Reformation in Berne and
Zurik. These Towns were the Lucernates, Vrani, Suitenses, Vnternaldii, and
Tugiani, who much abusing the Reformed Tigurines and Bernatas, made them so
angry, that they stopped the ways to those five Towns, that no victuals could
come to them. Upon this the five unreformed made war upon them, and had the
better, in which skirmishing Zuinglius was slain, and his body abused, cut in
pieces and burned, yet the Reformed continued in their religion, and peace was
concluded by the mediation of the King of France, and some Cantons of
Switzerland.


Mathe. But how came England to be Protestants?


Phila. Henry the seventh King of England had two sons, Arthur and Henry.
Prince Arthur the eldest married Katherine, daughter to Ferdinand King of
Spain, and died without issue. Then Henry the eighth his brother being King of
England, by the advice of his Counselors and Nobles, married the said Lady
Katherine, that so her dowry might not be carried out of England. Which match,
though contrary to Gods Word, was dispensed withal by Pope Julian the second,
and so continued twenty years. Now Charles the fifth Emperor being in England,
promised to marry the Lady Mary, daughter to Henry the eighth, by the said
Queen Katherine; which the Emperors Council misliked, because that the Lady
Mary was begotten by King Henry and his brothers wife, and so illegitimate;
therefore the Emperor forsook the match, and married the King of Portugals
daughter, called Isabel.

Upon this King Henry's mind began to be troubled, and the more because he
foresaw that there could be no firm succession to the Crown by children so
begotten. He propounded therefore this question to all the Universities of
Christendom, viz. whether his marriage were lawful? they all agreed it was
not; therefore the King sought a divorce, and desired the Popes consent. The
Pope sent Cardinal Campeius into England, who together with Woolsey, Cardinal
of York, was by his authority to judge the business: Woolsey was inclined to
the divorce, till he perceived the Kings mind was bent to marry Anne Bulloin,
who was a Lutheran. Of which he advertizing the Pope, he sent for his
Ambassador Campeius, who returned to Rome, without determining the Kings cause.
But the King, by Doctor Cranmers advice, and the Civilians, had Queen Katherine
divorced; therefore the Pope cursed King Henry and his Kingdom of England. And
the King abolished the Popes authority and tyranny in his Kingdom, and
enjoined that he should in his dominions, only be called Bishop of Rome, and
that himself should be acknowledged supreme head of the Church of England.
This was the beginning of Reformation of popish abuses, as in dissolving of
Abbeys and Monasteries in England and Wales, though Henry the eighth continued
in Romish doctrines, To the number of 645. vid. Cambden. Mr Fox his Martyro. p.
2.
and many blessed Martyrs were put to death in his time for professing the
contrary, even after he had abolished the Bishop of Romes authority, as Lambert
condemned by King Henry himself, and also of many others by his authority; and
ministers, such as Collins, Cowbridge, Leiton, Puttedew, Peke, do testify; as
also his setting out the six Articles, maintaining, page 1296.
1. Transubstantiation. And secondly, that the communion in both kinds is not
necessary to be received. And thirdly, against Priests marriage. And fourthly,
for vowing single life. And fifthly, Anno 31. regni H. 8.
for maintaining the Mass: and also sixthly, auricular confession to be
necessary. Which Articles were commended to Commissioners to be put in
execution, and many good men suffered, who held tenets contrary thereunto: as
Doctor Barns, Heirom, Garret, Marbeck, Filmer, Testwood and Person, and Bennet,
Kerby, Clark, Mendelsham, and Mistrisse Anne Askew, and others, burned at
Windsor and Ipswich, in London and Kent; all which show, that though King Henry
the eighth did abolish the power of the Pope in Civil and Ecclesiastic
matters in England, yet popish doctrine was still maintained.


Mathe. I pray tell me how the Pope came to have such great authority in
England in Civil and Ecclesiastical affairs. 2. How Englands Religion came to
be corrupted, which at first it seems was pure, Romans 1.8.
as Romes faith was before the Pope turned Antichristian. 3. How the
Reformation went on which was revived by King Henry the eight, so far as
abolishing popish jurisdiction.


Phila. For the first, you may find that the Pope came in by connivance of
peaceable and quiet Princes, who not discerning the Popes policy, after Phocas
the Emperor had made him universal Bishop, how he did work upon Princes of
weak judgment; as also upon such as he found to be superstitious; or that were
litigious, and stood in need of his help; and so did wind himself by
intrusion, and used his possession with tyranny. But this intrusion could never
be warranted by any just claim, through possession or submission to him in
tract of time, by custom or prescription, the foundation of his first
authority being surreptitious; for we cannot find any British or Saxon Kings,
that have obliged themselves or this Kingdom, submissively to the Pope. But
you may find that when Austin the Monk was sent into England by Pope Greg. 1.
to bring the Clergy to the ceremonies and service of the Roman Church (not to
make Christians in England, which was done many hundred years before, in the
time of King Lucius, who desired Baptism of Pope Elutherius, for himself and
his people) that he, nor any Priest that came with him into the Isle of Thanet,
Bed. l. 1. c. 26.
did preach till they had license from the King. But it is of courtesy (not
duty) the Pope has had much regard in England, as appears in that his Legates
and Nuncioes have had here entertainment. But this was no more then they had in
other places of the world, where their usurped authority was rejected: So in
Asia and Africa. This proves nothing of any right he had in England: for
though this Realm has admitted sometimes appeals to Rome, yet you shall find
that they have been oftener prohibited, and the Popes Bulls condemned, and his
excommunications slighted, and his decrees rejected; and that the King made
Laws and Ecclesiastical Canons by Parliaments and Synods, without the Popes
leave. As you may see in the days of King Egbert and Alfred, about the appeal
of Wilfride, Archbishop of York, who was the first that ever appealed (before
the Norman conquest) to the Pope, and in whose behalf the Pope sent Nuncioes
to England, with a Letter or Bull, to restore Wilfride to his pluralities, of
which the King, and great Council of the Kingdom, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Clergy, had divested him. But they would not yield to the
Popes desire to restore Wilfride, til he had submitted himself, and resigned
those Monasteries he held, which had moved the contention. So after the Norman
conquest, in the reign of Henry the first, Pope Paschalis put a new oath upon
Archbishops, to be taken when they received their Pall; which Anselme the
Archbishop having taken, thought himself obliged to maintain the appellations
to Rome; but King Henry pleaded the fundamental laws, which forbad any such
appeals without the Kings license; and that they were a violation to the Crown;
and a Law was made, that if any should bring the Popes letter or mandate in the
Realm, Rog. Hoved. in Hen. 2.
he should be executed as a Traitor to the King and Kingdom, and every one was
forbidden appeals to the Pope. It is true, that Pope Nicolas grants to King
Edward the Confessor, and his successors, that which he stood in no need of,
namely, the protection of all the Churches in England, and to make Laws with
the advice of their Bishops and Abbots in his stead for governing the same.
This was to make the world believe in after time, that their authority in these
things was derived from the Pope. Malm. de gest. Pontif. V^d. Mat. Par. an.
1164.
For we find, that this was always done by the Saxon and Danish Kings, before
any such Bull was sent from the Pope; yea, and disposed of Bishoprics without
the Pope: so did King William, and Rufus his son; and they counted themselves
as Gods Vicar to govern the Church, and to correct any wrong done in
Ecclesiastical Courts; Acts of Clarendon.
which course the Kings of England after the Conquest, always followed and
acted, with the advice and assistants of their Parliaments; as we may see in
the days of King Henry the second, and by the Statutes of Clarendon, which
prevents popish jurisdiction, by forbidding appeals, and disposing benefices,
and Ecclesiastical dignities. Stat. of Carlisle 25. of Edw. 1.
But in the reign of King Edward the first, is a notable statute, which
declares the holy Church of England to be founded in the estate of Prelacy, not
Papacy, and within the Realm of England, not without it, and by the King and
his Peers, not by Popes and foreign Bishops; and that the Popes encrochments
did aim at the ruin of the Church, disinheriting of the King, and destruction
of the Laws. 16. of Ric. 2. c. 5.
And in Richard the seconds reign, it is set down, that the Crown of England
has always been, and is free, and in no subjection earthly, but only to God,
and to no other, and ought not to be submitted to the Pope. It is true, that
King John resigned his Crown to the Pope; but that was but done in his
distress; he could not do that lawfully, wherein the whole Kingdom had the
greater share. So many Emperors have taken their Crowns from the Pope as you
have heard: but this has been done by some of them for greater solemnity, and
some for fear, or out of superstition, some to make their party the stronger
against their enemies, and the Pope has crowned them; but that of right he had
any power over the Crown, I find none.

Now for the second Question how Christian Religion came to be corrupted, Romans
1.8. Gild. de exid. and Conq. Brit.
being at first clear as Romes was in its Primitive profession of it. 1. It is
true that England had a light of the Gospel, as it is thought, by Joseph of
Arimathea, and his colony of Christians that came with him to Glassenbury,
which was in the time of Tiberius the Emperors reign. Peter came not to Rome
till the second year of Claudius, to lay any foundation of a Church there. Nor
do we find any plain face of a Church in England, till King Lucius and his
subjects were baptized; as you have read by Fugatius and Damianus, two
Ministers that Elutherius the Bishop of Rome fent to do it at King Lucius his
request. The Church of Rome continued faithful 350. years after Christ, as I
have showed, and kept her self untainted with heresy, and was a covert and
protection unto the professors of truth. But after the Emperor Constantine and
his successors turned Christians, Clergy men grew into great favor at Court,
and so wealth and ease first begat security; then covetousness, then pride;
next ambition; then devising of false tenets to maintain it, and superstitions
to uphold it: then also heresies to mask or depose truth. At last getting the
title of universal Bishop, the Eastern Church falling to decay, the world
looked on the Pope, though not as upon one that should be their superior in
secular matters, yet as one that should direct them in doctrines. He by
subtilty of the Schoolmen, and policy and power, sowed tares; and though he
seemed to keep the foundation, yet built beside it; kept up the truth in
unrighteousness, and delivered to the people by retaile what he pleased; shut
up the Scriptures, and gave them humane traditions. Now Princes and Priests
being some persuaded of his piety, and cozened by his hypocrisy; others
reverencing of his antiquity, and dazeled with his dignity; and others being
remiss and idle, were contented to enjoy the world in quiet, and take any
Religion that was offered them. Thus the world was made dark by Babylons cup,
and had no feeling of the loss of truth, no more then the Pope had, except he
were touched in his honors and profits. But God had pity upon his Church, and
raised up now and then some to set up his truth, as you have see. And lastly,
Luther to oppose the Popes errors, and King Henry the eighth to imitate his
successors, by abolishing his authority in England.

Now then to your third Question, How Reformation went on after King Henry the
eighth. I have showed you though that King did write against Luther, and
abolished the Popes power, yet he persecuted the Protestants, and those that
professed Luthers doctrine: of which there were many by reason of his books
dispersed in England. Luther himself was much troubled. The Pope sends forth
his roaring Bull against him; he answers it, and appeals to the next general
Council. But his doctrine was very acceptable to good Christians, generally,
though in some points they differed from him. He died in ^slebia, in the County
of Mansfelt, Febr. 17. 1546. where he was born.


Mathe. How thrived the Protestant Religion after Luther.


Phila. Beyond the seas fell out great troubles. A Council was called at
Ratisbone to end controversies of Religion, but no agreement, and so the
Emperor referred the controversy to the next general, or provincial
Council of Germany; but still the popish side desired to suppress Luthers
doctrine, but yet decrees against Protestants were suspended; yet the fire of
malice broke out against them; for Henry Duke of Brunsick invaded their Cities:
the Duke of Saxony resists him in the name of all the Protestants confederate
at Smalcaldy, and won all his dominions. The Emperor and the King of France
make peace, and both covenant to join, to restore the Romish Religion, which
cost France and Germany great troubles: for the King of France sent Minerius
Governor of Provence, against the Waldenses (of whom you have heard) who dwelt
in some part of that Country; as in Merindol and Cabriere. They of Merindol,
for fear fled into the woods. He spoiled and burned their Towns left desolate:
Cabriere was delivered upon composition, but yet none were spared, but some
killed in Churches; some burned in barns; some smothered in caves; others sent
to the Galleys; others starved in the woods. But God struck Minerius with a sad
disease, a fire scorched him within; his limbs rotted, made bloody urine, and
died in torments. The Emperor Charles the fifth by policy suppresseth these
Princes that upheld the Protestants: as the Duke of Saxony and others; as the
Landgrave of Hesse. About the year, 1546. when the Council of Trent was
gathered to convene, where the Emperor and the Pope made a league against the
protestants, and the Pope gave 200000 Crowns to make war against them, to the
Venetians, and maintained an army for a while, to cut them off. The Emperor
labored hard with many of the Princes, to submit to the Council of Trent, as
also the free Cities; and in hope they would, he desired that the Council of
Trent which was carried from Trent to Bononia, might come to Trent again, which
they refused: upon which the Emperor disanulled all they did at Bononia, and
said he would take care of Religion himself. And to this end consulted with
Princes and Bishops about it, who drew out a book of Reformation, called
Interim; to which few would consent, and many fled away to other Countries,
because they would not allow it: As Musculus preacher of Ausburgh, fled to
Switzerland: Brentius from Suere to the Duke of Wirtembergh: Martin Bucer, and
Paulus Fagius from Germany to England. The Pope himself would not allow it
without correction, because it allowed the marriage of Priests, and the use of
the Sacraments in both kinds, though it maintained the rest of the Roman
Religion. But especially the City of Magdeburgh withstood the book, nor
acknowledged the Council of Trent.


Mathe. How went things now in England?


Phila. King Edward the sixth now reigning, the mass was there forbidden by
Parliament, and a Book of Common Prayer set forth in the English tongue, with
an order of administration of Sacraments. Bonner, Bishop of London, and
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, for their obstinate defense of Romish doctrine,
were imprisoned: But King Edward dying, Queen Mary let them out, and made great
havoc of the Protestants, and restored the Popes supremacy, and the mass in
England, and got the Parliament to crave absolution of the Pope, and Cardinal
Pool to absolve the Realm. See Fox his Martyrology.
She neither spared Bishops, Ministers, nor common people, nor spared those who
had set her forward to obtain the Crown. Her persecution was sharp, but God
shortened it by her death, and Queen Elizabeth, whose death was intended,
succeeded her.


Mathe. How thrived the Protestants cause now in England, and other Countries?


Phila. In England popish Religion was abolished, and the Popes supremacy
disanulled; King Edwards profession followed, Anno 1. Eliza.
and his Book of Common Prayer allowed again by Parliament. But Ferdinand the
Emperor succceeding Charles the fifth, would endure no alteration of Religion;
and Henry the second King of France would not admit it neither, but moved
persecution: but he being killed by the splinter of a spear at Tilting, Francis
the second his son succeeds, and marries Mary Queen of Scots, of the Guisian
Family: which Family endeavored to abolish the Protestant Religion in France,
and sent an army into Scotland too for the same purpose, which by the aids of
Queen Elizabeth, was forced to retire. This King of France by the advice of the
Guisians, called a national Council at Orleance, under color to settle
Religion. But there the Prince of Condie was seized upon, and accused of
practice against the King. But this King shortly died, and the Prince of Condie
was cleared by a Parliament at Paris; and young King Charles the ninth, was
committed to the care of the Queen Mother, and the King of Navar. These
governors appoint a disputation by the advice of the States of the Realm at
Poyssie, 1561. which was four years before Calvin died; where Theodore Beza,
preacher of Geneva, and Peter Martyr and Marlorat, and the protestant party,
had the better, and the popish side (as the Cardinal of Lorain, and others)
concluded with them, that Christians do eat in the Sacrament spiritually by
faith, the body of Christ, which died for for us; although the Doctors of
Sorbon would not agree thereto; and so that disputation broke off. After which
the number of protestants increased, and much fear there was of uproars. But
the Queen Mother assembled the estates at St Germane, and made an Edict in
January, that the professors of the reformed Religion, should assemble to hear
sermons without the Town, and unarmed; which grieved the Guisian and popish
faction, who sought to get the King and Queen Mother into their hands, and
prevented the King of Navar from the reformed Religion, upon hope to have the
Kingdom of Navar restored to him again, by Philip King of Spain, at the Popes
mediation. In the mean time the Duke of Guise raises an army, First Civil war
in France.
and murdered 1500. hundred poor unarmed protestants at Church, in the Town of
Vassiace near Champaign. Then came to Paris, and seized on the King and Queen
Mother at Forteblew, and carried them both to Paris. Then the Prince of Condie
with many other Nobles at Orleance, of the protestant part, French Hist.
consulted to deliver the King, and Queen Mother (to which they were much
solicited by letters from the Queen her self) and also to defend the reformed
professors. They took many Towns; as Orleance, Roan, Burges, etc. Roan and
Burges were taken again by the Guisians. But at the siege of Roan, the King of
Navar was slain, that had turned from the reformed; and they hanged Marlorat,
a true preacher of Christ. This Duke of Guise was afterward slain by a soldier
at the siege of Orleance, and so the Protestants gained some peace by a new
Edict, March 13. 1563.


Mathe. Had the Protestants peace in other Countries?


Phila. No; for in the reign of the same Ferdinand Emperor, they suffered much
in Piedmont, for abolishing the mass in the Towns of Angrona, Lucerne, Perose,
Tallarat, with other places in those valleys: for the Duke of Savoy sent
Tritineus with an army to destroy them utterly, except they would again receive
the mass, and relinquish their Ministers. The people of Angrona being first
assaulted, fled to the mountains; but being fiercely pursued, turned again, and
with stones only worsted their enemies. So Tritineus thought good to use
policy, and offered them peace, if they would send and crave pardon of the
Duke, and pay to him 1600 Crowns. They sent, but nothing would be obtained. A
new army was sent against them, and they driven into the snowie mountains with
wives and children, defended themselves so well in the strait passages, that
with the loss of a few, they killed 1000. of their enemies, and obtained of
the Duke, peace, and liberty to use their Religion after their goods were
spoiled, and their houses burnt.


Mathe. Had they yet peace in France, and other places?


Phila. No; for in the reign of Maximilian the second, who succeeded Ferdinand
his Father, more troubles arose in France, and the Low Countries about this
reformed Religion. For the Protestants increasing much in the Low Countries,
the popish faction executed very severely the Spanish inquisition among them,
Protestants persecuted in the Low Countries.
that Country being at that time under the King of Spain, who sent Duke de
Alva thither with an army, to root out the true professors of the Gospel. This
Duke was very tyrannical over the nobility and people, and beheaded Count
Egmount, and also Count Horn, and suffered his soldiers to abuse men's wives
and daughters, before the faces of their nearest friends. The people therefore
took up arms under the conduct of Nassau, Prince of Orange, and his brother,
who freed Zeland and Holland from that tyranny: but in that war his brother
Ludovicus was slain. So in France notwithstanding diverse Edicts made on the
Protestants behalf, as that of January, and another in March, 1563. yet the
Romish faction made a league against them, about the year, 1564. and also their
King, Charles the ninth, Charles the ninth King of France.
covenanted with King Philip of Spain at Bayon, who sent his Queen Elizabeth,
sister to Charles, thither, to confirm that covenant in his name, for the
rooting out of the Reformed Religion. The Prince of Condie is appointed by the
Protestants to exhibit a Petition to the King in their behalf. But the King in
a vain fear of him, flies to Paris, and so heard not his supplication. Upon
this began a second civil war: for the Prince of Condie and the Protestants
seeing nothing but danger toward them, and injuries done to them, and none of
the Edicts of pacification regarded, besieged Paris, and afterward the Town of
Chartnesse. The subtle Queen mother sent to the Prince of Condie, desiring him
to require of the King such conditions of peace as he pleased. He affecting
peace, desired of the King, that the former Edicts set forth for the
Protestants, might be observed, and their wrongs redressed. All was granted,
but not performed. For the Prince having dissolved his army, re-delivered the
places conquered. The Protestants at their return to their Towns, were forced
to lay down their arms, and to keep within their houses: upon which many were
massacred, about three thousand, and all devices put in practice to intercept
the chief leaders of the Protestant part, who by great providence escaped to
Rochel. And from thence the Prince of Condie complained much in his letters to
the King, of the breach of the pacification made, sealed, and sworn to by the
King himself; but he received no answer. But the Kings brother, Duke of Anjou,
is made General of an army against the Protestants. The Queen of Navar, and
the Prince of Condie and Andelot join forces in defense of them, and so began
the third civil war; in which the old Prince of Condie was taken and slain,
and Andelot died, as is reported of poison, which was found in his body when it
was opened. Now the young Prince of Condie, and the King of Navar, govern the
army, to whose aid came the Duke of Bipont out of Germany, who died quickly,
and appointed the Count of Mansfelt to be Commander in his stead. The army of
the Duke Anjou, and the Protestants, joined battle at Moncontuire; there the
Protestants were discomfited, but they intented to adventure again in
Languedock, but that a new Edict of pacification was set forth and proclaimed
in both armies, and kept better then formerly: Plot for the massacre in Paris.
Yea, the King proposes his sister Margaret in marriage to the young King of
Navar, and met the Queen of Navar at Bloies, and conferred with her very
friendly; and also with the admiral, and appointed him general over the army,
which he pretended to raise for the aid of the Prince of Orange, a patron of
the Protestants in the Low Countries. The time of the marriage drawing near,
the Queen of Navar came to Paris to prepare for it. The admiral and principal
Noble men of the Protestants were invited. But the Queen of Navar died
suddenly, and was thought to be poisoned with a pair of gloves. The King seemed
very sorrowful; but the marriage went on, and was celebrated on August the 18.
1572. But on the 22. day after the same month, the Admiral was shot in the
arm going from the Louver: upon which the King of Navar, and the Prince of
Condie desired to depart from Paris; but the King of France prevailed with them
to stay, and he himself went to visit the Admiral, and seemed to lament very
much, and set a guard about him, as if to protect him, and caused the
protestants to take all their lodgings near him to be his assistants, if any
commotion should arise. But the next night after, the Duke of Anjou, and the
Duke of Guise, had soldiers ready planted in the street to make a massacre of
the protestants. And upon the sign given, the Kings guard killed the Admiral,
and flung his body out at window: at which the Duke of Guise greatly rejoiced,
and encouraged the soldiers to kill the rest of the protestants, who made
havoc, and killed man, woman and child which they could find, crying, that
wicked seed of the protestants should be quite rooted out. So all those that
attended in the Louver about the King of Navar, and the Prince of Condie, were
commanded to disarm and go forth; where they were all slain. The King of Navar,
and the Prince, were both brought before the King, and threatened to be slain,
except they would renounce their Religion. The King of Navar desired the King
to remember the friendship made up between them. The Prince of Condie more
stoutly said, he would not renounce his Religion for fear of his life. Some
protestants that were lodged in the Fobers of St Germane, escaped by flight.
The Prince of Condie and the King of Navar, by persuasion of Rozarius an
apostate preacher, fell away from the Reformed Religion for a time; but
afterward that Rozarius repented, and testified it to the Prince of Condie.
This massacre of Paris put to the sword about 10000. people. And in Lions, and
other places, within one month, 20000. more. It was so cruel, that many would
not believe it; others color it over with lies of treason plotted by the
protestants; Canagnius and Briguemald.
and some Noble men protestants, were tortured for to extort somewhat; but they
died in the faith and truth, and confessed no matter of treason.


Mathe. Was not the Reformed Religion now extinguished in France?


Phila. No; for though their chief Leaders were murdered; yet there were
certain Towns which were full of protestants, as Rochel, Mountalban, Nimes, and
Sarsarre. Rochel was besieged by the King both by sea and land, 1573. in
December, and endured till June. God helped the poor by abundance of fish, The
fish Surdonnes.
which were never seen before, nor since. Liberty of Religion was granted to
them, and conditions of peace, and to their associate Towns. Sarsarre was also
besieged even to famine, yet the people continued firm in Religion; but on
conditions of peace resigned the Town.

This King of France died in May 1574. Charles the 9th dies.
and much blood issued from many parts of his body, as a remembrance of his
bloody life.

Henry the third his brother, who was chosen King of Poland, Henry the 3d
succeeds.
succeeded him, and was ill affected to the protestants, yet at last they
obtained another act of pacification, and liberty to exercise their Religion in
all places, save in Paris, and some adjacent places. They were also declared to
be capable of places at Court, and places of Judicature; and all judgments
passed against them were nulled. But when they required security for this, many
ways were offered, but the Deputies for the protestants rejected all. The
Queen Mother said; Is not the word of a King sufficient security? One did
answer, No, by St Bartholmew, Madam, for then was the massacre. So they had at
last eight Towns delivered to them six years for security, and the pacification
was proclaimed all over the Country, May 1576.


Mathe. How fared the cause of Religion now in other Countries?


Phila. The Citizens of Magdenburg, Magdenb.
obtained by the intercession of the Duke of Saxony, and the Elector of
Brandenburg free exercise of Religion (by license of their Archbishop)
according to the confession of Ausburg, called also the Augustan Confession.
And in 1606. the Ambassadors from the Hungarians, came to Vienna, Hungarians.
and obtained Articles of peace, and that they should use their liberty of
conscience throughout all Hungary; wherein no Religion should be admitted but
the Roman Catholic, Lutheran, and the Calvinist. So likewise about 1608. the
Protestants of Austria being denied the free exercise of Religion, took up
arms, but within a little while obtained peace. Protestants of Austria. Bohemia.
So in Bohemia the next year following, the Protestants stood upon their guard,
fearing the Roman Catholics; but the Protestants and Catholics finding the
Jesuits to be occasion of these combustions, agreed in peace, and the
Protestants had freedom of Religion, and Churches allowed them to preach in
their native language.


Mathe. Did the Protestants in France enjoy the peace concluded in May 1576?


Phila. No; for still their enemies solicited the King to break peace with the
Protestants, and finding him unwilling, they assembled at Perone, Nemours, and
Nancy, about 1576. and made a league to root out the Protestants, because the
Protestants did not yield up their cautionary Towns, after six years expired;
whereas they had obtained of the King a longer time. But the death of Alanzon
the Kings brother, dying in the Low Countries, and the King having no issue,
and therefore they feared the King of Navars succession, made them extreme mad
upon this League.

Now the King also perceived that the Leaguers aimed at his life and crown, and
to set up whom they pleased to succeed him: and this he did upon good grounds.
1. Because libels were scattered about Paris to his dishonor. 2. Because the
Duke of Guise raised an army, and was made general of it. 3. Because they
carried the war rather toward Paris then the Protestant Towns. These things
put him in so great fear; that he desired the Queen Mother to procure the Duke
to lay down arms, and he would give him any part of his Realm to let him live
in peace. This made the Leaguers to ask high requests and securities; so that
the Protestants were prohibited to exercise their religion, and to turn
Papists, or else to depart the Realm. Upon this the King of Navar began to
oppose himself with the Prince of Condy, and the Duke Mommerancy. And yet
although the King of France and the Leaguers were united, yet the Pope
excommunicates him, and declares him incapable of the Kingdom. There came also
Ambassadors from the Electors of Germany, to desire his favor toward the
Protestants; who received no contenting answer, and returned. Then the Duke of
Guise fearing invasion of France by the Rutters, advised the King to set
quickly upon the Protestants army, under the command of the King of Navar; but
were discomfited at Contras. However the Pope much extolled the Duke of Guise,
and the preachers of France advanced him above the King: with which he was so
puffed up, that he came to the King at Soissons, and after to Paris, intending
to make him grant many unreasonable requests against his own honor, and for the
utter ruin of the Protestants, which raised such troubles in Paris, that the
King fled to Chartnesse, and to Roan, meditating revenge; yet he resolves to
join with the Leaguers, rather then the Protestants; and therefore the
Protestants could not be heard at Bloyes by the Parliament, Guise was there
slain, when they petitioned for restoration to their Religion, Goods and
Liberty. But the Leaguers ceased not till they had procucured a declaration
from the King and the Assembly, to disable the King of Navar from succession to
the Crown of France. The other Leaguers at Paris were mad for the death of the
Duke of Guise, and railed at the King; raised money for wars against him; and
the Doctors of Sorbon declared the people of France free from their obedience
to the King, and so might take arms against him. Upon this the Parliament at
Bloyes dissolves, and the King prepares to suppress the rebellion at Paris. To
this purpose he took truce with the King of Navar; by whose forces he
discomfited the Leaguers, and intended to besiege Paris, but the Leaguers
prevented him, by procuring Friar Jaques to kill the King, who did it in his
chamber with a knife, while he read a letter the Friar brought him. This was
done in that chamber, say some, wherein the massacre at Paris was formerly
plotted, this King being then Duke of Anjou, and chief in the plot.


Mathe. How fared it then with the Protestants?


Phila. Henry the third before he died of that wound the Friar gave him, which
was not many hours after, declared the King of Navar lawful successor; who
after his funeral confounded the Leaguers in many Battles. July 25. 1593.
But he then began to halt in Religion; for the Doctors of Sorbon, and diverse
Bishops, prevailed with him to hear mass in St Dennis Church. But still the
Leaguers hated him, and sent one Peter Burrier to slay him, by the instigation
of a Capuchin Friar, a Priest, and a Jesuit; but he was prevented. Upon this
the King published his declaration, prescribing a months liberty to all that
would come in and submit to his government; but else they should afterward
find no favor from him. By this means many Towns yielded to him, and at last
Paris it self, which he entered so peaceably, that within two hours the shops
were all set open, as if no wars had been. But the wicked Leaguers again
plotted his death, by one John Castil, December. 27. 1594
who came into the Kings chamber at the Louver among the Press, and struck at
the King with a knife, who stooping in, taking leave of his Lords, was struck
by it on the right cheek, and one of his teeth cut out. This traitor as he
confessed was a scholar of the Jesuits, French Hist. p. 874.
and executed, and the Jesuits banished out of France. This King received many
of his enemies into favor, as the Duke de Mayenne, and Nemours, and
enterteined peace with King Philip of Spain, by the Popes mediation. This King
escaped many treasons plotted against his life. And yet 1604. restored the
Jesuits again, and afterward admitted them to go into Navar and Berne, to the
great discontent of the Judges and Officers of that Country; yet 1606. this
King made special good orders in the behalf of the reformed Religion,
confirming the Edict of Nantes, 1598. concerning their pacification. But this
halting between two opinions, did not certainly please God; for though he
suffered the Protestants to have a national Synod at Gap, concerning their
doctrine and discipline, and therein to declare the Pope to be Antichrist
foretold by the word of God, and made it one of the Articles of their
confession; yet taking no warning by that stroke given on his mouth formerly,
he was struck to the heart by a cursed villain, one Frances Ravillac, riding in
his Caroch, even the next day after his Queens coronation day, moved thereunto
as he confessed, by no other reason, but because the King maintained two
religions in France, and by reading the book of Mariana the Spanish Jesuit,
and Bellarmins book of the Popes temporal power: which books by a decree of
the College of Sorbon, and by sentence of the Parliament, were burnt; as also
Jasper Scoppius his book, containing the same doctrine, tending to the subjects
rebellion against Princes, 1612. This soul fact was suspected to be of the
Jesuits plotting, however Father Cotton endeavored to wipe off the aspersion;
yet the Author of the book called Anticotton, refused it, and proved the
Jesuits to be the maintainers of that doctrine, and were guilty of this Kings
death, by Ravilac's own confession to father Aubigny; who being examined upon
it, said, that God had given him the grace always to forget what he heard in
confession; and so he saved his neck by that fine and false excuse. But he that
calls light out of darkness, brought out of this damnable act more respect to
the Protestant, and a check to the Pope: For now the great chamber called the
Tornelle, made a decree against the Popes temporal power. And the Protestants
began an assembly of the reformed Churches at Saumur, where Monsier de Bulloin
told them from the King and Queen Regent, that all their just requests should
be favorably answered, and whatsoever had been promised should be paid. And
the Universitie of Paris concludes against the Jesuits, and propounds to them
by Monsieur Servin, four Articles to subscribe. 1. That the Pope has no
temporal power over Kings; nor can he by excommunication deprive them of their
estates or dignity. 2. That the Council is above the Pope. 3. That Clergy men
ought to reveal conspiracies against the King or Kingdom, to the magistrate,
though it be revealed in confession. 4. That Clergy men are subject to the
secular Prince, or political magistrate.


Mathe. How sped the reformed Religionnow among the Netherlands?


Phila. They having suffered much misery under Duke de Alva their governor,
History of the Netherlands.
who had in his time executed 1860 people, beside by wars and tumults, as you
have heard: and Don John of Austria being little better; the States General
called Matthias, Archduke of Austria, to be their governor. He appoints the
Prince of Orange for his Lieutenant, which much displeased the Earl of Lalain,
who expected that dignity; so that Don John by this discontented siding,
defeated the Netherlands Army. The Duke of Anjou offers aid to the States; it
is accepted, and prospers against Don John, and he is chosen at last Lord of
the Netherlands. Yet for all these wars and troubles the reformed Religion
thrived. For notwithstanding the Popes Bull, offering pardon of sins, and life
eternal to all that would take part with Don John against the Prince of
Orange; yet Amsterdam agreed with the States of Holland, and turned all the
popish magistrates and Friars, Monks and Priests, out of the Town, and pulled
down the images in the Churches, and suffered only the reformed Religion to be
exercised; so they drove the Jesuits and Friars out of Antwerp, and granted
Churches to the Protestants. In Gaunt they whipped and burnt Friars, for
committing Sodomy. At last the Prince of Orange accepts the government of
Flanders; and in the year 1580. images and cloisters were demolished in
Deventer, Swool, and Vtrich: And being the King of Spain would allow no
Religion in his dominions but the Roman, the General Estates set forth an
Edict; whereby was declared, that the King of Spain had deserted the government
of the Netherlands, and therefore they abjured him, and took a new oath to the
several magistrates of every Town and Province among themselves. The Prince of
Orange about the eighteenth of March, 1582. was shot in his chamber by a
villain through the cheek, but he escaped death, and the villain was executed,
and the Friar that set him on to do the work. Many other treasons and plots (he
escaped) laid by the Spaniard, and the Prince of Parma. But at last one
Baltazar Gerard pistol'd him, at the enticement of one of the Prince of Parmas
Counselors (as he confessed) in hope of a great reward. After his death and
funerals, the States chose his second son, Grave Maurice, about eighteen years
of age, to be their head, and appointed a Council to assist him. The Prince of
Parma recovered now many Towns. The French King could not help the Netherlands,
because he feared the Leaguers, who began again to raise troubles in France,
about 1585. but counseled them to commend their cause to Queen Elizabeth;
which they did, and she assisted them with men and money; and she had
delivered her in caution for the money, Flushing, the Castle of Ramekins, and
Bril, and the two sconces. This made the Spaniards to use the English hardly
that were in his dominions. Upon which by Queen Elizabeth's commission, they
recompensed themselves upon the Spaniard at Sea. The Pope and the King of Spain
therefore, Gregor. 13.
that in England the reformed religion flourished, and that the Queen Elizabeth
was a great assistant to the Protestant abroad, devised how to invade England,
and depose Queen Elizabeth, Elizabeth from this, as well as many other
particular plots against her royal person.


Mathe. Popery being now abolished, and even vanquished, in England especially;
did it continue now in peace and unity?


Phila. No; for with hearts grief I must tell you, that those who were
protestants by profession, yet proved many of them profane and schismatic,
and raised great troubles in the Church. Others through surfeting upon peace,
and the plenty of preaching and printing, fell into strange fancies, and
uncouth opinions, to the great dishonor of God, and the true Religion.


Mathe. What were these?


Phila. In the year 1579. one Matthew Hamont a plough-wright, Matthew Hamont.
maintained horrible heresies against Christ, who was burned at Norwich, see
Stowes chro. p. 685. Others fell out with the Church about government and
ceremonies; as Robert Brown and Harrison, by whom, and their abetters in
Zeland, the Church of England was condemned as no Church. Others of loose life
brought in nicknames upon people more godly then themselves, as you shall find
hereafter, which bred much difference and heart-burnings, whispering, and evil
surmises, by which the people have been carried, some to prosecute, some to
persecute one another.


Mathe. But before we search England, resolve me I pray, whether or not were
the reformed professors quiet, and at unity beyond the seas, from whom we took
fire to reform popery. O, have not they filled England as well with dissension,
as at first with Reformation?


Phila. Heresies and schisms have been in all Churches, as tares mong the
wheat. And so in Germany and the Netherlands, ever after reformation, strange
people sprung up, of more strange opinions then faces or fashions.

As in 1521. Luther having published his doctrine very prosperously; whether
out of envy to his glory, or by mistaking his writings, or by misunderstanding
Scriptures, a strange sect sprung up, certainly by Satan's instigation, in
Saxony, who boasted that they talked with God, and he with them, and that he
commanded them to kill all the wicked (viz.) all that would not be of their
sect. Melanctho^
The first Author of this sect, was one Nicolas Stock, Nicholas Stock.
who pretended that God spoke to him by an Angel, and revealed his will to him
in dreams, and promised him the Empire of the world, and that the Saints must
live alone in the world, and he must be their leader to kill all Kings and
Princes, and cleanse the Church. He said he could discern of spirits, and of the
elect of God.

Next to him succeeds his scholar, Muncerus. Lembertus. Hortensius de Anab.
Thomas Muncerus, who preached in Alset in Thuringia, where he gave an oath to
his associats, who promised to assist him in executing his doctrine, which was,
to kill all the ungodly Princes and Magistrates, for which the Duke of Saxony
banished him, and so he went to Nurenberg, and was driven also from thence, and
so he came to Muthus in Thuringia again, and many of his old disciples resorted
to him, and received his doctrins as oracles, especially that part, Jo. Sleid.
com. lib. 5.
wherein he declared that all men's goods should be common, and all men free,
and of equal dignity. This doctrine brought to him 40000. who fell to
pillaging great men's houses, and brought away Noble men bound. But Count
Mansfelt raised an army with other assistants to resist them. Muncer preaches
to his company, that they should prevail according to Gods promise, namely, by
abusing some places of Scripture, as Psalm. 68.23. and Psalm. 149. and persuaded
them that they should dip their feet in the blood of the wicked; and that their
shot could do them no harm. Which oration made his followers refuse favor
offered them (viz.) to deliver up the authors of that sedition, and return in
peace to their dwellings. So the Princes discharged their Ordnance upon them,
and broke their intrenchments of carts, and slew many thousands of them; upon
which they fled, and dispersed themselves, but most of them to Frankhus, whom
the Counts army followed, and took the Town, and Muncer therein, and Phifer his
associate, and executed them, and three hundred more. Muncerus at his death
could show neither faith nor devotion.

After him rises up Melchior Hoffman, Melchior Hoffman. Chapter Nelles p. 11.
who said he was Elias: but venting the same errors at Strausburgh, was
imprisoned, and his followers suppressed.

Then next rose up John Becold, John of Leyden.
a Tailor of Leyden, 1533. with many Hollanders; he coming to Munster in
Wesphalia, he kept Conventicles, and so seduced many. The Magistrates commanded
them to depart the City, they went out at one gate, and came in at another,
saying they would not desert the cause of God. They enticed many neighboring
Towns to assist them, by fair promises of spiritual wealth, and worldly
riches, and freedom from paying rent, tribute or tithes. So they turned the
Citizens out of the Town, plundered the Churches and houses, and made orders,
that the inhabitants should bring in all their money into the common stock, upon
pain of death, and they burned all books save the Bible. One Cniperdolling his
vain Prophet, Mutus scabit mutum.
said, that God had revealed to him, that John should be King of the world, and
should destroy the Princes of the world by a mighty army, but spare the simple
multitude, and such as would embrace righteousness; and that he should send
forth twenty eight Apostles to convert the world to Anabaptisme. And John
himself pretending to awake out of a trance, seemed dumb like Zacharias, wrote
in tables, that it was the will of God that twelve men of his naming should
govern the City; and that a man might marry as many wives as he pleased; and he
beheaded some that opposed it. He himself took fifteen, and many of these
brethren upon this ordinance, lay with the hansomest women without marriage or
contract. He was called King of New Jerusalem, and proclaimed King of Zion. But
his Apostles were executed as seditious persons; and he and his Prophet were
hanged in iron chains, upon the high steeple of St Lambert, after Munster was
taken, 1535. being besieged half a year. The madness of this man was strange:
for one of his wives pitying the distress of the City, he cut off her head
himself in the market place. Sleid. 154.
And another time at his great feast, to which another false Prophet had called
Thuscocuvar, had excited him as being sent from God, he accused a man of
treason, and cut off his head, and returning, administered the communion with
those bloody hands. But for all he took on him the title of a King, yet this
showed him a Butcher; as the stealing the Churches rich vestments, and making
them into robes for himself, argued he had been a Tailor.

After John's death the Anabaptists chose another King, Hort. p. 74.
who killed his wife in a wood, that he might quietly lie with her daughter,
and killed a poor wench lest she should discover him. This man had his house
well stored with Church-plate. He and his Treasurer were burned. After him
succeeds John Cordwainer, John Cordwainer. Cornelius Appleman. Chapter Nelles, p.
52, 55, 56. John Wilhelms.
and then Cornelius Appleman, both which were executed at Brussels, as the
Captains of thieves, and committers of sacrilege. Then John Wilhelms, executed
also at Vtrecht. He wrote a book in defense of Polygamy, and affirmed, that to
rob the ungodly was no sin, and that the land belonged to Jesus Christ and his
disciples. He had one and twenty wives, some, mother and daughter, and some
sisters daughters. He was burned. It is lamentable to behold these peoples
hypocrisy. Sleidan. Bullinger.
They pretended nothing at first but holiness, humility, and honesty. They
used no swearing, nor obscene speech, yet being once got aloft they broke all
laws of humanity and honesty: so they would bear no office, Hortensius.
Gastius.
yet at last would be Kings. They said it was unlawful for a Christian man to
bear arms, or punish offenders, yet they made nothing of murdering many: you
may read more of them in diverse authors. Of this sect was David Georgius in
Holland, who said he was Jesus Christ, David Georg
and held many other wicked errors. He fled out of the Low Countries to Basil,
and very covertly dispersed his errors; but being dead they were revealed, and
by the Council of Basil his bones were dug up and burned, in detestation of
his blasphemies.


Mathe. What be the common received opinions of these men, and your judgment
of them?


Phila. You are to understand, that their opinions in diverse times and places,
varied, they not holding always the same. Anabapt. opinions.
But their opinion first and last, are neither fit for Church, Commonwealth,
nor Families. First, not for the Church; for they have affirmed that Christ did
not take flesh of the Virgin Mary; yet they can show no other save her, and for
that the Scriptures prophecy, that he should come of a woman, Genesis 3. and of
David's line, Psalm. 132.11. and that woman should be a virgin, Isaiah the 7. and
that her name was Mary, says Luke, cap. 1. and yet she could not be his mother
if he had no^ taken flesh of her, nor our flesh have any hope of eternal life.
These are worse Christians then Turks, Bulling. adver. Anab. fol. 6.
for they believe he was so born, but these curse the flesh of the Virgin, and
so deny Christ to be come in the flesh, 2 Ioh. v. 7.2. they say in Moravia,
that Christ was not true God, but only better gifted then other men; yet St
John says, The Word was God, Joh. 1.1. and Christ said, he and his Father were
one, Joh. 10. and he that sees him, sees the Father, John 24.9, 10. Michael
Servetus, a Spaniard, held the same, who was burnt in Geneva. And Valentinus
Gentilis, who called the Creed of Athanasius, the Creed of Satanasius; he was
justly executed at Berne. Thirdly, they hold we are not saved by faith, but by
the works of charity and affliction; yet Christ says, we obtain eternal life
by believing on him, John 3.16. So Paul, Romans 3.24, 28. for afflictions, they
are either punishments of sin, or Gods corrections, but no causes of
justification or salvation. But the blood of Christ only cleanses us from all
sin, 1 John 1. and by him only we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. And fourthly,
they deny original sin, because Christ has taken away the sins of the world;
but that is the penalty, not the being of it. So they say that children doing
neither good nor evil, are under grace, and without sin. But then how comes
death to lay hold on them? Romans 5.14. and cap. 6.23. And therefore fifthly,
they may well deny baptism to them, if they have no original sin. But Christ
said, let little children come to me, and yet none can tell how they should
come, but by this Ordinance. Sixthly, they rebaptize people, which is no where
commanded in Scripture, nor allowed by the Church, nor the imperial laws,
which put them to death that did, or suffered it to be done. Seventhly, they
expect a Kingdom, by some called the fist Monarchy, wherein they hope to reign
alone, and destroy the ungodly. This savours of carnal and worldly wisdom;
for Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. (but is spiritual) so is
the meat and drink of it, Romans so are the weapons of it, 2 Cor. 10. Nor can
they reign alone and kill all the ungodly, unless they kill themselves too.
But both must grow together till the harvest, Mat. 13. These people do but
furbush the old error of the Chiliasts or Millenaries, who said the Saints must
reign 1000 years on the earth, before the last judgment, who were by the
Church condemned above 1000 years since. Eighthly, they say with the old
Pelagians, that man by his own free will, can do all that God has commanded,
or else God gave his law in vain, nor would he punish delinquents, if he had
not given them power to do it, which is contrary to Scripture; for the Law is
holy, Romans 7.
just, and good, but we are sold under sin, and so our flesh is at enmity with
God, Romans 8. and therefore it must be given him from above, John 3. for the
natural man is dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. and surely if Adam could not of himself
stand in obedience by his free will, in the state of innocence, how can we in
the state of nocency since his fall. Nor did God give the Law in respect that
we could obey it, but to show his perfection in making it, and to make us find
our imperfection, that we might fly to his grace in Christ, who for us has
fulfilled it. Ninthly, they separate themselves from all Churches, because they
account themselves only pure, and therefore will not say the Lords Prayer,
Forgive us our trespasses, supposing that they have no sin. But at such God is
offended as with smoke, because they make him a liar, 1 John 1.8, 9. So they
account the office of the Ministry of no use, but depend upon peculiar
revelation; yet God has bid people to seek the Law at the mouth of the Priest,
Ezekiel. 44. but any one of them will preach, of what trade soever he be, though
neither called of God as Heb. nor by any authority constituted among the
professed people of Christ; and so they do preach without being sent, contrary
to St Paul, Romans 10. and so bring the Church into confusion.

And as their tenets are not fit to be suffered in the Church, so neither are
they in the Commonwealth. Sleidan in com. lib. 10.
For they hold that it is not lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, nor
for man to subject himself to them, but may depose them; nor to take an oath
of fidelity to them; nor may a Magistrate punish a malefactor with death.
First, he must not be a Magistrate they say, because Christ is the only King of
the Church; yet that proves not but that other Kings may be in the Church to
serve under Christ. So though it be said, that when Shiloh (viz.) Christ is
come, the scepter shall depart from Judah; but that is from the Jews, not from
all Commonwealths. It is true, he denied to the sons of Zebedee superiority;
but that was because he would correct their error, supposing his Kingdom to be
earthly, and because he called them not to Civil, but Ecclesiastical offices.
And what though Christ refused to be a King, and to judge between brethren; it
was because it belonged not to his office, not that thereby he meant to
abrogate the jurisdiction of other men, which was given to them from above, as
he told Pilate. So though we are forbidden to judge other men, yet thereby is
signified private and rash, and untimely, and wicked censures. And so though
Christ prophecieth that some Magistrates shall be persecutors of the Church,
Mat. 24. yet the spirit tells us that some shall be nursing fathers, Isa. So
Christ bid Peter to put up his sword, yet that was the material, not the
civil sword, or the sword of private revenge; nor was Peter a public
Magistrate. So though Jotham in his parable shows, Judge. 9.
that Kingship was affected by the Brier only, but not by the Olive, Vine, or
the Fig tree, yet that proves not that only the wicked, and not the godly, may
take upon them place of judicature: for Parables and Allegories prove nothing
in doctrines. Beside, that Parable was spoken particularly against Abimelech;
and from particulars, we cannot prove general positions.

Now, if it be lawful for one to be a Magistrate, it is as lawful for another
to be subject, because every power is of God, Romans 13.1, 2. and the fifth
Commandment bids us honor our Superiors, and nature teaches subjection of
the members to the head. Nor this is not servile but civil, and such as was
before Adam fell, as Eve being subordinate to Adam. It is a weak objection to
say, that there ought to be no subjection under the Gospel, because believers
are thereby admitted to the Kingdom of heaven, and so to be in subjection only
to Christ: for as in spirituals we are to be only his subjects, so in temporals
we are to be subject to men for order sake, and also for their tuition and
defense of us in our states and stations. And for this cause faith St Paul, you
pay tribute, because he is the minister of God for thy good, Romans 13.4, 6. And
whatsoever Anabaptists say, they themselves found such a necessity of order in
government, that they willingly did submit to John of Leydens government in
Munster. And that this subjection may be the firmer, it is lawful to take an
oath of fidelity to the Magistrate, though the Anabaptists are against it, by
which means they open a door to all rebellion, treason, and truce-breakings.
That oaths are lawful it is plain, because it seems to be a part of Gods
worship, being a calling upon to witness truth, and an acknowledging God to be
the greatest; yea, because it is commanded of God, Deuteronomy. 6.^^ thou shall swear
by my name. And much more is the oath of fidelity lawful; therefore Abraham's
servant swear to him; and Isaac swear to Abimelech; Zedekiah to Nebuchadnezzar,
which is called the oath of God, and the breach of it God swear that he would
avenge, Ezekiel. 17.19. Now from hence it will follow, that a Christian Magistrate
may punish the evil doers, how else can he defend them that are good; nor can
the Magistrate executing malefactors, be properly said to kill, but in justice
to give a just reward for his demerits. Nor can their tenets be consistent with
economy, or government of families. And that first, because they hold that a
Christian man ought to have nothing proper, but all things must be common,
because the first converts did so act. Yet St Peter said to Ananias, that
before he gave his goods in common it was his own, and so he was not bound to
it by the example of others, much less by any precept, Acts 5.4. therefore St
Paul makes alms a free gift, 2 Cor. 9. and admonishes rich men not to forsake
their goods, though to be liberal in good works, 2 Timothy 6. So they say they
may put away their wives if they be not of their religion, Bull. l. b. 1 f. 8.
contrary to St Paul, 1 Cor. 7. (and indeed neither Joseph nor Mosaes put away
their wives, though neither of them were Israelites) and therefore they
persuade women also to leave their husbands to follow them; for they hold it
lawful to have many wives, contrary to the Prophet, Malach. 2.15. Did not he
make one that he might seek a godly seed? And St Paul says, let every man have
his own wife, and the woman her own husband.

This Sect broke into diverse denominations. First into four, which four David
George thought to unite, Alsted. in Iadice The. Polem. p. 565.
and blasphemously preferred himself before Jesus Christ. Next they divided
into fourteen. The first sort called the Muncerians, of Muncerus, of whom I
have spoken before. An old Sect 130 years ago.
Secondly, Apostolikes, because they wandered about without staves, shoes, or
money. They washed each others feet, and left houses, wives, and trades. They
grew chargeable to the common purse; they put away their wives when they
pleased, at last were excommunicated by the rest of the brethren as idle
vagabonds. The third were Separatists, because they sequestered themselves from
the world, and brave clothes; marriage meetings, feasts, and music, and arms;
looked sad, and sighed much. The fourth were called Catharists, because they
pretended purity without sin, and said, children had no original sin, and
denied them baptism, and would not say the Lords Prayer. The fifth were
Silentes, because they seldom spoke. The sixth were called Enthusiasts, who
said the gift of prophecy by dreams came to them, and therefore would lie much
in trances, like Mahomet, when he was in a paroxisme, or fit of the falling
sickness, or like our Quakers. They said Anabaptisme was holy, but childrens
baptism came from the devil. The seventh were called Liberians, or
Libertines, who misunderstanding the liberty of Christ to be worldly and
carnal, thought themselves free from paying rents, tributes or tithes, though
Christ paid tribute to Caesar; and also took liberty to commit all
uncleanness. The eighth were called Adamites, because they thought themselves
in the state of innocence, and therefore accounted clothes to be a sign of the
curse, and therefore went naked, as did the old Adamiani, 300 years after
Christ in their Conventicles, or Hupocausta, under ground, caves which were
warmed by secret furnaces or stoves, in which place they stood naked, men and
women. The ninth sort were called Hutites, from their author John Huta. These
denied Christ's divinity with the Arrians. The tenth were called Augustinians,
who conceived there was no entrance into Paradise, till Augustine the Bohemian
opened it; forgetting that Christ said to the thief on the cross, this day
thou shall be with me in Paradise. The eleventh was the Beuckeldians, who said
that it was an holy thing to have many wives at once, forgetting Mal. 2.14.
where it is called treachery against the wife of thy youth, of which covenant
God is the witness. The twelfth was the Melchiorists, who of one Melchior
Hoffman their Prophet at Strausborough, whom they look for to come with Elias
at the day of judgment; and hold that Christ was not conceived and born of the
blessed Virgin Mary, but only passed through her as water through a conduit; in
which they agree with the old Eutychians. The thirteenth were the Georgians, so
called of David George, the original of the Familists, who thought himself a
greater Prophet then Christ, and that he would rise three years after his
death, and restore the Kingdom of Israel, but he was never heard of since. The
fourteenth were Menorists, so called of one Menor a Frisian, by whose name for
a certain time they were generally called. These differed not in doctrines from
the rest, no more then did the Muncerians and Hutites. Some were founded, as I
have showed, upon ancient heresies; some of them hold the same opinions with
the rest, but have added more to them. Many others there were, as the
Henerobaptist, Gastius de Ana. Exord. p. 20.
that baptized himself daily if the weather were temperate. Others did follow
Servetus, who not only denied baptism to children, but denied the deity of
Christ, who was burnt at Geneva, in the year 1553. Hist. of Anab. p. 53.
Others sottishly abusing Christ's words (except you become like children, you
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven) would turnble and battle in their own
dung, and play like children and innocents, and lie with one another, but I
believe not very innocently. Calv. contra Libert.
Some denied the resurrection of the body. Deukius held Origens error, that in
time the devils and wicked men should be saved. Others set all Christian duty
in prayer, like the old Euchytae. Others so left all things to God, that they
neglected the means God appointed. Vid. Hezychi Stephan. Budaeum.
Others held, that all that were not plunged in water, were not rightly
baptized; whereas the Greek word in the New Testament for baptizing, signifies
washing or sprinkling, as well as plunging, as Mark 7.3. and Heb. 9.10. And if
the Scriptures gives a word of diverse interpretation, no doubt but it was that
the Church might use such a form in baptizing, as the word admits, or as the
region and weakness of the party baptized, permits.


Mathe. But do our Anabaptists now among us hold such heretical opinions?


Phila. I believe all do not hold alike; but take them together, or severally,
you shall find all or some either to have a tincture of old heresies, or else
newly dipped into other colors, diverse from the truth.


Mathe. I pray make that appear.


Phila. Some of them hold, that Christ shall come from heaven 1000 years before
the general judgment, and shall reign with the Saints upon earth, and shall
destroy all the wicked (viz) all that are not of their sect. And this before
Christ come, they have endeavored to put in practice; and so they prove
Millenaries, and somewhat worse. Others hold that they are the communion of
Saints, and that all those that have been notorious sinners, and excommunicate,
may not be restored again upon their repentance; and so they be Novatians. Yet
this is but a pretense, for I find their practice contrary; for they do either
account their own sins none, or else favor them in the punishment. Others say
that in the true Church there are no scandalous livers; and if so, it will be
hard to prove their Church to be true, though they say the Church is bounded in
their societies, and therefore separate from all other Christian assemblies,
therein showing themselves Donatists. Some again of them hold, that Christ took
not his flesh of the Virgin Mary: And so held also the Priscilianists. Others
of them hold that it is lawful for the people to lay violent hands on the
magistrates and depose and slay them, how supreme soever they be, and so are
plain Jesuits. Some of them hold, that election is of foreseeen faith, and that
man has free will of himself, to refuse or accept Gods grace, and that a true
believer may fall away totally and finally from grace (and so are Pelagians)
contrary to St Johas tenet, 1 John 3.9. Others say, that there ought to be a
parity in the Church of ministers, contrary to St Paul, who says, that without
all contradiction, the less must be blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7. and
therefore left Titus in Creet to ordain Elders, i. ministers in every City.
Also, that Church Service and Ceremonies are superstitious, and that the Church
of England is no true Church, and therefore must be left, and in this they be
Brownists.


Mathe. How came these into England?


Phila. After this sect had continued in Germany a long time, but not above ten
years in any full vigor, Gastius de Anab. Exord.
they being suppressed and punished severely by the Princes there; a remnant of
them came in two ships into England, 1535. and lurking here a while, were taken
and made to recant; others were severely punished, as you may read in your
Chronicles, whose dregs other people have sucked in. Howes Chron. 1538. Camb.
in the life of Q. Eliz.
But in the year 1561. Queen Elizabeth by proclamation commanded them all to
depart the land within twenty days, upon pain of imprisonment, and
confiscation of goods, whether they were free born or foreigners.


Mathe. But what tenets are now peculiar to this sect among us, and your
judgment therein?


Phila. 1. That no children ought to be baptized.

2. That none are rightly baptized but those that are dipped.

3. That there ought to be no set form of prayer by the book.

4. That there should be no distinction between Clergy and the Laity; but all
that are gifted may preach and give Sacraments.

5. That it is not lawful to take an oath, though demanded by the Magistrate.

6. That no Christian can with a good conscience, execute the office of a
Magistrate. All which though I have here and there plainly, though cursorily
confuted, yet I shall do it at your request more particularly.


Mathe. I pray do so.


Phila. First, I shall prove that Infants ought to be baptized. 1. Because it
bears analogy with Scripture: for God thought fit in making a Covenant with
Abraham, to institute a Sacrament, by which infants as well as elder people,
might be admitted into his Church; which Sacrament was Circumcision. Then
surely God having by his son Christ abolished Circumcision, would not leave
those who are the children of Abraham by faith, Gal. 3.7. without some
Sacrament, by which their children also might receive the same benefit, Calv.
Insti. l. 4. c. 16. part. 6.
unless the Gospel has less liberty then the Law, which Christ denies,
laying, I am come that ye might have life more abundant, and then surely the
means of life also, namely baptism, for circumcision is so called, Col. 2.11,
12. circumcision without hands.


Mathe. But baptism of Infants is no where commanded in Scripture.


Phila. It is not necessary to be injoined in so many words, because there is
sufficient warrant for it, by bearing a proportion with circumcision, the sign
being only changed. In many such cases the Scriptures are silent, leaving men
to draw consequences of practice from general propositions. As for example,
when Christ says, except a man be born again, does he not mean a woman as well
as man? or because he said only to his Disciples at his last supper (where
there was no woman present) Do ye this in remembrance of me, may we not
therefore give the Communion to women without a special warrant, I suppose no
wise man will say so. And so also for keeping the Lords day there is no
command, nor yet to rebaptize any, which yet the Anabaptists do ordinarily
practice.


Mathe. But children can make no profession of faith or repentance, as those
did that came to John the Baptist, Mat. 3. and therefore are not I think to be
baptized.


Phila. Yes surely, because they are the seed of such as profess true
religion, and so are within the covenant and promise made to the visible Church
and her seed in Abraham, Genesis 18.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed. Which word (nations) compriseth young and old, every one in
their model and capacity of blessing; therefore circumcision was the seal of
Abraham's faith, Romans 4.11.
which he had before he was circumcised, was given to Isaac as the seal of that
faith which he had faederally as the son of Abraham, and was to appear in him
actually after his circumcision; and so baptism may be lawfully given to
infants now under the Gospel, though they be not circumcised, Romans 4.11, 16.


Mathe. But Christ says, go teach and baptize, inferring that they should be
taught, and be capable of teaching before they be baptized.


Phila. No such matter: For that direction of Christ, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all
nations baptizing them. The word translated (teach) signifies properly
(disciple them) which may be done by this Sacrament of entrance into Christ's
school or Church, and therefore teaching is set down by another word after
discipling, (...).
in verse 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.


Mathe. But we read not of any children baptized in the New Testament.


Phila. True, but we read of whole households baptized, as Acts 16.33. the
Jailor, and all that belonged to him. Among whom if you will say there were no
children, because they are not set down, I reply, there is no women nor
servants set down neither, and so then the Jailor was the whole family; and
Lydia, and Stephanas, were their whole family. But certainly Paul would have
set down the omission of his baptizing children, if he had omitted them in
those families, since that he is so exact in telling us what households he did
baptize. 1 Cor. 1.14.
And truly if the want of a peculiar command or practice in the New Testament,
should exclude Christian children from baptism, we are left in a more
uncomfortable estate for our children, then the Jews were. But where the
equity of the law remains, there the law is still in force; and where is the
same reason, there the same thing may be done for substance, though the
circumstance may differ. And I am sure our children have as much need by
baptism to have sin washed away, as theirs had by circumcision to have sin
cast away.


Mathe. But that promise of God, Genesis 17.7. of which circumcision was the seal,
was made only to Abraham and his seed by nature.


Phila. If it were so, why is it not kept; for the Jews are cast off from
being Gods people; therefore that everlasting Covenant was and must be
understood of Abraham's children by promise, not by nature, and so believers
being within the Covenant, may rightly claim the seal of the Covenant for their
children; Cyp. l. 3. ep. 8. Aug. ep. ad Dard. 57.
which seal baptism is to the Christians children, as circumcision was to
Jewish, the one corresponding to the other, even as the cloud and the red sea,
in which they and their children were all baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, Tertul. de
Resur. sarnis.
2. typed our baptism. Beside, is it not reason that those to whom the
Kingdom of God belongs, should be received into his Kingdom of grace, the
Church. And that children are such, Christ shows plainly, Mar. 10.14. And
that they were little infants it is plain, for he took them in his arms. Nay
farther, the Apostle says, that if one of the parents be a believer, their
children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and if so, then surely they are capable of the
Sacrament of entrance into the Church: nor are they so called holy, because
they are legitimate, (...).
or born in wedlock, for so an heathens child may be as holy as they; but holy
as heirs to the covenant, the virtue whereof is so powerful, that it can
rather entitle a wife, by an husband, or a husband by a wife unto it, and
therefore much more the child than contrary.


Mathe. Has baptism of Infants been from the Primitive Church or not?


Phila. I conceive it has, because no man can tell when it began, but we find
by all ancient writers and Churches, Aug. l. 4. ^^ bapt. infant. and l. 10. de
genesis ad lit. c. 23.
that it was practiced in their times, and things of that nature were always
held to be of some decree of a general Council, or else of Apostolical
tradition. Some would bear you in hand, that Pope Innocent the third brought it
in first, who lived about the year 1213. which is about 356 years since,
whereas we read of childrens baptism 1000 years before that. For Origin that
lived about 226 years after Christ, alleging, Ps. 51.5. Orig. in Com. in Ep.
ad Romans cap. 6.
In sin my mother conceived me, says, that for this cause the Church received
a tradition from the Apostles, to baptize children. Many of the ancient
Fathers, as Austin and Jerome, mention this custom of the Church against those
that denied original sin, 1 Cor. 15.
as St Paul instanced in the baptizing of the dead, to refute those that denied
the resurrection. So St Cyprian about the year 250. affirmed that children
might be baptized before the eighth day. And the Milevitane Council decreed
such to be accursed, that denied children baptism, especially if sick, or in
danger of death. And Irenaeus before this the Bishop of Lions, Iren. cont. Her.
cap. 39.
the Martyr and Disciple to Polycarpus, who was scholar to Saint John, wrote,
that children as well as elder people, were saved by their new birth in Christ
(viz.) by water and the spirit. And from those ancient times, look upon all
Christian Churches confessions and practice from the beginning, you will find
it always in use. As 1. Among the Greeks (who do annually excommunicate the
Pope) to whom St Paul was preacher. 2. The Russian punishes all with death
that refuse or deride it, or neglect it, and yet call the Pope an Heretic,
which I think they would not do, if they had received baptism from him. To
these St Andrew preached. So the Abyssins and Aethiopians, who received the
Gospel by St Matthew. So the Armenian Christians, to whom St Bartholomew
brought the blessed tidings of the Gospel. So the captive Christians in
Egypt, who received the Gospel by St Mark, and yet have no communion with the
Pope. So the Indians to whom St Thomas preached. So did the Britains, who were
taught by Simon, Zelotes, with other sorts of them; and it being so generally
received, one may wonder with Erasmus, what devil entered them people that
forbad baptizing children, which had been evidently done, above 1400 years.
Beside, as we find it done long before the Popes corruptions came in, so we
find it still used by those that are reformed from Popish doctrines; even the
Protestant reformed Churches, as you may see in all their Confessions and
Articles of Religion, as well in England, as France and Germany, as the French,
Galatius de exord. Anab. l. 8.
Helvetian, Bohemian, Dutch, Saxon, and Augustan Confessions; all which States
and Churches have punished with death those of contrary opinion, that either
have denied baptism to children, or rebaptized any. Cod. Just. lib. 1. tit. 7.
Justinian the Emperor made it a law. At Vienna they drowned them. England
has burned them.


Mathe. But they say that they rebaptize, because they were not rightly
baptized before. And they were not rightly baptized, because they dipped them
not.


Phila. This is indeed one of their tenets, but surely to baptize with (though
not in) water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, cannot
be denied to be true baptism; the washing, sprinkling, or drenching, is but
the circumstance only; and therefore one may fully and rightly be baptized
without dipping, as I have already showed you from the original word, (...).
which has diverse significations, and signifies as well to die colors and
wash, as well as to dip. And whereas they urge the word ((...) in) always to
signify (in) because it is said John baptized in Jordan, yet they may find it
in the third of Matthew to signify (with) where St John says of Christ, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, (...).
and with fire. Beside, they consider not the place where they were so baptized
in the Primitive times, which was an hot Country, where it was ordinary for
people to wash themselves often in a day; nor the time of the first age of the
Church, when they had hardly Churches or Font; nor consider they the multitude
of converts, which could not be well baptized, but in places of much water, as
Aenon was, where John baptized. If we should use the same way now, and in these
cold Countries, it might be the death of many tender creatures. I know they say
our children may stay while they be older, Christ was not baptized till he was
thirty years of age. But they consider not that Christ could not be baptized
sooner, for John was but new sent with commission from God to baptize; nor they
perceive not, that by deferring it, that they endanger the child's salvation, it
wanting the means appointed, whereby they should be brought to Christ their
Savior.


Mathe. Were not these tenets held by some in the Church before Anabaptisme
sprung up in Germany.


Phila. Yes, for about the year 250. after Christ, some taught that all that
were baptized by Heretics, ought to be rebaptized by the Orthodox Ministers of
the Church; and their reason was, because Heretics themselves had no part in
the Church, and therefore could give no baptism. Cyprian.
Of this opinion was St Cyprian, a Bishop of Carthage in Africa, martyred in
the days of the Emperor Valerian, who beheaded him. Against him Stephanus
Bishop of Rome, opposed himself, by calling a Synod at Rome against it, which
concluded that according to the tradition and custom of the Church, heretics,
and those that were baptized by them, might be received into the Church upon
submission and recantation of their errors without rebaptizing. And I believe
this opinion of Cyprian has been the ground of the Anabaptists rebaptization,
who will not recant it, 1. Council. Nic. Can. ^.19.
though St Cyprian is reported to have recanted his, which they might well do,
if they would distinguish of heretics; for some heretics destroyed the
foundation of faith, as the Samosatenians, who said that Christ was not of the
substance of the Father, but called the Son of God, only for his virtues. So
the Arrians, who denied the consubstantiality and coeternity of Christ with the
Father, and such as did deprave the form of baptism, saying, I baptize thee in
the name of the Father, by the Son, Niceph. hist. l. 10. c. 35.
in the Spirit; the baptism of such indeed is vain, and no baptism; but the
baptism of those that hold the foundation of faith, as the Novatians did, but
built not rightly upon it, yet kept the true form of baptizing: such might be
admitted into the Church again, without rebaptization, because there is but one
truth, faith and baptism.

Again, another error rose up about the year 380. Donatus.
by Donatus and his disciples. Donatus was Bishop of Numidia, and held, that
the true Church was only among those in Africa that held with him, contrary to
that universal donation which God gave to Christ by promise, Psalm. 2. I will
give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession; Optatus.
whom Optatus Bishop of Milevitane confuted in the time of Valentinian the
Emperor. Also this Donatus affirmed, that all that had been baptized in the
universal Church, save by those of his party, ought to be rebaptized; whose
error the Anabaptists still follow. These were worse then the other; for they
were not only schismatics, but heretics also; for they denied that Article of
the Creed, which confesses the Church Catholic; yet our Brownists and
Anabaptists in these latter times follow their steps, by refusing communion
with the Church of England, and in their uncharitable censures, of all that are
not of their party; Aug. ep. 50.
as also in defacing the Churches, and breaking down Communion Tables: for a
third error sprung up 1525. by the Anabaptists in Germany, of whom I have
spoken already. They held that children ought not to be baptized til they came
to ripe age, and can give account of their faith. These are very deeply plunged
in this old error, yea, more then any of the former; for they not only nullify
all baptism by Papists or Protestants, but deny baptism to infants also,
which neither the Novatians nor Donatists did.


Mathe. But what say you to the third tenet, That there ought to be no set form
of Prayer or Liturgy in the Church.


Phila. I shall prove that such set forms may be in the Church. 1. By
Scriptures. 2. Antiquity. And 3. By reason. 1. By Scriptures. Liturgy proved
lawful.
God set a form of blessing the people, Number. 6.23. So of confession, Deuteronomy.
26.5. and of prayer, Hos. 14.2. and Joel 2.17. And therefore the Church may
imitate God in this, she having the spirit of supplication poured upon her,
though such forms be not indicted to her by immediate infusion. Beside, we find
in Scriptures, that holy men of themselves did without any prescription from
God, set down forms of prayer and praises, as Moses, Number. 10.35, 36. and David
set Psalms to be sung at certain times, as Psalm. 92. a song for the Sabbath
day, and Psalm. 102. is a Psalm for the afflicted. So we find some called Psalms
of degrees, which they sung when the Priests went up the steps to the Temple.
This they did, and yet no doubt could pray by the spirit also. In the New
Testament also, Cyp. de orat. dom.
Christ not only set us a rule to pray by, Mat. 6.9. but as a form to use, Luke
11.2. When ye pray, say our Father, etc. And Christ used a form thrice, saying
the same words, Mat. 26.39. So the Apostle used a form, saying, The grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ be with you, and so in many Epistles.

2. It may be proved by antiquity, and modern history, that the Churches from
the Apostles, had set forms, that they might with one mind, and one mouth
glorify God, Romans 15.6. And some think that the form of sound words committed
to Timothy, was some symbol of faith, or form of Liturgy. But however it is
plain, that in the first hundred years, Victorinus Sciaticus in praef. Laturg.
Clem in Epi. ad Corinth. Hegesippus.
both the Greek and Latin, East and West Church had set forms, which some
write they received from the Apostles. And surely James chosen Bishop of
Jerusalem, by the Apostles, had not the name of Liturgus given him for nothing;
some say from a Liturgy that he composed. So likewise in the next age we find,
that the Christians met every Lords day, and had certain select places of
scripture read to them, and had common prayers, beside the ministers particular
conceived prayer, and also sung Psalms. So Ignatius writing to the Magnesians
(an Epistle generally confessed to be his) says, Just Mart. apol. 2. ad.
Antoninum Imperat.
and charge them to meet all in one place, and to have one common prayer, and
to meet in one faith, and one hope, unblameable in Jesus Christ, and so to run,
as if all were but one to the Church, as to one Altar, and one Jesus Christ.
This man suffered martyrdom in the year 107. after Christ. And as in the
former times they had their common prayers, (...). Tertul. apol. c. 30.
so they had also prescribed prayers, as appears in the forms of their prayers
for Emperors, recited by Tertullian, and the short antiphonas and responsories
which we find in St Cyprians, which are retained in our Liturgies to this time,
Magd. hist. cent. 3.
(viz.) Lift up your hearts, says the Minister at the Communion, the people
answered We lift them up to the Lord. He lived about the year 250.

Then next in the time of Constantine the great, about 300. and odd years after
Christ. He commanded prayers to be made in a set form for the welfare of the
Empire, Euse. Eccl. hist. lib. 4. c. 19.
and the propagation of the Gospel, and thanksgivings, for that God had given
him victory over all the tyrants and persecuters of the Church; and he himself
made a form for his soldiers to say every day.

And farther, the Council of Laodicea, about 368. called after the death of
Jovinian the Emperor, set down rules that one and the same service should be
used morning and evening. And when some began to make use of extempore prayers
of their own, and left the common forms, then the Milevitane Council assembled
afterward in the reign of Arcadius, about some 400 years after Christ, whereof
St Austin Bishop of Hippo, was president, and wherein the heretics, Pelagius
and Caelestius (who held that man had power and free will to do good without
the support of grace) were sufficiently confuted. This Council I say made
orders, that none should in the Churches use any other prayers, but those that
were composed by the Synod; and gives this reason, lest some by ignorance, or
want of care, might utter something in the Church that might be dissonant from
the Catholic faith; to which order not only Presbyters, but also Bishops, were
to be subject.

After this in the next age Basil and Ambrose, Chrysostom makes Liturgies for
their Churches. And in the next age Gregory and Isidore did the like, by
collecting from former Liturgies; which kind of form Calvin himself approves,
and wishes that there might be such a form, from which no Minister might
depart.


Mathe. Yet Calvin and his followers are against the Liturgy and discipline of
the Church of England, though it be a reformed Church, even as the Papists are
against Luther and him.


Phila. It is true, Mr Calvin's Reformation.
yet both Luther and he have been great refiners of Christian Religion from
dross and rust of superstition which cleaved thereunto, and mud, which it
collected by running through the dirty channels of Rome, that spiritual
Babylon. It is true, that he being bred to the Civil Law, yet studied
Divinity, wherein he proved a great proficient, as by his writings appears;
in all which he consents with the Protestant truth professed. He having
occasion to leave France, came to Geneva, which City had lately been abandoned
by the Bishop and Clergy thereof, for fear of the people who began to rise
against the popish religion there. Their civil government was by Magistrates
chosen yearly by the people; and for Church Government they had then agreed
upon none: but they chose Calvin for their Preacher, and Divinity Lecturer. He
with two other Ministers, persuaded with some ado, the people to bind
themselves solemnly by oath. First, never to admit Popery again. And secondly,
to obey such orders, in the exercise of Religion, as himself and the other two
had contrived according to the Word of God. They consented, and yet within a
little while repented of it. And because Calvin and the other two Ministers
would not administer the Communion to those that denied quiet obedience,
according to their oath; those three, Calvin and his two associats were
banished the Town; but within a few years they called him in again. He told
them, that if he undertook to be their Pastor, they must admit a complete form
of Church Discipline, and should be sworn for ever to observe it. The order
was, that there should be an Ecclesiastical Court erected, which should be
always standing, that should consist of one Clergy man certain, and two Lay
men annually chosen, which seemed much to content the people, they being
always to have the more voices; but Calvin knew that the Ministers had ods
enough, having both art, learning, and the tongue of persuasion. At last the
people many of them disliked it, and thought it no better then popish tyranny,
and imagined that Calvin had done all this to please his fantasy; as Apelles,
that pretended to draw the picture of Venus, and made it like his beloved
Cratina: Yet considering the time and place, I see not what more acceptable
government he could have set up; therefore those people thought it better to
condescend to him, than to dismiss him to their own infamy, since they had so
importunately recalled him to them; yet not many years after, the Consistory or
Ecclesiastical Court, having excommunicated Bertelier, the Senate of the Town
releaseth him under their common seal. But Calvin resolved to withstand that
decree, at least by refusing to absolve or give the Sacrament to Bertelier,
which he resolutely did not, and in the afternoon on the Lords day, after his
sermon, took his leave of them, saying, I commend you to God, and to the word
of his grace, and so bid them farewell. They of Geneva sent to the Helvetian
Churches, for their judgment in Calvin's discipline, and whether they might
better change then hold it. It was answered, that their ordinances were godly,
and inclined toward the Scripture; and that they were better to hold them, then
to change; so Mr Calvin's discipline was accepted. And as his name grew famous,
so was his discipline taken up by the French reformed Churches, and Scotland;
and by some exalted in their Sermons so high, that they have said, that a
Minister with his Eldership, has power given from God to excommunicate even
Kings and Princes. Beza and Erastus has canvased this point of discipline. The
first says, that excommunication is a most necessary discipline; and Erastus
denies the necessity of Lay Elders, to be Ministers thereof. By others it has
been cried up for the Lords discipline, Mart. Marpr. in l. 3. p. 8.
yea, and that all Christian Churches ought to receive it, whether the
governors of it will or not. And England has been threatened by libels, that
since the Brethren cannot prevail by Petition, to Prince, Parliament and
Council, we must thank our selves if such means be used to bring in
discipline, as will make all our hearts to ache. And I believe such has been
used of late years; but the disciplinarians have been prevented of their end,
by men of an higher genius then they have. But this has been the Helena that
has caused so much sharp contentions.


Mathe. It seems that Calvin's discipline aimed at a parity of Clergy and
Laity, which is the fourth point held by the Anabaptists, of which I desire
your judgment.


Phila. Calvin did indeed make them equal in censuring others by his
discipline, but not as the Anabaptists do; for they would have no distinction
between Clergy and Laymen, no, not in exercising the ministerial office, but
that all men perform it that will, if gifted. But God has distinguished them,
as he did Aaron from the Levites, and the Levites from the Laity: yea, before
the Law there was that distinction; Melchisedech was the Priest of the high
God; and it seems very nature taught it; for Jethro was Priest of Midian: And
Egypt had Priests too, distinct from other men. And Christ said to his
disciples, go (ye) and teach all nations. And St Paul does plainly distinguish
between the Pastor and flock, Acts 20.28. and says, they that are taught
should communicate to the teacher, Gal. 6.6. for all the body must not be an
eye or tongue. Methinks the judgment that God has showed upon men usurping
that office, should be enough to convince the evil of this opinion, as upon
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.31. Upon Miriam, Vzza, 2 Samuel 6.7. and
Vzziah, 2 Chro. 26.21.


Mathe. They say there is no difference between a gifted Layman, and a
Clergyman, but only ordination which adds no power to a man.


Phila. Yes, it does; for though sufficiency, or rather competency of gifts may
enable a man to the office, yet that ability cannot authorize him to perform
the ministry, and therefore he is to look for an outward calling by his
superior; Romans 10.15.
for how can they preach unless they be sent. Now they must be sent by such,
who by a continued succession from the Apostles, can derive their ordinations,
Helver. post c. 18. Bohem. Confess. c. 9. Aug. Confess. art 14. Wittemb. Con.
art. 20. Bern. in Cant.
which was long before the Church of Rome fell from the faith, even 1600 years
ago; which calling of Ministers has been followed by England, and the reformed
Church, who will suffer none to meddle with the administration of holy things,
without constitution. Against whom St Bernard speaks well, saying, They become
masters of the unlearned before they have been scholars of the learned; and so
are more ready to speak, then to hear, and apt to teach that they never
learned, and pour out, before they have any thing poured into them. It is true,
that it is prophesied, Joel 2.28. I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, yet
that was not meant upon all alike; for when it was fulfilled in Acts 2.15. it
was not given to all, but to the Apostles only: yet there was under the Gospel
a greater measure of knowledge given to teachers and hearers, then under the
Law, yet it follows not that all sheep should be shepherds. So we read of
some extraordinarily called, as Amos was an Herdsman; but such things cannot be
brought into ordinary imitation, no more then soldiers can expect to batter
down walls with rams horns, or rout their enemies with breaking of pitchers, as
Gideon did the Midianites. But if Anabaptists calling to preach, be ordinary,
let them prove it by Scripture; if immediate from God, by a miracle.


Mathe. I remember for the fifth Question, about an oath you have in some
measure satisfied me, yet I shall be willing to hear farther of the lawfulness
of it.


Phila. Surely if it be a part of Gods worship, as I have proved, then sure it
may be taken. 2. It may be and ought to be the end of controversy, says St
Paul. God commands it, Heb. ^.^^.
Deuteronomy. 6.13. and the 10.20. and rewards are promised for so doing in truth,
righteousness and judgment, Jer. 4.2. See Jer. 12.16. and Psalm. 63.11. It is
Christ says, Mat. 5. swear not at all; but that is meant by ordinary and
customary swearing, common in those times, not religious oaths, Calvin instr.
cont. Anab.
but swearing by the creatures. I know the chief they deny, is called ex
officio, whereby in a criminal business one is bound even to betray himself:
yet God imposed this upon the Jews, Exodus 22.11.
and Christ obeyed it before the High Priest, Mat. 26.63, etc. It is meant that
by law no man is bound to betray himself, true, but that is to go to the
Magistrate, and accuse himself: but if he be brought to him, and urged by oath
to clear, or else to betray himself, I know not how he can refuse it.


Mathe. Concerning the lawfulness of taking upon a man the office of a
Magistrate, which is the sixth Question, has been declared before, except you
please to add any thing more.


Phila. I say no more, but I think with St Peter and St Jude, that such are
presumptious and selfe-willed, and under a show of humility and declining
authority, Calv. instr. adv. Anab.
do despise government and dominion, because as they despair to attain dignity
themselves, they would have them despised that have it; but such says St Jude
shall perish in their own corruptions. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
For Magistracy was ordained of God to decide controversies, to punish the
evil, and maintain the good, Romans 13. and we have as much need of them among
Christians, as the Jews ever had, because the same lusts do strive in our
members, whereby we should be too apt to transgress both Law and Gospel, by
avenging our selves, Romans 13.
if there were not a magistrate appointed to be the avenger of wrath. Beside,
we find God to abet magistrates both by his title given to them, Gods, and also
by his providentiall presence among them, Psa. 82.1, 6. and by his direction of
them in the execution of their office, saying, you judge not for man, but for
the Lord, who is with you in judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. As also by a blessing
promised to the Church by them, Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and to want magistrates, has been threatened as a great judgment to a land, as
Judge. 17.6. Isa. 3.2. Hosea 3.4. and though the Anabaptists would persuade you,
that the reason of magistrates being over the Jews was, because they were a
stubborn people; yet if you examine the Anabaptists seditions and tumults, you
will find them to have as much need of governors, as any people; for their
commotions in Germany have been the death of one hundred and fifty thousands;
Portanus Catal. Here Is.
and at any time if they got any peace or security, even nature and reason
leads them to set up a superior, Lamb. Hort. p. 31.
and so John of Leyden was made King of Zion by themselves, and one
Cniperdolling, and Tuscocuver, false Prophets. And beside, we find the
authority of Magistrates, though heathens, established by the Gospel, Tit.
3.1. and Christians charged to pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.1. and therefore
certainly their office is lawful, since we must pray for them, that we may
live a godly and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And therefore
much more may Christians have, and pray for their proper magistrates; Psalm. 2.
and Christian men may entertain the office of a magistrate, and be not only
subject to Christ's scepter, but also may be a great means to advance the
Kingdom of Christ. And though Christ say my Kingdom is not of this world, yet
he means only that his Kingdom is spiritual, ruling in the hearts of men, or
glorious in heaven, not on earth; not by that speech intending that Kings
should have no temporal government, no more than he intends that Christians
should have neither houses nor lands, because the Foxes had holes, and the
birds had nests, but he had not where to lay his head. And what though Christ
refused to be made a King, so to be a Judge between brethren, nor to condemn
the woman taken in adultery, yet those acts of Christ warrants no man to refuse
magistracy. For first, Christ refused to be made a King, because the Messiah
Kingdom was not to be temporal; and also because Iudea's Kingdom by Gods
permission, was swallowed by the Roman conquest, and turned into provinces.
Likewise if he had accepted of it, the people had no power to perform it, but
he had made himself and them guilty of sedition, and so brought scandal upon
the Gospel, and the peoples lives to danger, if not destruction. Beside, he
came to be as a servant, not a King, and therefore in accepting Kingship, he
had overthrown his own design: so he refused to judge between the two brethren,
Luke 12.13.
because he was not called thereunto; for says he, who made me a judge, or a
divider; not but that it was a blessed office to make peace, Mat. 5.9. and
warrantable enough to end controversies, in St Paul's judgment, 1 Cor. 6.2. But
Christ was not sent to that end, and therefore refused to do it, teaching us
ministers especially to follow our calling, and all men not to meddle in
secular affairs without lawful commission. And again, he refused to judge the
woman taken in adultery. First to avoid the Pharisees snare laid to catch him,
either as a contemner of Moses Law, if he had not concluded her worthy of
death, or a usurper of Judicature, if he had authoritatively condemned her; he
therefore evades it, by putting them in mind of their own sins. I know some of
them do farther object, that we read of none in the New Testament that took
secular offices upon them, yet that will not prove there was none. It is
sufficient that we read of men in great office called to Christianity, and yet
do not read that they left their offices for all that, but as St Paul advises,
that every man continue in that wherein he was called; as the Eunuch,
Nicodemus, Theophilus a great man of Antioch, Publius the governor of Malta,
Sergius Paulus the Deputy of Paphos, Erastus the Chamberlain: But if there
were none such to be found, yet Christ subjecting himself to Caesar's tribute,
and Pilates judgment, argues magistracy lawful enough. To confirm you
farther herein, you may observe the practice of magistracy, and the approbation
of the office in the Confessions and Articles of all Christian Churches.


Mathe. Have these been only the disturbers of the Protestant Religion in
England?


Phila. No, I believe you hear of many more abroad, yet all of them hold
somewhat of the Anabaptists opinions or the Papists.


Mathe. I have heard of Brownists, Separatists, Arminians, Socinians,
Familists, soul-Sleepers, Millenaries, Levellers, Independents, Seekers and
Shakers, of whom I desire to be informed.


Phila. The Brownists next to the Anabaptists, Brownists.
have much troubled the Church. They are called so of one Robert Brown, who was
Schoolmaster of the Free School of St Olaves in Soathwark, Vid. Mr Giffords
Treause.
and dreamed like a Donatist, of a singular separated Church from the
Catholic, and imagined he must erect it or separate from the English Church.
Mr Fox that writ the Martyrologie, looked upon him as one that would set the
Church on fire; vet he found followers, and preached to them in a gravel pit
about Islington. He departed our of England, but returned again, and repented,
and died a member of the Church of England, and Parson of a Church in
Northamptonshire, and if I mistake not, was called A-Church; and if so, then
he that would be of no Church, died Parson of A-Church. But he had poisoned
many which proved Separatists, not only from the Church of England, and all
other reformed Churches, but even one from another, as the two Johnsons did;
Profane Schismat. p. 60.
the younger libelling upon the Elder in print, with many opprobries; the elder
cursed his brother and father with all the curses of Gods book. This separation
they confirmed with excommunications, nor would Francis be reconciled to his
father at his death, but sent him even to his grave with the curse. These in
their separation agree with the old Donatists, and new Anabaptists, in
conceiving that they be only the true Church, and that the Gospel is preached
no where, nor by any truly but themselves, and therefore will receive the
Communion with no other; and they that have gifts may preach; and that in the
Church there ought to be a parity; and will not serve God in Churches, because
they have been defiled with Popery; as if the Babylonish garment, and the gold
of Jericho, may not be consecrate to God, though it have been to an Idol,
since the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. We are by nature worse
then any Church can be made, yet God accounts us holy when we are dedicated to
him. St Paul did not think himself the worse defiled, because he sailed in the
ship called Castor and Pollux, two of the heathens gods. They will not say the
Lords Prayer, nor endure spiritual governors, nor allow payment of tithes,
though God did, and neither Christ nor his Apostles gainsaid it. 1 Cor. 11.8.
Nor do they love any ancient customs of the Church, as Fonts, nor Churches
themselves, which they call steeple houses, nor bells, nor Organs. It may be
they would be called together like the Turks, by a Crier on the top of their
Meschilis; or as some Sects have been by a great Horn. Or had rather sing out
of tune, then be directed to make a comely symphony. I have read of a people
that love to do the best things in the worst manner; Herodot. hist.
as to make their mortar with their hands, and mould their bread with their
feet. They are very erroneous about Gods attributes, accounting some of them
not essential; as that love is not of the being of God, but that the same love
is also in us, 1 John.
yet St John says, that God is love. Yet are they very uncharitable in not
suffering husband and wife to forgive each other a fault of incontinence,
though willing to live together, but will excommunicate the innocent party, if
the or she do forgive. Yet sure God gives such an example, Jer. 3.1. in a
higher case of mercy in himself, though he allows not that a woman divorced
and marrying another, should be received again of the first husband; but
shows, that he having not divorced the Church of Israel, he would receive her
again, though she had spiritually committed adultery with Idols. They be
extreme virulent railers upon our Church and all her Rites; so you may know
their spirit by their tongues, and from whence it is fiered. They magnify
their own Sect, as Simon Magus was by the Samaritans to be the great power of
God: Proph. Schism. p. 76.
but I leave them to canvasse one another, as Mr John does Mr Robinson and and
his Deacon, whom he calls Noddies, Nabalites, Doegs, Pharisees, Shimeites, etc.
They also pretend Scripture, for that which Scripture never allowed: as to have
ordination and excommunication by the multitude: that the people should choose
their Pastor: that a Pastor and a Doctor distinct in office, should belong to
every Assembly. They avoid our Congregations as profane, Proph. Schism of the
Brownists. p. 20. p. 27 30.39.
but let who will look into their profaneness and equivocations to excuse
wickedness, and let him forsake the English Church if he can. Their singing is
confused, and yet not every day a new song, and so the spirit is confined in
their Psalms, for which they condemn set forms of prai^r. Their prophesying is
but censuring other Churches, sometimes applauding, S^ Mr Simson complains of
Mr A nsw. Church.
and sometime contradicting one another, and by that have been divided into
diverse sorts, and called by diverse names, as Barronists, Wilkinsonians,
Johnsonians, Ainsworthians, Robinsonians. They have been noted to be extreme in
correction of their servant-maids, yea, The story of Stedley and Mansfeld.
their wives with as much undecency as severity. But I will not trouble my
self nor you with such relations, but rather desire you to take heed of
Schism and Heresy. 1. Because of the evil of it in it self. 2. Because of
the punishment God has brought upon such.


Mathe. I pray let me know that.


Phila. First, Heresy and Schism is a greater sin against humane society,
then murder, for that destroieth but some men, but Heresy and Schism
destroieth, or endeavors to destroy the Church. 2. Murder can but destroy
the body, but this the soul. Murder destroies only natural life; but this
destroieth life spiritual and eternal. Beside, Heresy rents a man from the
truth, and Schism from the communion of the Church, and so breaks the bond of
unity and charity, by which God is forsaken as well as the Church: and if they
think to maintain these rents they have made from the Church of England to be
lawful, let them tell you what Church has less error, or less evil
manners, and yet maintains none, either by her doctrine or authority, I believe
they will find even the Church of Corinth, and many of the Churches of lesser
Asia, to be guilty of greater error and worse manners, then the Church of
England was, when they separated from it; and yet Paul calls one the Church of
God, and Christ in the Revelation does call the other Churches: yet these men
while they condemn the Church of England of tyranny, they have been more cruel
to themselves by separation, then the Church could be, or was by
excommunication.


Mathe. I pray before you tell me of their punishments, let me know what other
kind of Sectaries have vexed the Church.


Phila. Papists when they were in authority they persecuted the Church, when
they were suppressed, Papists.
then secretly they corrupt the Church. By Papists I mean not the old before
the Trent Council (or rather Conventicle) begun in the year 1546. in the time
of Pope Paulus the third, though they were bad enough, but the Papists that
sprung up since, because they have brought in new errors, as other new
Sectaries have done. As 1. Concerning free will, that it works by it self with
grace in our conversion, though the Apostle says, that the natural man
receives not the things of God. 2. 1 Cor. 2.14.
They say original sin is quite taken away in baptism, so that it cease to
be sin, yet St. Paul says, that when he does that which is evil, it is by sin
that dwells in him, Romans 7.17. So they hold, that the certainty of salvation
depends only upon hope, not on faith, contrary to John 1.12. saying, Christ
gave them power to be made the sons of God that believed on his name. They say
the merit of Christ's death and obedience is our satisfaction, not our
righteousness; but Paul says he was made to us righteousness, and made sin
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So they say we
are justified by a general faith of apprehension, by which we believe the
Scriptures to be true; but Paul says, by a particular faith of application of
Christ and all his merits to our selves, as Gal. 2.20. who died for me, and
gave himself for me. So they say a man is not justified by faith alone, but by
other virtues; but Paul says we are justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law; for indeed good works do but justify our faith, not us; nor do they
justify us as a cause, but are signs and fruits of our justification. So they
say a man may merit at Gods hands, because God has promised to reward us, and
Christ has deserved that out works should merit; but Paul refuses all for
Christ's merits, and desires only to be found in him, Phil. 3.9. and not in his
own righteousness. So they say that Christ has satisfied for our sins, and
eternal punishment belonging to them, but the temporal we must satisfy in
this world, or in purgatory. It is true, we must satisfy men for wrongs done,
this is but a civil satisfaction. So we must fatisfie the Church by some
testimony of repentance, if we have offended the Church, but we know of none we
can make to God, but only in Christ: and for purgatory after life, we find none
in Scripture, but believe as death leaves us, so judgment finds us. So they
talk much of traditions to be believed as necessary to salvation, because the
Apostle bids the Thessalonians to hold fast the traditions which they had been
taught, 2 These. 2.14.
whether by word, or by our Epistle. But then they ought to prove to us, that
the traditions which they would have us receive, are such as were delivered of
Christ to his Apostles, or from the Apostles to the Church; 2 Timothy 3.16.
or else give us leave only to hold, that the Scriptures alone hold forth to us
all things necessary to salvation. So they hold vows of things not commanded,
are a part of Gods worship; such as is a vowed single life, wilful poverty,
and blind regular obedience, which destroy Christian Liberty; and therefore
till they prove such things commanded in Scripture, they must give us leave to
hold only our vow in baptism, and to reject the other as humane inventions of
seducing spirits, spoken against, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. So they hold the
worshipping of images to be a religious work; but that is forbidden in the
second Commandment, which they have taken away and divided the tenth into two,
Pascha Raubertus first sets it forth in lib de Corp. Christi and sang cap 14.
Ioannes Diaconus in vita Grego. 1. Legend of Simeon Metaphrastes in vit.
Arsenii.
the better to bring the people to image-worshipping. So they hold Christ to be
bodily present in the Communion Bread and Wine; a strange opinion, which was at
first but at School-Question; afterward maintained by tales and fictions of
Christ appearing in the Sacrament like a little child. A shameful opinion to
subject Christ to orall eating, and gutturall swallo wing. True it is that
Christ is really there present in a spiritual and mystical manner in a
Sacramental relation to the signs, and by faith to the believing receivers:
yet I know the Church of Rome has peremptorily condemned them for heretics,
that would not hold the bodily presence. For Pope Leo the ninth, and Victor the
second, and Nicolaus the second, called Councils against Berengarius, who had
disproved it by Aug. and Scotus. Yet Pope Innocent the third in his Conventicle
of Lateran, gave it the name of Transubstantiation, and ratified the doctrine
thereof, and has been the destruction of many a godly Martyrs life, in the
time of Queen Mary. So they call the Lords Supper a sacrifice, which they call
the Mass, and it serves for the quick and dead with them. But it is not
properly so called, but only as it is a memorial of Christ's offering up
himself, or because then we do in Christ offer up our selves a living
sacrifice, or because we make an offering at that time for the Minister and the
poor. So they make fasting it self a part of Gods worship, Romans 14.17.
whereas the Kingdom of God consists not in meat or drink, nor in fasting
from it, though temperance is a good virtue in a Christian; but to set up a
necessity of formal fasting, as a piece of Religion; or to set fasting in
absteining from flesh for conscience sake, and yet at the same time to eat that
which is far more delicious, is mere hypocrisy; yet we agree in the end of
fasting, that it is profitable to make the soul more attentive in Gods
service, that the rebelliousnesse of our flesh may be subdued, and to profess
our unworthiness of Gods creatures, and to testify in humiliation for the
aversion of judgments, which we either feel or fear. So they teach that a man
may not only do all the Commandments of God, but also do more than they
require, which they call works of supererrogation. But it is said, that by
nature we are not subject to the law, neither indeed can be; Romans 8.7.
and by grace we cannot do it of our selves, but Christ is the end of the Law
to them that believe; and so we do the law only by faith in Christ, Gal. 2.16.
and thereby are justified. Again, they adore and worship Saints, and yet they
know not what knowledge the Saints have of them. Isa. 63.16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us, said Isaiah. We
may have a reverend remembrance of them, and give God thanks for their patterns
and lights of godliness to us, and we ought to imitate their examples; but to
give them civil worship now they are absent, is simpleness, and to give them
religious worship, is idolatry. I know they pretend they intercede for us, and
present men's prayers to God, which if it could be proved, it might persuade
some men to give them a petition in special, as to a Kings favorite to prefer
our suits. But we know of no mediator between God and man, but the man Christ
Jesus. So they say that if one believe the general points of faith, it is
enough; we are for the doctrins built thereupon, to believe as the Church
believes, which belief is called implicit faith. It is true, that at first we
do assent to truth out of respect and regard to the Church that relates it; as
the Samaritans did believe at first for the woman's sake, but at last for
Christ's sake. So they hold praying for the dead, John 4.42.
because they hold also there is a purgatory, where men are purged by pains,
which satisfy for venial sins, and for their temporal punishment of their
mortal sins. But we know of but one satisfaction for sin, the least of which
we cannot be freed from but by the infinite merit of the blood of Jesus Christ:
therefore no particular man being dead, can lawfully be prayed for, because he
is determined of God in his condition. So they hold the Pope supreme over all
causes and persons, Kings and Bishops, and all because he was they say, Peter's
successor; yet Peter was not Bishop of Rome, and so his succession is
surreptitious; nor would the Greek Church ever acknowledge the Pope of Rome to
be supreme, but only the Bishop of the chief See, because Rome was the
imperial City. So they say that Sacraments do not only represent to us Christ
and his benefits, and instruments whereby God conveies them to us, but also
that they have a physical force to give grace; and also that the very
administration gives grace as it is a work done, which does much invade Gods
prorogative. So they make repentance a meritorious cause of remission of sin;
but how can a temporal penance, or a finite sorrow merit for an infinite
transgression; let them show that, and they shall make many an Esau glad, and a
sullen Ahab to rejoice.

The next turbulent people are the Papists called Jesuits. Jesuits.
Their order began in the time of Pope Urban the fifth. Their patron or founder,
was Ignatius Loyala, a Spanish soldier; they pretend to Visions and
Revelations, like the Anabaptists, and say that the Virgin Mary appeared to
this Ignatius with Jesus in her arms, and persuaded him to erect this order,
upon which it seems they call themselves Jesuits, though they supplant his
Gospel wheresoever they come. This order was confirmed by Pope Paul the third;
and Pope Gregory the thirteenth gave them a place in Rome to build them a
Collegde, which cost a vast sum of money. Some say 25 tun of gold.
They have a Governor called their General, who has power to command them
what he please, and they respect his commands as divine oracles, and to send
abroad his Emissaries, who transform themselves like Proteus, into all shapes
of professions to do mischief. Their errors are very destructive to policy
and piety: for they hold the oath of allegiance unlawful, but lawful to lay
violent hands on Kings and Princes, Vid. Mariana, adv Anticot.
if the Pope do but frown upon them by his curse or excommunication. They say
that the Pope is only a Bishop by divine right, and that all Bishops hold their
power and office from him. But some Cardinals and Bishops that be Papists, Vid.
Hist. of the Council of Trent.
are not of that mind, but hold just contrary. These are by their learning the
chief maintainers of Antichrist, and all its abominations, Index Expurg.
and have corrupted the writings of the Fathers, and makes them speak what they
list. They have been the fathers of all foul plots and treasons: the most vile
cozening imposters that ever were, as you may read of their presenting the head
of a dead man to the King of the Georgians, Hist. of Grego. Hieromonachus 1626.
making him to believe that it was his mothers head, who was taken and slain by
the Persians, because she spoke against Mahomet.

Another disturber of the Churches peace in these latter times, were the
Familists, Familists.
whose patron or founder was David George of Delfe, who called himself John of
Bridges, and affirmed that he was the true David that should restore the
Kingdom to Israel. That the Scriptures were only to keep men in order till his
coming, but he was able by his doctrine to save those that would believe him;
and that he was the right Messiah, and that the spirit of Christ was given to
him; and that the Church of Christ must not be built up by patience and
suffering, but meekness and love; and that whosoever spoke against his
doctrine, should never be forgiven. He died in August 1556. though he had
promised he should never die. After him appeared Henry Nicolas, born at
Amstelrodam in Holland, who maintained the same doctrine in his own name. He
was called the New man, or the Holy nature. Vid. Disco. of Anab. errors p. 89.
They teach that Adams state of perfection may be attained in this life; and
that all of their Family of Love, are as innocent as ever Adam was; and that
the resurrection of the body is fulfilled in them, and they acknowledge no
other, like Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17. His followers accounted him the
Son of God that was to come to judge the world, and whosoever obeieth not his
doctrine shall be rooted out; and that their Family of Love shall possess the
earth, and their posterity shall remain for ever. He made himself a greater
light then Christ, and said that in his light Christ was perfected; and that he
was codeified in God, and God hominified in him, and this they count the
everlasting Gospel spoken of, Rev. 11.15. They said the speech of Christ was
made good in H.N. I must walk to day and to morrow, Luke 13.32.
and the third day I shall be perfected; that is, by to day is meant the time
of Christ; by to morrow the time of the Romish Religion, and by the third day
the time of H.N. and his Family. If you demand how this Sect came into England,
I answer, by those that translated the book of David, George called the Wonder
Book, and H. N. his book called the Gospel of the Kingdom. So did one
Christopher Viret a Joiner in Southwark, in Queen Mary's days, translated some
of them out of Dutch into English. If you desire to know more of their
blasphemous and abominable errors, you may read their confession set down by Mr
Knewstub, and Henock Claphams book, Mr Knewstub Conf.
called the error of the right hand, and of the left. They be made up of many
heresies; their conversation is full of uncleanness; they partake with the old
Adamites, of whom St Augustine writes, who in their Conventicles or Paradise,
made warm by stoves, they exercise the rites of their religion in praying,
hearing of sermons, Lamb. Horten. p. 53. Gaftius p. 222.
and receiving the Communion all naked, both men and women. Some of these have
begun to practice their naked truth (as they call it) here in England, since
the year 1642.


Mathe. But it may be, Sir, I shall not find these books, and so shall not be
able to discover them when they speak, and therefore I pray tell me some of
their errors which you can remember.


Phil. They say every one of their congregation is as perfect as Christ,
Familists opinions.
or else he is a devil; the latter part whereof, I do believe. Also that it is
lawful to do whatsoever the higher power commands, though it be against Gods
command. Herein they perform blind obedience like Papists, and the Jesuits
Novices. If a man do so, how does he forsake his father and mother for Christ.
Or why said the Apostles to the higher powers, that it was more fit to obey God
then man. So they affirm, that in saying God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, we acknowledge three Gods; not perceiving we call them so,
because they are all but one God in essence, 1 John 5.7.
though three distinct persons. Here they smell of the old heresy of Noetians,
that held there was but one person in the Godhead, as the Socinians do now.
They say there is no other heaven nor hell, than in this world among us. What
place then is that to which Christ is gone before to prepare for us? or that
fire foretold of Christ, into which wicked men must depart? So that they are
not bound to give alms but to their own Sect, yet St Paul says, do good to
all. So that there ought to be no contrary both to the Law and Gospel practice
in all ages; that there was a world before Adams time: this is to be wise above
what is written. So that they ought not to bury their dead, because it is said,
let the dead bury their dead; Mat. 8.22.
which he spoke not as to have the dead neglected, nor despising those that did
that charitable work, but to warn him that he out of too much care of worldly
ceremonies, neglect not the blessed state of life, to which Christ called him,
saying, follow me. Also, that they need not say David's prayers, because they
have no sin; but St John says, 1 John.
such deceive themselves, and the truth is not in them.

But farther, they have blasphemous opinions concerning God; as that God has
no other Deity in himself, but such as men partake of in this life. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Indeed we are said to partake of the divine nature, but that is not by the
participation of equality, but of quality, both of grace and glory, not of the
divine essence, but the holy disposition or conditions thereof. So they hold
that Christ is not a person God and man, but an estate or condition in men,
common to them only who have received the doctrine of Henry Nicholas. So they
say that Adam was all that God was, and God all that Adam was, as if God
communicated his whole essence to Adam as to Christ, which no man can well
believe. Again, they would have none baptized till they be thirty years old.
Indeed Christ was not, nor could not till there was one sent to baptize
(namely) John the Baptist. They say there was no truth preached since the
Apostles times; yes, even that which they have often heard, but perverted,
because they did not entertain it in a love thereof, and so God has given them
up to delusions. So they affirm, that the resurrection of the body is only a
rising from sin and wickedness. But St John tells us of another, Rev. 20.5, 6.
Rev. 20.6. as well as St Paul in the 1 Cor. 15. They account marriage
whoredom, where the parties married have not true faith. Yet surely it is more
holy then the copulation of H. N. with the three women in his house, clothed
all alike, and called his Wife, Sister, and Cousin; which Cousin falling sick,
confessed that he had made unlawful use of her body, and made her believe she
should never die. The Governor hearing of it, came to apprehend him, but the
unclean bird was fled, so the Governor seized on his nest in the year 1556.
even when H. N. was fifty seven years of age, Knewstub. p. 15.27.
older than wiser. As for their high conceits of H. N. that he could no more
err then Christ; and of their great opinions of their illuminated elders, I
refer you to authors. Knewstub. p. 15.27.



Mathe. Who else has disturbed the Protestant Church?


Phila. The Antinomians, so called, Antinomians.
because they hold that there is no use of the Law under the Gospel. Some say
the first author of this Sect was one John Agricola of Isleby, who set forth
his opinions, 1535. But the first that appeared here, was John Eaton, Curate of
St Katherine Colemans Parish in London. He writ the book called the Honycomb,
wherein he endeavors to prove, that God does not, nor cannot see any sin in
justified people. That he sees no sin to condemn them for, is most true, as
Number. 23.21. He beheld no iniquity in Jacob to bring him under the curse, yet he
saw enough in Israel to punish them in the wilderness. To think otherwise is
to take part with the wicked, Psalm. 10.11. God hides his face and will not see
it, and as Psalm. 50.21. because God winked, they thought he was blind.


Mathe. What be their errors?


Phila. 1. That the moral Law is of no use to believers, not so much as a rule
of life or examination, and yet Christ preaches it and presses it, Mat. 5.
and more closely then ever it was before, even to rectify the spirit and
passions, as well as the outward manners. So they say that it is as possible
for Christ to sin, as a child of God. But as Christ did never sin, so now being
glorified, it is impossible he should: but we have sinned, and though
regenerate, yet so long as we carry about this body of flesh, in some things we
shall offend, but not to condemnation. So they say that a child of God ought
not to ask pardon for sin, and it is blasphemy so to do. But I will trust
Christ before them, who taught us to say, Forgive us our trespasses; Vid. Cypr.
in Dom. Orat.
and will imitate David who did ask God forgiveness, as you find Psalm. 25. and
Psalm. 51. So they say God does not chasten any of his children for sin, but yet
sin is the moving cause, and subject of Gods punishments, though not always
the final cause of Gods chastisements, but rather for probation of faith and
patience. If these doctrins were true, these men may sin by authority, and no
conscience being made of sin, who would deal with them but upon good security?
These doctrins opening so easy a way to heaven, it is no wonder but they have
many followers: For they say that in conversion, a man's soul has no
operations, but the spirit of God only instead of them, yet Christ opened his
disciples understandings to apprehend the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. So they say
that the soul may be united with Christ, and yet he an hypocrite, yet he that
has the new man, is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
So they say that a man must take no notiee of sin or repentance, yet David
does, Psalm. 51. Also that it is a damnable error to make sanctification an
evidence of justification, yet St Paul says otherwise, Romans 8.1.30. namely,
Vid. Mr. Wels his tract.
that such walk after the spirit, and those that are justified are glorified,
i. sanctified, which is the inchoation of glory.


Mathe. How may one farther discover them?


Phila. As a Familist is best discovered by trying whether he will abjure Henry
Nicolas and his doctrine, so may Antinomians by certain phrases which they
commonly use, and by other teners which they hold very strange and dangerous,
which I have not yet told you.


Mathe. I pray what are they?


Phila. 1. That the Law or preaching of it, is of no use to drive us to Christ,
yet Paul calls it a Schoolmaster to that purpose.

2. That a man is justified without faith, and that from eternity, yet Paul
says, we are justified by faith, and so have peace with God, Romans 8.1. We know
God justifies his people in his purpose from all eternity, but it is conveied
to them in time actually by their faith.

3. That we are united to Christ by the work of the spirit, without any act of
ours, yet Paul exhorts us to give up our selves to God, Romans 12.1. and says,
that we work together with God.

4. That a man is not Christ's till he have full assurance, yet David sometime
was beside the rock, Psalm. 41. and Paul was buffeted, 2 Cor. 12.

And 5. That the witness of the spirit is without any respect to the word, or
concurrence with it. But then how shall I try the spirit, whether it be good or
bad? Paul says, believe not every spirit, then I must try it, or else believe
it or censure it without trial; and if I must try it, I must have a rule to
try it by, and that must be the word, or nothing.

6. When a man has this witness of the spirit, he never doubts, yet David
did, Psalm. 37. Psalm. 71.

And 7. Assurance must not be questioned, though one commit murder or adultery,
yet David prayed for the spirit after those sins committed, Psalm. 51. This
doctrine will make a bold sinner, and a presumptuous, insurer of himself.

So 8. They say that sanctification is no evidence of a man's good estate, yet
Paul says that holiness is the end of our calling, and if so, then holiness
is an evidence that I am effectually called.

9. They say that to see I have no grace, will give me comfort, yet St Paul
finds no comfort, seeing in his flesh he found no good thing, but rather cries
out upon himself, O miserable man, Romans 7. yea, they say to take comfort at
the sight of any grace is legal; and yet grace came not by the Law, John 1.
but by Jesus Christ, and so it is evangelicall to find Gospel grace in us, and
to take comfort in it.

10. They say that an hypocrite may have the same grace that Adam had in his
innocence, yet most conclude that Adam was created in Gods image, which
consisted in righteousness and true holiness; which two qualities no
hypocrite can have.

So 11. They say there is no difference between the graces of the Saints and
hypocrites, yet Job says, the hope of the hypocrite is like the web of the
spider, spun out of their own fantasy, and easily removed, so is not the hope
of the Saints, for it is woven out of Gods promises, which makes the Saints so
settle upon an everlasting foundation.

So 12. They say that all grace is in Christ, as in the proper subject of it,
and that we have none in us, as if Christ believes, and Christ loves for us, 2 Timothy 1.5.
yet Paul finds faith in Timothy, and Christ supposes love to be in his
disciples, when he said, if you love me keep my Commandments, John 14.15.

So 13. They say Christ is the new creature, yet Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.17.
he that is in Christ is a new creature.

So 14. They hold that God loves a man never the more for his holiness, nor
the less for his wickedness; but Moses tells us otherwise, saying, God had
respect to Abels offering, not to Cains.

So 15. That sin in a child of God must not trouble him; but surely then David
might have saved much sorrow expressed in his penitential Psalms; and Christ's
affirmation of the Angels rejoicing at a sinners repenting, may be
dis-believed, for they rejoice not at our doing amiss.

So 16. Trouble of conscience for sin, shows one under the covenant of works;
yet Paul commends godly sorrow in the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.9.
who were believers. But what if such trouble of mind do argue one sometimes
under the spirit of bondage, or the law of works; yet this may be a means to
make us sigh the more after freedom, and does commonly bring his children to
Sion by Sinai, to freedom by bondage, Romans 8.15.

So 17. They say a Christian is not bound to take the Law as a rule of his
conversation. But why did not then Christ abolish the Law, as well as fulfill
it, Mat. 5.17. or why does the Apostle say that he does not by his preaching up
faith to justify a man, Romans 3.31.
make void the Law, but establish it? surely by accepting it for a rule of an
holy life, though not either to justify or condemn us, but to walk according
to it out of love to righteousness, Romans 7.22.

Again 18. They say a man is not bound to pray, except the spirit moves him,
yet Paul says, pray continually; and Peter bids us be sober, and watch to
prayer, as if it were a duty; and if we look upon it as a duty, then we are to
do it without expecting farther incitation by immediate infusions. So they say
that the spirit works in hypocrites by gifts and graces, but in Gods children
immediately: but then they need not take heed it seems to the sure word of
prophecy, as says St Peter, which he prefers for the Churches establishment,
before that of revelation, calling it a more sure word of prophecy. 2 Pet. 18,
19.
So they pretend that a Minister that has not this new light, cannot edify
them that have it. I wonder then how the Apostles edified the Church, who had
not this new light, or dark lanthorn rather of vain opinions; for I have
showed you that they are contrary to the Apostles doctrins: or if their light
were the most saving grace of God, yet a man that has it not may edify others,
by preaching salvation to others, though himself be a castaway. So they say no
Christian ought to be pressed to the duties of holiness. This is to make the
world believe, that there is no need of preaching, 2 Timothy 4.2.
yet St Paul bids Timothy to preach in season and out of season; and Titus to
rebuke and exhort with all authority. Tit. 2.15.


Mathe. What other Sects troubled the Protestant Church?


Phila. The Arminians revived the heresy of Pelagius Britto, who lived in the
days of the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius; who held that men by nature might
fulfill the whole Law of God; and denied original sin, and said that men were
sinners by imitation only of Adams, not by carnal propagation, contrary to
Psalm. 51. And that children had no need of baptism for remission of sin; and
that the Godly men in Scripture that confessed their sins, did it for example
sake, rather then out of guiltiness; whom St Augustine sufficiently confutes;
and their tenets were condemned by the fifth Council of Carthage, in the year
419. as heretical. Also by the Milevitane Council in Numidia. The patron of
the Arminians, was one Jacobus Arminius, professor of Divinity at Leyden in the
Low Countries, in the year 1605. his followers are called Remonstrants. Now as
Pelagius being driven from Rome, came into England, and infected it with his
errors, though by the travels of Germanus Altisidorensis, and Palladius, sent
hither by Caelestinus Bishop of Rome, the land was freed from his poison. So
Arminius infected England by his writings, and his well-wishers, such as
Conradus Vorstius, but was reasonably well stopped by the diligence of King
James, in sending over certain learned and grave Divines, to the Synod of Dort.
Yet nevertheless these errors have found many favorers in England, though
they are against Scriptures, and the Articles of the Church of England.

As concerning prepestination, they deny it, by saying that it is only the will
of God to save them that believe and persevere, and that there is no other
decree of election, contrary to Acts 13.48. as many as were ordained to
eternal life believed; and Ephesians. 1.4. he has chosen us to salvation before the
foundation of the world. So To. 8.30. whom he has predestined, them he has
also called. So they say election is of faith, not of persons, but Paul says
God has called us according to his purpose in Christ before the world. 4. That
election of us to faith, presupposes in us honesty and humility, and a
disposition to eternal life; whereas it is election that causes such virtues,
and not they election: Ephesians. 2.3, 4.
for by nature we are only given to fulfill the will of the flesh, and are by
nature the children of wrath as well as others, but God who is rich in mercy,
Romans 9.11.
has quickened us, etc. for election is not of works, but of him that calls,
for he loved us first, 1 John 4.10. So 5. They say election is not
unchangeable, but a man may withstand Gods decree; Mat. 24.24.
but Christ says, the elect cannot be seduced, for Christ loses not those
that are given to him, John 6.39. and therefore the chain holds from election
to glorification, Romans 8.30. which certainly is the joy of Gods people, that
their names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20. and therefore none can charge
them nor condemn them, Romans 8.33. So 6. They make election general, which is a
contradiction; Romans 9.18.
God has mercy on whom he will. And to some it is given to know the mysteries
of Christ's Kingdom, not to others, Mat. 13.11. to babes, and not to the
worldly wise, Mat. 11.15, 16.


Mathe. What farther errors hold these Arminians?


Phila. They say that the cause why God sends his Gospel to one people and not
to another, is not only Gods good pleasure, but because one nation is more
worthy then another, Deu. 10.14, 15
yet Moses told Israel that God chose their fathers out of mere love: And
Christ said, that Chorazin and Bethsaida were a worse people then those of Tire
and Zidon. Mat. 11.21.
So they say that God ordained Christ to die without any certain determination
of saving any particular man or people, Isa. 53.10.
yet Isaiah says, that when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, that
he shall see his seed. And Christ says, I know my sheep, and I lay down my
life for my sheep. So they teach that God did not intend to establish a new
Covenant of grace with man by Christ's blood, but to make any covenant with man
whatsoever, either of works or grace: But Christ is called the surety of a
better estament than was before, viz. of works, Heb. 7.22. whereby we are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption of Christ. So they say
that all are received into grace and favor alike, in the Gospel Covenant, and
none shall be condemned for original sin, and yet Christ says, I pray not for
the world, but for those thou have given me out of the world. They say also
that God confers equally the benefits of Christ's death to men; but the cause
why some men have them, and not others, is, by reason of their free will,
choosing it, and not of Gods singular gift of mercy, effectually working
thereunto, yet St Paul says, it is not in him that wills, or runs, but in
God that shows mercy. So they say Christ died not for those whom God loved,
and chose to eternal life, because they had no need of it. But they perceive
not that they were chosen to salvation in Christ, not out of him, nor without
him, Ephesians. 1.4. And they forget that Paul said that he was loved, and yet Christ
was given for him too, Gal. 2.20. So they say that original sin is not
sufficient in it self to condemn all mankind, nor yet to deserve temporal or
eternal death; yet it is said, that by one man sin entered, and death passed
upon all men; yea more, that the fault came upon all men to condemnation, Romans
5.12, 18. So they say that holiness and righteousness was not placed in man's
will in his creation, and therefore he could not lose it in his fall. But this
is against Scripture, for Ephesians. 4.24. Paul does parallel the new man to the
old, and shows that by Christ man regaineth what was lost in Adam,
righteousness and holiness. They say also that by spiritual death, no
spiritual gift was separated from the will, and therefore it being never
corrupted (if the understanding be enlightened) it can assume her freedom to
choose or refuse any good offered to it. It seems then our parents did not sin
willingly, ignorantly they could not, they knew the command: so then if neither
willingly nor ignorantly, then they sinned not at all. So they say a regenerate
man is not dead in sin, but can hunger after righteousness, yet St Paul says
otherwise, Ephesians. 2.1. you has he quickened who were dead in sins and trespasses.
They say also that a man may use the light of nature so well, that thereby he
may obtain saving grace; but we know neither how grace can flow from nature,
whereby we may use the light of nature so well; nor how nature can deserve
grace, but is rather by divine dispensation; nor does God efficaciously afford
to every man nor people alike the same means of faith and repentance, as Psalm.
147.19. Acts 16.6. So they say, that God in man's conversion does infuse no new
qualities or habits into his will contrary to Isa. 44.3. I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring; and he promises a new
heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Psalm. 51.
which David prays for. So they say, God only is a moral agent, persuading
to conversion, but the Church does acknowledge his attractive power, Cant. 1.
draw me. So God says by Ezekiel, that he will take away the stony heart, and
change the condition of it. So they say that it is in man's power to be or not
to be regenerate; for a man may resist the power of Gods grace: but how then do
we believe, according to the mighty working of his power, Ephesians. 1.19. or how
does God fulfill all the pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with
power, 2 These. 1.11. So they say that Gods grace in conversion does not prevent
or go before the act of man's will, but free will and grace are co-workers. But
surely God has preventing grace, as well as assisting grace which a man
receives, 1 Cor. 4.7. and which works in us to will and to do, before we
have any inclination either to will or do.

But besides all this, they do much err in the doctrine of perseverance; for
they say that perseverance of the faithful is not an effect of election, nor
any gift of God purchased by the death of Christ, yet Christ makes it depend
upon election, when he says, that the Elect cannot possibly be deluded, and
that he has laid down his life for the sheep, viz. that they might by
patience and continuance in well doing, attain eternal life, Romans 2.7. and so
nothing might be laid to the charge of Gods elect: but they say the regenerate
may totally and finally fall away from their justifying faith, and that some of
them do so fall, that they perish everlastingly; but if Christ died for us
while we were yet sinners, much more being justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him, Romans 5.8. for he that is born of God sins not
( i. to condemnation) because Gods seed remains in him. 1 John 3 9.
So Christ gives eternal life to his sheep, and they cannot perish, John
10.28. yet these men say, that one regenerate may sin to death, 1 John 5.18.
yet St John denies it, we know that whosoever is born of God sins not. i.
that sin unto death there spoken of. So they say that we cannot be certain of
future perseverance without revelation, yet St John testifies, that we may
know he abides in us by the spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.24. So
they say that assurance of salvation makes men neglect godliness, yet surely
he that has this hope purifieth himself the more, 1 John 3.2, 3. So they say
that temporary faith, differs not from justifying faith, but only in
continuance; but yet Christ makes great difference of them, Mat. 13. by their
rooting and fructifying. So they think it strange that a man should be new born
spiritually, as Nicodemus; but those that are to be saved, are born anew, 1
Pet. 1.23.
not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible. So they teach that Christ never
prayed for the infallible perseverance of the faithful, yet Christ told Peter,
that he had prayed for him, that his faith fail not, Luke 22.32. So for his
Disciples, Joh. 17.11. and not only for them, but for all that should believe
by their word, John 17.20.


Mathe. What other Sectaries troubled us?


Phila. The Socinians, Socinians.
who were the followers of those two Italians of Siena in the Dukedom of
Florence, namely Laelius Socinus, and his Nephew Faustus. The Uncle declared
his opinions to Calvin by Letters; the Nephew divulged them in public
writings. It is a mixture of many heresies, namely, of the Ebionites, Arrians,
Photinians, Samosatenians and Sabellians, Servetians, and Antitrinitarians. For
after the execution of Servetus the Spaniard, who was burnt at Geneva for his
blasphemy, 1553. in affirming that only God the Father was the true God, and
that neither the Son nor the holy Ghost, is eternal God, but that the Son was
a creature, and had his beginning of existence when God created the world. Many
sucked up his venom, as Valentinus Gentilis, who printed his blasphemies, and
called Athanasius his Creed, Satanasius Creed, who suffered death in the Town
of Berne, yet he had some associates in his bad opinions, as Georgius Blandrata
a Physician, Matheus Gibraldus a Lawyer, and Paulus Alciatus. And in the year
1557. Laelius Socinus showed himself a favourer both of Servetus and
Valentinus. He had by his Letters and travels done much harm in Poland and
other places before, namely, from 1551. unto 1557. and so forward, though
closely and subtly enough, until 1562. in which year he died about the age
of 37. His Nephew Faustus fled out of Italy to Lions in France (seeing that his
Uncle Cornelius was apprehended) together with others, who have scattered his
poison in the world, wrapped up in Laelius his notes. This Faustus writ two
books, though no great scholar (as he confesses to Puccius) if he had so
little knowledge in the tongues and Arts. Socin. Respons. ad Defi. Puccii p. 49.
One book handles the authority of Scripture, the other handles the cause for
which the Gospel of Christ is to be believed. The error of this Socinus was
spread far in Sarmatia and Transylvania, Silesia, Lituania.


Mathe. What were their errors?


Phila. That there is no natural knowledge leading a man to a belief of a
Deity, contrary to Paul, who says, that the invisible things of God are seen
by things created, Romans 1.20. and that the Gentiles do by nature the things
written in Gods law, Romans 2.14. So they say Christ is not God, and yet they
give him divine worship, and so make him an Idol, and themselves Idolaters. So
they deny the Godhead of Jesus Christ, which forfeits their own Christianity,
and overthrows Christian Religion, and all divine honor due to Christ from
men. This was the heresy of Samosatenus, Bishop of Antiochia, of whom you have
heard already. How can these men be called Christians, who deny the office of
Christ? No marvel though they refuse to be baptized in the name of the
Trinity, if they deny with Sabellius two persons in the Trinity: for they
say Christ is not truly God, John 8.58.
yet Paul says, he was in the form of God, Phil. 2.6. and the character of his
glory, Heb. 1.2. and in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col.
2.9. So they say that the Holy Ghost is not God; and so Macedonius held, who
was justly condemned by the second general Council of Constantinople, in the
year 386. But if the Holy Ghost be not God, why does St. John rank him as
equal to the Father and Son, 1 John 5.7. Again, they say the Incarnation of
Christ is repugnant to reason, which I have formerlie disproved; and that it is
not fully proved in Scripture, yet St John tells us, that the Word became
flesh, John 1.14. So they say that Christ did not by his death satisfy for our
sins; yet it is said that he is the propitiation for our sins, and that is all
one, 1 John 2.2. So they say it is against Scripture to believe three persons
in the Godhead, and yet Christ institutes baptism to be given in the three
names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So they say man was not created in
original righteousness, yet Solomon says, God made man upright, but he has
sought inventions. So they say that the old Testament is not necessary for a
Christian man, yet Christ says Moses spoke of him, John 5.46. and the men of
Berea searched the old Testament to prove the truth of the new, Acts 17.11.
These are very dangerous errors, because they overthrow the foundation of
Christian faith, namely, Christ's satisfaction for us, and plainly
Antichristian, in denying Christ to be God. And also they deny the person of
the Holy Ghost. They confound faith and works together. They say the Law is
imperfect, and yet that man is justified by the works of the Law, not by the
law of faith, Romans 3.27. Also, that the soul of man has no subsistence after
death, whereby it apprehends joy or sorrows; and so consequently they may
deny heaven and hell, as things only imaginary. They stand much upon reason,
and would subject not only Fathers and Councils, but also the Scriptures to it;
and so every man does like the Pope, in being the judge of all by his own
reason. Beside, they are tied in a knot with Arminians and Anabaptists,
concerning the power of magistrates, and are one as lawless as the other. And
the Papists are well pleased with them, because they perceive them to do their
work for them, in rooting out all Protestant Magistrates and Ministers.


Mathe. What Achans beside have troubled our Israel?


Phila. The Antitrinitarians, Antitrinitarians.
who hold opinions against the Holy Trinity, and scraped up the old Heresy
of Arrius, denying Christ to be God; and with the Socinians, deny the Trinity
of persons; and that the eternal generation of the Son is against truth,
contrary to Micah 5.2. whose goings out have been from everlasting. And they
say Christ is called God, not in regard of his divine essence, but his
dominion, yet Christ says, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. So they deny
the Holy Ghost to be God, yet St Peter told Ananias when he lied to the Holy
Ghost, that he lied not to man but to God, Acts 5.3. These by some Writers
(though first sprung up in Polonia 1593) are called Legatinarians, from one
Legate, who for obstinate holding these opinions, was burned in Smithfield,
March 18. Anno 1611. and after him in April following another was burned at
Leichfield for the same heresy.


Mathe. I hear also of men called Millenaries, who pretend to antiquity, and
would prove their opinions from Scripture. I pray what are their opinions?


Phila. They are a branch of the Anabaptists in some of their opinions.
Millenaries.
Their antiquity is fetched from Cerinthus a Jew, who lived about the 96 year
after Christ, in the time of Domitian, who held with Ebion, that Jesus was only
begotten of Joseph and Mary; and that he was not Christ born, but that Christ
came upon him at his Baptism in the form of a Dove; and that Jesus suffered,
but that Christ fled away, whom St John confuteth in his Gospel. John 1.
This man pretended revelations from Angels; and held that eternal life was
here upon earth; and that after the resurrection, Christ's Kingdom should be on
the earth, and that his subjects should eat and drink, marry, and keep holy
days, and offer sacrifice, and that this should last a thousand years. Into
which error also Papias fell, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 36
the Bishop of Hierapolis, for want of observing the Apostles writings. So did
Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions in France, both men of great authority in their
times, Iren. l. 5. cont. Valent.
namely, in the first hundred years after Christ. So in the reign of Galienus,
Nepos and his followers, called Nepotiani, affirmed from Rev. 20. 5, 6. that
the godly should rise before the wicked, and should live with Christ upon the
earth in abundance of all earthly pleasures. Eus. l. 7. c. 22.
But if that text be taken literally, those godly must be beheaded, and so dead
first, and then rise again, yea, and Christ must be come first. These were
convinced by Coracion. Eus. l. 7. c. 23.
But our latter Millenaries exceed all those before them in error; for they
will not stay till Christ come, or those godly be raised, Oh that men would
study dark mysteries less, and divine duty more, the Kingdom of Christ lesus
would be the better obtained.
but say that Christ's Kingdom must be set up out of hand; to promote which,
alll the ungodly must be slain, that the meek may inherit the earth, in which
the ungodly have no propriety of estate. By which doctrine the people are filled
with mad zeal, and coveting of rich men's estates, and marking them out for
destruction by fire and sword; God keep his people from becoming their prey.


Mathe. What are our Antisabbatarians?


Phila. Such as are against the keeping of any Sabbath, whether the Jewish
Sabbath, or the Christians Lords day. Of which opinion was one Hetherington a
Box-maker, who said, not only the Jews Sabbath day was of no force since
Christ's time, and the Apostles, but also taught that every day was a Sabbath,
as much as the Lords day. But he recanted his error at Paul's Cross God be
praised. And good reason; for though the Jewish Sabbath being but a shadow of
Christ, be now abolished, and we are not to be judged by the keeping of it,
Col. 2.16.
yet the morality of that Commandment is observed in keeping still one day in
seven holy to the Lord, for delivering us from the bondage of sin by Christ's
resurrection, as the Jews kept theirs in remembrance of their freedom from
the bondage of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. And thus the Law by the Christians observing
the first day of the week, Romans 3.31.
is not made void, but established. It is true that there is no precept for the
changing of it, because there was no need; for the moral intent of the Law,
commanded only that one day in seven be kept; so that if the Patriarchs before
the Law was given by Moses, kept a seventh day in respect to the creation; and
the Jews kept a seventh in respect of their liberation from Egypt, and the
Christians keep their seventh day in relation to Christ's redemption, that
Commandment is fulfilled so far as it requires an holy seventh day. And
though we have no precept for changing, yet we have their practice and
examples, who had the mind of Christ. For the first day of the week, called
since Christ's time, the Lords day, was first kept at Jerusalem, Acts 2.1. upon
which the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles. Then again at Troas, Acts 20.7.
in which verse is declared, that it was their usual meeting day. And the holy
Fathers have always observed it, Epist. ad Magnes.
and urged the keeping of it, as Ignatius scholar to St John the Apostle, his
auditor about thirty years, the second Bishop of Antioch, and a Martyr but 107
years after Christ, in the reign of the Emperor Trajan. (...).
He says, let every one that loves Christ, instead of the Sabbath celebrate
the Lords day. And Basil says, that when all days prescribed by the Law are
abolished, yet there remains one great day of the Lord, which shall never be
abolished. Of this opinion for the seventh day Jewish Sabbath, and against the
celebration of the Lords day, Traskilus.
was one John Trask and Theophilus Brabourn, but both recanted their errors;
for which, glory be to God. Trask preached against eating of blood and unclean
creatures, upon mistake of the injunction of the first Council of the Apostles
to the Gentiles, Acts 15.2. where blood and things strangled do not relate to
such things prepared for meat, but to the barbarous or canibal eating of things
half alive, and half dead in their blood, or eating any thing that was torn
from a living creature; therefore Paul says, that every creature of God is
good.


Mathe. What are your Soule-sleepers?


Phila. Those that revive that Sect in the time of Origin, Soul-sleepers.
in the third centurie of years after Christ, who held the soul did sleep in
the dust with the body, after death, because God said to Adam, Dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return; not perceiving this was spoken of the body only,
not of the soul, which came not from thence, Genesis 2.7. And also because
Solomon says, Eccle. 3.10. that man and beast, all return to one place; yet
they might have considered, that he says also, the spirit of a beast goes
downward, and the spirit of a man goes upward, even to God that gave it,
Eccles. 12. and that the souls of the righteous are in the hands of the Lord,
Wisd. 3. In the sight of the unwise they seem to die, but they are in peace.


Mathe. What are your seekers?


Phila. Surely people that have so long contended about truth and the Church,
Seekers.
that they have quite lost it; and therefore they say there is no true Church
nor Minister, nor Ordinances; yet they expect and seek, with Lo here it is,
and then there it is, and catch at every thing, but hold nothing; like one that
leaps out of a boat into the water, and then catches at every rush and flag to
save himself.


Mathe. What are your Divorcers?


Phila. Another sprout of the Anabaptists, Divorcers.
who like the Jews would put away their wives for a small cause, under
pretense that he finds her not an help meet for him. But this is contrary to
Christ's rule, Mat. 5.31. and c. 19.9. that no man should put away his wife but
for whoredom, lest he cause her to commit adultery, or another man to marry
her, and so he commit adultery.


Mathe. Is there any more such weeds in the Churches field?


Phila. Yes surely: for I hear of some that account the Scriptures a thing of
naught, both the holy books of the Old and New Testament; such were put to
death under Moses Law, Heb. 5.28. But we live in greater times of liberty, I
may say Libertinisme. The Lord hold the reine which Magistrates let too slack,
lest these unruly creatures, hurry both the Church, chariot, and the horsemen
of Israel to destruction.


Mathe. I pray what are the Shakers?


Phila. A kind of people that pretend to have the spirit by fits. But what
spirit it is that casts them into these seeming or swooning ecstasies, I know
not; but I doubt much whether it be the spirit of God, or of Satan, or of
dissembling. I have read of the spirit of Apollo that used such feats upon the
bodies of those whom he had possessed, namely, of shaking and quaking, which
being past, they have spoken some words which have been received for his
Oracles. So I have read and heard of Nuns pretended to be possessed by evil
spirits, beyond the seas, which the Friars can expel at their pleasure. But I
never knew, nor ever read in any credible author, that the spirit of God does,
or has entered the body of men in any such manner, but has enlightened the mind
with sober knowledge, and sound repentance, and comfortable faith, and well
grounded speeches that are unreprovable, and lead them in a life unblameable.
But these Quakers, their speeches are confused, and yet perverse and
peremptory. Their lives erroneous, not knowing or refusing to use the creature
of God as lawfully they may. I find them people of no sound knowledge, yet
despising learning, and rejecting Gods Ministers and Ordinances, by which they
may be better instructed. They dare not use their own native language, as the
word you, either because the Scripture uses the word thou, or else because
they think every man their fellow. The books that some of their own have
written, show enough of their simplicity.


Mathe. Are we not troubled with some of the old Pelagians?


Phila. There have been some long ago, that held some of the opinions of old
Pelagius. Britto the Welsh man, alias Morgan, Cond. in the fifth Council of
Carthage, and in others. Pontanus Cat. Haeret.
who lived in the time of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, about the year
416. His followers of latter time are reckoned to hold many errors; as 1. That
Adam should have died by the course of nature, though he had not sinned; yet we
find that God joins death to disobedience, Genesis 2.17. So 2. They say Adams sin
only hurt himself, not his posterity, yet Paul says otherwise, Romans 5.12. by
one man sin entered, and death passed upon all men, because all men did partake
of that one sin, yea, even those that never sinned, as Adam did, ver. 14. i.
actuallie, but not originallie, as children have no sin but that, and yet die.
August. Beza.
But therefore 3. These Pelagians deny original sin in children; but how then
says David, in sin my mother conceived me, Psalm. 51. and therefore original
sin is propagated by generation. 4. They say, the children of the faithful,
though not baptized, are saved, and they shall enjoy everlasting life, but not
in heaven; but Christ says, Joh. 3. that those which belong to Gods Kingdom,
must be baptized with water; nor does the Scripture set forth to us any third
place between heaven and hell. 5. They say that men are born in Adams
perfection, stature and age excepted; yet sure they are not born in such
integrity as Adam was made, for then all would be equally wise and good when
they come to age. 6. They say men have free will by which they are enabled to
do well without Gods grace; yet says Paul, not I, but the grace of God in me.
7. Gods grace they say is obtained by the merit of our works; yet Paul says,
that they that are in the flesh cannot please God, and therefore by natural
works they cannot merit grace. 8. They say that the word grace in Scripture
does not signify remission of sin, or donation of the Holy Ghost, but the
doctrine of the Gospel. But this is found otherwise: for as there is the
doctrine of faith, Fides quam credimus, and fides qua credimus.
which is preached, Romans 10.8. and the virtue of faith by which we believe it,
and are thereby justified, Romans 5.1. So the promulgation of the Gospel is a
common grace afforded to many, Tit. 2.11. teaching us to deny ungodliness;
and next, by it is begot saving grace, 1 Timothy 1.14. the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant in me, with faith and love which is in Jesus Christ. 9. They
say that faith is the knowledge of the Law and the History, not any special
work in us, but then the faith of devils and good Christians are both alike,
Jam. 2.19.10. They say the Law is not impossible for a man to keep, and it is
satisfied by the external obedience; why then does Paul say, that by the work
of the Law no man can be justified? Romans 3.20. yet he that can fulfill it may
be justified by it, and has no need of Christ, Gal. 3.12. So 11. They say that
to pray for the conversion of sinners, or for the Saints perseverance, is vain,
because it is in the power of their own free will. But surely the will of man
has not power to revive him, though he had power to kill himself; and
therefore prayer is very fit to be used for people unconverted, and also for
the godly because of their frailties; therefore Christ bids us pray for our
enemies; and Paul boweth his knees daily for the Ephesians, c. 3.16. So 12.
They slight the doctrine of predestination, which is applauded by St Paul, Romans
8.
and comfortable to Gods people. Many other errors they hold, not worth
relating.


Mathe. But I hear of some called Independents and Levellers, I would willingly
know what they are?


Phila. Independants are those that set up a congregationall government, which
shall depend upon no other Church, Synod nor Classis; and though they be
against the Bishops, yet they would have in every Church Bishop-Independants;
and so many Parishes, so many prelacies, because they are Independent upon any
other. They are bred from Separatists and Brownists. The first of them that I
can hear of, was one Mr Robinson, who leaving Norwich, turned a rigid Brownist
at Leyden. He dying, many of his followers went from thence to New England, and
planted at Plymoth there, and spread their errors by discourse, and into old
England by letters, where they endeavor to set Church against Church, and
Conventicles against our Churches, which they call steeple houses, which were
at first set up for the honor of God and his service, though abused by the
Papists to superstition, yet are they never the worse when they are returned to
a right use; for as there is no inherent righteousness in their walls, so
neither is inherent superstition in them. It is true that Jehosaphat took away
the high places and groves, because God had appointed, and a place was
consecrated for his service, 2 Chro. 17.6.
and such high places and groves were forbidden. But they just contrary to
Jehosaphat, pull down the consecrated places, and set up high places in
chambers, and meet in the groves and woods: God give them a right understanding
in the use of Churches. Beside this, they set themselves to overthrow learning,
and to rob it of all maintenance, and the ministers of all dues, and yet ask,
wherein have we robbed God? Mal. 3.8. where God answers them, in tithes and
offerings, which God thought a fit way to maintain his Priests. And Christ
bids the Leper go show himself to the Priest, and pay his offering, Mat. 8.4.
And Paul found it was equity, that as they which did wait on the Altar were
partakers of the Altar; So that it was Gods Ordinance that they that preach the
Gospel should live on the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Yet these like Julian the
Apostate would rob the Church of maintenance, that there might be no
ministry, because they despise prophecy. Again, they allow no set forms of
Prayer, no, not Christ's form, and yet they will say St Paul's (namely) The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost, etc. Yet it has ever been the practice of all true Churches, Jews
and Christians, to have set forms, as well for the uniform consent of the
people, Romans 15.6. in prayer and in praise, as also for the confining (not of
the spirit as they suppose) but of their inconsiderate spirits to the words of
truth and soberness. Yet there was always liberty enough to show the gift of
prayer, before and after Sermon, if men could use their liberty, not as
occasion to fleshly fantasies.


Mathe. I pray what be your Levellers?


Phila. They seem to me to be like those Heretics of old, In the third century
of years after Christ.
called Apostolici, in that affected wilful poverty. These seem to do so too,
by their digging in commons, and receiving men's charity. But their new name
intimates as if they would level men's estates to make an equality, because
people did (in the Apostles days for the better propagation of the Gospel,
and sustentation of the Gospell-professors) bring their wealth, and made
distribution to every ones need. They seem now poor enough, but what they may
do when they are a fit number, I know not; but I am sure the way they take is
not warrantable, nor savours of any true knowledge of Gods providence, or of
man's prudence.


Mathe. Have all these wicked Heretics escaped without any sign of Gods
displeasure showed upon them?


Phila. No, for as he has suffered many of them to fall into foul sins, so
upon them have fallen fearful punishments. As for foul sins, many of them are
caught in the birdlime of lust. Simon Magus had one Helena; Apelles, Philumena;
Montanus had Maximilla; Donatus had Lucilia; Elpidius had Agape; Priscilianus
had Galla; the Nicolaitans had wives in common. The Popes have been as bad;
Sergius had Marozia; Gregory the seventh had Matildis; Alexander the sixth had
Lucretia; Leo the tenth had Magdalena; Paul the third had Constantia; and Pope
Joan it seems had a Paramour. The Anabaptists most unclean, because they
maintain unlawful divorces, and Polygamie, and adultery, under a color of
spiritual marriage, by which they are become all one body. But I will say no
more, there is enough discovery made of them in diverse books. But Gods
judgments have followed Heretics; Simon Magus would needs fly, and was
killed by a fall; Hayn. compend. Eccles. hist. l. 1.
Cerinthus with the fall of an house at a bath; Elymas the Sorcerer was struck
blind; Priscilla and Maximilla hanged themselves; Manes was flead alive; Arrius
voided his guts at a privy; Nestorius his tongue rotted off. And our late
Sectaries have not all escaped: for as these beyond the seas came to lamentable
ends, by wars and other executions of justice, Sleid. comment. lib. 10.
as you may read in Sleidan's, Comment. and in Pontanus, and others; so even
these among us have been marked out by Gods judgments. Puntan. Cat. Heret.
Gastius de Anab. exorb. H^res Chron. p. 456. 379. 679. 765. 766.
For as Servetus was condemned at Geneva, and Phiser suffered at Muthus;
Munerus rackt and headed by the Duke of Saxony; John of Leiden and
Chipperdolling executed, and their bodies hung up in iron cages: so you may
read in our Chronicles, of some burned, others hanged of the Brownists for
seditious books, as Barrow, Greenwood, Studley, and Billet, and Penry the
author of Mart. Marp. Bull. adv. Anab. Disco. of Brow. Brow. Donat. proph.
schism.
You may read more of them then I am willing to write, in many good authors
cited in the margent. Some women Antinomians, have brought forth fearful
monsters, even thirty at one birth; and another woman of one female with horns
and claws. See Mr Wels his book of Antinomians. And for the Antisabbatarians,
one makes mention of some that laboring on the Lords day, have had their corn
and houses burnt; and of one great man that used to hunt upon that day, had his
Lady delivered of a child that had an head like an hound; which might teach
people to take heed that their rest upon the Lords day be not vain and
fruitless, but sequestring themselves from worldly business they do on that
day, give themselves to holy exercises.


Mathe. But I find some have troubled the Church about ceremonies and forms of
government, as much as these by their erroneous opinions; as those which some
call Prelaticall, and others called Presbyterians.


Phil. I cannot deny but that the Prelaticall or Canonical Ministers have been
of late about 1635. more strict than formerly, about Church Order and
Ceremonies. And the Presbyterian has been more extreme then needed, against
the Prelatical ministry, and Episcopal government, since both of them agree
in divine truths. God has given them both a right to his house, but they
quarrel who should have the upper, or who the lower rooms, and both contend
which of them should keep the keys. The Lord make them of one heart, that the
people may be freed of those distractions, in which they are bred by their
disagreements. It were happy if all would take the counsel of Irenaeus to
Victor Bishop of Rome, who did rashly excommunicate the Eastern Churches for
dissenting from his judgment in fasting and celebrating of Easter: For he told
him they did all agree in one faith, and therefore it was more fit for him to
study peace, unity and love. This controversy was afterward settled by the
general Council of Nice, that Easter being universally kept, should also be
uniformly kept by all Churches, not on the fourteenth of Nisan, but on the
Lords day. So it had been more happy for the Church if these men had suppressed
passion and put on patience, till the State had called a national Council to
have determined those controversies lately risen.


Mathe. I pray what was the main quarrel about?


Phila. About superintendency, Liturgy, and ceremony. By superintendency I
mean Episcopacy, which word in English signifies the office of Bishops: which
word Bishop was made so odious by the envious learned, to the ignorant
Lay People, about 1641. that a Bishop was thought as bad as the Pope, either
for Idolatry or superstition; and so were decried under the color of a
Reformation by the peoples exclamations, and their government deposed before
any other was settled, which has bred divisions and libertinisme ever since.
And I conceive if envy had not overswaied equity, faults might have been
corrected, and yet the dignity of the office have been preserved, which has
been venerable in all antiquity.


Mathe. But we find them of no more authority nor antiquity then Presbyters.


Phila. I suppose you mean not Lay Elders; for they were not used till of late
years, not so much as in Ecclesiastical censures, much less in ordination,
which Calvin himself never allowed. And if you mean Priestly Elders, it will
not be found that ordination was committed to them alone without a Bishop; for
that place 1 Timothy 4.14. which says, that Timothy had the hands of the
Presbytery laid upon him, Sedulius. Hieron.
surely that was not ordination Primasius ad 1 Timothy cap. 4. Oecumen. in cap. 9.
in 1 Timothy cap. 4. (...).
of him to be a Presbyter, but of the Prelacie to make him a Bishop, or else
the laying on of St Paul hands was but imposition, not ordination, for he was
not surely ordained twice, 2 Timothy 1.6. or else both was but imposition of hands
by blessing him. Indeed the words in Greek are both the same: but ordination is
expressed by another word, Acts 14.23. and when they had ordained them Elders
in every Church, and had prayed with fasting, (...), signifies a divine
institution, not holding up of hands in a choice of any. Vid. Act. 10 41 (...).
they commended them to the Lord: Or if you will say that Timothies ordination,
though spoken of twice, yet it only shows that St Paul and the Presbytery
were associate in the work, you will hardly find Calvin so to interpret 1 Timothy
4.14. in his Institutions. But be it so, Chryl. hom. 13. in 1 ad Tim. cap. 4.
that Presbytery was a company of Elders (whereas Calvin says they were
Bishops) yet you cannot by that prove, that preaching Elders were of the same
antiquity with the Apostles, except you take the Apostles themselves only for
such Elders; nor yet that preaching Elders (saving the Apostles) were of equal
authority with Bishops.


Mathe. I pray Sir make that forth to me, that Elders or Presbyters were not of
equal antiquity and dignity with Bishops.


Phila. You are to observe that both the Office of Bishop and Elders were both
at first included in the Apostles only, as 1 Pet. 5.1. the Apostle Peter there
calls himself a co-Elder, while he exhorts Elders; yet that proves not that
Peter was only an Elder, (...).
no more then it proves that those Elders to whom he then wrote, were all
Apostles; for none durst join themselves to the Apostles in commission, Acts
5.13.
till they had ordained and appointed them; and therefore no doubt those that
ministered had their approbation and appointment first from them, except they
had an immediate call from God, as Paul had from heaven, and Ananias in a
vision to go and baptize Paul. But their ordinary way was to give commission by
laying on of hands, and ordination. Therefore we read Acts 6.3. that they
appointed the seven elected Deacons, and laid their hands upon them, though
they had the Holy Ghost before that, Acts 6.3. yet had no commission to
officiate that duty till then, Acts 6.6. So also Barnabas and Saul was
separated by command from the Holy Ghost, to the particular work to which God
had appointed them, and they were separated by the imposition of hands, fasting
and prayer, and to that work approved. So we find that Barnabas and Saul ordain
Elders in every City, at Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, Acts 14.22, 23. till
which time we read not of the word Elders, nor of ordination: which power of
ordination so far as I see, was ever kept in the hands of the Apostles, and
such whom they made superintendents over many Churches. So Paul having made
Titus superintendent or Bishop, over Creet, appointed him to ordain Elders in
every City; Calvin. Institu. lib. 4. cap. 3.
which power I find not given to every inferior Presbyter, nor yet to many of
them associated without a superintendent. I know some may say, that those that
sent Barnabas and Saul were not Apostles. I answer, though none of the twelve,
yet of the second order, namely, Apostolical Prophets, such as are spoken of,
Ephesians. 4.11. not by foretelling things to come, but by expounding the divine
oracles, Ambrose in 1 Cor 12.
who in that time were no less than Bishops; for we read not of any of the 72
Disciples, nor of any other mere Presbyters, that ever took upon them
imposition of hands; and therefore when Philip had converted some people at
Samaria, the Apostles sent Peter and John to lay their hands on them, Acts 8.
by which they received the Holy Ghost by an holy consignation, Ephesians. 1.13.
not for miraculous operation.


Mathe. What other difference is there between Bishop and Presbyter?


Phila. As they were more ancient, that by them Presbyters might be ordained;
so they were of more dignity and authority then any mere Presbyters. This
dignity and authority the Apostles kept to themselves a while; First, because
as yet the Church was not settled. Secondly, because at first few or none were
found fit for that office. But at last, lest equality and paritie should breed
schism, they set up superintendents or Bishops, Hieron. in Tit. c. 1. and Ep.
ad Evagri.
who did excel other Presbyters, both in conferring rewards, and also in
censuring manners, as in Tit. 1.5. he had power to ordain. So they had a
jurisdiction coactive and corrective transmitted to them from the Apostles, as
Timothy is bid by St Paul, to charge some that they preach at Ephesus no other
but sound doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. and to restrain profane and vain bablings, 2 Timothy 2.16. And Titus is also authorized by S. Paul, to put some to silence,
Tit. 1.11. as well as to rebuke others, v. 10. yea, to excommunicate some Tit.
3.10. Hieron. (...). Luciferi.
By this means faction was prevented, which else likely might have made in
time as many schismatics as Priests; some people crying up Paul, others
Apollos, others Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. The Apostles therefore set up Bishops in
diverse Cities, who were succeeded by others in place and authority still above
Presbyters; Aug. cont. Manich. Epi. c. 4. to, 6.
which succession has kept people still in the lap of the Church, whose
prosperity has much depended upon their power and dignity. And that there
has been a continued succession of them, the Ecclesiastical histories
sufficiently declare. And that they have been always in higher dignity then
Presbyters must needs be allowed, or else the Apostles left the Church in
unwarrantable paritie, contrary to Christ's example, who gave the twelve
Apostles an higher title then the 72 Disciples; Luke 10.
and so did they set others above Presbyters: And these we find sometimes
called Apostles, i. of the second order. Gal. 1.19.
So James the Lords brother was called an Apostle, yet he was none of the
twelve; and also many other called so, 1 Cor. 15.7. which were not of the
twelve neither. This no doubt was in regard of their precedencie; as
Epaphroditus was called the messenger or Apostle of the Philippians, Phil 2.25.
Theod. in 1 Timothy 3.
and what is that says Theodoret, but their Bishop, namely, of that Church.
The twelve are always in Scripture called the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
because they had from him their immediate divine mission; but others that had
only Apostolic ordination, they are only called Apostles, or Apostles ( i.
Bishops) of such Churches, as Gal. 1.19. and 2 Cor. 8.23. And this appears
further that such Apostles were Bishops, because Christ commends the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, for trying those that said they were Apostles, but were
not. These that were tried could be none of the twelve, for they were all known
to that Angel, if they were at that time living; but it is most like to be
some that like Diotrephes sought the pre-eminence of an Apostolical Bishop,
which was above the Presbyters in many things. As 1. In imposition of hands, or
confirmation. 2. In ordination. 3. In superiority of jurisdiction. 4. In
Ecclesiastical censure. And 5. In giving definitive sentences.


Mathe. I pray make this plainly appear?


Phila. 1. For imposition of hands, or confirmation, we find no Presbyter, nor
any of the 72 Disciples, to take that office upon him alone without the Apostle
or Bishop; and when they did so, they did it rather for approbation of the
party, then benediction. Therefore though Philip converted the Samaritans, and
did miracles, yet Peter and John were sent to confirm them, Act. 8. so did S.
Paul at Ephesus, Acts 19. which imposition of hands was not always the medium
of conveying the gift of tongues, and doing miracles, but of sanctifying and
comforting grace, and therefore called a fundamental point of Christianity,
Heb. 6.2.

So 2. For ordination, we find it still given by the Apostles, not by the
Disciples; therefore Acts 6. when the seven Deacons were chosen, the Apostles
laid their hands upon them (not any other of the Disciples out of whose number
they were taken) though they were now but only ordained Deacons of the Churches
stock, Council. Constable. in Trul. Can. 16.
not of the holy mysteries.

And 3. They had a full jurisdiction over the Church, John 20.21. as my Father
sent me, so send I you. Bed. l. 3. c. 15. in Lucan.
This was not said to the 72 Disciples, who might well be the first
representative Presbyters; but to the Apostles Christ spoke this, from whom
both Presbyters and Deacons were to take their order, which if any man with the
heretic Arrius will deny, then he must prove from whence Presbyters derive
their order. From Christ they cannot, he made none of that name; if from the
Apostles, then they must confess it subordinate to the Apostles order set in
the Church, or else they must confound Apostles and Presbyters together,
contrary to St Paul, who says, all are not Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.29.

So 4. In Ecclesiastical censures the Apostles and Bishops were supreme, as
may be seen in 1 Cor. 5.3. where by the authority of Paul, the incestuous
person is to be delivered to Satan. This was the Apostolic rod, 1 Cor. 4.21.
and as the Fathers called it, the Bishops sword, which no Presbyter did use to
handle, farther than as it was delegated to him by the Apostle or Bishop, to
denounce or declare.

So 5. In giving definitive sentence in any matter of faith, we find it still
in the Apostle or Bishop, as Acts 15.13. after Peter, Paul and Barnabas had
been heard, James (not the Apostle) but Bishop of Jerusalem, being president of
that Council, gave definitive sentence in that controversy, about
circumcising the Gentiles.


Mathe. But does this government stand still in force?


Phila. I know not why it should not, being derived from so high an authority
as Christ and his Apostles. It is true, the pride of the Roman Bishop, and the
idleness of some others, have caused the people in many places to cast off
this government, by which the truth has much suffered, and the people have
been much distracted by strange forms of government imposed.


Mathe. Has God set any certain forms of government for the Church?


Phila. Yes, in all ages: For from Adam to the flood, the discipline of the
Church was domestical and paternall; the most ancient of the family being both
Prince and Priest, by which two Offices God has always governed his Church.
The eldest son always succeeded in his fathers place, except for wickedness
he was rejected, as Cain, Cham, and Reuben. After the flood God continued it in
Shem, who was King and Priest, thought to be Melchizedeck. Next God called
Abraham, whom Melchisedeck blessed, who ruled his family like a Prince and a
Priest; so did Isaac his son, to whom the promised seed was entailed. His son
Jacob though the younger, got the blessing and birthright. He had twelve sons,
God in them severed these offices: Judah had the scepter and seed royal
insured to him; Levi had the Priesthood, 1 Chronicles. 5.2.
and Joseph had the birthright. And these three never met again in any one but
in Jesus Christ. Then after Jacob, the Church was governed again by the heads
and fathers of the twelve tribes, though obscurely in Egypt, from whence when
God had graciously delivered them, and made them his peculiar people, he
severed the tribe of Levi from the rest, to wait upon his Altar. Yet he made a
distinction of Priests and Levites, and of Aaron and his sons from the rest of
the same tribe, by committing to them the charge of the holy things of the
Tabernacle, Number. 4. v. 15. 19, 20, 27, 33.
and by appointing them over the other Levits that came of Gershom, Kohah, and
Merari, to command them their several services. And God punished those that
rebelled against this order, as may be seen in Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Number.
6.9, 10.
who accounting that order wherein God had placed them, to be a small matter,
did aspire to the Priests office, and so incurred upon themselves the wrath of
God. Beside among the Levites themselves were three principal heads named by
God himself, as Eliasaph for the Gershonites, Number. 3.24, 30.
Elizaphan for the Kohathites, and Zuriel for the Merarites. And afterward
there were other chief fathers of the Levites, that directed the rest in their
several courses allorted by David, 1 Chronicles. 23.24. The Priests also were of
sundry orders among themselves. The first dignity belonged to the High Priest.
The secondary to him was Ithamar, Number. 4.28, 33.
and his offspring, who commanded the Gershonites and Merarites to their
service. These were reckoned and called the Princes of the Sanctuary in those
things that pertained to God. And out of these were chosen by David, the twenty
four courses to serve in the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 14.
together with substitutes under them to assist in their presence, or in their
absence: Luke 1.5. (...).
In this respect Zacharias is said to be of the course of Abia (viz.) the
eighth course of the twenty four. And these in the New Testament are called the
chief Priests, Mat. 2.4. And these also were Elders and Judges in their own
Cities, 1 Chronicles. 26.
for the execution of Moses Law, and sat also with the Elders sometimes of
other Cities in judgment, for the explication of Moses Law, wherein if any
thing seemed too hard, then it was referred to the counsel of Priests, of the
Levites and Judges which sat in that place, Deuteronomy. 17.
which the Lord did choose for the Ark to rest in.


Mathe. But what is this to the Church Christian?


Phila. Though it cannot be proved by consequent that the Church Christian is
bound to the same manner of government altogether. For 1. The tribe of Levi was
not subject to any other tribe, but true Christian Ministers are, though the
popish Priests love not to be yoaked by the secular power. 2. The polity of
the Jews being contained in the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 21.19.
it was necessary the Judges should be assisted by those that had the most
skill in that Law. 3. This preeminence followed the same family by inheritance
and birthright, so not with us; yet the order that God set for some to rule
over others, is not lightly to be refused, since God saw it was the best order,
rather then to leave them to a general equality of Priests; therefore the
Sanhedrim it self consisted not of all that would come in, (...).
but of seventy choice men. But it is plain that the Leviticall discipline does
set a form of diverse degrees among Ministers, by the evident wisdom of God,
which may justly be imitated by the Christian Churches, rather then parity,
which God never approved.


Mathe. But Christ used no such way of superiority himself, nor settled any
such, as we read of.


Phila. It is true, Christ used none such himself; for he came to serve and
give his life for the world, Mat. 20. yet at that time he was head of the
Church, and was a King to rule, a Prophet to teach, and a Priest to cleanse. But
his Kingdom was not worldly, and therefore he would not reign over his Church
by his bodily presence. So he was the disciples Lord and Master even then, John
13.
and all power in heaven and earth was his then, but he did not challenge it
til his resurrection. Then he took the Scepter and Kingdom declaratively,
which he only exercises by inward and spiritual power and grace, but leaves
the external government to others, and keeps the spiritual, effectual, and
celestial Kingdom in his own hand, which by his spirit in his ordinances he
conveieth into the hearts of his people; and this Kingdom belongs only to the
person of Christ; and they that think that any man, or corporation of men,
whether the Pope or the Presbytery, succeeds Christ in this Scepter, they be
highly deceived: And for the external government, he left it to the Apostles,
who had the mind of Christ, and they did as I have showed you. They were 1.
Greater then others in Christ's favor, always hearing him. 2. In gifts of the
spirit far above others, Acts 2.
and in doing miracles. 3. They received their abounding measure immediately
from the Holy Ghost; others received their measure mediately from their
preaching, baptizing, or imposition of hands. They showed their superiority
also, by charging, 2 These. 3. commanding, to Timothy and Titus, ordaining
contributions, 1 Cor. 16. threatening, 2 Cor. 13. so St John does Diotrephes,
and their delivering up to Satan, they that followed them durst not be so bold
(though the Pope is; Ignat. ad Romanos. (...).
) for Ignatius says, I enjoin nothing to you as Peter and Paul did, they were
the Apostles of Christ, but I the least. So in another Ep. ad Trallianos, he
says, I command not as an Apostle, but I keep my self within my measure. Yet
the Apostles after they had trained up men by their doctrines, letting them
accompany them in their travels, they then left some in one place, as Timothy
at Ephesus, Titus at Creet, and gave them authority to ordain ministers, and
govern the Church, and therefore they were superior to others: for equals have
no power over their equals.


Mathe. But I find Christ forbidding superiority, Mark 10. and the Apostles
associating others with them in electing to offices, Acts 6. and assembling
Councils, Acts 15. and imposing hands, 1 Timothy 4. and in excommunicating.


Phila. It is true, that upon the two brothers request to be the chief
favorites in his Kingdom, which they supposed would be an earthly dominion,
and being rejected, the other disciples disdaining them, the Lord tells them
that they should not use civil jurisdiction over one another, as the Gentiles
did; but he does not deny degrees or diversity of administrations to them; but
he thereby instructs them how to use the authority given of God, 2 Cor. 10.
not for subversion, but edification; so that hereby he forbids them compulsive
dominion, or violent jurisdiction over their brethren, but to leave that to the
secular power. Also to be ready to humble themselves to the meanest, and of the
lowest degree to win them to the Gospel; but that all ministers are by that
place proved to be equal, I understand not, and that because as I have said,
they used power and authority above others, which they would not have done if
Christ had forbidden it: yet I conceive the Apostles among themselves were of
equal authority, and toward the brethren they carrried themselves more like
fathers, than Lords or Masters. Now for their associating other with them. It
is true, that many places of Scripture seem to make for it (viz.) that they had
the concurrence of Presbyters, and others called a Presbytery, in their
several dispensations, which will not be found so, if well examined. For
first, in the choice of Matthias, Acts 1.
it is not expressed that the Church intermedled, only Peter acquainted the
rest, that one must be chosen in the room of Judas; but whether all the
Disciples, or the Apostles only named Barnabas and Matthias, is not fully
expressed; for it is said, they appointed two, and prayed, and cast lots; which
actions are most likely to be performed by the Apostles, who were led thereto
by the spirit of God; for certainly an Apostle might not be chosen by men,
however they might put men in election for it: therefore God showed which he
had chosen (viz.) Matthias, and he was accounted with the twelve Apostles. I
believe Peter and the rest might have chosen whom they pleased, but then it
would have seemed partiality; and beside they had not yet the Holy Ghost poured
upon them, and therefore rather committed the choice to Gods providence. Acts
6.2.
So the seven Deacons by appointment of the Apostles, were chosen by the
multitude, but approved by the Apostles, ver. 6. which men were at that time
only confirmed in that office of trust, to distribute the Churches stock,
impartially to the Grecists and Hebrew widows, not to teach or baptize; and
though Philip did so at Samaria, yet he did it as an Evangelist, not a Deacon;
so here is not any appearance that these were appointed by such a Presbytery.
We grant that the people did use to show their consent in elections, by holding
up of hands, which was never held mystical or sacred, as imposition of hands,
and ordination is, Socrat. l. 4. c. 30
as appears in the peoples choice of Ambrose to be Bishop of Millane (who was
before Lieutenant of the Province) for that he had by good persuasions quieted
the tumult that was made by the people, about choosing a Bishop: After which
both the Emperor and they, desired the Bishops to lay their hands upon him; so
that it is evident, the people nor lay-Presbyters, were associated in
ordination, or in imposition of hands. So Chrysostom, one of the Ministers of
Antioch, was sent for by Arcadius the Emperor to succeed Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople, and he was chosen by the full consent of the Clergy and
Laietie, yet none of them laid hands on him but Theophilus, Archbishop of
Alexandria; Socrat. lib. ^. cap. 12.
nor does the fourteenth of the Acts from the Greek word, prove any such thing;
for the word, though by some strained, will not properly signify the holding
up of hands in election, but rather an institution of one to an office; or if
it did, yet is there no mention made in that Chapter of such gesture used by
any, except Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.23. nor does that place of Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14.
which only text names Presbytery in the New Testament, where it is said
Timothy had the hands of the Presbytery laid upon him, prove any such
association of Presbyters and Laymen with the Apostle. For first, 2 Timothy 1.6.
if Timothy were at that time made an Elder or Bishop, sure it was not by
Lay Elders, for the less cannot bless the greater. If preaching Elders shall
be understood in the word Presbytery, then Presbyters ordained Presbyters or
Bishops, which we cannot find exemplified in the new Testament. What then was
the Presbytery here? Chrysostom tells us they were not Elders, Chrysostom. hom. 13.
in 1. Tim. 4. Hi^^on. in 1 Timothy 4.
but Bishops. And for the word Presbytery, Jerome expounds it for the office
that Timothy was called to, viz. of a Bishop. So does Primasius, and Haymo, and
Lyra say, that Presbyterium is the dignity of an Elder or Bishop; yea, Calvin
says as much upon that place of Timothy; Theodor. in 1 Timothy Theoph. in 1 Timothy
Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. S. 16.
yea, Ambrose, Theodoret, and Theophylact before him; and if so, the sense must
be thus as Calvin gives it. Stir up the gift of God that is in thee, by laying
on of my hands (not of others) as if he had said, look that the grace be not in
vain which thou receivedst by imposition of hands, when I created thee an
Elder: and so confesses that he understands not, 1 Timothy 4.14. to intend by
Presbytery the College of Presbyters, but only the ordering of Timothy to
become an Elder. Indeed that the Presbytery laid hands on Timothy, together
with St Paul, no place does evidently show; and in that very place, 1 Timothy
4.14. the word has you see a diverse signification: but that St Paul himself
alone did it, that place of 2 Timothy 1.6. clearly shows, whose hands alone were
sufficient, without the hands of the others, to give one a degree above
themselves, namely, to make Timothy an Evangelist to accompany Paul in his
traveling, or to make him a Bishop, which was of no effect, and of as little
to make him an Elder or Presbyter, because the less must be blessed of the
greater, namely, such as had the grace of imposition of hands committed to
them, which Presbyters had not. Therefore the Presbytery spoken of, 1 Timothy
4.14. if a number of men, yet must be such as had Apostolic grace, Theodor. in
1 Timothy 4.
as says Theodoret; and if they had Apostolic grace, yet could they not
convey it without the Apostles hands: for though God bestowed the spirit upon
others, as well as upon them, as on the 70 disciples, Aug. in Epist. Joh.
tract. 2.
and the rest, Acts 1.15. as St Aug. witnesses, yet we read not any of them
gave the Holy Ghost by laying on of hands, but the Apostles. Therefore we read
of the seven Deacons, were men full of the Holy Ghost, before they were chosen,
Acts ^.3. and yet after that the Apostles had laid hands on them, and that
Philip preached and baptized at Samaria, Chrysostom. hom. 18. in cap. 8.
yet he laid hands on none of them, but they received the Holy Ghost afterward
by Peter and John, Acts 8.15. because this was peculiar to the Apostles.


Mathe. Why did the Apostles use imposition of hands in their instituting
Pastors and Teachers in the Church, being it was an old ceremony among the
Jews?


Phil. It was an old ceremony indeed, used in making prayers for any. As Jacob
did, Genesis 48. in blessing the children of Joseph. So Moses on Joshua, Number. 27.
So on the heads of their sacrifices, Levit. 13.4. So in accusation the Elders
laid their hands upon Susanna. And Christ did not reject it, Mark 10. he laid
his hands on children when he blessed them, and Mark 6. on the sick when he
cured them. Now the Apostle Mark 16. receiving it from their masters example
and warrant, use the same ceremony in their dispensations: as Paul on the
father of Publius, Acts 28. Ananias on Paul that he might receive sight, Acts
9. So when the seven were chosen, Acts 6. and Paul and Barnabas separated, Acts
13. they had the hands of the Prophets laid on them. So Paul on the Disciples
(that had not experience of the Holy Ghost, Acts 19.) laid his hands, and made
them Ministers of Ephesus, Beza in Annot. act. cap. 19.
whereas yet were no godly assemblies to elect them, nor Presbytery to join
with him.


Mathe. What was the general rule for elections and ordinations in the
Apostles time?


Phila. We find three sorts. 1. By the spirit. 2. By lots. 3. By voices.
Matthias was chosen by lot, Acts 1. Paul and Barnabas by the spirit speaking by
himself immediately. Acts 13.
Timothy was designed by the spirit speaking in the Prophets, who after
received imposition of hands from St Paul. By voices and suffrages I find some
propounded, Acts 6. but not ordained, save by the Apostles, and such to whom
they gave Apostolic power, as to Timothy and Titus.


Mathe. What need was there then of imposition of hands, if chosen by the
spirit, or by lot guided by the spirit?


Phila. As a testimony that they were so ordained, as the spirit had appointed.
So Barnabas and Saul, Acts 13. with fasting and prayer were separated to
convert the Gentiles, not upon their own heads, but by a solemn way they were
commended to the grace of God for prospering the work: For imposition of hands
is not always taken for ordination to be an Elder, but also for a commending
of a man by prayer to the work propounded; and so the Prophets might well join
with St Paul in prayer over Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14.


Mathe. But we find others joined with the Apostles in deciding doubts of
faith, as Acts 15.6. So in delivering some up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.


Phila. For the doubts in a point of faith of that concernment, the Apostles no
doubt were content that the professors in Jerusalem should come together; but
for the determination we find none meddling in that Council, but Peter by way
of advice, ver. 7. and James the Bishop of Jerusalem giving the definitive
sentence, ver. 19. my sentence is, that you trouble not the Gentiles about
circumcision, etc. And for delivering up to Satan, you may see it was done by
decree of St Paul upon the incestuous person, 1 Cor 5. I have determined as if
present, to deliver him to Satan. Amb. in 1 Timothy cap. 1.
As for their assembling together at his command, it was that the whole Church
might see and fear, that upon reading the sentence, the spirit of Paul being
present by the power of the Lord Jesus, Satan should plainly smite him with
some evil, Chry. in 1 Cor. 5 hom 15.
as once Peter did Ananias dead, Acts 5. and Paul, Elymas the sorcerer, Acts
13. From this it is St Paul says, 2 Cor. 10. we have in a readiness to
revenge all disobedience, and is called his rod, 2 Cor. 13.2.
1 Cor. 4. which he will not spare. This I confess was excommunication, and
somewhat more, for many were excommunicated, and yet not delivered to Satan's
power, 2 Cor. 13.10.
which was a sharp execution of that power the Lord had given him. Thus we see
the Apostles kept this power, and by their command only it was executed. Christ
gave this power of the keys only to the Apostles, John 20. and Paul being an
Apostle, used them without the authority of Presbyters.


Mathe. But whether does the power still continue, and in whom?


Phila. Some gifts were appointed to the Apostles persons. As 1. Their calling
by Christ's own mouth. 2. Their infallibility in truth. 3. The visible
assistance of Gods spirit. 4. To speak extempore in diverse tongues. 5. To work
miracles. 6. To bestow the gifts of Holy Ghost upon others; all which was given
to them to beget and convert and confirm Christians at first. But this milk is
not necessary always to be continued, when the Church is grown to a ripe age;
for the Scriptures are afterward sufficient to make us perfect to every good
work, 1 Timothy
and the miracles then done are a full confirmation of their truth. But yet you
must know, that the authority of their calling lives yet in their successors;
and to teach, administer Sacraments, to bind and loose sins, to impose hands
for the ordaining Pastors and Elders, are not ceased, nor can be wanting so
long as there is a Church; for these beget faith, without which there is no
Church. Therefore their successors are stewards of the mysteries of Christ, and
are warned to take care of Christ's flock, Acts 20. and of this few doubt; but
the power of the keys troubles them to whom they are committed, that is,
excommunication and absolution. So others quarrel about ordination; and these
are the well-wishers to Lay-Eldership, which they would have joined in this
work with Apostles and Bishops; but they find no warrant for it. I know they
bring commonly two or three places of Scripture for Presbytery; as the hands
of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. which I have showed were the hands of Bishops
and preaching Elders at least, not of Lay Elders. So they say Christ bids a man
tell the Church, Mat. 18. which if a man will not hear, he is to be accounted
as an heathen. Now by this word Church they would bring in all the Lay Elders.
Chrysostom. hom. 61. in Mat. 18. Beza. annot. in Mat. 18. says, the chief implies
the whole.
But surely there is understood the spiritual Presidents and Governors; so
there we read of no Lay Presbytery. But they say, that in the 1 Timothy 5. Paul
tells us of ruling Elders, and thereforre there were some Elders beside those
that labored in the word and doctrine, as Romans 12. he that rules let him do
it with diligence: but it is plain, they are not distinct offices, Beza. annot.
in 1 Timothy 4. Chrysostom. hom. 15. in 1. Tim. 5. Hieron. in 1 Timothy cap. 5.
but sometime pertaining both to the Deacon or Preaching Elder, who also ruled
the Church, and in regard of their good government, deserved double honor of
reverence and allowance, but especially for laboring in preaching the Gospel,
because they cannot so well provide things needful for themselves. But for Lay
Judges, I never heard they were to be maintained by the Church stock; of which
maintenance the Apostle in 1 Timothy 5. speaks, and therefore here can be
understood no Lay Presbytery, but rather such as did govern the Churches
stocks, as the Deacons did, or ministers which either did both, Beza. annot. in
1 Pet. cap. 5.
or only labored in the word; for the name Elder compriseth sometimes all
those that have any Ecclesiastical function. And St Chrysostom on 1 Cor.
1.17. on these words, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 1.17.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach, says, that few were able to
preach, but many to give baptism; therefore the inferior sort of ministers
baptized, and the superior in wisdom Evangelized. They that performed the
first well, were counted worthy of double honor for their right ordering the
Church, but especially such as labored in the word and doctrine: so that still
we find no ruling for Lay Elders, but rather the duty and pains of their
Pastors and Teachers; (...).
the one by ruling the flock well in his Church and charge, whereof he is
president, by doctrine, administration, and example; (...).
the other for traveling with great pains of mind and body to dispense the
Gospel, and confirm Christians by travel and visiting, in which sense Paul
says, 1 Cor. 15. he labored more then all the Apostles. Yet I speak not this
in derogation to Laymen, which are holy, grave, and wise, but only that they
had no place in ordination or excommunication; yea, I believe good use might be
made of them for moderation of quarrels and strifes, and examinations, as 1
Cor. 6.4. and to end matters peaceably between Christians, but not to censure
Ecclesiastically, for that belongs to the ministers; nor to punish by the
civil law, for that belongs to the Magistrate. The keys were given of Christ
to his Apostles, and of them to their successors, which were spiritual
pastors; so that every godly minister has power to put by an unworthy receiver
from the Lords Table, as well as to admit one that is worthy, Amb. de poenit.
lib. 1. c. 2.
without the assistance of Lay Eldership, to whom neither power of preaching
the Word, nor administering the Sacraments, Chrysostom. de sacer. lib. 3.
was ever committed. For when Christ said to Peter, Aug. 5. Tract in Joh.
I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, he meant and intended it
to all the ministers of the Church, as appears in giving the rest of the
Apostles the same power after his resurrection. Therefore says Ambrose, Amb.
de dignita. sacer. c. 6.
all we that are Priests received the keys in blessed Peter; but he says not,
Laymen did also receive them.


Mathe. This may make Ministers take too much upon them.


Phila. Not if they be either wise and godly; Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 2.
for they are to use this power with moderation, and great discretion; for much
harm may be done by rash suspension from the Sacrament, or excommunication from
Christian society, nor less harm by facile and easy absolution. Therefore,
though a Priest has power to deny the Sacrament upon good grounds, yet not to
excommunicate from all society in the Church, without the authority of his
superior; nor was it wont that one should be received again to the Sacrament,
without the hand of the Superior and Clergy was laid upon his head, Cyp. l.
3. Ep. 16.
in token of reconcilement. So Bishops were wont to give account to Synods of
their excommunicating men, Conc. Nic. Can. 5. Council. Sardcens. Can. 14.
And for absolution of Schismatics, it is true the people have been called
together to be satisfied in their repentance, not to confirm the sentence, but
to satisfy their conscience in the absolution, and to prevent schisms
afterward, they observing how the party was stricken with fear, and recovered
with shame: but this was no proof of a Lay Presbytery.


Mathe. What was then the Presbytery mentioned by St Paul?


Phila. It is but once mentioned in all the New Testament, as in the 1 of Tim.
4.14. which I have proved to be only spiritual men, as Pastors and Teachers
called Elders; as at Jerusalem fifteen years after Christ's ascension, were
Apostles and Elders, Acts 15. So at Antioch were Prophets and Teachers, as
Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manahen, Saul and Mark, and others, Acts 13. which
the Apostles placed in Cities, where they had planted the Gospel. This was
done for the defense of believers against seducers, that crept into houses, and
subverted many, by teaching things that they ought not for filthy lucres sake,
2 Timothy 3. And that those ruling Elders were Lay Judges, that Paul speaks of, it
plainly appears to the contrary; for the Apostle there speaks of maintenance
allowed out of the Church stock, which I never heard or read was given to any
Lay ruler; and certainly if St Paul was loath to have the Church burdened with
a widow, 1 Timothy 5.
so long as her own kindred could maintain her, would less put the charge of a
Lay Judge upon it. The Governors in the Apostles times were moderators of
dissentions, 1 Cor. 6.4. between party and party, by their gifts of wisdom,
discretion, and judgment, by-which decision of controversies the slander of
the Gospel might be prevented, in their going to law before Magistrates, who
were Infidels, 1 Cor. 6.1. But beside these I find no Lay rulers to meddle in
Ecclesiastical affairs, 1 (...). 2. (...).
I mean common people called Lay, from the Greek word that signifies people,
or secular men, but only Presbyters, i. Priests in a short speaking. Beside, we
find that God has always governed his Church by Regal, Prophetical, or
Sacerdotall jurisdiction; therefore Christ being all these in himself,
governs his Church so by Magistrates, Teachers and Pastors. Now the Lay Elder
is neither of these: for they are no Prophets, because they have no charge of
his word; nor have they Priestly power in regard of sins, and Sacraments, as
Jam. 5.14, 15. If any be sick, let him send for the Elders of the Church, who
shall pray, and anoint him with oil, and his sins shall be forgiven him.
These Elders were not Lay men, but such to whom was committed the gift of
healing and absolution. Nor have they the Regal power, for then the Magistrate
must be subject to them, not they to him; or if they had, it can last no longer
than when the Magistrate is a Christian: So that I see not how Lay Elders
should be governors of the Church, but they must be Magistrates or Ministers.


Mathe. If there be no Christian Magistrates, must then the Ministers take all
the power of government?


Phila. They may do as was done in the Primitive times, when the Church was not
protected by the civil sword, but rather persecuted.


Mathe. But what if they grow Heretics, or prove pernicious?


Phila. Then the whole may avoid the unsound: for in such cases the people have
power of desertion, but not of coercion; they may avoid or decline, but not
punish their Pastors, as John 10. my sheep know my voice, but strangers they
will not follow. So Romans 16. mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them;
for no doubt where the public State is not Christian, Cyp. l. 10. Ep. 4
the people have power to choose a good Pastor, and refuse a bad one.


Mathe. What Presbytery is that which the ancient Fathers do so often speak of
in their writings?


Phila. First, you must know that the Scriptures speak of three degrees in the
Church, and so do the Catholic Fathers (viz.) of Deacons, Elders or
Presbyters, and Bishops; and when they speak of a Presbytery, they mean a
company consisting of these, as if you read them, you shall find in Ignatius,
Jerome in Tit. 1. Amb. in 1 Timothy 5. Ignat. ad Trallianos. Magnes. Philad. Smyrn.
Antioch. Aug. de civit. dei. l. 20. c. 9. and in Psalm. 106.
Isid. Originum, lib. 7. Tertul. in Apolog. In his tract of flight in the time
of persecution. And Aug. speaking of seats of Church Governors, shows plainly,
that Lay men had not judgment seats in the Church; for who governed the Church
he tells us in Psalm. 106. they that sat at the stern, as himself did.


Mathe. How came Bishops to be above the Presbyters?


Phila. Christ made a difference in the degrees of Apostles and disciples; so
did the Apostles of Bishops and Presbyters: for though at first both the
Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, were all included in the Apostles: yet as they
found reason to lead them to make Deacons, Acts 6.3. and also Presbyters in
several places to keep up the Gospel which they had planted, as there were
Presbyters at Ephesus, Acts 20. and also among the converted Jews, 1 Pet. 5.
where St Peter calls himself a fellow Presbyter, i. in care and pains, not
in office and degree; (...).
so the equality of Presbyters breeding faction among the people, they were
forced to commit the care of the Church planted, to some choice person, who
might oversee the flock as Pastor of the place, and the rest to be his helpers
in dispersing the word, and advising in the Church government: and to these
were committed ordination, and imposition of hands, and the keys; (not to the
Presbyters) which the Fathers call Episcopal power. This may be seen by Paul's
Epistles to Timothy and Titus; 1 Timothy 1.2. So c. 5.22. Tit. 1.5.
and how they kept the keys to themselves, may be collected from the 2 These.
3. where he bids the Presbyters only note him by a letter that would not obey
his words; but the use or sparing of the rod he keeps to himself, 1 Cor. 4. 2
Cor. 12.13.
and delivers it to those no doubt whom he made overseers or Bishops like
themselves, who were also called Bishops, Cyp. l. 3. Ep. 9. Amb. in Ephesians. 4.
Epiph. cont. Here Is. lib. 1. haer. 27. Hier. in Jac. Theod. in Phil. cap. 1.
and exercised the office of Bishops or overseers while they lived, and so left
it to other faithful men afterward. James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem,
as says Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 5. and St Jerome says, the Apostles ordained
him so. And Theodoret upon the Philip. chap. 1. says, that Epaphroditus had
the Episcopal office settled on him, because Paul calls him their Apostle,
Ephesians. 2.25.


Mathe. Why were not Bishops trusted with the Church at the first erecting of
it?


Phila. Because the Church had at first more need of Presbyters and Deacons:
Epiph. cont. Aerium. lib. 3. ho. 75.
for whilst the Apostles continued near the places where they had planted
Churches, there was no need of any Bishops or overseers, save themselves by
their presence, letters, or messengers. But when they were finally to forsake
those parts, then they did secure the Church by fit substitutes 2. Sufficient
men for the office were very scarce to be had, as Phil. 2. I have no man like
Timotheus, who will faithfully care for your matters, for all seek their own.
Calv. Insilt. lib. 4. cap. 8.
3. Factions began by the equality of Presbyters, as some among the Galathians
set up circumcision. So Phil. 3. some were called dogs, and evil workers, and
were the enemies to the cross. So Col. 2. some burdened the Church with
traditions, others corrupted the Gospel with Philosophy. Col. 2.
So some impugned the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. and Col. 2. Others fained the
day of Christ to be at hand, 2 These. 2. many wolves entered foretold, Acts 20.
and false teachers, 2 Pet. 2. yea, many Antichrists, 1 John 2. and cap. 4. to
prevent or repress which, the Apostles set up superintendents or Bishops to
rule the Presbyters, as they to teach the people, that the gainsaiers might be
reproved, Tit. 1.5. And that they exercised Episcopal jurisdiction, is plain,
in that he had power of ordination: 1 Timothy 5.2. Oecumen. in 1 Timothy cap. 4.
lay hands therefore suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5. And also the power of
correction. So 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a father;
which plainly shows the difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter. And if we
read ancient writers, Epiph. haeres. 25. Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 8. and Ep. 4.
you will find beside the proof of Scripture, both reason and practice enough
for the setting of Bishops in the Church over Presbyters, although in many
cases the Presbyters did associate the Bishop.


Mathe. But how prove you Bishops to be chief?


Phila. It is not unlike but the Church having received this order from the
Apostles, would always continue it; and therefore from the Primitive times
they had peculiar to themselves, Hier. ad Rusti. Monachum.
singularity in succession, and superiority in ordination. By singularity I
understand one Bishop in one City, though diverse Presbyters and Deacons in
diverse Congregations; and upon this singularity depends the safety of the
Church, Hier. advers. Lucif.
which else would be rent asunder by as many schisms, as there be Priests. It
may be you will object, that St Paul seems to acknowledge many Bishops in one
City, Phil. 1.1.
as at Philippi, he writes to the Bishops and Deacons. Oecumen. in 1 cap. ad.
Phil. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in 1 chap. ad Philip. Opt. cont. Pamerianum. l. 25
But these were Presbyters, yet called Bishops, because as yet the name was
common to both; but afterward they were distinguished by their proper name, as
Theodoret writes in the 1 chap. to the Philippians. And Optatus says, that he
is a schismatic, and a sinner, that erecteth one Bishops seat against another.
2. They had superiority in ordination; for it was fit that the less should be
blessed of the greater, and that a superior must ordain the inferior. It is
true, Council. Cartha. 4. Can. 4.
that the Council of Carthage says, that Presbyters shall lay their hands
near the Bishops hand upon the head of him that is to be ordained; so that
shows that Presbyters cannot ordain without a Bishop, and therefore their
hands were only laid by way of consent and approbation, or else the Fathers
and other Councils are deceived. Yea, Tit. 1.4.
beside, the Scripture settles it in the Bishop, not in the Presbyters; as you
may read in another Council, who rejected a Presbyter that was ordained, or
consecrated by another Presbyter, though the Bishop laid his hands upon his
head, but suffered the other Presbyter to read the words of consecration,
Council. Hispalenf. Ca. 5. Epiph. haer. 69.
because himself was troubled with sore eyes, and could not well read. So was
one Colluthus a Presbyter reproved, and all the Presbyters that he had
presumptuously made, were rejected in a general Council. So it was decreed
against Maximus a Presbyter in the same case, Athan. apol. 2.
by the first Council of Constantinople, Can. 4.


Mathe. But how prove you their succession?


Phila. First, the Scripture tells us that the Apostles placed some in diverse
Cities in their life time; as Timothy at Ephesus, where Onesimus succeeds, Eus.
lib. 3. cap. 35. Titus at Creet; Epaphroditus at Philippi; Polycarpus at Smyrna
by St John; Linus at Rome by St Peter; Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Eus. l. 2. c. 1.
James at Jerusalem by the Apostles, and he was succeeded by forty Bishops,
unto Macarius, who sat in the Council of Nice. Eus. l. 3. c. 22.
So Euodias succeeds Peter at Antioch; Ignatius was next, who had seen Christ
in the flesh. Hieron. in Ignat. Col. 4.
Mark St Peter's scholar was Bishop of Alexandria, to whom succeeded Arianus.
Caius, of whom Paul speaks, Romans 16. was Bishop of Thessalonica, Archippus of
Coloss, Dionysius Bishop of Corinth; and so look and you shall find succession
maintained by an holy care of the Church rulers, commending it one to the
other, especially in those places and Cities that had their first Bishops from
the Apostles hands; and we find them in a plain succession, for 676 years after
Christ, in the fourth, fifth and sixth general Councils; but by wars,
persecutions, and the like, the succession has been in many places interrupted
and sometimes at a stop in Rome it self: but yet this shows there was (and
ought to be also so far as I see) a succession of them continued; Hieron. ad
Evagrium.
and therefore the Presbyters themselves till they grew factious in case there
was none settled by the preceding Bishop, they did elect one out of themselves,
and placed him in an higher degree, and called him Bishop. And this says St
Jerome was general throughout the world, after that men began to challenge
those that they baptized to be their own, and not Christ's, it was decreed that
one of the many Presbyters in a City, or Province, should be chosen, Hieron. in
1. c. Epist. ad Titum.
and set above the rest, to whom the whole care of that Church should
appertain; and in these successions continued of one and no more, though the
Presbyters were many. Ignat. in Epist. ad Antiochen.
Therefore Ignatius in his Epistles to diverse Churches, warns the Laity to
obey the Presbyters and Deacons; and that the Presbyters feed the flock till
God show who shall be your Pastor after my death. Thus they succeeded one
another, and always in an higher degree than Presbyters; for although at first
the name Bishop and Presbyter was used indifferently one for the other, while
the Episcopal office remained in the Apostles and Evangelists, yet when they
succeeded, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 4. S. 4. Theodor. in cap. 3.1. Ep. ad Tim.
that were neither Apostles nor Evangelists, then the higher degree were called
Bishops, answering to the Apostles, by which term Apostle, the Bishops were
first called, as was Epaphroditus, (...).
Phil. 2.25. but afterward they left that title to the twelve Apostles, and
took the name of Bishops or overseers to themselves; so verifying the prophecy
in Psalm. 45.16. concerning the Church; instead of thy fathers ( i. the Apostles
that begat thee) thou shall have children, even such as thou have begotten, i.
ministers, Hieron. in Psalm. 45. Aug. in Psalm. 45.
whom thou shall make rulers, i. Bishops, says St Jerome, whom the Church has
placed in the seats of her fathers; and to bring them back to the cells of the
Presbyters, has been accounted no less then sacrilege: and however men may
count it Reformation to abolish that order, I shall pray that they may not find
it destruction to the Church, Exact. Synod. Chalcedon. de Photio and Eustathio.
and lastly to themselves a curse, Pro. 20.25. Mal. 3.9.


Mathe. However they succeed the Apostles in ordination and corrections, yet
the Presbyters think not themselves inferior, and therefore not subject to
them.


Phil. They ought not so to think but to be subject, because God has made them
Fathers and Pastors; and Christ calls them the seven stars in regard of their
rule, as the seven Planets do govern natural bodies; and Angels in respect of
their intelligence they have with Christ's mind, which they are to convey to
others. This name Angels, says Austin, was given to the Ruler of the Church of
Ephesas. Aug Epi. 162.
So Auth. in 1 Cor. cap. 12. And Bullinger says, the heavenly Epistle was
directed to the Angel, i. the Pastor of the Church of Smyrna, which was
Polycarpus, who was placed there by St John fifteen years before he wrote the
Revelation. By which may be gathered, that these were chief in authority, and
that Presbyters and people were to take direction and reproof from them, for
he is charged above the rest, and therefore surely he had some power and
authority above the rest, these being the chief Priests, Aug. in Psa. 45
and Fathers of Christ's Church; and therefore are to be ob^ied, not only by the
people, but the Presbyters also, as says Jerome to Nepotian, Hier. ad Nep.
teaching the duty of a Presbyter. Be subject to thy Bishop, and reverence him
as the father of thy soul; and that Presbyter that does not so, Amb. offi.
lib. 2. cap. 24 Cyp l. 3. Ep. 14
he through pride swarveth from the right way. And Cyprian blames some
Presbyters, that without regard to the Bishop set over them, do take upon them
to do any thing, but he threatens to suspend such from their ministry. Ignat.
ad Mag.
Therefore Ignatius advised the Magnesians, that as Christ did nothing without
his Father, so they should neither without their Bishop, whether you be
Presbyter, Deacon, or Lay man. And he charge the Sarsonses thus: Presbyters
be subject to your Bishops; Deacons to your Presbyters, and Lay men to all. My
soul for theirs that observe this order, the Lord will be always with them.
This man lived near enough to the Apostles time, to know how the Church was
then governed: And by the Apostolical Canons the Presbyters and Deacons are to
do nothing without the consent of the Bishop, Can. Apost 8. Council. Arelat. 1.
ca. 19. Hier advers. Lucif.
for to his charge the people are committed; no, they are not to baptize
without the Bishops leave, says Ierom, and affirms, that the safety of the
Church depends thereupon; not that Bishops usurped and took this power upon
themselves, but by the Apostolic tradition and example, and afterward by the
allowance of Emperors, and laws of States and Provinces, and Synodall Canons;
none of which did allow any domineering in Bishops, but gave them power over
Presbyters, and yet Presbyters leave to appeal from them (if they thought
themselves wronged) to the nearest Bishops, Council African. can. 129.
or to the Primate, or to the next Synod.


Mathe. Whether may the people have the election of Pastors by Gods Word?


Phila. We find no such election in Gods Word. O^^umen in 1 Timothy cap 4.
By the commandment and appointment of the Holy Ghest, were Bishops made; as
Timothy by prophecy, The d^. in 1 Timothy 1.
i. by divine revelation say Theodore, The phylact, and Ambrose o^ the first
Epistle to Timothy. Next they (...)se others, as I have showed you. Afterward
came in popular elections grounded upon humane society, which in reason
challenges an approbation at least, of those to whom they submit themselves,
and allow maintenance. But yet even in this the people had only rather a
proposal of one, or approbation of one, then an election of one: for they had
two ways to settle a Bishop; the first by election, Cyp. l. 1. Ep. 1.
the second was by postulation; the election was thus performed. When a Bishops
chair was void, some Bishops that were nearest consulted to meet there at a
certain day, of which they gave notice to the people and Presbyters of that
place, who came on that day into the Church, and three Bishops at least came
also from the adjacent places, and there observed whom the Clergy named, and
whom the people proposed; and as all or most agreed, so the man was chosen, but
another day fixed for his ordination. In the mean time any objections might be
made, but if he were clear, the Bishops made him Pastor of that Church. But
secondly, if that City wanted an approved man, then they desired the Bishop of
the ancientest City called the Metropolis, and he the Metropolitan, to send
them such an one as he approved; which he did after himself and three other
Bishops had tried him. Thus also Presbyters were settled and ordained by the
examination of the Bishop, and testimony of the people; Council. Cartha. 3. Can.
22. Conc. Laodic. Can. 23.
yet the multitude must not elect those that were called to be Priests, though
they might present such as they thought fit. But always three Bishops at least
ordained a Bishop, and one Bishop a Presbyter, Can. Apost. ca. 1, 2. This was
the common order, except when the people made tumults, Eus. l. 1. c. 24. Evag.
l. 2. c. 5. etc. 8.
as the Church histories tell us. For which uprores the Emperor Justinian took
away that power from the people, and settled in the Governors of the City, to
propound three, two, Novella Consti. 123.
or one orthodox and holy man without partiality, and the Bishops were to
ordain him; and if in six months this was not done, then the Metropolitan
might settle one. So that we may see that the peoples election was not founded
on Gods command, but upon the reason of humane government, and was subject to
the Laws and Canons of Princes and Priests; Did. 61. S.
for the rule was that in the choice of Priests, the people was not to be
followed but taught, and therefore their power may be forfeited, and
transferred to the superior; and therefore if the multitude have a right, then
the Magistrate much more. And we find, that election of Bishops by default,
abuse, or petition, has devolved to the Prince, being a Christian. Therefore
lest variance should arise (as oftentimes it did) about the choice of a Bishop,
Theodosius the Emperor commanded the Bishops then present with him, to settle
Proclus in the Episcopal chair, before Maximianus successor to Nestorius,
Bishop of Constantinople was buried. Pelagius being chosen Bishop of Rome
without the Emperors consent, was excused by Gregory, Platina in Pelag. 2.
because the Town was besieged, and no messenger could pass to the Emperor,
Greg. Ep. l. 1. c. 5. Did. 62. S. breviter.
which Gregory was by the Emperor chosen Bishop of Rome, without popular votes.
The Canon Law in this case has a good rule (viz) the people is to present, the
Clergy to elect, the Prince to consent.


Mathe. How came this to Princes hands at first?


Phila. There were at first few great Princes Christians, and so could have no
right in this business of electing Bishops. 2. Bishops though they had greater
authority than Presbyters, yet they had no endowment but from the common
charity: and therefore the people after the Apostles time, might justly expect
some hand in the choice of them, and so they had. For Fabianus the nineteenth
Bishop of Rome, was chosen by their full consent; and so they generally had it
till after Constantine the Emperor. But we read of Theodosius the elder,
commands the Bishops to give him a catalogue of such whom they thought fit to
be made Bishop of Constantinople. Sozom. l. 7.
They did, and the Emperor chose Nectarius, one not yet baptized, and hardly
known, yet the Council though he was neither chosen by Clergy nor people,
thought it their duty after that he was baptized, to pronounce him Bishop of
Constantinople. And this power in Princes arose sometimes from the desire of
the Clergy: as when Valentinian willed the Bishops to elect a Bishop of
Millane, to succeed Auxentius; the Synod prayed him, being wise and religious,
to choose one. So sometimes by reason of differences in the choice, it has been
referred to the Emperor: and sometimes in regard of favor the Emperor had
showed to them, in recalling them from banishment, building Cities and Churches
for them, and giving them endowments to those Churches, whereby the people were
the more eased, and the Bishops more free in the exercise of their function.
And this was much like the right of patronage which was always allowed, and is
still with us here in England. But if we search antiquity, we shall find Synods
allowing this power to Princes (viz.) that no man shall be ordained Bishop
without the King. Conc. Aurel. 51. Greg. Turonici hist. Fran.
The Kings of France kept this power, and so have our Kings of England to
themselves, neither suffering Clergy nor people to meddle in the choice, but by
royal assent, no not the Pope himself. Henry the first of England sent the
Pope word, that he would not lose the investiture of his Churches, Mat. Paris
in Hen. 1. an. 1103
for the loss of his Kingdom. And no wonder if Emperors and Kings looked
narrowly to this power, of which as the Pope did strive to rob them on the one
side, so did the Presbytery on the other. Therefore the Statute of Provisors of
benefices, Stat. Edw. 3. anno 25. Westmo.
provides clearly for the King in electing Bishops, or collating Bishoprics.
And this is no more then was allowed to those that founded Churches, and gave
maintenance to them (viz.) to present a Clerk: for they gave the Church, so did
the King, Ansegilus legum Franciae, lib. 1. cap. 84. Statut. de Marlebride.
Novella Consti. 123. cap. 18.
but neither King nor patron did consecrate or ordain; nor may any Bishop nor
authority refuse such, being men of good life and learning, if they do the
Plea of Quare impedit lies against them. The same liberty was given of ancient
times by the Council of Toledo, an. 654. And the Roman Laws determined the
same throughout the Empire: by all which you may perceive how Princes had the
power of electing Bishops.


Mathe. But I have heard some holy Fathers and Councils to have been against
receiving of Bishops from the Princes Palace.


Phila. It is true, Epist. Athan. ad solit. vitam agentes.
Athanasius says, that there is no Canon that a Bishop should be sent out of
the Palace. But Athanasius speaks of such as were sent from Constantius the
Emperor, and placed in the Churches by force of his soldiers, which was an
invasion of the Churches rites, because they had no admission by the Bishops.
So it is true that the second Council of Nice alleged a Canon, Nic. Syn. 2.
Can. 3.
that all elections of Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons, made by the Magistrate
are void, because a Canon says, that if any Bishop obtain a Church by the
help of the secular magistrate, let him be deposed, and put from the Lords
Table, and those that communicate with him. But this Council did not deny
power to the Emperor or Prince to nominate, but to impose a Bishop by his own
command, against both the Metropolitan, and other Bishops admittance and
ordination, Nic. Syn. 2. Can. 3. Conc. Paris. Can. 8.
who should properly admit and ordain them. So the Council of Paris will have
no Bishop imposed upon the people with the other Bishops leave (viz.) the
Metropolitan and his Com-provincials; for if any such were, no man should
accept him for Bishop. And this was decreed long before in the Apostles Canons,
saying, Can. Apost. 30.
If any Bishop resting on worldly governors by their help obtain a Church, let
him be deposed and excommunicated, and all that join with him.


Mathe. How did the Bishops govern the Church?


Phila. They followed the Apostles rule, namely, to order their special
congregations by their own singular power; but in a matter wherein the whole
Church was interessed, they governed by Synods and Councils, as the Apostles
did also, Acts 15. which Councils they at first (before there was a Christian
Magistrate) called by consent among themselves, or by the chief Bishop among
them. So there were two Synods summoned in Asia about reformation of the
Church, and ordaining Bishops. Others at Ancira in Galatia, and in France, and
at Antioch against Montanus. Others at Rome about the celebration of Easter.
But when the Emperor Constantine turned to the Christian faith, he called the
general Council of Nice in Bythinia, against Arrius, who denied Jesus Christ
the Son of God to be of the same substance with the Father; which opinion was
there condemned and accursed: and Easter day settled to be kept upon the Lords
day, and not on the Jews fourteenth of Nisan. And so Councils were usually
called till the Pope usurped the power, striving to wrest it from the Emperor,
and to set himself above Councils. But had Charles the fifth dealt as roundly
with him about the Council of Trent, as the Emperor Sigismund did in the
Council of Basil, it had not been twenty five years in calling, nor so long in
sitting, and so little good done. But that they governed the Church by
Councils, it may appear from the great Council of Nice, Council. Nic. Can. 5.
Con. Ant. Ca. 20
which decreed that there should be in every Province a Synod twice a year. So
concluded the Council of Antioch, so did the first Council of Constant. Can.
2. So the Council of Chalcedon Can. 29. So the third Council of Toledo, Can.
18. So the second Council of Turo, Can. 1. And so good and approved was this
government, that when the Synod of Antioch, sixty years before that of Nisen
had condemned Paulus Samosatenus for heresy, and he would not yield up his
Church, but kept it by violence; they complained to the Emperor Aurelianus, an
heathen, and he drove him out (to his shame) from Antioch.


Mathe. Why then are Bishops so much cried down in these latter times?


Phila. 1. By that spirit that lusts to envy. And 2. By self love, which if
it cannot swell us to be as big as others, we do strive like Satan to pull down
others to be like our selves. 3. By covetousness which loves to part Christ's
coat, or to cast lots for it; many had rather cloth themselves with the
Churches means, then Christ's merits, and wrap themselves warm in his coat,
rather then trust to the purchase of his Cross. These are the motives,
whatever the pretenses are; or else why was not the Abbey and Bishops lands
reserved to pious uses. I believe the Commonwealth was more rich by the
Churches leases, then ever she was by the Churches purchases. The Farmer then
grew from a Yeoman to a Gentleman, and most of the purchasers are now fallen
from Gentry to beggary. But beside all this, it is no wonder if that be cried
down in these times of Libertinisme, Hieron. in 1. Epist. ad Titum.
which was set up for the preventing of schism and heresy, whose ground is
always pretended liberty of conscience, which kind of people are always
adverse to Christ and his Spouse, the Church, and therefore ever persecute the
overseers of the flock, Cypr. Ep. 55.
that they may the better adorn themselves with the ruins of the Church, and
are no doubt the followers of the great Antichrist, and forerunners of the last
apostasy of this world, since the Church has been governed by them, Simler. de
rep. Helvet. fol. 148
for 1500 years, and upward, or by none, or else by a disorderly confusion, as
we see in those Churches who have cast off Episcopacy; as in Switzerland, where
a Lay man is President of their Consistory. And at Zurick and Basil their
Consistories are wholly Lay, and Ministers are only to advise. Yea, in other
places Ministers are not so much as assistants; so that they may use their
Ministers like minstrels, and choose whether they will hear them or no: for they
have no power, nor hardly a right derivation of their ministry, from the order
of Christ and his Apostles.


Mathe. Whether can you derive your own aright, having originally received it
from Rome by Popish Bishops?


Phila. You think it seems that our Bishops took their ordination there at
first, or that there were no Bishops in England to ordain others, but they must
needs travel to Rome for it, or take it from Rome by delegation; and if so,
you take our Bishops and ministry to be merely antichristian. But suppose we
had it from thence, that will no more prove our ministry antichristian or
popish, then our very Bible, Gospel, or Baptism, if we received it from
thence. For superstition cannot annihilate the ordinances of God, given at
first from Christ, no more then building stubble upon the foundation can
destroy it; or than a spring water is utterly spoiled by running from a rock
through a clay. But our Bishops and Presbytery, we derive from the Apostles, as
we do also our Protestant doctrine professed, which though held in
unrighteousness in the Church of Rome, like a captive for a time, yet at last
redeemed it self, and came to light, and showed it self the true child of
God, begotten at first in Rome by the word of truth, from which she deviating,
the truth chose another foster-mother to dwell withal, that will maintain her
with goods and life, and not forsake her to the death. So our Bishops and
Clergy came not at first from Rome, though Rome has made bold to invade the
Church of England. But for the first three hundred years after Christ, the Pope
had nothing to do out of his own Diocese, as may be seen by the Council of
Ephesus order, Con. Ephesians. p. 1. act. 7.
made in the behalf of the Cyprian Bishops against the Patriarch of Antioch,
who challenged their ordination. That Council decreed that the Cyprian Bishops
should not be violated in their right; and also that no Bishop should busy
himself afterward in another Province, or invade others privileges, Ruff.
hist: Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
which they enjoied from the beginning. By which the Bishop of Rome was shut up
within his own City and Suburbs. And we find for certain, that the British
Bishops did not acknowledge any obedience due from them to the Pope, Spel.
Conc. anno 601.
which they must needs have done, if they had their ordination from him: and
they had reason to stand upon it, being Brittany was the elder Church, planted
by Joseph of Arimathea, in Tiberius Caesar's time, Gild. de conq. Brit.
and Peter came not to Rome till the second year of the Emperor Claudius, to
settle that Church.


Mathe. How came the British Bishops to be consecrated.


Phila. Some think by those that came with Joseph of Arimathea into England,
having Apostolic authority, such as Simon Zelotes, who was crucified in
Brittany. Jerome. in Catal. script. Eccles.
Others think that some were ordained by Fuga^ius and Damianus, whom Elutherius
Bishop of Rome sent to baptize (at the request of King Lucius) himself and
people. And if it were so, there is no reason to find fault with our Bishops
succession from thence, he being an holy man and martyr, and his two messengers
being faithful Pastors. But the Brittans being conquered by the Saxons, we
find that the Saxon Bishops were consecrated by Austin, whom Gregory the first,
Bishop of Rome, had formerly sent to bring the Brittans to his three rules.
First that the British Clergy should be subject to the Bishop of Rome.
Secondly, that they should conform to the Roman custom about the celebration
of Easter. Thirdly, that they should join with him in preaching to the Saxons.
All this they Synodically refused, so that Austin was fain to return to Rome to
be consecrated himself, and then to consecrate the Saxon Bishops alone,
without the assistance of any other Bishops. Now they denying thus to be
subject to Rome, makes others suppose they had their consecration from some
Greek Bishops of the East, because they stood for the celebration of Easter
with the Greek Church, which yet was a schism from the Council of Nice, who
decreed it to be kept contrary to the Eastern custom, and agreeable with the
Church of Rome: yet this shows that British Bishops had no dependence on the
Roman Bishop, no more then they of the East, who were consecrated without the
Bishop of Rome's authority, according to the Canons of the Council of Nice,
Theodor. in lib. 5. cap. 9.
that three of the Bishops of the same Province might consecrate another
Bishop, as occasion offered it self. No doubt but Episcopacy was settled in
England by the first Christians that came thither, as Joseph, and Simon
Zelotes, who having converted King Lucius and many of his people, Clem. Epist.
1. ad Jacobum fratrem Domini.
that King took away the Druids and Flamins, and heathen Temples, and divided
them into Bishoprics, which was an apostolical constitution, and as Vicar of
Christ in his Kingly Office, did settle fit men to supply those places, and to
be in authority over others; upon which ground I suppose other succeeding Kings
followed him: as Ethelwald made wilfrid Bishop of South Saxons; Malm. de Gest.
Pont. Aug. p. 257.
and King Alfrid made Oenewolphus Bishop of Winchester; Edward the Confessor
made Robert a Monk, Bishop of London, and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury.
And as the Saxon Kings, so did the Norman Kings the like. For William the
Conqueror, chose Lanfrank to be Archbishop, and King Rufus chose Anselm to be
Archbishop of Canterbury. And the Popes laid no claim to the English Churches
patronage, till the reign of Henry the first. And we find anciently in the
Greek and Latin Churches, the Emperor did elect and erect Bishops, and that by
the desire of Synods; as Valentinian the Emperor was so solicited by the
Synod of Millane. So the Emperor Theodosius commanded the Bishops to set up
Proclus for Bishop to succeed Maximian. Theod. l. 4. c. 6. So. l. 7. c. 90.
Greg Ep. lib. 1. cap. 5.
So Gregory the first was appointed by the Emperor Mauritius, to succeed
Pelagius, Bishop of Rome, whom the Pontifical it self in the life of
Pelagius, 580 years after Christ, admireth as a new and strange accident, that
he was chosen Bishop without the Emperors consent, though the reason was,
because the Longobards then besieged Rome so straightly, that none could pass to
the Emperor for his consent. And this continued, and upon some failings by
occasions, Did. 63. S. Adrianus.
was renewed to the Emperor, as by Pope Adrian to Charlemain; and by Leo the
eighth after Adrian, 130 years, in a Synod to Otho, that he and his successors
should appoint the Bishop of Rome by Ring and Staff, which continued in the
Emperors 300 years after, and was restored to Henry the fifth, anno 1111. by
Pope Paschalis the second, and was never taken from them but by treachery. And
the same course the Kings of France and England have always used. Greg.
Turonens. bist. 10. c. 31.
The Statutes of England make it plain, saying, that the Church of England is
founded in the state of Prelacy within the Realm, by the King and Peers
thereof, 35. Edw. 1. Stat. of Carlisle
and denies all the incrochments of the Bishop of Rome, which is declared
farther in the Statute of provisors, and in the reign of Richard the second.
16. Ric. 2. c. 5.
But this was but only their election and appointment to the place by the
Prince, their consecration was done by the Clergy, namely by the Metropolitan,
and some of his comprovincials according to the Canon of the Nicen Synod. Nic
Syn. 2. Ca. 3
But how the three Archbishops, and the twenty eight Bishops, in the time of
King Lucius, Or appointed to that dignity by the King, being Presbyters before;
for a Bishop is but a Presbyter exalted.
about two hundred years before that Council were consecrated, is somewhat
questionable, except done by some of the Eastern Patriarchs or Bishops, whose
opinion about the celebration of Easter, the British Bishops held a long time,
according to the old rule, Obedience follows ordination.


Mathe. Why are some men such enemies to Bishops?


Phila. By envy of their dignity and place, as I have said before, which makes
men swell as the toad in the Fable, to be as big as the ox. Others out of self
love and conceit, that they like Absalom, could do much better, if they had
their places. Others out of a desire of parity. And some out of covetousness
like Judas, to put Christ and the Churches portion into their purse, and so
raise themselves, because they cannot be raised; and speak evil of others,
because no body can justly speak well of them. For these reasons many have
troubled the Church, and turned Schismatics and Heretics. As Thebulis, Eus.
hist. l. 4. c. 21.
because he could not be a Bishop, corrupted the Church with gross opinions,
from whence sprung many sects, and wretched Heretics. So Arrius, because one
Alexander had the dignity which he desired, Theod. l. 1. c. 2.
he broached that damnable heresy, that Christ was not of the same substance
with the Father. So Donatus, because he could not be Bishop of Carthage before
Cecilianus, he pretended that none were of the true Church but himself and his
followers. Aug. de here is. c. 22.
So Aerius that giddy brained heretic, said, there was no difference between a
Presbyter and a Bishop, with whom the Acephali may be sharers, though sprung
from one Severus Antiochenus (men without an head, or without wit) so called
because they would not live under an head Governor or Bishop, Niceph. lib. 18.
cap. 45. Eccl. hist.
except necessity drew them to it; and thought they might add their fancies to
the Creed it self; as some in our time that think it lawful enough to patch
up a new Religion with old heresies, or new inventions. But though these men
are against Bishops, yet I could wish they were not against Episcopacy, lest
they fall into the very quintessence of schism: for Bishops may be regulated,
yet not Episcopacy be extirped, since it has been always held and found to be
the bond of Church-union; and separation from it, the symboll of faction.
Therefore the ancient Writers counted those that would not be subject to them,
to be worse then infidels: for they held the Church had her external being and
constitution by Bishops, and they that did not communicate with Episcopacy,
were not in the Church. Yea more, Cyp Ep. 27. and in Ep. ad Flo. Pupianum.
Clem. Ep. 1.3. Ruff. transl.
Russinus is so bold to say, that all Priests, Clergy men, people, nations and
languages, that would not obey their Bishops, should be shut from the communion
of the holy Church here, and of heaven hereafter.


Mathe. Many found fault as much with the Liturgy, as with Episcopacy.


Phila. They found none, but fained some. They pretended that set forms of
prayer were not to be used in the Church, neither considering the authority,
antiquity, nor the convenience of it. First, not the authority, as that it was
appointed by God himself, Number. 6.23. where the Priests are appointed to bless
the people in a set form of words. So Deuteronomy. 26.13. the people are injoined a
set form of prayer after the payment of his tiths. Nor do they consider that
the book of Psalms are all set forms of prayer or praise, and delivered to
chief Musicians to be set to diverse instruments to praise God withal, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. and 1 Chronicles. 25.3. and 2 Chronicles. 30.21. and Ezra. 3.11. Nor do they
discern that Christ gave his Disciples a set form first, giving it them as a
pattern in the first year of his ministry, Mat. 6.9. and in the third year of
his ministry gives it them as a prayer expressly to be used, Luke 11.2. when you
pray, say Our Father: which prayer is not of extempore conception neither; for
we may find in old Jewish Euchologues, most of the petitions: not that Christ
need to borrow of any, but he did it to show that truth was his freehold
wheresoever he found it, and to teach us to subject our selves to the spirit in
ancient truths, rather then to affect extempore raptures. Nor do they perceive
the antiquity of set forms in the N. T. Church; for we find St James the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, was the first setter forth of Liturgies, and he placed
there by the Apostles. So Titus was left in Creet, to set in order things than
were wanting; and what things they were, being they had the Gospel and
Sacraments, let any man tell you, except they were Church Rituals. Ignatius
also, Bishop of Antioch, taught his Church, Liturgies and Doxologies, as
appears by the Ecclesiastical histories. He lived in the first hundred years
after Christ, and from that Church of Antioch, Trip. hist. l. 10. c. 9.
where men were first called Christians, Liturgies were derived to other
Churches, as to Rome it self. For Gregory the first being Bishop of Rome,
brought in the form of the Greek Letanies in that Church; so that our Liturgy
primarily comes from the Greek, Conc. Ancyr. 1. tom. Con. Conc. Meter.
not the Latin Church: but if it did, yet whatsoever is good in it, may be used
by any Christian Church, except we think it not fit to worship Christ, because
he was sometimes consessed by the devils mouth. Nor do they see the convenience
of it; St Paul did, namely, that we may with one mind and one mouth, glorify
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 15.6.
And Mr Calvin approved it very much, writing to the Protector of England in K.
Edw. the sixths time, that there should be a form of Church Service, from which
Ministers might not depart in the exercise of their functions, that there may
be an help to the simplicity of some, and a remedy against the levity of others
that affect innovations, and for the clearer appearance of the unanimity of all
Churches among themselves. I know they say also, that set forms of prayer
hinders the gift of the spirit in ministers, which would utter it self
freely, but that it is bound up by reading a set form. But considering that the
minister is the mouth of the people to God, I conceive it convenient that the
people know what he sollicites God for, that they may the more comfortably join
with him in prayer. Nor can I see how the Church is more edified by extempore
prayer, than a set form, since the Church is edified as well by Sermons
composed, as sermons preached. Besides, the spirit of the Church may edify her
members by her composures, as well as any one member may edify any part of the
Church, by his voluntary conceptions and expressions, which may be done for
ostentation, or may want consideration and discretion also. Nor does set forms
limit the spirit any more then extempore raptures, neither in the minister nor
people. Not in the minister, for he has diverse times in private devotions, and
before and after his Sermon, to enlarge himself farther as occasion requires.
And for his being stinted by the Liturgy, there is no reason but he may, since
the spirit of the Prophet must be subject to the Prophets in their prophesying,
1 Cor. 14.
and then why not in praying by the spirit of the Church representative, which
composed the Liturgy. And for the spirit in the people, it is no more limited
by a set form, then by a sudden conceived prayer; for their spirit being
equally intent upon this, is as much limited as by that: and so as the peoples
spirit is subjected to the ministers in his prayer, so much more ought the
spirit of the minister be subjected to the spirit of the Churches corporation.
I have seen many ridiculous pamphlets against the Liturgy, more fit for wast
paper then to be answered. I spoke enough before of this matter, in answer to
some heresies. Some do object that it contains not prayer for all occasions;
yet I think if they would well consider the Letany, they can hardly add any
thing to it, though upon every particular petition therein, they make as long a
prayer, as the whole Liturgy.


Mathe. But the ceremonies are more offensive then the Liturgy.


Phila. They need not, if people would consider the paucity, the indifferency,
and the power that the Church has to impose things indifferent. For first,
there was but three, the Surplice for the Minister, the Cross for the
Baptized, and kneeling for Communicants: three innocent ceremonies (as many of
the complainers themselves have confessed) in the opinion of wise men; yet have
they been violently opposed by many that cannot find the medium between
affirmative and negative superstition, but either rush into the gulf, or dash
upon the rock. The Praecisian he will have no ceremony without special warrant
from Scripture, like the Sadduces. The Papist on the other side will have them
necessary to divine worship, though not set down in Scripture, like the
Pharisees traditions of the Elders. Between both these lies a middle way to
walk in, Zanch. de sacra Script. p. 262.
bounded with the authority and liberty of the Church, in imposing and using
things indifferent, as she finds those things expedient and convenient to be
done, which she finds neither commanded nor forbidden in Gods Word.


Mathe. Methinks it seems reasonable that Church-ceremonies should have
special warrant from Gods Word.


Phila. If there be a general warrant it is as good, as 1 Cor. 14.23, 40. let
all things be done to edification, decently, and in order. This is ground
sufficient for the Church to impose what she thinks to be so. Calvin.
And upon this ground it is that the Church has appointed times ceremonial to
be observed, as well as things, as the Feasts of Christ's Nativity, Resurrection
and Ascension, and Whitsontide, Zane. in tract. de sacra Script. p. 279.
as well as habits and gestures, which Mr Calvin says, are divine altogether,
as founded on Scripture. As kneeling at prayer is a divine ceremony, as it is a
part of that decency commended to us by St Paul, Let all things be done with
decency, yet it is a humane ceremony, Calv. instit. l. 4. c. 10. S. 30.
as it is appointed by men to persons, times, or places. And Vrsinus a reformed
judicious Divine, says, that ecclesiastical constitutions are good, Ursin.
Catecb.
so far as they do assign that which is generally intimated, though not
expressed in the word of God.


Mathe. But if ceremonies be made parts of Gods worship, they are unlawful.


Phila. To make them any part of Gods essential worship is unlawful, but not
to use them in the accidental parts of it, for the more decent and convenient
discharge of Gods service. For as God made a man perfect, and no man can add to
him, but yet to cloth this man is no presumption, but rather an argument of
our estimation of him: So to Gods essential worship the Church may not add any
thing, but to apply ceremonies to the outward part of it, for decency or
edification is no derogation to Gods service. And for places of Scripture
alleged against ceremonies, they make nothing against them, as that of Deuteronomy.
12.32. there is meant an adding to Gods word by way of corruption, as
fraudulent coiners that adulterates money. So in that of Esa. 29.13. is intended
those humane constitutions that is contrary to Gods word. So that of Col. 2.23.
is meant that will worship which was set up by the Essens, (a branch of the
Pharisees) as necessary to religion, and was a negative superstition, ver. 21.
touch not, taste not, handle not, of which the non Conformist is guilty, saying,
wear not, cross not, Dan^us de doct Christianae, cap. 25. Zane. in Colos. ^.27.
kneel not; and these they obtruded upon men as parts of doctrine, and a rule
of Gods worship, which is to accuse Gods word of imperfectnesse. But so our
Church does not, nor adds nothing to what God has commanded, but she
appoints something to be done, which may serve to the performance of what he
has commanded.


Mathe. But ceremonies made significant, or to teach us any spiritual duty by
their mystical signification, are by religious men thought unlawful.


Phila. Those significant ceremonies which are mixed with false doctrins are
unlawful, as the Pharisees attributed to their washing cups, pots, and tables,
as great a legal purification of their bodies, as to those washings which God
had appointed to that purpose; yea, they imputed a spiritual virtue to them,
of cleansing the soul from sin, which Christ reproved, Mark 7.8. saying, that
which is from without defiles not a man, and therefore that which is a mere
outward washing, being not of Gods institution, cannot purify a man; so that
he condemned not the washing, but the false opinion joined with it. Beside,
ceremonies are not sacramental, but moral signs of duty, which are not
unlawful, being neither significant by any special representation, nor
obsignant by ratifying to man Gods covenant and grace, but only puts us in mind
of some duty we owe to God, provided always that they be not such significant
ceremonies, as God has taken away by the coming of Christ, Zanch Epi. ad
Hoop. p. 1087.
or used with any Jewish opinion, or popish superstition, as they do their
ceremonies. Abraham used a ceremony in giving his servant an oath, by putting
his hand under his thigh, which was a humane ceremony, for Abraham had no
command from God so to do: and it was significant, for it taught a considence
in Christ, who was to come (after the flesh) out of Abraham's loins; for the
oath intended that as he hoped to have any happiness by Christ, who was to
come of Abraham's seed, that he would be faithful to his master, in taking a
wife for his son. So Mordecai's Feast of Purim was a significant sign to them,
to be thankful for their deliverance from Human's bloody plot. So the yearly
Feast of Dedication, set up by Machaheus, 1 Match. 4.59. in remembrance of their
deliverance from the cyranny of Antiochus, who had forced Idolatry upon them,
by setting up the image of Jupiter in the Temple of God, and Machabeus his
renewing true Religion, and consecrating a new Altar to God, John 10.22. (...).
therefore called the Feast of Renewing. And in the New Testaments Church were
the Feasts of charity, both to signify and preserve love; and these were
continued till almost 500 years after Christ. And those were condemned that
would not communicate in such Feasts, by the Council of Gargna, a Town in
Paphlagonia, a modest and godly Council, which condemned Eustatius, Conc. Garg.
who inclined to the heresy of Lalianus, the patron of Encratites, or strict
livers, who thought that only an honest life without faith, was religion good
enough, and could not abide the public congregation of Gods people in Temples.
So the holy kiss in those Feasts commended by St Paul, 1 These. 5.26. was of
humane institution, not of Christ's, and the property of it was significant
(viz.) of Christian love, and it was done in the holy and public worship of
God, to show that it did not only signify the love that Christians had one to
another, but that love which they enjoied by the atonement of Christ, who had
kissed the Church with the kiss of peace, Psalm. 2.
and they him by the kiss of faith and obedience. So the covering of the
woman's head in the Church, and the man's head uncovered, was a mystical
significant sign; first of the man's subjection immediately to Christ, 1 Cor.
11. Call. in 1 Cor. 11 P. Martyr on the same, p. 151
and of the woman's subjection to the man in Christ. Yea further, it signified
the moral duty which one owed to the other; the man to rule rightly by his
dominion, and the woman of her subjection to her husbands government; Zanch.
desac. script. p. 273.
and therefore we ought not to be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16. but rather wait
till they be changed, since they are not of perpetuity, Chem. Exam. part 1. p.
25.
but have been always changeable: as we know at first in the Primitive time,
the people stood up at prayer every Lords day, from Easter to Whitsontide, to
argue their belief of Christ's resurrection, which is not now enjoined or used.
So the French prophecy or preach with their heads covered, to show their
dominion of teaching, their people are uncovered, to show their subjection to
his doctrine, which is contrary to the Apostles order to the Corinthians. All
ceremonies are not so fit for all times, the Church has liberty to settle or
abrogate them, as she sees cause; which liberty no wise man ever denied the
Church, but holds significant ceremonies to be profitable for the people,
Calv. opusc. p. 344. Calv. instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Chem. Exam. part 4. tract.
de Imag. p. 13. Zeppe. Leg. Mos. l. 4. c. p. 312 Juni cont. lib. 4. p. 283.
Chem. Exam. part 2. p. 32.
so that such a mean be kept, that Christ be illustrated, not obscured. I
believe upon this ground it is, that Luther, Chemnitius and Calvin, allow of
pictures in the Church, done by way of historical narration, both for ornament
and remembrance, without any superstition. So Holydaies are, and may be
celebrated in remembrance of some special benefit received from God about that
time, or by some eminent person that he has employed for the Churches good.
And indeed none of these things were thought superstitious, till opinion of
merit, and of efficacious operation, was annexed to them. But to conclude, if
ceremonies of humane institution being significant to some duty which Gods
worship requires, be unlawful, I see not but men may refuse to take a lawful
oath, because ones laying their hand on the book and kissing it, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
signifies a worshipping God the author of that book, in taking the oath, and
that one does aver the truth of his conscience toward man, as well as his
faith toward God in so doing. Nor can a man keep the Lords day religiously, if
it be not a mystical and significant sign to him of the resurrection of Christ
past, Heb. 4.9.
and of our spiritual rest from sin, and of that eternal rest which is promised
to the people of God. Nor do I see how people can have any religious respect to
Churches, if they take them not as signs or shadows of the celestial Temple,
Zanch. de Redemp. l. 1. tract. de tempt. col. 703.
where the spirits of the faithful are collected together praising the Lord.
Nor can we keep any festival, without casting an eye upon what it relates to
in his signification. And truly if ceremonies had no signification, they were
the more fit to be cast out of the Church as unprofitable, and as such as the
Papists use that want sign and sense.


Mathe. But having been superstitiously abused, they ought rather to be
abolished, then used in the Church services.


Phila. Yet in Josh. 6.19. the spoil of Jericho is commanded by Joshua to be
brought into Gods treasury. And Gideon was commanded to take the wood of the
idolatrous grove, and offer sacrifice, Judge. 6.26. We find also, that those
things which the Jews abused, was continued by godly men, Bishops of Jerusalem
in the Primitive times, as Circumcision though not as a Sacrament, but as a
sign to show they came of the line of Abraham. So the Feast of Easter was kept
by many reverend and worthy Bishops and Martyrs, before the Council of Nice,
on the same manner and day as did the Jews, but not with the same end as the
Jews did. So the Council of Nice did not abolish the feast of Easter, but
changed it into the Lords day. So the Papists have abused the Lords Supper by
erroneous opinions, and idolatrous adorations of it, which shows many good
things may be abused, and yet are not therefore to be disused: this were to
deny the use of the Sun, because Absalom lay with his fathers concubins in the
open light. Surely a ceremony washed from superstitious dirt (may be used in
the Church) by mutation or correction, Clem. Exam. p. 34. c. 1. Zanc. de Red.
in 4. precept. p. 678.
without utter abscission; for they being thus purged, are sanctified to holy
use. And so the Church of England only retained three, the Surplice to warn the
Minister of purity; the Cross to warn Christians of constancy, and kneeling to
admonish communicants of humility. We know the Papists have abused these and
others to superstition: but abuse makes nothing evil, which is not evil in it
self. And therefore the best reformed Divines have concluded even as ancient
fathers have done before them, who did not demolish all that was dedicated to
idolatry, Calv. opuscul. tracb. de vitand. superst. p. 78.
but converted them to better use. So neither does Mr Calvin approve of that
morosity in men, who because some ceremonies of the Papists may not be
observed, therefore none may; yea, some non Conformists have written, that
though the Papists have dedicated Churches to idolatry, yet there being a good
use for them among us, they may be retained; as also Popish vestments may be
altered, and make ornaments for the Church. And surely they say well in that,
and it were good if the rest would not wrest away the liberty of the Church in
such things, which may make a lawful use of indifferent ceremonies for
convenience without offense to God.


Mathe. But yet they are offensive to many good men, and therefore to be left
off.


Phila. First we must consider whether they be offensive in themselves, or made
offensive by the intention of the Church, Theo. l. 3. c. 16.
as Julian the Apostate set up his image in the Market place, among the images
of the heathen gods, that he that gave eivill respect to his image, might be
thought also to do honor to them; or if they did no respect, then they might
seem to despise both the gods and the Emperor. So he set an Altar near his
throne with a fire upon it, and incense upon a table, Sozo. l. 3. c. 17.
and all Officers of his army that came to receive his largess of gold, did
first cast some incense into the fire, by which many were scandalized or caused
to stumble. So he caused all the fountains in the region of Antioch, to be
dedicated to the heathen goddesses, and all the meat in the Market to be
sprinkled with heathenish holy water; yet the Christians were so wise, as not
to avoid their drink and meat, knowing that to the clean all things are clean,
Tit. 1.15. and also bought what was sold, and made no scruple, as 1 Cor. 10.25.
Then next we must consider, whether the offense arises not from our own
ignorance and weakness, and so we be not straightened by the Church, but in our
own bowels, and so like little children that complain their clothes are to
little when their bellies are too full. The offense must lie in one of these;
If it lie in the Agent, it is either directly evil, as David's matter of Vriah,
2 Samuel 12.24. which was sin, or else it is indirectly, and so either with or
without the intention of the Agent. 1. Without his intention, as Peter, Gal.
2.11. in a partial complying with the Jews, had no intent to offend the
Gentiles. 2. With his intention, as when men do it of purpose to stumble
others. So Heretics by seeming holy and austere, have drawn many from the
truth, as did the Novatians, who decreed, that men who had fallen by infirmity,
should never be received again into the Church: by which seeming strictness
they got many followers, and continued many years, even from the reign of
Decius, to the reign of Julian, and after. So we say men may give offenses to
the weak, or to the strong: to the strong, as Peter was an offense to Christ,
when he bid him to favor himself; Mat. 16.
for though he spoke out of good will, yet Christ found it a subtle temptation,
and so cast it as a stumbling block out of his way. 2. To the weak (who are not
able to distinguish) we give offense when we do unadvisedly lay things in their
way, Mat. 18.
which may annoy them before they be aware. It is true we are not to offend one
of Christ's little ones: But now things indifferent when they be fully
determined by the Church of God, we must not be contentious, it is not the
custom of the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. of which Church we must be more
tender, then of any particular men, 1 Cor. 10.23. But if indifferent things be
not at all, or but in part determined by the Church of God, then we must
consider charitably of other men's consciences, who are not fully persuaded of
the lawful use of them: and therefore they are so far to be used, as they may
prove no offense to others, So 1 Cor. 10.25. Eat, and make no question or
scruple, because God has given us liberty to use, or not use them; the earth
is the Lords to do thee good; but in case of offense against thy brother, eat
not, the earth is the Lords to hurt no man's conscience by my liberty, or Gods
allowance: so that first he says eat and make no scruple, though the Feast was
dedicated to Idols, for the earth is the Lords, and man's superstition cannot
abridge thee from the lawful use of the creature. But if a weak brother that
is not well satisfied in Christian liberty, shall inform thee of the idolatrous
Feast, saying, this meat is offered to idols, then use not thy Christian
liberty to the wounding of that weak conscience; for the earth is the Lords for
thee to use lawfully, and not licentiously. Therefore the Council of the
Apostles, Acts 15. though they gave liberty to eat meats that were forbidden by
Moses law, yet restrained the Christians from things strangled, and from blood,
and things offered to idols, left they should offend the Jewish people newly
converted to the Christian faith. Acts 15.3.
So St Paul circumcised Timothy (his father being a Greek) to shun giving
offense to the Jewish converts, yet at another time he would not circumcise
Titus, Gal. 2.3, 4.
lest he thereby should approve the doctrine of those that imposed upon
Christians an absolute necessity of circumcision, contrary to the liberty of
the Gospel. Herein the Apostle carried the matter with great discretion,
letting religion regulate charity, and charity regulate Christian liberty.


Mathe. But though many things may be lawful, yet not expedient; for though
one intends no scandal, yet it may be taken though not given, and therefore
such offensive things are to be avoided.


Phila. Not so; for men may be offended at that which must not be avoided; for
men may be corrupted (that take offense) in their judgment, or in their
affections. 1. In their judgment, as those people were, that took offense at
Christ's doctrine, saying, that they must eat the flesh of the Son of man, else
they had no life in them, Joh. 6.53. because they understood not the spiritual
sense of it, ver. 52. So in their affection; as when by pride men take offense
at the simplicity of the Gospel, as 1 Cor. 1.23. Christ crucified was to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishness. It is true, that
where there is no declaration of the right use of things indifferent, we are to
indulge the weak, P. M. lo. com. class. 2. c. 4. p. 201.
but where a declaration is, or may be had concerning the using or not using
such things, there we are not to nourish men's presumptions instead of
weakness. I know some pretend that Papists may be the more confirmed in their
Religion, to see reformed Churches use their ceremonies. But I think rather by
our reforming what they have abused, they may rather see the error of their own
religion. We may as well refuse their Churches as their ceremonies, and they
may as well be settled the more in their religion by our not using them (but I
fear more by abusing them.) Indeed some ministers have objected against the use
of them, but yet are now reconciled to them for advantage sake. So others say
that our use of these ceremonies makes profane persons to contemn all religion;
but I think rather that men's stripping religion of decent rites, does more
confirm profaneness, then clothing of it with decent ceremonies, and brings in
disparity more then uniformity. So some object it is a great hindrance to
preachers that cannot conform to them; but the necessity of preaching the
Gospel ought to overpoize any ceremony, because a woe follows the neglect of
one, 1 Cor. 9.16. Cartw. replica. p. 266.
but none for using the other. Others say, that if some ministers who are non
Conformists should submit themselves, it were a discredit to them; but yet St
Augustine won himself much glory by writing retractations: Some again, that
the command of conformity to a ceremony, does infringe Christian liberty; but I
say then it must be proved that the Church teaches that there is a necessity
to salvation placed in humane ceremonies, or else a necessity of sanctity, or
of merit, or that they must be necessary to Gods worship. Indeed if the Church
did so, I confess she did destroy Christian liberty; V. Calv. Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 10. Sect. 4.
for it is not obedience necessary to man's commandment that infringeth
Christian liberty, but the opinion of necessity in the matter of command, as if
to do it were necessary to eternal life. This indeed were to offer violence to
the scepter of Christ, by which a man has a liberty in things indifferent,
which invasion the Church of England disclaimeth in the 39 Articles.


Mathe. God having so settled his Church, what is required of it?


Phila. That it be established in an holy stare of Magistrate, Minister and
people, most agreeable to his revealed truth in Christ, that as God the Father
was acknowledged by his creation and providence, so the Son of God might be
worshipped for his redemption, and the Holy Ghost be known by his operating in
us the blessed ends that God intended in our creation, and the effects of
Christ's redemption that so the office of Christ, as a King, Priest, and
Prophet, may be set forth by our faith and obedience to the same. Of this holy
and orderly state, God made Israel a type, Esa. 51.15, 16.
when he did that which Esaias makes repetition of, saying, I have covered thee
in the shadow of my hand namely, I kept thee in thy going through the
wilderness to Canaan that I might plant the heavens, and lay the foundation of
the earth, that is, that I might make thee a state consisting of superiors and
inferiors as a body politic, and say to Sion, thou art my people. And as he
made them into Prince, Priest and people under the Law, so certainly he did not
intend to leave the Gospel people to disorder and confusion; and therefore he
made Kings nursing fathers, and Apostles, Bishops and Presbyters, to instruct,
and people to be ruled and instructed, as I have already declared; it remains
to show what effects in the mystery of godliness the blessed spirit works on
Christ's redeemed people called the Church.


Mathe. That I desire to know.


Phila. First it works in Christ's Church, people outward and inward holy
worship. The outward consists in places, utensils and gestures, fit for
divine service. The inward consists in an holy heart and life answerable
thereunto, which is wrought in us by the operation of the Holy Ghost the third
person in the most holy Trinity.


Mathe. What am I to conceive and believe of the Holy Ghost, since I find
little speech of him in the Creed, save only in one article or two at most.


Phila. Though you find little speech of him, as you do of the name of the
Father and the Son, yet all those Articles of the Creed that follow from
believing in the Holy Ghost, do relate to him, and to his operations upon the
object thereof, which is the holy Catholic Church, which he sanctifies, by
making in it the communion of Saints, and sealing to it the remission of sin,
and bestowing upon it the power of the blessed resurrection, and the felicity
of eternal life. And insomuch as we are taught to believe in the Holy Ghost,
as well as in the Father and the Son, that word (in) does intimate to us, 1.
That he is God as well as the Father and Son, or else we may not believe upon
him. But we find that we are to be baptized into his name, together with the
Father and the Son, Mat. 28.29. 2. That he proceeds from the Father and the
Son, and therefore called the Spirit of the Father and the Son. Of the Father,
John 15.26. and of the Son, Romans 8.9. and proceeds from the Son, in that he
breathed him upon his disciples, John 20.22. and yet is a distinct person from
them both, as appears, Mat. 3.17. where the Father speaks, and the Holy
Ghost descended, and the Sun submitted his humane nature to baptism, and yet
he is equal to the Father and the Son, and therefore divine worship is due to
him as to them. Therefore it is fit that we know him in his nature and
operations.


Mathe. I pray declare them to me.


Phila. I shall, first he is eternal, and was before the world, Genesis 1.2. and
cannot alter his nature and condition. So secondly, he is immense, and so every
where present, Psalm. 139.7. and therefore he is at hand always to give us his
help and assistance. Again, he is omnipotent, Romans 15.19. all wonders and
miracles were done by him, and therefore he is able to deliver us, and make us
for ever most happy, as well as he is omniscient, knowing all our wants, Acts
10.19. 1 Cor. 2.10. Now for his effects they are either common or proper;
common to all creatures, or all men. To all creatures, as in the creation, when
the spirit of God cowred on the waters and earth mixed together, not yet
separated (as an hen sitting on eggs) thereby qualifying that chaos to take
several forms, Genesis 1.2. which spirit also garnished the heavens, Job 26.13.
and is still sent forth to continue the creature by production and generation,
Psalm. 104.30. which kind of operation is common also to all men, Job 33.4. the
spirit of the Lord has made me: and not only so, but the same spirit gives
inventions to men, of Arts and Sciences, as to Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exodus
31.3. so to write excellent things for the common use of men; so to qualify
Ministers with the gifts of prophecy and preaching, and tongues, yet not all
with saving grace, mat. 7.22. So many men have illumination to discern of some
doctrines of faith, by drawing off the veil that hangs before other men's eyes,
though without application to themselves, or correspondent practice of such
knowledge, Heb. 6.4, 5. they have a taste, but no delight nor digestion; for it
neither takes them from the love of the world, nor makes them the more to love
God or goodness; yea, and in other men he works restraining grace to forbear
some foul sins, as Abimelech to forbear Sarah, Genesis 20.6. yea, and to do some
laudable actions, contrary to their disposition, 1 Samuel 10.10. when Saul
prophesied, which was so strange to the people, that it became a proverb, Is
Saul also among the Prophets. This restraining grace God gives the wicked, not
sur their own, but for the Churches sake, who would by them otherwise in their
lusts, be basely defiled, or utterly destroyed. Now there be other operations
and effects of the spirit, proper to the elect, and some of them are general,
and some particular: the general are the conception of Christ, and the
qualification of his humane nature to make it fir for the great work of
redemption of the elect, Isa. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me to preach
glad tidings, etc. which spirit he received without measure, John 3.34. The
second general work is his dwelling in the elect, by which they are made a
temple for God, 2 Cor. 6.10. and built together for Gods habitation, Ephesians. 2.22.
Also regeneration of them, whereby they are washed and sanctified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. Then next he
uniteth the elect into one mystical body by faith and love in the bond of
peace. Beside, Ephesians. 4.3.
he has particular operations in the singular persons of the elect; as first
he works in them liberty from the power of sin, and ability to subdue the
corruption in nature, which neither natural reason, not moral prudence can
do, but where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.13. because
the law of the spirit of life has made us free from the law of sin and death,
Romans 8.2. And this the spirit does by exercising of us in the works of
mortification, till we have crucified the old man, and even wounded sin to
death, by becoming to us the spirit of judgment and burning, Esa. 4.4. both
to condemn our selves, and to consume our dross; therefore it continually
lusts against the flesh, and makes our hearts to rise against sin, Gal. 3.
as it does against any thing we hate; and if at any time we yield to the
flesh, this good spirit becomes like a voice behind, calling to us that we are
out of the way, Esa. 30.21. by daily good motions and checks of conscience, and
by baptizing us with fire, Mat. 3.11. inflaming our hearts with an holy revenge
upon sin, and with a love to all goodness, righteousness and truth. Then next
he does infuse divine graces into the heart, which are like so many letters
commendatory of us to God; as faith to believe above reason natural, as
Abraham did, Romans 4.17. and without any visible means, Heb. 11.1. so also he
works in us love to God, by which we tender the pleasure of God above all
things in doing and suffering, of which we are never ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by this holy spirit which he has given us,
Romans 5.5. and makes us wait by hope, for the righteousness to be revealed,
Gal. 5.5. with longing and sighing, Romans 8.23. and praying by the spirit of
supplication poured by him upon us, Zac. 12.11. and never leaves till he has
made us partakers of the divine nature, resembling God in selfe-contentment,
though we be shut out of the worlds society, and in being in love with good men
that are begotten of God, 1 John 5.1.
therefore he is called the spirit of love, Romans 15.30. and in wisdom, Mar.
13.11.
whereby the elect discern those mysteries which none knows but God and they,
for they are not discerned by others, 1 Cor. 2.14. and also in transforming
them into the practice of those things they hear and believe by this spirit,
from one glorious grace to another, 2 Cor. 3.18. and this through the
sanctification of obedience, 1 Pet. 1.2. by which he gives us comfort, by
giving us peace of conscience, and joy in assurance of remission and freedom
from the guilt of sin, in which respect he is called the comforter, John 16.7.
and so he is, but especially in the times of affliction, wherein he gives them
such tastes of heavenly glory, as makes them to contemn all earthly things, and
rejoice in tribulations, Romans 5.4. because this spirit of glory rests upon
them, 1 Pet. 4.14. Thus he goes always with the elect, working in them a
spiritual strength to persevere, though sometimes they be like smoking flax,
almost choked in their sad melancholy fumes, or like bruised reeds that have no
strength, then does he establish the inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. by nourishing the
seeds of grace sown in our dry ground, by his sweet dew from above, Esa. 44.3.
and by his secret and powerful assistance in the times of trial, 2 Cor. 12.9.
bearing witness to them, that they are the sons of God for all their crosses
in this world, Romans 8.15. which he seals to them by the promises believed,
concerning Christ and himself, Ephesians. 1.13. All which considered, we should make
much of this spirit, and not grieve it, nor quench it. Not grieve it by acting
without it, by our own sensual desires, and separating our selves from the
societies where he does afford his gracious dispensations, Jud. 19. or do not
acknowledge his power in giving them skill and abilities to perform their
several places and callings; nor asking counsel of him, or direction from
him, Esa. 30.1. but rather despise it even in his ordinances, 1 These. 4.8. and
turn their ear from it, as Neh. 9.20, 30. and harden their hearts against it,
Zac. 7.12. and rebel against his doctrine, and so grieve him in his ministers,
Esa. 63.10. and Acts 7.51. as St Stephen told the Jews, yea, to tempt him by
venturing to try whether he will punish them or no, as Ananias and Saphira did,
Acts 5.9. by all which they show, that whatsoever portion of the spirit they
have received, yet it is in vain. Also we must not quench it as some do fire by
casting on water, or withdrawing that which should feed it, ^ Tim. 1.6.
or lose it as we do springs, for want of endeavor to draw or pump them. And
this men do, when after they have had some taste of heavenly gifts in remorse
for sin, or some joifull apprehensions of Gods promises, yet they fall away,
and having begun in the spirit, yet end in the flesh, Gal. 3. So when they fall
into gross sins, after calling to grace, they cause the Holy one to cease from
them in his operation for a time, and so lose the joy which formerly they found
in Gods service. So do they discourage the spirit of their Teachers, so that
they cannot do their work with joy, but grief, Heb. 13.17. Thus by living in
known sins, they sad the spirit which would seal them to the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. which may possibly conduce to the unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost, if these be not repented of.


Mathe. I pray declare to me that sin, as plain as you can.


Phila. It is a wilful and total falling away from the grounds and true
beginnings of Christ, and from that spiritual fellowship, which one has had
with the people of God therein, after ones illumination and outward
sanctification, contemning the Gospel, and despighting the methods and
operations of the Holy Ghost without repentance, even to death. All this may be
gathered from Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and Heb. 10.25, 26, 27. But this must be rightly
understood. As first, that he must be one enlightened with some competent
knowledge in true religion, and sanctified by outward calling, at least to the
covenant of grace, Heb. 10.29. and the seals thereof though not sanctified by
saving grace, which shows it self by true repentance from all sin, and by
relying on Christ by faith for his salvation. So next he must wilfully
apostate, Heb. 10.26. as it were without temptation, not as David by lust, or
Peter by fear, yea, it must be a total falling from all parts of truth, which
may possibly overpower his nature, by the terrors of the law. Also he must
despise the Gospel, and even loath the way of salvation by Christ, and scorn,
the Gospel, which is the means of sanctification, and has in some manner
worked formerly upon himself some change of mind and manners. Besides, he must
offer some despite by blasphemy and persecution, and that not of ignorance,
as Paul did, but of desperate malice; and that not only to the person of the
holy, as many have done to the person of the Father and Son, by many
presumptuous sins, but to the work of grace, and operating power of the Holy
Ghost in us, by which God comes more near to us then in other things, or to
his power showed outwardly for approving Gospel Truth. So the Pharisees
blasphemed the miracles of Christ, saying, that they were wrought by Beelzebub,
Mat. 12.24. whereas be did them by the spirit of God, ver. 28. by which they
were convinced, both what, and from whence he was, Joh. 7.28. Again, this sin
must be continued in without remorse, which sometimes makes men despair of
mercy, when they reflect upon the greatness of their sins, which men may do,
though they never committed this sin; yet this sin is continued unto death, as
appeared in Julian the Apostate, without any repentance; and therefore is
called the sin unto death, 1 John 5.16. and the sin unpardonable by our
Savior, Mat. 12.13. not because it exceeds Gods mercy or the merits of Christ,
but because it prevents and disappoints the application of them for want of
faith and repentance, they having apostated in their very heart (which is the
place where faith and charity should be rooted) although they do not always
show it outwardly, Heb. 3.12.


Mathe. How may one be sure to escape this sin?


Phila. First let him examine himself whether he have the Holy Ghost, Romans
8.9. and we may know it by its lusting against the flesh, and making our heart
to rise against sin, Gal. 5.17. Next it begets in us a pleasant taste of things
that are of a spiritual nature; for of our selves we have spiritual foul
palates, like people in fevers, Romans 8.5.
that makes them distaste what is good. Next it stirs us up to mortify sin and
all evil concupiscence, Romans 8.13. and then it gives us victory over sin, by
making us free from the law of sin, by the law of the spirit of life, Romans 8.2.
so that the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousness, Romans 8.10. by which the heart is circumcised, as well as the
outward man or the outward manners, Romans 8.29. Beside, this spirit does
transform us into the image of holiness from one glorious grace to another, as
he hears them related in Gods word, wherein we behold the glory of God, 2 Cor.
3.18. also it makes us glorify God in the very fires of affliction, because
his love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. and when a
man finds that he has the Holy Ghost, then let him beware of those sins that
are forerunners of this. As first, the forsaking of that means by which they
were once enlightened, as the Jews did the ministry of John the Baptist, who
was a burning and a shining light, and for a while they rejoiced in his light,
but after fell away. So take heed of affecting men's praises more then Gods, and
of a common alienation of the mind from goodness, and of evil actions without
temptations, of envy at godly men, and misinterpretations of their good words
and works. If they have any sense of these sins, break off the course of them,
lest you proceed to the contempt of the operation of this good spirit, but
rather behave themselves as those that partake of the spirit, Gal. 5.25. by
bringing forth the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22. as love, joy, peace, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. by which
they are known to be his Church.


Mathe. What mean you by the Church?


Phil. This word Church is to be considered nominally, locally, and personally.
The word or name Ecclesia, the Church, was used among the Athenians for an
assembly of Citizens called together out of the common multitude by name, by a
public Crier to hear the decrees of the Senate; which word is used by the
Apostle, to signify the Church Christian, which also signifies a company of
people called together by the voice of Gods ministers, out of the rude world,
and kingdom of Satan to hear the Gospel revealed from Heaven. But the word
Church is derived of the Greek word that signifies Lord; from which word
Kyriake or Kyrios, Lord, comes the Scotch word Kirk, and our word Church.

2. This word is taken for a place of holy assemblies to meet in about the
service of God: so 1 Cor. 11.18. when you come together in the Church, which
though not (it may be) such as ours is, yet being a place set apart for such an
use he calls it the Church. And such places the Christians had from the
Primitive times, which being the place that contained those that were the
living Churches of God, namely, faithful Christians, the place so containing
in a figurative form of speech, Aug. Q. 57. in Levit.
is called by the name of the people contained therein, which ancient writers
have not feared to call holy places, in regard of their separation to holy
uses; and therefore as Christ did not allow common things to be set or carried
through the Temple, so the ancients did not like that holy services that
concerned general meetings should be done in common places or houses, Basil.
in Rug. comp. explic. Q. and respo. 310.
except dedicated to holy uses, urging that in 1 Cor. 11. to forbid common
eating in the Church, and the holy banquet in a private house. That the word
(Church) has been used for place, it appears by all that have anciently
written on the 1 Cor. 11. or commented thereupon. Sedul. Com. C^^y^ost. Theodo:
And indeed there were such places from the beginning of the Gospels reception,
even from the time of the Apostles, to the Emperor Constantines time, Called
(...), and (...).
three hundred years after Christ, though they were no stately structures, but
at first some upper rooms in houses, which some devout Christians dedicated to
divine worship: Bid de locit sanct. ^^. 3. c. 3.
the first of which was thought to be that upper chamber where Christ kept his
last supper, and where the holy spirit descended upon the Apostles, where they
had assembled before, and where Christ had twice appeared to them on the first
days of the week, John 20. In this place it seems the Apostles met often upon
weighty occasions, as in the choice of the seven Deacons, Hieron. Ep. 27.
and there was the first Council held about circumcising the Gentiles, Acts
15.6. And this place some called the chamber of Sion, and the upper Church of
the Apostles, Cyril Hieroso.
which place seemed to be sufficiently consecrated by the presence of Christ in
the celebration of the holy mystery of his Sacrament, Psalm. 50.2.
so that from Sion God appeared in perfect beauty, and the Gospel went forth
from Sion, as the Law from Sinai. And we need not make doubt of this, when we
consider how men sold their possessions, and then laid them down at the
Apostles feet, who no doubt with such money would purchase some place for
Christian-assembly, and rather this then any other, being first sanctified by
Christ's institution of his last supper there; and therefore some take this
place for that house where the Apostles sat together, when the Holy Ghost fell
upon them, Acts 2.2. and indeed we read not of any place more likely for their
convention, than there where their Master, and our Lord Jesus made his last
supper. Others think also, that Acts 2.46. from house to house, (...),
understood for (...), as the Syri, and Arab. gives it.
is to be understood of the Christians going from the Temple to this house
where they broke the bread of the Eucharist, and after that did eat their own
meat with gladness and singleness of heart, and the rather, because Christ
had forbid them to go from house to house, Luke 10.7. and therefore their going
from house to house, was only from the Temple to this Oratory in the morning to
receive the Sacrament, and then to pass to other places of their repast; which
order the Church of Corinth neglecting, St Paul began to reform, by blaming
them for taking their own meat before the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.21. which
taken of it fasting, was seconded by the second Council of Maliscon, Can. 6.
Cent. 6.
The next place of holy assemblies you may read of, is at Troas, Acts 20.7. an
upper room three stories high. After this, as believers increased so they
either gave places for assemblies out of their devotion, or built some upon
ground purchased, as Eusebius tells us out of Philo, Eus. Eccl. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 16.
and shows their orders of serving God in those places, by hearing Scriptures
read, and expounded and sung Psalms, and distinct of ministe rial degrees, and
also distinct places for men and women. It is plain from Romans 16. that some had
such places in their houses, wherein were many Christians assembled; but if it
were but a family only, St Paul salutes the master of the family and his
household, as Aristobulus household, Romans 16.10. but if it were a place of more
general meeting, Oecumen. in Romans 16.
then he called it the Church in such an ones house, as Romans 16.5. and Col.
4.15. salute Nymphas and the Church in his house. And that there were places o^
great capacity and resort, in the first hundred years after Christ, by the
relations not only of godly Christians and first Fathers and martyrs, Lucian in
Philop. Clem. Recog.
but by the report of the very heathens themselves living in that age, as
Clemens speaks of the house of Theophilus, to whom St Luke dedicateth his
Gospel, and book of the Acts of the Apostles, that was turned into a Christian
oratory. So some think Pudeus house was the like after his martyrdom, of whom
Paul makes mention, Clem. in Epi. ad Corinth.
2 Timothy 4.21. in which places they did orderly worship God by men ordained to
that work, and on times appropriated for that purpose, that so Gods service
might be discriminated by persons, times, and places, appropriated thereunto.
Therefore we find them to have a common form of prayer, Ignat. in Epi. ad
Magnes.
to which they were exhorted to meet in one place, that with one mind and one
mouth, they might glorify God in Jesus Christ, Theoph. Antio. henus, lib. 2.
ad Autolycum.
Romans 15.6. And these places they called by the names of Synagogues and holy
Churches, though the same word Church also sometimes signified the congregated
persons of holy people, Clem. Alexand. lib. 7. strom. And by others the house
of God, Constituti Apo. lib. 2. c. 57.
which is described to be plain, open, and long, and toward the East, toward
which in those days the Christians worshipped God in their Church service,
Tertul. Apol. cap. 16. These places were most of them demolished in the times
of persecution; as Claudius had banished the Jews from Rome, Acts 18.2. So
Commodus deprived Christians of their houses; Dioclesian threw down their
Churches in the third century, which were set up in the first and second, as
was foreprophecied by Hippolitus in the beginning of the third century, Hippol.
de consum. mundi.
as a preceding sign of Antichrist. The Churches says he shall be made as
common houses, or else quite ruined, or turned into a kind of warehouses, or
Costermongers storehouses; the Sacrament of Christ's body shall hardly be
extant; the Liturgy shall be extinguished, the singing of Psalms shall cease,
and Scriptures scarce be heard. This may agree to our time, and a beginning to
the last apostasy, since we contemn those places of worship, which our
religious primitive predecessors thought fit to set up, and were only
demolished by heathens and heretics. If you desire further satisfaction of
these places, called Churches, see Cypr. de opere and Eleemosynis, and Eusebius.
lib. 8. and t. 9. Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 8. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 38. M. Falux.
I know some object that some ancient heathen writers about these times that I
have spoken of, did upbraid the Christians, because they had neither Temples
nor Altais, Origin cont. Celsam. Arnobius. Lactan. adv. gent. l. ^. c. 2.
nor Images; and the learned Fathers confess that they had none, nor ought to
have any; but that is, such as the heathens had, to which they confined their
divilish deities, as to images and places: but that the Christians had such to
meet in for divine worship, the Fathers never denied, as is already proved,
though they seldom called their Churches by the name of Temples, to difference
them from Idol-temples, Orig. hom. in cap. 9. Josuah.
but Ecclesiae, Churches or places to congregate the Church of God in together,
as may be gathered from some of their homilies, which place some also call the
Temple of God, Lact. lib. 5. cap. 2.


Mathe. Those Churches were founded indeed for Gods service, but ours have been
dedicated to Idolatry, as the heathens were, and therefore not fit to be used
by us Christians.


Phila. Seeming sincerity must not disanull Christianity in the use of any such
things, since all things are sanctified by faith and prayer, and since that to
the clean all things are clean, and that it is lawful for us to hold up pure
hands in all places without doubting. Do you not read that the spoils of
Jericho were dedicated to God, yea, the very Babylonish garment which cost
Achan his life for robbing God of it; and that St Paul made no scruple to be
and pray in a ship, named the Castor and Pollux. And did not the first
Christians in this land make use of the Temples which King Lucius our first
Christian King sequestered from Idolatry to Christian devotion. Or do you find
any man of sober mind, till the Brownists made their schism from our Church,
that ever refused to serve God in those Churches, which Papists formerly had
used in their Religion; nay have not some of them made use of Monasteries of
worse foundation than Churches, as at Campin and Narden in the Netherlands,
where they met weekly to act their public devotions, so that they are one way
in opinion, and of another in practice. I know they object, Deuteronomy. 12.1. that
Israel was commanded to destroy the heathens places of worship; but they
consider not that that very commandment was given to drive them to that one
place, in which God had appointed to put his name, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. so that we
may by better reason pull down all private Conventicles, that people may be
brought to the place of Gods public worship. They may as well be afraid to
pray in any Parish called by a superstitious name, as in the Church so called,
if they neglect the doctrine of faith, which directs us to the true use of every
creature.

3. The Church is taken personally, and so for either the Church malignant,
Psalm. 26.5. called the congregation of evil doers, and sometime for the true
Church, or any assembly thereof; and that company is called Ecclesia, as the
assembly of the Jews was called the Synagogue, and of wicked men a
congregation, because like greges a flock of cattle, they met together
disorderly, as Acts 19.39, 41. Aug. in Levit. Q. 57.
called the Beasts of Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. though sometime they be used
indifferently one for the other, as Lev. 8.3. So that all the three words,
Kuriake, Synagogue and Ecclesia, signify a Church or an house set apart for a
people to meet in about sacred occasions, which people are the Church
personal, which Church is to be considered, as it is known to God, or to us.
As it is known to God, who only knows who are his; we rather believe it, then
see it, as our Creed teaches, when we say, I believe in the holy Catholic
Church, that is, I believe there is such an universal Church dispersed
throughout the world, though I know not the parties. Beside, this Church is to
be considered not only in the whole, but in the parts whereof every holysociety
is a communion of Saints, and so the Church is partly known to us, at least in
outward calling to be Saints, and in an answerable profession of it. As the
Brown, hold.
Not therefore such an holy society is meant, as is totally and perfectly
sanctified, and fully obedient to the whole will of God revealed; for such a
communion was never found in Adams family, there was a Cain, and Noah's Ark,
clean and unclean men, as well as beasts, that were as unlike in their
conditions, as the Raven and the Dove, Aug. in Joh. 6. Beda in Romans ^
as Shem and Cham; Rebecca had Esau in her womb as well as Jacob; the Church of
Israel had a world of wicked in it; in Christ's little College was one traitor;
in the field of the Church is tares as well as wheat, and a through reformation
or purgation of them, cannot be till the worlds end, Zuinglius art. 34.
Mat. 13.29. yet this Church is called the kingdom of Heaven in the New
Testament, because it makes us to be of heavenly natures, and guides us to
Christ's heavenly kingdom. But if we will be of a congregation absolutely holy,
Socrat. schol. lib. 5. cap. 10.
we must get a new found ladder to go up to heaven, as said Constantine to
Acesius the Novatian Bishop.


Mathe. What is meant by this personal Church?


Phil. Not any one man, as the Papists make the Pope to be the Church virtuall,
nor a company of any creatures, save men; for bruits are incapable of rational
doctrine, nor are Angels tied to it; for Christ is not their nature, but the
seed of Abraham, Heb. But the Church personal is a company of people every
where dispersed, effectually called ordinarily by the ministers of the word,
from the profaneness of the world, to the supernatural dignity of Gods
children, to whom they are united in Christ by faith, and to one another by
love. In which people we are to consider their invisible essence, and their
visible existence. First, their visible existence which they have in common
with the visible Church, being admitted into it by that way that God in his
word has appointed for that purpose, as the Jews were by circumcision under
the law, and both the professors of Christ among Jews and Gentiles by baptism
under the Gospel. Secondly, they are to be considered in their invisible
essence, which is faith in God through Christ, and love to one another. This
Church is included in the visible Church, though not so plainly discerned as
the visible is, yet they partake of the same blessings and afflictions with the
Church visible, as a child in the womb of the mother partaketh of her joies and
griefs.


Mathe. I pray Sir, show me the state and condition of the visible Church, and
how to distinguish of the invisible company from others merely visible, if it
may be.


Phila. The visible is that universal and Catholic Church, which God has
endowed with the means of salvation through Christ, typed or preached: as he
was typed and prophesied of, the Jews were a chief part of it, as they were a
settled Church; but before that it remained in the family of Adam, and Sheth,
and Noah, whose Ark was a type of the Church. Then after the flood in a few
families, especially in those that came of Shem, from whom came Abraham in the
ninth generation after him, being the son of Terah, whom God called from Vr of
the Chaldees, and with him settled his Covenant of Christ first promised to
Adam. From him came Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs, and from them the
people called Israel, after old Jacobs name, given him of God. But afterward
were called Jews, of Judah, whose tribe stood to the house of David, and was
the Kingly tribe; yet in process of time it came to be a name of profession or
distinction from the ten other tribes, who worshipped in the Temple of Samaria,
John 4.20. built upon the mount Gerizam, between whom there was a feude
implacable, as John 4.9. and St Paul affirms it a name of religious profession,
Romans 2.28. he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, but inwardly. But these were
once the true visible Church, especially after their redemption from Egypt by
Moses and Aaron, by whom God gave them laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, which
were put in practice first in their travels in the wilderness, and quiet
possession of Canaan, under diverse sorts of Governors, as first Moses,
secondly, Joshua, and then under Judges, Aug. de civit. dei, l. 18. c. 22.
for the space of 320 years, next under Kings, about 520 years, till they were
carried captive to Babylon for seventy years. Then they returned by King Cyrus
his leave, and had commission to rebuild the Temple, which was forty nine year
in finishing. From that time they were under the power of the Medes and
Persians, and such Deputies as they appointed, called the heads of the
captivity, such as Mesullam, Hanania, Benechia, Husadiah, Zerobabell of the
line of David, as also other ten more after Alexander the great, yet still
there was a visible Church among them. Next the government divolved to the
Machabees of the tribe of Levi, and in them continued, till Herod by the Roman
power deprived them of all sovereignty. In whose time Christ was born, 536
years after the captivity of Babylon, who like Daniels stone, put all the
former monarchies down, by setting up a new spiritual kingdom in men's hearts,
to which even Kings themselves should be subject. Now when he came, he found
the Church of the Jews in much confusion by Sects and schisms of Pharisees
and Sadduces, Herodians, and few that would entertain his doctrine, yet some
there was that were his disciples and followers, whom having converted by
preaching, and confirmed by miracles, and given his Sacraments as seals of his
New Testament he suffered death by the Jews envy, and the unjust judgment of
Pilate for man's redemption, as has been declared, and rose the third day after
for our justification, and about 40 days after having instructed and confirmed
them in the rule of his spirit all kingdom in the Church, he ascended into
heaven, and sent the Holy Ghost down upon them, who were with the rest of his
disciples, his visible Church, which they mightily increased by their travels
among the Gentiles, after the Jews had persecuted and despised the Gospel.


Mathe. Where was now the visible Church?


Phila. It was translated to the Gentiles, who were before without Christ,
being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. strangers from the
covenant of promise, and had no hope, but were without God in the world,
destitute of all good, and possessed with all evil, though convinced of a
godhead by nature, Romans 1.19. but rightly knew him not: some said that he was
One of himself; another, that the world was his son; so that when they came to
worship God, Orph. in 1 Sect. de Deo. Tresmig. in Pimaud. c. 9.
they did it by idols, as I have told you, seeking God downward in the
creature, by which they should have been led upward to God: yet God of his
infinite mercy takes this wild Olive, and plants it upon the stock of the Jew,
Jesus the root and offspring of David, that they might be the children of
Abraham, by living in the faith of Abraham, which is rightly to be a true
visible Christian, whether Jew or Gentile.


Mathe. Wherein consisted Abraham's faith?


Phila. In believing that God would raise up one out of his seed, in whom
mankind should be blessed, even Jesus Christ, whose sufferings were signified
by sacrifice, without which analogicall relation, they ^ould never have
savoured sweetly with God. And as believed on Christ to come, so Christians
believe on the same Christ passed. And this belief is the essential being of
a true Christian, that is, a trusting upon Christ by faith, for perfect
redemption. And this is that makes the difference between the visible and
invisible Christian; for the visible or external Christian, is one that
partaketh of the visible privileges of the Church, as Word and Sacraments, but
not of the invisible graces thereof: they hear and understand not: they
receive, but perceive not: they read, but believe not: they believe literally
not spiritually: they conceive, but do not produce Christ but abortively. But
the other Christian is not only visible by profession and participation of the
common rites of the Church, but is also a partaker of the invisible graces
offered and conveied under those outward mysteries of the Church, by the grace
of faith, which only justifies him to Godward, Jam.
and produces good works, whereby he is justified in his faith with man, and
approved a true visible Christian. But God requires only faith to justify
before him; Orig. in Romans 3. cap.
for the Lord required not of the penitent thief what before he had wrought,
nor did expect what work he should fulfill after he believed, but being
justified by the confession of his faith in Christ, our Savior joined him as a
companion with himself, being now ready to enter into Paradise. And that this
is the essential being of a true Christian, these Authors following will
manifest, namely, that such invisible Christians are justified before God by
faith, Romans 3.
without the deeds of the Law, so says Ignat. in Epi. ad Ephesians. Justin. in
dial. cum Tryphon. Clem. Alex. in strom. 7. Aug. ad Bonif. l. 3. c. 5.
Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 26. Ambr. in Romans 3. Basil mag. de humilitate. Victor
Antiochenus in Marc. 5. Raban. in Ecclum. c. ^. Remigius in Psalm. 29. Idiota c.
6. de conflictione carnis and animae. Giselbert in alterc. c. 8. Theoph. in
Romans 10. Bern. sermon. 3. de adventu dom. Rupertus in lib. 7. in Joh. c. 7.
Foleng. in Psalm. 2. Fulgent. ad Monim. l. 1. Honorius in spec. Ecclus. de not.
dom. Ferus in 1 p. pass. dom. Aquin. in Lect. 4. super Gal. 3. sic in Romans 3.
All these hold with St Paul, Romans 3. and c. 10. with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.
Therefore the Primitive Church baptized after such confession was made, as
Abraham was circumcised after he believed, Romans 4.11. yet Isaac was
circumcised, and all the children of Israel, at eight days old (except when
they traveled through the wilderness) into the faith of Abraham. So the
children of Christians were baptized into the faith of their converted parents,
Cypr. ^p. 59. See the bapt. of the Church of Geneva, printed 1641.
they believing in their parents, in whom as infants they had only sinned, and
for whom their parents believed, as well as for themselves. And though this
practice be not set down in the Scripture by verbal command, yet considering
that Christ gave some commandments by voice to his disciples, touching things
pertaining to the kingdom of God, Act. 1.2, 3. And this practice being of so
great antiquity in that kingdom of God, i. that is the Church, we need not
make doubt of it, except we will be contentious against the Churches custom,
See Hookers Eccles. Politic. lib. 1. sect. 14. Dr Field on the Church, l. 4.30.
1 Cor. 11.16. which ought to overruled men's fancies, and stand as a law to
quiet conscience, because the Church is directed by the same spirit that gave
the Scriptures, 1 of These. 4.8. and therefore Paul exhorts them to keep the
traditions they had been taught either by word, or by Epistle. And that
baptizing of infants was an Apostolical tradition, may be gathered both from
Councils and Fathers, as I have in part declared, and of which you may read
farther in Aug. l. 10. de genesis ad lit. c. 23. So Orig. Com. in 6. Romans Cypr.
Epi. ad Fidum. Council. Cartha. and Council. Melivitan. does curse those that
deny baptism to children. See also Irenaeus in his 2. lib. cant. Here Is. c. 39.
And if it were so anciently practiced, and no direct time set down when it
began, we may well conceive that it was delivered to the Church by by the
Apostles, and not taken from the Pope, who did not apeare many hundred years
after baptism of children was used in the Church. Now this baptism is the
first mark of a visible Christian, who next is discovered by those works, which
baptism requires of him, namely, to forsake worldly lusts and vanities, the
devil and all his wicked designs, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in the sight of all men; this is to be a visible Christian, and a company thus
qualified, make a visible assembly, and being settled by the Regiment of
Pastors, and necessary Officers for governing them, they are called a visible
Church constituted.


Mathe. What be the marks of an invisible Christian, by which he may know
himself to be of the true invisible Church? and then I shall desire some
satisfaction in the outward government of the Church.


Phila. The marks of an invisible Christian by which he knows himself to
belong to salvation in Christ, are vocation, adoption, regeneration,
justification and sanctification, and a certain hope of eternal glory built
upon his belief in Christ, which is the ground of his hope. Now vocation is
not that by which God calls men in common, by the Word and Sacraments, but a
divine virtue wrought in our hearts thereby, through the Holy Ghost, by which
we are moved from our corrupt and sinful condition, to a supernatural life in
Christ, to whom being united as to our head, are justified by faith, sanctified
by repentance to Gods glory, and a man's own salvation. This is an act of Gods
free good will to his elect, and therefore is both efficacious and unchangeable,
Romans 11.29. and therefore this grace of calling is not universal, but belongs
only to those whom God foreknew and elected, Romans 8.30. and whom Christ has
redeemed, only we may know that we are called, if our hearts be stirred up to
praise God for it, 1 Pet. 2.9. and pray to be established in it, 1 Pet. 5.10.
and to live a godly life, Ephesians. 4.1. aiming at eternal glory, that we may be
found blameless, 1 These. 5.23.

The next mark is adoption, a most gracious benefit of God whereby he receives
us that are strangers from him, for Christ's sake to be his children, and makes
us with him to become heirs of heaven and eternal life, Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.21.
by which we are encouraged to call God Father, Chrysostom hom. in Psalm. 150.
Romans 8. and confess that we have received, and hope to receive all graces and
favors from him. This grace is begun in this life, in those who receive Christ
by faith, John 1.12. in whom it appears they are sons, but yet it appears
not what they shall be, 1 John but that shall be perfected at the resurrection,
for which perfect adoption, we sigh longing for the redemption of our bodies,
Romans 8.23. Now we know that we are adopted by the liberty which God has given
us, not only from the servitude and bondage of the law, which exacts that of us
which we cannot do, and from the service under the dominion of sin, Romans 6. and
from humane traditions, and worldly rudiments, Col. 2. but also from that human
fear of serving God; so that we can serve him with a free and ready mind, as
Luke 1.74. he having delivered us, and so we delight in the law of God after
the inward man, and can come boldly to the throne of grace, to make our wants
known to God our Father.

The next note is regeneration, a blessed benefit of God, whereby he restores
our corrupt nature to his own image by the Holy Ghost, and the incorruptible
seed of his Word, 1 Pet. 1.23. This is the effect of a most blessed marriage,
where God is the Father, man's ear is the wife, the seed is the word, the heart
is the womb, and the regenerate soul is the child, which is bred with sighing,
and brought forth with sorrows, but great joy at the delivery. But as it
grows, it is like Jacob in great conflict with Esau, namely, the flesh, as
you see Romans 7. both dwell in one house, but Jacob the spirit always gets the
upper hand, both in the blessing and in the birthright, yet with great
reluctation in this, till we are freed by death, and the flesh glorified at the
resurrection. The effects of this regeneration is, 1. A love to God that begot
us above all things, and love to them that are begotten as we are, 1 John 2.
Avoiding of sin, 1 John 5.18. he that is born of God sins not, but keeps
himself, namely, he sins not willingly, wilfully, delightfully,
despitefully against the rule of grace, not continually, not to death, and by
virtue of Christ's resurrection, leads a new life, Romans 6.4. and 1 Pet. 1.3.
and therefore through Christ, God sees no sin in him to condemn him, however
he does to correct him; Romans 8.
for it is Christ that justifies, who can condemn.

The next note whereby one may know himself to be of the Church invisible, is
justification, which signifies as much as to make just, as to purify is to
make pure. The word is not found in any of the old and purest Latin authors,
but is taken up by diverse to express the Hebrew and Greek terms, Tsadhick.
(...).
of a just man. Now a man is said to be made just by infusion, or by plea. By
infusion, when the habit or quality of justice is put into one, as into Adam by
creation, and so men by regeneration in some degree; and thus one may be said
to be formerly or inherently just; yet to justify signifies somewhat else. 2.
A man may be justified by plea; as he that accuses one makes him unjust, Esa.
5.23.
so he that by plea does vindicate him, has made him an honest man, Job 9.20.
that is, to be esteemed or reputed so, as the ancient authors do interpret
the word. Hesichius. Suidas. (...) by (...).
So that in this case we are rather to lean to the common use of the word, then
to the sound arising from the notation; for Psalm. 119.4, 8. the law is called
by the interpreter, justifications, not because they justify a man, but
because they declare him just that does them, because he has done according to
those statutes. So a Judge condemning a malefactor, is not by that act made
formally, or inherently just, but approved just by that law which he has
executed. But this declaration of a man's justice, is not justification, for
that takes place upon accusation only: if Adam had not sinned, he might have
been commended and declared to be just and innocent, yet not properly
justified. So wisdom is said to be justified by her children, Mat. 11.19.
i. vindicated to be just against all the cavils of wicked men, by the apology
that her children make in her defense. Some men therefore are justified, yet
not inherently just; as when a fault is charged and acknowledged, and
satisfaction pleaded, or sufficient amends is made to the party offended, and
so freedom from punishment is merited, and the fault therefore as it were
extinguished, because the party offended reapeth as much benefit, as if the
fault had never been committed: but if the offended shall accept only of a bare
acknowledgement of a fault, or a promise of amends, that cannot be pleaded for
satisfaction to justify; or if the fault be of so high a nature, that no
sufficient amends can be made, there is no means for the offender to be
justified; otherwise if the party offended have made full satisfaction, then is
he free from punishment, and to be reputed blameless. Now this satisfaction is
made by doing or suffering, that which (saving the fault) is not due. And this
may be done by the offender himself, or by another for him: The offender
himself may plead satisfaction, if he can prove that the plaintiff has
committed as great a fault against himself. But satisfaction made by another,
is when the doing or suffering by another, is accepted for the doing or
suffering of the offender himself: and this may satisfy for the offender,
better then he can satisfy for himself oftentimes. So a man cannot satisfy
God for his offense by any act of his own, because his best righteousness is
imperfect and sinful; but being justified by another satisfaction, he is made
just by the justice of another, that is, by the imputation of the others merit,
though that merit be not reputed as done by the offender, but accepted for him,
no more then the offenders sin can be reputed his that justified him, though it
may be imputed to him. Now the effect of justification is pardon, which is the
remitting of punishment deserved by an offense, yet it is not any essential
part of justification, but only a consequent or contingent effect thereof. Now
justification is before God or man, that before man you may apprehend by what
has been said; that before God is thus to be considered. God is infinitely
just, sin is a transgression of his infinite will and wisdom, which is the
rule of justice; the punishment due to this sin, is everlasting torments in
hell; therefore to be justified before God, is to be cleared in his sight from
the guilt of sin, and to be absolved from that punishment, which in divine
justice is due to sin: and this none can avoid, unless he can plead the
fulfilling of the law, or that which is proportionable thereto; we cannot plead
the fulfilling of the Law, for the most righteous man does transgress it. Luke
1. sine querela, non sine culpa.
Zachary and his wife Elizabeth, walked in the law blameless, i. before men,
not God, and there none can plead any formal or inherent righteousness of his
own; and if no man can be so justified by pleading his own righteousness, then
he must be justified by some other proportionable satisfaction to Gods justice,
namely, by the righteousness of Christ, Romans 3.23, 24, 26. for it were a
blemish to Gods justice, to free a sinner from punishment, without his justice
be satisfied. No man can do that if he offend but one tittle of the law, nor
free himself from everlasting punishment: nor can he plead that he has
suffered any injury at Gods hand, whereby he can claim acquittance from the
least sin: nor can any other mere creature make satisfaction for him, that
creature being sinite, and Gods wrath infinite: therefore he that justifies
man, must not only be perfectly righteous himself, but infinite also, and
Almighty, and so no less then God, Esa. 63.1, 2, 3. Heb. 1.2, 6. Again, God
being but one, cannot properly be satisfied merely by himself, Gal. 3.20.
for that were in a manner to forgive without satisfaction, and to pardon
without justification; therefore the person that makes satisfaction, must be
not only God, but some way differing from him, and so inferior to him, Joh.
4.28. Now it would have puzzled Angels and men to find out such an one, God only
has revealed him in the Gospel, namely, Jesus Christ the only begotten son of
God, the second person in the most glorious Trinity, 1 John 14.18. Romans 3.24.
by whom we are justified by his satisfaction, and are made righteous before
God, by that righteousness which is formally in Christ alone, Romans 3.20. Phil.
3.8, 9. 2 Cor. 5.21. This Jesus Christ that he might make full satisfaction for
the sins of his elect, did take upon himself the guilt of their sins, Esa.
53.12. 1 Cor. 15.3. and assuming the nature of man into the person af his
deity, that so he was true God and true man, a fit mediator between God and
man; and so by the power of his divine nature, made full satisfaction in his
humane nature, Phil. 2.7. Heb. 2.14. and that by doing what we had, and by
suffering what we ought; and our failings are perfected by his active
obedience, and punishment remitted by his passive, and by both the whole man is
justified, both being imputed to us, and accepted of God for us; the one for
that inherent righteousness which should have been in us, and the other for
that satisfaction that we should have made in our own persons; for now God
esteems us as free from original and actual sin, Romans 5.8.
and from all sins of omission and commission, 1 John 1.9. and therefore are
esteemed as perfectly righteous, and therefore free from all punishment; for
you are not to understand, that by Christ's sufferings we are freed from sin,
Romans 4.25.
by his active obedience made righteous, but by both jointly; For they cannot
be separated, no more then we can find a medium between a righteous man, and
him that is no sinner. Now of this justification they alone do partake, who by
faith lay hold of it, and apply it to their selves, by which they may know they
are justified.

Another mark of a true Christian invisible, is sanctification, not of office
as consecration, but an holy quality of mind, and disposition and renovation of
spirit, by which we put off the old conversation, and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. And by this means we
come to walk worthy of our calling to holiness, 2 Timothy 1.9.
which must be now as our professions are in the Commonwealth, wherein every
one desires to excel by making his calling his business, and to show himself a
work man that needs not be ashamed. This the Apostle calls glorification, Romans
8.30. because indeed grace is but glory initiated, and glory is but grace
consummated. This is done when God is pleased to magnify the power of his word
in our hearts, to sanctify so thoroughly, that our spirits, souls and bodies,
may be blameless. Of this many boast of it, and the Papists nouzle them in it,
by saying, that sanctification is incident to reprobates; and that castawaies
may partake of the renewing of the Holy Ghost. But surely they may say as well,
that they are united to Christ, how else can they partake of his spirit? or can
they be sanctified that have not his spirit? or have they his spirit that are
not his members? Indeed there be some things that bear a resemblance with it,
in which the world is received: and that is, 1. Civility or common honesty; and
the next is restraining grace, by which they may be said to be sanctified
sacramentally, or putatively, Heb. 10.26.
or disposed toward it, Heb. 6.4, 5. but this is but to have it fieri, but non
in facto esse, i. in a way toward it, but not in thoroughly or truly: and
therefore men must distinguish between civility which is wrought merely by
moral education, according to natural principles, without any knowledge or
desire of knowing Gods word, but they are careful to maintain equity and
common honesty for the keeping up of trade, and commendation of themselves:
upon which ground also they keep themselves from drunkenness, whoredom, and
enormous crimes, without relation to Gods word. Now sanctification though it
incline to the same things or duties, yet it does it by the true medium of
heavenly light, which is the word of God; and they that do not so, are as far
from sanctification, as the heathen morallists. Now their civility, and all
mere natural men's honesty, stands principally in the duties of the second
table, where the light of nature is most clear; but for matters of piety in the
first table, they observe it but ceremoniously, and so far as they conduce to
preserve their credit among those they live withal: but true sanctification
has an eye to both, to give to Caesar and to God their several duties. Mat.
22.21.
So the moral holy man rests only in negatives, and thinks it charity enough
not to do hurt, but true holiness does both eschew evil, and do good, 1 Pet.
3.11. So the moral man thinks it holiness enough to profess a dislike of
popery, and to quarrel with a Bishops dignity, though they be utterly ignorant
of the orthodox faith, and the grounds of the true worship of God. Again,
civility never goes beyond the outward man, Mat.
because it takes hold only of the outward letter of the law, but passes over
the spiritual sense of it. So he that has restraining grace which he takes
for sanctification, is much deceived; for the difference between them is, that
restraining grace has painfulnesse and coffeehouse, at the bridle that God
puts upon them, and at the bands wherewith they are bound, at which they rage,
Psalm. 2.1, 3. as horses that some upon the bit by which they are guided,
whereas a man that is truly sanctified, desires that his very inclinations to
evil, were utterly abolished, that it might not rebel against the law of the
mind. Romans 7.23.
Again, they desire to extend their Christian liberty to the utmost, without
enquiring after the bounds of liberty, or the expedience of putting it in
practice; but a man sanctified desires to subsist within his bounds, 1 Cor.
6.12. and had rather live where nothing is lawful, then where all things are
lawful. Beside, there is great difference in their absteining from sin; for
restraining grace makes one abstain from sin for fear or shame, because they
would give the greater liberty to some sin which they desire to nourish, Aug.
de civit. dei, l. 5. c. 12.
as some heathens abstained from injustice, intemperance and covetousness, by
that unbounded desire which they had after glory and dominion; but he that is
sanctified escheweth evil because it is evil and displeasing to God, of whose
love he has had so large experience, that he trembles to offend him, Psalm.
130.4. Again, they that have only restraining grace, when the means of that
straint is removed, grow licentious, as Israel, when they had no King, Judge.
17.6. and the 18.19. but they that are sanctified are a law to themselves, 1 Timothy 1.9. they need none of the terrors of it, though they are willing to be
led by the doctrine of it. By these rules thou may know whether thou art
sanctified or not, and from these marks arise an assured hope of eternal
glory, because we carry about us the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, of which at the first it may be we have but a
conjecture, i. a light inclination to the probability of Gospel truths; next
an opinion, wherein the mind is more strongly swaied to think it true. Next
comes faith, which makes a firm and undoubtfull persuasion of the truth of it.
Now in this case some have a little faith, some a full assurance of it, which
is peculiar to Gods people; and they may know they have it by the comfort that
it affords to one under the pressures of sin and Gods justice, Psalm. 73.23, 24.
and also by the ravishing of the affections to the love of those truths, which
is very strange and supernatural; for there is no greater antipathy in the
world, then there is between man's heart and Gods word, and yet by faith is bred
such affection to it, that a man will give his life, rather then one tittle of
this truth should fail: and beside, it works a strange change in the whole
man from sin to righteousness, that one can hardly know him to be the same
man: Lact. de falsa sapient. l. 3. c. 27 Non abscindit, sed abscondit vitia.
This Philosophy could never attain to, but rather hides sin then removes it;
but the word of God is so powerful in operation, that it not only removes sin,
but also all doubtfulnesse of the truth, of Gospel Truth, more then the
authority of the Church can do, which is variable, and possibly erroneous. So
much of the rules of sanctification, and hope of glory.


Mathe. Whereunto does sanctification advance us, more then common Christians?


Phila. To a true repentance, and a communion with God and his Saints in the
Catholic Church.


Mathe. I desire to know what these things are truly in themselves; for I fear
some do as much mistake true repentance, as the Sectaries do the communion of
Saints, and the Papists do the Catholic Church.


Phila. You say true; but repentance which is holy and sanctified is not a
fretting grief, which some take at sin, because it has brought them into a
dangerous condition; for which they wish the sin undone, (...).
no place being left for other advice and counsel. This hurts the mind, and
casts it from the hinges of deliberation, except God turn it to a change of
mind, whereby one becomes more wise afterward, to amend what he has done
amiss, and to make amends for his error, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. The cause of the one
is the spirit of adoption, whereby we are sealed the sons of God. The cause of
the other is the spirit of servitude; the one arising from the Gospel-promises,
the other from the threatenings of the law for fear of condemnation, (...).
both are well distinguished by St Luke. The godly repentance, Acts 2.37. they
were pricked in their hearts for their unkindnesse to Christ; but Acts 7.54. is
described the very spirit of remorse, not the remorse of spirit, by saying they
were cut to the heart by Stephens sermon, (...).
which argued only vexation, envy and malice. This kind of repentance may go
before faith, and be without faith, but the true repentance to salvation is
caused by faith, or else it is merely sinful, Romans 14.23. nor can it purify
the heart without faith, Acts 21.24. and therefore the arguments for
repentance, are drawn from the promises of grace exhibited in Christ, Mat. 3.2.
Two things must especially be observed in repentance. 1. That it be not put off
and deferred. 2. That it be continued, because the faithful do continually sin
little or much, as appears, Psalm. 32. and Psalm. 51. Mat. 18.2. and therefore
even the very regenerate are exhorted upon their falls, to repentance, and
pardon is promised them, Ezekiel. 33.11. and Rev. 2.9. notwithstanding the rigid
doctrine of the Novatians, and the Catharists, who denied repentance to those
that had sinned after baptism. For though God in Christ takes away the power
of sin, yet not the power of sinning; the dominion of sin is destroyed, but sin
is not quite taken away out of our nature in this life, that so we may the more
aspire toward heaven, where no sin shall remain. Now the parts of this
repentance is, 1. A turning of the heart from evil, with hatred and
mortification of the old man, and a turning of the heart to good, with a love
thereof, and practice of it, by enlivening of the new man; Esa. 61.2. V.d. Aug.
lib. de vera and falsa penit. cap. 13.
from whence flows a sadness for offending God, and a joy that arises from
the hope of pardon, Psalm. 51.10. for we need not hold, contrition, confession,
and satisfaction, to be essential parts of true repentance, because that
reprobates have them, and yet have not true repentance, as Judas, yet may they
be the effects of true repentance in them that have it, but not a cause of
remission, nor have power to blot out all sin as the Papists suppose, as not
the sin of a reprobate, nor the sin against the Holy Ghost. Nor need we think
confession is absolutely necessary to salvation; for Peter wept, but said
nothing as we read of, yet sanctification produces a confession of sin first
to God, either publicly, as Neh. 9. or privately, as Psalm. 32.5. and that
generally of all sin, Luke 18.13. or parricularly, of the sins of our lives,
Jam. 5.16.
as Psalm. 19.13. And 2. To my neighbor, Mat. 18.15. that I may receive counsel
and comfort from him, and he satisfaction from me, and so reconciled one to the
other, as Mat. 5.23.3. There is another confession which is made before the
Pastors of the Church, of some sins which burden conscience, Luke 19.8. So
there is a public confession of sins made by Priest and people to God, in the
public place and exercise of religion, either ordinarily of the common sins
that cleave to nature, or extraordinarily on the times of humiliation for some
peculiar sins that have infected both Priest and people, Neh. 1.7. So there is
a confession which has been used in the Church, by those which for
disobedience have been excommunicated, and could not be received into the
congregation again without such confession. But these confessions prove not
papisticall, auricular confession of all sin to be either forced upon men as
lawful or necessary to our reconcilement with God: for as it is impossible to
confess all sins, Psalm. 19.13. so it is not any where commanded in Scripture,
nor any example given that it should be so done to a Priest, or to that end;
and the rather because there is another rule of remission and justification
with God, set down, Ezekiel. 18.21. and Romans 4.23. namely, repentance and faith.
Indeed confession of sin was not established as the Papists urge it, till the
time of Pope Innocentius the third, who did order in the Council of Lateran at
Rome, about the year 1215. that all of either Sex, after they came to the years
of discretion, should confess all their sins faithfully once in a year to
their own Priest, which was seconded by the Council of Trent, which enjoined
confession before Easter, but we find it not imposed by any divine authority,
as it is of no great antiquity. Therefore though a man may in case of a
troubled conscience, go and confess to one that is a true minister and
lawfully called thereunto, having the word of reconciliation, and Gospel
dispensation committed to him, yet he is not to be forced thereunto; for in
that there is too much formality, and something of tyranny: or if thou have
wronged thy neighbor, thou may confess thy fault to him; but if thou be
ashamed to confess it, Chryl. hom. 2. in Psalm. 50.
lest it prove approbrious to thee, yet confess it daily to God and thine own
soul, and devise some means or way to make him satisfaction, Aug. lib. 10.
conf. cap. 3. Amb. lib. 10. in Luke cap. 96
as the case requires; for some sins (as Peter's) are confessed by the eye in
tears, when shame stops the mouth of confession, and let those exactors pass
that are very curious in the search of other men's sins, but too sloathfull to
amend their own. Now the effect of repentance, is a christian holy life, by
which we come to be of the communion of Saints. And such a life we must lead,
that we may recover that chief part of Gods image lost, consisting in
righteousness and holiness. And this is necessary because our God is holy,
and we are joined to this holy God, and made his people by covenant, and he
has in Christ purged us, redeemed us, and adopted us his children; and because
Christ has inserted us into his own body, as his members, and the Holy Ghost
has dedicated us as temples to God, and has appointed us to heavenly
incorruptibility; and therefore a Christian life consists not in an outward
profession of the Gospel in tongue, but in an imitation of Christ, having his
word for the rule, and Gods glory for our end and scope, simplicity and
sincerity for the mode and manner of it, with a continual perseverance, and
daily progress in it. Now of this life there be three parts. 1. A denial of
our selves. 2. A meditation of life to come. 3. A right use of worldly goods.


Mathe. I pray declare how.


Phila. First, a denial of our selves there must be, the foundation whereof
is, because we are not our own but Gods, who by Christ has redeemed us, Romans
14.7, 8, 9. and therefore we must renounce all our affections that resist the
law of God, as impiety, pride, and hypocrisy, and have an humble and voluntary
subjection in all things to the will of God, and a practice of those things
that God requires of us, as of sobriety, righteousness and godliness, as
Tit. 2.12. Therefore this life must have respect both to God and men. First, to
men, so that is honor we prefer before our selves those whom we ought, and as
much as we ought, and so by humility, candor and modesty, we destroy pride and
hypocrisy. So we must be ready to benefit all men out of the sincere affection
of charity, Heb. 13.1, 2. because the end why God gives his benefits, is, that
they may be bestowed for the common good of the Church, as God bestows his
providence in common among good and bad, and we know not fully who are good,
and who may not be made good by our charity, they all bearing outwardly to us
the same image of God, and the similitude of Christ's members.

Now secondly, the denial of our selves in relation to God, stands in these
two things. First in an equanimity, and a fair construction of mind in all
actions and state of life. Secondly, in bearing the cross aright. The first of
these appears in our being subject to Gods will in all things, and in shunning
ambition and covetousness, and expect prosperity only from God, depending only
upon him, and not desire riches or honors without him, or out of him, and
therefore to follow no wicked arts to compass them, but to cast all the burden
and care of them only upon him, and so not envy any man's prosperity, but commit
all accidents of life to Gods will, as afflictions, diseases, and poverty, and
the death of friends, and to bear all with patience. Secondly, the denial of
our selves in relation to God, stands in the right carriage of the cross, and a
moderate bearing of that adversity which God sends upon us, by what hand soever
it be outwardly afflicted, Mat. 5.4. and so obtain the blessing of the mourners
comfort, which causes us though troubled, yet not distressed, though
perplexed, yet not in despair, persecuted, yet not forsaken, cast down, but
not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. This is done, first, by considering how the glory
of God is illustrated by freeing his people from it, as 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. and
how we are taught to hate both sin, the devil, the world, and the flesh, John
15.19. and to serve God not for worldly pleasure and advantage, but for his own
sake, Romans 5.5. And secondly, it is done by considering the comforts of the
cross, which are, First, that God has purposed and appointed all the
sufferings of the Church, and neither men nor devils can add to them one jot
more then he has determined, John 19.11. Acts 4.28. And secondly, that our
sins are forgiven us in Christ, with whom, and for whom we suffer, 2 Timothy 2.12.
if we suffer for a good conscience, which makes the event of the cross happy,
1 Pet. 4.13, 14. and gives us hope of an eternal reward by the example of
Christ, Phil. 2.9. and of the Saints, Heb. 11.2. who by faith and patience
obtained a good report, because they suffered for righteousness, Mat. 5.10.

The next business of a Christian life, is to meditate on the life to come, as
those that behold things promised afar off, and seek another country beside and
above this world, Heb. 11.13, 14. This meditation includes a contempt of the
world, as of riches, honors, pleasure, and of death, which like physic does
evacuate many evil humors, by considering the various afflictions of this
life, and that all the joy and pleasures of it are but momentany, and yet
hinder us from employing the mind about heaven, though themselves have in them
neither continuance nor contentment, they neither satisfy nor sanctify us,
but are like painted reeds, gay vanities without, but hollow within, though we
run after them as children, after butter flies, and get a fall by following,
and some hurt by heedlesse pursuing them. And this contempt of the world would
be the more seriously performed, if we consider that here we are exiles from
home, i. from heaven, 2 Cor. 5.9. and therefore we should have a most serious
and joifull desire of the life to come, which would make us either value death
as nothing, or else look upon it as Christ has made it, namely an entrance
into life, and a freeing us from our stepmother the world, by delivering us to
the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother of us all. Indeed if we do not
thus, the common creature shames us, who sigh and groan to be delivered, Romans
8.19. And the heathen wise men, and Philosophers, thought it their glory to
contemn death: yet I do not say that this life, or the things thereof are
altogether to be detested, for they are the blessings of God, and testimonies
of his good will to help through this wilderness of sin; but so far to contemn
them, as they make us obnoxious to sin.

Therefore the third part of a Christian life, is to make a right use of those
that God has afforded us in this life. In this case we must mark the right use
and abuse of those things. The right use, is to make them serve our necessity,
not superfluity, and to increase our delight in, and praise to God, Psalm.
104.1, 15. and so tasting, thou may see how good the Lord is. The abuse, when
first, we exceed our measure, and incline to extremes: God makes our cup
overflow, and we make it overflow us. Or secondly, when we are too abstemious
in denying to our selves the lawful use of the creatures, which God has given
us to lead us to acknowledge the bounty of the Creator. The one way we make our
belly our God, Phil. 3.19. The other are too superstitious, as were the Essens,
Col. 2.21. the one through too much love of the creature, does extinguish the
meditation of the life to come, and the other does frustrate the favor of God
offered to him in this life; of both which faults we must give an account,
especially we being of the true Catholic Church, which teaches the right use
of these things, and are well understood by those that are of the communion of
Saints.


Mathe. What mean you by the Catholic Church, and whether is it always in the
same state? Then I desire to know what the communion of Saints is, and next,
what kind of government this Church has always had and allowed.


Phila. By the Catholic Church, I mean that which is intended in the Creed,
which I believe to be, though I believe not in it, as I do in the holy Trinity,
yet that it is, and ever will be while the world endures, notwithstanding all
the power of Satan, Mat. 16.10. And of this Church we are to believe that we
are members, and profess our selves to be joined thereunto, and to live and
die members thereof. Now this Catholic Church is the City of the living God,
or a company of holy men, who by the free election of God, are called to union
with Christ, God and man, to life eternal, as well those souls that are
triumphant in heaven, as those people that are militant here on earth, Col.
1.18. of all which Christ is the head; for I reckon not Angels to be of the
Church, but only those for whom Christ died, that he might sanctify them, Ephesians.
5.16. but as he took not the nature of Angels, so he died not for them. Not for
the good, for they needed no sanctification by redemption, though a
preservation in their standing, by the virtue of him, in whom they were first
called to immutability of estate, who was the first born of every creature,
because he was eternally born of God, before any creature was made, Col. 1.15.
and by him they were made, and therefore must hold their estates; but yet they
cannot be of the redeemed Church, in regard they were never captived, nor did
ever fall from, nor fall out with God, and so need him that was only a Mediator
between God and man, of whom this Church consists, which is one, holy,
Catholic Church, built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ
being the head corner stone. This is the subject of all the benefits which God
has afforded us in Christ through his spirit; and is called one, because it is
the one only mystical body of Christ, and has but one faith to knit it to
Christ, and one spirit to agitate it, one God by whom it is called to worship
him, and to be glorified of him; one love by which all the members are gathered
among themselves, and one salvation the felicity thereof, and one bond of
divine love in Christ toward her, in which respect she is called his friend,
his beloved, and his Spouse. So it is called Catholic in regard of the
universal largnesse of it, being tied to neither persons, time, nor place.
Therefore it is either ignorantly or arrogantly assumed by the Papists, who
call their Roman Church, Catholic, whereas it wants the Catholic extension of
it, as well as the Catholic truths of it. So it is called holy, because it
has a most holy and sanctifying head, by which sin is not imputed, and her
corruptions by the Holy Ghost by degrees taken away, that she may be presented
to God without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 1.27. So it is called Prophetical and
Apostolical, because she is founded upon their doctrine, Ephesians. 2.20.

Now the parts of this Church are triumphant or militant: The triumphant is
that part which now triumphs with Christ the head of the Church, over all
enemies, and enjoieth with him all gladness and felicity of soul, and after
the resurrection shall enjoy the fullness of it in soul and body united. That
the souls of the just after death do enjoy heavenly felicity, is plain,
because it is said, Rev. 7.15. that the souls of the dead were before Gods
throne, in white robes serving God day and night; and because Christ promised
the thief that time he died, that his soul should be with him in Paradise,
Luke 23.43. which Paradise St Paul calls the third heavens, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4.
And it is said, Heb. 12.23. that the spirits of just men are in the heavenly
Jerusalem, and therefore when this tabernacle is dissolved, i. our bodies, we
have an house in heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. or else St Paul had little reason to
desire dissolution, if not to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. But yet all this
proves nothing for the Popes canonization of Saints, whose memorial is
esteemed of all good men, and their examples imitated: but we find no Scripture
for their canonization, nor for those honors the Pope gives them. As 1. To be
written in a Catalogue, thereby commanding them to be called Saints. 2. By
calling on them in the prayers of the Church. 3. By dedicating to their memory
Temples and Altars. 4. By offering any sacrifice in their honor. And 5.
Celebrating days festival to their memory. 6. By setting up their pictures.
7. By reserving their relics to worship. And all this must be done by the
Pope and none else, Bell. de heatitud. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 7. and 8.
say his flatterers, and he cannot err therein; yet St Paul says, that only
God knows who are his, not the Pope; for he canonizeth hypocrites, whom he by
his indulgence has flattered to hell in their life time, and then places them
in heaven when they are dead, though their souls be in the place of torment.
This kind of canonization came up by Pope Leo the third, Bell. ut supra.
about eight hundred years since, and then Antichrist was detected, and so
canonization is Antichristian. So is their giving to them religious worship,
which in Scripture is neither commanded, nor given by any good man, farther
then by esteeming them of blessed memory, Luke 1.44. or by praising God for
them, Gal. 1.5. or by imitation of their faith and virtue, yea, Angels have
refused it at the hands of men and Apostles also, as Acts 10.26. and 14.15. and
Rev. 19.10. and 22.8. And as bad is their doctrine of Saints interceeding for
us; for there is but one Mediator, who makes intercession, in whose name only
we expect salvation, Acts 4.10. and receive remission, Acts 17.31. He is a
perfect Mediator, and needs nor requires any copartners, 1 Cor. 1.13. and
Heb. 12.2. Beside, Aug. lib. 10. conf. cap. 42. Amb. de Isaac, cap. 8. Aug. in
Psalm. 118.
who can insure us, that the dead departed have any cognizance of our state or
prayers, Isa. 63.16. surely Christ is our mouth to speak to God, and our eye to
see him, and our hand to offer to him, and that prayer that is not offered by
him, is so far from blotting out sin, that it becomes sin it self: therefore
the worshipping of Angels forbidden by St Paul, Col. 2.18. is unlawful, and
the invocation of Saints as bad, Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis agenda.
since the dead know not what the living do, and that true Christians believe
not on Peter himself, but in him upon whom Peter believed, as Aug. says well,
in his book of the City of God, lib. 18. cap. 58. But worse is the religious
worship of their images, though there may be a civil use of them for adorning
of houses, or keeping of them in memory, Aug. de civit. dei, cap. 14, and in
Psalm. 36. and in Psalm. 113.
or painting of them historically. But to set up their images or pictures in
Temples and holy places, under pretense of instructing the ignorant, as did
Pope Gregory the first, they have degenerated to superstition and idolatry, as
Serenus Bishop of Massilus, forewarned that Pope, nor would suffer any to be in
his Churches; however those logs of which the images were made, have better
fortune then their fellows, who being as good as they, yet are laid behind
the fire. There was none in Churches in the time of Eusebius, Bishop of
Caesarea, about the year 330. But the first painting of Church wass, was done
by Pontius Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, who painted the Churches with the story of
the Israelites Sunset in the wilderness, to deter the people from gluttony,
that came to the annual Feast of St Faelix. But surely he has no religion
that worshippeth an image, though the image of Christ; Lactant. de errore Orig.
lib. 2. cap. 16. anno 300.
for we are not to make images of things in heaven to worship them. Therefore
the most ancient religious men have set themselves against pictures and images
in Churches, as did Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, anno 390. as
appears in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, Epist. ad Joan. Jerusal.
concerning whom, see Trip. hist. lib. 9. cap. 4. But worst of all is their
adoration of the relics of Saints, which has not any show of warrant in
Scripture, nor antiquity, but is a mere will worship, Col. 2.23. We find it
given neither to Patriarch nor Prophets, nor Apostles, whose bodies no doubt
were more honorable then others, till the Church began to be corrupted by
idolatry and superstition, which they borrowed from heathens and heretics, as
Carpocrates, who with his Marcellina, carried about them little images of
silver and gold of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and also of Christ, all which
they worshipped; Epipha. cont. Haeres.
or else from some filthy dreamer, Jude ver. 8. such an one as Eguainus, of the
order of Benet, an English Monk, swear in the Council held in London, anno,
712. that the Virgin Mary appeared to him in a dream, and told him it was her
will that her image should be set up in the Churches to be worshipped. It was
therefore concluded it should be so by Pope Constantine the first, and Boniface
his Legate, then here in England, and so images were set up in England. It is
written, Amb. lib. de morte Theodosii.
that Hellen the Empress found Christ's Cross, but yet she worshipped only him
that died upon it. But these images, and worshipping of relics, might the
more easily be obtruded upon the people, after that Libraries were destroyed by
the invasion of the Goths and Vandals, by which means ignorance and negligence
crept into the Church. Much less is the sign of the Cross then to be
worshipped, as a thing that either sanctifies, or puts the devil to flight,
as the Papists say, for that belongs to the efficacy and merit of Christ's
death; nor have we any command or example in Scripture for so doing. It is
true, that the sign of the Cross has been anciently used by Christians, as a
mark of distinction, that they were neither Jews nor heathens; but for
worshipping of it, or attributing virtue or merit to it, I read nothing, though
I find it used by the confession of Fathers, 1400 years ago, even at baptism,
Cyprian. ad Demet. prop. ^^nem.
nor thought unfitting by our modern and protestant divines, as Bucer,
Zanchius, Zuinglius, and others. Nor do I think that days ought to be
dedicated to Saints now in the Church triumphant, nor to be celebrated in
regard of any mystery inhering to them; nor are they more holy then other
days, nor the keeping of them a part of divine worship, farther then an holy
duty done upon that day extends it self; though I know it is lawful for the
Church by a common consent, without superstition or idolatry, to appoint
certain days for divine duties, as to hear the word of God, and to pray for
the turning away of Gods judgments, Aug Epist. 128. ad Jan.
and to give thanks for benefits received, spiritual and temporal. As
Mordecai appointed the Feast of Purim, and Judas Machabeus the Feast of the
Dedication. But these, and all other festivals in the old Testament, was set up
for the honor of God; and so those in the New Testament to the honor of God in
Christ; one moral, in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, called the Lords day;
the other are Ecclesiastical, appointed by the Church, in remembrance of what
Christ has done for us. But to appoint Holy days for other use then to God
and his worship, or to place merit of grace and favor of God in keeping them,
In vigilis Ap. and in f^st. com. Martyrum.
as the Papists do, as appears in their prayers at those times, is
superstitious, so it is also to dedicate such days to Saints departed. I know
that some days of old time has been kept in the memory of some holy Martyrs
(for the confirming of Christians) in those places where they have suffered,
but are now out of use; Hieron. apud Eusebium. lib. 4. cap. 14.
yet they then did only remember their suffering, and gave thanks to God for
their constancy in the faith.


Mathe. What do you count the Church militant to be?


Phila. That company of faithful people here upon earth, who are governed by
one certain head, and under his banner do fight against the world, flesh, and
devil, and all afflictions in spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. In regard of which battle it comes to pass, that the Church militant
is not always in one happy state to outward appearance, but as Israel and
Amaleck, one prevailing, and sometimes the other; like the moon waxing and
waining; or Noah's Ark sometime tossed on the flood, and sometimes resting on
the mountain; or like Christ's ship, now in a calm, anon in a storm; or a lilly
among thorns; or a childing woman sometimes groaning, and anon rejoicing. The
reason hereof is, that God may be known and feared by his Church, as a
correcting father, Pro. 3.13. who will chastise his children for their
offenses, 1 Cor. 11.32. that they may not be disinherited, nor condemned with
the world; the main end whereof is, that God may be glorified in delivering of
his Church, as he was in delivering Israel out of Egypt, and from Pharaohs
pursuit of them, Exodus 15.1. and from the captivity of Babylon, Psalm. 126.2.
and that they may learn to hate sin which causes God to bring afflictions,
Isa. 63.10. and to serve God more sincerely, Jer. 31.18, 19. by hearty zeal and
repentance, Rev. 3.19. also that the Church may give an evidence to their
profession of the truth, Mat. 10.22. and be confirmed to Christ their head,
Romans 8.29. who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, 1 Timothy 6.13.
and so be distinguished from hypocrites, who in time of trouble fall away, not
understanding that by the cross the Church is propagated, and by dissipation
increased, and that the blood of martyrdom is the seed of the Church, to whom
the promise of a better life is made, but it must be expected to be performed
by hope.


Mathe. Who is the head of this Church militant?


Phila. He that is the head of the Church Catholic, generally God in Trinity,
but more particularly Christ who is the Churches mystical head, and she is his
body and kingdom, Ephesians. 1.22. and the 4. cap. ver. 15, 16. and he governs as
her head principally, by the scepter of his word and spirit, Phil. 2.13. Now
thus Christ has a kingdom natural or dispensatorie. His natural headship or
kingdom, is that whereby he reigns in unity of essence with the Father and
the holy Spirit from all eternity, which shall never have an end. The kingdom
that he has by dispensation, is that free and voluntary kingdom, which he
received from God for the salvation of his Church, and shall in the end of the
world be given up to God the Father again, 1 Cor. 15.25, 28. in the mean time
he is by dispensation the head and sole monarch of the Church. But he has
nevertheless a government ministerial, not only invisible by his spirit and
Angels, John 16.7. Heb. 1.14. but a visible ministration by the word and
wholesome discipline, to the exercise whereof, some men are by his appointment
delegated for the helping our infirmities, and speaking to us in Christ's
absence, 2 Cor. 6.1. And this has always been done by Bishops and Presbyters,
Acts 20.28. who by the Holy Ghost were made overseers of the flock, not secular
men, though Princes had ever this external government in the dispensation of
spiritual things committed to them; for then how was the Church ruled for 300
years after Christ, till the days of Constantine; yet the secular power is to
govern men as men, but the ministers only governs them as Christians, and
therefore in this case Princes themselves have not refused subjection to this
ministerial government of Christ, as the Emperor Theodosius, to St Ambrose
Bishop of Millane. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Nor have any dared to usurp their office without some exemplary punishment, as
Uzzah and Uzziah, till these latter times, 2 Samuel 6.7.
wherein any tradesman dare take upon him the office of a minister, and a
seutor to be a soul member. Beside, if this ministerial government were
committed to secular powers, then they might give the Sacrament, and a woman if
a Prince, might preach too, notwithstanding St Paul, 1 Cor. 14.34. But we find
Jehosaphat to distinguish the civil power, 2 Chro. 19.5.8.
from the ecclesiastic ministry, in the Old Testament; and surely the Church
of the New Testament was not left to confusion in government, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Therefore the ancient Fathers have reproved even Emperors, Amb. Ep 33. de
Valentin. Imper. Ath^n^s. Ep. ad agintes vitam solit.
when they took upon them to meddle with things divine, which was no part of
their administration; for though God had committed to them the Empire, yet to
the minister the sacred things, the mysteries whereof they are to teach, not to
be taught: yet religious Magistrates are to rule over ministers by their civil
power, to which ministers are to subject themselves; yea, they may and ought to
correct negligence in the practice of religion and vice, which is a scandal to
religion; yea, and heresies, blasphemies and sacrilege proved to be so, by
Ecclesiastical judgment, but not to define points of faith, nor to exercise
ministerial offices. It is true, that Moses, Eli and Samuel, and others, did
exercise both offices many times, yet we cannot argue from an extraordinary
action in a state not fully settled, that it should be so in a settled Church and
State; for by the same reason a Priest may act the office of a Prince or a
Judge at any time, as did Moses, Eli and Samuel. But we find when the
Priesthood was settled, that Moses then meddled not with Aarons business, and
Eli and Samuel were Judges by an extraordinary call in a corrupted State, but
ordinarily it was otherwise. So in the New Testaments Church holy things were
always ordinarily and ordinately administered by Bishops and Presbyters, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. to whom those of the Church were to submit themselves, Heb. 13.17.
Nor was the Church governed by any one man, but by them, Acts 15.6. no not by
Peter alone, though he was in that Council: and the ancient Fathers decline
that sole definitive judicature, Cypr. lib. 31 Epi. 19. ad Cletum. Amb. in 1 Timothy 1. Hier. in Epi. 1. ad Tur.
which the Pope has challenged to himself; St Cyprian durst not do so, and St
Ambrose says, that first the Synagoue, and afterward the Elders of the Church
was to be consulted, and without them nothing was to be done; and St Jerome
says, that till by the instinct of the devil contentions arose in the Church,
it was governed by the counsel of ministers. Nor was the government of it
democraticall, or in the power of the people, for then they must have this
power from themselves, or from God: it cannot be from themselves; for this
power is not by right of nature, or Nations, but is supernatural, and of
divine right: nor have they it from God, for no Scripture sets it forth, but
therein they are called the flock which are to be fed, not to govern or choose
their Shepherds. Yet it is true, they were present at the ordination of
Matthias, Acts 1. and the seven Deacons, Acts 6. but they only named or
designed them, but ordained them not: however such a particular fact at first
proves not that it must be so always, no more then because the first Kings
were chosen by the people, therefore they must be so always. So that it seems
to me that the Church militant is neither democraticall, as governed by the
people, nor monarchical by any one man, but aristocraticall, that is, governed
by some chief heads of the ministry.

Therefore the Pope can derive no such power from Peter, as to be the head of
the Church; for Peter was never so constituted by Christ, nor was ever so
acknowledged by the rest of the Apostles; for then they would never have
contended who should be chief, as they did, Luke 22.24. Christ is only the
head, who is the head stone, and the foundation of it; Mat. 16.18, 19
for though our Savior said to Peter, thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church, yet he called him only Peter, Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap.
22. Cypr. lib. de unit. eccles.
not Petra the rock, for that was Christ; for all the Apostles were endued with
the same power which Peter had, John 20.22. when Christ said to them, receive
the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted. Nor can the Pope
challenge succession from Peter, who was Bishop of Antioch (not of Rome) as
some write. But the Scripture says, that the Jews were especially Peter's
charge, Gal. 2.7. who were all banished from Rome by Claudius, Acts 18.2. and
so Peter had but little to do there; or if he were Bishop there, yet the Pope
cannot be his successor properly, Amb. de incarn. cap. 5.
if he succeed him not in faith and doctrine; for faith is the Churches
foundation; much less can he pretend to be Christ's Vicar, any more then any
other Bishop, who may be said to be vice Christi in the stead of Christ, to
woo men to be reconciled to God: Conc. Nic. can. 6. Cypr. Ep. ad Papas, 41.58.
when he was at the best he was allowed to be but one of the Patriarchs, nor
called by the ancient Fathers but only brother, colleague, or fellow Bishop.
But had they taken him for Christ's Vicar, or the head of the Church, they would
have given him other titles than they did, Pius 2. Ep. 301.
as might become one of so high degree. This swelling title of head of the
Church, and Christ's Vicar, and Universal Bishop, was a forerunning sign of
Antichrist, as said Gregory the great, who was Pope, in his seventh Book, Greg.
M. lib. 4. Ep. 36.
and Epist. 39. to Mauritius the Emperor, and therefore he much declined and
waved such titles.


Mathe. I pray what think you of Antichrist, what, or who is he?


Phila. You know St John tells you there were many Antichrists in his time, 1
John 2.18. that is, some that were contrary to the Gospel of Christ in faith,
or manners, or both. Jerome. in Mat. 24.
Some account all the heads of Heresies to be Antichrists. Others say that they
be such as overthrow all good manners; and so one describes the state of the
Church of Rome, saying, that the Princes and Judges are the beasts seal, Papa
Honorius in dial. de libero arbit.
the Clergy his pavilion, the Monasteries his Tabernacle, the Nunneries his
bedchamber, and the people to bear his image. This he spoke of the second
Beast, Rev. 13.11. And Bernard the Abbot says plainly, Bern. ad Gaufrid.
Lorat. Epi. 125.
who writ about 546 years since, that the Beast in the Revelation, to whom a
mouth is given, speaking blasphemies, is he that sits in Peter's chair. The
other Beast is more subtle, as this is cruel, yet both join against Christ.
So many other conclude the Pope and Papacy, to be that man of sin, and son of
perdition, that has laid an opposite foundation to Christ, (...)
2 These. 2.3, 4. politickly pretending Christian profession, and yet
overturning his truth. Indeed if one would be lead by Chronograms, or the
numerall letters in the word Lateinos, Pet. Mart. in 2 Reg. 4. Iren. l. 5. c.
25.
or Ecclesia, Italica, or in the Hebrew word Romiith, or in Maometis, one may
find the number of the Beast, Rev. 13.18. which is 666. about which time after
Christ, the Pope was made supreme, and universal Bishop in the West, and
Mahomet chief Prophet in the East. And though I will not build my faith on
numbers in names, nor do I think that all names be imposed inevitably by the
influence of the stars; yet this is not altogether to be despised, since
Nimrods name included his nature, i. an apostate rebel; and Cyrus his name in
Hebrew was like himself, wh was an head to the people, and in the Persian
language a glorious Sun. This Antichristianity, is called the mystery of
iniquity, 2 These. 2.7. for it is a secret wickedness in the name and nature of
it; for Antichrist may signify one that is a vicegerent for Christ, As (...)
and (...).
or a Deputy, or a Lieutenant for him; and thus the Pope would be thought
Christ's Vicar, because he sits in the Temple of God, or a part of the Church
visible corrupted, and exalts himself above all earthly power, that has given
to it the title of God or Lord, and showing himself as God, 2 These. 2.4.
both in placing and displacing Kings, and forgiving sins. So is the nature of
his doctrine opposed to Christ very subtly, namely, because faith must appear
by works, therefore to set up works to justify our persons, which works the
popish writers call also the works of faith, not of the law, though they be but
works of men's inventions, and so they prefer works before the formal
righteousness of Christ imputed to man for justification. Mahomet speaks also
very well of Christ, but he enjoins external works of his own collection, by
which men must be saved. So the Pope and Mahomet join in one against Christ in
this, and also in holding that the holy Scriptures are not sufficient for
salvation, but their canons and rules of obedience have more attributed to them
for performance, then the obedience of faith; which devices are like the
locusts that came out of the bottomless pit of their inventions, Rev. 9.
having the face of a reasonable creature, but a scorpions sting, which gives no
rest to the soul, but poisons it; yet if hue and cry were made after the Pope
and Mahomet, a man might justly stop the Pope upon suspicion of being the more
proper Antichrist, for these reasons. First, because the name of Antichrist
agrees most properly to him and his seat; yea, all the descriptions of
Antichrist in Scripture, does so likewise. But by the Pope we mean not every
Bishop of Rome from the Primitive times; for many of them were Confessors and
Martyrs, till the time of Sylvester, neither was Antichrist discovered much,
till Boniface the third took from the Emperor Phocas the name of Universal
Bishop, and his See of Rome to be called the supreme head of all Churches.
After this we find in the Pope and Church of Rome, all the marks of Antichrist;
for he sets in the Temple of God, like an Hornet in a Be hive, driving out the
laboring Bees, and devouring their honey. The popish writers make this an
argument of their Church, being the true Church and Temple of God, because
Antichrist sits there. It is true that they have the name and show of a Church
Christian, but have neither true Doctrine nor Sacraments in their simplicity,
as the Scripture sets them forth, and has delivered them to the Church; so
that they have only the name of a Church, as Sardis had, that she was living,
but indeed was dead, Rev. 3.1. And in this Church Antichrist sits as a
usurping Tyrant over Gods ordinances, abusing them, and changing them at his
pleasure, and over all authority Ecclesiastical and Civil, that bears any
similitude of Elohim, even as St Paul foretold, 2 These. 2.3, 4. And this may be
proved from their own writers; some of them saying that it is not lawful for
any man to reprove what the Pope approves; for all men ought to be judged by
him, Zodericus. Zamorra, lib. 2. cap. 1.
but he by none; and that he has all power in heaven and earth, so assuming to
himself the right of Christ, as well as his title, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, which made him so bold, as to let Emperors kiss his feet, Alexand. pap.
3
and to set his foot upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick, abusing the 91
Psalm, saying, thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Dragon; as also Pius the
fifth did (when he deposed. Queen Elizabeth) abused Jer. 1.10. Behold I have
appointed thee this day over Nations and Kingdoms. Beside, is not he right
Antichrist that arrogates to himself power over Gods word and his law, and
says, Gratia in gloss.
that he can dispense with the law of nature, and contrary to the Apostles, and
therefore has dispensed with Princes to marry their brothers wives, which St
John Baptist would not allow to Herod; and make parricides saints, and forgives
sins to the unrepentant, yea, sins before they are committed, yea, they say it
is less dangerous to break Gods Commandments, then the Popes, as to break the
Sabbath, rather then an holy day, or the Lent fast, and flesh eaten on Friday,
is more punished then theft or adultery. Again, he maintains the doctrine of
devils by forbidding marriage and meats; 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3
and maintains heathenisme for true Religion, by commanding the worship of
images, and the adoration of dead Saints, which was the practice of the
heathens in worshipping of their Demons. Beside this, Antichrist does equal,
if not prefer the blessed Virgin Mary before Christ, as may be seen by the
titles they give unto her; as the Turks set Mahomet above Christ. And farther,
his religion is patched up of other petty Antichrists, and therefore certainly
he is the great Antichrist: For as the Valentinian heretics and Marcion, when
they were confuted by Scripture, they said that the Scriptures were
insufficient, obscure, and of no authority; so do the Papists. Aug. cont.
Pelag. Epipha. her. 42.
So as the Pelagians held free will to remain in man fallen for the choosing of
any spiritual good; so do the Papists. So the Marcionite held women might
baptize; so do the Papists. Iren. l. 1. c. 13.
The Carpocratians denied to Lay men the reading of the Scriptures; so do the
Papists, that their mystery of iniquity may not be discovered. The Manicheans
held the body of Christ to be but imaginary; so do the Papists, in that they
tell us of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, without its true proprieties.
Aug. haer. 71.
And as they gave only the bread in the Sacrament, so do the popish Priests.
The Tassiani did forbid Priests marriage, so does the Pope. Eusebius. lib. 5.
eccl. hist. c. 17.
Montanus invented laws for fasting; so did the Papists. The Collyridiani,
worshipped the Virgin Mary, whom Epiphanius calls idolaters, haeres. 79. The
Marcionits preferred virginity above all things, Epiph. haeres. 2. so do the
Papists. The Carpocratians had images of Christ to worship; so have the
Papists. And the heretics called Apostolici, admitted none into their
fraternity, unless they deprived themselves of their goods, and renounced
matrimony; so do the popish Monks and Friars. The Armeni worshipped the cross;
so do the Papists. And also in many other things the Pope licks up the vomit of
old heathenisme and heresy, and differs from the true Christian Religion, in
sixty and odd several points. But beside, the papacy appears to be the great
Anrichrist, because he denies Jesus to be Christ, not in words, 1 John 2.22.
but in effect, because he denies the person of Christ and his office. For in
his doctrine of transubstantiation in the Lords Supper, he denies the
proprieties of Christ's humane nature, and by consequent his Mediatorship. So he
makes void his Prophetical office, as if he had not perfectly revealed the
will of his Father, John 15.15. and therefore the Pope deviceth other
doctrines, as necessary to salvation. So he disanuls Christ's Priestly office,
by setting other Priests to offer a sacrifice of the mass for quick and dead,
Heb. 10.14.
and annihilates his sole Mediatorship and intercession, 1 Timothy 2.5. by
appointing the mediation of Saints. Also he abrogates Christ's Kingly office, by
assuming to himself all power in heaven and in earth; Council. Lateran. sess.
10.
yea, arrogates to himself power over souls departed to send them to
purgatory, and fetch them out at his pleasure, Clem. 6. in sua bulla. Rev.
13.13. Nicol. Lyra. in cap. 4. Daniel.
or to canonize them Saints, as he thinks fit. Again, he uses false signs and
lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9. pretending to cast out devils, and make images to
sweat, weep, or smile; which kind of wonders if they had any semblance of
truth, yet are not to be expected in these latter times, however they were
necessary in the first planting of the Church, Greg hom. 19. in E^ang.
and ministers are rather to be judged to be true, because they do none rather
then otherwise, says Chrysostom. in 49. hom. on Mat. for they were necessary
that the world might believe, yet after men do believe, Aug. lib. 22. de civil.
dei.
it were strange to expect miracles. But beside, the Pope exercises the power
Civil and Ecclesiastic, as Rev. 13.12. whereby the power of the first beast
is meant (in authentic Writers) the power of the Roman Empire, which was much
wounded and weakened, Rev. 13.12. but healed by the Popes taking on himself the
authority thereof, and so becomes rich and potent, being adored with gold and
silver, and adorned with purple and scarlet, Rev. 17.4. And farther, you may
know this beast by his marks of cruelty; and therefore as the first beasts
bodily shape is likened to a Leopard, Rev. 13.2.
his mouth like a lion, and his feet like a bear, as if all the cruel
properties of Daniels beasts were met in him, together with the blasphemous
tongue of Antiochus Epiphanes, whom Polybius calls Epimanes the mad man. So the
Popes cruelty and tyranny is set forth in the second Beast, Rev. 13.11. like a
lamb, but spoke like a dragon, exercising it on true Christians, as it is
foretold, Rev. 13.15, 17. that all that would not worship the first beasts
image, that is, the Pope himself, should be killed, and that none should buy
or sell, but such as bore some mark of his obedience; Otto the first to Pope
John the twelfth, 942.
as the mark of the Beast by his ordination of Priests, and oath taken of
Emperors and Princes; or that bore his name by imposition on the people,
called Papists of Papa, Great. distinct. Q. 3.
the Pope, or Roman Catholics; or else that had the number of his name by
subjecting themselves to the sovereignty of the Latin Church; as Michael
Paleologus was fain to promise to Gregory the tenth, 1273. at Lions in France,
that he would subject himself and his people to him, till which time he would
suffer no aid to go out of the West, to relieve the Christian Greek Churches in
the East. And thus he sits in the Temple of God as a politic tyrant, that is,
in their consciences whom he has seduced and commanded to serve him, who would
seem to be the true Church and Temple of God, and yet are in the mean time but
the Citizens of spiritual Babylon, which is interpreted to be Rome by St John,
built on seven hills. It is true that he speaks of two beasts, Rev. 17.9. Rev.
13.1, 11.
the first is generally taken to be the successive heathenish estate of the
Roman Empire, which persecuted the Christians openly; the other the successive
estate of Popes, after the apostasy from the Gospel Truth, who by idolatry,
superstition, and persecution, and Seat in Rome, became the image of the first
Beast. It is simple to think that Antichrist is one man, as it were to say that
Israel were the name of one man only, whereas it is the name of a whole nation
also. So Sion is the name of a hill, yet it signifies also the Church. And it
is as simple to say that Antichrist must deny that Jesus Christ in plain words,
for then every man would detect him and detest him; neither could then his
doctrine be called the mystery of iniquity; nor could the great whore bear on
her forehead properly the name Mystery, Rev. 17.5.
which in former time was written upon the Popes Myter, however it is now taken
away, and put on the front of their religion. It is as vain to think that the
Turk is Antichrist; for he is understood to be signified in Magog, whose
interpretation is (Uncovered;) but the Papacy by Gog, which signifies (covered
or secret) because he is not as the Turk, an open enemy, but a close enemy of
Christ's. An earthly minded beast having horns like a lamb, but a voice like a
dragon, Rev. 13.11. seeming like Christ, but teaching like the devil, making
great show of religion, with a golden chalice, but it is full of soul poison,
Rev. 17.4. The chief tokens that this Antichristian whore must be taken for
Rome, the Popes seat, is plain. First, because the ruin of Rome was the
forerunner of Antichrist; and while the Empire was settled at Rome, it hindered
the delection of Antichrist, which many learned men do write that it was the
meaning of St Paul, 2 These. 2.7. he that now lets, will let till he be taken
out of the way. Indeed the Emperor Constantine departing from Rome to
Constantinople, gave the Pope the first inlet to Romes state and government.
But then the Goths and Vandals invasions of Rome, (...).
hindered him again, in the years, 414. and 459. and 549. by turning it to
ruin. This was the head of the first Beast, which was wounded, Rev. 13.3. as
able Divines write, but was healed again by Popes repairing the ruins of Rome,
and taking on himself the image of the first beast, and gets as much honor
to the Roman Bishop, as before was given to Roman Emperors, and more, for he
has made Kings and Emperors to kiss his feet, Rev. 13.11.
and has brought Rome into as much respect of the world, as any Emperor could.
And as this second beast made fire to come down from heaven, so does the Pope,
by making that heavenly censure of excommunication and absolution, stoop to his
earthly pleasure, and places of heavenly Scripture to serve his sensual
desires. It is he that gave life to the image of the beast, that is, to that
shape which he left to the Emperors, which he made to speak what and when he
pleased, for they became but his creatures, for he made them, and caused the
people to make them at his pleasure, yet but as images of Emperors, to what
they had been. The seat of this Beast is Rome, which in St John's time was built
on seven hills, and if it be not so now, Virgill. Propertius.
it matters not, so long as it stands for old Rome. And the City of Rome is
called the great whore sitting, and her religion spiritual fornication, and
her dominion very vast, as extending it self over many nations, by power and
wicked policy. She is likewise called Babylon, Rev. 17.5. Babel was a Tower,
and after a City, called Babylon. The Tower was built by certain families that
schismed from the family of Shem, Genesis 11.1, 2, 3. Genesis 10.8.
of which the apostate Nimrod was the head, and therefore Micah calls that
soil the land of Nimrod, Micah 5.6. Here God confounded their language, and
they left off to build the Tower; yet afterward men built a City there, which
in process of time became a great Monarchy, of which Nebuchadnezzar was a
famous King; which City and Kingdom was a great adversary to the people of God
the Jews. In all which respects it was a type of Rome, which at first as it was
built for vain glory, and to get a name, as Babels tower was, and next, became
the greatest Monarchy, as Babylon did, and opposed the true Church by idolatry
and persecution; so has Rome done, and therefore has been esteemed as a
second Babylon by authentic Writers, as Tertul. adv. Judeos, cap. 9. Rhenanus
in his ancient Copy, though Pamelius the Romanist blots Babylon Roma out of the
margent. Heir. Fabiolae de vest sacerdot. Andreas in Apocal. cap. 53. Ausbert
in Rev. 13. But this spiritual Babylon, Rome, will have a fearful fall.
Grostead Bishop of Lincoln, said it must fall by a bloody sword, which indeed
St John foretold him, Rev. 17. and the 18. chap. But first by him that sat
upon the white horse, chap. 19. who is called the word of God, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, as in opposition to the titles of the man of sin, and son of
perdition. The walls of this spiritual Babylon have been falling a long time.
First by diverse Kings falling from them, Rev. 17.16. who in time will be Romes
ruin. Secondly, by their slit tongue and divided languages in divinity, as may
be found in Ferus, Granatensis, and Pintus, and many others. I will name but a
few, as Orkam, that writ against the Decretals, and in defense of the Emperor,
about 1333. Next Armachanus the Irish Bishop, writ against Friars, 1363. Then
Wickliffe discharged against Rome walls, two hundred volumes of books, like so
many vollies of shot: to stop whose doctrine, was called the Faedifragus
Council of Constance, who contrary to their covenant, burnt John Husse, and
also Jerome of Prague, and dug up Wickliffs bones, and burned them in spite,
as the dog that bites the stone, because he cannot him that flung it. Then one
Walter Brut, in the time of Richard the second, did affirm, that the 1260
days, (...) Martyrology. DVX CLERI.
spoken of by St John in the Revelation, were prophetically so many years; and
that the Pope being head Captain of the Clergy, appeared to have the number of
the Beast in that title. Now as God stirred up many faithful Christians in
England, so he did abundance in foreign parts, as Marsilius Patavinus, Joannes
de Gunduno, Luitpoldus, Vlricus Hargenor, Dantes, Aligerus, Gregorius
Ariminensis, Andreas de Castro, Franciscus Petrarcha, Joannes de rupe scissa,
Michael Cesenas, Gulielmus Ockam, Petrus de Corbaria, and Matthias Parisiensis,
with abundance more, many of whom were persecuted by the Beast, and many were
by Gods providence preserved, who have set such a fire in Rome, that will never
be quenched, but she must burn, and the smoke rise up for ever, Rev. 19.3.


Mathe. But if the Pope be this great Antichrist why is St Paul and St John so
close in the describing of him.


Phila. Not because they were fearful of persecution, but because they would
prove faithful to the Church: as Daniel to save the Jews from hatred and
dangers, penned some things that concerned their enemies, the Persian and the
Grecian, in a language least known to them: and many things that concerned the
Jews glory or troubles, he writes in close hidden terms, calling the Son of
God the Prince of Princes, Dan. 8.25. and the land of Judea the land of Tzeby,
Dan. 11.16. and Antiochus a man of an hard face, i. impudent; and minding
hidden things, i. secret wickedness hardly practiced by any before him. So the
Apostles did obscure the Emperors and Popes of Rome, under the terms of Beasts
and Antichrist, lest they should provoke them to persecute the Christians
before the time. For the Beast was, and is not, and yet is, Rev. 17.8. He was
in rising, an hundred years after Constantine, and then was not, i. even almost
extinct by the invasion of the barbarous Goths and Vandals: and yet is, i.
recovered, and gets the place of Rome, once governed by Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemviri, Triumviri, which some Writers say, are the five heads or
Kings spoken of, Rev. 17.10. and the sixth was an Emperor, which St John says
(is) and the other was not yet come, namely, the Pope, who when he did come,
continued not long, but he was dispossessed by the Goths. But then he
recovering again, made up the seventh, by assuming the temporal power, and
yet appeared as an eight, because he had a spiritual power diverse from the
former. Of all which matters of Antichrist and his ruin, one concludes well
in these verses.

Antichristus eat, Christus comitatus ab alto
Coelicolis properat Gog, Magog ecce ruit;
Ecce ruit regnum, serpens detrusus ad orcum
Bestia tum sequitur, cauda propheta dein
Cauda propheta, dein populus seductus ab ill is
Veh miseris, ter veh, qui fide deficiunt.

Mathe. Though I find by what you have said, that the Pope is not the head of
the Church, yet may I not think the Papists and many other heretics and
schismatics to be of the body of the Church militant?


Phila. You cannot justly so think: for the Church militant is that part of the
Church Catholic, which under the banner of Christ her head, fights, or is
ready to do it against his enemies, the world, flesh, and the devil, and all
their crafts and errors, and their afflictions in spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6.13.
But they do not so; not that I think they are a company of men perfect and void
of sin, as the Catharists and Anabaptists do; nor are they such, Aug. lib. de
here is. cap 88. Cyp. lib. 4. Ep. 2.
as having never id in matters of faith, refuse to retain any sinners in their
congregation, as the Novatians and Donatists did. But yet not such a company as
consist only in outward profession and communion of Sacraments, under one
Pastor, the Pope, but have the internal virtues of faith, hope, and charity,
whether living under the Law of the Gospel: yet we exclude not as the Papists
do from this Church, all that are not baptized, or under the examination of
Catechism, or all kind of heretics, apostates, excommunicate persons, or
schismatics, farther then they wilfully continue such; nor do we think that
reprobates and hypocrites are members of the Church, though they outwardly
profess themselves so.


Mathe. I pray make this appear.


Phila. First, many that are unbaptized, and but under the discipline of
catechizing, may be, and are members of the Church militant, because many such
are included in the covenant, Act. 2.39. as the Eunuch, Acts 8. and Cornelius,
Acts 10. yea, Rahab in the Old Testament, mentioned, Heb. 11.31. and the thief
crucified with Christ; and many were martyrs before they were baptized. Beside,
as many have been baptized who were never true members of the Church, 1 John
2.19. (for many sheep are out of the fold, Aug. in tract. 45. in Joh.
and many wolves within) so by the same reason many unbaptized may be members
of the Church militant, Bell. lib. 1. de baptismo, c. 6.
though not visible, because they may have the baptism of fire and blood,
though not of water. So we say that heretics and apostates stubbornly
continuing, such are not of this Church, because they have made shipwreck of
faith, and therefore are to be shunned by the faithful, being not of their
society, 1 John 2.19. Yet we cannot deny them admittance upon their returning
and repenting. And so we account of schismatics, Council. Nicen. cap. 18, 19.
who rent themselves off from the Church, Christ's mystical body, and so is no
part of it, because they break the union of members with the head, and one
another, and therefore so standing they cannot be members of the Church, no
more then a branch rent from a tree can be part of the living tree; or a member
cut from the body, to be part of the living body. So those that are justly
excommunicate in the right sense of the Catholic Church, and have no mind to
return, and to be reconciled, cannot be of the Church militant, because such
want repentance, and love, and peace. But because the whole Catholic Church
cannot personally or actually excommunicate one, some think therefore that
whether excommunication be inflicted justly or unjustly, one is but cast out of
the Church visible, or some particular Church. Indeed sometimes it may very
well be so; but if it be done by the rule of the whole Church, surely it is all
one as if done by the whole, or the representative body of the Church, because
the same spirit guides any part (if they go by a true rule) which guides the
whole; as 1 Cor. 5.4. and therefore in ancient time, Nic. Conc. Can. 5.
if one Church did excommunicate a man, another Church might not absolve him.
It is true, that a man unjustly excommunicated, is only cast out of the visible
Church, John 9.34, 35.
or particular Congregation, and therefore he retaining his faith and baptism,
is nevertheless a member of the Church militant; yea a man justly
excommunicate, yet upon his repentance is a member of the Church militant, and
ought to be admitted into the visible Church, and particular Congregation, as
was the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. for the censure of excommunication is
to such a man only corrective, 1 Cor. 5.5.
not destructive: for though it be said there for the destruction of the flesh,
yet I suppose that he was not delivered to Satan to be killed, but rather that
he finding himself cast out of the Church, which is the kingdom of God, and
so deprived of the benefits thereof conveied to men, by prayer, word, and
Sacrament, and so in the devils power, it might work in him a mortification of
fleshly concupiscence by true repentance. Nor do we set open this Church door
so wide, as to account reprobates of the Church militant, nor yet notorious
sinners without repentance: for the members of the Church militant are living
stones, built upon the corner stone, Christ, 1 Pet. 2 5.
in whom they are chosen and enrolled as his soldiers, and are Saints by
efficacious calling, because predestined thereto, Romans 8.30. which reprobates
are not. So manifest and notorious sinners are not of the Church militant,
because they fight not against sin, but subject themselves to it, having not
the spirit that lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. whereas in the members of
the Church militant, Christ lives by the holy spirit, deriving to them, sense,
life, and spiritual motion. Nor do we number hypocrites to be of the Church
militant, though in the visible Church by partaking of the doctrine and
Sacraments, because they want those virtues and graces which proves one to be a
member of the mystical body of Christ, as faith to apprehend Christ the head
and foundation, and to be united to him, and therefore can bear no fruit in
him, but must be taken away, John 15.2. though they be in Church visible; which
Church the Papists only acknowledging, may well hold that the true Church is
always visible.


Mathe. Why, is it not so?


Phila. You are to consider, that the term or word Church is diversely
understood. First, for the universal company of believers, and so it is
invisible; and therefore it is said in the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic
Church: now faith is the evidence of things not seen. Secondly, Church is taken
for a company of men in particular places, professing one and the same true
religion, and so it is visible. Again, if you take the Church in the external
form of it, namely, for a company of men met together to perform Church duties;
so the Church is visible: but if you take it in its internal form, consisting
in efficacious calling, and faith; so it is invisible: for it is hard to judge
who has these graces. Therefore certainly neither the whole Catholic Church,
nor all that part of it called militant, is visible. But some part of the
Church militant has, and is, but yet is not necessary to be always visible,
but may possibly lie hid, and unappearing at some times. Aug. in lib. 5. cont.
Donat. c. 17 Rev. 13.13, 14
In which regard the Church is called a garden enclosed, and a fountain sealed,
Cant. 4.11. and the weapons of her warfare to be spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.4. When
Antichrist reigned over the world, where was then the Church visible? surely
fled, like the woman, Rev. 12.16. into some solitary place, as Eliah was forced
to do by Iesabel, 1 Kin. 19.10. Indeed there has been, and I fear will be
again, when our Sun will be darkened, and her Moon will not give her light, and
our Stars fall from the Churches heaven. And when you see the abomination of
heresies, schism, and libertinisme set up in Gods Temple, let him that is in
Christianity fly to the Scripture, for there you shall only find what the true
Church is, namely, certain people called at diverse hours, some at the first,
some at the second, others at the third. So at the beginning, middle, and end
of the world, and not all alike at all times, sometimes clouded, sometimes more
resplendent; so that it is not always visible, nor always alike visible.


Mathe. Whether is the visible Church subject to defects, or errors?


Phila. Yes; for Adam and Eve fell in Paradise, and afterward the world was so
wicked, that the Church remained only in Noah's family. And after God had chosen
the people of Israel to be his Church, they worshipped the golden Calfe; and
for that and other sins, we find them left without Religion, Priest, or Law, 2 Chronicles. 5. and their Temple ruined, and themselves dispersed. Christ says, that
faith shall hardly be found on the earth; 2 These. 2.
and St Paul prophecieth of a general apostasy. So in the time of Athanasius,
the Christian world was overrun with Arianisme, only Athanasius stood for
Christ, that he was of the same substance with the Father. But he was but one
man, and one man could not make a Church; so that the Church as well as the
Moon, may suffer an eclipse, especially when the sword shall awake against the
shepherd, Zach. 13.7. and he shall be smitten, and the sheep scattered. So
likewise the visible Church may err, not the Church Catholic and universal;
for truth could not be found then upon earth, nor any visible militant Church,
for then they have no truth to fight for. But the visible Church as it
consists of its outward matter and form, namely, of a company of men
exercised about Ecclesiastical matters may err, and so it did before the Law
in the time of the Patriarks, and under the Law, as the Church of Israel, and
since the Law. For the visible Church of the Jews persecuted the Christians:
and the Disciples were all offended and stumbled at Christ's sufferings, and
hardly believed at first, his resurrection; yea, and after, it erred about his
Kingdom, Acts 1.6. which they thought should be earthly. So they doubted a
while about the calling of the Gentiles, Acts 10.20. cap. 11.2. So we find the
Church of the Corinths full of division, 1 Cor. 1.11.
and schisms, and doubts of the resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. and the
Church of Galatia falling back to Judaisme by circumcision. Gal. 5.1, 2, 3.
Yea, all the Eastern Churches, as well as the seven Churches of the lesser
Asia, have had their errors, and remain in some, as the Papists say, even till
now. Yea, general Councils have not been free; for one has disallowed what
the other has allowed, and both cannot therefore be true. As the Council of
Franckford broke down the Images in Churches, Aug. lib. de unita. Eccles. c. 3.
which the second Council of Nice restored; and so many others did one
contradict another, which shows the Churches imperfection, and that it stands
not with her nature to be free from error: for then if she did once err, she
could be no longer a Church. Therefore the Church of Rome if it be a visible
Church, can challenge no such prerogative, especially since Antichrist sits
there as chief governor, Hier. in Epist. Rustic.
since which time by avarice, the Law is perished from the Priest, and vision
from the Prophet.


Mathe. I pray tell me the notes of a true visible Church?


Phila. I suppose you mean particular Churches in several nations. For the
universal Catholic Church, is rather to be believed then seen, as is implied
in that Article of the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church. There be
therefore three notes of a true visible Church. First, a sincere preaching of
the Word. Secondly, a pure dispensation of Sacraments. And thirdly, a right
administration of discipline. These are the notes of a true Church, though all
of them are not sound always, and at the same time in a Church. As the Jews
for forty years in the wilderness wanted circumcision: so sometime some
ministers may possibly through ignorance, infirmity or fear, or to please
greatness, depart from sincere doctrine; and so by the dragons tail many
stars are cast to the earth, and by some of them the waters are made bitter,
Rev. 8.11. yet may it be a true Church, so long as the discession from pure
doctrine is not general. So a Church may by ministers neglect, want
Sacraments, and by the tyranny of Princes, want discipline; yet if the Church
be purely visible, it has ordinarily these three notes, which indeed freeth it
from maintaining error, heresy, and schism, though all three may possibly be
in it, 1 Cor. 1.11. and cap. 3.3
1 Cor. 11.19. provided always that the heresy thrust it not into infidelity,
or cause it not to deprave the doctrines of faith, as the Church of Rome has,
and so is become adulterous and heretical. So it may be in some things
schismatic, so far as to hurt charity, not verity, by taking occasion
unjustly, as the Separatists, to depart from the Church, but not giving
occasion to the Church, to depart from them, as the Papists have done to us,
like the old Pharisees, who gave just occasion to Christ and his Apostles, to
separate themselves from their traditions. Therefore true doctrine is the
chief note of a true visible Church, whereby people are taught as Christ's
sheep, to hear his voice, John 10.27. and to continue in his, and his Apostles
doctrine, Acts 2.42. which is the foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20. And for
the Sacraments, they are commanded by Christ himself, Mat. 28.19. and Luke
22.19. So also is the administration of discipline set down by our Savior,
Mat. 18.17. and used by St Paul, 1 Cor. 5.5. upon the incestuous person. So
that the right use of these must needs be a note of a true visible Church. Let
the Papists brag of their term Catholic, I am sure it no way agrees to them,
neither in respect of the extension of their Churches bounds, which is not
universal, nor yet in regard of their doctrines, which are not according to
the Catholic truths confessed by the primitive, or orthodox Churches of old,
and therefore their word Catholic is no note: for a true visible Church is not
to be judged by a name, but by the thing it ought to hold; otherwise, the Pope
like Simon Magus, might be thought the great power of God, Acts 8.10. Nor does
their boasted antiquity make their Church the more true: for many things were
said of old, which were not intended at the first, as they were afterward used,
Mat. 5. It is not antiquity, but his truth that is the ancient of days, that
is the note of the Church. Aug. Q. 14. vet. and No. Testam.
The devil is older then the Church, and Idolatry and Paganism is very
ancient, and the Jews and the Samaritans pleaded antiquity, and held the
Gospel of Christ but a novelty, yet their Church was not the true. Beside, if
antiquity be a note, then the Church Christian, and Jerusalem, and that of
Antioch, where Peter taught, and sat as superintendent for seven years, must
be accounted the true Church, and not Rome, which was planted since; but the
authority of religion must not be measured by time. Cypr. lib. 2. cont. gent.
Nor does duration prove it the better; for it is neither a proper or
inseparable note, as appears Psalm. 47.7, 8. Rev. 12. And truly the Church of
Rome has not had a continued duration; for Bellarmin says, that a Church
cannot subsist without a Bishop, and the seat of Rome has been often vacant by
wars and schisms among the Popes themselves, as has been formerly showed you.
Nor does their amplitude and multitudes make any thing in this case for them;
for Satan's Kingdom is larger then Christ's, and his numbers more then Christ's
little flock, who are often like Noah's family in the Ark; they have a many of
the vulgar, Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
the Church has a few faithful; one precious stone is worth many toies. Nor
will succession of Bishops help them to a note; for who succeeded Melchisedeck,
but Christ, many hundred of years falling between, Vid. Athan. laudem in orat.
Nazian.
and the place changed also: for the Church is not bound to place, or persons
of men. Nor can ordination prove a note, since heretics has it as well as the
true Church: neither can we find their ordination always good, if Pope Jone
was ordained, or she ordained any. And Liberius the Pope being an Arrian,
ordained Arrians also. Nor does unity pass for a note, except in the faith,
under one mystical head, Jesus Christ: for satan is not divided against satan,
and very thieves are united together. Nor can their miracles prove their Church
true, because they are false and Antichristian, 2 These. 2.9. and are invented
to maintain false doctrines. Beside, if they were true, they were not always a
note of a true Church: for not only heathen gods have done strange things to
persuade their divinity, Bell. lib. de notis Eccl. cap. 14. Socrat. hist. lib.
7. c. 17.
but even heathen men, as Vespasian made a blind man see, and a lame man walk.


Mathe. What Church do you hold has these three notes?


Phila. The true Christian Protestant Church; especially as it was constituted
by the first reforming Princes in England: for the doctrine thereof is built
upon the holy scripture. They administer Sacraments in their primitive purity,
and hold only two generally necessary to salvation, i. Baptism and the Lords
Supper, rejecting all the spurious Sacraments of the Church of Rome. As
confirmation, which the Church of England did use in a laudable manner, and
might do much good by using it as it was, but not as a Sacrrment; for it kept
young people in a care to render an account of their faith; and Ministers and
Parents to teach them Catechism. So penance was injoined notorious offenders
for satisfaction of the Church, and to reduce them better manners, and to beget
fear and shame in others, but never held it a Sacrament, no more then it did
matrimony or ordination. As for the fifth spurious Sacrament of Rome, extreme
unction, they never used it, because not instituted of Christ as a Sacrament.
It is true, Mark 6.13. the Disciples anointed many that were sick, with oil,
and they were healed, and St James in cap. 5.14. advises them to use oil with
prayer for the sick; but it was no consecrated oil, as the papists use,
Bellar. lib. 1. de extrem. unct. cap. 3.
nor applied for remission of sins to seven parts of their body. But you will
say we in England at this time want right discipline. I answer, It is true, yet
the Church does maintain it in her doctrines and constitutions, but she cannot
use it in those times when the shepherd is smitten, and the sheep are
scattered, or else combined against him, that they may live at their own
liberty without correction by the rod of discipline; yea libertinisme is grown
to such a height, that the disciplinarians themselves who envied the Bishops
authority, dare not exercise the Presbyterian virge, lest they also follow the
Bishops dejection.


Mathe. Might not a National Council set all right?


Phila. No doubt it might with Gods blessing, so that it were called and
empowered by authority, and consisted of men orthodoxall, and of just minds, and
of moderate temper, who would make Gods will their law, and Gods word their
rule; otherwise, whereas they might be the balm of the Church, they prove her
bane, as many have done, namely, the second Nicen Synod, and that of Constance,
and the Roman under Innocent the third, and many others; so that the outward
communion of the Church has been often dissolved, though the inward has and
must hold among the faithful.


Mathe. I desire to know what the Communion of Saints is.


Phila. The participation of those benefits to which the Saints only have a
right in common: and this communion they have with God, and of his benefits
among themselves. That they have a communion with God, you may see, 1 John 1.3,
7. by which we have a connection and union with him, by love of him toward us,
and our love to him and his word and service; and so as it were cohabiting and
dwelling one in and with another, John 14.23. as a father with his children by
providence, and children with their father by a loving obedience. And this
communion is express in Scripture particularly with the blessed Trinity. As
first with the father by being made his sons, 1 John 3.1. through Christ by
faith, John 1.12. and by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, who leads us into all
saving truth, John 16.13. and testifies to us that we are the children of God,
Romans 8.16, 17. For as the Father by his love to us, draws us to Christ, John
6.44. so Christ dwells in our heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.12. and the spirit acts
and perfecteth this union and communion by his operation through his spiritual
graces, Romans 8.14. Therefore as God the Father has given us his Son, so his
Son has united our nature to himself, by an union indissoluble, as a body and
members to the head, 1 Cor. 12.12. So the Holy Ghost does combine him and the
Saints, by a true and real union and communion of his substance, not by his
body being in ours, or ours in his, but as the branches are in the vine, which
though differing in sight, yet agree in connection, communication, and
assimulation. By this spirit we have communion with Christ's divine nature,
because it dwells in us, and conforms us to it self, 2 Pet. 1.4. and also with
his human nature, as children are partakers of the same flesh and blood, Heb.
2.14. yea, of the same spirit, 1. Cor. 6.17. and of his sufferings also, Romans
8.17. that we may be glorified with him. For by the union we have with Christ,
is obtained all the benefits of his birth, death, resurrection, and ascension,
spoken of before, together with all the blessed effects thereof wronght in us,
as free justification, regeneration, adoption, and freedom from sin, satan,
and the sinful world, with all the consequents thereof, which is remission of
sin, resurrection of our bodies, and life eternal; all which is sealed to us
by the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, by both which we have
communion with Christ; for all that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, Gal. 3.27. and the cup of blessing, and the sacramental bread, is the
blood and body of Christ to faith, 1 Cor. 10.16.


Mathe. What need was there of two Sacraments, since both of them have relation
to the death of Christ.


Phila. He that did first institute them, knew best the reason of appointing
two; and the Scripture, which is the express mind of Christ, sets forth
baptism to us, as the Sacrament of initiation or entrance, or first grafting
into Christ and his mystical body the Church. The other as the Sacrament of
sustentation, by which we are with the word, nourished up to life eternal.
Therefore St Paul, Romans 6.5. calls baptism a planting into the similitude of
Christ's death, and Romans 11.17. he says the Gentiles were grafted into the true
olive, which no doubt was at first by the word of faith preached, and baptism
received. And the Sacrament of the communion, is represented to us as food, to
which Christ had some respect, John 6.55. saying, my flesh is meat indeed,
though he explains it afterward in a spiritual sense, ver. 63. saying, the
spirit quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. It is true that there is no
clear analogy between grafting and washing, except we consider the subject of
that Sacrament in diverse respects. 1. As a wild tree, and so by baptism one is
said to be grafted, because it is a means ordained for our admittance into the
stock. 2. If we consider man as a polluted infant in birth natural, so washing
is proper, Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. and therefore baptism is called the washing of
regeneration, or the new birth, and differs as much from the other Sacrament in
the thing signified, as in the sign; for the sign of one is water, of the other
wine. So the thing signified in the one, is the all-cleansing spirit of God,
John 3.5. which in effectual baptism operates with the water; the thing
signified by the other, is the all-cleansing blood of Christ: not but that both
are in both; the blood of Christ concurring with baptism, through the efficacy
of it (though not signified by it) and the Holy Ghost in the communion by his
powerful operation, conveying the efficacy of his body and blood to every
believer.


Mathe. Though Baptism be but the Sacrament of entrance, yet there be many
tender minds who cannot comfortally bring children to it, as there be many
being fearful of their own unworthiness, and to partake with such as are not
fit, as they suppose, to abstain from the Lords Table. I pray therefore to help
me therein, that I being strengthened, I may comfort others.

Phil. First, I know no reason why any Christians should doubt of bringing
their children to baptism, for the reasons I have already showed. But beside,
if Christ did admit children that were carried in peoples arms to his person
for a blessing, Luke 18.15.
no doubt they may be admitted to baptism, where his blessing is to be
expected, especially there being no other ordinance appointed, whereby we may
bring children to him but this, and that we find no prohibition in Scripture
against it. And whereas some say they may not, because they have not faith,
they cannot prove they have none, because Christ says there be little ones
that believe in him. Greg. Decret. lib. 3. cap. ^. de baptis.
Nor can they prove that none may be baptized that believe not; for Simon Magus
was. If they say that he made a confession of it, I say they may make a better
confession and profession by their parents and witnesses, than he did by
himself. Or if there were a Text containing these words, he that believes not
shall not be baptized, would discreet men think it meant only of those that
could hear and understand, and not of Infants who cannot understand no more
then that place of St Mark 16.16. includes infants damnation, where Christ
says, he that believes not shall be damned. And what forbids us to believe,
that being God works without means upon some, may not also into the children
of Christians by his preventing grace, convey so much seminall grace, as may
make them capable passively, at least of this Sacrament of entrance. Beside,
why may they not be admitted upon their parents faith, as well as Christ cured
some for the faith of others; as the Palsy man, and the woman of Canaans
daughter, and the centurions servant; especially they having only sinned in
their parents. I see not but the imputation of their parents faith may possibly
remove that which is imputed for the parents fact, through that means which God
in Christ has ordained, and so as they sin by another, so in this case they
may believe by another, that as the malady is brought upon him without his
will, so without his will it may be healed: Cypr: Ep. 59.
for no doubt the grace of God in Christ abounds above the guilt of Adams
sin, Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18. and so the ordinance of Baptism required and
applied by the faith of the parents, answers to the ordinance of imputation
of guilt for the parents fact; and so Gods ways are equal, that he may be
justified in his doings, and clear when he is judged. By all which it may be
collected (beside from the ancient custom of the Church, which is not to be
despised) that parents may without fear, and in faith bring their children to
baptism.


Mathe. But how shall I resolve the fearful in mind, about their refraining to
the Lords Supper?


Phila. Their fears may be good or bad. If they be good, as fear of their
unworthiness, as Job feared all his works, they be the fitter guests for this
Table, whose precious viands is able to remove that cold Systole of fear, and
bring forth the warm Diastole of faith, both which those that have the spirit
of God do breath at certain times, Psalm. 119.131. this may be a filial fear
of offending God by their unworthiness. But a despairing fear is bad, as if
Christ would cast thee away when thou come to him; and so is a panick fear,
when thou can give no account of it: so is an erroneous fear of taking the
Communion in a mixed assembly, because I have not a certain good character of
all present, or do certainly know that some of them are not so strict and
conscientious livers, as they ought to be. For it is true, that many are not to
be admitted, as the unbaptized, and those that are ignorant of the grounds of
religion, and of the mystery of this holy Sacrament; and some are to be
sequestered from it, as Adam from the tree of life, lest he profane it; and as
the leprous out of the camp, lest they infect others: so are obstinate and
scandalous men, and inordinate walkers, Mat. 1^.1^. 2 These. 3.
pertinacious heretics, wilful schismatics, are to be suspended, and they
that neglect to do it (if it be in their power) do highly offend God. But now
let the fearful consider, whether they consent or allow of the one sin, or the
other, if not, he need not fear; or whether it be in his power to separat those
vile from the precious, if not, let it content him that God has given him an
heart to grieve for the disorder; or if thou have power to separate one from
the other, thou must be careful that you mistake not the wicked for the just,
lest while you fear to beguilty of spilling the blood of Christ, yet thou
bring the blood of some of his flock upon thee, because thou take from
them the food allowed them by their Shepherd. Consider therefore your fear to
receive in a mixed assembly, whether it proceed not from self conceit that you
are more holy then others, or that you may be defiled by them, or that it is
sinful to accompany with such at the Communion, and search if you can find any
prohibition for it, or reprehension in Scripture for so doing: you may find
prohibition of mixing with scandalous Christians company in common society, and
at meat, not in sacred things, 1 Cor. 5.11. So in 2 These. 3.14. they are bidden
to have no company with those that obeyed not the Apostles words in that
Epistle, that was, that Christians should walk orderly and laboriously in their
callings. So then they must forbear the company of such in common conversation,
not at the Lords Table: for were it fit that the whole Church should forbear
the Communion because of a wicked person there present? surely nay, but rather
imitate Christ's Disciples, who did not avoid receiving the Lords Supper,
because Judas was there, Luke 22.21. Neither did Christ forbid him, because
though inwardly bad enough, yet be was not convicted of it, and Christ not
coming then as a judge, would not censure him. If we therefore look not
narrowly into this fear, it will make us neglect the duty we owe to God, and
the benefit God offers to us, because another man does not do his as he ought,
Aug. ex. Cyp. lib de lapsis.
which is a thing disallowed by ancient Churches and Doctors, namely, that one
is defiled with those men's sins that come unworthily to the Lords Table.


Mathe. How may one become a fit communicant of the Lords Supper?


Phila. The New Testament sets down two rules: Christ bids us do it in
remembrance of him: St Paul bids us to examine our selves, and shows the
danger of the neglect, that it incurs judgment, and the reason of that danger,
because for want of examination we discern not the Lords body. By all which we
may find what is the duty of a true communicant, which no doubt consists in a
right knowledge of the mystery of it, and a true faith in the application of
it; both which to examine, is our preparation. Therefore we are to consider,
First, the thing it self. Secondly, the relation that it has to Christ.
Thirdly, the end of it. Fourthly, the fitness of a receiver.

The thing it self is a visible earnest of an invisible good, expected by
faith in Christ, to whom we have right through his word, of which the Sacrament
is a seal. In this Christ has showed his abundant love, that he would not
only make himself visible to us, by taking our nature, but also humble
himself to our sense of tasting and feeling, that we may not only see, but
taste and handle the word of life: so that though he be gone far from us, and
above us in the union hypostaticall, having taken our manhood into God, yet he
is with us by an union sacramental, that we may take him into our selves, and
by virtue thereof, be transformed to his likeness, in righteousness and
holiness. The next thing to consider, is the relation the Sacrament has to
Christ. First in the elements. Secondly the actions of the receiver. The
elements are mean and plain, bread and wine, the common food of the poorest man
in that Country where it was first instituted. But the element is made
excellent by the institutor, Christ, as sometimes coins of base metal are
made valuable by the power of Kings, and a small piece of parchment by law,
enabled to convey an inheritance. The elements are mean and poor, the better to
resemble him that had neither form nor beauty in his passion; and also to set
forth his power, who can do wonders and miracles by weak means; yet they be
doubled, to confirm our comfort; and they be the elements of our sustentation,
to present to us his virtue, by which the soul is nourished to everlasting
life. Next we are to consider what relation the actions of Christ in the
consecration has to himself, and of the receiver to Christ, namely, in that
he eats and drinks the Sacrament.

The actions of Christ in his consecration of the elements to a sacramental
use, are, First, his taking and blessing of the elements, Luke 22.19, 20. There
is another cup named in the 17 verse, which was only the cup of thanksgiving
used by the Jews in all their solemn feasts. But this was the cup of blessing,
1 Cor. 10.16. the cup of the New Testament in his blood, which blessing caused
it to cease from being a common drink, and to become sacramental, signifying
that he took our nature, and sanctified it to undertake the work of redemption,
and yet altered not the elements in their nature, but use; not in their
substance, but efficacy, no more then he altered the nature of man by taking it
into the deity, though he advanced it in quality above the common capacity of
humane nature. So he brake it, Aug. tom. 8. in Psalm. and tom. 9. tract 7. in
Ep. Johannis.
to show what violence should be used to his body; and poured out the wine, to
set forth the effusion of his blood. So he gave it to his disciples, to show
that he freely bestowed himself upon the Church, with all his merits.

Secondly, we are to consider in the actions of the receiver, what relation
they have to Christ. Their action is taking, eating, drinking. Taking shows
the believers hand of faith apprehending Christ. Then he eats and drinks the
Sacrament, to signify the benefit we get by Christ, whose precious death is
exhibited to us in the Sacrament, and proves to us, either like physic to
prevent evil, or to purge us of it, 1 John 1.7. or else is like ordinary food
to sustain us, or like dainty meat to refresh and restore us. Again, it is
eaten and drunk, to show that he is like meat, without which we cannot live,
and after which we should most earnestly long, and eagerly desire, as hungry
men do after victuals; as also to show what conformity our spiritual stomach
has with Christ: for as that which we eat is retained, if it agree with our
stomach, else it is repelled: so if our stomachs spiritual do agree with
Christ, we retain him because he agrees with it, and pleases it, and
contents it, which the world does not. Beside, it is eaten and drunk, to show
that Christ must incorporate with us; not that we turn him into our nature, as
we do other meat, but by our receiving him, he turns our nature to his
likeness: as leaven does turn the bread into its own likeness, the bread does
not turn it, and in this respect the Kingdom of God is like a leven, Mat. 13.
By this is also set forth that rare union that we have with Christ, he
concorporating himself with us by faith in a wonderful manner: Aug. Ep. 23.
Aug. in tract. 26. in Joh.
for though we eat him not with our mouth, yet we do by our mind. Therefore
Christ said, take, eat, this is my body, which indeed is not his body till it
be eaten, nor then his natural, but his sacramental body, which men feed on
by faith, and not by sense; by which faith Christ is there present to every
believer, and that not only by his infinite and unlimited presence, by which he
fills all places; nor by that real presence which the Lutherans imagine, as
if Christ's body did partake of the incommunicable properties of the deity, such
as ubiquity, by which they believe Christ to be in or under the elements: nor
is Christ present in the Sacrament by the change of the elements into his body,
as the papists hold. A strange opinion, to make Christ subject to orall eating,
and gutterall swallowing, and to make God do things not only contrary to nature
(which all men grant he can) but things contrary in nature, which he cannot do,
because that implies a contradiction. As we read that God made the Sun and
Moon stand still, it was contrary to nature: But he never did, nor never will,
make the Sun to stand and go at one and the same instant: so neither make
Christ's body infinite like the deity to be every where at one time. Nor
certainly will he so far debase the body of Christ, as to make it a general
food for all in the Sacrament, which was intended only for the spiritual
nourishment of the faithful. And farther, Christ is present energetically, i.
by virtue and power; so he is among those that are gathered together in his
name, by the working of his holy spirit; but in the Sacrament he is relatively
present, as being represented thereby; as Kings are in their officers of State,
whose act is counted as the Kings own, though he be personally present in his
Court only. Amb. de Incar. cap. 5.
So when his body was in the grave, his virtue wrought from heaven to quicken
it: so now his body though in heaven, yet his power works in every faithful
receiver; as the Sun enlightneth the eye, though the body of the Sun be in
heaven. Again, our eating and drinking the Sacrament, must intimate to us, that
as food makes a uniting continue between soul and body, so does the Sacrament
between Christ and us by faith; and as food does more strongly unite one member
to another, so does the Sacrament one member mystical of Christ to another by
love, because we being many are one bread, and one body, being all partakers of
that one bread; and as by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, so we
all have been made to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. that so we having
all one food of life, so we be of one mind and souse, and one affection, which
is the spirit of life. Moreover, by partaking of this Sacrament by eating and
drinking, is sealed to us our right to the covenant of grace, as sure as that
which we eat is our own, and concorporated with us. Therefore it is the duty of
a communicant, to consider how he understands the end of the Sacrament, and the
effects of it, that so he may not receive only, but perceive the Lords body,
and so do it in remembrance of him. In which duty it is required that we
remember his death, and the benefits thereof, which not being done, the
Sacrament is slighted and profaned, because that to which it relates, has no
impression in us, as by remembering his love expressed to us in his death, than
which none could be greater, being endured for us while we were enemies, Romans
5.8. or the horror of his death being most painful, shameful, fearful,
enduring not only the spite of wicked men, but an abstraction of the divine
comfort for a time, so that never was sorrow like his, Lam. 1.12. all which was
most properly due to us; nor remembering the benefits of his death, which
concerns us; as by it the sting of death is taken away, though a stain is left;
the curse of the law is abolished, it is to us no killing letter; the exaction
of the law is nullified, we being not bound to every jot and tittle of it for
our justification, but our weak performances are excepted of God in Christ,
because we have a right to all Christ's righteousness, and a just claim in him
to all the blessings of the law; so that neither the corruption of nature can
reign over us, Romans 6.14.
nor sin bind us over to punishment everlasting, and for temporal afflictions
they shall all work to our good and glory, as they did to Christ's, Romans 8.28.
Phil. 2.9.


Mathe. How may one then rightly remember Christ in receiving the Sacrament,
and so become a faithful receiver?


Phila. These do one include the other. For as faith looks upon Christ and his
benefits, so remembrance calls those things to mind, which faith believes; so
that this remembrance must be a believing remembrance, that the Sacrament
presents to us under seal, the benefits of Christ's death and passion. It also
must be a thankful remembrance for those inestimable favors of which I told
you. Next it must be an obedient remembrance to what he has commanded, and now
God in him entreats us to do out of love.

By all which you may discern how a communicant must be qualified, and in what
he must especially examine himself, namely, in faith, which is the special
condition of the covenant of grace, of which the Sacrament is a seal. Now
faith must be considered in the cause, the nature, and the effects of it. The
causes of faith are the word, which is the seed of it, and the spirit which is
the virtue of this seed, both these brings light to discover the darkness of
our natural estate, and the comfort in Gospel light. Then next a power to
regulate and conform us to its own rules, and to subdue all opposition, 2 Cor.
10.4. Now for the nature of faith, it being convinced that the word is of
divine authority, it gives both an intellectual assent to the truth of it,
because God does avouch it, and a fiduciall assent to the goodness of it for
our own salvation; and as to the Word, so to the Sacrament, which is the seal
thereof; which goodness breeds in us a love, longing and delight in the holy
mysteries. Upon which follows an heavenly and holy effect of faith: as to
desire and hunger after the food of the soul, and a strong conversion of it
into our souls nutriment, and growing in grace by the strength of it more and
more, Romans 13. 2 Pet. 2.2. Next a sympathy with Christ's members in their griefs
and joies. Then a readiness to every good work, and a strong repulse of evil:
upon which follows affiance in God, hope in his promises, peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, and a continual fructification in an
holy life, by the strength of the Word and Sacrament, while we walk here in
this wilderness of sin, as the Israelites did in the strength of Manna and the
Rock-water, till we come to the land of everlasting rest.


Mathe. I thank you for your patience and resolutions of my general and
disordered queries. I shall make bold hereafter (if God give leave, and you
will afford me your assistance in resolving me) to trouble you with some other
more particular cases. But before I part, I desire you since there is such
divisions among us, to tell me what Church you think most safest for one to
cleave unto in life and death, and what congregation is best to associate my
self withal.


Phila. I suppose you find by what has been said, that the Protestant Church
is the soundest for doctrine, and therefore hold you to their principles of
doctrine, as they have been set forth and maintained by our The 39. Articles of
the Church of England.
Church of England, in the time of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth,
and her successors. And for matters of discipline, it is to be wished that some
were settled among us for the suppressing voluptuous living and libertinisme.
But if it may not be had, let us be content with the Gospel preached, and pray
for reformation. As for the Congregation you speak of, I hold the public
generally best, because Preachers in Churches will make more conscience of what
they preach, then those of the private conventicles or chambers, except it be
some that are forced to make such places their refuge to exercise their
ministry, which in conscience they cannot give over, though prosecuted much
like as the primitive Doctors were persecuted.


Mathe. But they that do preach in public, some are of one opinion, some of
another, as Prela^icall, Presbyterian, and Independent.


Phila. Let no titles trouble you, but try the spirits whether they be of God,
by their teaching faith and an holy and good life. Let men impose upon others,
or take up what names they please to themselves, be thou content to be a
Protestant Christian. And for men's private opinions, except they publish them
to seduce others, they must stand or fall to their own master. And for joining
your selse to a Congregation, I will give you no advice, but only si^ce you
have liberty given, use it to the best advantage for your soul, by hearing
ministers of the soundest judgment, and most edifying. And because all
Congregations are mixed, it is best to consort with those that are the most
pious in their lives, and unanimous in their worship of God.


Mathe. But some say the learned are not the right Preachers, but the plain
man, though a Tradesman, who preaches by the spirit.


Phila. Surely the learned are more to be trusted for the soul, as a learned
Physician for the body; but they go by rule, others by rote; so do these
mechanic preachers, they despise learning, as some do riches, because they
despair to get, and so they entitle the spirit to their ignorance, of which
the spirit is no author, but the devil, and man's presumptuous sins: for the
spirit never employed any about his Church, but either he made them able by
infusion (which they cannot prove he has them) or else by acquisition. He gave
Isaiah the tongue of the learned, as well as Bezaleel and Aholiab the gift of
handicraft. So Christ took plain men to preach his Gospel, but he made them
learned by the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which he has not done these. So he
employed Paul the learned, and Luke the Physician. So the Lord allowed schools
for the Prophets, as we do Academies to be as medicines for the rude manners of
the people. If these men had more learning, they would see they wanted more,
but having none, they find none they want. But however let them prove they have
the spirit without learning, the able minister shall prove he has the spirit
by learning; as one may show his faith by his works more evidently then another
can show faith without them.


Mathe. But why do you advise me to the public meeting places, as Churches,
rather than to chambers and conventicles, surely one is as holy as the other,
is it not?


Phila. Yes, in respect of any inherent holiness in them; for neither has
any, but the Church has the holiness of dedication and separation from all
other use, as the Jews Temple had, till the abomination that makes desolate
was set there, i. the Roman soldier. And therefore God looks it should be
used with discrimination; for holiness becomes his house for ever, and sure
a decent handsomnesse and behavior, does not mis-become it. But I do advise
you to Churches the rather then chambers, because Christ has forewarned you of
seeking him in the private chambers, Mat. 24.26.


Mathe. But I see as much disorder in Gods service there, as in the chambers,
both in service and at the Communion by diverse gestures.


Phila. The more pity; for they that pretend to sanctify Gods name, ought to
make an holy discrination between those things that are called by his name, and
other things that are not. As Gods word, and Gods house, and the Lords table. I
confess in some things people may be borne withal; as not kneeling at
prayers, when the Church and seats are so full that they cannot do it. So at
the Communion every Church have thought fit to have one gesture by themselves,
because people come to the Communion with one faith, to feed upon one Christ,
and in one love and charity. So some Churches beyond the seas stand, some walk,
some sit; the English Church was wont to kneel. Now since our discipline is
dissolved, all these foreign gestures are crept into our Church, and being
there is no power to reduce them to their pristine gestures, ministers can do
no more then to instruct them to be well satisfied in their own minds, and to
have a charitable opinion of them. For it may be they that receive it standing,
look on it in relation to the Passover, a type thereof, which was eaten
standing. They that take it walking, conceive it as a viaticum, or a
refreshment in their journie, toward the land of eternal rest. They that take
it sitting, look upon it as a spiritual banquet set before them to feed upon
by faith. They that kneel, conceive it as a pardon sealed and delivered to them
of God, and so think good to take it kneeling. By this charitable construction,
one Church or Christian shall not condemn another for a thing indifferent.


Mathe. But the Sabbath is not a thing indifferent, yet some allow none, or at
least not the Lords day, but Saturday the Jews Sabbath.


Phila. They that will allow none, deny the fourth Commandment, which requires
a moral Sabbath. They that will not have the Lords day, understand not the
sense of that Commandment, which binds not all men to the seventh, which the
Jews kept but to a seventh. For the Jews themselves seem to me to have the
seventh day from the creation altered, as well as the beginning of the year at
the Passover, of which Moses gives a reason, Deuteronomy. 5.15. in repetition of the
Commandment, saying, because God delivered thee out of Egypt, therefore he
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day. Nor do we find a Sabbath day kept, till
the reigning of Manna, but that they marched one day as well as another; yet if
the day from the creation was altered by a new designation of a day, yet the
law was not broken, which only intended a seventh day rest from six days
labor, whenever God should prescribe or fix the day to begin. Neither is the
law broken by Christians, because the day is altered; for the intent of the law
is kept, which binds to keep holy one in seven, only the day is altered upon
good ground: for as the Jews kept their day in remembrance of Gods delivering
them from Pharaoh; so the Christians keep one in seven, i. the first day of the
week in remembrance of Christ's deliverance of them by his resurrection from
satan, sin, and death, and so has performed indeed to us, what was but typed
forth to the Jews, by whose Holy days and Sabbaths, we are not now to be
judged, Col. 11.16, 17.


Mathe. But what need we keep a day in remembrance of Christ's resurrection, if
we shall have no benefit by it, if some say true, that there is neither heaven
nor hell.


Phila. These men shall find their error to their grief at the resurrection,
which shall be procured by Christ's resurrection, who is the first fruits of
them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. Concerning hell I have already showed you. That
there must be a resurrection, there needs no proof, since the wicked must be
punished, and the just rewarded, which commonly falls out contrary in this
world, and that many things may be revealed which yet lie hid, as well sacred
mysteries, as mysteries of iniquity, Romans 2.16. And for heaven no doubt it is
the place of felicity, where Gods elect shall enjoy eternal life, whither
Christ is gone before to prepare a place for them; the happiness of which
place is called by St Paul our house from heaven, and the excellency of the
inheritance is set down by the name of crowns and kingcomes, and an eternal
weight of glory, of which unbeleevers must look for no part, but such as have
fought a good fight against corruptions, and kept the faith in a pure
conscience; which God of his mercy give you and I grace to do, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom I commend you, and so take leave for this time,
because important occasion calls me away.


Mathe. Gods peace be with you.


Phila. And Gods grace be with you.


Amen.

FINIS.
The Table of the Contents.
OF man's happiness, p. 1 Of man's propagation, p. 3 Of Christ's humanity, p. 9 Of
principles leading to felicity, p. 12 How man came to wander from it. p. 13
That there is a God proved by reason, p. 15 How men came to worship false
deities, p. 16 When came in false gods, p. 17 Of Atheism, p. 19 No true God
but one, p. 20 Christians worship that God, ibid. Persons in the Godhead, three
and no more, p. 21 The means to know God, p. 25 The Scriptures are Gods Word,
p. 26 Canonical books, p. 29 The Jews have not corrupted the Text of the Old
Testament, p. 30 No contradiction in the Scriptures, p. 31 Confutation of those
that reject Scriptures, p. 32 Of Scriptures translation, p. 33 The judge of
Scriptures sense, p. 34 How the Scripturesets out God to us, p. 35 Of Gods
attributes, p. 36 How God is to be considered of before the Creation, p. 37 Of
Angels, and their degrees, p. 38, 46 Their fall and sin, p. 47 Of Gods
operations in himself, and to usward, p. 39 Of predestination, p. 40 Of Gods
external works, p. 45 The world not eternal, nor made by it self, p. 45, 46
The place of evil Angels, p. 49 What use of the stars, p. 53 Why Christians
retain the names of Planets on their week days, as did the heathen, p. 54 Of
the Creation of man, p. 55 Of the souls immortality, p. 59 Of man's fall, p. 61
How the hope of felicity was given and continued to man, p. 63 Of the types of
Christ, p. 64 Of their analogy with the New Testament, p. 65 Of the promises
and prophecies of Christ's Nativity, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, p. 84 Of
the departure of the Scepter from Judah, p. 85 The necessity of Christ's birth
by a Virgin, p. 86 Of the spiritual relations that Christ's Birth, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension has to us, p. 89 How Christ's conception is applied
to the Holy Ghost, ibid. The effects of that conception upon us, p. 90 Of the
blessed Virgins conception of Christ, p. 92 The spiritual effects of Christ's
birth upon us, p. 95 No sin cleaving to Christ's conception, p. 93 How Christ
suffered being God and man, p. 96 How could he being just, be put justly to
death for the unjust, p. 98 Of Christ's carriage before Pilate and Herod, p. 101
The meaning and end of his sufferings, p. 103 The testimony of his Godhead in
his sufferings, p. 106 The necessity of his death, p. 107 Whether Christ died
in his nature, or his person, ibid. How Christ was slain from the beginning of
the world, and yet toward the end, p. 108 The mystery of his bones not broken,
and his side pierced, p. 108 Of his burial, p. 109 Of his descending into hell,
p. 111 The honor he got by his resurrection, p. 112 Of reverence due to his
name, p. 113 The benefits ue have by his resurrection, p. 114 By his ascension,
p. 115 By his session in heaven, ibid. And by his coming to judgment, p. 116
The necessity of the last judgment, and of that day, p. 117 Of the signs of
it, p. 118 Of the trial of men then, p. 119
The second part beginning next to 119. but figured by 115.
Why the Jews believed not in Christ, p. 115 Their punishment, p. 116 The
transferring of the Gospel to the Gentiles, p. 117 Association of Christians,
p. 119 Their first meeting places of Christians for worship, p. 120 Their first
Churches, p. 121 Their persecutions by the Jews and some others, p. 123 Their
persecutions by some Emperors, p. 123 Persecutions by Heretics, and some
others, p. 131 Persecution from the Western Church p. 133 Of the growth of
Popedom, ibid. Popish succession, p. 134 How came in the Protestant Religion,
p. 145 Of heresy and Heretics before Corstantine, p. 128 Persecutions by
Arrians, p. 131 And by Eutychians, p. 132 A view of ancient heresies, and
modern, p. 146 By whom Protestant doctrines were held before Luther, p. 148 How
the Protestant Religion came into England, p. 156 How the Pope got authority in
England, p. 157 How Christian Religion was first corrupted in England, p. 159
How reformation in Religion went on after H.8. p. 160 How it thrived in
England, and in foreign parts, p. 161 How the English Church was troubled
after reformation, p. 169 Of the old and new Anabap. p. 171 Baptism of
Infants, p. 178 Rebaptization, p. 180 Of Litourgie, p. 181 Calvin's Church
government, p. 183 Parity of Clergy and Laity, p. 185 Of oaths, ibid. Sects
troubling the Protestant Church p. 187 Gods punishments on diverse Sectaries p.
207 Of Bishops and Presbyters, p. 208 Forms of governing in all ages by
superiors, p. 212 Bishops accounted superior, and Presbyters second, p. 221
Of election of Pastors, p. 225 Government of Churches by Bishops, p. 228 How
Bishops derived from Rome, or otherwise, p. 229 Why some are enemies to
Bishops, p. 230 Of Litourgies and Ceremonies, p. 231 Of requisites in a settled
Church, p. 239 Of the Holy Ghost and his operations on Church people, p. 240 Of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 242 Of the Church, p. 244 Of Abraham's faith,
p. 250 The marks of a true Christian, p. 252 Advancement of sanctification, p.
256 Of repentance, p. 257 Of the Catholic Church, p. 261 Of the Church
militant, p. 264 Of the Churches head, p. 265 Of Antichrist, p. 267 Why St Paul
so covertly describes the Antichrist, p. 272 Whether heretics and
schismatics be of the body of the Church militant, p. 273 Of the Churches
visibility, p. 275 Of the notes of a true visible Church, p. 276 What Church
has those notes, p. 278 The good of a national Council, p. 279 Of the
Communion of Saints, ibid. The reason of two Sacraments, p. 280 That parents
may with confidence bring children to baptism, p. 280 That men may receive the
Lords Supper with a mixed assembly, p. 281 Of a fit Communicant, p. 282 How
Christ is to be remembered in the Sacrament, p. 285 What congregation is best to
associate ones self withal, and what Church is the safest, p. 286 Of the
holiness of the Church or place of Gods worship, p. 287 Of the Lords day, p.
288
FINIS.

