THE RIGHTEOUS RULER. A Sermon preached at St Mary's IN CAMBRIDGE June 28.
1660. Being appointed a day of public Thanksgiving to God for the happy
restoration of His Majesty to his Kingdoms.

By JOHN SPENCER, B. D. Fellow of Corpus Christi College, in CAMBRIDGE.

1 Chronicles. 29. 22, 23. And (all Israel) did eat and drink before the Lord, on
that day with great gladness, and they made Solomon, the son of David King the
second time, and anointed Him (...) Lord, to be chief Governor, and Zadok to
be priest.

Then Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord, as King in stead of David his
Father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed Him.

Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Universitie of CAMBRIDGE, 1660.

To the READER.
THe three first works we read of after the flood, were, A work of Piety, (the
building of an Altar, Genesis 8. 20.) A work of pleasure, (Noah his planting of a
Vineyard, and drinking of the wine thereof to excess, Genesis 9. 20, 21.) A work
of policy (the building of Babel,) Genesis 11. 4.)

National calamities are frequently in sacred Writ compared to a flood: Dan. 9.
26.
and such were the evils (civil and spiritual) England long labored under: Isa
28 2.
a flood, which covered the tops of our highest Mountains (Princes and Nobles)
and threatened destruction (as that did to Seths) to the two pillars of our
Land, Magistracy and Ministry.

Now upon the asswaging of such floods, there are three sorts of works which
men (according to their different principles) entertain themselves withal:
Religious persons with works of piety, and grateful acknowledgements to the God
of their salvation. Sensual persons about works of pleasure, excessive drinking
and sports (like Swine, wallowing the more in the mire, the more the Sun shines
on them.) Subtle persons about works of Policy, Hag. 1. 4.
the repairing and cieling of their own ruined houses, stepping in first after
the good Angels coming down, to get cure for their civil evils: in short, there
are ten that complain of a leprosy, to one who is thankeful for the cure. To
the sacred memory therefore of our deliverance, and to invite men to offer the
sacrifices of praise to God, I here build this altar, and that (after the law
thereof, Exodus 20. 25.) of rude and unpollisht stones.

Heretofore we were ready to dance about every image of power, made of the
peoples Earrings and Jewels broken to pieces (their laws and liberties
violated) while our Moses was in the cloud, and we thought our selves justified
with saying, Exodus 32. 1.
As for this Moses, we wot not what is become of him: but God has been pleased
to restore him to us again, and by him to conduct us (in a happy degree) out of
that wilderness condition the Nation was in.

Now to inkindle in our breasts a joyful and pious sense of this divine favor,
is the end of this ensuing Sermon, to which the slightness of the materials may
possibly render it not altogether disproportioned (bonfires designed for the
increasing and expressing a public joy, art not made of solid timber, the
slightest materials are then most serviceable) God has not only furnished us
with an occasion, but an ability to rejoice, the joy of His Majesty's entrance
to his Kingdoms, being assisted by the three National blessings, 2 Samuel 24. 13.
Plenty, Peace, Health, (rarely in conjunction, observed to grace the
Inauguration of our English Kings.)

I had not here been challengeable for so bold an attempt as the giving any
character of His Sacred Majesty, (every pencil especially at so great a
distance is not permitted to draw a Kings picture) but I considered that honor
and praise, are reckoned, not among the free-will-offerings, but the necessary
sacrifices to these gods upon earth, Psalm. 82. 6.
good and righteous Princes. It is prophesied of good King Solomon, Psalm. 72.
15. that prayer should be made for him continually, and daily should he be
praised, (a double honor which those that ruled ill before never had,) besides
the Text (in the latitude of its sense) did invite me hereunto, the Lxx reading
it thus, (...), when the righteous are commended, the people rejoice.

I easily foresee that some passages herein will be indicted of bitterness,
which therefore an ordinary policy would have prompted me to expunge, Jer. 8.
11.
but that I was well aware, Nulla remedia tam faeciunt dolorem, quam quae sunt
salutaria.
it is slight healing which commenceth not from a search of the wound: the
Apostle warrants a cutting reproof when a sin eats like a Gangrene into the
credit or safety of a Church. 2 Timothy 2. 17.
It is the Surgeons wisdom to accommodate his practice not to the humor,
Tit. 1. 13.
but necessity of his Patient. (...)
This Sermon is not presented to the eye with the same brevity it was to the
ear; Qui misericordia^ peccato impertit, peccanti denegat.
Truth in some places requiring greater assistance then those few minutes
allotted for such services in the Pulpit, would allow.

Cambridge July 23. 1660. J. S.

The Righteous Ruler. A Sermon preached at St. Mary's in Cambridge, June 28.
1660. being appointed a day of Public Thanksgiving for His MAJESTY'S
restoration to His Kingdoms.
PROVE. 29. 2. When the Righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when
the Wicked bear rule, the people mourn.
GOds government of the World is full of Riddles and Mysteries; the Temple out
of which the Angels (the Ministers of Divine Providence) proceed, Job 23. 9.
is said to be full of smoke, Psalm. 77. 19.
Rev. 15. 8. and we never find the eyes of our Understandings to ache and smart
so much, as when long detained in this smoakie Temple, we are never more
confounded and humbled into a sense of our own shortness, then when long
entertaining our thoughts about the mysteries of Divine Providence.

Now Providence is thus mysterious especially (as the Wise man notes) because
of the strange checquer-work therein, Eccl. 8. 17.
the wonderful vicissitudes, Subtexta malis bona sunt, lachrimaeque sequuntur,
vota.
and mixtures of happy and adverse occurrences. A thing frequently noted in
Scripture. Dan. 2. 21. He changes times and seasons, he removes Kings and
sets up Kings. 1 Samuel 2. 7. The Lord makes poor and makes rich, he
brings low and lifts up. Eccl. 7. 14. In the day of prosperity rejoice, in
the day of adversity consider; God has set the one over against the other.
Job 12. 23. He increases the Nations, and destroys them: He enlarges the
Nations, and straitneth them again: and in the Text we find him sometimes
setting up a righteous, and anon a wicked Ruler; the people sometimes
rejoicing, sometimes mourning.

That method which God observed in making of the World, he sometimes observes
in governing of it; he permits things to run first into a kind of Chaos and
confusion, Job 38. 7.
that so his Saints (like the Morning-starrs) may sing praises to God, when
they see his Wisdom and Power issuing all things at last into excellent order,
beauty, and composure. Moreover, the holy God does by this variety of
Providence (adverse and prosperous) most wisely keep alive a quick and vigorous
sense of himself in the minds of men: for we shall always find that a constant
tenor of felicity, Vid. D. Iackson Atheism. sect. 1. c. 4.
an undisturbed enjoyment of the World does choke and smother the innate
notions of a Deity in the minds of men; and on the other side, a perpetual
indigence and constant night of affliction starves them. Men may lose their
taste, relish and sense of God (as they do of their meat) both by too much
fullness and satiety in a long continued prosperity, and by too long fasting in
a tedious course of misery. Pharaoh (while his Sun was not overcast) cries out
Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord, that I should fear him? and (on the other side)
the Heathen, when he saw virtue baffled and worsted, breaks out, Solicitor
nullos esse putare Deos. Ovid.


Therefore wise Agur prays for a mixed state Prove. 30. 8, 9. with good reason,
lest he be full and forget God, and lest he be poor and so blaspheme him.

To come nearer to the Text: It presents us with the bright and dark side of
this pillar of divine Providence, whereby God guides his people through the
Wilderness of the World. I shall especially determine my discourse unto the
first words of the Text, wherein we may note two things,

1 A case supposed, when (or, if) the righteous be in authority. 2 The Wise
man's observation, or judgment thereon, the people rejoice.
I begin with the first. The case proposed, when the righteous are in
authority, God and Religion justify and abet Rule, Sovereignty, and Authority
in the World: God does by his setting up such to rule; and Religion does, in
that we see here, that righteous men (called thereto) do not decline it. God
never intended that the Magistrates Sword should be turned into a plough-share:
No government so opposite as Civil and Spiritual (too often) in the
administration, but none that so sweetly agree in their institution and
original. Order (which the Magistrate preserves) God is the God of, 1 Cor. 14.
33. and Law (by which he proceeds) is but reason improved, (which grace does
not destroy but suppose.)

More particularly, God justifies Rule and Soveraigntie two ways, by his Word,
by his Wonderful Providence.


First by his Word: The Gospel does very sparingly meddle with State matters,
but when it does, it engages to obedience, by as obliging principles as it
does to Religion; even a principle of Conscience, Romans 13. 5. We must be
subject for Conscience sake: (not barely for safeties sake) and a principle of
the highest fear, Romans 13. 2. They that resist (the powers) receive to
themselves damnation: a doctrine taught the world (in the type) long before by
that fire and earth-opening which destroyed the opposers of lawful authority.
Number. 16. 33, 34. High and honorable are the Titles given to Kings and Rulers
in sacred Scripture of which I shall note but these two peculiar: 1 That of the
Lords anointed so often (as a glory) about the heads of Princes in sacred Writ:
and it is observable, that this title is given to the meanest among the order
of Kings, (even a Heathen Cyrus. Isa. 45. 1. Cyrus mine anointed) when it is
never given expressly to the high priest, though anointed too, and that with a
most sacred and costly ointment kept in the Temple, and to be used only at his
Consecration; nor yet to Prophets, though anointed too, as well as Kings.

2 Another Title given to Kings, is that of Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. I have said ye
are Gods, and Exodus 22. 28. A title never given to any but to men in civil
Power and Authority, representing God in their persons (as a Judge does a King)
and in their power; a King may (as God does) abrogate and establish Laws (as
the exigences of State and Council may direct) which the Church (having not
dominium fidei) cannot do.

by his providence. A Traitor the Latin phrase does most elegantly style one
that is reus laesae Majestatis, one guilty of hurt Majesty; now because after
so many treasons, I cannot but rationally conceive Majesty to be greatly hurt,
and the reverence due to lawful Authority too much impaired in the breasts of
many men, I shall therefore the more largely discourse on this argument; [the
several providence whereby God has eminently appeared from heaven to justify
and second his Viceroys upon earth.]

1 By those eminent judgments by which he has generally These three sins,
high ingratitude, oppression, and rebellion, very seldom have their dooms
adjourned to another world, because they so much thwart Gods government of
this. None of all those persons guilty of rebellion in Scripture, went to their
Graves in peace, Achitophel, Absalom, Percussorum Cae^^^^ fere
ne^^riennioquisquam super vixit neque sua^ morte defunctus est, damnati omnes,
alius alio casu periit, pars na^fragio, praelio, nonnulli semet eodem illo
pugione quo Caesarem violarunt interemerunt.
Sheba, Abner, Abiathar, Ioab, Athaliah, Zimri, Adoniah: we shall seldom find
any men (like blinded Sampson) endeavoring to pull down the pillars upon which
Gods house stands, (for such are Kings) but they themselves (like him) perished
in the ruin. The Heathen Historian observed, that there was hardly one of
Caesar's murderers (though a heathen Prince) that survived the wickedness three
years, all dying violent deaths, some by shipwreck, some in battle, some by the
hand of justice, others by their own, and that very sword which they had first
profaned by his blood. Instances of this kind all Stories are full of: It was
a truth known to a proverb in Solomon's time, Sueton. in vita Jul. Caesar. Vid.
notas Casaubon in locum.
Prove. 24. 21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change, for their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both. Prove. 17. 11.
Treason is a sin for which God allowed no sanctuary under the law; Ioab was
taken from the horns of the altar and slain while under the guilt of this sin.
We must know that God's justice is an attribute that he is very jealous of,
Acts 5. 36, 37.
his own son shall die to declare it to the world, and therefore no wonder that
he is so severe against those who lift up their hands against the Magistrate
who is the Minister of his justice in the world. Romans 13. 4.


God abets authority and rule, by that aw and reverence to it so deeply
implanted by him in the minds of men. The great power of God seen in giving law
and bounds to the raging waves by so inconsiderable a means, as an heap of
little sands, falls under frequent notice and observance: but why do not we
as much observe the lusts of men kept within their bounds by a little gilded
dust, (a weak man armed with power and authority from God)? these are compared
to the raging sea, Psalm. 65. 7. Thou stillest the noise of the sea, the rage of
their waves, and the tumult of the people. How strange is it to see a
Magistrate sometimes drive away evil with his eye (as Solomon speaks,) Prove.
20. 8.
killing and crushing wickedness (though armed and daring) like the Basilisk,
with a look, his bare presence! much of God is observable in it. It is God who
restrains popular insolences by an implanted reverence to authority, it is he
which keeps this beast, the multitude, from knowing its own strength, and so
from attempting to cast its rider. This David accordingly acknowledged, Psalm.
144. 2. It is God who subdueth the people under me.

God abets Kings and Governors by those strange preservations vouchsafed by
him to their persons. There goes another kind of lifeguard about a King then
men generally are aware of: God has this as his especial title, Psalm. 144. 10.
The God that shows salvation unto Kings; and he tells one of his Governors,
Hag. 2. 23. I have set thee as a signet upon my right hand. Prove. 21. 1.
The hearts of Kings, but much more the times of Kings are in Gods hands: Psalm.
31. 15.
Caesarem vehis and fortunam ejus, was a speech that had more sense in it, then
the heathen Prince that spoke it was aware. -- (...), Theocr.
Kings are subject to more then ordinary dangers, and therefore have a more
then ordinary power concerned in their protection. Many an Assassine has found
himself daunted with the rays of Majesty, and deterred (by an unexpected
reverence possessing him) from his intended villainy, and has found cause to
say to his Prince as Laban to Jacob, Genesis 31. 29. It is in the power of my hand
to do you hurt, but God has spoken to me, saying, speak not to Jacob neither
good nor bad: the instances of popish Princes falling by the hands of
Assassinates are many, but great deliverances has God vouchsafed to Protestant
Kings, not above one being to be instanced in suffering any personal violence
by a private hand. Hence the title of (...) given to Kings by the Ancients,
(...), S. Chrysostom. A King does not fall like common men, a prodigy in nature
commonly gives us notice of his death.

Fourthly, God justifies rule and authority, by giving A public place may well
enough suit an ambitious spirit, but a public spirit is the seal of authority,
it is Gods special gift. Men are indeed naturally desirous to be at the top of
the tree of fortune (as it is called) not that they might be more fruitful,
and do more good, but that they might be nearer the sun, and more out of the
reach of the hand of violence; But a public spirit, it is (I had almost said)
donum miraculosum given as a seal to authority, and we shall find the highest
instances of it, in persons eminently called by God to some public trust, 1
King. 3. 11.
in Moses praying God rather to blot him out of his book then not to pardon his
people, Exodus 32. 32. and in David, v. 17.
against me and my fathers house let thine hand be, and not against these
sheep, 2 Samuel 24. 27. and the Apostle charactereth a lawful Magistrate by this
spirit, Luke 22. 25.
Romans 13. 4. He is the Minister of God for good to thee. It is God who gives
Magistrates to consider, non traditam sibi populi servitutem sed tutelam.

It is noted of Augustus Caesar, that when once he was possessed of the Empire,
all his former arts of wickedness, fraud and tyranny (the low stratagems of a
particular, narrow spirit) he wholly discarded, and addicted himself entirely
to the love, defense, and advancement of the commonwealth of Rome, and like
Saul, Boeclerus diss. politi. in Caes. Aug.
when called to the government was turned into another man: ut satis constaret
(says one) divino quodam munere, mutatum and formatum tantum principem Men
that are intended but for a narrow place and sphere (like the snail in its
little house) turn out horns (not arms) to every body else.

It is seldom seen that God so far owns an Usurper as to vouchsafe this seal
of authority, (...), Aristot. and Polit. c. 10.
a truly public spirit. It is seldom that he gives him a heart to use his
power really to the peoples good; some good things he may sometimes do to
compound with the people, but nothing out of a public spirit and a real
fatherly affection. Men naturally seek their own, and love to be at ease: Judge.
9. 9.
Cain spoke his own sense, and of most wicked men, Genesis 4. 9. Am I my brothers
keeper! Ambitious spirits (like flame) the higher they rise, the more they are
contracted into the narrow point of self by the constringency of ambient fears,
jealousies and distrusts.

It is Gods highest owning of a person in power, when he makes him like
Mordecai, Esth. 10, 3. a person seeking cordially the wealth of his people and
speaking peace to them: Isa. 22. 21.
when (contrary to his natural temper) like Solomon, Psalm. 51. 12.
he gives him largeness of heart, in which there may be room for more then
himself, when he gives him (...) a free, (...) LXX.
or (as the word imports) a royal, a princely spirit.

Fifthly, God seals to Authority and Sovereignty extraordinary direction and
assistance which he often gives his substitutes in the administration of their
office, which is sometimes very strange. It is the speech of Solomon, Prove. 16.
10. A divine speech is in the lips of a King, his mouth transgresses not in
judgment. (Deo nimirum, Iansen. in locum.
cujus vices gerit, ejus sententiam moderante.) The intimacy between God and a
good King is greater, then men think of: God has made Princes in judicature
(as it were) his own oracles to the people: Infallibility is more annexed to
the chair of Moses, then to the chair of Peter: supposing the Prince be not
wanting to himself (by conversing with Gods law and man's) he is most likely to
have God of his council. A King sometimes sees per emissionem radiorum, by an
unexpected emission of those beams of light and wisdom, whereby he scatters
the mists of fraud and imposture cast before his eyes to procure wickedness
indemnity.

There were three ways especially by which God of old bore witness to a person,
and justified his bearing rule and authority over a people. 1. (as was
observed) by giving him a public spirit suitable to his public place. 2. by
moving the hearts of people, to own and obey the person so set up by God, 1 Samuel 10. 26. 2 Samuel 19. 14. 1 King. 12. 20. 1 Chronicles. 29. 23, 24. Psalm 144. 2.
3. By giving him an understanding heart a spirit of wisdom, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. 2 Samuel 14. 17. 1 Samuel 10. 16. 1 King. 4. 29. Great was the assistance God gave to
his substitutes of old in judgment. De Imper. sum. potest. c. 5. sect. 9.
Grotius tells us, he that diligently reads over the old Testament, Plures
reperturus est Principes Prophetas, quam Prophetas sacerdotes: shall find more
Kings who were Prophets, then Prophets that were Priests, that so they might be
the better fitted for the discharge of their weighty office: and no question,
God is more assistant to Kings under the Gospel, to teach them what they shall
do, then we are aware: He judges amongst the Gods in an especial manner
(judicio insito) as Iehoshaphat told his judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Ye judge for
the Lord, who is with you in judgment.

strange continuance thereof so long in the world against all opposition made
against it. Great bandying there has been against government at all times, by
the sons of Belial; opposition against the eminency of Magistracy, Jam. 4. 25.
(the spirit within us lusts to envy) against the restraint thereof, Jude v.
8. Some despise dominion, not only Governors but Government it self is a
burden to them; Government is styled the ordinance of God, those that are above
other ordinances, are above this most of all.

There are three inward and three outward guards which God (in mercy) has
vouchsafed the world to keep sin out of it: Romans 2. 15.
the three inward are, the common principles of nature (some remaining
characters of that (...) anciently written upon the tables of our hearts.) 2.
the dictates of Gods holy Spirit, and silent whispers of that. 3. the checks of
an enlightened conscience: the three outward are, the sacred Scripture, the
Ministry with the spiritual, and Magistracy with the civil sword; now men fight
with all these guards, smother the light of nature, grieve the spirit, harden
their consciences, reject the Scriptures, despise prophesyings, and (...) (as
the word is) lay aside and null (what they are able) Magistrates and Dominions:
Jude v. 8.
but now, as we argue that the Scripture, the light of nature, the Ministry,
the checks of conscience, are of Gods own appointing, and owned by him, in that
all the malice of men and devils could never quite remove, null, and abolish
them, so we may conclude, Magistracy sealed to, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
by heaven, in that ((...)) men without law could never quit themselves
thereof. Many people have thrown off Governors, but never any could throw off
Government, no sooner have they cut off one head but another comes up in the
room thereof: Government and Magistracy is a bush of thorns that pricks and
tortures wicked men, and it has been often on fire, and had long ere this been
consumed, but (as we have reason to believe) God is in it, his mighty power is
engaged in its defense: This God owns: Psalm. 75. 3. The earth and all the
inhabitants are dissolved, but I bear up the pillars of it.

Seventhly, God has attested unto Sovereignty, by suffering none of his
servants in Scripture, few or none in story to be guilty of wilful opposing of
lawful authority, or usurping the place of their lawful Governor. We find
many a wicked man guilty of this sin, of opposing the Magistrate, (mentioned in
the first particular) many of deposing, as Jeroboam (in part) Athaliah, Zimri,
Herod, and others: but no good man in Scripture guilty of either. And few or
none shall we meet with in story, guilty of this sin; Tertullian apologizing
for Christians among other things alleges this in their defense, that among
all the Assassins of Emperors, nunquam inveniri potuerunt Christiani: Salmas.
Def. Reg. c. 7.
and Salmasius observes that not till much beneath the times of Austine occurs
there any mention of any private Christian in all Ecclesiastic history, qui
Regi suo manus cruentas attulcrit, vel qui armis contra Regem pugnarit: and a
late writer has enlarged the observation, telling us that in the succession of
about six ages, Vid. Grot. de imper. sum. pot. c. 3. sect. 14.
no man of any learning and reputation attempted any thing against the interest
or honor of Princes, excepting Lucifer Calaritanus who spoke rude and
unbeseeming words against Constantius the Arrian Emperor; but to impeach the
credit of his practice, He is noted by S. Ambrose for a person that separated
himself from the communion of the Church: but as reverence to other divine
commands wore off in time (as the power that exalts it self above all that is
called God obtained in the world) so to this among the rest (of obedience to
lawful authority.) Gods olives and vines decline the Magistrates place, whiles
brambles scratch every one that would get above them. None so easy to drive as
Christ's sheep; they are the swine of the world, that are hard to drive, men of
strong lusts and proud spirits which create Magistrates the greatest trouble.
They are filthy dreamers who despise dominion, Jude, v. 8.

special blessing which he generally vouchsafes upon the due execution of
justice by men in power and Sovereignty. It is seldom seen that private
revenge (though the matter of it might be just and deserved) has been happy
and successful, Ultiones publicae maxima ex part prospere cedunt, at in
vindictis privatis hoc minime tenet. Verul. Sermon. fidel. c. 4.
whereas generally vindicta publica, the punishment inflicted by a Magistrate
(in vindication of injured innocence) has succeeded happily. Commonly private
revenges take off one enemy, and invite many: but public revenge executed by
the rules of justice procures Gods especial blessing upon a person or nation,
Jer. 22. 3. Thus says the Lord, Execute judgment and righteousness, Jer. 22.
15, 16.
and deliver the oppressed, and I will bless you, etc. Prove. 21. 3. God in the
first ages of the world did govern it, and administer justice oftentimes
immediately by his own hand, and punished many a person (as we read) with
death for the violation of his laws, whereas now God has committed (as all
spiritual judgment to his son, so) all civil judgment to the Magistrate, and
therefore Gad has a special blessing pronounced upon him for executing the
justice of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. 21. and in him every righteous magistrate.

These eight particulars laid together will evidence God to be a very great
abettour and justifier of rule and Sovereignty in the world.

We learn hence two things. 1. The unjustness of that charge so often drawn up
against Religion, as if an enemy to government, a patron of State-disturbance.
When ever there have been state troubles, atheists cry out Tantum relligio
potuit, etc. religious persons have been always thought the Iona's in the ship,
when there has been a storm in the state, Eliah esteemed a troubler of Israel,
1 Kings 18. The apostles, Acts 24. 5. (...), and Acts 17. 6. those which turned
the world up side down. so Esth. 3. 8. Some conceive this was the reason why
Cyrus gave command, so punctually to build the Temple but threescore cubits
broad, and threescore cubits high, even a politic jealousy of the strength
thereof, as occasion might serve. The heathens used to reproach the Gospel upon
this account, as may be collected probably from 1 Pet. 2. 14, 15. Submit your
selves unto Governors, as unto them who are sent of God, etc. For so is the
will of God, that in well-doing you may put to silence the ignorance of
foolishmen, whose mouths upon neglect of this duty, were like an open Sepulcher
to bury the good name of Christianity and the professors of it. So 1 Timothy 6. 1.
And we read in history of a pillar set up with this inscription, Nomini
Christianorum deleto qui Rempublicam evertebant. Politicians have been always
jealous of pretenders to Religion, lest it should be used like the holy Ephod
to hide a Sword in. Erasmus when he saw the stirs and commotions in Germany
occasioned thereupon, to the grief of all good men, Ep. ad Fratr. inferior Germ.
thus expressed himself, Annon haec mea fuit vox ad primum gustum libellorum
Lutheri, res redibit ad seditionem? and one well notes that however the Rulers
of this World have been very jealous of the strength of the Church, and very
careful to keep that under hatches, yet they have suffered Babylon to be built
in its full strength, though Romes professed principles lead to removal of
Magistracy and State commotions.

Now these jealousies and reproaches might be occasioned two ways, 1 By the
spiritual pride of professors, thinking that the Gospel jubilee freed all
servants from obedience to Masters, and Subjects from obedience to Princes,
especially if in the state of Gentilism; an opinion which the Devil (no doubt)
leavened the minds of men withal, Daven. in Coloss. c. 3. v. 22.
(as a learned man speaks) Ut inde in odium vocaret Christianam religionem apud
Ethnicos, quasi ordinis perturbatricem, to bring Christianity into disgrace, as
if a disturber of the peace and order of a Nation. 2 From the (misapprehended)
honor of appearing in Religions defense: deluded people apprehend they may
fight for Religion, and cannot die (they think) with greater assurance of
honor here, and heaven hereafter, then, Luke 11. 51.
when they fall like Zechariah between the Temple and the Altar. People like
the Turks will receive this Jewish practice of opposing Moses and Aaron into
favor, when Politicians have once christened it with the name of Zeal for
Religion and Liberty.

But Religion may say (as Elizabeth) God has rolled away my reproach, for
howsoever politic pretenders to Religion (that stand by the Altar but to warm
their own hands) have upon every slight ground opposed lawful Authority, and
thrown dirt in the face of Governors, yet the doctrine of the Gospel warrants
no such thing. The Pulpit was never intended to be a Circle, in which to raise
up the evil spirits of sedition, and state commotions. No Religion in the
doctrine of it, so greatly secures the power of Kings, and the peace of States,
as the Christian does. We are bidden by the Gospel to be obedient (...), 1 Pet.
2. 18. to the crookedst and frowardst Masters God sets over us, so that
Religion can never be pretended against Loyalty.

And therefore when I take a sad review of the evil of our late disturbances, I
take not so much notice of the loss of King, Liberty, Property, Parliaments,
Blood, (though very great) as of the impairing so far the credit of Religion,
in the violences offered to the person of His sacred Majesty, and that by
persons so highly pretending to it. I am sorry the Papists seem to have now a
30th of January to return us for a 5th of November.

But blessed be God who put it into the heart of the Parliament to begin their
work at the removal of this stain and blot from Religion, not suffering the
blood of a Prince to lie any longer (like aquafortis) upon Religions credit to
corode and eat thereinto. We find their practice justified by the holy Ghost,
who having told us of King Iehoash being murdered by his servants, out of hand
tells us who they were that did it, 2 Chronicles. 24. 26. to wit, none of the
professors of the true Religion, none of the Israelites but Zabad the
Ammonite, and Iehozabad the Moabite, that so the honor of Religion might not
suffer for a moment in the breast of the Reader, and thus our Senators tell
the World (as soon as God favors them with an opportunity) that it was not Law
but Violence, not Religion but Pretenses, not the Nation but a Faction that
attempted so unparalleled a wickedness.

check to all traitorous attempts against Majesty and Authority. There is a
threefold treason that falls here under challenge, that of the heart, of the
tongue, and of the hand.

1 That of the heart, of which those were guilty Jude v. 8. who despise
dominions, and those men of Belial, 1 Samuel 10. 21. who despised Saul in their
hearts. Owl-ey'd creatures that can see nothing in a King but flesh and blood
and a little state, (like children that can see nothing in the rainbow but
only a few fine colors.) Oh methinks those words, by me Kings reign, Prove. 8.
should strike reverence and religion into every Atheist against those whom the
Scripture styles Gods among men. Let us not think slightly of a King, when God
has enjoined reverence to himself and him both in a breath in the Old
Testament, Prove. 24. 21. in the New, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honor the King:
The murder of common and ordinary men, we observe that God makes use of the
very birds and beasts to discover, but a very thought that impeacheth Majesty,
that does (not cut off, but) soil the skirt of a King, the Scripture tells us a
bird of the air shall discover it. Eccl. 10. 20. God at one time or other
suffers this sower leaven to breath forth in words or actions to the persons
ruin.

2 This may give a check to the treason of the tongue, to those who speak evil
of dignities, Jude v. 8. when a King has given a title of honor to a person,
all the Subjects must own it and honor him accordingly; how much more when God
has given such eminent titles to Kings, should we look upon our selves as
bound so to do? (...) 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Scripture styles it (...), an accusation of blasphemy when evil language is
used against these Gods upon earth, Jud. v. 8. So 1 King. 21. 13. he blasphemed
God and the King: No reason is there (as some have done) to reckon those titles
of Highness, Buchanan in Praefat. libr. de jure regni.
Majesty, and Lordship, given to men in power and place, inter soloecismos and
barbarismos aulicos, amongst Court soloecisms and barbarisms, which the
Scripture uses, Psalm. 21. 5. The (Kings) glory is great in thy salvation,
Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him. The Jews have a wise proverb,
Migrandum est ex eo loco in quo Rex non timetur, we must go out of that place
speedily where the King is not reverenced: for we shall generally find scorn
and contempt thrown upon Kings and men in authority either a sad forerunner of
some heavy judgment upon the people, or else of the removal of the power it
self so scorned: and therefore these two things, Job. 12. 21. Gods pouring
contempt upon Princes, (...) Arist. Polit 5. c. 10.
and weakening of their strength and power are joined together, and we have seen
in our times one of them a constant fore-runer of the other: Fear, a power is
more safe under, then contempt.

of the hand most of all: whether it be the hand of Zimri (that of a private
person) or the hand of Joab (that of a multitude in a way of force under one
Captain.) 2 King. 9. 31.
1 King. 1. 7.


1 Then let no private hand be lifted up to violate Majesty, 1 Samuel 26. 9.
so abetted by heaven. Christianity disowns all consecrated daggers. In heathen
Writers indeed, nothing of more familiar occurrence then Panegyricks in
commendation of the assertors of public liberty (as they styled them) by the
assassinating of a Ruler, when the people once pleased to vote him a Tyrant; a
thing easily pardonable in them, being able (by the dim light of nature) to
discover no more in a King then a head of gold, supported by the clayie toes of
popular election and acceptance: but Scripture shows a higher Charter then so,
whereby Kings hold their Crowns, Prove. 8, 15. by me Kings reign: Herein is a
considerable difference between Christianity and Gentilism; in Gentilism there
was sometimes a high measure of honor and respect given to the person of a
particular Emperor, evidenced in swearing by his Genius, in Martials stiling
his Law Edictum Domini Dei nostri, in canonizing of him when dead, etc. but
little or none gave they to his Office, as appears in the liberty (mentioned)
to violate his person, when judged an Encroacher upon the public liberty. On
the other side, Christianity alots a less (though a truer) honor for the
Magistrates person, but then reflects a higher upon his office; stiling it Gods
Ordinance, Romans 13. 2. His throne, Gods throne, Rev. 12. 3. Himself Gods
Minister, Romans 13. 4. the justice He executes Gods justice, Deuteronomy. 33. 21. It
has respect first to his office, then to his person, which is therefore sacred
and inviolable, (as that piece of Brass is, upon which the Kings Image is
stamped, Reipsa profecto cernitur multos (in principem) conjurasse, quibus vero
feliciter cesserit, perpauci admodum fuerunt. Machiav. Princ. c. 19. In locum.
and as the bread in the Sacrament, being dedicated to a holy and peculiar
service, is thereby secured from that irreverend and profane handling that
common bread is exposed unto:) Hence we shall find the King of heaven upon the
violation of his Image in a King, punish a person or people as guilty laesae
Majestatis: The Prophet tells Lachish, that she was the beginning of sin to the
daughter of Sion, Mic. 1. 13. Iunius conceives the Holy Ghost says so because
that place were guilty. [ perfidae illius conspirationis contra Regem Amasiam
factae] of that perfidious conspiracy against King Amasiah (there slain.) 2
King. 14. 19.


2 Let no hand of Ioab (no joint force of people in a way of open War) resist
the powers thus ordained of God. Romans 13. 1, 2.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. in this particular
especially, that it raises such evil spirits in a Nation, which when there is
no more work for them to do, tear those in pieces which raised them; it being
not seldom observed, that Soldiers raised in a Civil War, turn their Arms (at
last) upon those who first occasioned their wearing of a Sword. The taking Arms
to redress some evils in the government of a Nation, proves generally but as
the cutting off of the hand to get rid of a cut finger.

So much be spoken to the case the Wise man supposes, I come now to the second
part of the Text. the people (in such a state) rejoice: Which words may be
taken in a twofold sense,

1 So as to denote morem populi, the fashion and custom of a people in such a
case, they use to rejoice, when the wicked perish there is shouting, Prove. 11.
10. no prayers for their continuance, no tears for their loss; but when the
righteous bear rule, they use to rejoice.

2 The words may be taken so as to denote officium populi, the duty of a people
in such a case; It is to express a joyful sense of the great blessing
vouchsafed to them:

morem populi, the custom of the people in such a case: They use to rejoice;
and truly very great matter of joy a people have who sit under the shadow of a
righteous, religious Prince, upon several considerations:

1 Under a religious Prince a Nation generally injoies the impartial execution
of Law and administration of Justice. Genesis 18. 25.
A Prince represents the person of God, and a righteous Prince his nature,
which is to do justly to all men, Prove. 21. 15. It is a joy to the just to do
judgment. Every man is now likely to become pupillus sub legum tutela; It will
be found a certain truth, that bad men may occasion good laws, Optimus
Magistratus praestat optimae legi:
wise men must make them, but good men must execute them. A Kings greatness
sets him above the fear of men, and his goodness above their favor: he is
therefore like good blood which always runs to the wounded part (relieves the
oppressed) he speaks in the language of the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 75. 2. Joh.
29. 14, 15.
When I receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly: Judge. 9 5.
whereas wicked Magistrates are like bad humors in the body which take to the
corrupted part and promote the inflammation. A bad Governor is well compared,
in Jothams parable, to the bramble which stands in the Kings highway, not to
shelter the sheep, but to pull its fleece from off its back. Now this is a
thing which makes a people rejoice, the due observation of Laws, which are the
sinews of peace, as money of war.

2 A righteous Prince does a Nation much good by his very presence therein:
Little do men understand how great a blessing the very presence of a good King
is to a people whom God looks upon as an universale in repraesentando, as the
peoples representative not only in his office, but in his person, and the
people as holy in him their head, Jer. 5. 1. 2 King. 22. 20
Run too and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, if you can find a man that
executes judgment, Ezekiel. 22. 30.
and I will pardon it. So 2 Chronicles 32. 25. the wrath of the Lord came not upon
Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah: Commonly when the night of affliction and
misery is drawing on upon a Nation, God lays a good Prince to sleep, Isa. 57.
1. a place which Grotius understands of good King Josiah: an interpretation
rendered probable by 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.

3 He is a very great blessing to a Nation by the powerfulness of his example,
whatsoever a King does, generally pleases the people, Josh. 24. 31.
2 Samuel 3. 36. I have set thee as a seal upon my hand, says God to a good
Ruler, and such is every good King, Hag 2.
Gods seal; and men are commonly turned as clay to this seal, (as Job speaks,
c. 38. 12.) except very much hardened in their sins. Law commands men out of
wickedness, but a good Kings example shames them out of it. Isa. 49. 23.
Kings are styled Nursing fathers, and Queens Nursing mothers, and (as children
do) so do a people in their manners show the constitution, and report the good
or bad temper of those their public Nurses: the example of common men makes
vice a fashion, of Kings, a law; a poor man's wisdom shall shall be despised,
Eccles 9. 16. when a great man's vice and folly shall be applauded.

Fourthly, By the successfulness of his counsels, He is great matter of joy to
a people generally. That Prince is most likely to be attended with success who
makes use of this wisdom, Prove. 14. 8.
not to promote his own unwarrantable designs, but to discover other men's: It
is a maxim in law, When a state is in preservation of law, nothing can hurt
it. And it is a proverb in Scripture, Prove. 10. 9. He that walks uprightly
walks surely. The instances of unfortunate and righteous Princes are very few.

Reason of state indeed seldom makes use of that topic ab honesto, for it is
generally thought that religion makes a Prince a lamb, Sceptrorum vis tota
perit si pendere justa incipit, evertitque arces respectus honesti: Libertas
scelerum est quae regna invisa tuetur. Lucan. lib. 8.
and then he is next door to devouring; that cases of conscience were not
written for a Prince to read. That a Prince who is to be faber fortunae suae,
must use crooked instruments as well as strait; turn aside to counsels, which
nice Casuists possibly will not justify. But we shall find God blasting such
doctrine as this by his Providence frequently; a Mounte-bank may sometime
remove a fit, but it is the Physician must cure the disease: and thus
sometimes, the wily stratagems of unrighteous politicians (those slight
healers) may remove a fit of a distemper the body politic groans under, Jerem.
6. 14.
but it returns afterward with greater violence, it is righteousness only is
the Physician to cure it. Righteousness may possibly lose a throw or two, but
it constantly wins the game; Not I, but the Lord says to a wily politician
King Shallum, Jerem. 22. 15. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in
cedar? (because thou managest affairs of state politickly) did not thy father
eat and drink and do justice, and judgment, and then it was well with him? He
judged the cause of the poor and needy and then it was well with him?

That policy and cunning do not carry it, and that the game goes not always to
him that can best cog the die, appears both in nations and particular men. See
it in nations. The Asiaticks more quick and acute generally then the Europeans
anciently, were conquered by the Grecians: The Grecians by the Saracens, The
Athenians by the Spartans, The Egyptians by the Persians, many nations by the
Turks, and yet the latter the more dull and unpolitick people: see it in
particular persons, who more acute then Machiavel, and who more unfortunate in
his counsel to Caesar Borgia? Clement the seventh, a politic person but not
successful; Achithophel, drowned in his own depth. It is a thing which
Scripture often tells us of, Psalm 9. 16.
Gods blasting the unrighteous counsels of Politicians. Job 12. 20.
It is one of Gods characters, Job 10. 3.
Isai. 44. 25. Isa. 19. 11.
That he turns the wisemen backward and makes their knowledge foolish, Job
12. 17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes judges fools. It is a
truth of everlasting faithfulness, that can never be brought about (safely) by
bad means, which could not be by good. Besides, righteousness brings success to
counsels, because politicians generally hunt counter and never think to find a
Prince walking in the broad rode of justice and honesty, Discimus experimento,
fidissimam Custodiam Principis, esse ipsius innocentiam. Plin. ad Trajan.
and so he walks undiscerned. Again, Love and Honor are the Magistrates Iachin
and Boaz, his main strength and establishment, which by an unalterable law of
heaven are intailed only upon virtue and righteousness.

A righteous Prince is a very great matter of joy to a that largeness of heart,
and publickness of spirit, which constantly attends a religious Prince. Good
and righteous Masters are peculiarly styled, 1 Timothy 6. 2. (...), not as we read
(pertakers of the benefit)
(that is, as Grotius notes) They which take care of, or assist doing good to
others by providing conveniences and necessaries for those under their charge.
(...) signifying cura^ alicujus gerere, as, (...), Isa. 26. 2. is by the LXX
intended to signify a people that take care of truth. Lawful authority is
generally attended (as was noted) with a public spirit, Nulla omnibus seculis
reperta est, vel philosophia vel secta, vel religio, vel lex, vel disciplina,
quae in tantum bonum communionis exultarit, bonum vero individuale depressit,
quantum fides Christiana. Verulam* de augm scient. l. 7 c 1. Rom 12. 4, 5.
but goodness always; it is the natural product of religion, whose law is,
Philip. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man on the things
of others: It makes a man owl-ey'd to his neighbors faults, and eagle-ey'd to
his necessities, Isa. 58. 7. Goodness delivers from those lusts and impurities,
which shrivel, shrink and crumple the spirits of men and make them particular
and selfish: As soon as ever the sun of righteousness shines in upon the soul,
(like the flower) it opens, and expands it self in care for and love to our
brother: a public spirit is a natural and pregnant discovery of God in a soul:
it is the nature of heaven to be always imparting, but of the earth to be
always receiving. Now what matter of joy is this to a people to have rulers
whose large hearts engage them, to be (...), Romans 13. 6. always attending upon
the good of their people?

by his care to advance religion and the Church of God: At the inaugurations of
the Kings of Judah the testimony was put into their hands, Isa. 60. 10.
2 Kings 11. 12. to denote the Prince his being charged, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
with the care of Gods worship as well as the peoples safety: 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.
no such magna charta for a King to defend, as Scripture: Grotius well notes
that the piety of good Kings (in Israel) is still entitled to the
reformations, and the wickedness of bad ones to the several abuses in the
Church. The Heathens acknowledged such a religious care well becoming a Prince
in that form of prayer (mentioned in Tacitus) used by them for their Emperor,
Sacra Scriptura religionis in melius muta^ae laudem, in pejus, culpam, Regibus
assignat. De lmp. Sum. Potest. c. 8. sect. 2.
Ut Deus ipsi intelligentem humani divinique juris mentem daret. It is the duty
of a King to favor religious persons: to say with David, Psalm. 101. 6. Mine
eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land. Such persons are indeed accounted
(like Sampsons hair) but the excrements (the offscouring of a nation) but they
are, in truth, (like that) the strength thereof, Act. 27. 31.
Zach. 12. 5. 2 Samuel 5. 12. It is the duty of Kings especially to contend for
the faith: Job 22. 30.
Errors and heresies are the red Dragons teeth, whereby he devours souls,
which when sown in a nation, too often up come armed men (wars and seditions)
there being no such enmities as those which are founded in religious
differences:) It is the King who is the Churches Guardian (looked upon as
always under age) engaged to preserve her portion sacred and entire, Church
goods (like Manna) corrupt and breed worms while detained in the wilderness of
sacrilegious invasion, but continuing sweet, and a monument of divine bounty,
while kept in the Temple. Now by this his care of religion, a good Prince is an
occasion of great joy to a people, procuring thereby so great a blessing from
heaven upon them. Virtue (in many particular persons) has not her portion paid
her till arrived at full growth in heaven, but the histories of all times
assure us of a temporal reward entailed upon religion and virtue when becoming
(in any measure) national: the works of God herein abetting his word, Prove. 14.
34. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Non
calliditate aut robore, sed pietate ac religione, omnes gentes nationesque
Romani supera^runt. Tul. Orat. de A^isp.
Jer. 18. 8. Hos. 14. 8. Nay the very shadow thereof has proved (like Peter's)
healing to a state, as has been noted in the Roman Empire. Deus ostendit in
praeclaro Romanorum Imperio, quantum valerent virtutes civiles, etiam sine vera
religione. August. Epist. 5. ad Marcel.

Thus we see how justifiable the custom of people is, to rejoice when the
righteous are in authority.

Secondly, The words may be understood as denoting the duty of a people in such
an instance of divine favor as the bestowing of a righteous Ruler on them: An
expression parallel hereunto occurs, Prove. 11. 10. When it goes well with the
righteous, the city rejoices: Commonly the generality of men rejoice little at
the happiness of good men, but they should rejoice then, it is their sin if
they do not: so here, the people do rejoice, that is, they should rejoice, and
express a grateful sense of the mercy vouchsafed them. A people should let the
world see that the King has their hearts; the heart of a nation being a throne
to be reserved only for God and a good King to rule in: we are sometimes
commanded to honor bad Princes, but never commanded to rejoice in them.

Great is the honor God has now done a nation, having given them a King who
bears his own image three times over, once as he is a man, again as he is a
Magistrate, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8.
and a third time as he is a righteous person: would we foretell the fate of a
people, Psalm. 109. 6.
(foresee what mercies or judgments God has in store) let us fix our eyes
much upon these stars, Isa. 32. 1.
the Rulers and Governors therein, and their dispositions and affections, Isa.
1. 26. I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at
the beginning, afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the
faithful City. On the other side, No such sign of ruin to a people as bad
Governors. God had a purpose of wrath against the Kingdom of Israel, and not
one good King had they in the whole Catalogue.

The more the Jews sinned, the more God impaired the goodness and excellency of
their government; Their government was (like that of man in innocence) a
Theocracie, God being their Ruler, and immediate Lawgiver: Provoked by their
sins, he sets up Kings over them, allowed a power little less then absolute:
then Dukes who were indeed ex gente Judaica but in subjection to some foreign
power or other: Not yet reformed, they are governed by Rulers which were
aliens, but yet in their own Land, and with a reservation of some power to
themselves in Spirituals and Civils, afterward (they being deaf to the voice of
this rod) the Scepter departs from Judah, all form of civil polity is
cancelled, they scattered over the face of the earth, and left (like water in a
vessel) to take shape, figure, law from that State or Nation Providence should
dispose them in.

Two things we learn also from this branch of the Text.

First, Use.
That there are no such enemies to Prince or people as they, who (by any evil
counsels) make a breach upon a Princes righteousness. Such persons poison a
fountain. A Prince cannot sin at so cheap a rate as common men: seldom do such
Counselors go to their graves in peace, sometimes they are given up by Prince
as a Sacrifice to popular fury to expiate their own guilt: sometimes he
disgusts them himself. A King cannot endure continually to be reproacht and put
to the blush, by that wickedness which the sight of such persons renews the
memory of; and therefore at last, hates (like Amnon) the sight of those by whom
he has lost the honor of a constant righteousness. See this truth justified
in Haman, a wicked Counselor to Ahasuerus, destroyed by him, Sejanus by
Tiberius, Empson and Dudley, and Wolsey under the Henry's, and many others
occurring in history, burning their fingers at last, by holding the candle to a
Prince, whilst walking in ways of darkness. Hence one well notes, Primum sibi
ad ruinam gradum struit, qui non reveretur conscientiam Principis: The first
step to ruin, is to bear no reverence to a Princes Conscience. Worthy
therefore of a Courtiers remembrance is the counsel of Solomon, Prove. 28. 23.
He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor then he that
flattereth with his lips.

Nothing procures a man greater favor with his Prince (that owns any degree of
good Nature) then plain and righteous counsel seasonably, Quemadmodum pessimis
Principibus sine fine dominatio, i^a quamvis egregiis, modus libertatis placet,
Tac. hist. l. 4.
humbly, and constantly given, (this flows from Nature, compliance from Art)
whereas wicked Counselors are like bushes and thorns, which men run to in a
storm, but cut up commonly in a calm.



We come not now together to rejoice for a Victory gotten in a Civil War (the
Romans allowed no Triumphs for such victories.) The eye that is bloud-shot
cannot bear the clear and pleasant light of the Sun; and truly I question not
but many good men (since our late unhappy differences) could not bear that
light of joy and gladness which a victory might otherwise occasion, Omnia in
bellis civilibus misera sed nihil miserius quam ipsa victoria. Tul.
while they had sanguinem civium, the blood of fellow-brethren and Citizens
(shed on both sides) so much in their eyes and thoughts: but surely nothing now
can be pretended sufficient to interrupt and disturb our joy, no harsh string
to make our Music ungrateful, except the not gratifying of some few private
and particular interests.

When the foundations of the earth were laid, the Morning star sang for joy, Ps
5 28.
Job. 38. 7. all our foundations of Government, Religion, Law, Parliaments,
were out of Course; now that we see God laying them again, should we not
express a joyful sense of the Mercy, and like good members of the body
politic, rejoice in the welfare of the whole?

This is a duty God requires at such a time as this, Isa. 65. 18. be glad and
rejoice for ever in that which I create, for behold I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy. Sub Te spiritum and patria^ receperum studia,
quae priorum temporum immanitas exiliis punichat, cum sibi vitiorum omnium
Conscius Princeps, inimicas vitiis arts, non odio magis quam reverentia
relegaret. Plin. ad Trajan. orat.
Sure I am, if any part of the Nation have matter of joy, we in the University
more; Universities and learned men most flourishing under Kings, but especially
under righteous Kings: Its observable that when there was no King in Israel,
Judge. 17. 6. we read (v. 10.) of a Levite who served for ten shekels of silver
by the year, a suit of apparel, and victuals. Pliny long ago noted it, that
Arts flourish only under good Princes, as well knowing that they are learned
men that must embalm their names, and make them liker to Gods, by procuring
them a kind of immortality. Besides a just Prince knows Universities design
to instate him in the highest honor a Prince is capable of (To be Rex Virorum.)

Ministers are styled helpers of the peoples joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. That I may
accordingly discharge my duty this day in helping forward your joy, give me
leave to retail the mercy and blessing of this day, and give you a view thereof
in these five parcels and particulars.

a fixed and established Ruler over us. We might be well assured that the
Nation was sick before, by its shifting of sides so often, and never continuing
long in one posture of Government; (an evil too big for any other Teacher to
make men understand, but sad experience.)

Frequent shifting of Governors is the great punishment of the sin of a
people, Prove. 28. 2. For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof: but by a man of understanding the (perishing) State thereof shall be
prolonged: with this evil God punished the revolted Kingdom of Israel, which
had as many Kings (within one) as the Kingdom of Judah, and yet lasted not much
above half the time thereof: with this judgment God avenged the blood of his
servants upon the Roman Empire (even the frequent changing of Governors from
Caesar to Constantine) by the murdering of them so frequently.

This is a very great evil upon many accounts, for in such vicissitudes of
Government, there will (of necessity) be fresh favorites, who are never
wanting to make use of such troubled waters to heal their lame fortunes. In
such vicissitudes people never learn the art of obedience, Res dura, and regni
novitas me talia cogunt, moliri. Dido in Virg.
nor a Prince the art of Government, self-preservation being the mystery
chiefly employs his study, in order whereto he is often prompted to several
counsels ungrateful and disobliging: Laws (in such times) usually lose their
force, Rulers letting go these reins of Government when ready to be thrown out
of the saddle, to save themselves from a dangerous fall: God rains snares upon
a Nation in such a condition, that being voic't up for Law to day, which shall
be Treason to morrow: besides such times produce abundance of dissatisfied
persons who heated by such violent motions and turns, catch fire at last, and
endanger the peace of the Nation.

Matter of joy then we have, in that His Majesty's restoration silenceth all
disputes amongst ambitious spirits, (who shall be greatest?) The Nation before,
did (like Penelope) but texere and retexere in her Lords absence in foraign
parts, but make and unmake Laws and Rulers: and there was little observable of
England, but what Solomon notes of the locusts, Prove. 30. 27. The Locusts have
no King over them, yet go they forth by bands; so, that we should (without our
legal and settled King) go forth so by bands and armies as we did to the terror
of our Neighbour-Nations. But we hope that while our Lillies point to the
North, they will labor and toil no more, now that our hearts and prayers point
toward His Majesty, God will bless us with that rest and consistency which all
great bodies (especially Nations) naturally tend and move unto.

Secondly, We have matter of joy in that this settled Ruler is a King: The
government of England now bears conformity to Gods government of the World, (it
is administered by one.) When God promised to bless Abraham, he does it thus,
Genesis 17. 6. I will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee: when
he would bless Sarai, he does it thus (v. 16.) I will bless her, and she shall
be a mother of Nations, Kings of people shall be of her; and when Ishmael, v.
20. Behold I have blessed him, twelve Princes shall he beget: and he commanded
his own people, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. (long before they came to Canaan to set a King
over them) hence the Jewish Masters tell us three things were especially
appointed them when they came to Canaan, Sckickard. de jure Reg c. 1. Theor. 2.
to choose them a King, to build God a Temple, and to root out the Amalekites.
The sin indeed of the Israelites was (as they confessed) very great in asking of
a King, because they quarrelled with that excellent form of Government they
were already under, Jud. 8. 22, 23.
in which God was their King, and Law and Justice administered immediately by
himself, or by persons extraordinarily stird up and inspired by him; a Form of
government which good men (when invited thereto) would never attempt to alter:
and the rejection of this Form of administration will appear to be the sin of
the people, (and not the bare asking of a King) upon a diligent comparing of
Scripture, 1 Samuel 12. 12. 1 Samuel 8. 7. 1 Samuel 10. 19. 1 Samuel 8. 20.

Much might be alleged in commendation of regal Government, but I shall add
but this one consideration (as having so great affinity with the Text,) It is
hard for a Ruler (in any other Government) to be more then ordinary righteous,
and be matter of rejoicing to a people, (above others) sine metu ostracismi*
nor can the deserts of a Subject (under another Form) be high and eminent, but
he is more feared then favored, oftener ruined then rewarded (the envy of the
fall of so eminent a person, proving dangerous to none, being divided amongst
the Many that Rule and Command) and certainly it is a considerable commendation
of Kingly administration, that we can say of it, the Ruler may do good offices
with the fewest fears, and a Subject perform noble services with the highest
hopes.

Sure I am this Nation of England is of a more noble and generous spirit then
to sit contentedly under any other then a Royal shadow; this was ever our way
of Government. De Bell. Gal. lib. 4. sect. 6.
Status Reip. Anglicanae, semper Regalis fuit and semper haereditarius (says a
learned Antiquary.) Julius Caesar makes mention of the Principes Britanniae
before the times of Christ: Paucae Respub. aevum tulerunt (excipio parvas
quasdam validiorum tuitione aut amicitia firmas.) Sola Veneta est quae aevum
millenarium jactet. Lips. Monit. Polit. l. 2. c. 1.
many changes have been in the persons, but none in the Government, till of
late (as indeed we shall find Monarchies in History lasting for many hundred
years in a Nation, but Venice is the only instance of a Commonwealth, which
has continued a thousand years, and that too for some special reasons.)

Upon this account we have matter of great joy, that we are now returned to our
old Form of Government (the Nation was like a fish before, sick till it came
thither where it was first spawned.) To those that think this no such matter of
joy, I shall propound the question that Abimelech did to the men of Sichem,
Judge. 9. 2. Whether is it better for you that all the sons of Ierubbael (which
are threescore and ten persons) reign over you, or that one reign over you?
remember also, that he is your bone and your flesh. This government (so highly
abetting that unity which all things tend unto) has been received with the
greatest expressions of joy in Scripture, Number. 23. 21. 1 King. 1. 39. 2 King.
11. 14.

3 We have matter of very great joy in that we a righteous King to be our
Ruler. Our Elder is now like those which stood about the throne, Rev. 4. 9. who
were clothed in white garments and had crowns on their heads.

We have a King who is legally righteous: one born our King, invading no man's
right, standing upon no men's skulls to be higher then his brethren; He sits
upon the throne of his Fathers, upon a throne that the law makes his: when God
would prescribe the laws of the King who should be over his own people, He
first provides for the legality of his title, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Thou shall in any
wise set him over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose.

Now this is matter of joy to a nation, because it rolls away one of the
greatest reproaches from it (the having of a fellow subject to usurp the throne
of Majesty.) The nation before was under the curse of Cham, Genesis 9. 25. being a
servant of servants: (...) erit en servili opi^icio, inidoneus est (regno) lex
Judaic. Schick. de jur. Reg. c. 1. Theor 3. Prove 19. 10.
the Church of God in Captivity (Grace does not take away sense of honor) thus
characters of the misery of her Captivity, Lament. 5. 8. Servants have ruled
over us, the crown is fallen from our heads. It is a shame for a nation to sit
under the shelter of a gourd which came up in a night of war and confusion:
when a King is taken (like Saul) from among the stuff, (the common sort of
people) Majesty loses its reverence, 1 Samuel 10. 27. and a people their safety,
Zach. 9. 6.

Then again, a small measure of charity will warrant us to style his Majesty
religiously righteous: For that may be said of him which can of no Prince in
the world besides, that he has had evils enough to discover and improve his
virtues, and enemies (under freedom and malice too much) to report and greaten
his vices, if he had been chargeable with any: Against vicious persons.
His Majesty in his late Proclamation has made a practical commentary on
those words of Solomon, Prove. 14. 35. The Kings favor is toward a wise
servant, but his wrath is against him that causes shame. Who observes not his
constancy in religion? All His injuries from enemies could not conquer his
charity, all the difficulties He beheld between Himself and his throne, tire
out his hope, nor yet any temptations from Rome, stagger his faith.

What a Christian spirit does He discover in endeavoring so many ways the
union of his people? the law of love, is once more, become (...), a royal law,
Jam. 2. 8. His Majesty's declarations assure us that He would not have us (like
lines) running all to one and the same center, the King; yet never touching one
another, in any hearty love and affection.

And certainly it is high time for us to think of joining hearts and hands: We
well agree in the main, religion and loyalty, why should we fall out about
mint and cummin? It has always been the Devils policy to set the people of God
at variance about circumstances, how hot were the disputes and contentions in
the Apostles times about meats and drinks? how high the animosities in after
ages about the time of the observation of Easter, the precedence of their
Bishops, etc. and in our own times about matters which (in themselves
considered) commend no man to God: The Devil has always endeavored to choke
the Church of God (like Adrian) with gnats and flies, disputes about matters of
small moment in religion: oh how are we benighted that seem yet ignorant of
Satan's devices! It was the infant state of the Church in which men were set at
distance by circumstances. Words that stand in regimine in the Hebrew tongue,
lose a letter or two and yet no breach is made in the sense: truly there is no
thinking we shall stand long (peaceably) in regimine, in government and order,
if superiors and inferiors be loath to part with some punctilio's and
circumstances in their opinions and practices, which may be done without any
breach made upon the sense of Creed or Scripture: The noble, large and
ingenuous spirit of the Gospel will accept men every where (as God does) Acts
10. 35. for righteousness and innocence sake. Admirable is that rule of the
Apostle in matters of indifferency, Romans 14. 3. That the strong do not despise
the weak, nor the weak judge and condemn the strong.

But to return; this consideration also is a matter of very great joy to a
people, to sit under the wing of so virtuous a Prince: When Rulers and Kings
rise up and worship the Lord, then sing O heavens, and be joyful O earth,
break forth into singing O mountains. Isa. 49. 7, 13. God has not done thus to
every nation: few virtuous men, but fewer virtuous Princes: many righteous
persons in sheepskins and goat skins, but few in Ermines.

And here give me leave to pause a little and to take notice of a considerable
(because so rare a) circumstance, in the happiness of his late Majesty of
blessed memory, even the transmitting to posterity so much of his wisdom and
virtue (surviving in his issue.) A great part of that stock of honor, many an
eminent Monarch has died possessed of, his unworthy son who succeeded him has
embezelled: Rehoboam the imprudent son of wise Solomon, Spartian in Sever.
Domitian of Vespasian, Commodus of Antoninus, Bassianus of Severus: Instances
in this kind are so familiar, that an historian notes, Neminem prope magnorum
virorum optimum and utilem filium reliquisse, denique aut sine liberis eos
interiisse, aut filios habuisse, Sleidan. lib. 9. 1597.
ut melius fuerit de rebus humanis sine posteritate discedere: and that
judicious Historian notes it as one reason why the fame and memory of that
eminent Prince, John Duke of Saxony, continued not so fresh and precious after
his death, as his virtue (discovered in doing and suffering so much) did merit,
quia filios reliquit sui dissimilimos, because He left sons which gave the
world no assurance that they were his genuine offspring: and Scripture notes
it as one special reason why Samuel was rejected of the Israelites, because his
sons walked not in his ways, 1 Samuel 8. 5. But to proceed.

Fourthly, His Majesty is more then a Ruler, He is a evils sufficient for a
history: the nation seemed like that roll, Ezekiel. 2. 10. Written within and
without with lamentations and mourning and woe. What invasions upon our rights
civil and sacred did we long stand sad spectatours of? We have seen arms, the
iron-mole that stained our religion, and eat out order and law: Astronomy shows
us the Dragons Tail placed as near as may be to Charles-wayn, and we beheld the
Emblem too plainly expounded in our own nation; those which should have been
the tail and not the head (to use the Scripture phrase, Deuteronomy. 28. 13.) invading
the throne of Sovereignty; throwing down the stars (the Nobles and Senators)
to the ground, putting dishonorable abatements into the fairest coats of arms:
we beheld every common bird feathering its nest from the Eastridge feathers,
(the unworthiest persons enriching themselves with the lands of Princes): we
heard many Zeba's and Zalmunna's saying, Psalm. 83, 11, 12.
Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

Another greater evil then these mentioned, was this; Our Adversaries had taken
away not only our happiness but our innocence, Job 27. 6.
(that which Job when all was gone, health, wealth, children, state, would not
part withal till he died) the consent of the nation to his Majesty's death, to
the setting up of an Usuper, being so highly and boldly pretended to: Matt. 27.
24.
The virgin daughter of our people could not be put to death, but first (like
her in the story) she must be ravished, (never till now did I see so much
wisdom, in that character the holy Ghost gives the opposers of a lawful King,
Psalm. 62. 4. They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they
delight in lies.)

Well, his Majesty (under God) is become (in a happy degree) a Deliverer to us
from our many evils: now we understand the words of Solomon, Prove. 16. 15. The
light of the Kings countenance is life, and his favor (nay his presence) is
like a cloud of the latter rain. Our case had been woeful, if his Majesty when
desired to return to his Kingdoms, should have returned us, the answer of Him
in the Prophet, Isa. 3. 7. Make me not a ruler over this people, for Jerusalem
is ruined, and Judah is fallen. Church and state are undone: So that now, great
matter of joy we have but to recount the storms and tempests we have survived.
When God brings thus back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice
and Israel shall be glad, Psalm. 53. 6.

We have all the assurance we can ordinarily have that his Majesty shall prove
a very happy and successful Ruler to us, To omit many happy omens and
prognostics of his prosperous reign, as his education amidst arms at home, and
the observation of the policies of the greatest Kings of Europe abroad, the
advantage of the wise counsels of a Royal Father confirmed by his own
experience (and none like them. Prove. 4. 2, 3, 4.) The assistance of two
brothers so eminent for their Wisdom, Valor, and Affection to him, (which,
when so qualified, prove the best supporters of the Princes Arms) the strange
Providence of God seen in preserving His Majesty through so many deaths and
dangers, Firmissimum id Imperium quo obedientes gaudent. Live.
that general satisfaction and joy expressed upon his return, (most likely to be
continued by His Majesty's moderate Counsels) a thing very considerable, Prove.
14. 28.
for in the multitude of Subjects is the Kings honor, but in the affection of
them is the Kings safety: a well disciplined, valiant, and experienced army, to
omit, (I say) these, I shall take notice of five or six particulars which are
as a token for good unto us, Psalm. 86. 17.
that His Majesty's reign shall prove a blessing to the Nation.

But before I propose them, I must premise thus much, that I lay them not down
as pretending to a prophetic, or designing to gratify a secure and supine
spirit, (men are apt enough of themselves after storms and tossings to fall
asleep; pillows need not be sown under their elbows) all Gods promises of
temporal blessings are but conditional, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Never any people held
their happiness by a fairer Charter then Jerusalem, Levit. 14. 41, 45.
but yet the plague of sin (after its being scraped with so many judgments) so
far spread in Gods house, that it was at last so pulled down, Eccles. 9. 18.
that one stone was not left upon another: one sinner (but much more many) may
destroy much good, the sins of Prince and people may be as a wind easily able
to scatter this refreshing cloud, yet no bigger then a man's hand: but I propose
these happy omens to let us see what engagement we have to thankfulness and
prayer, (men use to pull cheerfully, when they perceive the thing coming, Dan.
9. 2.) besides such mollifying considerations may serve to allay any swellings
and risings which an insensibleness of our present hopes may possibly occasion.

First then, A special token for good is this: It is Gods usual method to make
those Princes most fortunate and happy, whose first days he has most exercised
with crosses: No Princes in sacred Writ so eminent as Moses and David, whose
first days were cloudy and full of evils. Lewis the 12th of France, Henry 7h.
of England and Queen Elizabeth were famous in their times for their justice,
prudence and felicity, but withal not unacquainted with closses in their first
days: Vid. Suet in Vit. Aug. Caes.
Augustus Caesar was one of the best Emperors Rome had, which was (in a great
measure) due to those five Civil Wars which exercised his valor and prudence:
we have never so great security the day will be fair and clear, as when the Sun
rises in clouds and mists, and at last scatters them and quits it self of them.

Nube solet pulsa, candidus ire dies. Thus has it been with Kings, those shine
most brightly in History, whose risings were obscured with a cloud of crosses
and adversities: Affliction in a Kings youth, does fastum detrahere and nervos
intendere: it makes him humble and vigilant, and so the fitter person for God
to bless, 1 Samuel 26. 16.
and sucess to crown: Kings (like Saul) lose their armor and honor, whilst a
constant felicity lulls them asleep: Gold gains; but dross loses by the
furnace, and thus a common servile spirit is broken, or made desperate by
affliction, but the spirit of a King improves in Wisdom, Courage and Virtue:
whereas it is often seen that Kings glorious in their rise, set in a cloud, and
end their days ingloriously upon one account or other.

Now how great His Majesty's sufferings have been, would be (I know) an
ungrateful office on such a day of rejoicing as this, sadly to recount: we
could not know them without our blood, nor hear them without our tears.

Secondly, That usual method God observes in bestowing the greatest blessings
upon his people, was exactly observed in His Majesty's restoration: for,

1 It was accomplished without humane means and helps. His Majesty was not
possessed of his Kingdoms till his Friends had used their outmost power and
policy to restore him, and his enemies their outmost malice and cunning to
deprive him. We saw a formidable and successful army scattered without blow, Et
quamvis nullo maculatus sanguine miles, Psalm. 76. 5.

Quae potuit fecisse, timet. --
The King had been long called Nullus in that old Prophetic verse (and such,
in times of affliction, the eyes of people are usually much upon) and God did
not return him till he was Nullus indeed, though in another sense (as the Devil
will always be found a Liar, even when he tells truth;) He was Nullus in the
hopes of his Friends, Nullus as to any present assistances and powers of his
own, Nullus in his enemies thoughts and esteem.

And then God reinvests him with power and honor; and thus he uses to bestow
his blessings upon a people, See Isa. 60. 22.
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall repent himself concerning his servants, Zach 4. 6.
he will judge his people, when he sees that their power is gone, Isa. 41. 18,
19, 20.
and there is none left. Isa. 63. 5. Hos. 1. 7.
I looked and there was none to help, therefore mine own arm brought salvation.
Thus is England saved and His Majesty restored, alone by the arm of God made
bare (divested of all humane assistance) now God does not use magno conatu
nihil agere, when things come to us in a manner extraordinary, we naturally
expect great matters.

His Majesty's restoration was after a long night of misery and affliction
upon the Nation: We had written Ichabod upon Church and State: Hag. 2. 7.
I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, I will
shake all Nations, and then the desire of all Nations shall come, (sore throws
before the birth.) Thus God shook our heaven and our earth, Dan 12. 1.
(our Church and State) he shook all the three Nations, Ezekiel. 37. 11.
and then His Majesty (their true desire) is restored: Dan. 9. 25.
Religion and peace (like Abraham's sacrifice) are usually entangled in a
thicket, Psalm. 104. 3.
before they are laid upon Gods altar; commonly given in after many
encumbrances and difficulties, the forerunners of them.

It is the speech of God concerning the husbandman, Isa. 28. 24, 25. Does the
husbandman plough all day to sow, does he open and break the clods of his
ground, when he has made plain the face thereof, does he not cast abroad the
fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat? Surely if the
husbandman will do thus, God, after he has suffered the ploughers to make long
furrows on the back of the Church (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 129. 3.) will
at last cast in his precious seed.

The afflictions of Prince and people, separated from each other, have been
great enough to endear each to other: we have found that head and members, when
parted, both bleed, Sen de Clem.
and that ut Regi viribus opus est, ita and populo capite. Should I now dwell
upon our Sovereigns crosses, I could justify my self by the example of the
Holy Ghost more largely relating the sufferings of Job (yet a Prince too) then
Solomon's greatness and splendor: Job. 29. 25.
but these the world is a witness to, as it is of an Eclipse of the Sun.

As for the Nation, never was that more eclipsed and fuller of darkness, then,
when (like the Moon) in most direct opposition against our Sun (our lawful
Sovereign.) Our Moses rod was no sooner vilely thrown to the ground (his power
usurped by the populacy) but it became a serpent to sting and afflict us. Very
guilty indeed the Nation has formerly been of opposition against Kings. The
Scotch History mentions about 50 of their Kings deposed or imprisoned, or
falling by the hand of violence; and a learned Antiquary had (some years since)
computed 30 several rebellions in England, since the Conquest. If any shall
account the mentioning so known a matter a discovery of the nakedness of my
mother Country, I shall acquit my self by the example of Ezra and Nehemiah,
Nehem. 9.
confessing the sins of their people in the day of their return from the
captivity, Ezra 9. 7. But I hope that experience will teach us now to value His
Majesty, if not for his Virtue, for his Necessity: It is seldom the crowd of
men learn any thing by Aphorisms and politic Lectures, Job. 41. 8.
but stripes enter into fools, and (I hope) as the phrase is in Job, we shall
remember the battle and do so no more.

Fourthly, His Majesty is greatly propense, humbly to Cardinal Richelieu was
pleased once (in a complement) to profess himself desirous to be a Peer of
France, only ut sciret orbis, qualis and quantus est Ludovicus cujus radius and
rivus est Richilius; and thus when a King shall own himself but as a monument
of divine bounty, and wisdom, and power* set up only to let the world see what
God can do. He is most likely to stand long and happy.

The Ancient Heathens upon any successful performance, (...).
Plutarch tells us (...), they used to entitle Fortune and some good Genius
thereunto, so to decline the envy of men and of their Gods too. But we shall
find His Sacred Majesty (we hope heartily) intituling God to all that he now
enjoys: that so he may not be jealous of any retrenchment of his honor.

Whereas on the other side, Vid. D. Casaub. Orig. of temporal evils. p. 37, etc.
we shall find nothing so frequently blasted from heaven, as persons high and
lofty in their own eyes, too great to acknowledge God in any enjoyment. Is. 2.
12, 13. The day of the Lord of hosts, Isa. 23. 9.
shall be upon all the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, Prove. 15.
25. 16. 5.
and upon all the Oaks of Bashan. See Job 40. 12. Dan. 4. 25.
Prove. 6. 17. Isa. 26. 5.
Isa. 5. 15. Luke 1. 52. God is most especially jealous of Pride in Princes:
the many Kings of Assyria, Persia, Babylon, perishing by presumption and self
assuming, are as a cloud of witnesses to abet this truth: this sin God did
especially caveat against in the King over his own people, D. 17. 20. 2 Chr.
32. 25.

Fifthly, Another good omen of His Majesty's happy reign, is this, there meet
most eminently in him, those two things which establish the throne, and they
are Mercy and Truth: Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his
throne is established by Mercy. Hence David prays for the King thus, Isa. 16. 5.
Psalm. 61. 7. O prepare Mercy and Truth which may preserve him: Solomon
especially recommends these two to his son Rehoboam, Prove. 3. 3, 4. Let not
Mercy and Truth forsake thee so shall thou find favor, in the sight of God
and man: (These two (be it spoken with reverence) uphold the throne of God and
therefore God especially upholds them, Psalm. 25. 10. Psalm. 108. 4.)

A Statesman would have said, that Policy and Power preserve the King: No, the
Wise man (who best knew) tells us they are Mercy and Truth: and with good
reason, for there are no two things so contrary to the end and to the
continuance of government, as cruelty and treachery: such a Prince as has both
these meeting in him, has lost the two chief instruments of action, and they
are amor and fides (love and trust) for no man can love that Prince who owns no
mercy, nor trust him that regards not truth, and it will be hard to recount
many cruel and treacherous Princes, happy and fortunate. 1 King. 12. 7.
Temperatus timor cohibet (populum) assiduus in vindictam excitat. Sen. de Clem.
None ever counted it a Princes honor to rule over men as they do over beasts
(merely by fear,) and the experience of all times has proved it not to be his
policy: Semper metuet quem saeva pudebunt, was a poetica licentia, which a
wise Prince will never warrant himself in. If executions be few, they will be
charged upon the merit of the persons; Lucan. lib. 8.
if frequent, upon the Princes disposition, then which nothing renders him more
ungrateful, man being naturally a compassionate creature.

But it is not mercy alone, will establish a throne, there must be truth too,
Prove. 17. 7.
fidelity, open-heartedness, He must not be made up totus ex artibus. Princes
which (like- Absalom) kiss all men alike, seldom succeed happily, because they
occasion the disappointment of so many (which a man cannot so well bear as an
expected injury.) Cruelty and Treachery have gotten many a Throne, but they
have established none.

Now both these meet most eminently in our Sovereign: Mercy, though provoked
more then ever Prince was, he was not (in natali imperii) born like Esau, all
over red with the blood of those who had forfeited their lives to his justice;
but his first and great (I may now add, frequentest) request to the Houses was,
that the Act of Indemnity might be as speedily and as comprehensively drawn up
as might be: His Majesty contents himself with the submission of his
adversaries: Poenaeque genus vidisse precantes. The fears and jealousies of
guilty minds (no question) represented His Majesty (as vapors do the rising
Sun) of a bloody color and disposition; but he has defeated not only the
hopes but the fears of his adversaries, by showing his greatness (as God whose
Viceroy he is) even by pardoning and forgiving offenses. Number. 14. 17.
And His Majesty's whole demeanor assures us, that this clemency is virtus
Personae, Novum imperium inchoantibus utilis est clementiae fama. Tacit. Hist.
4.
not virtus temporis only, and in observance of the old rule, -- mitissima sors
est
Regnorum sub Rege novo:
And as eminent is He for Truth, Joh. 8. 18.
no King might (as Christ does) write Test meipso, with better confidence then
He. Hear what that valiant Scotch Marquess said of him when ready to die, (and
the words of dying, especially understanding men, I value next to the
Scripture) For His Majesty now living, Hist. Montr.
I believe never people might be more happy in a King; his commands to me were
most just, in nothing that he promises will he fail, he deals justly with all
men.

I shall close this fifth particular, by superadding this one observation: De
Gub. Dei, l. 7.
It is Gods usual method to suppress and expel a power or people guilty of
such or such a vice, by persons eminent for the contrary virtue. Thus Salvian
takes notice how God punished the Spaniards (a lascivious people) by the
Vandals, a Nation eminent for their chastity and temperance; so the Persians (a
luxurious and riotous generation) He overthrew by the Macedonians, eminent (at
that time) for their abstinence and moderation in diet: and thus God now uses
his Majesty to succeed and suppress persons lately in power highly
challengeable for the want of Mercy and Truth: Mercy, we might be well assured
they were never designed to build Gods Temple, there was such a noise of fatal
Axes continually heard in the Nation: Truth, breaking all the bands (like the
possessed man) of Oaths and Covenants wherewithal they had been bound: the
character of England at that time we might find in Isa. 59. 14. Judgment was
turned away backward, and Justice stood afar off, Truth was fallen in the
streets, and Equity could not enter.

Sixthly, Another token for good is this, After great When a nation is full of
distraction and confusion, God generally takes one of these three courses with
it. 1. He sometimes leaves it in confusion, suffers the people to be without any
settled form of government, and to hold up one another till he corrects all,
thus he dealt with the Israelites, Judges 21. 25. When there was no King in
Israel, but every man was a law to himself. God sometimes deals by a nation (as
they did by the ship, Acts 27. 15.) cuts the cables and anchours that held it,
and lets it drive. Or, 2. He sometimes sets a Tyrant over it, (as it is an
hundred to one, but when the ill humors are in motion, they gather to an head
at last.) Thus we read in the Judges, he dealt with his own people. Or, 3. He
raises up some eminent person whom he qualifies with all Princely dispositions
for so great a work as the healing of the breaches in a nation. Thus we find
him raising up Moses after the Egyptian oppression, Gideon after the
Midianitish slavery, David after Saul's injustice, and Nehemiah and Zorobabel
after the Babilonish captivity, to become healers to Israel. Thus Julius, and
Augustus Caesar, in the Roman Empire were raised up by God to be repairers of
the breaches in that government under which Christ was to be born, and
afterward Constantine as a shadow from the heat of the ten Persecutions, and
Charles the great in the West, and Queen Elizabeth after many changes both in
Church and State, and Henry the 7th before her, happily curing the issue of
blood the nation had so long labored under.

Great and many are the evils which England has languished under these many
years, now to use the word of Mordecai to Esther, Esther 4. 14. Who knows but
his Majesty is come to the Kingdom for such a time as this. God has taken all
the forementioned courses with our discomposed nation; 1. We were left to the
unconstant counsels, and giddy determinations of those who styled themselves,
Custodes libertatis, (it would pose a wise man, to tell who they were)
sometimes this party, 1 King. 1. 5.
sometime another pretended to the title of the supreme authority of the
nation. 2. Then he set over us, a person that like Adonijah got him chariots
and horsemen, and said, I will reign; but now we hope God has set him over us,
whom he will make a great blessing to this great people; when a nation has
been under many Rulers Solomon tells us, how the state thereof must be
prolonged, Prove. 38. 2. even by the advancement of a man of understanding,
which we hope God (according to the method of his providence) has now blessed us
withal, even a man who shall restore again the Kingdom to its ancient dignity
and liberty, and the Church to its due honor and discipline.

If we now lay all these particulars together, we shall easily, I think, see,
what great cause we have to shout and rejoice and cry, God save the King.

I have hitherto endeavored to be the helper of your joy, give me leave (in a
few words) to be the directour of it, and so conclude. Let us take care that
our joy be seasoned, with sobriety, with trembling and with religion.

With sobriety. This passion of joy does very much dance before the ark, as to
discover our nakedness, so as to allow our selves in any intemperate and
unwarrantable transports.

It had been high indiscretion in Noah and his family when in the ark, and
perceiving the Dove approaching with an alive branch, to have made such a noise
and lumber, as should have frighted her away: We have seen the Dove and the
olive branch of mercy and peace, and settlement after so many tossings and
tempests nearly approaching us, oh let us not fright them away by our
revellings and debauches. Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14.
He that is hardened in his wickedness after ten mercies, (for so give me leave
to account this unum magnum) is little better then he that was hardened in it
after ten judgments.

Let our joy be seasoned with trembling; this should trembling, not out of
distrust of God but our selves, not for fear God will not continue, but that we
shall not deserve our happiness. God forbid, that the Tree of fortune (as it is
called) should be so fairly blown, that we might only see how great hopes sin
is able to blast. God has threatened an unreformed people, that they should go
out of one fire, and another should devour them, Ezekiel. 15. 7. and has
counseled England in Israel long ago, 1 Samuel 12. 24, 25. A bell sounds no
longer then the tremor partium is continued, our ears now hear the joyful
sound of the restoring of King, Parliament, liberty, Church, and State, but
this is likely to be continued no longer then there be a holy trembling about
us, and a holy fear of forfeiting our mercies by our sins; A good memento
Joshua gave the Israelites, Josh. 24. 20. If you forsake the Lord, then he will
turn and do you hurt after he has done you good.

devotion; expressing it self in these duties.

1. In a holy and devout admiration of the wisdom and counsel of God, in this
happy issue of his Providence: He that should take but a superficial view of
England, for these last years past, would be ready to conclude, a divine
Providence little concerned therein, that it was a land (contrary to what is
said of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 11. 12) which God cared not for, and which the eyes of
the Lord were never upon from the beginning of each year to the end thereof.

But then, whosoever deliberately observes victory favoring now this party and
anon the other, to encourage the prosecution of the war till God had punished
both; the strange ballancings of parties for the safety of the whole, the
removal of so many persons of power and interest without power and might, (like
great Oaks pulled up by a hair) the strange state of the nation, being (like a
ship on fire) perishing and sinking in it self, and even then a fear and a
terror to the nations round about: his Majesty restored to his throne, when
his enemies fea^^* and friends hopes were almost at an end; finally, the great
ship of the State turned about with a very small helm, (by means much
disproportioned) whosoever is wise and will observe these things will be invited to
believe a God wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, Isa. 28. 29.
to have interested himself in all the counter motions and seeming casualties
we have stood spectatours of.

Our duty now is to admire the handy work of God, to come and behold the works
of the Lord, and what desolations he has made in the earth, Psalm. 46. 8. We
should not be a nation, seeing many things but observing them not, Isa. 42. 20.
What one says of parables, that they tend tum ad involucrum, Verulam de Aug.
scien. lib. 2. c. 13.
tum illustrationem veritatis (for the concealment of truth before, and for the
illustration thereof, after they are unfolded) is true of the many contrary
occurrences in the worid; they seem to obscure a divine Providence, (while in
contest and motion) they occasion short spirited men to cry out, Te facimus
Fortuna Deam, to conceit the world but a kind of lottery, and that are no eyes
in the wheels of Providence, but in the happy issue and result of all, they
greatly evidence and advance a divine superintendency; reason being warranted
to conclude it excellent wisdom which could set so many crooked pieces into so
comely a fabric, issue so many discords in so sweet a close, and happy
composure in the Church of God: God gets himself glory when he has
accomplished his whole work upon mount Sion, Isai. 10. 12.

Secondly, Let our devotion express it self in fervent

1. For the Nation, that seeing God has now vouchsafed* (...) one head, so we
may have one heart. Pray we here especially for union amongst Ministers. It is
a standing law of music, The leading notes must always be concord, Ministers
are styled (...), Heb. 13. 7. our leaders, if there be discord and variance
amongst them it will sadly influence the nation.

Now this blessing of peace and union, God only (in whose hand men's hearts
are) is empowered to bestow, Jer. 32. 38. I will give them one heart, and one
mind: Philosophy tells us that compositio is opus hominis, but mistio is opus
naturae: Men may compound things of different nature (clay and iron and silver
and gold, as in Nebuchadnezzars image) but to make a real mistion, and
incorporation between things, is the sole prerogative of nature: His Majesty
(under God) has compounded the people of the nation, and put us into better
form and order, Non opus est Concilio non syllogismis, ad s^dandas Lutheranorum
turbas. Carnal. Contaren. cited by Bs. H. N. D.
but God alone can miscere animas, give us one mind and spirit: books enough
have been written for unity, Scripture calls aloud to us (in every Epistle
almost) to avoid contentions, every one sees the evil of dividing, our
adversaries have confessed our differences but circumstantial, and such as call
only for a little mutual forbearance: and yet we stand at distance, and our
hearts (like stones) ready to fly further off one from each other after our
lying in the fire: This assures us that the public fires are not likely to be
quenched but by buckets taken out of the Church (the fervent prayers thereof.)
This expedient the Apostle (after his holy counsels) uses as his reserve, Romans
15. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded, one
toward another. To engage us to follow his example, let us consider they are
our divisions which strengthen the hands of enemies and sadden the hearts of
Friends. Antoninus (an ingenuous heathen Emperor) amongst other consolations
proposed to himself to animate him against the fears of death, Lib. 9. 5, 3.
uses this as the chief: remember (O my soul) that thou art then to go (...),
from men not of a mind with thy self. For if any thing would invite one,
(says he) to honor this life with a wish, it would be this, (...), if it were
possible to live amongst men of the same opinion with ones self: Certainly this
makes Christians so weary of the world to see the sons of one common mother
fall out about circumstances, it is this which makes them so earnestly long to
go to that place, where alone unity in the faith is to be attained, heaven: 1
King. 6. 33.
Ephesians. 4. 13. the doors of the Temple alone are of olive tree, nothing but
peace there: pray therefore that the Church may be able to lay a more just
claim, to the title of the Kingdom of heaven, because of a greater measure of
holiness and unity, obtaining therein.

Secondly, In prayers for his Majesty as we are enjoined, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Psalm.
72. 15. that God would vouchsafe him wisdom and understanding, which is (...),
Arist. Polit. 3.
a virtue peculiarly due to a Ruler, 1 King 3. 11. a prosperous reign, God owns
it as his prerogative to fasten a Ruler as a nail in a sure place, Isa. 22. 23.
let such a nail be never so well headed with policy, Eccles. 12. 11.
and pointed with power, God must be the Master of the assemblies to fasten it,
or else it will take but little hold.

3. In praises to God for all that joy which he has been the author of, Genesis
8. 20.
we should own God as the fountain whence all the waters of consolation ^low
unto us, Exodus 15. 26.
Isa. 65. 18. I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a joy. But in such
a work as this (the restoring of a King to his throne) God challenges the
being owned as the sole author and contriver of it; Psalm. 144. 10. It is he
that shows salvation unto Kings, Dan. 2. 19. He sets up Kings and pulls
them down, Psalm. 21. 3.
Dan. 4. 25. Job 12. 18. Psalm. 84. 39.
It is especially noted as an eminent instance of divine power, that God
loses the bonds of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle; (...), etc.
the Chaldee paraphrast and the LXX seem to understand it of Gods bringing
Kings brought low and captivated again to their royal throne, and his girding
them again regali baltheo: a thing often noted in Scripture, as Gods peculiar
work: And to assure us it is so, He sometimes sets up the meanest persons, and
brings down the most mighty and powerful Monarchs from their throne, 1 Samuel 2.
4, 5. Job 12. 15, 19. Luke 1. 52.

Let us therefore thankfully own God in this great work, and pay him the
tribute of praise and honor, let our zeal vent it self in hearty praises to
the God of our salvation, and not so much in speaking Satyrs against the
authors of our late misery, it being hard to throw dirt at them, but some of
it must light upon our Church and nation in whose bosom they were so long
nourished. We may with Deborah, Judges 5. 9. say, our hearts are toward the
wise leaders and captains, and counselors, who were forward in the work, but
we must bless the Lord

But I am sensible how far this loquacious passion of joy has transported me;
I shall end all with the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 72. 18, 19. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel who only does wondrous things, and blessed be his
glorious name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen,
and Amen.

FINIS.

