A DISCOURSE Concerning Vulgar Prophecies.

WHEREIN The Vanity of receiving them as the certain Indications of any future
Event is discovered; And some CHARACTERS of Distinction between true and
pretending Prophets are laid down.

By JOHN SPENCER, B. D.

ISAI. 44. 24, 25. I am the Lord, that stretches forth the Heavens alone, --
that frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad. EZEKIEL. 13. 9.
My hand shall be upon the Prophets that see Vanity, and that divine Lies; they
shall not be in the Assembly of my People. LONDON, Printed by I. Field for
Timothy Garthwait at the Kings head in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1665. C

THE PREFACE
THe Soul of Man was ^^de for intimacy and converse with God, and therefore; in
a tacit sense thereof, is continually reaching and aspiring after it. But Lust
and Pride having blinded its Eye, it is apt to affect and seek it in fond and
fantastic ways. Whereas good men are (as Antoninus speaks) (...), become
familiar with God by holy practices, by profound Humility, by abstractions from
the World and Lust; Men have conceited it is procured and maintained by going
off from Reason, by Raptures, Visions, Prophecies, Enthusiasms, hot and
vigorous impressions of spirit; and have verily thought (as the Ancient
Heathens by their Prophets) that they are scarce ever full of God, till they
are half beside themselves. And therefore the Lives of the Romish Saints are
stuffed out with perpetual Stories of such things as these, which do but render
them ^o the contempt of men that have a true and sober Notion of Religion.

In confidence of this conceit, such numbers of Devoto's in all Times have
pretended Enthusiasm and extraordinary illapse from Heaven, though to different
ends and purposes, according as a different habit of mind or body and some
mutable circumstances of the Age or course of life might determine an hot Humor
and busy Fancy (for it is little else) to ^xert it self.

Among the many giddy Fancies and Errors of the late Times, bred, like the
Worms in the Manna, out of the Body of our corrupted Government and Discipline,
this was that (...), lea^ing imposture, That the true Seculum Spiritus Sancti
was now coming on upon the World, wherein the immediate Teachings of God should
antiquate the more dead an^ obscure Teachings of the Gospel, as those did the
more weak and cloudy Instructions of the Law; that the Minds of Holy Men should
conceive (like the Virgin Mary) by the sole overshadowings of the Holy Ghost,
without any Assistances from Man or Humane Literature. That Men should be
autorized and assisted to the due performance of the Duties of public
Preaching and Praying by the incitements of God upon the place. That God was
about no new Work, but his Secrets were still made known unto the Faithful.
That the mighty impressions and propensions upon the spirits of the Faithful,
was an interpretative Voice from Heaven, a kind of Bath-Col to supply the
defect of Scripture-Prophecy in Dispensations more dark and aenigmatical.
Whence it came to pass that every morbid heat of Passion and blind Zeal was
christened by the name of an Ignis sacer, the sacred impress and discovery of
the Holy Ghost, and every crazy Fancy and Dream dubbed a Prophetic Vision.

Now as Storms and Tempests at Sea, though they prove the Evils of many a
private man, yet are the good things of Catholic Nature, because serving as a
kind of natural Exercise to keep that vast Body of Waters from putrefaction:
Thus howsoever the bold Pretenses to Revelations, Prophecy, and a greater
intimacy with the Divine Spirit, proved the great Evils of those particular
Times, causing many (weaker vessels especially) to make shipwreck of Conscience
and a sound Mind, and betrayed them to gross and shameful Notions in Religion
and Policy; yet to the Church of God in general this has proved the happy
issue of this Ignis fatuus of Enthusiasm (in all the expresses thereof) even so
effectual a Discovery of it, both i^ its Effects, those bogs of Sedition,
Blasphemy, Profaneness, Giddiness, it leads into, and in its Cause, only a
natural f^rvor and pregnancy of spirit i^ some more refined, and an heated
Melancholy in other grosser Enthusiasts, then has been formerly made; and such
as might effectually secure the Person that can do more then believe, from
being easily abused by such shining Vanities as any pretended Enthusiasms make
a proffer of. So that the present Undertaking to lay forth the impostures wrapped
up in this most famo^us instance of Enthusiasm, supposed Prophecy, may seem to
have nothing to justify it but an honest intention: Especially considering
tha^ there are Penal Statutes provided to prevent the spreading of Seditious
Prophecies, by the Severities of which those may be whipped into their wits, whom
the Physic of an Argument cannot cure of their Prophetic Frenzies.

These Considerations would easily have persuaded me to have spared the Reader
and my self a further trouble, but that I saw so great an affinity between the
present and precedent Subject, that the Discourses upon both would (like both
the feet) derive a mutual strength and assurance upon each other; and that the
Prophecies which are the issues of an hot head and disturbed imagination, are
but the one half of those which abuse the Faith of the People: I considered
withal that Prophecy is the most obstinate piece of Enthusiasm, having our
innate Curiosity and an Experience as great as Prodigies to make it
considerable. Besides, while good Laws are the best Security of the Peace,
sober Principles laid in the Minds of the People are the best Security of the
Laws.

A DISCOURSE Of the Vanity of VULGAR PROPHECIES.
CHAP. I.
Some general accounts given of the Argument.
Counterfeits in Art, Nature and Religion. False prophecy one instance of them.
What kind of false Prophets the times of the New Testament are freed from. The
miscarriage of States often by occasions contemptible, noted. The present
argument suitable to the age, because an age of action, of intellectual
improvement, and yet, in many, of Enthusiasm. Several confident pretenders to
prophecy of late, taken notice of. The affinity between Prodigies and
Prophecies in the general ^ends of both. Prophecies of evil consequence in
States and why. Our Nation extremely inclined toward them in former times. The
ancient Ethnic Statesmen how they secured themselves against the prophetic
humor of the people. Judges of Prophecy in Plato, who. The Sibylline Oracles of
what use among the Romans. The Opinions the ancients had of Prophecy, couched
in the fable of Teresia. Religion a great sufferer by them in the Practice,
Credit, Doctrine and Foundation thereof. These noted prejudicial to the mind,
and why: And to common life. Two examples to evince that, taken notice of
Prophecies as universally attended to as Prodigies, amongst Heathens, Jews,
Christians, with a threefold account thereof.

THE hypocrisies of things are as familiar as those of men, for as there is a
great deal of reprobate Silver which carries the image of the King and looks
like Sterling, so there are in Art, in Nature, in Religion the many instances
of things that do only Gal. 6. 12.
(...) carry a fair face, bear a title and garb beyond their true and real
value* As there is a ^^ue Masculine Rhetoric wherein the golden aples of some
rich conceptions are set in the silver pictures of some Eccles. 12. 10
(...) words of desire, expressions chosen and fitly set, so there is a (...),
the charm of some soft and siren words and periods which (like a tinkling
cimbal) make a pretty sound in the ear for a time, and rather inchant the mind
then inform it. In Nature also there are the real Diamonds, and Angels of
light, and others which by Sophistry 2 Cor. 11. 14
(...), are only transformed into their likeness and usurp their title.
Religion also (through the Arts of evil men) is forced to carry two differen^
faces of things under the hood of one and the same name and outward appearance:
in which we find lying wonders, Rev. 2. 24. ^
fan^astical depths, a knowledge falsely so called, a Spirit of error, and so
false Prophecies disguised in the titles and images of the true.

It is indeed the great blessing promised to the times of the New Testament,
that we should be delivered from all those (...) (as the Z^ch. 13. 2. 1 King.
18. 19.
Targum styles them) Prophets of the spirit of a ly, which should call men to
the worship of Images: and God has fulfilled the same unto us, there being now
none of those lying Prophets among us that the minds of the Heathens were
abused withal, who used to erect some Idols themselves had devised, telling
the people Maimonid. de Idolat. c. 1. sect. 3.
they were the Images of such a star or constellation (...) which was made
known to them by Prophecy. Yet there are still left among us (that there may be
an exercise of Christian prudence as well as of other Virtues) some Prophets of
a ly, which call men to a reverence of the images of their own busy Fancy, some
who (...). (as Theodor. l. 4. c. 10.
Theodoret of the Enthusiasts of his Age) call the idle phantasms of their
dreams, prophetic visions.

Our present business therefore is, to rub off the gilt of these shining
vanities Supposed Prophecies, and to discover the folly of that faith and
affection with which they are so generally entertained; and in order thereunto
to lay down some characters of dictinction between real and pretending
Prophets, and to inquire (as we can) whether the Mic. 3. 6.
Sun be quite gone down over the Prophets, and the minds of men never visited
now with any beams of Prophetic light, so familiar in the former Ages of the
World.

The Argument, I know, is as fruitful a field of imposture as the fo^egoing,
and the persons to whom I oppose my self therein, are men of a more exe^cised
faith then understanding, and there is nothing more reverenced by some, and
e^ploded by others then Prophesying; and therefore I easily foresee that I
shall (like the candle) praelucendo perire, suffer greatly my self in the
prepossest thoughts of the most, while attempting to give light to others in so
imposterous and litigious an Argument as this is. But when bodies Politic have
been often choked (like Adrian) with g^ats, ruined by some occasions they
despised and thought most beneath their caution, (Propheci^s and Enthusiasms
among the rest) and because if all men of more improved intellectuals should
value themselves so far, ^s never to stoop to a notice of those contemptible
errors which the people are abused withal, no body would be informed, (as no
bodies sores cured if all should be nice:) I have the intentions and hopes of a
public service to balance the prejudices of some severer persons.

But that which more effectually reconciled me to this attempt, was a regard to
the special sutableness thereof to the present Age: and the great Affinity
between this and the foregoing Argument.

The Age wherein our lot is fallen, is an Age of Action and Expectation, and in
such times, prophecies generally take confidence to become public, being then
most grateful to men, usually very impatient of uncertainties where they are
hugely concerned. Among the Jews we find Prophets and Oracles especially
consulted in times of some public distraction, and (...). Polib. Hist. lib. 3.
Polybius tells us that when the Armies of the Romans and Carthaginians were
ready every day to join battle, every bodies mouth was full of Oracles and
Prophecies. Men upon such occasions are apt to believe as they affect, and then
to presage as they believe. Besides, it is a time of improvement in all humane
and divine knowledge, and that happy day seems risen upon us to which God has
promised an Dan. 12. 4.
increase of Knowledge: Nature begins now to be studied more then Aristotle, and
men are resolved upon a Philosophy that bottoms not upon fancy but experience,
a Philosophy that they can prove and use, not that which commenceth in faith
and concludes in talk. And considerate men are too much themselves now to be
brought (like bees) to hive under any odd form of Opinion and party of men, by
the confused noise and dinn of Carnal reason, the Spirit of God, Superstition,
Reformation, and the coming in of Popery. Now while Wisdom seems thus to have
hewn out her seven pillars and her house is going up so fast, it is ^ duty to
assist her work by removing a^l the rubbish of Prodigies, Vulgar Prophecie^,
and what ever Doctrine makes the minds of men soft and easy (by teaching men to
believe without evidence) and so, unfit to make a due judgment of things.
More-over, It Is a time wherein (as it is usual) Folly is as busy as Wisdom.
Never greater talk of terrible Signs, Revelations, new-lights, Prophecies and
Visions in our own and other Kingdoms then now. Lu^ in tenebris. edit. 1657
Histor. Revel. edit. per I. A. C. 1659. Revel. Divin. Epitom. Edit. 1663.
We have had ^ Volumes of Prophecies and Visions lately tendered to the World,
and that by men of no common name, and with a confidence, I think, beyond the
examples of History. For as many amongst our selves, disbelieve the Writing of
God though sealed with so many mighty signs, martyrdoms, accomplished
predictions, a resurrection from the dead, and the attestation of millions of
wise and good men; so they protest their visions in the face of the Sun,
without any considerable signs, and notwithstanding the contempt of all sober
Christians, and those contrary events whereby God has frustrated the tokens of
these liars and made these Diviners mad. And some of them stic^ not to tell the
World, that by how much the ^carer that Great day of the Lord is, the more
evidently and familiarly does he excite his Prophets; and that they understand
the frequent possessions, Witchcrafts* and fanatical Enthusiasms of the
Quakers; Histor. Rev. p. 189.
Satanicas esse praestigias, quibus opera Dei obsuscare nituntur, ut olim Jannes
and Jambres Mosi restitere, to be the delusions of the Devil, whereby they
endeavor to obscure the works of God, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses of
old.

As for that Affinity noted between this Argument and the foregoing, it will
appear in the correspondence observable between Prodigies and Prodigies in the
General Nature, evil Consequents, and common acceptance of them both.

1. In their General Nature. For as Prodigies are received (as the Quia
ostendunt, porte^dunt, monstrant, prae^icunt, ostenta, portenta, monstra,
prodigi^, dicuntur. Tull. de Divin. l. 1.
reason of the name intimates) as a kind of Real prophecies, (predictions, as
in a figure, of some great plague or change in State.) So Prophecies as a kind
of Verbal Prodigies, wonderful indications of the fortunes of Kingdoms or
private persons: both feed the curiosities of men by the pretended notices of
the future; and have always gone undivided in the Opinions and regards of
easy men, both among Heathens and Christians. Having therefore imbittered, and
dried up that one breast, the Opinion of Prodigies, which used to suckle this
childish humor of curiosity in men: I shall endeavor to do as much to that
other of common Prophecies, that so the minds of men may be forced to take to
some more substantial nourishment and may come the more entire and undisturbed
to sober and wise thoughts.

2. In their evil consequents. These Vulgar Prophecies having as malign an
influence upon the State, Religion, the Understanding, and Common life as
Prodigies.

1. They are of very evil consequence in the State. The monuments of our own
and foreign Nations assure us that there is not a more fruitful womb of
seditions and confusions in States then the Opinion of such predictions is. He
that shall read ur Histories (says our great Sir Ed. Cooks Instit. p. 3. c. 55.
Lawyer) shall find what lamentable and fatal events have fallen out upon vain
prophecies, carried out of the inventions of wicked men; pretended to be
ancient, but newly framed to deceive true men: and withal, how credulous and
inclinable to them our Contrymen in former times have been. The reason why
the publication of any such evil prophecies (as he tells us) has been made
felony without clergy by some ancient Statutes in our Kingdom; and still
interdicted under severe penalties both in our own and See Le^d Howard
Defensat. against Prophecies. c. 20.
foreign Countries. What attempt will not take confidence from a persuasion
that God will succeed it, and that it is the accomplishment of some divine
prediction? and besides, how certainly will the best cause fall to the ground,
where the hands which are to suport it, are weakened by an Opinion of some
unpromising Omen or Prophecy?

The Ancient Ethnic Statesmen seem very sensible what a ready weapon of
Sedition this sacred Opinion of Prophecies in the people was, and therefore
being unable to wrest it from them, they endeavored as much as they could to
blunt its edg; by subtle maxims, such as these, Artemid. Oncirocrit. l. 1. c. 2.
(...), Persons very simple or very poor, never saw any dreams in which the
public was concerned. And that none but a King or a General was (...)
preferred by the Gods the Prophet of a City: Or by appointing some prudentdent
Overseers and interpreters of Prophecies. Their Doctrine (as we learn from
Plat. in Tim.
Plato) was (...), etc. It is not for the person acted by a pr^phetick fury,
whether he continue in it still or no, of himself to judge his Prophetic
Visions or Speeches: for (as it is commonly and truly said) to speak and do
things becoming, belongs soly to a wise person. (...). Wherefore the law
provides that an order of Prophets be set Judges over all Enthusiastic
Divinations, which Prophets some by mistake call Diviners. Where indeed the
Order of Prophets to whom He gives the pre-eminence, were none else but wise
and prudent Men (as a Mr Smith Disc. of Proph^^y. p. 195.
late Writer, truly) but whereas he adds, who by reason of the Sagacity of
their Understandings were able to judge of those things which were uttered by
this dull spirit of Divination, which resided only in faculties inferior to
Reason, I conceive he misapprehends the end and office of these prudent
Persons; who were indeed Judges, but not to interpret but to moderate these
prophetic furies. For if these Enthusiasms were really divine, no wise man
would, and if really phrenetical, no wise man could judge them, so as to expound
and interpret them; for can any man make any sober judgment of the phantasms
and heats of distraction, or find any reason in that which never approached the
faculty of Reason? These Wise Men therefore seem a ^ind of Ethnic Sanhedrim to
judge of pretended prophecy in an authoritative way, and to expunge or expound
according as might best comport with the occasions of State. And the better to
blanch over their Sentences and to make them look like Oracle, they were
themselves reported and verily thought by the people, really prophetic
persons. Answerable to which subtle men among the Graecians, the Romans had
constantly chosen out of the City, their sole Keepers and Interpreters of the
Sibylline prophecies, which serve^ as a kind of Ethnic Alcoran, expounded
always by those Mufties according as the circumstances of State might require:
and it is not unlikely that Caesar had been tampering with one of them, who told
the Romans in open Senate, as from the Oracles, of Sibylla that Tull. de Div.
l. 2. sub fin.
he that they had now their King in reality, must have the title of King too,
if they would be in a safe condition.

I incline to believe that this political Sophism in reference to Prophecy, was
couched by the Poets in the fable of their Hermaphrodite-Prophet Teresia, whom
they feign stricken with blindness by Juno, but in recompense of that ill turn,
blessed by Jupiter with prophecy: and further that this (...), etc. Just. Mart.
Quaest. and Resp. ad Ort^o^. Q. 146.
person had the forms of both Sexes, and was often instrumental to accord many
differences and strifes among the God. Wherein they seem to intimate that
prophecy (as found among them) was given only to persons bereft of the use of
Wisdom, as in a dream, or in the eclypse of reason by a (...) (...) (as
Plutarch calls it) Prophetic effiux, (in truth, a subtle vapor ascending the
body of the Pythia from those hollow caverns over which she stood, and
begetting a kind of dry drunkenness in her for a time, and so disposing her to
an imitation of the Ecstacies and prophecies of an Enthusiast.) Or else of the
very habit of wisdom; (and that by Juno, a hand of Providence) as no men
distracted, hypochondriacks, Epileptical persons, old women: and this by God,
to compensate their great blindness and (...). Plat. in Tim.
folly in all other matters. Now these Prophecies seemed to carry the form of a
Woman* as being delivered generally by that Sex, but constantly by persons
extremely ignorant, credulous, talkative, and impotent both in mind and body;
and of a Man, as being directed, expounded and overlooked by the care and
wisdom of some prudent Men. And the fable seems further to intimate of what
singular Use in State, these pretended prophecies proved (when subtly
managed) to compound differences among the Gods, Men of minds or power too high
to be set down by any Law but what pretends from God; and to conclude all pro
and con in a Nation about matters referring to the Gods and Religion.
Accordingly the ancient lawgivers, Numa, Scipio, Lycurgus, Lysistratus,
Sertorius, and the rest, called their laws Oracles, and the ten tables
pretended from God as well as the two. And lib. 2. de Divin.
Tully advised the secret custody of the Sibylline Oracles, Valeantque (says
he) ad deponendas potius quam ad suscipiendas novas religiones; thus some
subtle men among the Jews, to accord the fierce disputes between the School of
Hillel and Schammai, invented the story of a Vid. Doctor Lightfoot, Hor. Habr.
p. 156.
Bath Kol (the lowest degree of prophecy, according to them) a voice from
heaven, saying, Et horum and illorum verba sunt verba Dei viventis. But when
the laws of God will not warrant us to tell a ly for his honor, much less for
our interest, it is an instance of the piety and policy of the State to enact
severe laws against persons of so prostitute a Conscience, as to encourage a
sedition by any pretended prophecy: that so the just reverence of Divine
prophecy may be secured, and Faction may not use those Arts to disturb, which
Honesty dare not to secure the common peace.

2. Vulgar Prophecies have as malign an influence upon Religion. In the
practice thereof: for in an Opinion of such things, the thoughts of some men
are wholly entertained with enquiries where will God be next, and their great
question is, Watchman, what of the night? what news of things as yet in the
dark and out of view? the work of the day scarce ever aproacheth their
thoughts: the great sign with them of a familiar acquaintance with God is, when
he is continually whispering news in men's ears, and making them intimate to his
secrets, and no man shall be thought a spiritual preacher by them, but he that
can loose the seals of the Apocalyptick visions. In the interim by such fond
thoughts and curiosities the minds of men are made vain and trifling* their
spirits too subtle and airy to fix upon a serious thing, and while their eyes
are thus, at the ends of the Earth, they neglect to hee^ their way, and become
(like silly birds) but the fairer mark for the Fowler, by standing thus at
gaze. And as great a sufferer by such things, is Religion in the Reputation
thereof; for when subtle men shall see us (like the ancient Egyptians) inshrine
every Ape, give reverence to every vain person and clouted rhyme, which may ape
the gestures and style of a prophet or prophecy, they will be ready to conclude
Religion a mere Systeme of phantasms, inexplicable impressions, and a tutoring
of men to a faith of contrad^ctions or mere imaginations. And all the Devoto's
in the world shall be thought a Society of easy men that can say much and prove
nothing, and that (what was falsely said of the Jews of old) give worship to an
Asses head, to the idle Visions of their own or other men's heads, as soft and
ignorant as theirs. Besides, an easy faith of such Vulgar Prophecies as of
divine impression, does greatly prejudice Religion in the Doctrine thereof. For
men will readily conclude him a Man of God, and that the Word of the Lord is
with him (be his Doctrine what it will) that seems to tell them things to come,
(the reason why the Seducers of greatest name in Story have pretended
Prophecy.) The Church of Rome proves her self the Temple of the Living God, and
Gods presence with her, by the Voice of his Oracles heard therein. She has
(she tells us) the Spirit of Prophecy (called the Testimony of Jesus) to bear
Vid. Bozium Eugub. de Signis Eccles. l. 6 c. 2.
witness to her Doctrine, discipline and worship: and to this purpose gives us
in a list of her Prophets (but most of them women) and of their wonderful
predictions, and challenges us to instance any such parallel examples. To whom
we return, Dan. 3. 16.
We are not careful to answer thee in this matter: while the house of God with
us is built upon the foundation of the true Prophets and Apostles, it will not
need daubing with any such untempered mortar as Vulgar Prophecies are, to give
strength or beauty thereunto. But Religion is a far greater sufferer by such
Spurious Visions, and Prophecies, in the foundation thereof, that Sure Word of
Prophecy upon which it bottoms. There can hardly be a more subtle way invented
to sink the value and credit of all divine prophecies and illapses, then the
multitude of those tinsil Enthusiasms wh^h are in the World. Men will quickly
grow coy, and loath to trust themselves with a Revelation, when they see so much
imposture breaking in upon the world that usurps that name. The Ethnic world
had been for many ages imposed upon by Enthusiasms, Dreams, Oracles,
Prophecies, Apparitions of the Gods, till Socrates (in a discovery of the
Vanity of them) called men to an use of judgment, and taught them to entertain
no doctrine without or against apparent reason. And the many abuses formerly
put upon them, made them no: only readily entertain his doctrine, but so
prejudiced them against the very air of a Revelation, that as the Jewish
masters were perpetually demanding of signs, so the Gentile Philosophers,
Demonstrations, of the first preachers of the Gospel, and upbraiding them that
their Doctrine was Just. Martyr. in Dial. cum Tryph. p. 207.
(...), a paradoxical doctrine, and altogether impossible to be demonstrated.
And amongst our selves, while some must have an Enthusiasm in all the great
turns of life, and must be fed, like the Patriarchs, with Visions and Prophecy,
others (seeing the impos^ures wrapped up in them) hate such light meat, and begin
to look upon a Revelation as a matter un-intelligible, both in the manner of
conveyance, and the way of discovery and discrimination, and to think no man
can answer the taking up of any Opinion upon the credit of a prophetic
testimony, to his cool and advised thoughts. But if the more fortunate
credulity and simplicity of the persons to whom these Visions and prophetic
Raptures happen, make them impregnable by a temptation to any such subtle
Atheism, yet still Scripture is disparaged while the affections of men are
divided between an old Prophecy and a new, and that sickly humor in some men of
longing after somewhat new in Religion, is fed, men's gadding Fancies are
gratified, and Religion is exposed to the danger of being evaporated into air
and rapture.

3. These pretended Prophecies do as much usurp upon the mind and
understanding: because instructing both Deliverers and Receivers only to a
bold and forward Faith. For they that deliver them presume it were not to
believe but to dispute, if they should (like Judge. 6. 17.
Gideon) desire a sign of God that it is he indeed that talks with them:
these impressions they conceive are both writing and seal to themselves, and
proclaim by their own mighty force and vivacity that they are set on by a
divine hand: the mind of man (say they) under the Divine Visitations, is only
(...), to attend* in an humble passiveness and silence, to God, while
instructing it by the whispers of his Spirit. A Doctrine which is virtually an
infinite imposture, and which brings a man into a (...) (as the Maimonid. Mor.
Nevoc. P. 3. c. 50.
Arabians call the Wilderness) a desert of wandering, wherein he may run for
ever from one wild imagination to another; and contains as much Reason therein,
as the conceit of that Mariner that should think his Ship ran a right course
only because driven with a fierce wind. And as much do these Prop^ecies usurp
upon the Understandings of those to whom they are tendered; we must trust our
Faith with these things, but never o^fer to demand first the security of some
divine Sign; we must believe them of divine inspiration only because we are
told they are so: and if we demur, as thinking the condition unreasonable, we
are bidden to have a care we be not found to fight against God, and so must
become fools for fear we prove knaves. But when our Blessed Savio^ himself
would not so far control the Law of reasonable Nature in Man, as to require
him to a Faith of his Prophecies before sufficient assurance given of their
Divinity; we know not to value our selves, if we suffer a Faith of these common
Prophecies to be forced upon us, which offer nothing to assure them but solemn
looks and Verily verily. The World swarms with pretended Prophecies and
Revelations; we have not only our monthly but our daily Prognosticators, and
therefore the honest looks of the proposers are not sufficient grounds of trust
in this business. That proposition, Intellectus patiens recipit phantasmata, is
a truth also in Divinity; the soly passive intellect, that is impressive and
easy, that does not use it self to discourse and judge, receives Fantasms into
it self, little besides the airy Visions of its own or other men's vain
imaginations.

4. These Prophecies are of very evil consequence in common life: They give
silly men to conceit they are never Gods favorites till they are half mad, and
have constant intelligence from Heaven by some new Vision. They torture men's
minds with infinite anxieties, and lay upon their thoughts the Evils of an Age
to lament at once. They encourage them in very evil purposes, by the confidence
they give them of success. They keep men from possessing themselves in peace by
a secure repose on the wisdom and goodness of God. They tempt them to a neglect
of those faithful and acknowledged Rules of life, Scripture, and the Maxims of
Reason, to attend to measures fantastical and never proved. They cow men's
spirits, and betray those succors which Reason affords and commands the use of.
Thus the Senatus plurimumei tribuebat, and ipsius permoti concionibus, nihil
sibi contra Regem suscipiendum esse putabant. Comin. de Bell. Neapolit. l. 3.
Historian tells us the Senate of Florence would by no means make opposition to
the French King Charles the eighth, because advised to the contrary by the
reputed Prophecies of Savanarola. The Examples of men which have run themselves
upon strange Precipices by following these foolish fires, are infinite. I shall
instance but two, to stop, if it were possible, the mouths of my two
Adversaries in this Argument, the Papist and the Enthusiast. The first shall be
the strange Example of Pope Gregory the ninth, who was persuaded by the
pretended Visions and Prophecies of Catharina de Senis to go from Avenion to
Rome, against the Reasons and Persuasions of his Cardinals and Friends; whereby
he became the occasion of that Schism which lasted for about forty years in
that Church. Hic positus in extremis, habens in manibus sacrum Christi corpus,
protestatus est coram omnibus ut caverent sive a viris sive a mulieribus sub
specie religionis, loquentibus visiones sui capitis, quia per tales, etc. J.
Gerson. de Exam. Doctrine. consid. 3.
In an easy foresight whereof, a few hours before his death (which happened
within half a year after his coming thither) having the holy Eucharist in his
hands, he protested before them all, that they should beware of either Men or
Women delivering, under a s^ew of Religion, the Visions of their own hea^;
because himself, being seduced by such, had, in a neglect of the sober counsels
of his Friends, drawn himself and the whole Church into danger of imminent
Schism, except the mercy of Christ interposed. The other Example touches
closer upon our present Times; that of Comenius (a person whose other works
praise him, so that I need say nothing) who was so enchanted by the simplicity
of manners, solemn asseverations, frequent ecstasies, rapturous speeches, devout
language, pompous visions, unaccountable passions, some casually accomplished
Predictions of those three pretending Prophets, Christopherus Kotterus,
Christina Poniatovia, Nicholaus Drabicius, as greatly to reverence their
persons, to record and at last to publish their Visions and Prophecies under
the specious title of Lux in tenebris, to write the History of their Lives and
prophetic Raptures, to attempt to reconcile the contradictions in their
Predictions: and where their deformity appeared through the finest colors he
could dissemble it with, He ventures to bring himself off, thus; Histor.
Dabric. p. 157.
Sapientiam Dei vary nobiscum ludere, and lusisse hac in re, haec ostendunt,
etc. And elsewhere, ib. p. 234.
Non invenio quid dicendum restet, nisi aut haec prophetica non esse divina,
aut hypothesin Theologiae nostra (de omnimoda Immutabilitate Dei, etiam nostri
and temporalium respectu) vacillare. Utrum potius suspicandum sit, quid si
pronunciare ne festinemus? and the like: which is to make God a deceiver (I
speak as a man) that so silly men may speak truth.

Thirdly, Prophecies and Prodigies touch and agree in the universal reception
of them both. Prophecy never wanted Professors or Auditors in any Age or place
in the World. It was the Opinion of some of the Jews, and most of the Gentile
Philosophers of old, that the Soul came down into the Body, pregnant with
Piutarc. de Defect. O^ac.
(...), a prophetic power, (...), but it is muffled and blinded because of its
commixture and confusion with this lump of Earth, which perpetually sends up
such a thick mist of Fantasms before its Eyes, that it cannot now see afar off.
A Doctrine, which the deport of the Soul, while a prisoner to its own house,
seems a little to encourage: for as the Bush in the Fable, having sustained a
great loss of cloth, is fancied to stand ever since by the highway catching
hold of every man's clothes, in hopes to recover its own lost goods; so the
Souls of men seem to express a tacit sense of a great loss in regard of the
knowledge of things future, in this embodied state, in that they stand (as it
were) in triviis, and hastily catch at any pre^ending Prophecy and shadow of
Divination: (...) indeed I have nothing (in this matter) (...) to accuse my own
Nation then others (...) being an argument of the blindness of most Ages and
Nations, that they readily swallow down such Flies as these when tendered to
them.

What place and repute Prophecy held among the Gentiles of old, those words
(...), and the like, and that vast rabble of Chaldeans, Astrologers,
Soothsayers, Necromancers, Interpreters of Dreams and Prodigies, Diviners by
the Smoke, the Exta, the Incense on the Altar, by a Staff, the chirping of
Birds, all of familiar occurrence in their Writings, are a sufficient
assurance. Particularly the Eastern Nations were so mad upon Divination, that
Isai. 2. 6.
(...) they are full of the East seems used proverbially by the Prophet, to set
forth that mighty passion with which the Jews were carried after Divination and
the knowledge of Futurities. And with how easy a Faith the Jews used to meet
any pretenders to Prophecy, though calling them (to the most open defiance of
Reason and Religion) Idolatry, the Writings of the Old Testament will
sufficiently resolve us. And Christians (though these Vulgar Prophecies have
been proved, by an infinite Experience, a dead catch, devoid of the life of
truth and perspicuity) stoop as greedily to them, when ever thrown before them,
as if they were all Oracle. For they easily believe no man to be so projectedly
Atheistical, as to entitle God to the Visions of his own brain: not considering
that the spirit of heated Melancholy may inspire these Prophets, and abuse them
with some vigorous impressions as much as they do other men.

Now it cannot but seem strange to our first thoughts, that while all other
Sects and impostures suited to the present gusto of the people, have had their
peculiar times and places of acceptance, and the Wheel of Fortune (as it is
called) has gone over them all and crushed them in the dust, Enthusiasts and
pretenses to Prophecy should prove an obstinate cheat which all Ages and
Nations have been thus gulled withal; especially considering that the hiding of
Events from us is so great a security to the quiet of our minds, and felicities
are always greater, and Evils (because they then afflict us but once) the
lighter, which do surprise us. This so strange and catholic a Vanity must
determine our Inquiries after some catholic and immutable Causes in humane
Nature which may give us some probable account thereof. They are (I conceive)
especially these three:

1. A catholic presumption of the singular readiness of God to communicate
with Man, especially if a more refined person, (...) (...) and separate from
all the ways of the people (as the Masters say a Prophet must be.) This
persuasion may grow either from a kind of tacit sense in the Soul that it was
made for converse with God, to refer to him, to derive light and law from him.
A remembrance of which birthright of the Soul remained a while in the more
simple and innocent years of the World, in that frequent intercourse between
God and Man, by the mission of Angels, vouchsafing of divine Visions and
Prophecies, immediate Oracles, and that administration of civil affairs in the
Jewish Kingdom by the immediate direction of God himself. Or else (which is
more explicable) it might possibly arise from a fantastical measure of goodness
in God. Men have thought it could not stand with the goodness of God to suppose
him reserved, and to leave them in the dark in some very doubtful and perplexed
circumstances of life: and therefore si Dii sint, divinatio est was thought by
Tully and others a very natural consequence. And a late Writer, to prove
Prophecy not yet ceased, places this in the front of his demonstrations (so he
calls them) the eternal duration of the Divine Goodness and Bounty; which will
oblige him (says he) to as free a communication of this prophetic light now,
as in the years of old: and therefore concludes his Argument with a brand upon
the Inexcusabilis ^rgo est hominum illoru^ malitia and temeritas, qui hunc
divinae gratiae fontem exsic^atum hodic volunt: non minus pecca^do quam
malev^li Philisth^i, Genesis 26. 18, etc. Author. lib. cui tit. Probat. Vis. apud
Comen. in Hist. Revel. p. 204.
inexcusable wickedness and rashness of those men who would have this Fountain
of Divine Grace dried up, while denying Prophecy. But who art thou, O vain man,
that wilt thus mete out the Heavens with thy span? prefer thy short thoughts of
what is fit and good the measures of infinite Bounty and Goodness? Does not the
Papist conclude an infallible spirit in the Church, from the same topic the
Enthusiast does a prophetical spirit therein, even because God's goodness will
not permit him to withhold so great a Blessing? Certainly if God's goodness
prove the spirit of Prophecy to be at all in the Church, it will prove it also
as plentifully poured out now, as in the primitive Times, God being as rich in
goodness now as then.

2. Opinions of this World vast and unmeasured, is another great support of the
credit of Vulgar Prophecies. Men in all times have been apt to value the
concerns of this World amiss, to think persons and affairs hold the same place
in the thoughts of God as of a man, and could not imagine that what was a great
reality to their enchanted minds, was but (...), a great Fancy in the account
of Heaven: and therefore easily conceived that all Events of greater note came
with observation, and had the harbinger of a Prodigy or Prophecy to run before
and give notice when ever they are coming after. This Vulgar Judgment of things
drew forth that speech from the Zosim. Histor. l. 2.
Roman Historian, (...), etc. It has often occurred to my thoughts as a
Wonder, that when the City of Byzantium has risen so exceedingly, that no City
besides can vie fortunes or greatness with it, (...), no Prophecy was ever
given our Ancestors from the Gods of its singular felicities and increase. And
my thoughts (as he goes on) often running upon this strange instance, (...),
having turned over many Volumes of History and Collections of Oracles, scarce
at last have I light upon an Oracle of Sibylla Erythrea which seems to carry
some prophetic ayrs of the succeeding grandeur of this City. But yet after a
full recital of the Oracle, he concludes (as he had reason, so loose and
general the words are) If the Oracle shall seem to any one to speak a different
sense, (...)
let him take to it if he please.

3. There is in the minds of men an infinite thirst after the knowledge of
Futurities. What purchase would be thought (by many men) too great for the
knowledge of such things as these, How long such a King shall reign, who shall
succeed to the Throne, when Antichrist shall fall, how long they shall live,
whom they shall marry, what shall be the issue of such a War, when such a cloud
of affliction shall go off from their Tabernacle: this thirst made the Religion
of the Gentiles (that thought there was nothing beyond the Horizon of sense)
almost nothing but a continued Divination, an unwearied pursuit of this
knowledge, in Oracles, in Omens, in Prophecies, in Prodigies, in Auguries, in
the Signs of Heaven, in the Guts of the Sacrifice, and the like; and so far
befooled them that they often preferred the ravings of a madman, the chirpings
of a Bird, the babble of an Astrologer, and the Dreams of an old woman, to
greater veneration then the words of the wise; and made the smoke of his house
appear a better Oracle then the man of counsel that dwelt in it. And an
impatience of the ignorance of things to come, fooled the Jews as well as the
Gentiles out of their Reason and Religion both at once, tempting them to Hos.
4. 12.
ask counsel at their stocks, and to seek to their Staff to declare futurities
unto them. Amongst our selves a like affection for this knowledge betrays so
many men to such Opinions of Astrologers, Fortune Tellers, the predictions of
Enthusiasts, and men upon a deathbed. Look as those gross vapors, which, while
he^e below, are of no name and consideration, but as soon as they mount the
Heavens, and carry light and fire with them, draw the eyes of men upon them,
and are thought Divine presages. Thus those persons, whose grossness and
dullness in all matters referring to Religion, Learning or common life, rendered
them to the neglect or pity of sober men, as soon as that black humor in them
takes fire, and the men seem to speak from Heaven, and to carry a prophetic
light with them, they presently become considerable, are advanced the common
Subjects of Discourse, their Prophecies are studied more then the Bible, and
men wonder to see how little those fools-bolts mist of the mark they were
levelled unto.

Now the teeth of men have thus watered for this forbidden fruit, the knowledge
of things to come, partly from a weakness and childishness of temper whereby
they cannot relish and digest the strong meat of substantial Doctrine and solid
argument; partly from some present uneasiness of condition, the duration
whereof looks like an Eternity to their short spirits, while they know no end
thereof; partly in a vain hope that according as a good or an evil is
prophesied concerning them, so their diligence may be applied to promote it or
prevent it.

In consideration of all the premises, I have applied my self with the greater
seriousness to sink the reputation of those pretending Prophecies which so much
ingross the studies and affections of many men, and to evince that pretenders
to Predictions now, are, in all likelihood, Jer. 23. 26.
Prophets only of the deceit of their own heart, and that none of their
Prophecies are to be attended to, as the certain indications of a future time.

CHAP. II.
The Vanity of Vulgar Prophecies detected from the unworthiness of the
Pretenders to them.
All things and Persons thought by the Heathens to partake somewhat of a
Prophetic Power. Wisdom only excluded by them from any share in that gift.
The Persuasion too much abetted by some Christians. To reprehend which, the
first Consideration is proposed. That Prophetic Maxim, That Prophecy rests not
but upon a wise, a valiant and a rich man, how understood by the Modern Jews: A
conjecture concerning the Reason of it, in their sense. How understood by the
more Ancient Jews, shown at large from their Writings. God's Prophets never mad
in a Prophetic fit. Wisemen an ancient addition of the Prophets: the title
usurped by the Ancient Philosophers and Magicians. Jews, Christians and
Heathens required Sanctity in order to true Prophecy. None born Prophets of the
Jews, and why. Our pretended Prophets largely proved devoid of all true
Prophetical qualifications, and therefore not creditable. The Church of Rome
why so fruitful in such Prophets.

HOw much a fond affection for Prophecy had blinded the Minds of the Ethnic
World, appears by their conceiting the Prophetic light as much diffused as the
natural; and that as every thing did, according to its measure, participate of
the Sicut imago ipsius boni in omnibus Deum praefert, sic in cunctis est
vestigium aliquod vaticinii. Jambl. de Myster. Aegyp. in. p. 89.
Goodness, so of the Prescience of God. They regarded the whole World, and all
the Tanta est exuberantia Providentiae ad ostendenda nobis signa, ut etiam in
calculis, virgis, lignis lapidibus, frumento, farin^, indicia praebeat
futurorum, etc. Id. ib. p. 76.
parts thereof, but as so many softer Oracles: not a Star or Comet in the
Firmament, not a Monster on Earth, not a Staff in the Wood, not a Gut in the
Sacrifice, not a Line in the Hand, but was thought prophetical. The Earth was
thought pregnant with a Plut. de Def. Orac.
(...), a kind of Prophetic efflux and most Divine Spirit, able to inspire the
Pythia which stood over it. The Souls of all men were thought continually
uttering some softer voices of Prophecy, but could not be heard till a Dream,
or an Ecstacy, or a Frenzy had hushed the clamors of an obstreperous Reason;
and therefore even persons which could not speak sense, yet were presumed able
to speak a Prophecy. In short, every thing was thought pregnant with some
Presage, but only Reason and the Mind that had wisdom; for as to that, their
Doctrine was Plut. de Def. Orac.
(...), mortal wisdom (stylo novo, corrupt Reason) diverts and extinguisheth
that Enthuusiasm which would otherwise rise upon the Soul. And I am sorry to
see, that amidst all this light which falls upon us from Heaven, men should yet
be so little awakened out of the Dreams of Gentilism, as to think Divination
almost as familiar a thing as the Heathens did; an^ that while we profess
Miracles the Seal of Faith, and Prophecy the Rule, and Prophet the great title
of the Lord thereof, we should be so lavish of these sacred names, as to throw
them away upon every prodigy which our Philosophy cannot Salve; and should
still conceit a monster, a Comet, a great wind, the falling of the salt, or the
tingling of the ears as prophetical as they did; and profane the sacred title
of prophecy by bestowing it upon the crazy fancies of every idle visionist; and
be ready to call him a Prophet, that has scarce reason or morality enough to
entitle him Man.

That this is no scandal may in part appear from the foregoing Treatise, but
will more fully by what time we dismiss our first Consideration to reprehend
the vanity of receiving these Vulgar Prophecies as Gods signs of the condition
of a future time; which is this, Consider. 1.
The Prophets which deliver them are generally devoid of all the Prophetic
qualifications necessary to conciliate reverence to their Persons and
Prophecies. What these are we may best learn from the Jewish Masters; now with
them, it is a ruling Maxim (...) Maimonid. Praef. in Sed. Zer. and de fund. leg.
c. 7. sect. 5.
Prophecy rests not but upon a wise, a valiant and a rich man: where by the
Wise man, they understand a Man of prudence, and well practiced especially in
their Cabbalistical and traditional learning, in great price with them: the
other words they expound in the rigid an^ usual sense and meaning of them;
because observing in Scripture so much courage attending the prophetic Spirit,
and generally great riches, excepting ( Vid. Vorst. in Not. ad. Maim. p. 88.
say they) in the instances of Moses, Samuel, Amos and Iona; who yet did not
conflict with extreme necessities, nor yet (I think) any of the Prophets,
except in a time of some common calamity, when their strai^s and indigencies
were rather a 2 Cor. 6. 2. Habac. 3. 17.
testimony to their office then a scandal. But I think the most rational
account that can be given of this Maxim thus expounded, is this* The greatest
assurances which Faith can require in the Prophet himself, are these two: that
he appear a person not apt to be deceived himself (by taking the impression; of
a strong Fancy for the hand of God upon him) which therefore, that first
requisite of wisdom secures him from the Suspicion of: and that he appear a
person not apt to deceive others. Now all aptness to deceive others grows
(...). Artemid. On^iroc. l. 2. c. 74.
either from a fear of cispleasing by some grievous, or hope of reward by some
grateful prediction; and therefore that he may be proof against temptaion from
fear or hope, they make him armed with valor and riches. And perhaps that (...).
Maxim we met with before among the heathens somewhat like this among the
present Jews) might carry some respects to some such considerations as these.

But I conceive the more Ancient Rabbis intended some richer Sense in this
Maxim, understanding (...) the Wise man, in a more lax and general
signification: so as to comprehend a person furnished with all the kinds of
wisdom: with Natural wisdom, that is, Soundness of mind both before and in the
time of the prophetic afflatus. Accordingly, Vorst. ub. sup.
Vorstius tells us from the writings of the Jews, that among many other
preparatory requisites to prophecy, the first they lay donw is (...) a Natural
disposition, an (...), a firm and sound constitution of body, that there appear
no show of a person crazy and sunk into phantasms. And V. Blond^ll's Treat. of
the Sibyls. l. 1. c. 25. fuse Sherlog. Antiq. Heb. l. 1. Dis. 4.
all writers ancient and modern have been careful to secure the Divine Prophets
in the Opinion of being sober and rational, even while acted by the Prophetic
Spirit, fully able to conceive and express what was sealed upon their minds by
the hand of God upon them. God sometimes sent his Servants (as L. 1. cont.
Haer^s. 48.
Epiphanius distinguishes) (...), the Ecstacy of sleep (in the silence and
composure whereof, the Soul might best attend the softer whisperings of the
Spirit) (...), not an Ecstasy of mind, whereby the Understanding became
useless, and the language confused and inconsequent: whereas the Ethnic
Prophet was (...), the Organ of the Devil, sounding forth such discordant and
rude airs as he inspired him with, of which the person scarce retained the
remembrance when the fit was over. It Is noted of the Idol-Prophet, that he used
not to prophecy (...) Mai^. Idolat. c. 6. sect. 1.
till in the previous use of some extatical solemnities, he became frantic and
epileptical.

To this Natural was superadded a Livine Widom, 1 Pet. 1. 10.
great skill in the Law of God, and the mysteries relating to the person and
Kingdom of the Messiah, in conjunction with a divine Philosophy, the knowledge
of the works of Nature, with reference to piety and virtue, (the most valued
learning of those whiter Ages of the World.) God did not Raro sub V. T.
Prophetiae donum contingebat nisi iis qui diu in (...), i. (...), and in (...),
i. (...) essent instituti. Cui rei inserviebant Prophetarum Scholae. Grot. in
Sap. 7. 27.
use to hazard the reputation of his Oracles by trusting them with such
Prophets, whose rudeness would have rendered their persons and Message to the
common scorn; but the prophetic Spirit found them or made them wise and
understanding men: and that in so eminent a degree, that the title of (...)
wise men Scripture seems to refer to these titles. Prove. 1. 6. Jer. 8. 8, 9,
10. Mat. 23. 34. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Hos. 9. 7.
seems to have been anciently the peculiar addition of Prophets and used
characteristically, as Scribe was originally the distinctive title of a Son of
the Prophets, and an expectant of that sacred function: and therefore an
ancient Doctor Cited by M. Smith, Disc of Prophes. p. 269.
of the Jewish Nation tells us (...) after 40 years (the time they assign to
prophecy after the second Temple) all the Wisemen were called the Men of the
great Synagogue: as conceiving that title now too August and sacred for them to
wear, as the Primitive Bishops did the title of Apostles, to whose places but
not to their measures of the Spirit they did succeed; and from hence it came to
pass, that all the Devils prophets that assumed the skill, usurpt also the
style of God's Prophets, and were entitled Dan. 2. 12. 13. Exodus 7. 11.
Wise men; and perhaps the more ancient Philosophers amongst the Gentiles, as
they borrowed their Wisdom, Scld. dc. Iur Not. and Gent. l. 1. c. 1.
so also the style of (...) or Wise men, from the prophetic Doctors of the
Jewish church so eminent in all the parts of Wisdom.

By (...) the rich man there, they understand (as apud Cl. D. Pocock. Port.
Mos. p. 227.
Maimonides expounds the word) (...) the man that rejoices in his portion, of
riches, honor, health, pleasure, which his father has allotted to him, that is
of a contented and cheerful Spirit: for as that water which is not mudded with
Earth nor ruffled with the wind, is most apt to receive and reflect an image,
so that Mind which is not soyled with covetous desires as with earth, nor
discomposed with anger or sorrow, as with wind, is most receptive of a
prophetic image and impression. Accordingly we find none of Gods Prophets (nay
none of his servants) blemished in Scripture for an inordinate love to this
worlds goods; and so far did they stand from a morose and sour humor, that we
scarce read of any inspired persons but were Exodus 15. 21. 1 Samuel 10. 5. 1 Chronicles. 25. 1. 2 King. 3. 15.
frequent in the use of the instruments of Music, that by the soft and gent^e
airs thereof they might allay all undue ^eats, and charm their unquiet thoughts
into stilness and silence.

By that third word (...) they understood (I conceive) these three
excellencies: (1.) Great courage and presence of mind: that which we may find
a^l the Prophets in Scripture eminent for: Upon which account perhaps, the
title of (...), stout or valiant, became the almost distinctive Epithet of a
Prophet. Our forementioned Maimon. d^ Idolat. c. 1. sec. 6.
Master, speaking of Abraham describes him by the character of (...), this stout
one. And some of the R^bbins conjecture, that the Month Tisri o^ September is
styled (...), 1 Kings 8. 2. the month of the Valiant, because (say they) three
great Prophets were born therein. But this Mic. 3. 8. Isa. 50. 7. Ezekiel. 3. 9.
Act. 4. 13. 31.
singular presence of m^nd, I conceive rather an effect of then a disposition
to the prophetic Spirit. (2.) Power over inordinate affections, for so
Maimonides having asked (upon occasion of this Maxim) who is the strong man?
makes answer (...), the man that subdues his concupiscence; for herein the true
strength and vigor of the Soul reports it self, that it can maintain its
supremacy, and give check to all its rebel-passions: and therefore (...) (a
word used in Scripture for temperance) signifies a having somewhat in ones
power, and holding it within the compass of ones strength. All inordinate
passions the Jews used to style the vails of the Prophets, which intercepted
the light of Prophecy, ready otherwise to fall upon them; and therefore rightly
judged, a power over the motions of the lower Soul essential to the Prophetic
State. (3.) Singular gravity and severity of life and manners: for in such a
sense the word occurs, 2 Samuel 22. 26. (...) with the strongly or heroically
perfect, thou will show thy self perfect. And a late Jacob. Bold. de Eccles.
ante leg. l. 1. c. 9. P^. 18. 26.
learned Papist conceives that the title of (...) Genesis 6. 4. was anciently the
distinctive character of the Prophets, and that we are not there and in other
places to understand (as we translate it) Giants, sed homines virtute and
sanctitate ad miraculum usque potentes, and quasi Gygantes: for which he gives
several reasons. It has been the acknowledged doctrine both of Jews,
Christians, yea Heathens, that God never sets up a prophetic light but in
golden candle-sticks, persons of most refined minds and manners. Amongst the
Jews it obtained so much, that Hucusque nemo adhuc fuit, qui dicere voluerit,
Deum Majestatem suam Divinam habitare facere in viro malo, sed tum demu^ si in
melius ipsum prius converterit. Maimon. Mor. Nevoc. P. 2. c. 32.
Maimonides tells us that hitherto there was never the man that would say that
God did cause the Divine Majesty to dwell in a bad man, but then only when he
had reformed his life: nay so ass^r'd were they in this Doctrine, that the same
Master tells us De fundam. leg. chapter 7. sec. 12 Vid. and Phil. Iud. Quis rer.
div. haeres.
elsewhere, that if a prophet arise and show them a sign or a wonder, yet they
believe him not, if not found to have walked (...), in the ways of prophecy,
in holiness and separation from the world, in the study of Wisdom, etc And as
much was this doctrine subscribed unto by the Christians. l. 7. cont. Cells. p.
336.
Origin takes notice that the Prophets God ever spoke by, were eminent (...),
for the inimitable sanctity and incomparable settledness of life and manners;
and many more besides himself cited by a Christ. a Ca stro de Vaticin. l. 3. c.
11. and 16.
Modern writer concerning Prophecy. And the very Heathens thought the Divine
Majesty did so hate to touch any unclean thing, that the prophetic illapses
could never grace an impure Soul. Aristotle (speaking of prophetic dreams)
tells us to suppose that they are ever sent from God, De Divin. per. Insom. c.
1. and Iamblic. de mist. Egypt. cap. cui. tit. inspirat. vacat. etc.
(...), and that he sends them not to the best and wisest of men, but
indifferently and as it happens, is an absurd conceit: and therefore the wiser
heathens prepared themselves for the reception of any divine communications by
abstinencies, washings, some fantastical separations and sanctities; which
proceeded upon a tacit sense of this truth, that the light of heaven cannot
shine through dirt and filth, nor God ever make an unhallowed place or person,
his Oracle. And if we consult Scripture, we shall find that howsoever the order
of Kings by whom the Judicial, and of Priests by whom the Ceremonial law was
administered, was maintained by a natural and hereditary succession of persons
in the families of David and Aron; yet the order of Prophets (by whose care the
Moral law was especially secured) was always elective: never any born Prophet
of the Jews, but the office was served by such persons as God found qualified,
generally with wisdom, always with piety. And therefore our Savior tells us we
may know fals-Prophets Mat. 7. 15, 16.
by their fruits: by some evil manners, or some doctrine which directly tends to
encourage them. As for the instances of Amos 7. 14.
Amos, Balaam and Caiaphas, which may be opposed to what has been said, I
shall return but this (for brevity's sake) that they are examples singular, and
in their occasions extraordinary and therefore (like the jogging of young
trees) do but more fully confirm and settle the rule they seem to shake.

Having thus fitted our prophetic balance, if we proceed now to weigh our
pretending Prophets therein they will be found greatly wanting. For the greater
part of our little Prophets, appear devoid of that natural wisdom, and
soundness of mind of which the true prophets of God gave such undoubted
evidences. That word (...) Prophets (deriving from (...) madness) carries in
the Original thereof a remembrance what kind of cracked metal, the Ethnic
Prophets of old were generally made of: and it derives a great suspicion upon
our modem Prophets of some such crazy temper, that so See a book intit.
Admirable and notable Prophecies uttered by 24 Roman Catholics. by James
Maxwel. cd. 1615.
great a part of these ignes fatui have risen from the boggs of the Romish
cells and hermitages, where the strict separations from Company and hones:
business, the high applauses of an abstract and ecstatical devotion, the severe
disciplines of the body by excessive fastings and scourgings, the strict
forbidding of Marriage ^o persons not capable of that doctrine, the common
Opinion of the frequent visits of the V. Mary and other Saints vouchsaft to
more severe livers, together with a strong opinion of meriting, by such devout
singularities, the highest favors and intimacies with God, cannot easily fail
of intoxicating, weaker heads especially, with the conceit of some
extraordinary visions and prophetic inspirations. Accordingly such swarms of
prophets and rapturists have flown out of those hives in some ages, that the
Council of Constance, Anno 1415. was convened (as Tract. de Probat. Spir.
Gerson tells us) especially to determine which should pass for Canonical and
which for Apocryphal prophets in that Church: and the many gross fallacies put,
even upon wise men, by such frequent Visionists, put him upon writing those
learned and pious pieces extant in the collection of his works, De probatione
Spirituum, De distinctione verarum visionam a falsis, De examine Doctrinarum,
and that Epistle entitled Doctrinae ad quendam Eremitam, in all which he does
with great Sobriety and Christian zeal advise against the spreading infection
of those more solemn and demurer frenzies, Visions and pretended Prophecies.
Nor perhaps will that term be thought a bolt let fly without aim, if the Reader
consider further how frequent such prophetic visions and illapses are with
these persons; Revelations usually are as familiar with them as Arguments with
other men, those three Vid. Revel. Div. Epitom.
Prophets, Kotterus, Christina, and Drabicius, which of late years have made
such a noise in Germany (as fruitful in Enthusiasts as Africa in monsters) had
their weekly or daily Visions, and heard from God almost every day: and the
Visions of any one of them may compare numbers with all that the prophetic
writings make mention of. A consideration that will give us a great jealousy
that the most of them were but the visions of a disturbed Fancy, and the
spurious issues of that enchanting humor of Melancholy which will present as
many delusive images to a man as a conjurers glass. And perhaps, therefore did
the holy Prophets record the year and the month when they received the divine
illapses, that so their Visions and Prophecies might not be thought the fatal
and therefore frequent workings of that black humor in them, but the arbitrary,
and therefore often interrupted, Visits of the true prophetic Spirit.

If we proceed next to make search into their acquired Wisdom, we shall soon
perceive them greatly unworthy the title they assume: Is the hundredth part of
them (as formerly) improved by any ingenuous education? are they not persons
generally whose grosness and ignorance gives them a great confidence,
credulity, and talkativeness, three gifts of singular use to men of their
profession? are they not silly women, S. Brigit, S. Hildegardis, S. Catherin
Senensis, S. Teresia, S. Matild, S. Elizabeth, which are of greatest name for
Prophecy in the Romish Church? Who were the men in the late times that most
affected the Opinion of Prophecy and inspiration, but they which (like the 1
Kin. 13. 18
Lion in sacred writ) would gladly tear God's learned Prophets in pieces, but
had a kindness for the Ass? The Ebionites (a sort of ancient Enthusiasts) lib.
1. c. (...).
Eusebius tells took their name originally from the Hebrew word (...)
signifying poor, (...), because of the poverty of their understanding: and c.
4. cont. Libertin.
Calvin speaking of the Enthusiasts of his time, says of them, ignari sunt
supra quam dici possit; and as vast as that number of pretenders to revelation
was in Germany, (even 40000) the Sleid. Comment. l. 5.
Historian relates, in tanta hominum colluvie, ne unus quidem inventus traditur
qui literas didicerit: in such a rout of people, the followers of their Prophet
Muncer, not a man was found that could read; and of Erat David ille homo
exiguae quidem peritiae sed philautiae maximae. Ub. Em. l. de Spirit. David.
Georg. p. 47.
David George (that famous new New-light of Germany in the last Age) it is
recorded, that He was a man of little Learning, but of an extraordinary
self-love. It Is only because the men are in the dark, that every rotten
imagination shines to them and looks like Prophecy. They are easily imposed
upon by a busy fancy, because their undisciplined mind is unable to disabuse it
self by an appeal to some sober and enduring principles.

And their Morals will appear as unworthy of the Prophetic dignity as their
intellectuals. Are they not persons generally discontented with the present
s^ate of things, and therefore clap the mantle of Samuel over the devil of
Sedition, and disguize the wishes of or encouragements unto some sudden change,
in the sacred livery of a Prophecy? are they not persons generally extremely
indigent and therefore have their eyes much upon the rewards of Divination? are
they not persons commonly of a very morose and sour humor, especially where
they perceive themselves neglected? is there any shadow of that unforced
gravity, real sanctity, contempt of the profits and applauses of this world
which made the faces of God's Prophets to shine before men? What indifferency
to the Opinions of men discovers it self in them? How much the notices of men
affect them, appea^s from the many Ecce's and Selah's they affix to their
prophetic Speeches if ever they chance to hit. Whereas we may observe that
howsoever there be a very critical notice taken in the Gospels how all the
lines both of typical and verbal prophecy centered in the person of our Savior,
and how all were exactly fulfilled which referred to him (the more to assure
our faith in so concerning an article as his being the true Messiah) yet there
is so little intimation given when and how those other prophecies (in Daniel
especially and the Revelations) of a more common and worldly reference, had
their accomplishments, that there is scarce any argument wherein Divines more
labor then in determining the places and seasons of them: and this, that God's
Prophets might appear satisfied from themselves, and nothing sollicitous about
the Opinion of a vain man. But especially notorious shall we find these
pretending Prophets for Sensuallity and Sedition. The Gnostics which arrogated
such an intimacy with God stand branded with Sensuallity and opposition to
Magistrates, in Ep. S. Jud. ver. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Sacred writ. Mahomet was a most unclean and turbulent Prophet, the chief
Doctrines taught and practiced by the Muncerians in Germany, were Multiplicity
of Wives, and No necessity of Magistracy: and that false prophetess (whether
person or Society) in the Revelation is called Rev. 2. 2^.
Iezebel, who was a very turbulent and a very lascivious Woman. Whereas when
the true Spirit of Prophecy was powered out upon men in the Primitive times, it
made them famous especially for purity, and a perfect submission to the most
inhumane Magistrates.

To think now that the prophetic Spirit (if yet found in the world) balks all
the more lively images of God therein, all those persons whose singular lives
and learning were most likely to derive a reputation upon their message, and
dwells with those which have scarce any thing of man, besides speech and
figure, is to approach very near the judgment of the old Heathens subscribed by
(...). Orig. cont. Cells. l. 4. p. 227.
Celsus, that bruit beasts were not only wiser then Mankind, but more dear to
God a conceit easily pardonable to their hypothesis, that God conveyed the
knowledge of futurities to man, through them. The Orig. cont. Cells. l. 7. p. 337
^athers thought it sufficiently to reproach the faith of all the Ethnic
Prophecies and Oracles, that they were delivered by persons notorious for
nothing but the grossness of their minds or manners. It will here perhaps be
opposed that very many modern Prophets have been persons of unstained lives,
persons whose piety and prophecy reflected a mutual grace upon each other. To
which I answer, That we scarce ever met with a false prophet in Mic. 3. 5. 11.
Ezec. 13. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 7. 15.
Scripture but challenged for some enormity of life or doctrine, and therefore
the Spirits which came out of the mouth of the False Prophet are well emblem'd
by Rev. 16. 13.
frogs, which as they can only croke and make a noise, so they live in the mud,
and are impure creatures. And as it was then, so it is generally now.
Paracelsus (several of whose Prophecies are extant) was a walking Dunghill (so
offensive and corrupt his life) if V. Hornbeck de Weigelian.
story do not misreport him. Cominaeus de Bell. Neapol. l. 5.
Savanarola (the Italian Prophet) was condemned, by the Senate of Florence, to
the fire, for raising Seditions in the State. Vis. Drabic. Histor. per I. A. C.
p. 131.
Drabicius (so much the discourse of late) was excommunicate for his scandalous
manners not long before he fell a prophesying. As for the Piety of the rest, it
usually keeps pace with their Prophecy, being as fantastical as that,
consisting in some pathetical Prayers, vehement expressions, bodily severities,
affected anomalies and aversions from the innocent usages of men, not in a
profound Humility and universal Charity. But if any of these persons were so
really religious as it is pretended, I cannot weaken their title to Prophecy by
this first Consideration, but may possibly effect it by some that shall succeed.

CHAP. III.
Vulgar Prophecies proved vain from the intrinsic circumstances of them.
Several circumstances in the matter and style of those Prophecies instanced
in, which speak them unworthy of God. Their being generally delivered in
numbers noted as a character of Vanity, and why. The Devil's Oracles of old
delivered usually in Verse. Why afterward in more natural and familiar forms.
Tully's exception against the pretended Oracles of the Sibyls justified. What
appearance of Poetry in the Prophetic Writing^. These Prophecies noted to be
delivered without any or a very long time prefixed for their accomplishment:
useless upon that account to any good end. Why Scripture-Prophecies may be
allowed a long time to be accomplished in, but not Vulgar. The Devil concluded
to influence these Vulgar Prophecies, and therefore not to be credited.

OUr second Consideration, to evince the Vanity of these petty Oracles, is
this: Considerat. 2.
Their very shape and character speak them greatly unworthy of God, who alone
is able to declare the things that are to come. For * they seem not at all
levelled (what was Orig. l. 7. cont. Cells. p. 335.
noted of old of all the Devil's Predictions) (...), to ^he bettering and
correction of men's lives and manners, but rather to Curiosity and Sedition in
the State. * God is seldom owned in them as the Author of the Evils foretold,
nor Repentance as the remedy. * They frequently betray men (by some ambiguous
expression) to the Evils they seem to warn them of. * They commonly come forth,
and are most attended to in times of action and expectation, and therefore most
likely to be then invented. * They are generally found (as lines drawn by no
rule) to cross and thwart one another. * The style they are delivered in,
commonly wears the Devil's livery, being so full of darkness and perplexity,
that it may serve to any interpretation. * The knowledge they pretend to give,
is profitable to no great end, whereas all the gifts of the Spirit are bestowed
1 Cor. 12. 7.
(...), to some common benefit. * They are generally delivered in such affected
barbarisms, halting meeter, fantastical pictures and emblems, which carry
nothing of that grace and majesty which attends the breathings of the true
Spirit of Prophecy in Scripture. * Events are often foretold in them, without
those circumstances of time, place, persons, and the like, which might assure
the Events to be as well foreseen as foretold when they come to pass. * The
matters foretold in them are cheap and trivial, and such as it were infinitely
better for men not to know. * The pretended Visions, often monstrous beyond the
fictions of Bedlam, the style fluttering and uneven, like the heated spirits
which conduct it. In short, Let but any wise man read over the Prophecies of
Scripture, and then those of Merlin or Nostredame, and I believe he will scarce
need an Argument to persuade him that they were never both inspired by the same
Spirit.

But there are two things of more especial note in these Vulgar Prophecies,
which are the Characters of Vanity: (1.) Those Poetical numbers in which they
are frequently delivered: For whereas all the great Prophets of God delivered
themselves in a natural and unforced order of words, the far greater part of
these pretended Oracles of elder and later times are delivered in Verse, the
better to inchant the fancies of the people, and to become observable; for an
Oracle in Verse at once commands and courts the Soul to a regard thereof. The
Devil's Oracles of old were so generally clothed in numbers, and those enameled
with all the curiosities of art, that when they became about the times of
Plutarch more familiar and simple, it was so much observed, that he wrote a
D^scourse upon the occasion, entitled (...), Why the Pythia does not now as
heretofore use Poetry in her Oracular Speeches. To satisfy which Q^estion,
among other things, he tells his Reader, That (...). etc.
God had now removed from his Oracles, Poetry, and variety of dialect, and
circumlocution, and obscurity; and ordered them to speak to those which
counsu^t them, as Kings to their People, and Masters to their Scholars, in
language intelligible and persuasive. But this rather shows the knot then
unties it. The true Reason of this change of language was (I conceive) either
because men began to suspect that where there was so much of man appearing in
the Oracle there could not be much of God, and that Inspiration is too hot and
active a thing to move the sober and cool pace of a Poem: or else because the
tempers of men were grown more sedate, their minds and discourses not so
turgent and ecstatical as heretofore; or because he saw the clouds began to
break, and God addressed him to men in more natural and familiar ways, and
therefore the Devil (who would never be out of fashion) came nearer to the
minds of men, and laid aside the state and solemnity he formerly spoke to them
with. Or perhaps because the true Oracles of God, delivered in more easy and
neglected language, began to lie more exposed to the common view, and he would
not have his to differ from them, but to imitate them. There is that coolness
and curiousness in a Verse, which speaks it greatly unsuitable to the vehemence
and seriousness of the Prophetic Spirit. It uses to beget transports of mind,
which cannot bear the slowness and nicety of a Poem: for, as common and
quotidian thoughts are beneath the grace of a Verse; so great and vehement are
above the straits thereof; they are impatient of borrowing feet, that are fit
to fly. And therefore Tull. de div. l. ^.
Tull^ enters this judicious exception against the Cibylline Oracles of his
time, that they we^e delivered in Verses, and many of those Acrosticks, and
ca^ried the evident tokens of art and contrivance; and therefore (says he)
magis artis and diligentiae erant, quam incitationis and motus, they were
rather the issue of Art and diligence, then Enthusiasm and divine motion. Nor
is the Exception entered by a Amyrald. Dissertat. de Trinit.
late learned Writer against this Exception of Tully, That the Book of Job is
Poetical, and some of the Psalms Acrosticks, of any great moment; those
writings being inspired by (...) the Holy Ghos^ (as the Jews distinguish) a
more gentle and easy afflatus, that was still and sedate, and approached very
near to the more rational and divine actings of a wel-disposed mind. Whereas
the motions of the Prophetic Spirit (strictly so called) are quick and
vehement, and such as the slow feet of a Verse cannot hold pace withal. And as
for the Poetry in those Books, it is rathe^ in the phrase and matter of them
then in the measure. For if there be any set numbe^s observed in them, they are
generally so mysteriously couched that none of the learned have been able yet
to make any certain report of them. And therefore, upon this score, I should
make no great doubt to throw out the vast rabble of rhyming, clinching, versing
Prophets, as persons that tell the worst lies in the best manner.

Another thing which proclaims the Vanity of these Vulgar Prophecies, is, the
circumstance of time with which they are generally delivered: For either they
prefix no time at all, or a very long period thereof to be accomplished in;
whereby they can minister neither to the honor of God nor the good of man. For
they can give no testimony to his Providence or Prescience, because they will
be thought to be fulfilled by chance, or the Prophecy (because long ago
delivered) will be forgotten, and the Event, when it comes, be thought to have
stood in no relation at all to the Prophecy; and therefore it may perhaps, by
the singularity thereof, beget wonder in men, but not piety. Nor can any man be
warned by them to avoid an Evil, which may come (for ought he knows) not till
his head be laid; nor can they give check to the sins of the time, for men will
be ready to say, like the scorners in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 12. 22.
The days are prolonged, and every Vision fails. Nor (if the Prophecy fail)
shall the Prophet be alive to bear the shame of his impostures. The condition
of those Prophecies in sacred Writ, which take Ages to be accomplished in, is
quite diffe^ent; for they stand perpetuated in Scripture, and therefore fall
under the daily notices of men; so that when the Events foretold come to pass,
they may readily be compared with the Prophecies; which, the more ancient date
they bear, the more wonderful will they appear when accomplished, and the more
full reports will they make of their divine Original, and of the Scripture
wherein they are found. For there is nothing does so seal the Faith of the
divine Inspiration of Scripture, as the various Predictions therein, delivered
at such distant times and places, exactly accomplished in their seasons. But
these Vulgar Prophecies are either not delivered to writing at all, or the
writings forgotten, or looked into but by a few curious persons, and therefore
easily altered and varied (as the Prophecies of Me^lin have been) as might suit
occasions, or men's humors. Besides, though even these Scripture-Prophecies,
which are of a m^re catholic concern (as those relating to the Messiah and his
Kingdom) received a slow accomplishment, yet the Prophecies of a more confined
reference did not use to go long before they were delivered of the Evils they
were pregnant with, See Ezekiel. 12. 22, 23, 24, 25.
especially after men grew so wicked as to deride the patience of God, and to
think they lived the longer for being threatened by his Prophets.

From all this it appears, in a great degree of probability, that the Father of
Lies gave being to very many of these spurious Prophecies, that by these false
he might derive a suspicion upon the true ones, or abuse the minds of men with
vain hopes, panick fears, or curious impertinences. And will any man, that owns
his Savior for his Prophet, receive the Devil for his Oracle? or when he is
sick of things present, go to the God of Ekron (by attending to any Prophecy of
his incitation) for quiet and resolution? Shall we value our Faith at so cheap
a rate as to trust it with the Oracles of the Father of Lies? Can the Devil be
presumed Isai. 41. 23. and chap. 44. 7.
able to give us true resolutions to any questions concerning the future? (Did
God ever make him of his Council, or deliver Times and Seasons into his power?)
or willing, if able, to do it with any fair and single intentions? Have the
beams of the Sun of Righteousness put out all the fires on his Altars, the
Glory and Power of the Divine Oracles and Miracles spoiled his great trade of
lying Oracles and Wonders, and shall our easiness and vanity encourage him to
drive this more secret and little trade of Prophecies and Prodigies? Certainly
that man is strangely desirous of news that will go to the Devil for
intelligence.

CHAP. IV.
The vanity of these Prophecies evinced by their coming unattended with Signs.
The difference between a Sign and a wonder. Of what kind of Prophets no Sign
was to be required. What method the Jews observed in the trial of Prophets.
Miracles not a Sign required of all Prophets. Six P^ophetical Signs taken
notice of. Our Savior's Prophecy confirmed by them all. Signs of the Prophet
and of the Prophecy. None of these Vulgar Prophets give a Sign. Their pretended
Sanctity no sufficient Sign. Their admired gift of Prayer of as little credit
as that. Natural ^rdor how effectual to enable the power of speaking freely o^
the sudden: that confirmed by the example of the ancient Roman Orators.
Quintilian. (...) of o^d, what. Why some men fluen^ only before company. The
great efficacy of exalted imagination to assist an ex^emporary Rhetoric. Why
vehement speeches so migh^ily move men. What kind of heats commendable in
Religion. The powerful impression of these Prophecies ^o sign of their
Divinity. Divine impressions not distinguishable soly by their power and
evidence, Asserted against some Jewish Rabbis. Artemidorus. Some accomplished
Predictions, no safe Sign of the inspiration of ou^ Modern Prophets.

THe Vanity of receiving these Prophecies as the certain indications of any
future Event further appears from hence; The Deliverers of them show neither
Sign nor Wonder to derive authority upon their persons and prophecies. Consid.
3.
Signs and Wonders so often coupled together, and sometimes used indifferently
in the Writings of the Old and New Testament, are not always the same thing;
every Wonder or Miracle being indeed a Sign, and so often styled; but every
Sign is not (if we speak acc^rately) a Miracle. For (...) a Miracle, is some
mighty work transcendent to the powers and capacities of natural Agents, but
And so Eustathius seems to distinguish, saying, (...). In 2. Iliad.
(...) a Sign, is any extraordinary indication, besides, sufficient to make
faith of the real inspiration of the person who pretends to speak from God.

Now all persons that pretended of old to speak immediately from God, came
attested with some Sign or Wonder; except they only called men to obedience to
some acknowledged Precept in the Law of Moses: for then (as Notandum est hoc,
ab eo Propheta qu^ tantum hortatur ad implenda legis jussa, nulla signa
requiri. Grot. Not. in Deuteronomy. 18. 22.
Grot^us, I think, truly notes) no Sign or Wonder was required of them, because
the condition of that Economy, in which God had promised and the people more
wanted such extraordinary Teachers, was a competent security to their Faith,
that they were not imposed upon by any such pretender, especially if the
forementioned prophetic qualifications were found about him. But if the
inspired man required them to a faith of some Prediction or Doctrine, really or
in appearance, new, he came always authorized by some divine Sign or Wonder. It
is therefore a Maxim with the Masters, that Maimonid. de Fundam. Leg. c. 7.
sect. 11.
when ever God sends a Prophet to a People, (...) he gives him a Sign or a
Wonder that the people may know God has truly seat him. Accordingly we meet
with the Jews Mat 12. 38. Luke 11. 29. Mat. 16. 1. Luke 23. 8.
often demanding a Sign of our Savior as the Seal of his divine Mission and
Prophecy; and what a singular respect they had to some Sign in the trial of
Prophets, may appear, as from the sacred, so also, from the Jewish Singularem
signi (quod (...) and (...) vocant) in Prophetis dijudicandis ratione^ haberi,
apud Judaeos, tum e sacris literis tum e Magistrorum doctrina discimus. Seldom.
de Synedr. l. 3. c. 6.
monuments. In consideration whereof, all the Impostors anciently, which usurped
the title of Prophets, pretended to Mat. 24. 24. Rev. 16. 13, 14 2 These. 2. 9.
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Act. 13. 6.
Signs, without which counterfeit Seal they and their Doctrine could never have
past unsuspected among the people: and the better to ape a Miracle, most of
those pretenders to Enthusiasm among the Jews, Christians, and Heathens, were
Magicians, as might be made appear were it here pertinent. He that was Truth it
self was content to borrow credit and authority (before men) to his Prophecy,
from Signs and Wonders, Act. 2. 22.

Now Miracles were generally reserved to seal the person and message of such
inspired persons as were to introduce a way of Worship, in truth or common
Opinion, new: and therefore were never wrought (fam^liarly at least) but by
Moses the Deliverer* Elijah and Elisha the Restorers, and our Savior the
Fulfiller and Finisher of the Law* and his D^sciples, the Preachers of a Gospel
which was a Act. 17. 19.
novel Doctrine in the opinion of me^, at that time. Scarce any Prophet was
(...), a worker of Paradoxes (as Josephus says of our Savior) but he that was
a Preacher of them. But however, all the Heralds of Heaven had the badg of some
divine Signs, whereby unpossest minds might easily distinguish them from
Impostors. Of these, it will suffice to my present purpose briefly to point to
some few, which the Ages, to which Prophecy was promised, seem to have made the
greatest reckoning of.

As (1.) The discovery of some present matter, evidently out of the compass of
all humane knowledge: as the secrets of the heart, the counsels of the
bedchamber, matters done at distance and with all possible secrecy, and the
like. Such wonderful discoveries were of Joh. 4. 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 14. 25.
great consideration with the people (in that time to which God had promised
Prophecy) to assure the divine Mission of the Prophets: accordingly our Savior
was Mat. 21. 2. Luke 22. 12, 13 11. 17. 24. 38.
frequent in the use of such divine Signs, and so were the 2 King. 6. 12. 2 Samuel 12* 12.
other Prophets it is likely: and therefore the Jews, which looked upon our
Savior but as a Mock-Prophet, required him to a discovery of a Luke 22. 64.
Mock-Secret, the person who smote him on the face while he was blindfolded; the
revealing whereof they called Prophecy, (...) discovery of such kind of Secrets
being received as the Seals of a Prophetic Spirit. (2.) The constant coming to
pass of Eve^^s foretold in very Non ex solo successu, verbis respondente,
cognosci Propheta potest, nisi successui mult^s addiderit circumstantias quas
nulla humana prudentia pro^picere possit. Grot. Not. in Deuteronomy. 18. 22.
critical and contingent circumstances. Many things the Prophets foretold to
fall out within the compass of a few months or days, that so their Prophecies
of a longer time might have the greater credit, and men might quickly
understand that they were established Prophets of the Lord. Thus it is said,
they knew 1 Samuel 3. 19, 20. and 9. 6.
Samuel to be, when they saw none of his prophetic words to fall to the
ground: and Ezekiel. 33. 33 Jer. 28. 9.
Ezekiel having delivered his Prediction, adds, And when this comes to pass,
then shall they know that a Prophet has been among them. And God himself, in
the trial of Prophets, appointed the Jews to look to the issues of their
Predictions, Deuteronomy, 18. 21, 22. Upon which Text, Maimonid. Praefat. in Sed. Zer.
e verse. D. Pocock, p. 19.
Maimonides lets fall this gloss: Cum quis, ipsum munus propheticum sibi
vendicaverit, dicemus ei, ede nobis promissi, and refer nobis aliqua eorum quae
nota fecit tibi Dominus; quo referente, si vera evas^rint promissa ejus omnia,
hinc prophetiae ejus veritatem percipiemus. Quod si in aliquo ipsoru^, vel
minutissimo, mendax fuerit, hinc nendacem cum esse cognoscemus. Atque haec est
expressa legis de hujusmodi probatione sententia. So that it seems probable
that the ^^ews required but the Sign of some accomplished Prediction (not
always a Miracle) from the more common sort of Prophets: and therefore (...)
Gerundensi^ derivat ab (...) venit, quoniam v^nturum aliquod significat, ut si
dixero, Ego sum Propheta verus a Deo missus, and hoc erit vobis signum, eras
veniet locusta, asellus and bruchus. Drus. in Deuteronomy. 18.
some derive the Hebrew word (...) a Sign, from (...) venit, because the most
frequent Sign of Prophecy the Prophets 2 King. 7. 18 Jer. 28. 16, 17 Mat. 26.
34.
gave, and the people required, was the coming to pass of some Prediction,
delivered is such circumstances as no Eye of humane prudence could possibly
foresee. (3.) Some gifts and abilities extraordinary gotten suddenly and
without humane industry, and abiding with them, (for many possessed persons have
for some time Vid. Psel. (...). and I. Voss. de Idol. l. 3. c. 44. p. 969.
spoken languages, and made show of singular abilities to discredit this
prophetic Sign,) as to deliver himself ex tempore in very weighty sentences,
to sing praises to God with singular art and dexterity upon the place, to
interpret Scripture with great evidence of truth. All which were Raymund. Pud.
Fid. p. 99.
comprised by the Jewish Doctors, in that degree of Prophecy they styled (for
distinction's sake) Spiritus Sanctus. This prophetic Sign our Jo. 7. 15, 16.
Savior and his Act. 4. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 10.
followers did seal the truth of their Enthusiasm withal, as other Ancient
Prophets had done before them. It is God only that can make his way to the
Soul immediately, and seal it with the abiding characters of Wisdom. (4.) The
attestation of some Person of whose Prophetic Spirit there is no question:
According to that Maxim of the Maimonid. Fund. leg. c. 10. sect. 9.
Masters, (...) The Prophet of whom some other undoubted Prophet witnesses
that he is a Prophet, is assuredly a Prophet. Accordingly they note that the
testimony of Deuteronomy. 31. 7. Josh. 1. 17.
Moses to the divine Mission of Joshua procured him the Faith of the People
before his conduct was credited from Heaven by any Miracle. Which rule I take
to have a truth therein, though I de^ur upon that other they sometimes superadd
to it, Omnis vates qui surrexit locutus est de Prophetiis so cii sui. Vorst. in
Maim. de ^und. leg. c. 10.
Every Prophet which arose; spoke in testimony of his companion in Prophecy. It
is likely some 2 King. 3. 11, 12.
did. And therefore perhaps would our Savior have his Prophecy attested by Joh.
5. 32.
John the Baptist (generally reputed a Luke 20. 6.
Prophet by the people) that so ^his, as well as all other prophetic Signs,
which ever singly and apart derived credit upon the person and message of any
other inferior Prophet, might conspire in the Person and Prophecy of him the
great Prophet of his Church. (5.) The immediate voice of God from Heaven to
him, before witnesses, was another Sign of a Prophet Psa. 99. 6, 7. Job 38. 1.
Exodus 24. 16.
in ancient times; especially before the building of the Tabernacle: but when
Prophecy became more common, God chose to speak to holy men Number. 12. 6.
by Dreams and Visions: and perhaps the ceasing of that more usual way of divine
Manifestation under the second Temple, might occasion some to think he might
possibly return to the more ancient way of revealing himself, by a Bath Kol, a
voice from heaven. However, with this also Sign God 2 Pet. 1. 17. Joh. 12. 2^.
dignified our Savior. (6.) The general prevalency of their prayers, especially
in matters of a more public reference, was a very probable sign of true
Prophets anciently. God assigns this as the Characteristick note between false
and true Prophets, that one had great interest and power in the Court of
heaven, and the other none at all. Jer. 27. 1^. Ezekiel. 13. 4, ^.
But if they be Prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them, let them
now make intercession to the Lord of Hosts, etc. This was a sign of a Prophet,
because it was a sign he prayed by a special instinct from God, whereby he knew
what blessings God was ready to bestow; and besides, it was a sign of that
singular favor he had with God: and therefore we shall find an high value set
upon the the prayers of a Prophet both by God and men, Genesis 20. 7. 1 Samuel 7. 5.
Deuteronomy. 9. 18. 20 26. 2 King. 2. 12. Mat. 18. 19.
in Scripture. And perhaps in confidence of the Observandu^ est Propheteru^
preces esse efficaces, plurimum confer ad vitam, si pr^ iliquo preces ad Deum
fuderint. Procop. com. in Genesis 20. 7.
prevalence of his prayers, some people that held our Savior for a great
Prophet though not the Messiah, brought their young children to him that he
might lay his hands upon them and pray, Matthew. 19. 13. This prophetic sign
also attested the Prophecy of our Bl. Savior, Ioh. 11. 42.

These were some of those more general signs which gave testimony to the Divine
Mission of a Prophet: but besides these, there were also frequently added some
particular signs of the truth of this or that extraordinay prediction;
especially if of some matter of greater import, of the truth whereof it was
somewhat necessary the people should have a full assurance: the instances
whereof are of familiar occurrence Is. 3^. 7. Jer. 44. 29. 1 Samuel 2. 34. 1
King. 13. 2, 3 2 King. 20. 8. 1 Samuel 2. 1, 2, 3
in the Book of God, and therefore the Disciples, when our Savior had foretold
an Event so great, as the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, demanded of
him a sign both of the truth and time of the accomplishment of that Prophecy.
Luke 21. 7.
Master when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign when all these
things shall come to pass? These particular and almost present signs, gave
assurance that the Prophet did not deliver conjectures but Prophecies, and the
doubling thus of his Prophecy was a sign that the thing was certain with God,
and not foretold conditionally only, (as judgments and blessings often were)
and that the agreement between the Prediction and the Event when coming to
pass, was not a chance but a Providence. So that these were more immediately
the signs of the Prophecy, as the other six of the Prophet.

From all this, it seems more then probable, that all true Prophets came
distinguished by some divine sign, although it appear not now from Scripture,
what particular sign it was which gave credit to each Prophet therein
mentioned; and that anciently Men were wiser then to let every prophecy pass
current, as soon as ever it had the image of the King of heaven stamped upon it,
carried the face of an inspiration from God. Men then understood Prophecy, upon
many accounts, too much exposed to suspicion of imposture to be credited upon
the single testimony of every zealous pretender thereunto: ^and therefore all
Prophets though they came not recommended by equal testimony (the occasions
they were to serve not being of equal moment) yet still with what might suffice
to place their divine Mission beyond a question. Some were attested by Wonders,
some by signs, some by both. If then (to apply all this to the occasion) Men
would once be so advised as to demand some such divine sign as used heretofore
to credit the Prophetic function of these pretended Prophets, they would
certainly all sneak away like Juglers when called to show a Miracle. What have
they generally beyond Ordinary besides ignorance and confidence? What Miracle
or Sign does God bear witness to their b Mission by? what have all the great
Swelling words of Enthusiasts been at last delivered of, beside the crude air
of some flatulent imagination? have they, after all the noise they have made,
blessed the world with the discovery of any useful secret in Philosophy or
Divinity? are not Scripture prophecies as dark, diseases as desperate, nature
veiled as much now as in former Ages? do not all their books (like the barren
fig tree) bear leaves only, a few rampant Metaphors, and some higher strains
of prophetic Scripture, jumbled together like the images of a dream? shall we
then appear so unworthy of the title we carry as to think a few exstatical
looks and Scripture phrases sufficient to entitle a man to the Opinion of (...)
a Master of light? as the Jews use to style a Prophet: It is not to be imagined
that God would send Prophecy into the world, and not have it regarded, or that
it can be regarded, if it come attended with nothing whereby it can be known.
When the Apostles had such an extraordinary measure of the Spirit, there was
(...), a manifestation of the Spirit; as the extraordinary Measure of the
Spirit then poured out gave Gal. 3. 2.
testimony to the Gospel, so the mighty signs and wonders which attended it
gave testimony to the Spirit.

To all this, I know, it will be opposed that many of these modern Prophets
come attended with signs sufficent to the man who is of an humble and teachable
temper, whom alone God seeks to satisfy: viz. these four, Eminent Sanctity. A
very liberal and powerful gift of Prayer. The mighty energy and impression of
their Visions and Prophecies. The accomplishment of very many of their
Predictions. To all which I shall return a few words.

First, We are told that they are persons of very eminent Sanctity, that are
wholly abstract from the pleasures and honors of this world, and have no fleshly
relishes appearing in them, and therefore it is most unlikely that they would
deceive others or should be deceived themselves by a false Prophecy. To which I
answer, There is nothing more misjudged then Sanctity, it is too commonly
thought to stand in some more solemn looks at a Sacrament, in visiting of an
holy shrine, in some extatical devotions, in the use of some interpreting
garbs, faces and Phrases, in caressing of Christ by some pretty attributes, in
declaiming with much zeal against some odious names, heresy, Antichrist and
Superstition, in carrying it very morosely toward men of a different form from
ones self, in some severer disciplines and neglects of the body: and therefore
it is unsafe trusting our faith with a prophecy upon a report of the sanctity of
the Prophet. Besides, no men more subject to such delusions, then men of devout
affections, if of strong fancies, impressive tempers, and weak intell^ctuals:
for in such persons; an indiscreet use of Religion by very pensive and solemn
thoughts, affected retirements and Silences, ^oo intense Meditations, continual
fervors and endeavored heats, unreasonable fastings and watchings, the neglect
of innocent diversions and relaxations, especially if joined with the continual
study of some dark prophecies and visions in Scripture (more proper
entertainments for Men of great learning) cannot easily fail of intoxicating
the mind with wild and extravagant imaginations. The overstraining of them by
such intense devotions and perpetual fervors, De multis in religione and
austeritate vitae constitutis, incredibilia ^ere sunt quae idoneis testibus
refrentibus audivi. Gers. de did. Ver. Vis. a falls.
has produced so many cracked brains, pretended Prophets and visionists in the
Religion houses of the Romish Church; who is yet so ill advised as to cite them
as the proofs of that prophetic Spirit she lays claim unto. Moreover, It has
ever been the Policy of the Devil to do the Church the greatest Mischief by men
of greatest name for Religion. He knows good men are soonest decoyed by those
which seem of a feathe^ with themselves, and that error will soo^er be
entertained from a^pious then truth from a profane person. And therefore the
Jews among the four things which they say destroy the world, number, A
Religious man that is a Fool. God perhaps permits it thus to be, that men might
learn to make him only Lord of their Faith; and not to give an absolute trust
(his due alone) to the wisest or best of Men. Good men are no more exempt from
mistakes and lunacies, then they are from a fever or the infirmities of Age.

But we are further told that many of these prophetic Persons are sealed by
the singular gift of praying in the Holy Ghost. Their lips seem touched by a
coal from the altar, so fervent and so Scripture-like are the expressions they
bespeak God withal upon the sudden. Nature uses to be eloquent indeed in its
own concerns, but lisps and is a child in the things of heaven, uses to speak
to God in language of ic^, words that freeze and even die between the lips; and
besides, where words come without forcing, and sit handsomely about the matter,
dantur in illa hora, it is (surely) not they which speak but the Holy Ghost
which speaks in them. Nature seems not sufficient for such singular
performances upon the place. Moreover, their words (like arrows pointed and
fired) make a very deep and abiding impression upon the hearts of the hearers,
the Souls of men become half unbodyed, while they hang upon the lips of these
extraordinary persons; and therefore surely non vox hominem sonat; there is
more in these words then the voice of a Man, and the charms of a little fervent
and Pathetical language.

I answer, This devout ardor with the effects consequent thereunto, does
extremely inchant the minds of men with great Opinions of the Men in whom it
appears; and is readily received (like the divine fire that came down upon the
Sacrifice) as the testimony of God to the person and to all he offers. David
George obtained the repute of a Prophet chiefly Spaenhem. de Orig. Anabap. sec.
24.
assiduo ac ardenti in speciem preces ad Deum funclendi studio. Whereas all
these strange phoenomena may be salved by mere mecharical principles, all
generally being but the ^ssue of a natural pregnancy and fervor of temper,
exerting it self in fluent words tinctured with religion and Scripture phrases.
Where there is naturalis quaedam animi mobilitas (which Quintilian requires in
order to speaking well ex tempore) a natural moveableness of Soul, whereby it
is enabled to turn it self nimbly and with ease to new thoughts and words, and
this ass^sted (or rather created) by some more brisk and active spirits, it may
equal, perhaps exceed the performances of more advised thoughts. A moderate
heat, wherein all the Spirits flow to their proper principles and fountains,
the vital to the heart, and the animal to the brain, and are put into quick but
manageable motions, does raise in a man a more fine and exquisite power of
perception, and cause the images of things to appear more distinct, and to come
faster upon his mind, then otherwise they would, and by consequence make the
Understanding more pregnant, and the expressions more fluent and easy. And
therefore when the Orators of old attributed their more fortunate performances
and rhetorical inlargements in their extempore declamations before the people,
(then much in use) to the special assistance and incitation of God; Quintilian
judiciously gives them to the present heat and fermentation of spirits, the
great instruments whereby the Soul performs all its works in this embodied
state. His words are these, Inst. Orat. l. 10. c. 7.
Si quem calor ac Spiritus tulit, frequenter accidit, ut successum extemporalem
consequi cut a non possit; Deum tunc adfuisse, Veteres Oratores aiebant, sed
ratio manifesta est: nam been concepti affectus and recentes rerum imagines
continuo impetu feruntur, quae nonnunquam mora styli refrigescunt, and dilatae
non revertuntur. Which words I shall dismiss untranslated, lest (like liquors
put into another vessel) they should contract a flatness and loose Spirits.

Now these words of Quintilia^ give a good account of the extempore felcities
of the Orators of those times, which themselves had such great thoughts of,
that (...) to speak divinely or by inspiration V. Francis. Ferr. de
Acclamationib. Vet. l. 3. c. 14.
was the usual phrase whereby they expressed speaking fluently, pathetically and
with coherence, without more thoughts then just ushered the words they spoke.
And that Spirit which generally inspires our Divine Orators and makes them
un-over with such winning rhetoric, is much of kind with that which incited
those civil ones; viz. a natural fervor of temper, excited by some superficial
affection, and assisted by a plenty of fit expressions made familiar to them by
study and custom. For we find men of very evil lives Interdum ficbat ut preces
inter and sacrificia, tantis ardoribus astuaret, ut omnes parts corporis
exarde secrent, facies instar purpurae rubcret, etc. Vit. and glor. S. Ignat.
per. Anon. c. 9.
Ignatius, Dr. Casaub. Enthas. m. p. 214.
Hacket, and others eminent for this religious Rhetoric and fervor; and many
of these Orators have confessed themselves greatly straightened and bound ut (as the
phrase is) when in their closets, who are carried with full sails when to act
before a Extemporalis actio auditorum frequentia ut miles concentu signorum
excitatur, secundos impetus auget placendi cupido, velo, inio. Quintil. l. 10.
c. 7.
Company; because desire of Opinion makes them more concerned, excites
affection, and consequently that ardor so essential to a smooth performance.
They are (in the Phrase of Plato) (...) full of the Theater, are touched with
applause, and therefore act to the height of themselves in public, but are
cold and indifferent where the breath of man is wanting to excite and blow them
up.

Now our admired Prophets having this natural fervor and pregnancy of Spirit to
wing their Fancies, and this heat intended by the new forces of an (...) (as
Longinus styles the Earthy vapor which inspired the Pythia) an enthusiastic
vapor of heated Melancholy arising from the hypochondria, it cannot fail of
displaying it self in such rapturous and lofty strains of divine rhetoric; as
shall be verily thought to flow Ps. 68. 26.
e vena Israelis, from the same Divine Spirit which inspired the Prophets: when
the persons are but heightened by a fume somewhat more gross and unruly then
that which inspires our common Poets, whose more happy heats and sprucer
fancies have been thought the issue of borrowed Spirits, and therefore the
blood of the grape been generally vouched by them the most natural exciter of
the poetic vein. Besides, these Prophets are much advantaged for a more lively
imitation of Enthusiasm above the more Vulgar pretenders to it, by an exalted
Imagination. For the most vehement Objects of Religion, God, Heaven, Hell, the
glories of the new Jerusalem, some prophetic Scheams, being made familiar to
their softer fancies, stand before their minds in very distinct and affecting
ideas. Now where imagination is thus boiled up and often rubbed upon by the most
moving objects, it fails not of raising affections and and consequently
expressions great and vehement as the objects are from whence they do arise.
And therefore Quintil. Instit. Orat. l. 6. c. 3.
Quintilian, to assist the power of Speaking very movingly and fluently
extempore (which the Orators of those times so much endeavored) advises to
imprint upon imagination, (...), the images of the things we are to speak
about: as if we were to speak about the murder of any person, suddenly to make
all the terrible images of the bleeding man to walk upon the Scene of Fancy,
and to set (as it were) before our eyes all the black circumstances of the
action, thereby to quicken affection, and by that Expression.

I intend not these words to stifle the devout ardors of holy men displayed in
affectionate Ps. 42. 1.
pantings after God and a divine Nature, in desires too big for words, divine
relishes, and that unforced Rhetoric which the abundance of their hearts
instructs them unto, when to bespeak God in private. For our Religion could no
more please our selves then God, if it could not ravish the heart as well as
renew it, if it were a kind of caput mortuum, an heavy, stark, insipid thing,
without heat and Spirit. Heat and zeal is the calidum innatum of the New Man,
without which he neither lives nor moves. Only care must be had, that this heat
and zeal (like the flame at Pentecost) aspire and mount upward, but without
firing the Persons head, and making him of too hot and fiery a temper to bear
any confinement of Opinion or practice, by Scripture, laws or the Reasons of
wise men. I have in all this designed only the disparagement of the ignorant
imaginations of those men, which (like the heathens of old) look upon heat and
noise, words full of charms thrown out without method or measure upon the
sudden, and very vehement affections, the symptoms of a person full of God,
and managed by some power transcendent to natural. Whereas all these things,
howsoever, like Meteors, they carry an heavenly appearance in the eye of
ignorance, we have found of a more common and base Extraction. Nor is the
mighty power they may have over the Spirits of others, any argument to the
contrary; all fluent language, feathered with soft and delicate phrases, and
pointed with pathetical accents, being naturally fitted (as the stage will
assure us) to make a deep impression upon the heart. (...). Plut. (...).
Plutarch speaking of that rare Art, those Masters of Language, the Grecian
Sophists, discovered in composing and delivering of their Orations, tells us,
that they raised up a kind of Bacchical Enthusiasm, and transported their
hearers, with some honey words, soft and effeminate phrases and accents, and a
kind of singing tones. And no doubt those hearers, of whom he there speaks,
which used to applaud their Orators at the end of their Declamations with a
(...), divinely, heavenly, inimitably spoken; found themselves as much stirred
and moved as many a Man at a Sermon, who yet thinks it is not the Art of the
Preacher but the Spirit of God that warms and excites him.

It is further alleged in vindication of these Prophecies, that they are no
evanid and languishing imaginations; but come upon the minds of those that have
them with a light and evidence which bears before it all scruple about their
divine Original: Now the Devil or Melancholy cannot possibly seal the mind with
Opinions which carry that energy with them as these do: so that the very great
Strength of the Impressions (like that of Samson) speaks the mighty presence of
God with them: For how did the Prophets of God of old know themselves divinely
incited but by feeling the hand of God strong upon them, and his Jer. 20. 9. 11.
word in their heart as a burning fire shut up within their bones, whence they
were weary of forbearing and could not stay?

I answer, whence these prophetic phancies come to be thus vigorous and
importunate shall be inquired in due place; for the present, I assert (yet not
I but the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
Lord) that there may be an (...), energy of Error as well as Truth, which may
strongly carry a man quite out of the hearing of what ever reason may be
tendered to disabuse him. (...). Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 10.
Theodoret tells us of some Enthusiasts of his time, which receiving the
vigorous working of some Demon in them, took it to be the presence of the Holy
Ghost. And Inter hos quidam bend literatus and famolus hoc etiam propria manu
in scriptis, quae legi, reliquit and argumentis and conjecturis plurimis
asserere conatus est. J. Gers. De distinct. ver. vis. a falsis.
Gerson of many others, of which every one had it (he said) certainly revealed
to him that he should be Pope. Amongst which there was one of great name and
learning which left this revelation in writing with his own hand, and
endeavored to make it good by many arguments and conjectures: and we find in
Scripture, false Prophets as much pretending plerophories and strength of
persuasion as the true. As for those Characters whereby Gods Prophets were
enabled to distinguish infallibly a divine dream and prophetic impression, in
their own minds, from the delusions of the Devil or Fancy, it is extremely
difficult at this distance from that Age of Prophecy, clearly to assign them.
Mr. Smith. Disc. of Prophecies, c. 4.
A late learned writer, from Aberbanel and Maimonides, in this matter thus
ventures to resolve his Reader: A Prophet when he is asleep may distinguish a
Prophetical dream and that which is not such, by the vigor and liveliness of
the perception, whereby he apprehends the thing propounded, or else by the
imbecility and weakeness thereof. And therefore Maimon. has said well. All
Prophecy makes it self known to the Prophet that it is Prophecy indeed, that
is, makes it self known to the Prophet, by the strength and vigor of the
perception, so that his mind is freed from all scruple whatsoever about it. (A
notion which he there endeavors to build up by Scriptures, but how short they
fall of reaching the proof thereof, the indifferent Reader may easily
perceive.) But though I doubt not but the divine illapses made a very deep
impression upon the minds of holy men, and came attended with such light and
evidence as chased away all shadow of scruple about their divine Original, yet
I think to assert this vivacity of impression the distinctive character of
divine from pretending Enthusiasms and dreams, is neither true nor safe. Which
will perhaps appear by what time I have shown the Reader, that the Ancient
Interpreters of Dreams proceeded by some such rule as this. Artemidorus gives
this difference between (...) and (...), a natural and divine Dream: (...), a
common Dream is the mere figment of men asleep, of which he says, (...).
So far as it appears in sleep it is vigorous and active upon the Scene of
Fancy, but as soon as the sleep determines, that vanishes from the thoughts.
But then (...) a divinatory Dream, (...), has a more lasting energy upon the
mind, (...). Artemid. Oneiroc. l. 1. c. 1.
creates a regard of the futurities declared in it, ingageth endeavor, and is
made apt extremely to stir up and excite the Soul that has it. Besides, if
that power and evidence, with which a conceit may bear down the mind to a
persuasion thereof, may be preferred the Sign of its divine Original, how many
men shall we soon have that will look demurely, and tell the World (as the Sons
of Fancy among us used to do) that God has made out this or that to them, and
that this is much upon their spirits, and therefore past question an intimation
from God?

As for those accomplished Predictions brought to support the falling credit of
these Modern Prophets, they will prove but Prove. 25. 19.
as a foot out of joint. For there was no prophetic Sign foregoing to assure
the accomplishment to be any other then a lucky his. And besides, the Sea
several Examples in Boz. Eugubin. de Sig. Eccles. l. 6. c. 2.
Papists, nay the Tul. de Div. l. 1. Sibyllas praevidisse apud multas Gentes
pericula divinitus imminentia admonuissc populos, etc. Jambl. de Mist. Aegyp.
m. p. 59.
Heathens, tell us (and men must be willing to give that Faith they expect from
others) of many instances of such Predictions deliveted by their Popes,
Religioso's, Diviners, Oracles, very particularly accomplished. Now then I
demand, were these Prophecies from Heaven, or from Men? If from Heaven, why
then do many men think with no more favor of the Heathens and Papists, to whom
God seems to give the testimony of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy? If from men
(assisted by civil Prudence or evil Spirits) then all accomplished Predictions
are not concluding Arguments of the divine Inspiration of the Authors. But
because God in the trial of Prophets has Deuteronomy. 18. 21, 22.
directed us to a regard of the issues of their Prophecies, this matter may
seem to merit a more close and particular Consideration, to which therefore I
shall next apply my self.

CHAP. V.
The failing of Vulgar Prophecies an assurance of their Vanity.
Vulgar Prophecies referring to the Public, generally false: that proved from
Justin Martyr, and the falsehood of some Modern Prophecies particularly
instanced in. A fayleur but in a circumstance a sign of the forgery of the
whole Prophecy, and why ^. A five fold account given of the pretended
accomplishments of some Modern Prophecies. How far it seems fitting that
Prophecies should descend to the circumstances of Events. An account why some
of these Prophecies hit and others miss. All Divine Prophecies fulfilled which
were absolutely delivered. Some Characters to distinguish such Prophecies by.

THat which may yet more fully secure us in a persuasion of the Vanity of all
these Modern Prophecies, Confiderat. 4.
is this: All these unattested Prophets generally fail in all their Prophecies,
but always in some. Generally in all; viz. such are most fit to assure men of
their divine Inspiration, as those only are which are of a public reference.
Jer. 28. 8.
Jeremiah tells us, that the Prophets which had been before him of old,
prophesied both against many Countries, and against great Kingdoms, of War and
of Evil and of Pestilence; as they also did sometimes of great National
Blessings. Now the coming to pass of such Prophecies was the most undoubted
evidence of their Divinity: for though the Devil may be presumed able to bring
about some little turns in the lives of private men, yet the spirit of the
living creature only moves in those great Wheels, the turns in States are soly
under the particular conduct of God; those Wheels are too great for him to move
one way or other. And therefore (...), etc. Resp. ad Orthod. q. 2.
Justin Martyr, when the accomplished Predictions of the Ethnic Prophets were
opposed to him, returns this judicious Answer; No event which the Ethnic
Prophets foretold, either against the Truth of God, or his Worshippers, or
referring to the public Affairs of the Grecian States, ever came to pass;
though perhaps some matters of a more narrow concern might, which fell more
within the Devil's compass. An Observation more fully justified in the
pretending Prophets of later times: what is become of all the Oracular leaves
of Grebner? has not the wind taken them away, and the whirlwind scattered
them? (as it did those of the Sibyl.) He prophesied (says V. Mr Medes Letter
to Mr Hartlib, Part. 4. p. 652.
Mr Mede) great matters of Henry the fourth of France, which proved clean
contrary; of Queen Elizabeth, and other Princes, which never came to pass: I
have, I know not how often to satisfy one or other, told them as I now tell
you, and yet every five or six years it comes up again as if it had never been
discovered. Men are prone to believe anything they would have, etc. And how
have all the swelling Prophecies of Cotterus, Christina Poniativia, and
Drabicius, concerning the sudden Conversion of the Turks, the Establishment of
the German Churches by Frederick King of Bohemia and Gustavus of Sweden, the
sudden Propagation of the Gospel throughout the World, the advancement first of
Ragotzi the Father, and then the Son and then the Brother, to the Crown of
Hungary, of the dreadful overthrow of the Papacy (many of them delivered about
fifty years ago) been delivered of nothing but the wind? even their great
Patiamini Apologiam meam, quam post publicatas revelationes Cotteri, Drabicii,
etc. and mox contra omnem spem eventus spei nostrae contrarios, amicoru^
trepidatio texere coegerat. J. Comen. in Praefar. ad Histor. Revelat.
Patrons themselves being witnesses; while yet so enchanted with the Opinion of
them as to publish them now as the Oracles of God, when Divine Providence has
encouraged sober Christians to hiss them out of the World. And indeed it is so
Isai. 44. 25.
the usage of Divine Providence to shame the impatience and curiosity of men
discovered in attending to such Prophecies, that I persuade my self it is next
to impossible to instance a Modern Prophecy referring to the Public, that
speaks distinctly as to words and time of accomplishment, that failed not in
the substance or some eminent circumstance thereof. Now a fayleur but in a
tittle, is a dead Fly sufficient to make the whole Prophecy smell strongly of
an imposture. Of Divine Prophecies (...) (as the Master to whom we have had
such frequent recourse, Vid. Pocock. Port. Mos. p. 23.
well notes) not the greater nor lesser part, substance or circumstance, ever
fell to the ground. And He tells us, those words of Jeremiah, Jer. 23. 28.
The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he that has my Word,
let him speak my Word faithfully; what is the chaff to the wheat? their Doctors
used to gloss thus; Prophecy is a thing pure without the allay of any falsehood
mixed with it, like wheat cleansed from the chaff; but Dreams and other vulgar
Indications have a lie always intermixed, and are like chaff in which there are
but some few grains of wheat. God is careful to accomplish the very criticisms
and circumstances of his Predictions, because this gives the greatest assurance
of their Divine Author. For the substance of Events may possibly be thought
Object great enough for the Eye of humane Prudence to see afar off, but
circumstances are easily presumed too little for our heavy Eyes to discern at
any great removes.

If any Person better seen in the Writings of Modern Prophets, then I have any
ambition to be thought to be, is able to instance a Prophecy of any longer
date, whose words did exactly touch the Event foretold both in the substance
and circumstance thereof; yet he shall always observe his Prophet to have failed
in some one, nay in very many other instances, if any thing talkative (as it is
well the prophetic humor in such persons disposes them to be) which is a
sufficient assurance that he foretold nothing by a divine suggestion. Thus
Savanarola (a Dominican) foretold long before, that Charles the eighth of France
should come into Italy with a great Army, which came to pass: But Ad haec
divinitus fibi patefactu^ esse dicebat oportere statum Ecclosiasticum per vim
armorum em^ndari. Nondum quidem istu^ accidit, sed tunc t^mporis prope^erat ut
ficret. Phil. Co^^inaeus, de bell. Neap. l. 3. p. m. 586.
withal, that God had revealed to him that the State Ecclesiastic should be
reformed by force of Arms: which (says the Historian) has not yet (nor yet)
happened, but at that time was very likely to have been effected. The Examples of
this kind are too great for Arithmetic.

The two branches of this Consideration I find struck at by a double Objection,
which I shall endeavor to secure them from. It is opposed to the first, That
very many of these Modern Prophecies have been very punctually accomplished,
though unsealed by any divine Sign attending the delivery of them. In Answer
hereunto, I return, (1.) Mere prudential Conjectures after the Event often
commence accomplished Prophecies in vulgar Opinion: the common sort of people
being apt to invest every thing that lies out of the road of their thoughts and
observations with the Opinion of some Divinity lodged in it. Thus that famous
Speech of Seneca the Tragaedian, -- Venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingen.
Pateat Tellus, Typhisque novo.
Detegat orbs; nec sit terris
Ultima Thule, --
has been concluded the voice of God, a prophetic instinct referring to the
discovery of America in these latter Ages, which was indeed but the voice of a
Man, a rational conjecture proceeding upon a probable persuasion, that so great
a part of the Globe of the Earth was not all Sea, and so would in time be
found. Nec velim quenquam opinari quod haec longius petita sint, aut ex Daemonc
aut ex astris, sed ex Aristotelis Oraculo, solum enim inquit ille, prudentum ac
sapientum veram esse Divinationem. Card. de vit. propr. c. 42.
Cardan having related several very strange Predictions of his, exactly
fulfilled, adds, Neither would I have any one think these to have been far
fetched, either from the Devil or the Stars; but only from the Oracle of
Aristotle, who gives true Divination only to prudent Persons. This prudential
Divination, which is but the foresight of the effect in the promises of some
parturient Causes, is familiar with wise and observant men. For a wise- man's
heart will tell him more then seven watchmen that are upon a tower, whose
office it is to see men and things at distance. Prudence is but the contraction
of Providence in the name, and the commendable (...). Synes. de Reg.
image of it in the nature thereof. (2.) Many of these accomplishments were
rather lucky hits then divine foresights. These Prophets are many, and
perpetually shooting of their bolts, and it were hard if they did not sometimes
hit the mark, especially when standing so near as sometimes they do before they
let fly (foretelling things, removed by no great distance of time.) Such a
lucky cast was that singular foresight of Tully, reflected upon by Praeclara
conscientia, sustentor, cum cogito me de Rep. aut meruisse optime cum potuerim,
aut certe nunqua^ nisi divine cogitasse, ca^abque; ipsa tempestate eversam esse
Remp. quam ego 14 annis ante prospexerim. Epist. l. 10. 3.
himself as a kind of divine Testimony to the sincerity of his intentions in
reference to the Commonwealth. And the fortunate Speech of that Ancient Greeian
Philosopher Lucanus Ocellus, (...). Lucan. Occl. (...).
Greece has been often barbarous heretofore, and so shall be again in after
Ages, some would be ready now to prefer to the repute of a Prophecy, which was
but a loose and conjectural Conclusion built upon an observation that Bodies
Politic, as well as Natural, have their decays and years of dotage, and that
the deepest dye of any worldly felicity would in time languish and change
color. (3.) A great part of these Prophecies are mere impostures, and contrived
after the Event, by some idle heads. For it is seldom that we hear of them,
till the matters related in them are past; and then these Prophets, having the
Event before them to take measure of, make their Prophecy to fit it exactly,
both in substance and circumstance, that so there might be the less suspicion
that they saw things to come (like the man but half cured of his blindness)
only in rude generals, and by the heavy Eye of humane prudence. Whereas there
cannot be a greater assurance of sophistry in a Prediction, then an over-busie
and critical enumeration of Events therein. For Prophecies should deliver the
general substance or some one great circumstance of an Event so distinctly that
they be not thought loose conjectures, but as to the circumstances of less
remark, they should be wholly silent, that they be not suspected only disguized
Histories when once they are fulfilled. For this Reason perhaps the Divine
Prophecies come forth (like the pillar in the Wilderness) partly cloud and
partly fire, cloudy and obscure as to the lesser circumstances, but bright and
clear enough as to the substance of Events foretold. Whereas these Vulgar
Prophecies either stay in loose Generals, and like a sack are so contrived that
they may be clapped upon any person, but perfectly fit none; or else are most
industriously particular and scarce omit a circumstance. Thus the pretended V.
Lib. 8. Orac. Sibyl.
Sibylline Oracles tell out Saviors very name Jesus; and whereas the Prophet
only foretells, A Virgin shall conceive, they add, The Virgin Mary shall
conceive, and the like. For so it is usual for such Apes of Prophecy to become
ridiculous by an over-acted imitation. (4.) Many of these Vulgar Prophecies o^
their successes, in all probability, to diabolical efficiency. The Devil first
excites such Images in the Fancies of these Prophets, as may probably determine
them to foretell many things, which he conceives most likely to fall within his
sphere of activity, and then he accomplisheth as many as he can, though with no
more of true foresight then that man has that should think fit, when he knows
them, to fulfill many of his Neighbors Dreams. And he is the more ready to
interpose his power in this business, because when men shall see their
Prophecies or Dreams, of future contingencies especially, thus strangely
issued, they will stroke their heads presently, and make no doubt of their near
approaches to the prophetic grace; and whilst other men are detained in an
idle attendance to such shining vanities, they are 2 Timothy 2. 26.
(...), taken alive by this Fowler in his net. And this Consideration may
probably resolve us why some of these Prophecies so strangely hit, and others
miss; viz. because the Devil fulfils as many of them as fall within his
compass, and those which his confined power extends not to accomplish
necessarily fall to the ground. (5.) Several of these Prophecies are delivered
in words so loose and unconfined both as to sense and time, that it were a
great wonder, if amidst the vast varieties of Providence they appeared not
fulfilled in some Event and Time or other. Thus it was noted of old of the true
Callide, qui illa Oracula composuit, perfecit, ut quodcunque accidisset,
praedictum videretur, hominu^ and temporum definitione sublat^ adhibuit ctia^
lat^bram obscuritatis, ut iidem versus ali^s in aliam rem posse accommodari
viderentur. Tul. de Div. l. 2.
Sibylline Oracles, that they were composed in such dark and undetermined
expressions, that Fancy might make them, like a Picture, look to any Person,
any Event whatsoever. All this offers us some account of those successes which
these Prophetical Essays have sometimes been followed with; and withal
conclude the great necessity of some divine Sign to attest the Prophet or
Prophecy, that so it may be known that the Event was not a chance, a prudential
foresight, or diabolical delusion, but a true prophetical accomplishment.

To the second branch of the present Argument it is opposed, that many of God's
Prophecies were never fulfilled. If all were (says Si omnia, Unde igitur fuit,
quod Israelitici ^tiam Prophetae a suis ludibria passi, quaeritantibus, Ubi est
verbum, etc. Praefat. in Hist. Revel. p. 11.
Comenius) whence was it that the Prophets became the public scorn, the People
sarcastically demanding, Where is the Word of the Lord? Let it come now, Ierem,
17. 15. To this Objection (though indeed it merit rather a Censure then an
Answer) I return, That Scripture See Number. 23. 19. Isai. 34. 16. Josh. 23. 14. 1 Samuel 3. 19. Isai. 14. 24. Mat. 5. 18. Hab. 2. 3.
abundantly assures ^s, that never one word which God spoke fell to the ground:
and therefore perhaps the LXX chose to render Urim and Thum^nim by (...) and
(...), Manifestation and Truth, because by these two especially were God's
Oracles distinguished from the Devil's: God's being eminent for perspicuity and
Truth, and the Devil's for obscurity and falsehood. God has given us this
character to know a false Prophet by, Deuteronomy. 18. 22.
When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor
come to pass, this is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet
has spoken it presumptuously; and therefore we may rest assured, that God, if
he 1 Kin. 8, 15.
speak with his mouth, will fulfill with his hand. True indeed, we read of some
divine Prophecies of great Blessings and Judgments not literally fulfilled: But
these (as God himself Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9
tells us) though absolute in their terms, yet were always conditional in their
interpretation; and therefore when ever they were not fulfilled in terms, there
was some great sin or repentance interposing which gave a very rational account
thereof to the minds of men. But all divine Prophecy, absolute both in its
terms and intent, constantly was fulfilled. Now when the Prophecy was such, the
People might understand by such Signs as these, *If the Prophecy were sealed
with the Oath of God, or some equivalent asseveration: 1 Samuel 15. 29*
*If it were delivered as a Sign of the truth of the Prophet's Mission, or of
some other more considerable Prediction: *If the Prediction were delivered in
terms of the Preter-tense: *If it were often repeated by the same or more
Prophets: *If it were a Prediction of some Evil against things or persons
evidently devoted to destruction: 1 King. 15. 29.
*If the things foretold were of an indifferent nature, not greatly good or
evil, and many such like. These I say constantly came to pass: and therefore to
those words of the people (which thought a Prophecy delayed, forgotten) I
oppose the words of God appealing to the Experience of these very People: My
Words and my Statutes which I commanded my servants the Prophets, Zech. 1. 6.
did they not take hold of your Fathers? to which the People, in a more serious
temper, return; Like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us, according to
our ways, and according to our doings, so has he done unto us.

CHAP. VI.
Many Modern Prophecies proved to arise from Melancholy.
The strong Opinion of Inspiration in Modern Prophets, proved an effect of the
power of Melancholy. Their pretended Visions attributed to the same cause. The
Visions of melancholy men, why many, and to them very evident. Their vehement
incitations to Prophecy proved also a symptom of Melancholy. How this humor
becomes effectual thus to excite to Prophecy. Dying men, why often, in
appearance, Prophetical. A natural account of the Prophetical Essays of the
Pythia. Plutarch's Philosophical account of some ceasing Oracles justified. The
ardors in these Prophets and the Sibyls, natural. The delusions of Melancholy
assisted usually by the cooperation of the Devil.

A Fifth Consideration to reprehend the Faith of these Prophecies, is this;
Those popular Wonders which show forth themselves in the Authors of them,
Consid. 5.
plainly appear but the natural Effects of Melancholy tinctured with Religion.
This will appear more clearly if we be a little particular: (1.) That
invincible confidence (which inchants the vulgar) of their being divinely
inspired. It is ordinary with such such men to take to themselves the titles of
the Placuit Deoper me tanqua^ ultimam suam Tubam Nationibus, etc. Drabic.
Revel, Div. Epit. p. 16
Trump of God, the last Prophet, (...) uti Maximil-Montani Prophetis. apud Eus.
l. 5. c. 15.
the Word and Power of God, and the like; and that with a plerophory that shall
bear it self against the strongest Reasons, contrary Events of things, yea
sometimes the greatest bodily severities that can be used to discompose their
Dreams. Now as the Heathens holding (...), that the brain was sacred, and the
seat of some Deity, when any one neezed they would venerate the noise as a kind
of expression of the Deity inshrined in the head; thus these men being strongly
possessed by this conceit, that they are Goded with God, and that the Holy Ghost
is lodged in their heads, not a fancy can rise up therein but it is received
with as sacred Opinions as a Papist does the regs and relics of his Saint;
not a cloudy expression drops from them but it is christened Rev. 2. 24.
a depth and a great mystery, their ear cannot tingle but God is thought to
whisper into it, and the men cannot dream at the common rate of other mortals.

Whereas all these imaginations are but the issues of that impostrous humor
when it passes into a disease. A Melancholy Fancy is a kind of Incubus and
Succubus to it self, serving to beget and to conceive any odd crotchet, and
that with so much strength, that it appears before the mind in the certainty of
sight or taste. And it is so usual for this black humor to bew^tch the mind into
some one wild and extravagant conceit, while it appears sound and untouched in
all its other judgments, that the Greek Physician has defined it, (...). Aret.
cappad. l. 1. c. 5.
A solemn sadness and seriousness about some one odd Fancy without a fever.
Now look as the images which appears before our Minds in a dream, ow their
general odness of composure to the power of Fancy over reason in our sleep, but
their more particular figures usually to the occasions of the day before: thus
the conceits of Melancholy (the dreams of waking men) ow their general wildness
and fondness, to the undue figuration of the brain or Spirits by this anomalous
humor, but their particular kinds to those mutable occasions of common life,
the head is most accustomed to receive impressions from. Men of a more
contemplative Genius, conceit themselves inspired with some rare mysteries in
Nature, with the Cabbalistick sense of Scripture, with the understanding of the
hidden analogies between the sensible and intelligible, and the greater and
lesser world, with the Art to cure all the natural leprosies of metals, and
the like: Men whose course of life determines their thoughts more upon civil
affairs this humor possesses with the opinion of their being designed Popes or
Princes, or some Restorers of the public liberty. And persons of a more
devotional complexion talk much of Visions, raptures, converse with Angels and
prophecy, and are apt to fall down before every idol of their busy fancy, as
if some Deity were lodged in it. Thus this giddy humor moves every man (^s
Plut. (...) etc.
Plutarch says the Divinatory Enthusiasm does) (...), according as he is
naturally disposed and inclined.

How the humors of the body arive at an ability thus to impregnate the mind
with conceits wild and monstrous beyond the Varieties of Africa, is an enquiry
not pertinent here; but to question that so they can, is to speak our selves
strangers to all the stories of Hypocondriacks, books and discourses abound
withal; and that it is nothing but the enormous power of a disturbed
imagination that bears down these persons into a belief of divine visions,
voices and illapse, sappears sufficiently in that they usually commence
Prophets per saltum, and before they are tolerably qualified with knowledge or
piety, they become inspired; and that though heaven and earth refute their
predictions once and again, an heart deceived by the fullness and importunity of
the Impression, has so turned them aside, that they cannot attend; and
therefore are no more awakened out of their prophetic dreams by any contrary
events, then the beggar out of his dreams of greatness and honor by the rags he
wears and the dunghill he sleeps on. An example of which grossness and
non-attendance we have in Drabicius (a German Prophet, of whom so much written
and discourst of late) who though he saw his predictions clearly refuted by
events, and told thereof at one ear by his Friends and at both ears by his
enemies, yet was so Jud. ver. 8.
(...) carried away by the power of his prophetic dreams as to secure himself
in his fond opinion of Inspiration by returning, Hist. Revel. p. 248.
Annon vox Dei est quae dicit, etc. Is it not the voice of God which Amos 3. 7.
Joel. 2. 28.
says, God does nothing but he reveals his secrets to his servants, and that
in the later days he will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and young men
shall see Visions and old men dream dreams: Scriptures which any pretender to
prophecy might have cited in his vindication, as well as he.

2. Those wonderful Visions represented to their minds in some Ecstacy or
profound sleep. At such a time some very frightful or lovely images show
themselves upon the Scene of Fancy, and those (as dreams take figure from the
occasions of the day) generally made after the likeness of those Apocalyptical
or other Prophetic Visions, with which the minds of such persons when awake
are commonly entertained and deeply sealed. Now these Visa, by the great
singularity of their form, vivacity of representation, and prophetical analogy,
do so wonderfully affect and possess the Mind, and inchant it with such huge
fears or joys, that the Melancholy person doubts not to receive them with the
faith and affection of Divine discoveries. And therefore if the more terrible
aspect of the images represented to his mind, proclaim them the proper emblems
of some great evils, he presently concludes that God, who tenders his servants
with the care and affection a Mother does her sucking child, would willingly
have them forewarned, that so they might by repentance, prayers or prudence
avert the impendent evil from themselves, or fortify their minds with
Christian patience to receive its coming. But if their more delightful form
prefer them the types of some joyful Event, as is the freedom of the Church
laboring under some heavy oppression, the propagation of the Gospel, and the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom; they hastily catch at the welcome token, and
that is thought foretold therein which themselves have the greatest passion
for. And they are the more soft and easy to such prophetical conceits, because
those passions of Fear and Hope, so intimate to our Natures, and which
generally govern the Persuasions even of wiser men, are so regnant in their
Souls made so impressive by Melancholy and some tinctures of Religion.

Now these pretended Visions, which conciliate Veneration to these Prophets
with ruder persons, will appear much beneath our wonder, if it be considered
that Melancholy when it exceeds its just proportions, is very productive of
them. This the Philosopher has noted, (...). Arist. de div. per insomn. c. 1
Men that are of a talkative and melancholy temper see any kind of Visions. And
this, especially because they have so deep a resentment of the most affecting
objects, whose images therefore recur to the fancy when they are asleep, in
most distinct and lively figures. Now the Visions of such men are the more
evident and lively, because of the dryness of their temper (as Melancholicis,
propter ficcitatem, visae in somnis prorsus evidentia apparent. Comment. in
Hippocrat. de Humor. l. 2.
Gallen gives the reason) whereby there are no such mysts and vapors rising up
to confound and obscure them, which are the cause why the night-Visions of
persons full fed, or overcome with wine, are so confused and leave such
languishing impressions upon their waking Fancies. These images being so clear
and active, the mind takes them (as the birds did those on the tables of
Apelles) for true and real things; and as when we suddenly awake out of some
very affecting dream, the figures which its clearness and strength of
impression made upon the Fancy, cannot not presently be blotted out, but we
continue for a time to entertain it with the affections of a great reality;
thus (but by a more obstinate delusion) are the persons we now speak of imposed
upon by an unruly Fancy. For when deep sleep has fallen upon them, and cut the
Soul off from all converse with things sensible, it is wholly immerst in the
view of those images which walk upon the stage of Imagination, with which the
common sense is as inwardly moved, as if excited by some object from abroad;
and therefore it receives them with the Opinion of their being not fantastical
but real and divine appearances. As for those Visions these Prophets speak of
when they are awake, they may arise from those V. Joh. de Guevar. de Inter.
Sens. l. 3. q. 30.
vehement and intense thoughts, which represent some great Objects to them in
very distinct and affecting Ideas; with which the mind is so fully possessed and
sealed, as not much to attend to the circumstance of the real presence thereof;
and therefore easily persuades it self, that object stood before it of which it
had so lively a perception, and with which it was so inwardly touched and
affected. Besides, nothing so familiar as for men of very impressive phancies
and timorous dispos^tions to have a continual scene of strange sights presented
before them. The (...). De. Insom. c. 3.
Philos^pher noted long ago, that to persons young and that look intensly, if
it be dark, there appear many strange images moving to and fro, so that in a
great fear they hide themselves in the bed-clothes. Whereas in such sights the
Fancy is both Scene and Spectator to it self. This shows that it is possible
that these pretended Visions may be but the enchantments of Melancholy. But he
that considers that Divine Visions were vouchsaft as rarely and upon as
concerning occasions as Miracles will believe it probable that they are no
other. Did God dispense the favors of these divine visits to the Patriarchs and
Prophets so sparingly of old, and are they become now as familiar to some men
as dreams to others? Familiars, has been the title of bad spirits but never of
good.

3. Their vehement incitations to prophecy. They feel the new images of things
or persons striking with great strength and evidence upon their Fancies, and
themselves quickened by a very hot and active principle, whose powers they
cannot easily stand against, to make the Vision plain, and to declare to others
what conceits and passions it comes attended with: and therefore they conceive
that the word of the Lord is as a fire shut up in their bones, and that they
are (...), wholly possessed by some divine power which they cannot bear themselves
against, nay indeed should not, for who are they that should withstand God?
Whereas all these things are but the subtle fallacies which the fumes of
hypochondriacal Melancholy, when grown hot and fiery, put upon the Fancy, being
as apt to intoxicate the brain, and make it impressive to as odd conceits, as
the active vapors of lusty wine. These vapors being carried by the brain with a
mighty force, confou^d the natural figurations thereof and excite some new
Idols therein, which by the s^ngularity of their appearance, and importunity of
occurrence, cannot but create affections correspondent to them Job 32. 18, 19,
20.
which together with those fiery Spirits, will put men upon great freedom of
speech (that which a very affecting dream will sometimes do) to deliver
themselves of those strange thoughts which upon such occasions will rise up
within them. Now it is no wonder at all (as the (...). De Divin. per Insomn. c.
2.
Philosopher says) if such kind of men being thus incited to speak very much
and of very various things (the Scenes of Fancy being so often shifted by these
giddy vapors) that they have some fortunate hits, and true divinations.

That it is only the foreign heat of these Vapors which excites these
predictions, appears probable in that every Cerebri fla tuosa calcfactio,
undecun que proveniat, sub certa temperic constituta incitat ad mira eloquenda,
per cantilenas, hominemque supra se pene constituit. Christ. a castr^. de
V^ticin. l. 1. c. 21.
flatuous calefaction of the brain whence soever it arise, is apt to make a man
ecstatical, to express it self in wonderful speeches, and those often
prophetical. The vapors of wine meeting with some constitutions, have strangely
ap'd an Enthusiasm; as appears from those Verses of the Ovid. Fastor. l. 3.
Poet, upon occasion of the truly Jovial doings upon some of their idolatrous
Festivals.

Invenies illic qui Nestoris ebibat annos
Quae sit per calices facta Sibylla suos.
There shall you find old men turned boys by wine,
Young Maids old Sibyls, who by the cup divine.
Accordingly in some In hoc adyto, Liberi, vaticinaturi, plurimo mero sumpto,
uti apud Clarium aqua epota effantur Oracula. Macrob. Satum. l. 1. c. 18. V.
Is. Vos. De Idolat. l. 2. p. 685.
Oracular places, the Diviners used to excite the Prophetic faculty (as they
thought) by a liberal, dose of wine or some water which had a kind of
inebriating property: such hot and unwieldy vapors (though excited by a fever)
have made dying men so famous, for their prophetical Essays, in all Ages and
Nations: though they have been vainly thought (as all Extraordinaries,
especially about the minds of men usually are) of a more divine extraction. And
that prophetic fit which seized the Pythia placed over some hollow cavern of
the Earth, was owing to the subtle and fiery spirit (as Sibylla suscipiebat
Deum per Spiritum quenda^ tenuem igneumque qui crumpebat ex ore antri, etc. De
Mist. Egypt. m. p. 66.
Iamblicus calls it) thence ascending her tender body and Alibi fatidic^
Sp^cus, quorum exha^ation^ temulenti, futura praecinunt, ut Delphis, etc. Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 2. p. 93.
intoxicating of her, though in so^ewhat a more violent manner then wine would
have done (in so much as sometimes she dyed in the fit) and sealing her Fancy
(already strongly possessed with the extraordinary Sacredness of her place and
office) with wild conceits which she delivered in as wild a manner: and this
account of the pretended inspiration of the Pythia is favored by Strab. Geog.
l. 9.
Strabo, telling us that she expected the Oracular power being placed ove^ the
narrow mouth of the Sacred cavern, and that (...), from thence was carried
forth an Enthusiastic To this purpose Prudentius: P^rdidit insanos m^ndax
Dodona Vapores. In Apoth. tit. cont. Jud.
vapor or spirit, which excited the atent disposition to prophecy in her soul,
as the wind does the Musical power of some well-tuned Organ. And therefore I
think Plutarch, not so much out, as commonly thought in his Treatise, (...),
concerning the ceasing Oracles, (for so it should be rendered, Vid. Molin. Va^.
l. 3. c. 11.
all not being silenced in his time, nor long after) when attributing their
Silence in some formerly famous places, to the languishing of that
Enthusiastic Vapor which inspired the P^ophetess, the caverns (as he
conceives) lying continually open being apt (like exposed liquors) to lose
Spirits; and to decay it their ancient virtues. This imposture the Devil abused
the world withal, till the light of the Gospel and Philosophy made the fallacy
notorious.

To return. As for that mighty ardor whereby they are carried forth to deliver
themselves, it is perfectly a natural thing, being but the impatience of that
hot and nimble vapor of fermented Melancholy. The Sibyls of old (which Arist.
Probl. sec. 30.
Aristotle rightly judges inspired only by this fiery Spirit) used Sibyllae
crebro se dicunt ardere, torrente vi magna flammarum. Ammian. Mar* cel. l. 21.
sub init. ub. sup.
often to mention those divine fires they felt themselves (as they thought)
quickened and excited by; which were only the Symptoms of this exalted humor of
which the same Philosopher notes (...), etc. it becomes even like boiling water
when once sufficiently heated. And that they are only these hot and restless
Spirits arising out of the caverns of the body (much of temper with those in
the Pythia) which inspire them, appears in that we generally find them (...)
(as Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 15. Joh. 10. 20.
Eusebius styles the Preachers, of Montanus his doctrine) Prophets that talk
without measure. Their books and discourses are so voluminous as if they feared
nothing more then the poor title of Minor Prophets: witness the mighty bulk to
which the Revelations of St. Brigid, Drabitius and others swell into. We may
ever have Prophecies from these persons very good cheap. Whereas when the
Spirit of wisdom incited the holy men of old, their words were weighed in a
balance, their discourses consequent, their seasons of Prophecy few and chosen,
and their Doctrine precious as the gold of Ophir.

While I thus salve the strange Phoenomena about these Vulgar Prophets by the
powers of Melancholy; I intend not to deny but that the Devil (who works by
darkness as God by light) may sometimes interpose, and where he finds the Mind
fitted by this distemper for him to work upon, may (to make the imposture more
fine and subtle) act it to some expressions beyond the bare capacities of this
juggling humor, as to speak languages, to tell some things at distance, as the
certain coming of such a friend or Epileptick fit, upon such a day or hour
(which the German Prophetess Christina often did.) It seems to have been the
received opinion of the Ancient Jews that an high Melancholy or distraction was
attended always with an evil Spirit. whence that speech of the^rs concerning our
Savior. Joh. 10. 20.
He has a Devil and is mad, upon which Text Mr Mead tells us that they used to
style their Melancholici and Maniaci (...) or (...). And according to the
strain of all the Jewish Scholiasts (as Disc. of Prophec. p. 250.
Master Smith informs us) by the Evil Spirit of Saul nothing else is meant but
a Melancholy kind of Madness which made him Prophecy or speak distractedly and
inconsistently: and when the gentle aires and motions of 1 Samuel 16. 23.
Music had dissipated these Melancholy vapors the Evil Spirit departed with
them.

CHAP. VII.
Probable Arguments to prove all divine Prophecy now ceast.
The Cessation of Prophecy now, not absolutely asserted, and why. Five reasons
alleged to prove its cessat on, probable. A promise of Prophecy to any Age,
the greatest Security that it is not imposed upon by Pretenders to it. No
Promise of Prophecy made to the ends of the World. The several ends Prophecy
served to under the times of the Old and New Testament: proved unserviceable
t^^ any such ends now. Why Prophecy not given now to comfort good men it
affliction. Why it exspired in the Jewish Church so long before our Saviors
coming. Several reasons alleged against the received Opinion of a Bath Kol
succceding to Prophecy under the second Temple. The Original of that speech of
Strabo, that Moses advanced him self by the promise of a Religion without
Sacrifice or Prophecy, guest at. Such a Religion proved the felicity of this
New Dispensation.

THE last Consideration which I shall superadd to disparage the says of these
Vulgar Prophecies is this. Confid. 6.
It seems highly probable that the true Prophetic Spirit is now gone up, and
that all divine Revelations, as well of future Events as new Doctrines, are
wholly ceast in the Church of God. I shall not be positive in this Assertion,
because I find a Synod convened in Germany, Anno 1633. where the Divines being
moved by some zealous persons to declare themselves against all pretended
Revelations and Prophecies, now that God had so eminently refuted the famous
Visions of Cotterus and Christina Poniatovia in the unexpected deaths of
Gustavus of Sweden and Frederick of Bohemia, prophesied of by them, as the
Saviors and Restorers of the German Protestants; They declined it, adding, that
Nondum ullam Ecclesiam, aut Consistorium, vel Academiam, no vas id genus
prophetias penitus rejecisse, aut condemnasse: nos cur primi esse vellemus?
Hist Revel. per J. A. C. p. 131
yet no Church, or Consistory or University had altogether rejected or
condemned, such kind of new Prophecies, and why would we be the First?
Certainly then 'twill very ill become my privacy and obscurity to take the
Chair and pronounce confidently that folly is with them all, and that there is
nothing of Divine Prophecy now in the world besides the vain noise and
affectation thereof. I shall only crave the freedom to tender those reasons
which make it seem probable to my self that there are no such extraordinary
visits of the Divine Spirit now to be found in the world. Whereof the first is
this:

1. God has by no Promise encouraged our Expectation of any such prophetic
inspiration in these latter Ages of the World. Reas. 1.
When ever God gave Prophecy to his Church, as it usually came attended with
some other eminent gifts, whereby men might understand it was an Age of
Extraordinaries; so it was always ushered by some promise thereof. God gave
Prophecy to the Church of the Old Testament, and to the Times wherein our
Savior was first manifested and preached to the world (styled the Act. 2. 17.
last days, being the expiring times of the Jewish Oeconomie) and there was
notice given thereof by a fore-running Promise delivered by Deuteronomy. 18. Joel. 2.
32.
Moses and Joel. God would not have so great a gift, that comes forth (as all
extraordinary ones do) upon some errand of import, to steal into the world; and
men be in danger of losing the benefit thereof, while destitute of any thing to
resolve them whether there be any (...), Holy Ghost thus given yea or no.
Besides, where we have no special promise, we have no ground at all of
expectation or trust, and if we trust our Faith with any pretended Prophecy and
Revelation though presented with all the probable appearances of truth, before
we know whether God has made promise of any such matter now, we do but tempt
God, and expect he should charge himself with us while we walk in praecipitiis,
in ways wherein he never told us we should meet him. A Promise from God in
this matter, is (I think) one of the most necessary securities to our faith.
There were under the times of the Old Testament undoubtedly, as many persons
inspired only by the Spirit of heated Melancholy, and more by a much worse,
then now there are; but that which was the great security to the minds of good
men then, that they were not cheated by any of the gilded Prophecies then
current among them, was, that God had made them a Promise to send them Prophets
from time to time to resolve them in all matters relating to this life as well
as the other: and therefore they might presume the Providence of God would be
more especially watchful to preserve them (if not greatly wanting to
themselves) from being fatally abused while expecting instruction by a
Prophecy, a way of divine Sanction in those times. In confidence especially of
this divine security, we find even See 2 King. 9. 11, 12, 13. 2 Chro. 20. 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. 2 Chro. 25. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Princes proceeding without scruple to action, and in matters of very great
moment, upon the bare word of a Person that pretended to speak from God, though
without any Sign (that we read of) given to seal his Mission from God upon that
occasion; whereas now a Prince would but fall the Martyr of his own credulity,
if trusting his affairs with the most importunate voices of a pretending
Prophet against sober Reasons of State, when there appears neither divine Sign,
nor promise of Prophecy, to warrant his Faith.

It is readily acknowledged, that none of God's true Prophets but came attested
at one time or other with some divine Signs; but yet he that shall consider
that these were not vouchsafed to bear testimony to each particular message
which they delivered as from God, and that many Signs were given by them (as
the causing of iron to swim, disclosing the secrets of the bedchamber,
foretelling the death of some person, and some seeming contingencies) which ^t
is likely fall within the Devil's compass to show; and that sometimes the
Prophets 2 Samuel 7. 3, 4.
countermanded their own counsels and advices, and that those holy men were no
more exempt from the delusions of Melancholy then good men are now; and that
Miracles have been so counterfeited by the Arts of Magic, that even wise men
have not been able to detect the imposture; must needs grant, that the promise
of God to teach men by Prophecy, together with the Prophet his appearing (as
the Jews speak) (...) a Man fit for Prophecy, was generally the firmest ground
of trust they had to build the faith of the Divinity of his Signs and Prophecy
upon. And therefore I think many Signs might more firmly conclude the divine
inspiration of men in those Ages to which Prophecy was promised, then the like
can do if tendered by any Pretender to inspiration in our own.

Now then, there being not the least air of any promise of Prophecy made to the
last Times of the World, we have reason to think that the Prophetic Spirit is
flown back to Heaven (like Elijah) and has left nothing behind it, but its
mantle, its garb and dress, which Imposture sometimes walks up and down the
World withal. As for that place of Scripture so often alleged by the Modern
Enthusiasts, to justify the Expectation of Prophecy now; Joel 2. 28.
It shall come to pass in the last days that I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. it is wholly
impertinent, because, as (...) Comment. in loc.
Theodoret notes, it received its evident and literal accomplishment at the day
of Pentecost. But a greater then Theodoret is here, S. Peter, who Act. 2. 16,
17.
expressly fixes the accomplishment of that Prophecy in the liberal effusions
of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit upon that great Day: where we may note
by the way, that he seems not to understand the place of Prophecy strictly
taken (for Prediction) in favor of which alone it is alleged by our
Adversaries, but for those other extraordinary gifts of the Spirit there
mentioned, and for which Prophecy does often suppose elsewhere in Scripture.

2. All other extraordinary gifts which anciently attended the Prophetic
Spirit, are now ceased. Reas. 2.
The gifts of healing, of working Miracles, 1 Cor. 12. 10.
of discerning of Spirits, of diverse Tongues, of interpretation of Scripture,
have all expired with their occasion; and why should we imagine that Prophecy
(numbered with them) survives them all? a gift of which I am sure the World has
incomparably less need then of any of the rest! Those other gifts of the Spirit
could ease the pains, enlighten the Eyes, resolve the Conscience, presently
confirm the Faith of men, which a Prophecy could not do: and therefore whereas
we find those gifts very familiarly used, and liberally conferred in the first
times of the Gospel, yet we meet with this prophetic gift very rarely exerted
by our Savior or his Apostles; and some of the Persons who had it (as if they
were rarely to be found) are particularly mentioned in the New Testament; Acts
13. 1.
viz. Agabus, Barnabas, Simon Niger, Lucius, Manahen, Silas, the four Daughters
of Philip, and some few others. Why then should a Gift, which was of so little
name and consideration ^n compare with the rest, continue in the Church, when
all the other (like Scaffolds when the House is built) are taken away, now that
the House of God is built up, and the Faith confirmed? Certainly the fond
affection which some men have for Prophecy, and that strength of face with
which others pretend to it, are the things which suborn their Understandings to
believe that so acceptable a gift is honored with a longer continuance in the
World then the rest of its Brethren. If we consult Antiquity, it will appear
more likely that this gift alone is fallen, there being V. Mr. Smith Disc. of
Prophec. p. 272.
more frequent mention therein of some Miracles wrought in the Name of Christ,
but less is said concerning the Prophetical Spirit, especially after the second
Century.

3. Prophecy cannot now minister to any of those great ends, Reas. 3.
to which under the first times of the Old and New Testament it did. It served
under the Old Testament as a seal of the divine Inspiration of those Scriptures
in which it was found; and was a pregnant assurance to present and future
Times, that all those Promises, Precepts, Threatenings, found in conjunction
with any accomplished Prophecy, were equally of divine Original. To this
purpose speaks a Author Sep^. IK. l. 3. c. 8. ap. Vois. in Pug. Fid. p. 101.
Jewish Doctor, (...) The fundamental Reason why Prophecy is extant in the
Prophets, is only this, That they may with the greater authority exhort men to
an observation of the Law, to divine Worship, and to do what is acceptable unto
God, and that Man may be perfect with God, not barely that they may declare
things to come. This is found in the Prophets but out of a secondary intention,
only to confirm the truth of their inspiration; and the like reason of
Prophecy in Scripture is alleged by Orig. l. 7. cont. Cells. p. 338. Ed. Cantabr.
Origin. Whereas these Vulgar Prophecies cannot (need not) seal any divine
Doctrine or part of Scripture if they should be fulfilled; and therefore have
no more real value then the seal in separation from the writing. They tell us
perhaps (which no wise man much concerns himself to know) that after such a
period of time, such a great Prince shall ascend the Throne, such a famous
Event shall fall; and if the Prediction chance to succeed, the Prophet looks
big, and the People wonder, and that is all. Moreover, Prophecy served (like the
Shechinah in the Temple) as a Ecclus. 36. 15. Rev. 19. 10. Luke 7. 16. Joel 2.
28. Isai. 29. 9, 10.
testimony of God's dwelling in and owning of that Church in which it was
found. And accordingly the departing of the Prophetic Spirit from a people, if
found elsewhere in the World, was a Sign God had given them a bill of divorce.
Thus God at last assured his rejection of the Jewish and acknowledgment of the
Gentile Church, by his taking Prophecy wholly from the one, and giving it at the
same time unto the other; that which Orig. cont. Cells. l. 7. p. 337
Origin and Just. M. Dial. cum Tryp. p. 211. and 245.
Justin Martyr take frequent notice of in their Disputes against the Jews and
Heathens. Now Prophecy is no more necessary in this Age then Miracles to
witness Christ's presence with his Church, for she has had it liberally
already; and when it departed, it went not from her to Jew or Turk, but back to
Heaven, leaving behind it the many virtues of the Spirit, in themselves more
undoubted pledges of his favor. And besides, the Christian Church now is
crumbled into so many Sects and Forms, that were Prophecy now in the World, men
would be apt to receive it as a testimony, not to their Church, but to their
Party, (to which purpose the Faction of Rome pretends it;) and therefore
perhaps Prophecy was to be found in the more united times both of the Jewish
and Christian Church, but went away when they began to distinguish themselves
by little Forms and Notions, lest it should seem to witness not to the Truth of
God, but humors of Men.

A third Reason assigned by some Deus prophetas mittendo fecit ne opus
haberemus Astrologis and divinatoribus and ariolis, quoniam illos consulere
possumus, etc. Maimon. apud D. Pocock. P. M. p. 20.
Jewish and Christian Writers, why God gave the People of the Jews their
Oracles and Prophets to give them the knowledge of Futurities, as the success
of a Battle, the issue of a Sickness, the condition of other Kingdoms in
aftertimes, etc. is this; Because else in all likelihood they would have
apostatized to the Rites of the Heathen, who had their Oracles and Diviners
(...), being prompted thereunto by that natural liquorousness in the minds of
men after the knowledge of things to come, as Orig. cont. Cells. l. 1. p. 28. l.
3. p. 113.
Origin gives the reason; and Deuteronomy. 18. 14, 15.
Scripture seems to assign the same why God gave them Prophecy, even to secure
them from all temptation to consult the Oracles of the Heathen, which we find
they sometimes did in the 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7.
silence or 2 Kin. 1. 2.
absence of the true Prophets. To suppose Prophecy necessary now for this end,
to save men's longing after the knowledge of things sealed up in the Counsels of
God, is to reproach the World, and to suppose it as liquorish as in its more
childish years. Has not the World out-grown the follies of Auguries,
Soothsaying, and professed Diviners long ago, and took up in the resolves of
Reason, as the best Oracle to consult in a civil business? and must Christians
be thought the only persons that want a Prophecy to arrest their anxieties in
reference to hereafter, and a Prophecy of the certain truth whereof they are as
much unresolved as of the issue of affairs? And besides, we shall observe how
God sometimes chastised that wanton humor in the Jews, by permitting even his
own Predictions to be, not seldom, the 2 King. 8. 13, 14, 15. 2 King. 10. 10. 1
King. 11. 31, 40.
occasions of very evil Effects.

If we proceed to a view of those Ends which prophecy served to more specially
in the times of the New Testament, it will more clearly appear a great
impertinence now. It served then as a divine largess to grace the solemn
Inauguration of our Savior to his Mediatory Kingdom: To assure the acceptance
of his person and undertaking with God, who empowered him to confer such great
gifts on men. To fore-warn and so to fore-arm young Coverts, apt otherwise to
be scandalized by the then approaching persecutions for Christ's sake. To seal
the reception of the Gentiles to the dignity of Sonship, upon whom God had
bestowed so great a portion of his Spirit. To prefer the Christian Economy to
as sacred regards with men as the Jewish had of old, because attended with as
liberal an effusion of all extraordinary gifts upon men, as that was. Now it
were greatly to under-rate the Reader's time and my own, to prove Prophecy in
this Age utterly unnecessary for the service of any such ends as these. So that
there appears not any sufficient Reason why we should believe there are any
Examples of the Prophetic Spirit now extant in the World. Miracles and
Prophecies always came forth from God to serve some great occasions, (his
Servants never wrought a Miracle, or foretold an Event, as Juglers show tricks,
or Gypsies tell fortunes, only to cause wonder or to supply discourse:) now
these occasions being long ago expired, it is but reasonable to presume that
Miracles and Prophecies are fallen with them.

To all this perhaps it will be opposed, That oft-times a very black and
tedious night of affliction covers the Servants of God, and that a Prophecy
might then serve as the voice of the Cock to bring the joyful news of an
approaching morning of deliverance; and that for this end also God often
favored his ancient People the Jews with Prophecy, even to let them understand
when their miseries should determine, lest they should grow weary and faint in
their minds.

I answer; God has now supplied good men with higher cordials then a Prophecy
to support their sinking spirits with in a day of Evil. He has confirmed his
singular affection to them by the great gift of his Son, he has told them that
all things shall work together for their temporal or eternal good, that they
have a merciful High Priest that is touched with a feeling of all their
infirmities, that their light affliction which is but for a moment works for
them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; and are not these
Considerations better to them then ten Prophecies? Besides, God having now
caused the felicities of the other World to stand before us in so full a light,
he would have our minds less entangled with sollicitous and unquiet thoughts
about the futurities of this. It greatly becomes us now to be more heroical and
manly in our hopes and resolutions then the Jews were, whose temper was as
weak, wordly and carnal, as their way of Worship; in compliance with which God
encouraged their service by a Covenant made up of worldly Promises, possession
of the Land, the abundance of all things, freedom from evils and bondage. Now,
lest in a tedious affliction they should think God had forgotten his Covenant,
and should cast about for some new Master, the Prophets were sent from time to
time, to resolve them of the cause and continuance thereof, and (that their
patience might not tire) to tell them when their warfare should be
accomplished. Besides, their notices of the felicities of the other World,
being so obscure and languishing, might easily render them to greater
impatience of the undetermined miseries of this: and therefore when in the
times of the second Temple they began to be more clear in the Doctrine of a
Resurrection and a life to come, Prophecies of a temporal reference became more
rare; as appears from the words of that Psa. 74. 9.
Psalm, written (it is thought) after the Captivity, where the Church under
great pressures thus bemoans her self: We see not our Signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there any among us that knows how long: which words
suggest to us a fourth Reason. Reas. 4.


4. Prophecy expired in the Jewish Church for two or three hundred years before
the coming of our Savior. This is a truth of catholic acknowledgment, all
Ievish and Christian Writers confess it but only Justin Martyr, who once and
again (...). Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 211. and 245.
tell; Trypho the Jew, There never ceased in your Nation, either Prophet or
Prince till Jesus Christ was both born and had suffered. But in this Opinion
that excellent Man stands against all the Ancients, and against Psalm. 74. 9.
Canon and 1 Mac. 9. 27. 4. 46. 14. 41.
Apocrypha; and therefore his Testimony not binding. Now if Prophecy ceased
then, we have no reason to presume it continues now; for what ever Arguments
seem to conclude it necessary to the Christian Church now, would with much more
strength conclude the necessity of it to the Jewish then: for the Scripture was
then more dark and incomplete then now, the People were of a more weak and
worldly temper, the Economy more carnal, the Age more accustomed to
Prophecies, Men more in danger of being tempted by the absence of Prophecy to
consult the Devil's Prophets and Oracles, then so frequent in the World, and a
succession of Prophets more fully promised without any limitation of time, then
now. Besides, the reason of its cessation seems to have been catholic, viz.
this: It had now ministered to all those great Ends to which it was thought
necessary in the Times to which it was vouchsafed; and therefore (as it is said
of David) having thus served its Generation, it fell asleep. For though it be
true that the cessation of Prophecy, as also the absence of the many Glories
from the Second Temple which the First had, might serve to take men off from
looking too intently upon the face of Moses, whose splendour plainly appeared to
be nigh to vanishing away, and to quicken their desires after the more inward
and abiding Glories of the Messiah's Kingdom, and to cause them to expect that
New Dispensation so long promised before, which should restore the Prophetical
Spirit more abundantly; yet I conceive this to be neither the only nor the
principal Reason of that long interstitium of Prophecy in the Jewish Church.
For the Ark, the Shechinah, the heavenly fire, and the rest, were ceremonial
appendices, and served the pomp and splendour of that Lower Dispensation, the
utter absence whereof from the second Temple might show that Economy now
waxing old and wearing away; but Prophecy lasted (it is concluded) for at least
forty or fifty years under the second Temple, and besides was given rather for
Moral then Ceremonial Ends, which having sufficiently served, it was beneath
the sacredness thereof to be continued to serve only the pomp of the Church,
or the curiosities of Men.

The only thing now occurring to my thoughts, which may seem to weaken the
force of this Reason, is the common Opinion of a (...) Filia vocis, a soft
voice, heard as descending from Heaven, and was (say the Masters) a lower
degree of Prophecy continuing under the Times of the second Temple as a kind of
twilight in the Jewish Church after the setting of the Sun of Prophecy; and to
which the (...) Targum. in Cantic. cap. 1.
Targum is thought sometimes to refer. But as for this prophetic voice, I see
no great reason why we should stick to number it with those Jewish Fables
mentioned Tit. 1. 14. and invented (as many more were) to serve the glory of
that Nation, and to greaten the favor of Heaven thereunto: there being no two
Nations so much remarked for vanity and pride, both in sacred and profane
Writings, as the Jewish and Grecian; and there are none that have so corrupted
Histories, and obtruded so many Legends upon the credulity of the World, to
inhance the credit and reputation of their own People. Can it easily be thought
that God would now speak from Heaven to them who had turned the deaf ear to all
his Prophets, and were now so addicted to Magic, Superstition, and all the
Examples of Folly and Profaneness? What reason can be given why God should
silence all the Prophets, the Oracles by Urim, and by Visions, and honor that
obdurate People by any immediate addresses? What higher Grace did God confer
upon Abraham, upon Moses, nay upon his Son, then to speak to them by a Voice
from the excellent Glory? What are all the occasions, upon which they say it
was heard, but weak and tri^ling, and evidently unworthy of so sacred an
Oracle? When Jonathan began his Paraphrase, V. Christoph. Helvic. de Paraph.
Chald. p. 12.
they tell us he was checked by a Bath Kol, saying, Quis est ille qui revelat
filiis hominum mysteria Legis? When Rab. Judah Sanctus died, the Dr. Lightfoot
Hor. Hebr. p. 149.
Talmudists tell us, Bath Kol beatitudinem eum plangentibus pronunciavit, and
the like. Besides, a Voice from Heaven seems reserved as the more sacred way of
divine Revelation (so far is it from being the lowest degree of Prophecy) for
the Times of the Gospel. It was a Mat. 3. 17. Joh. 12. 28.
Voice from Heaven that gave testimony to Christ, that occasioned S. Paul's
Conversion; and it is urged as a strong argument against refusing the Gospel,
because it is a Heb. 12. 25.
turning away from him that speaks from Heaven: And we shall observe that all
the Prophecies of the Old Testament have not that Expression, I heard a Voice
from Heaven, so often as that single Prophecy of the New, the Revelation: God
generally making use of other ways before, to give his Prophets an intimation
of his Counsels: So that this Notion cannot greatly prejudice the Reason
alleged, having so little color of truth to recommend it. Nor am I alone in
this persuasion, finding some learned men speaking Vocale Responsum quod (...)
dicitur, sub secundo Templo fuisse, null lo idoneo testimonio potest comprobari,
quamvis Iudaei contra pertendant. Molin. Vat. l. 1. c. 26.
very doubtfully of it, and others very Credamne ^go Deum Populo tam dira
apostasia laboranti, ita indulgentem, ut e coelo cum iis familiariter colloqui
dignaretur, atque iis Oracula tam sublimia exhibere, tamque frequentia ut non
paria Prophetis? etc. R. Dr. Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. p. 63.
confidently against it. Though perhaps all this be more then I need have said,
for this was no personal Prophecy, nor (that I can find) ever asserted to
declare things to come, but to direct in some emergent difficulties in common
life.

In confirmation of what has been said, 'twere easy to superadd the many
Testimonies of the Ancients to prove the going up of the Prophetic Spirit in
this confirmed State of the Kingdom of the Messiah, who are so full in this
persuasion, that (as it is noted) the Montanists are by some of the Fathers
proved to be no better then Dissemblers when they pretended to the Gift of
Prophecy, for that it was then ceased in the Church. But that I seem not to
boast in See their several Testimonies in Mr. Smith's Disc. of Prophec. p. 270.
another Man's line, I shall dismiss this Chapter with a Conjecture upon a
passage in (...), Geogr. l. 16.
Strabo applicable to our present purpose. He, coming to speak of Moses and
some Jewish Customs, makes (after the manner of the Heathen) a very invidious
relation of what Arts he used to oblige so great a multitude his Followers. One
of which, he says was a promise to deliver to them, Such a worship, and such
rites of Sacrifice, as should not trouble the Users of them with any great
expenses, nor prophetical raptures and ecstacies, nor any other absurd
businesses in Religion. A Speech that assures Strabo not over-fond of such
things himself, for else he could not so easily have believed a promise of
deliverance from them, the best bait Moses could use to catch the hearts of the
Multitude withal. But certain it is that no promise was further from his
thoughts then this; for his law was a Heb. 9. 10. Ephesians. 2. 15.
law of rites and costly sacrifices, and his great with was that all the Lords
people were Prophets, and nothing that himself more pretended or Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
18.
promised then Prophecy. I conceive therefore that (as most lies bottom upon
some truth) this Relation was originally but some traditional prophecy of the
State of the times under the Messiah current (among some others) among the
Jews, or else a right opinion of theirs founded in a mistaken Sense of that
Prophecy of Dan. 9. 24. 27.
Daniel concerning the Messiah, that He should seal up Vision and Prophecy and
cause sacrifice and oblation to cease. Now this notion of the ceasing of
Prophecy and Sacrifice might (as some other did) arrive at last among the
Gentiles, who understanding it to halfes, might easily entitle Moses to the
promise thereof, a Person of so great Name both among the Jews and themselves.

But a freedom from these two is, if not the promise, the performance only of
the Mediator of a better Covenant the^ Moses, who by the offering of himself to
God left place for no other then (...), the Romans 12, 1.
living sacrifice of our selves to God; and by the more liberal effusions of
his Spirit to enlighten our minds, and to place oru hearts above the fears and
hopes of this world has made Prophecy less necessary now, and therefore most
likely not be at all therein. Sure I am God has no where promised it to the
ends of the World, nor do men most disposed, by great wisdom and Sanctity, to
receive it, either feel it or desire it, and all that ever have, with the
greatest wariness, trusted to it, have been at last clothed with shame and
confusion; and God in his Providence seems to deliver all pretenses to it to
persons so extremely ignorant, vicious, vain or hypochondrical, that it is
become a scandal to profess it, and for a man to pretend an Enthusiasm now,
gives notice that he wants a Physician; whereas heretofore his greatest
judgments Miracles and signs came to secure the honor of Prophecy, and of those
excellent Persons which professed it.

Now there is scarce any Man but has a quick sense of the happiness of being
freed from a Religion made grievous by so many chargeable sacrifices as the
Jewish was: and who so considers that it was so hard to distinguish true
Prophecy from false even in that Age to which it was promised, that often the
People, and 1 King. 13. 18, 19.
sometimes the true Prophets were abused by the Pretenders to it, and that it
could not but have some uneasinesses therein, while attended with those Isa.
21. 3. Genesis 15. 12. Dan. 10. 8. Jer. 23. 9.
vehement transports, consternations, tremors, aenigmatical Visions, and that
harshness which the most gentle strokes the hand of God made upon the faculties
of those holy men which were acted by it, cannot but value it as a happiness
that God has delivered us now to the conduct only of that sure word of
Prophecy, the Scripture, and the evident and gentle Maxims of Right Reason.

CHAP. VIII.
The Conclusion.
Private persons not Competent Judges of Prop^ecy, and why. The Decree of Pope
Leo touching New Prophets commended. Men formerly and still subject to b^
imposed upon by seeming Miracles. The discrediting of t^ese Prophecies of great
advantage to the Church.

LEst these Considerations should not be thought sufficient to disparage that
easy faith which private men usually meet these Vulgar prophecies withal; I
shall further mind the Reader, that Prophecy is in it self and so has been
judged by wise men a matter too nice and subtle for any, much less for men
that 1 Cor. 14. 16
occupy (...), the room of the unlearned in the Church, to make an hasty
judgment in. Therefore (^s was noted before from Plato) the Laws in the
Grecian Commonwealth, appointed (...) some public Judges over Enthusiastic
prophecies: which institution, whatever further end the State aimed at therein,
proceeded upon this acknowledged principle, That Prophecy was in the source and
sense thereof too perplexed and dark a business for the ruder minds of private
men to make any steady judgment in.

And therefore as passionately as the Romish Church lays claim to the Spirit
of Prophecy, as the testimony of God to her, yet upon occasion of some
Enthusiasts which would define the particular time of the Day of judgment, we
find a very severe and punctual Decree made by Pope Leo to limit the judgment
of such Persons, the sum whereof is this. Caterum, si quibusdam eorum Dominm
futura quaed^ in Dei Ecclesi^ inspiratione quapiam revelaverit, etc. Council.
Later. Sub. Leon. 10. Ses. 11.
If God have revealed some things to come to any of them, we will by no means
that they be presently reputed Impostors, or any way disturbed, (against the
Apostolical command of not despising Prophesyings) but Volum^^ ut lege
ordinariae tales assertae inspirattones, antequam publicentur a^t aut populo
praedicentur, ex nunc Apostolicae sedis examini reservatae intelligantur, etc.
we will that by an Ordinary law all such asserted inspirations before they be
published or preached to the people, be from henceforth understood reserved
solely to the cognizance of the Apostolical Chair. But if that may not be
without some danger of delay, and an urgent necessity advise otherwise, then
that they be notified to the Ordinary of the place, that he taking with him
three or four grave and learned men, and having diligently examined the whole
business with them, when they shall judge it convenient (upon which we charge
their own Consciences) they may give license for the publication of them. And
after many other Proviso's in this affair, the whole is concluded with a severe
temporal and spiritual punishment threatened upon the offenders in the premises.
Should appear ictus Piscator, the Pope once stricken by such apish prophets
became wise, and would no longer entrust the judgment of them with the sof^ and
ignorant Multitude.

Now Prophecy has been thus wisely reserved to the cognizance of Persons of
more exercised minds, because Solent Americani ipsos montes and quicquid
communem naturae ordinem egr^ditur, venerari. D. Vos. de Id^lol. p. 7.
humane Nature undisciplined is so extremely prone to meet things pompous and
vehement with very sacred and solemn thoughts, and to think (as the frogs in
the fable, by the bloc^ which fell among them) if the person make a great noise
and busse, come attended with flaming expressions, pathetical devotions,
si^gularities of gesture and phrase, affected silences and severities, that he
is (...); sent from God extraordinarily, to rule in their minds and lives.
Besides, men that have no notices of the compass of natural or diabolical
operation, are ready to receive the sudden tremors, frequent ecstacies and
other works which fall not within the little circle of their ^bservation, as
the powers of God and exam^les Miraculous. And this they may be the more easily
tempted to do, because though sometimes the signs these Prophets show are so
thin and weak that the dullest eye may see through them, and discover them to
be the delusions of the Devil or Melancholy: (such was that of Zeii excessu
signum aliquod (ut Gedeoni vel Maria) dari inflanter petiit D^abic. datumque
est Frontis punctura and velut igne ambusta. facies (risum ten^atis?) Histor.
Drab. per. J. A. C. p. 14^*
Drabicius and many of Apollavius,) yet sometimes juggling Prophets have acted a
Miracle so to the life, that even wise men have been imposed upon by the sine
and subtle management of the imposture; as may apear by that Chapter in Multi
eorum admoto igne non uruntur, ignem videlicet repellente Deo intus afflante,
vel si uruntur non persentiunt, neque pungentia percipiunt vel radentia vel
ulla tormenta. -- per invia vadunt (...) ignem feruntur intacti, etc. De Mist.
Aeg.
Iamblicus entitled Miracula multa fiunt. a Prophetis, and M. Mede Apost. lat
times. P. 2. c. 2. and 3. Mat. 24. 24.
other writers.

If all these considerations might obtain with men to give no faith or (which
is next to it) a very slow and doubtful one to all pretended Prophets now, the
happy consequent would be the freedom of the world at last from these ancient
cheats, for these little Oracles (like those of old) would soon become less
talkative if men were once become less credulous; and God would no more be
looked for in the whirlwind of raptures, mystical phrases, and ecstatical
Orations, but in the still voice of a great humility, a sound mind, and an
heart reconciled to himself and all the world; and they would begin to believe
God knows better what is good for us then we do our selves, while hiding
futurities from us, that so we might not be discomposed by any joys, sorrows or
fears born out of due time; and they would cast anchor only upon his Promises
and Attributes, when afflicted with all his waves, and value them as sufficient
security to the peace and quiet of their minds in the worst of Evils. Finally
all the Ends the Devil seeks to serve upon such Prophecies would be happily
defeated; who if they chance to hit, fails not to possess the Deliverer of them
with an impregnable persuasion that he is God's Holy One, his (Urim) sacred
Oracles being found with him; and the Receiver with such great Opinions of them
as shall render him curious, credulous, anxious, impertinent in his studies,
and regardless of the known rules of life. But if they miss, he tempts men to a
suspicion of all Prophecy for the sake of the false, and to regard even the
Revelations of Scripture but as more venerable impostures.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Treatise of Vulgar PROPHECIES.
CHAP. 1.
Some general accounts given of the Argument.
Counterfeits in Art, Nature and Religion. False prophecy one instance of them.
What kind of false Prophets the times of the New Testament are freed from. The
miscarriage of States often by occasions contemptible, noted. The present
argument suitable to the age, because an age of action, of intellectual
improvement, and yet, in many, of Enthusiasm. Several confident pretenders to
prophecy of late, taken notice of. The affinity between Prodigies and
Prophecies in the general ends of both. Prophecies of evil consequence in
States and why. Our Nation extremely inclined toward them in former times. The
ancient Ethnic Statsmen how they secured themselves against the prophetic
humor of the people. Judges of Prophecy in Plato, who. The Sibylline Oracles of
what use among the Romans. The Opinons the ancients had of Prophecy. couched in
the fable of Teresia. Religion a great sufferer by them in the Practice,
Credit, Doctrine and Foundation thereof. These noted prejudicial to the mind,
and why: And to common life. Two examples to evince that, taken notice of.
Prophesies as universally attended to as Prodigies, among the Heathens, Jews,
Christians, with a threefold account thereof. p. 1.

CHAP. II.
The Vanity of Vulgar Prophecy: detected from the unworthiness of the
Pretenders to them.
All things and Persons thought by the Heathens to partake somewhat of a
Prophetic Power. Wisdom only excluded by them from any share in that gift.
The Persuasion too much abetted by some Christians. To reprehend which, the
first Consideration is proposed. That Prophetic Maxim. That Prophecy rests not
but upon ^ wise a valiant and a rich man, how understood by the Modern Jews: A
conjecture concerning the Reason of it, in their sense. How understood by the
more Ancient Jews, shown at large from their Writings. God's Prophets never mad
in a Prophetic sit. Wisemen an ancient ad^ition of the Prophets: the title
usurped by the Ancient Philosophers and Magicians. Jews, Christians and
Heathens required Sanctity in order to true Prophecy. None b^rn Prophets of the
Jews, and why. Our pretended Prop^ets largely proved devoid of all true
Prophetical qualifications, and therefore not creditable. The Church of Rome
why so fruitful in such Prophets. p. 31.

CHAP. III.
Vulgar Prophecies proved vain from the intrinsic circumstances of them.
Several circumstances in the matter and style of the Prophecies instanced in,
which speak them unwor^hy of God. Their being generally delivered in numbers
noted as a character of Vanity, and why. The Devil's Oracles of old delivered
usually in Verse. Why afterwa^d in more natural and familiar forms. Tully's
exception against the pretended Oracles of the Sibyls justified. What
appe^rance of Poetry in the Prophetic Writings. These Prophecies noted to be
delivered without an^ or a very long time prefixed for their accomplishment:
Useless upon that account to any good end. Why Scripture-Prophecies may be
allowed a long time to be accomplished in, but not Vulgar. The Devil concluded
to influence these Vulgar Prophecies, and therefore not to be credited. p. 50.

CHAP. IV.
The vanity of these Prophecies evinced by their coming unattended with Signs.
The difference between a Sign and a wonder. Of what kind of Prophets no sign
was to be required. What method the Jews observed in the trial of Prophets.
Miracles not a Sign required of all Prophets. Six Prophetical Signs taken
notice of. Our Savior's Prophecy confirmed by them all. Signs of the Prophet
and of the Prophecy. None of these Vulgar Prophets give a Sign. Their pretended
Sanctity no sufficient Sign. Their admired gift of Prayer of as little credit
as that. Natural ardor how effectual to enable the power of speaking freely on
the sudden: that confirmed by the example of the ancient Roman Orators.
Quintilian. (...) of old, what. Why some men fluent only before company. The
great efficacy of exalted imagination to assist an extemporary Rhetoric. Why
vehement speeches so mightily move men. What kind of heats commendable in
Religion. The powerful impression of these Prophecies no sign of their
Divinity. Divine impressions not distinguishable soly by their power and
evidence, asserted against some Jewish Rabbis. Artemidorus. Some accomplished
Predictions, no safe Sign of the inspiration of our Modern Prophets. p. 58.

CHAP. V.
The failing of Vulgar Prophecies an assurance of their Vanity.
Vulgar Prophecies referring to the Public, generally false: that proved from
Justin Martyr, and the falsehood of some Modern Prophecies particularly
in^tanced in. A fayleur but in a circumstance, a sign of the forgery of the
whole Prophecy, and why. A fivefold acco^nt given of the pretended
accomplishments of some Modern Prophecies. How far it seems fitting that
Prophecies should des^end to the circumstances of Events. An account why some
of these Prophecies hit and others miss. All Divine Prophecies fulfilled which
were absolutely delivered. Some Characters to distinguish such Prophecies by.
p. 83.

CHAP. VI.
Many Modern Prophecies proved to arise from Melancholy.
The strong Opinion of Inspiration in Modern Prophets, proved an effect of the
power of Melancholy. Their pretended Visions attributed to the same cause. The
Visions of melancholy men, why many, and to them very evident. Their vehem^nt
in^itations to Prophecy proved also a symptom of Melancholy. How this humor
becomes effectual thus to excite to Prophecy. Dying men, why often, in
appearance, Prophetical. A natural account of the Prophetical Essays of the
Pythia. Plutarch's Philosophical account of some ceasing Oracles justified. The
ardors in these Prophets and the Sibyls, natural. The delusions of Melancholy
assisted usually by the cooperation of the Devil. p. 95.

CHAP. VII.
Probable Arguments to prove all divine Prophecy now ceast.
The Cessation of Prophecy now, not absolutely ^sserted, and why. Five reasons
alleged to prove its cessation, probable. A promise of Prophecy to any Age,
the greatest Security that it is not imposed upon by Pretenders to ^t. No
Promise of Prophecy made to the ends of the World. The several ends Prophecy
served to under the times of the Old and New Testament: proved unserviceable to
any such ends now. Why Prophecy not given now to comfort good men in
affliction. Why it exspired in the Jewish Church so long before our Saviors
coming. Several reasons alleged against the received Opinion of a Bath Kol
succeeding to Prophecy under the second Temple. The Original of that speech of
Strabo, that Moses advanced himself by the promise of a Religion without
Sacrifice or Prophecy, guest at. Such a Religion proved the felicity of this
New Dispensation. p. 110.

CHAP. VIII.
The Conclusion.
Private Persons not competent Judges of Prophecy, and why. The Decree of Pope
Leo touching New Prophets commended. Men formerly and still subject to be
imposed upon by seeming Miracles. The discrediting of these Prophecies of great
advantage to the Church. p. 131.

FINIS.

