Let this Book, Intit'led, The History of the Royal Society of London, for the
Improving of Natural Knowledge, be Printed.

WILL. MORRIS.

THE HISTORY OF THE Royal-Society OF LONDON, For the Improving of NATURAL
KNOWLEDGE.

BY THO. SPRAT.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for I. Martyn at the Bell without Temple Bar, and I.
Allestry at the Rose and Crown in Duck-lane, Printers to the Royal Society.
MDCLXVII.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
OF all the Kings of Europe, Your Majesty was the first, who confirmed this
Noble Design of Experiments, by Your own Example, and by a Public
Establishment. An Enterprise equal to the most renoun'd Actions of the best
Princes. For, to increase the Powers of all Mankind, and to free them from the
bondage of Errors, is greater Glory than to enlarge Empire, or to put Chains on
the necks of Conquered Nations.

What Reverence all Antiquity had for the Authors of Natural Discoveries, is
evident by the Diviner sort of Honor they conferred on them. Their Founders of
Philosophical Opinions were only admired by their own Sects. Their Valiant Men
and Generals did seldom rise higher than to Demy-Gods and Heroes. But the Gods
they Worshipped with Temples and Altars, were those who instructed the World to
Plow, to Sow, to Plant, to Spin, to build Houses, and to find out New
Countries. This Zeal indeed, by which they expressed their Gratitude to such
Benefactors, degenerated into Superstition: yet has it taught us, That a higher
degree of Reputation is due to Discoverers, than to the Teachers of Speculative
Doctrines, nay even to Conquerors themselves.

Nor has the True God himself omitted to show his value of Vulgar Arts. In the
whole History of the first Monarchs of the World, from Adam to Noah, there is
no mention of their Wars, or their Victories: All that is Recorded is this,
They lived so many years, and taught their Posterity to keep Sheep, to till the
Ground, to plant Vineyards, to dwell in Tents, to build Cities, to play on the
Harp and Organs, and to work in Brass and Iron. And if they deserved a Sacred
Remembrance, for one Natural or Mechanical Invention, Your Majesty will
certainly obtain Immortal Fame, for having established a perpetual Succession
of Inventors.

I am (May it please Your Majesty) Your Majesty's most humble, and most
obedient Subject, and Servant, THO. SPRAT.

To the Royal Society.
I.
PHILOSOPHY the great and only Heir
Of all that Human Knowledge which has bin
Vnforfeited by Man's rebellious Sin,
Though full of years He do appear,
(Philosophy, I say, and call it, He,
For whatsoever the Painters Fancy be,
It a Male Virtu seems to me)
Has still bin kept in Nonage till of late,
Nor managed or enjoyed his vast Estate:
Three or four thousand years one would have thought,
To ripeness and perfection might have brought
A Science so well bred and nursed,
And of such hopeful parts too at the first.
But, oh, the Guardians and the Tutors then,
(Some negligent, and some ambitious men)
Would never consent to set him Free,
Or his own Natural Powers to let him see,
Lest that should put an end to their Authority.
II.
That his own business he might quite forgit,
They amusd him with the sports of wanton Wit,
With the Desserts of Poetry they fed him,
Instead of solid meats to encreas his force;
Instead of vigorous exercise, they led him
Into the pleasant Labyrinths of ever-fresh Discourse:
Instead of carrying him to see
The Riches which do hoorded for him lie
In Natures endless Treasury,
They chose his Eye to entertain
(His curious but not covetous Eye)
With painted Scenes, and Pageants of the Brain.
Some few exalted Spirits this latter Age has shown,
That labored to assert the Liberty
(From Guardians, who were now Usurpers grown)
Of this Old Minor still, Captived Philosophy;
But 'twas Rebellion called to fight
For such a long oppressed Right.
Bacon at last, a mighty Man arose,
Whom a wise King and Nature chose
Lord Chancellor of both their Laws,
And boldly undertook the injured Pupils cause.
III.
Authority, which did a Body boast,
Though 'twas but Air condensed and stalked about,
Like some old Giants more Gigantic Ghost,
To terrify the Learned Rout
With the plain Magique of true Reasons Light,
He chased out of our sight,
Nor suffered Living Men to be misled
By the vain shadows of the Dead:
To Graves, from whence it rose, the conquered Phantome fled;
He broke that Monstrous God which stood
In midst of the Orchard, and the whole did claim,
Which with a useless Since of Wood,
And something else not worth a name,
(Both vast for show, yet neither fit
Or to Defend, or to Beget;
Ridiculous and senceless Terrors!) made
Children and superstitious Men afraid.
The Orchards open now, and free;
Bacon has broke that Scar-crow Deity;
Come, enter, all that will,
Behold the rip'ned Fruit, come gather now your Fill.
Yet still, methinks, we fain would be
Catching at the Forbidden Tree,
We would be like the Deity,
When Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil, we
Without the Senses aid within our selves would see;
For it is God only who can find
All Nature in his Mind.
IV.
From Words, which are but Pictures of the Thought,
(Though we our Thoughts from them perversely drew)
To Things, the Minds right Object, he it brought,
Like foolish Birds to painted Grapes we flew;
He sought and gathered for our use the True;
And when on heaps the chosen Bunches lay,
He pressed them wisely the Mechanic way,
Till all their juice did in one Vessel join,
Ferment into a Nourishment Divine,
The thirsty Souls refreshing Wine.
Who to the life an exact Piece would make,
Must not from others Work a Copy take;
No, not from Rubens or Vandike;
Much less content himself to make it like
The Idaeas and the Images which ly
In his own Fancy, or his Memory.
No, he before his sight must place
The Natural and Living Face;
The real Object must command
Each Judgment of his Eye, and Motion of his Hand.
V.
From these and all long Errors of the way,
In which our wandering Praedecessors went,
And like the old Hebrews many years did stray
In Deserts but of small extent,
Bacon, like Moses, led us forth at last,
The barren Wilderness he past,
Did on the very Border stand
Of the blessed promised Land,
And from the Mountains Top of his Exalted Wit,
Saw it himself, and showed us it.
But Life did never to one Man allow
Time to Discover Worlds, and Conquer too;
Nor can so short a Line sufficient be
To fadome the vast depths of Natures Sea:
The work he did we ought to admire,
And were unjust if we should more require
From his few years, divided 'twixt the Excess
Of low Affliction, and high Happiness:
For who on things remote can fix his sight,
That Is always in a Triumph, or a Fight?
VI.
From you, great Champions, we expect to get
These spacious Countries but discovered yet;
Countries where yet instead of Nature, we
Her Images and Idols worshipped see:
These large and wealthy Regions to subdu,
Though Learning has whole Armies at command,
Quartered about in every Land,
A better Troop she never together drew.
Methinks, like Gideon's little Band,
God with Design has picked out you,
To do these noble Wonders by a Few:
When the whole Host he saw, They are (said he)
Too many to Overcome for Me;
And now he chooses out his Men,
Much in the way that he did then:
Not those many whom he found
Idely extended on the ground,
To drink with their dejected head
The Stream just so as by their Mouths it fled:
No, but those Few who took the Waters up,
And made of their laborious Hands the Cup.
VII.
Thus you prepared; and in the glorious Fight
Their wondrous pattern too you take:
Their old and empty Pitchers first they brake,
And with their Hands then lifted up the Light.
Io! Sound too the Trumpets here!
Already your victorious Lights appear;
New Scenes of Heven already we espy,
And Crowds of golden Worlds on high;
Which from the spacious Plains of Earth and Sea,
Could never yet discovered be
By Sailers or Chaldaeans watchful Eye.
Natures great Works no distance can obscure,
No smalness her near Objects can secure.
Y' have taught the curious Sight to press
Into the privatest recess
Of her imperceptible Littleness.
She with much stranger Art than his who put
All the Iliads in a Nut,
The numerous work of Life does into Atoms shut.
Y' have learned to Read her smallest Hand,
And well begun her deepest Sense to Understand.
VIII.
Mischief and true Dishonor fall on those
Who would to laughter or to scorn expose
So Virtuous and so Noble a Design,
So Human for its Use, for Knowledge so Divine.
The things which these proud men despise, and call
Impertinent, and vain, and small,
Those smallest things of Nature let me know,
Rather than all their greatest Actions Do.
Whoever would Deposed Truth advance
Into the Throne usurped from it,
Must feel at first the Blows of Ignorance,
And the sharp Points of Envious Wit.
So when by various turns of the Celestial Dance,
In many thousand years
A Star, so long unknown, appears,
Though Heven it self more beauteous by it grow,
It troubles and alarms the World below,
Does to the Wise a Star, to Fools a Meteor show.
IX.
With Courage and Success you the bold work begin
Your Cradle has not Idle bin:
None e're but Hercules and you could be
At five years Age worthy a History.
And nere did Fortune better yet
The Historian to the Story fit:
As you from all Old Errors free
And purge the Body of Philosophy;
So from all Modern Folies He
Has vindicated Eloquence and Wit.
His candid Style like a clean Stream does slide,
And his bright Fancy all the way
Does like the Sunshine in it play;
It does like Thames, the best of Rivers, glide,
Where the God does not rudely overturn,
But gently pour the Crystal Vrn,
And with judicious hand does the whole Current guide.
TO has all the Beauties Nature can impart,
And all the comely Dress without the paint of Art.
A. COWLEY.

AN Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Reader is entreated to take notice. That much of this Discourse was Written
and Printed above two years before the rest: For this cause, in the First and
Second Books, he may chance to find some Expressions that by reason of the
difference of time may seem not well to agree with the last: But those having
passed the Press so long ago, were out of my power of changing them; and
therefore I will refer it to his kindness, to do it for me.

I must also acquaint him, That in the Title of my Book I have taken a liberty,
which may be liable to exception: I have called it a History of the Royal
Society; whereas the First Part wholly Treats of the state of the Ancient
Philosophy; and the Third chiefly contains a Defense and Recommendation of
Experimental Knowledge in General: So that it is only the Second Book that
peculiarly describes their Undertaking. But for my excuse I may allege the
Example of many of the Ancients, who have often from the Principal Part of
their Works given Title to all the rest: In their imitation, though this Book
does Treat of many Subjects that are not Historical, yet I have presumed to
name the whole a History, because that was the main end of my Design.

The Style perhaps in which it is written, is larger and more contentious than
becomes that purity and shortness which are the chief beauties of Historical
Writings: But the blame of this ought not so much to be laid upon me, as upon
the Detractors of so noble an Institution: For their Objections and Cavils
against it, did make it necessary for me to write of it, not altogether in the
way of a plain History, but sometimes of an Apology.

THE HISTORY OF THE Institution, Design, and Progress, OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF
LONDON. For the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy. The FIRST PART.
I Shall here present to the World, Section 1. The Preface, and Design of this
Discourse.
an Account of the First Institution of the Royal Society; and of the Progress,
which they have already made: in hope, that this Learned and Inquisitive Age,
will either think their Endeavors, worthy of its Assistance; or else will be
thereby provoked, to attempt some greater Enterprise (if any such can be found
out) for the Benefit of humane life, by the Advancement of Real Knowledge.

Perhaps this Task, which I have proposed to my self, will incurr the Censure
of many Judicious Men, who may think it an overhasty, and presumptuous
Attempt: and may object to me, that the History of an Assembly which begins
with so great expectations, ought not to have been made public so soon; till
We could have produced very many considerable Experiments, which they had
tried, and so have given undeniable Proofs, of the usefulness of their
undertaking.

In answer to this, I can plead for my self, that what I am here to say, will
be far from preventing the labors of others in adorning so worthy a Subject:
and is premised upon no other account, then as the noblest Buidings are first
wont to be represented in a few Shadows, or small Models: which are not
intended to be equal to the Chief Structure it self, but only to show in
little, by what Materials, with what Charge, and by how many Hands, that is
afterward to be raised. Although therefore, I come to the performance of this
work, with much less deliberation, and ability, then the weightiness of it
requires: yet, I trust, that the Greatness of the Design it self, on which I am
to speak, and the zeal which I have for the Honor of our Nation, which have
been the chief reasons, that have moved me to this confidence of writing, will
serve to make something for my Excuse. For what greater matter can any man
desire, about which to employ his thoughts, then the Beginnings of an
Illustrious Company, which has already laid such excellent Foundations of so
much good to Mankind? Or, what can be more delightful for an Englishman to
consider, then that notwithstandng all the late miseries of his Country; it has
been able in a short time so well to recover it self: as not only to attain to
the perfection of its former Civility, and Learning, but also to set on foot, a
new way of improvement of Arts, as Great and as Beneficial (to say no more) as
any the wittiest or the happiest Age has ever invented?

But besides this, I can also add, in my Defense, that though the Society, of
which I am to write, is not yet four years old, and has been of necessity
hitherto chiefly taken up, about Preparatory Affairs: yet even in this time,
they have not wholly neglected their principal End; but have had Success, in
the trial of many remarkable things; of which I doubt not, but I shall be able,
as I pass along, to give instances enough to satisfy the curiosity of all
sober Inquirers into Truth. And in short, if for no other end, yet certainly
for this, A Relation of their First Original ought to be exposed to the view of
Men: that by laying down, on what course of Discovery they intend to proceed,
the Gentlemen of the Society, may be more solemnly engaged, to prosecute the
same. For now they will not be able, handsomely to draw back, and to forsake
such honorable Intentions: when the World shall have taken notice, that so
many prudent men have gone so far, in a business of this Universal Importance,
and have given such undoubted Pledges, of many admirable Inventions to follow.

I shall therefore divide my Discourse into these three general Heads. Sect.
II. The Division of the Discourse.


The First shall give a short view of the Ancient, and Modern Philosophy; and
of the most Famous Attempts, that have been made for its Advancement: that by
observing wherein others have excelled, and wherein they have been thought to
fail, we may the better show, what is to be expected, from these new
Undertakers; and what moved them, to enter upon a way of Inquiry, different
from that, on which the former have proceeded. The Second shall consist of the
Narrative it self: and out of their Registers, and Iournals, which I have been
permitted to peruse, shall relate the first Occasions of their Meetings, the
Encouragement, and Patronage, which they have received; their Patent, their
Statutes, the whole Order and Scheme of their Design, and the Manner of their
Proceedings. The Third shall try, to assert the Advantage and Innocence of this
work, in respect of all Professions, and especially of Religion; and how
proper, above others, it is, for the present temper of the Age wherein we live.
On the First and Last of these Particulars, it is not needful that I should
long insist: because several Great Men have already so much prevented me about
them; that there is hardly any thing can be spoken, in which I shall not almost
tread in their very Footsteps. But yet it is requisite, that something be here
said to that purpose, though it be only in Repetition: because I perceive,
that there is still much prejudice remaining on many men's minds, toward any
now Discoveries in Natura Things. This I shall try to remove, not that I
imagine, that those Reasons can have any great effect in my weak hands, which
were not able fully to prevail, when they were enforced by the Eloquence of
those Excellent Men, who have gone before me in this Argument: But I rather
trust to the inclination of the Age it self, wherein I write; which (if I
mistake not) is far more prepared to be persuaded to promote such Studies,
then any other time that has gone before us.

And first, Sect. III. The Philosophy of the East.
let us observe the Practice of the best, and the civilest Nations, amongst the
Ancients; and a little trace out the course which they followed, to enrich
their Countries, by the introducing of Foreign Arts, or a searching into New.

It is evident, from the universal Testimony of History, that all Learning and
Civility were derived down to us, from the Eastern parts of the World. There it
was, that Mankind arose: and there they first discovered the ways of living,
with safety, convenience, and delight. It is but just, that we should attribute
the original of Astronomy, Geometry, Government, and many sorts of
Manufactures, which we now enjoy, to the Assyrians, the Chaldeans, and
Egyptians. And as to them we owe the Invention; so from them proceeded the
first Corruption of knowledge. It was the custom of their Wise men, to wrap up
their Observations on Nature, and the Manners of Men, in the dark Shadows of
Hieroglyphics; and to conceal them, as sacred Mysteries, from the
apprehensions of the vulgar. This was a sure way to beget a Reverence in the
Peoples Hearts toward themselves: but not to advance the true Philosophy of
Nature. That stands not in need of such Artifices to uphold its credit: but is
then most likely to thrive, when the minds, and labors of men of all
Conditions, are joined to promote it, and when it becomes the care of united
Nations.

Into the East, the first Inquisitive Men amongst the Grecians traveled: By
what they observed there, they ripened their own imperfect Conceptions, and so
returned to teach them at home. And that they might the better insinuate their
opinions into their hearers minds, they set them off with the mixture of
Fables, and the ornaments of Fancy. Hence it came to pass, that the first
Masters of knowledge amongst them, were as well Poets, as Philosophers: For
Orpheus, Linus, Musaeus, and Homer, first softened men's natural rudeness, and by
the charms of their Numbers, allured them to be instructed by the severer
Doctrines, of Solon, Thales, and Pythagoras. This was a course, that was useful
at first, when men were to be delightfully deceived to their own good: But
perhaps it left some ill influence, on the whole Philosopy of their Successors;
and gave the Grecians occasion ever after of exercising their wit, and their
imagination, about the works of Nature, more then was consistent with a sincere
Inquiry into them.

Sect. IV. The Philosophy of Greece.
When the fabulous Age was past: Philosophy took a little more courage; and
ventured more to rely upon its own strength, without the Assistance of Poetry.
Now they began to gather into Assemblies, and to increase their interest: and,
according to the different temper of the Grecians, from the Eastern Nations; so
were their Arts propagated in a different way from theirs. The Greeks, being of
a vigorous, and active humor, established their Philosophy, in the Walks, and
Porches, and Gardens, and such public places about their Cities: whereas the
Graver, and more reserved Egyptians, had confined it to their Temples.

In Greece, the most considerable (and indeed almost the only successful)
Trials, that were made in this way, were at Athens. The wit of whose
Inhabitants, was ('it is true) admirably fit, for the reducing of Philosophy into
Method, and for the adorning of it with the noblest words; when once it had
been before completed in its substance: But yet their Genius was not so well
made, for the undergoing of the first drudgery and burden of Observation, which
is needful for the Beginning of so difficult a work. This will appear, if we
remember, that they were the Masters of the Arts of Speaking, to all their
Neighbors: and so might well be inclined, rather to choose such opinions of
Nature, which they might most elegantly express; then such, which were more
useful, but could not so well be illustrated by the ornaments of Speech.
Besides this, their City was the General Schole, and Seat of Education: and
therefore the Epitome's of knowledge best served their turn, to make their
Scholars, in a short time, finish the course of their Studies, and go home
satisfied with a belief of their own Proficience, and their Teachers Wisdom.
They were also commonly (as most of the other Grecians) men of hot, earnest,
and hasty minds: and so loved rather to make sudden Conclusions, and to
convince their hearers by argument; then to delay long, before they fixed their
judgments; or to attend with sufficient patience the labor of Experiments. But
to say no more, they had but a narrow Territory; and the condition of those
times, would not allow a very large commerce, with foreign Nations: they were
much exercised in the civil Affairs of their Country: they had almost a
perpetual War, at home, or abroad: which kinds of busy, and active life,
breed men up indeed for great Employments: but not so well for the diligent,
private, and severe examination of those little and almost infinite
Curiosities, on which the true Philosophy must be founded.

Sect. V. The Original of the Philosophical Sects.
In that City therefore, the knowledge of Nature had its Original, before either
that of Discourse, or of humane Actions: but it was quickly forced to give way
to them Both. For it was not yet come to a sufficient ripeness, in the time of
Socrates. And he, by the authority of his admirable wit, made all parts of
Philosophy to be taken off from a condition of increasing much farther, that
they might be immediately serviceable to the affairs of men, and the uses of
life. He was one of the first men, that began to draw into some order, the
confused, and obscure imaginations, of those that went before him: and to make
way for the composing of Arts, out of their scattered Observations. All these
various Subjects, the vastness of his Soul comprehended in his casual
Disputations: but after his death they were divided amongst his Followers,
according to their several inclinations. From him most of the succeeding Sects
descended: and though every one of them had its different principles, and
rendezvouses: yet they all laid claim to this one common title of being his
Disciples. By this means, there was a most specious appearance of the increase
of Learning: all places were filled with Philosophical disputes: controversies
were raised: Factions were made: many subtilties of confuting, and defending,
were invented: but so instead of joining all their strength to overcome the
Secrets of Nature (all which would have been little enough, though never so
wisely managed) they only did that, which has undone many such great attempts,
before they had yet fully conquered her; they fell into an open dissension, to
which of them, her spoils did belong.

It Is true, at the same time, some few men did continue an earnest, and
laborious pursuit, after Natural causes, and effects: and took that course,
which, if it had met with us much encouragement, as the others had, would
without question have produced extraordinary things. But these Philosophers,
digging deap, out of the sight of men; and studying more, how to conceive
things aright, then how to set off, and persuade their conceptions, to others;
were quickly almost quite overwhelmed, by the more plausible and Talkative
Sects.

This was the success of that Famous Age of the Grecian Learning, Sect. VI. The
Philosophy amongst the Romans.
in respect of Natural knowledge. They stayed not for an information sufficient
for such a noble Enterprise: They would not suffer their posterity, to have any
share with them, in the honor of performing it: But too suddenly, for present
use, they clapped up an entire Building of Sciences: and therefore it is not to
be wondered, if the hasty Fabric, which they raised, did not consist of the
best materials.

But at last with their Empire, their Arts also were transported to Rome: the
great spirit of their Lawgivers, and Philosophers, in course of time,
degenerating into Rhetoricians, and wandering Teachers of the opinions, of their
private Sects. Amongst the Romans, the studies of Nature met with little, or no
entertainment. They scarce ever dreamed of any other way of Philosophy, then
only just reducing into New Method, and eloquently translating into their own
Language, the Doctrines, which they had received from the Greeks. And it was a
long time too, before even that could obtain any countenance amongst them. For,
in the first warlick and busy Ages of that State, they only applied
themselves to a severity of Moral virtue; indeavor'd after no other skill, then
that of the Customs, and Laws of their Country, the Ceremonies of their
Religion, and the Arts of Government: esteeming every thing that came out of
Greece, as an outlandish fashion, which would corrupt the manners of their
Youth; and allure them, from that strictness of Discipline, and Integrity of
Life, by which they had enlarged the Bounds of their Commonwealth. Till at
length their power being increased, and their minds a little softened by the
Greatness of their commands, and having tasted of the pleasures of the East;
they were content too, by degrees, to admit their Philosophy. And yet all the
use, that they made of it at last, was only, either that they might thereby
make their speech more plentiful; or else, that when they were at leisure from
Civil affairs, they might have that as a companion, and comfort of their
Retirements. Sect. VII. The Philosophy of the Primitive Church.


This was the condition of Philosophy, when the Christian Religion came into
the World. That maintained it self in its first Age, by the innocence, and
miracles, and sufferings of its Founder, and his Apostles. But after their
Deaths, when Christianity began to spread into the farthest Nations, and when
the power of working wonders had ceased: it was thought necessary, for its
increase, that its professors should be able to defend it, against the
subtilties of the Hethens; by those same ways of arguing, which were then in
use, among the Hethen Philosophers. It was therefore on this account, that the
Fathers, and chief Doctors of our Church, applied themselves to the
Peripatetick, and Platonic Sects: But chiefly to the Platonic: Because that
seemed to speak plainer about the Divine Nature; and also, because the
sweetness, and powerfulness of Plato's Writings, did serve as well to make them
popular speakers, as disputers. Having thus provided themselves against their
adversaries, they easily got the victory over them: and though the Idolatrous
Gentiles had kept the instruments of disputing, in their own hands, so many
hundred years; yet they soon convinced them, of the ridiculousness of their
worships, and the purity, and reasonableness of ours.

But now the Christians having had so good success, against the Religions of
the Heathens, by their own weapons; instead of laying them down when they had
done, unfortunately fell to manage them one against another. So many subtle
brains having been set on work, and warmed against a Foreign enemy: When that
was over, and they had nothing else to do (like an Army that returns
victorious, and is not presently disbanded) they began to spoil, and quarrel
amongst themselves. Hence that Religion, which at first appeared so innocent,
and peaceable, and fitted for the benefit of humane Society; which consisted in
the plain, and direct Rules, of good Life, and Charity, and the Belief in a
redemption by one Savior, was miserably divided into a thousand intricate
questions, which neither advance true Piety, nor good manners. Hence arose all
the Heresies of those times Against these, besides the force of Disputation,
the Church obtained the Arm of the Civil Magistrate: and so at last by the help
of many General Councils, got them extinguished, (if I may say they were
extinguished, seeing in this age wherein we live, we have seen most of them
unhappily revived). But still by his means, there was no knowledge in request,
but the Disputative Philosophy. For while things were in this posture, and so
many great Wits engaged in the heats of controversy: it was not to be
expected, that they should look out for further assistance, then the Arts,
which were already prepared; or that they should make any considerable
endeavors, about new inventions, and the tedious trial of Experiments. Nor can
we much blame them for it: seeing in a time of War, every man will rather
snatch up that armor which he finds ready made, then stay till men go to the
Mine, and dig out new Ore, and refine, and harden it a better way; in hope to
have his weapons of a stronster, and nobler Metal at last.

Nor was that Age unfit for such an enterprise, only on the account of these
Wars of the Tongue: But also by reason of the miserable distempers of the
civil affairs of the World, about that time: which were chiefly occasioned by
the Roman Armies usurping the Right of choosing Emperors, and by the invasions
of Barbarous Nations, which overwhelmed the greatest part of Europe. Amidst
these distractions, it was impossible for any thing of this Nature to have
prosper'd: and in so vast in inundation of ignorance, which carried away with
it the very grown and aged Trees themselves (those parts of Learning which had
taken root, so many generations past) it would have been in vain, to have
committed any new plants to the ground. Such studies as these, as they must
receive encouragement from the Sovereign Authority, so they must come up in a
peaceful time, when men's minds are at ease, and their imaginations not
disturbed, with the cares of preserving their Lives, and Fortunes.

To go on therefore with the matter of Fact: Sect. VIII. The Philosophy under
the Church of Rome.
Having left that dismal Bloody Age, we come into a Course of Time, which was
indeed far quieter: But it was like the quiet of the night, which is dark
withal. The Bishops of Rome taking the opportunity of the decay of the Roman
Empire, had wrested from it so many privileges, as did at last wholly destroy
it: and while it was gasping for life, forced it to make what Will, and
Testament they pleased. Being thus established, and making Rome, whose name was
still venerable, the Seat of their Dominion, they soon obtained a Supremacy
over the Western World. Under them for a long space together men lay in a
profound sleep. Of the Universal ignorance of those times; let it suffice to
take the Testimony of William of Malmsbury, one of our ancient English
Historians, who says, That even amongst the Priests themselves, he was a
Miracle that could understand Latin. Thus they continued; till at last, that
Church adopted, and cherished, some of the Peripatetick opinions, which the
most ingenious of the Moncks, in their solitary, and idle course of life, had
lighted upon. This Sect was excellently well made for their turn. For by
hovering so much, in geneall Terms, and Notions, it amusd men's minds, in things
that had not much difficulty: and so the Laity being kept blind, were forced in
all things to depend on the Lips of the Roman Clergy. From that time, even down
to the Reformation, the Gentlemen of all these Countries, employing themselves,
chiefly in arms, and adventures abroad: and the Books of the ancients, being
either destroyed by the Goths, and Vandalls; or those which escaped their fury,
lying covered with dust in the Libraries of Monasteries: few or none regarded
any of the Arts of Wit, and Reason, besides the Churchmen.

This, I will take the boldness to say, must needs be very injurious to the
increase of General Learning. For though I shall justly affirm, to the honor
of that sacred profession, that all knowledge has been more searched into, and
promoted by them, then by any other order of men, even from the Egyptians
times, (whose Priests in good part invented, or at least preserved, the
Learning of the East) down to our present Age: yet I must also add, that
whenever all the studious spirits of a Nation, have been reduced within the
Temples walls, that time is naturally liable to this danger, of having its
Genius more intent, on the different opinions in Religion, and the Rites of
Worship, then on the increase of any other Science. Of this I shall give two
instances: one, from the Ancients: the other, from our selves.

It is manifest, that amongst the Jews, all the men of Letters still applied
themselves to the understanding of their Law: that being the public way of
preferment, to the highest places of Judicature and Authority in the State. For
that many Fraternities were erected, and (as I may call them) Iudaical
Monast'ries constituted. Hence came all the interpretations on the Writings of
their Great Lawgiver: which at last grew so numerous, and various amongst
themselves, that Christ, when he came, could hardly find any thing of Moses his
mind, in all they had writ: But performed more himself toward the explanation
of the Law, in two Chapters, then they had done in all their infinite Volumes.
But while they were so excessively busy, about such sorts of contemplations,
the other parts of Learning were neglected: Little or no footsteps of
Philosophy remaining amonst them, except only the memory of that History of
Plants, which was not written by any of Aarons family, but by their wisest King.

But my other instance comes nearer home, Sect. IX. The Philosophy of the
Schole-men.
and it is of the Schole-men. Whose works when I consider, it puts into my
thoughts, how far more importantly a good Method of thinking, and a right
course of apprehending things, does contribute toward the attaining of
perfection in true knowledge, then the strongest, and most vigorous wit in the
World, can do without them. It cannot without injustice be denied, that they
were men of extraordinary strength of mind: they had a great quickness of
imagination, and subtilty of distinguishing: they very well understood the
consequence of propositions: their natural endowments were excellent: their
industry commendable: But they lighted on a wrong path at first, and wanted
matter to contrive: and so, like the Indians, only expressed a wonderful
Artifice, in the ordering of the same Feathers in a thousand varities of
Figures. I will not insist long on the Barbarousness of their style: though
that too might justly be censured: for all the ancient Philosophers, though
they labored not to be full, and adorned in their Speech: yet they always
strove to be easy, natural, and unaffected. Plato was allowed by all to be
the chief Master of speaking, as well as of thinking. And even Aristotle
himself, whom alone these men adored, however he has been since used by his
Commentators, was so careful about his words, that he was esteemed one of the
purest, and most polite Writers of his time. But the want of good Language, not
being the Schole-mens worst defect, I shall pass it over: and rather stop a
little, to examine the the matter itself, and order in which they proceeded.

The Subjects about which they were most conversant, were either some of those
Arts, which Aristostle had drawn into Method, or the more speculative parts of
our Divinity. These they commonly handled after this fashion. They began with
some general Definitions of the things themselves, according to their
universal Natures: Then divided them into their parts, and drew them out into
several propositions, which they laid down as Problems: these they
controverted on both sides: and by many nicities of Arguments, and citations of
Authorities, confuted their adversaries, and strengthened their own dictates.
But though this Notional War had been carried on with far more care, and
calmness amongst them, then it was: yet it was never able to do any great good
toward the enlargement of knowledge: Because it relied on general Terms,
which had not much foundation in Nature; and also because they took no other
course, but that of disputing.

That this insisting altogether on established Axioms, is not the most useful
way, is not only clear in such airy conceptions, which they managed: but also
in those things, which lie before every man's observation, which belong to the
life, and passions, and manners of men; which, one would think, might be sooner
reduced into standing Rules. As for example: To make a prudent man in the
affairs of State, It is not enough, to be well versed in all the conclusions,
which all the Politicians in the World have devised, or to be expert in the
Nature of Government, and Laws, Obedience, and Rebellion, Peace, and War: Nay
rather a man that relyes altogether on such universal precepts, is almost
certain to miscarry. But there must be a sagacity of judgment in particular
things: a dexterity in discerning the advantages of occasions: a study of the
humor, and interest of the people he is to govern: The same is to be found in
Philosophy; a thousand fine Argumentations, and Fabrics in the mind,
concerning the Nature of Body, Quantity, Motion, and the like, if they only
hover a-loof, and are not squared to particular matters, they may give an empty
satisfaction, but no benefit, and rather serve to swell, then fill the Soul.

But besides this, the very way of disputing itself, and inferring one thing
from another alone, is not at all proper for the spreading of knowledge. It
serves admirably well indeed, in those Arts, where the connection between the
propositions is necessary, as in the Mathematics, in which a long train of
Demonstrations, may be truly collected, from the certainty of the first
foundation: But in things of probability only, it seldom or never happens,
that after some little progress, the main subject is not left, and the
contenders fall not into other matters, that are nothing to the purpose: For if
but one link in the whole chain be loose, they wander far away, and seldom, or
never recover their first ground again. In brief, disputing is a very good
instrument, to sharpen men's wits, and to make them versatil, and wary defenders
of the Principles, which they already know: but it can never much augment the
solid substance of Science itself: And me thinks compared to Experimenting, it
is like Exercise to the Body in comparison of Meat: For running, walking,
wrestling, shooting, and other such active sports, will keep men in health, and
breath, and a vigorous temper: but it must be a supply of new food that must
make them grow: so it is in this case; much contention, and strife of argument,
will serve well to explain obscure things, and strengthen the weak, and give a
good, sound, masculine color, to the whole mass of knowledge: But it must be
a continued addition of observations, which must nourish, and increase, and
give new Blood, and flesh, to the Arts themselves.

But this has been only hitherto spoken, against the Method of the Schole-men
in General; on supposition, that they took the best course, that could be in
that kind. I shall now come, to weigh that too. For it may easily be proved,
that those very Theories, on which they built all their subtle webs, were not
at all Collected, by a sufficient information from the things themselves. Which
if it can be made out, I hope, it will be granted, that the force and vigor of
their Wit did more hurt, then good: and only served to carry them the faster
out of the right way, when they were once going. The Peripateticks themselves
do all grant, that the first rise of knowledge must be from the Senses, and
from an induction of their reports: Well then; how could the Schole-men be
proper for such a business, who were tied by their Cloysterall life, to such a
strictness of hours, and had seldom any larger prospects of Nature, then the
Gardens of their Monasteries? It is a common observation, that men's studies are
various, according to the different courses of life, to which they apply
themselves; or the tempers of the places, wherein they live. They who are bred
up in Commonwealths, where the greatest affairs are managed by the violence of
popular assemblies, and those governed by the most plausible speakers: busy
themselves chiefly about Eloquence; they who follow a Court, especially intend
the ornament of Language, and Poetry, and such more delicate Arts, which are
usually there in most request: they who retire from humane things, and shut
themselves up in a narrow compass, keeping company with a very few, and that
too in a solemn way, addict themselves, for the most part, to some melancholy
contemplations, or to devotion, and the thoughts of another world. That
therefore which was fittest for the Schole-mens way of life, we will allow
them. But what sorry kinds of Philosophy must they needs produce, when it was a
part of their Religion, to separate themselves, as much as they could, from the
converse of mankind? when they were so far from being able to discover the
secrets of Nature, that they had scarce opportunity, to behold enough of its
common works? If any shall be inclinable to follow the directions of such men
in Natural things, rather then of those, who make it their employment: I shall
believe, they will be irrational enough, to think, that a man may draw an
exacter Description of England, who has never been here, then the most
industrious Mr. Cambden, who had traveled over every part of this Country, for
that very purpose.

Whoever shall soberly profess, to be willing to put their shoulders, under the
burden of so great an enterprise, as to represent to mankind, the whole
Fabric, the parts, the causes, the effects of Nature: ought to have their eyes
in all parts, and to receive information from every quarter of the earth: they
ought to have a constant universal intelligence: all discoveries should be
brought to them: the Treasuries of all former times should be laid open before
them: the assistance of the present should be allowed them: so far are the
narrow conceptions of a few private Writers, in a dark Age, from being equal
to so vast a design. There are indeed some operations of the mind, which may be
best performed by the simple strength of men's own particular thoughts; such are
invention, and judgment, and disposition: For in them a security from noise,
leaves the Soul at more liberty, to bring forth, order, and fashion the heap of
matter, which had been before supplied to its use. But there are other works
also, which require as much aid, and as many hands, as can be found. And such
is this of observation: Which is the great Foundation of Knowledge: Some must
gather, some must bring, some separate, some examine: and (to use a Similitude,
which the present time of the year, and the ripe fields, that lie before my
eyes, suggest to me) it is in Philosophy, as in Husbandry: Wherein we see, that
a few hands will serve to measure out, and fill into sacks, that Corn, which
requires very many more laborers, to sow, and reap, and bind, and bring it into
the Barn.

But now it is time for me to dismiss this subtle generation of Writers: whom I
would not have prosecuted so far, but that they are still esteemed by some
men, the only Masters of Reason. If they would be content, with any thing less
then an Empire in Learning, we would grant them very much. We would permit them
to be great, and profound Wits, as Angelical, and Seraphical, as they pleased:
We would commend them, as we are wont to do Chaucer; we would confess, that
they are admirable in comparison of the ignorance of their own Age: And, as Sir
Philip Sidney of him, we would say of them; that it is to be wondered, how they
could see so clearly then, and we can see no cleerer now: But that they should
still be set before us, as the great Oracles of all Wit, we can never allow.
Suppose, that I should grant, that they are most useful in the controversies
of our Church, to defend us against the Heresies, and Schisms of our times:
what will thence follow, but that they ought to be confined, within their own
Bounds, and not be suffered to hinder the enlargement of the territories of
other Sciences? Let them still prevail in the Schools, and let them govern in
disputations: But let them not overspread all sorts of knowledge. That would
be as ridiculous, as if, because we see, that Thorns, and Briers, by reason of
their sharpness, are fit to stop a gap, and keep out wild Beasts; we should
therefore think, they deserved to be planted all over every Field. And yet I
should not doubt, (if it were not somewhat improper to the present discourse)
to prove, that even in Divinity itself, they are not so necessary, as they are
reputed to be: and that all, or most of our Religious controversies, may be as
well decided, by plain reason, and by considerations, which may be fetched from
the Religion of mankind, the Nature of Government, and humane Society, and
Scripture itself, as by the multitudes of Authorities, and subtleties of
disputes, which have been heretofore in use.

Sect X. The Restoration of Learning.
And now I am come to the time within our view, and to the third great Age of
the flourishing of Learning. Whether this recovery of knowledge did happen by
the benefit of Printing, invented about that time, which showed a very easy
way of communicating men's thoughts one to another? or whether it came from the
hatred, which was then generally conceived against the blindness, and
stupidity, of the Roman Friars? or from the Reformation, which put men upon a
stricter inquiry into the Truth of things? whatever the cause was, I will not
take much pains to determine: But I will rather observe, what kinds of
knowledge have most flourished upon it. If we compare this Age of Learning,
with the two former; we shall find, that this does far exceed both the other in
its extent: there being a much larger plot of ground, sown with Arts, and
civility at this time, then either when the Grecian, or Roman Empires
prevailed. For then (especially under the Romans) so many Nations being united
under one Dominion, and reduced into the Form of Provinces: that knowledge
which they had was chiefly confined to the walls of the Imperial Cities
themselves. But now (not to insist on the Learning of far remote Countries, of
which we have only imperfect Relations; but to contract our observation to
Christendom alone) there being so many different States, and Governments in
Europe, every Country sets up for itself: almost in every place, the liberal
Arts (as they are called) are cherished, and public allowance is made for
their support. And in this compass, the infinite numbers of Wits, which have
appeared so thick for these many years, have been chiefly taken up about some
of these three studies: either the Writings of the Ancients: or Controversies
of Religion: or Affairs of State.

The First thing that was undertaken, Sect. XI. The Recovery of the Ancients.
was to rescue the excellent works of former Writers from obscurity. To the
better performing of this, many things contributed about that time. Amongst
which, as to us in England, I may reckon (and that too, it may be, not the
least, whatever the action was in itself,) the dissolution of Abbyes: whereby
their Libraries came forth into the light, and fell into industrious Men's
hands, who understood how to make more use of them, then their slothful
possessors had done. So that now the Greek, and Latin Tongues began to be in
request; and all the ancient Authors, the Hethen Philosophers, Mathematicians,
Orators, Historians, Poets, the various Copies, and Translations of the Bible,
and the Primitive Fathers were produced. All these, by the several
Transcriptions, and the ignorance of the Transcribers had very many different
readings, and many parts wholly lost; and by the distance of times, and change
of customs, were grown obscure. About the interpreting, explaining, supplying,
commenting on these, almost all the first Wits were employed. A work of great
use, and for which we ought to esteem our selves much beholding to them. For
indeed, if they had not completed that business, to our hands, we of this age,
had not been so much at leisure, as now I hope we are, to prosecute new
inventions. If they had not done it, we should: of which we ought not to doubt,
seeing we behold, that even now, when the soil of Criticism is almost quite
Barren, and hardly another Crop will come, yet many Learned men cannot forbear
spending their whole labor in toyling about it: what then should we have done,
if all those Books had come down untouched to our hands?

We cannot then, with any sobriety, detract from the Critics, and
Philologists, whose labors we enjoy. But we ought rather to give them this
Testimony, that they were men of admirable Diligence: and that the Collections,
which they have made, out of the Monuments of the Ancients, will be wonderfully
advantageous to us, if the right use be made of them: if they be not set before
us, only that we may spend our whole Lives, in their consideration, and to
make the course of Learning more difficult: But if they be employed, to direct
us in the ways, that we ought to proceed, in knowledge for the future; if by
showing us what has been already finished, they point out to us, the most
probable means, to accomplish what is behind. For methinks, that wisdom, which
they fetched from the ashes of the dead, is something of the same nature, with
Ashes themselves: which, if they are kept up in heaps together, will be
useless: But if they are scattred upon Living ground, they will make it more
fertile, in the bringing forth of various sorts of Fruits. To these men then we
are beholding, that we have a fairer prospect about us: to them we owe, that we
are not ignorant of the times that are gone before us: which to be, is (as
Tully says) to be always Children. All this, and much more, is to be
acknowledged: But then we shall also desire of them, that they would content
themselves, with what is their due: that by what they have discovered, amongst
the rubbish of the Ancients, they would not contemn the Treasures, either
lately found out, or still unknown: and that they would not prefer the Gold of
Ophir, of which now there is no mention, but in Books, before the present
Mountains of the West Indies.

Thus I pass over this sort of revived Learning. Sect XII. Religious
controversies and Arts of Policy.
And now there comes into our view another remarkable occasion, of the
hinderance of the growth of Experimental Philosophy, within the compass of
this bright Age; and that is the great a-do which has been made, in raising,
and confirming, and refuting so many different Sects, and opinions of the
Christian Faith. For whatever other hurt or good comes, by such holy
speculative Wars (of which whether the benefit or mischief over-weighs, I will
not now examine) yet certainly by this means, the knowledge of Nature has been
very much retarded. And (to use that Metaphor, which an excellent Poet of our
Nation, turns to another purpose) that shower has done very much injury by
falling on the Sea, for which the Shepherd, and the Plough-man, called in vain:
The Wit of men has been profusely powered out on Religion, which needed not its
help, and which was only thereby made more tempestuous: while it might have
been more fruitfully spent, on some parts of Philosophy, which have been
hitherto barren, and might soon have been made fertile.

But besides this, there have been also several other professions, which have
drawn away the Inclinations of Men, from prosecuting the naked, and
uninteressed Truth. And of these I shall chiefly name the affairs of State, the
administration of Civil Government, and the execution of Laws. These by their
fair dowry of gain, and honor, have always allured the greatest part of the men
of Art, and reason, to addict themselves to them: while the search into severer
knowledge has been looked on, as a study out of the way, fitter for a melancholy
humorist, or a retired weak spirit, then to make men equal to business, or
serviceable to their Country. And in this, methinks the Experimental Philosophy
has met with very hard usage: For it has commonly in Men's Censures, undergone
the imputation of those very faults, which it endeavors to correct in the
Verbal. That indeed may be justly condemned for filling men's thoughts, with
imaginary Ideas of conceptions, that are no way answerable to the practical
ends of Life: But this on the other side (as I shall shortly make out) is the
surest guide, against such Notional wanderings: opens our eyes to perceive all
the realities of things: and cleers the brain, not only from darkness, but
false, or useless Light. This is certainly so, in the thing it self. But the
greatest part of men, have still apprehended the contrary. If they can bring
such Inquirers under the scornful Titles of Philosophers, or Scholars, or
Virtuosi, it is enough: They presently conclude them, to be men of another
World, only fit companions for the shadow, and their own melancholy whimsies:
looking on those who dig in the Mine of Nature, to be in as bad a condition, as
the King of Spains slaves in Peru, condemned for ever to that drudgery, and
never to be redeemed to any other employment. And is not this a very unequal
proceeding? While some over-zealous Divines do reprobate Natural Philosophy, as
a carnal knowledge, and a too much minding worldly things: the men of the
World, and business on the other side, esteem it merely as an idle matter of
Fancy, and as that which disables us, from taking right measures in humane
affairs. Thus by the one party, it is censured, for stooping too low; by the
other, for soaring too high: so that methinks, it is a good ground to conclude,
that it is guilty of neither of these faults, seeing it is alike condemned by
both the extremes. But I shall have a fitter occasion, to examine this
hereafter. However it be, it is not to be wondered, if men have not been very
zealous about those studies, which have been so far removed, from present
benefit, and from the applause of men. For what should incite them, to bestow
their time, and Art, in revealing to mankind, those Mysteries; for which, it
may be, they would be only despised at last? How few must there needs be, who
will be willing, to be impoverished for the common good? which they shall see,
all the rewards, which might give life to their Industry, passing by them, and
bestowed on the deserts of easier studies? and while they for all their pains,
and public spirit, shall only perhaps be served as the poor man was in the
Fable: who, while he went down into the well, in assurance, that he should find
a mighty Treasure there, was in the mean time robbed by his companions, that
stayed above, of his Cloak, and all the Booty that he had before gotten?

The Philosophy of the Moderns.
And yet, notwithstanding all these unfortunate hindrances, there have been
many commendable attempts in this way, in the compass of our Memories, and the
Age before us. And though they have been for the most part carried on, by the
private Diligence of some few Men, in the midst of a thousand difficulties,
yet it will not be unprofitable to recount some of them: if it were only to
give a fair ground of hope, how much progress may be made by a formed and
Regular Assembly, seeing some single hands, with so small encouragement, could
dispatch so much of the work.

There are Five new ways of Philosophy, that come into my observation.

Sect. XIII. Modern Dogmatists.
The First is, of those, who, out of a just disdain, that the Ancients should
still possess a Tyranny over our Judgments, began first to put off the
reverence, that men had born to their memories; and handling them more
familiarly, made an exact survey of their imperfections: But then having
rejected them, they pursued their success too far, and straight fell to form
and impose new Theories on Men's Reason, with an usurpation, as great as that of
the others: An action, which we that live in this Age, may resemble to some
things that we have seen acted on the Stage of the World: For we also have
beheld the Pretenders to public Liberty, turn the greatest Tyrants themselves.
The first part of these men's performance is very much to the praised: They have
made the ground open, and clear, for us: they have removed the rubbish; which,
when one great Fabric is to be pulled down, and another to be erected in its
stead, is always esteemed well nigh half the whole work: Their adventure was
bold, and hazardous: They touched men's minds in their tenderest part, when they
strove to pluck off those opinions, which had, by long custom, been so closely
twined about them: They freed our understandings from the Charms of vain
apparitions, and a slavery to dead Men's names. And we may well ghess, that the
absolute perfection of the True Philosophy, is not now far off, seeing this
first great and necessary prepation for its coming, is already taken off our
hands. For methinks there is an agreement, between the growth of Learning, and
of Civil Government. The Method of the rise and increase of that, was, this. At
first in every Country, there prevailed nothing, but Barbarism, and Rudeness:
All places were terrible with Giants, and enchantments, and insolent Usurpers:
Against these there first arose some mighty Heroes, as Hercules, Theseus, and
Jason: These scowr'd the World, redressed injuries, destroyed Monsters: and for
this they were made Demigods. But then they gave over, and it was left to the
great Men, who succeeded them, as Solon, and Lycurgus, to accomplish the Work,
to found Commonwealths, to give Laws, to put Justice in its course: And why
may I not now presume (as many others have done before me) to reduce these
stories to a Philosophical sense? First then, the Phantasms, and Fairies, and
venerable Images of Antiquity, did long haunt the World: against these we have
had our Champions; and without all question, they had the better of the cause:
and now we have good ground to trust, that these Illusions being well over, the
last finishing of this great Work, is nigh at hand, and is reserved for this
undertaking.

So then, thus far they did well. But in the second part of their Enterprise,
they themselves seem to me to have run into the same mistake, for which we
chiefly complained against those Ancients, whose Authority they destroyed. The
greatest occasion of our dissenting from the Greek Philosophers, and especially
from Aristotle, was, that they made too much have to seize on the prize, before
they were at the end of the Race: that they fixed, and determined their
judgments, on general conclusions too soon, and so could not afterward alter
them, by any new appearances, which might represent themselves. And may we not
suppose, that posterity will have the same quarrel at these men's labors? We do
not fall foul upon Antiquity, out of any singularity of opinion, or a
presumptuous confidence of the strength of our Wits above theirs. We admire the
men, but only dislike the Method of their proceedings. And can we forbear
murmuring, if we see our contemporaries disdain them, and yet imitate their
failings? If we must constitute a Sovereignty over our Reasons; I know not, why
we should not allow this Dominion to the Ancients, rather then to any one of
the Moderns. They are all dead long since: and though we should be over-reached
by them in some few falsehoods, yet there is no danger, lest they should
increase them upon us: whereas, if we once hang on the lips, of the wisest men
now Living; we are still in their Power, and under their Discipline, and
subject to be led by all their Dictates for the future. It is true indeed, a
diligent Inquirer of these times, may gather as much experience, and in
probability, conclude as rightly, as a whole Academy, or Sect of theirs could:
yet I shall still deny, that any one Man, though he has the nimblest, and most
universal observation, can ever, in the compass of his life, lay up enough
knowledge, to suffice all that shall come after him to rest upon, without the
help of any new Inquiries.

And if we suppose the best, that some one Man, by wonderful sagacity, or
extraordinary chance, shall light upon the True Principles of Natural
Philosophy: yet what will be the profit, of such universal Demonstrations, if
they are only fitted for talk, and the solving of appearances? Will there be
any great matter, whether they are certain, or doubtful; old, or new; if they
must be only bounded to a systeme, and confined to discourse? The True
Philosophy must be first of all begun, on a scrupulous, and severe examination
of particulars: from them, there may be some general Rules, with great caution
drawn: But it must not rest there, nor is that the most difficult part of its
course: It must advance those Principles, to the finding out of new effects,
through all the varieties of Matter: and so both the courses must proceed
orderly together; from experimenting, to Demonstrating, and from demonstrating,
to Experimenting again. I hope I shall content my Reader, if I only give one
instance in this case. It is probable, that he, who first discovered, that all
things were ordered in Nature by Motion; went upon a better ground, then any
before him. But now if he will only manage this, by nicely disputing about the
Nature, and Causes of Motion in general; and not prosecute it through all
particular Bodies: to what will he at last arrive, but only to a better sort
of Metaphysics? And it may be, his Followers, some Ages hence, will divide his
Doctrine into as many distinctions, as the Schole-men did that of Matter, and
Form: and so the whole life of it, will also vanish away, into air, and words,
as that of theirs has already done.

Sect. XIV. The ill effects of Dogmatical Philosophy.
But it is time for me to give over this Argument; in which I fear, that what I
have already said, will alarm some excellent men, whose abilities I admire: who
may perhaps suspect, that it has bin with a particular reflection. I might say
for my self, That first they must pass sentence on themselves, before they can
think so, seeing I have named no man. But I will rather sincerely profess, that
I had no satirical Sense, but only declared against Dogmatists in general. And
I cannot repent my having done it, while I perceive, there are two very
dangerous mischiefs, which are caused by that way of Philosophy. The one is,
that it makes men give over, and believe that they are satisfied, too soon.
This is of very ill consequence: For thereby men's industry will be slackned,
and all the motives to any farther pursuit taken away. And indeed this is an
error, which is very natural to men's minds: they love not a long and a tedious
doubting, though it brings them at last to a real certainty: but they choose
rather to conclude presently, then to be long in suspense, though to better
purpose. And it is with most men's understandings, as with their eyes; to which
those seem the most delightful prospects, where varieties of Hills, and Woods,
do soon bound their wanderings; then where there is one large smooth campaign,
over which they may see much farther, but where there is nothing to delay, and
stop, and divert the sight.

But the other ill effect of which I shall take notice, is, that it commonly
inclines such men, who think themselves already resolved, and immovable in
their opinions, to be more imperious, and impatient of contradiction, then
becomes the calmness, and unpassionate evenness of the true Philosophical
Spirit. It makes them prone to undervalue other men's labors, and to neglect
the real advantage, that may be gotten by their assistance; least they should
seem to darken their own glory. This is a Temper of mind, of all others the
most pernicious; to which I may chiefly attribute the slowness of the increase
of knowledge amongst men. For what great things can be expected, if men's
understandings shall be (as it were) always in the warlike State of Nature, one
against another? if every one be jealous of another inventions, and still
ready to put a stop to his conquests? Will there not be the same wild condition
in Learning, which had been amongst men, if they had always been dispersed,
still preying upon, and spoiling their neighbors? If that had still continued,
no Cities had been built, no Trades found out, no Civility taught: For all
these noble productions came from men's joining in compacts, and entering into
Society. It is a usual saying, that Where the Natural Philosopher ends, the
Physician must begin: and I will also add, that The Natural Philosopher is to
begin, where the Moral ends. It is requisite, that he who goes about such an
undertaking, should first know himself, should be well-practis'd in all the
modest, humble, friendly Virtues: should be willing to be taught, and to give
way to the Judgment of others. And I dare boldly say, that a plain,
industrious Man, so prepared, is more likely to make a good Philosopher, then
all the high, earnest, insulting Wits, who can neither bear partnership, nor
opposition. The Chemists lay it down, as a necessary qualification of their
happy Man, to whom God will reveal their adored Elixir, that he must be rather
innocent, and virtuous, then knowing. And if I were to form the Character of a
True Philosopher, I would be sure to make that the Foundation: Not that I
believe, God will bestow any extraordinary Light in Nature, on such men more
then others: But upon a bare, rational account: For certainly, such men, whose
minds are so soft, so yielding, so complying, so large, are in a far better
way, then the Bold, and haughty Assertors: they will pass by nothing, by which
they may learn: they will be always ready to receive, and communicate
Observations: they will not contemn the Fruits of others diligence: they will
rejoice, to see mankind benefited, whether it be by themselves, or others.

Sect. XV. The Revivers of the Ancient Sects*
The second endeavors, have been of those, who renounced the Authority of
Aristotle: But then restored some one or other of the Ancient Sects in his
stead. If such men's intentions were only, that we might have before us, the
conceptions of several men, of different Ages, upon the works of Nature,
without obliging us to an implicit consent to all that they affirm; then their
labors ought to be received with great acknowledgements: For such a general
prospect will very much enlarge, and guide our inquiry: and perhaps also will
help to hinder the Age from ever falling back again into a subjection to one
usurping Philosopher. But if their purpose was, to erect those Schools which
they revived, into as absolute a power, as the Peripateticks had heretofore: if
they strive to make a competition between Aristotle, and Epicurus, or
Democritus, or Philolaus: they do not contribute very much, toward the main
design. For toward that, it is not enough, that the Tyrant be changed; but the
Tyranny it self must be wholly taken away.

The Third sort of new Philosophers, Sect. XVI. Modern Experimenters.
have been those, who have not only disagreed from the Ancients, but have also
proposed to themselves the right course of slow, and sure Experimenting: and
have prosecuted it as far, as the shortness of their own Lives, or the
multiplicity of their other affairs, or the narrowness of their Fortunes, have
given them leave. Such as these, we are to expect to be but few: for they must
divest themselves of many vain conceptions, and overcome a thousand false
Images, which lie like Monsters in their way, before they can get as far as
this. And of these, I shall only mention one great Man, who had the true
Imagination of the whole extent of this Enterprise, as it is now set on foot;
and that is, the Lord Bacon. In whose Books there are every where scattered the
best arguments, that can be produced for the defense of Experimental
Philosophy; and the best directions, that are needful to promote it. All which
he has already adorned with so much Art; that if my desires could have
prevailed with some excellent Friends of mine, who engaged me to this Work:
there should have been no other Preface to the History of the Royal Society,
but some of his Writings. But methinks, in this one Man, I do at once find
enough occasion, to admire the strength of humane Wit, and to bewail the
weakness of a Mortal condition. For is it not wonderful, that he, who had run
through all the degrees of that profession, which usually takes up men's whole
time; who had studied, and practiced, and governed the Common Law: who had
always lived in the crowd, and born the greatest Burden of Civil business:
should yet find leisure enough for these retired Studies, to excel all those
men, who separate themselves for this very purpose? He was a Man of strong*
clear, and powerful Imaginations: his Genius was searching, and inimitable: and
of this I need give no other proof, then his Style it self; which as, for the
most part, it describes men's minds, as well as Pictures do their Bodies; so it
did his above all men living. The course of it vigorous, and majestical: The
Wit Bold, and Familiar: The comparisons fetched out of the way, and yet the
most easy: in all, expressing a soul, equally skilled in Men, and Nature. All
this, and much more is true of him: But yet his Philosophical Works do show,
that a single, and busy hand can never grasp all this whole Design, of which
we treat. His Rules were admirable: yet his History not so faithful, as might
have been wished in many places, he seems rather to take all that comes, then
to choose; and to heap, rather, then to register. But I hope this accusation of
mine can be no great injury to his Memory; seeing, at the same time, that I say
he had not the strength of a thousand men; I do also allow him to have had as
much as twenty.

The next Philosophers, Sect. XVII. The Chemists.
whom I shall touch upon, are the Chemists, who have been more numerous, in
this later Age, then ever before. And without question, they have lighted upon
the right Instrument of great productions, and alterations: which must for the
most part be performed by Fire. They may be divided into three rancks: Such, as
look after the knowledge of Nature in general: Such, as seek out, and prepare
Medicines: and such, as search after riches, by Transmutations, and the great
Elixir. The two first, have been very successful, in separating, compounding,
and changing the parts of things: and in showing the admirable powers of
Nature, in the raising of new consistencies, figures, colors, and virtues of
Bodies. And from their labors, the true Philosophy is like to receive the
noblest Improvements. But the pretensions of the Third kind, are not only to
indow us, with all the benefits of this life, but with Immortality it self. And
their success has been as small, as their design was extravagant. Their Writers
involve them in such darkness; that I scarce know, which was the greatest task,
to understand their meaning, or to effect it. And in the chase of the
Philosopher's Stone, they are so earnest, that they are scarce capable of any
other thoughts: so that if an Experiment lie never so little out of their rode,
it is free from their discovery: as I have heard of some creatures in Africa,
which still going a violent pace straight on, and not being able to turn
themselves, can never get any prey, but what they meet just in their way. This
secret they prosecute so impetuously, that they believe they see some footsteps
of it, in every line of Moses, Solomon, or Virgil. The truth is, they are
downright Enthusiasts about it. And seeing we cast Enthusiasm out of Divinity
it self, we shall hardly sure be persuaded, to admit it into Philosophy. It
were perhaps a vain attempt, to try to cure such Men of their groundless hopes.
It may be they are happier now, as they are. And they would only cry out with
the Man in Horace, that their Friends, who had restored them to a perfect
sense, had murdered them. But certainly, if they could be brought to content
themselves with moderate things, to grow rich by degrees, and not to imagine,
they shall gain the Indies, out of every Crucible: there might be wonderful
things expected from them. And of this we have good assurance, by what is come
abroad from diverse eminent Persons: amongst whom some are members of the Royal
Society. And, if it were not already excellently performed by others, I might
here speak largely, of the advantages that accrue to Physic, by the
industrious labors of such Chemists, as have only the discreet, and sober
flame, and not the wild lightning of the others Brains.

Sect XVIII. Those that have handled particular Subjects.
But the last kind, that I shall name, has been of those, who, conscious of
humane frailty, and of the vastness of the Design of an universal Philosophy;
have separated, and chosen out for themselves, some particular Subjects, about
which to bestow their diligence. In these, there was less hazard of failing:
these by one man's Industry, and constant endeavors, might probably at last be
overcome. And indeed they have generally reaped the fruits of their modesty. I
have but one thing to except against some few of them: that they have been
sometimes a little too forward to conclude upon Axioms, from what they have
found out, in some particular Body. But that is a fault, which ought to be
overwhelmed by their other praises. And I shall boldly affirm, that if all
other Philosophical Matters had been as well, and as thoroughly sifted, as some
admirable Men of this Age have managed some parts of Astronomy, Geometry,
Anatomy, etc. there would scarce any burden have remained, on the shoulders of
our Posterity: But they might have sat quietly down, and enjoyed the pleasure
of the true Speculative Philosophy, and the profit of the Practical.

To all these proceedings, that I have mentioned, there is as much honor to be
paid, as can be due to any one single humane Wit: But they must pardon us, if
we still prefer the joint force of many men.

And now it is much to be wondered, Sect. XIX. Modern Academies for Language.
that there was never yet such an Assembly erected, which might proceed, on
some standing constitutions of Experimenting. There have, it is true, of late,
in many parts of Europe, some Gentlemen met together, submitted to Common Laws,
and formed themselves into Academies. But it has been, for the most part, to a
far different purpose: and most of them only aimed at the smoothing of their
Style, and the Language of their Country. Of these, the first arose in Italy;
where they have since so much abounded, that there was scarce any one great
City without one of these combinations. But that, which excelled all the other,
and kept it self longer untainted from the corruptions of speech, was the
French Academy at Paris. This was composed of the noblest Authors of that
Nation: and had for its Founder, the Great Cardinal de Richelieu: who, amongst
all his cares, whereby he established, and enlarged that Monarchy so much, did
often refresh himself by directing, and taking an account of their progress.
And indeed in his own life, he found so great success of this Institution, that
he saw the French Tongue abundantly purified, and beginning to take place in
the Western World, almost as much, as the Greek did of old, when it was the
Language of Merchants, Soldiers, Courtiers, and Travelers. But I shall say no
more of this Academy; that I may not deprive my Reader of the delight of
perusing their own History, written by Monsieur de Pelisson: which is so
masculinely, so chastely, and so unaffectedly done, that I can hardly forbear
envying the French Nation this honor: that while the English Royal Society has
so much out-gone their Illustrious Academy, in the greatness of its
undertaking, it should be so far short of them in the abilities of its
Historian. I have only this to allege in my excuse; that as they undertook the
advancement of the Elegance of Speech, so it became their History, to have some
resemblance to their enterprise: Whereas the intention of ours, being not the
Artifice of Words, but a bare knowledge of things; my fault may be esteemed the
less, that I have written of Philosophers, without any ornament of Eloquence.

Sect. XX. A proposal for erecting an English Academy.
I hope now, it will not be thought a vain digression, if I step a little aside,
to recommend the forming of such an Assembly, to the Gentlemen of our Nation. I
know indeed, that the English Genius is not so airy, and discoursive, as that
of some of our neighbors, but that we generally love to have Reason set out in
plain, undeceiving expressions; as much, as they to have it delivered with
color, and beauty. And besides this, I understand well enough, that they have
one great assistance, to the growth of Oratory, which to us is wanting: that
is, that their Nobility live commonly close together in their Cities, and our
for the most part scattered in their Country Houses. For the same reason, why
our streets are not so well built as theirs, will hold also, for their
exceeding us in the Arts of Speech: They prefer the Pleasures of the Town; we,
those of the Field: whereas it is from the frequent conversations in Cities,
that the Humor, and Wit, and Variety, and Elegance of Language, are chiefly to
be fetched. But yet, notwithstanding these discouragements, I shall not stick
to say: that such a project is now seasonable to be set on foot, and may make a
great Reformation in the manner of our Speaking, and Writing. First, the thing
itself is no way contemptible. For the purity of Speech, and greatness of
Empire have in all Countries, still met together. The Greeks spoke best, when
they were in their glory of conquest: The Romans made those times the Standard
of their Wit, when they subdued, and gave Laws to to the World: And from
thence, by degrees, they declined to corruption; as their valor, their
prudence, and the honor of their Arms did decay: and at last, did even meet the
Northern Nations half way in Barbarism, a little before they were overrun by
their Armies.

But besides, if we observe well the English Language; we shall find, that it
seems at this time more then others, to require some such aid, to bring it to
its last perfection. The Truth is, it has been hitherto a little too carelessly
hand led; and I think, has had less labor spent about its polishing, then it
deserves. Till the time of King Henry the Eighth, there was scarce any man
regarded it, but Chaucer; and nothing was written in it, which one would be
willing to read twice, but some of his Poetry. But then it began to raise it
self a little, and to sound tolerably well. From that Age, down to the
beginning of our late Civil Wars, it was still fashioning, and beautifying it
self. In the Wars themselves (which is a time, wherein all Languages use, if
ever, to increase by extraordinary degrees; for in such busy, and active
times, there arise more new thoughts of men, which must be signified, and
varied by new expressions) then I say, it received many fantastical terms,
which were introduced by our Religious Sects; and many outlandish phrases,
which several Writers, and Translators, in that great hurry, brought in, and
made free as they pleased, and with all it was enlarged by many sound, and
necessary Forms, and Idioms, which it before wanted. And now, when men's minds
are somewhat settled, their Passions allai'd, and the peace of our Country
gives us the opportunity of such diversions: if some sober and judicious Men,
would take the whole Mass of our Language into their hands, as they find it,
and would set a mark on the ill Words; correct those, which are to be retained;
admit, and establish the good; and make some emendations in the Accent, and
Grammar: I dare pronounce, that our Speech would quickly arrive at as much
plenty, as it is capable to receive; and at the greatest smoothness, which its
derivation from the rough German will allow it.

Nor would I have this new English Acamedy, confined only to the weighing
Words, and Letters: But there may be also greater Works found out for it. By
many signs we may ghess, that the Wits of our Nation, are not inferior to any
other; and that they have an excellent mixture of the Spirit of the French, and
the Spaniard: and I am confident, that we only want a few more standing
Examples, and a little more familiarity with the Ancients, to excel all the
Moderns. Now the best means, that can be devised to bring that about, is to
settle a fixed, and Impartial Court of Eloquence; according to whose Censure,
all Books, or Authors should either stand or fall. And above all, there might
be recommended to them one Principal Work, in which we are yet defective; and
that is, the compiling of a History of our late Civil Wars. Of all the labors
of men's Wit, and Industry, I scarce know any, that can be more useful to the
World, then Civil History: if it were written, with that sincerity, and
majesty, as it ought to be, as a faithful Idea of humane Actions. And it is
observable, that almost in all civilized Countries, it has been the last thing,
that has come to perfection. I may now say, that the English can already show
many industrious, and worthy Pieces in this kind: But yet, I have some
Prophetical imagination in my thoughts, that there is still behind, something
Greater, then any we have yet seen, reserved for the Glory of this Age. One
Reason of this my strong persuasion, is a comparison, that I make, between the
condition of our State, and that of the Romans. They at first writ, in this
way, not much better then our Moncks: only Registring in an undigested manner,
some few naked Breviaries of their Wars, and Leagues, and Acts, of their City
Magistrates. And indeed they advanced forward by very slow degrees: For I
remember, that Tully somewhere complains, in these Words: Historia nonclum
latinis literis illustrata. But it was in the peaceful reign of Augustus, after
the conclusion of their long Civil Wars, that most of their perfect Historians
appeared. And it seems to me, that we may expect the same progress amongst us.
There lie now ready in Bank, the most memorable Actions of Twenty years: a
Subject of as great Dignity, and Variety, as ever passed under any Man's hands:
the peace which we enjoy, gives leisure and encouragement enough: The effects
of such a Work would be wonderfully advantageous, to the safety of our Country,
and to His Majesty's Interest: for there can be no better means to preserve his
Subjects in obedience for the future, than to give them a full view of the
miseries, that attended rebellion. There are only therefore wanting, for the
finishing of so brave an undertaking, the united endeavors of some public
minds, who are conversant both in Letters and business: and if it were
appointed to be the labor of one or two men to compose it, and of such an
Assembly, to revise and correct it, it might certainly challenge all the
Writings of past, or present Times.

But I see, I have already transgressed: For I know it will be thought
unadvisedly done, while I was enforcing a weightier Design, to start, and to
follow another of less moment. I shall therefore let it pass as an extravagant
conceit: only I shall affirm, that the Royal Society is so far from being like
to put a stop to such a business, that I know many of its Members, who are as
able as any others, to assist in the bringing it into practice.

Thus I have dispatched my first general Head; in which, it may be, it was not
needful to have stayed so long: seeing, I am confident, I have said nothing,
but what was before very well known, and what passes about in common discourse.

I did on purpose omit the Learned Age of the Arabians, Sect XXI. The
Philosophy of the Arabians.
in its proper place: because I was resolved, as I came down, to keep my self
as near as I could, within the Bounds of Christendom. But I shall now add,
concerning them, that their Studies also were principally bent, upon expounding
Aristotle, and the Greek Physicians. They were, without question, men of a
deep, and subtle Wit: which is a Character that it may be in all Ages has
belonged more justly to the Tempers of the Southern, then of the Northern
Countries: of this they have left many noble Testimonies behind them; so many,
that (if we believe some worthy and industrious Men of our own Nation, who have
searched into their Monuments) they might even almost be compared to Rome, and
Athens themselves. But they enjoyed not the light long enough. It brake forth
upon the point of their greatest conquests: It mainly consisted, in
understanding the Ancients: and what they would have done, when they had been
weary of them, we cannot tell: For that Work was not fully over, before they
were darkened by that, which made even Greece it self Barbarous, the Turkish
Monarchy. However, that knowledge, which they had, is the more remarkable,
because it sprung up, in that part of the World, which has been almost always
perversely unlearned. For methinks, that small Spot of Civil Arts, compared to
their long course of ignorance, before, and after, bears some resemblance with
that Country it self; where there are some few little Valleys, and Wells, and
pleasant Shades of Palm Trees; But those lying in the midst of Deserts, and
unpassable Tracts of Sands.

Sect. XXII. A defense of the Royal Society, inrespect of the Ancients.
But now it being a fit time to stop, and breathe a while, and to take a review
of the ground, that we have passed. It will be here needful for me, to make an
Apology for my self, in a matter, which, if it be not before hand removed, may
chance to be very prejudicial to men's good opinion of the Royal Society it
self, as well as of its Historian. I fear, that this Assembly will receive
disadvantage enough, from my weak management of their cause, in many other
particulars: so that I must not leave them, and my self unjustify'd, in this,
wherein we have so much right on our sides. I doubt not then, but it will come
into the thoughts of many Critics, (of whom the World is now full) to urge
against us, that I have spoken a little too sparingly of the Merits of former
Ages; and that this Design seems to be promoted, with a malicious intention of
disgracing the Merits of the Ancients.

But First, I shall beseech them, calmly to consider; whether they themselves
do not more injure those great Men, whom they would make the Masters of our
Judgments, by attributing all things to them so absolutely; then we, who do
them all the Justice we can, without adoring them? It is always esteemd the
greatest mischief, a man can do those whom he loves, to raise men's expectations
of them too high, by undue, and impertinent commendations. For thereby not only
their enemies, but indifferent men, will be secretly inclined to be more
watchful over their failings, and to conspire in beating down their Fame. What
then can be more dangerous to the honor of Antiquity; then to set its value at
such a rate, and to extol it so extravagantly, that it can never be able to
bear the trial, not only of envious, but even of impartial Judges? It is
natural to Men's mind, when they perceive others to arrogate more to themselves,
then is their share; to deny them even that, which else they would confess to
be their Right. And of the Truth of this, we have an instance of far greater
concernment, then that which is before us. And that is, in Religion it self.
For while the Bishops of Rome did assume an infallibility, and a sovereign
Dominion over our Faith: the reformed Churches did not only justly refuse to
grant them that, but some of them thought themselves obliged to forbear all
communion with them, and would not give them that respect, which possibly might
belong to so ancient, and so famous a Church; and which might still have been
allowed it, without any danger of Superstition.

But to carry this Dispute a little farther: What is this, of which they accuse
us? They charge us with immodesty in neglecting the guidance of wiser, and more
discerning Men, then our selves. But is not this rather the greatest sign of
Modesty, to confess, that we our selves may err, and all mankind besides? To
acknowledge the difficulties of Science? and to submit our minds, to all the
least Works of Nature? What kind of behavior do they exact from us in this
case? That we should reverence the Footsteps of Antiquity? We do it most
unanimously. That we should subscribe to their sense, before our own? We are
willing, in probabilities; but we cannot, in matters of Fact: for in them we
follow the most ancient Author of all others, even Nature it self. Would they
have us make our eyes behold things, at no farther distance, than they saw?
That is impossible; seeing we have the advantage of standing upon their
shoulders. They say, it is insolence, to prefer our own inventions before those
of our Ancestors. But do not even they the very same thing themselves, in all
the petty matters of life? In the Arts of War, and Government; In the making,
and abolishing of Laws; nay even in the fashion of their Clothes, they differ
from them, as their humor, or Fancy leads them. We approach the Ancients, as
we behold their Tombs, with veneration: but we would not therefore be confined
to live in them altogether: nor would (I believe) any of those, who profess to
be most addicted to their Memories. They tell us, that in this corruption of
Manners, and sloth of Men's Minds, we cannot go beyond those, who searched so
diligently, and concluded so warily before us. But in this they are confuted by
every days experience. They object to us Tradition, and the consent of all
Ages. But do we not yet know the deceitfulness of such Words? Is any man, that
is acquainted with the craft of founding Sects, or of managing Votes in popular
Assemblies, ignorant, how easy it is to carry things in a violent stream? And
when an opinion has once mastered its first opposers, and settled it self in
Men's Passions, or Interests: how few there be, that coldly consider, what they
admit for a long time after? So that when they say, that all Antiquity is
against us; it is true, in show, they object to us, the Wisdom of many Ages; but
in reality, they only confront us, with the Authority of a few leading Men.
Nay, what if I should say, that this honor for the dead, which such men pretend
to, is rather a worshipping of themselves, than of the Ancients? It may be well
proved, that they are more in love with their own Commentaries, then with the
Texts of those, whom they seem to make their Oracles: and that they chiefly
dote on those Theories, which they themselves have drawn from them: which, it
is likely, are almost as far distant from the Original meaning of their
Authors, as the Positions of the New Philosophers themselves.

But to conclude this Argument (for I am weary of walking in a rode so trodden)
I think I am able to confute such men by the practice of those very Ancients,
to whom they stoop so low. Did not they trust themselves, and their own
Reasons? Did not they busy themselves in inquiry, make new Arts, establish new
Tenants, overthrow the old, and order all things as they pleased, without any
servile Regard to their Predecessors? The Grecians all, or the greatest part of
them, fetched their Learning from Egypt. And did they blindly assent to all,
that was taught them by the Priests of Isis, and Osiris? If so; then why did
they not, together with their Arts, receive all the infinite Idolatries, which
their Masters embraced? seeing it is not to be questioned, but the Egyptians
delivered the rites of their Religion to strangers, with as much Solemnity at
least, as they did the Mysteries of their Hieroglyphics or Philosophy. Now
then, let Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, and the rest of their wise Men, be
our examples, and we are safe. When they traveled into the East, they
collected what was fit for their purpose, and suitable to the Genius of their
Country; and left the superfluities behind them: They brought home some of
their useful Secrets: but still counted their worshipping a Dog, or an Onion, a
Cat, or a Crocodile, ridiculous. And why shall not we be allowed the same
liberty, to distinguish, and choose, what we will follow? Especially, seeing in
this, they had a more certain way of being instructed by their Teachers, then
we have by them: They were present on the place: They learned from the Men
themselves, by word of mouth; and so were in a likely course to apprehend all
their Precepts aright: whereas we are to take their Doctrines, so many hundred
years after their death, from their Books only, where they are for the most
part so obscurely expressed, that they are scarce sufficiently understood by
the Grammarians, and Linguists themselves, much less by the Philosophers.

In few words therefore, let such men believe, that we have no thought of
detracting from what was good in former times: But, on the contrary, we have a
mind to bestow on them, a solid praise, instead of a great, and an empty. While
we are raising new Observations upon Nature, we mean not to abolish the Old,
which were well, and judiciously established by them: No more, then a King,
when he makes a new Coin of his own, does presently call in that, which bears
the Image of his Father: he only intends thereby to increase the current Money
of his Kingdom, and still permits the one to pass, as well as the other. It is
probable enough, that upon a fresh survey, we may find many things true, which
they have before asserted: and then will not they receive a greater
confirmation, from this our new and severe approbation, then from those men,
who resign up their opinions to their Words only? It is the best way of
honoring them, to separate the certain things in them, from the doubtful: For
that shows, we are not so much carried toward them, by rash affection, as by
an unbiased Judgment. If we would do them the most right; it is not necessary
we should be perfectly like them in all things. There are two principal Ways of
preserving the Names of those, that are passed: The one, by Pictures; the
other, by Children: The Pictures may be so made, that they may far nearer
resemble the Original, then Children do their Parents: and yet all Mankind
choose rather to keep themselves alive by Children, then by the other. It is
best for the Philosophers of this Age to imitate the Ancients as their
Children: to have their blood derived down to them; but to add a new
Complexion, and Life of their own: While those, that endeavor to come near them
in every Line, and Feature, may rather be called their dead Pictures, or
Statues, then their Genuine Offspring.

The End of the First Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY. The SECOND PART.
Section I. The Division of the Narration.
THus I am, at length, arrived at the second Part of my Method, The Narration it
self. This I shall divide into three Periods of Time, according to the several
Degrees of the preparation, growth, and complete Constitution of the Royal
Society.

The First shall consist of the first occasions of this Model, and the Men, who
first devised to put it in execution: and shall end, where they began to make
it a formed, and Regular Assembly.

The Second shall trace out their first attempts, till they received the
public assistance of Royal Authority.

The Third shall deliver, what they have done, since they were made a Royal
Corporation.

It may seem perhaps, that in passing through the first of these, I go too far
back, and treat of things, that may appear to be of too private, and Domestic
concernment, to be spoken in this public way. But if this Enterprise, which is
now so well established, shall be hereafter advantageous to Mankind (as I make
no scruple to foretell, that it will) it is but just, that future times should
hear the names, of its first Promoters: That they may be able to render
particular thanks to them, who first conceived it in their minds, and practiced
some little draught of it long ago. And besides, I never yet saw an Historian
that was clear from all Affections: that, it may be, were not so much to be
called Integrity, as a stoical insensibility: Nor can I, more then others,
resist my inclinations, which strongly force me to mention that, which will be
for the honor of that place, where I received a great part of my Education. It
was therefore, some space after the end of the Civil Wars at Oxford, in Dr.
Wilkins his Lodgings, in Wadham College, which was then the place of Resort for
Virtuous, and Learned Men, that the first meetings were made, which laid the
foundation of all this that followed. The University had, at that time, many
Members of its own, who had begun a free way of reasoning; and was also
frequented by some Gentlemen, of Philosophical Minds, whom the misfortunes of
the Kingdom, and the security and ease of a retirement amongst Gown-men, had
drawn thither.

Their first purpose was no more, Sect. II. The Meetings at Oxford.
then only the satisfaction of breathing a freer air, and of conversing in
quiet one with another, without being engaged in the passions, and madness of
that dismal Age. And from the Institution of that Assembly, it had been enough,
if no other advantage had come, but this: That by this means there was a race
of young Men provided, against the next Age, whose minds receiving from them,
their first Impressions of sober and generous knowledge, were invincibly armed
against all the enchantments of Enthusiasm. But what is more, I may venture to
affirm, that it was in good measure, by the influence, which these Gentlemen
had over the rest, that the University it self, or at least, any part of its
Discipline, and Order, was saved from ruin. And from hence we may conclude,
that the same Men have now no intention, of sweeping away all the honor of
Antiquity in this their new Design: seeing they employed so much of their
labor, and prudence, in preserving that most venerable Seat of ancient
Learning, when their shrinking from its defense, would have been the speediest
way to have destroyed it. For the Truth of this, I dare appeal to all
uninteressed men, who knew the Temper of that place; and especially to those
who were my own contemporaries there: of whom I can name very many, whom the
happy restoration of the Kingdom's peace, found as well inclined, to serve
their Prince, and the Church, as if they had been bred up in the most
prosperous condition of their Country. This was undoubtedly so. Nor indeed
could it be otherwise: for such spiritual Frensies, which did then bear Rule,
can never stand long, before a clear, and a deep skill in Nature. It is almost
impossible, that they, who converse much with the subtilty of things, should be
deluded by such thick deceits. There is but one better charm in the world, then
Real Philosophy, to allay the impulses of the false spirit: and that is, the
blessed presence, and assistance of the True.

Nor were the good effects of this conversation, only confined to Oxford: But
they have made themselves known in their printed Works, both in our own, and in
the learned Language: which have much conduced to the Fame of our Nation
abroad, and to the spreading of profitable Light, at home. This I trust, will
be universally acknowledged, when I shall have named the Men. The principal,
and most constant of them, were Doctor Seth Ward, the present Lord Bishop of
Exeter, Mr. Boil, Dr. Wilkins, Sir William Petty, Mr. Matthew Wren, Dr. Wallis,
Dr. Goddard, Dr. Willis, Dr. Bathurst, Dr. Christopher Wren, Mr. Rook: besides
several others, who joined themselves to them, upon occasions. Now I have
produced their Names, I am a little at a stand, how to deal with them. For, if
I should say what they deserve; I fear it would be intepreted flattery, instead
of justice. And yet I have now lying in my sight, the example of an Elegant
Book, which I have professed to admire: whose Author sticks not, to make large
Panegyricks, on the Members of that Assembly, whose Relation he Writes. But
this President is not to be followed by a young Man; who ought to be more
jealous of public censure, and is not enough confirmed in the good liking of
the world; to think, that he has such a weighty, and difficult work, as the
making of Characters, committed to him. I will therefore pass by their praises
in silence; though I believe, that what I might say of them, would be generally
confessed: and that if any ingenuous man, who knows them, or their writings,
should contradict me, he would also go near to gainsay himself, and to retract
the applauses, which he had sometime, or other, bestowed upon them.

For such a candid, and unpassionate company, as that was, and for such a
gloomy season, what could have been a fitter Subject to pitch upon, then
Natural Philosophy? To have been always tossing about some Theological
question, would have been, to have made that their private diversion, the
excess of which they themselves disliked in the public: To have been eternally
musing on Civil business, and the distresses of their Country, was too
melancholy a reflection: It was Nature alone, which could pleasantly entertain
them, in that estate. The contemplation of that, draws our minds off from past,
or present misfortunes, and makes them conquerers over things, in the greatest
public unhappiness: while the consideration of Men, and humane affairs, may
affect us, with a thousand various disquiets; that never separates us into
mortal Factions; that gives us room to differ, without animosity; and permits
us, to raise contrary imaginations upon it, without any danger of a Civil War.

Their meetings were as frequent, as their affairs permitted: their proceedings
rather by action, then discourse; chiefly attending some particular Trials, in
Chemistry, or Mechanics: they had no Rules nor Method fixed: their intention
was more, to communicate to each other, their discoveries, which they could
make in so narrow a compass, than an united, constant, or regular inquisition.
And me thinks, their constitution did bear some resemblance, to the Academy
lately begun at Paris: where they have at last turned their thoughts, from
Words, to experimental Philosophy, and perhaps in imitation of the Royal
Society. Their manner likewise, is to assemble in a private house, to reason
freely upon the works of Nature; to pass Conjectures, and propose Problems, on
any Mathematical, or Philosophical Matter, which comes in their way. And this
is an Omen, on which I will build some hope, that as they agree with us in what
was done at Oxford, so they will go on farther, and come by the same degrees,
to erect another Royal Society in France. I promise for these Gentlemen here
(so well I know the generosity of their Design) that they will be most ready to
accept their assistance. To them, and to all the Learned World besides, they
call for aid. No difference of Country, Interest, or profession of Religion,
will make them backward from taking, or affording help in this enterprise. And
indeed all Europe at this time, have two general Wars, which they ought in
honor to make: The one a holy, the other a Philosophical: The one against the
common Enemy of Christendom, the other also against powerful, and barbarous
Foes, that have not been fully subdued almost these six thousand years,
Ignorance, and False Opinions. Against these, it becomes us, to go forth in one
common expedition: All civil Nations joining their Armies against the one, and
their Reason against the other; without any petty contentions, about
privileges, or precedence.

Thus they continued without any great Intermissions, Sect. III. Their first
meetings at London.
till about the year 1658. But then being called away to several parts of the
Nation, and the greatest number of them coming to London, they usually met at
Gresham College, at the Wednesdays, and Thursdays Lectures of Dr. Wren, and Mr.
Rook: where there joined with them several eminent persons of their common
acquaintance: The Lord Viscount Brouncker, the now Lord Brereton, Sir Paul
Neil, Mr. John Evelyn, Mr. Henshaw, Mr. Slingsby, Dr. Timothy Clark, Dr. Ent,
Mr. Ball, Mr. Hill, Dr. Crone: and diverse other Gentlemen, whose inclinations
lay the same way. This Custom was observed once, if not twice a week, in Term
time; till they were scatt'red by the miserable distractions of that Fatal
year; till the continuance of their meetings there might have made them run the
hazard of the fate of Archimedes: For then the place of their meeting was made
a Quarter for Soldiers. But, (to make have through those dreadful revolutions,
which cannot be beheld upon Paper, without horror; unless we remember, that
they had this one happy effect, to open men's eyes to look out for the true
Remedy) upon this followed the King's Return; and that, wrought by such an
admirable chain of events, that if we either regard the easiness, or speed, or
blessed issue of the Work; it seems of it self to contain variety, and pleasure
enough, to make recompense, for the whole Twenty years Melancholy, that had
gone before. This I leave to another kind of History to be described. It shall
suffice my purpose, that Philosophy had its share, in the benefits of that
glorious Action: For the Royal Society had its beginning in the wonderful
pacifick year, 1660. So that, if any conjectures of good Fortune, from
extraordinary Nativities, hold true; we may presage all happiness to this
undertaking. And I shall here join my solemn wishes, that as it began in that
time, when our Country was freed from confusion, and slavery: So it may, in its
progress, redeem the minds of Men, from obscurity, uncertainty, and bondage.

Sect. IV. The beginning of the Royal Society.
These Gentlemen therefore, finding the hearts of their Countrymen enlarged by
their Joys, and fitted for any noble Proposition: and meeting with the
concurrence of many Worthy Men, who, to their immortal Honor, had followed the
King in his banishment, Mr. Erskins, Sir Robert Moray, Sir Gilbert Talbot, etc.
began now to imagine some greater thing; and to bring out experimental
knowledge, from the retreats, in which it had long hid it self, to take its
part in the Triumphs of that universal Jubilee. And indeed Philosophy did very
well deserve that Reward: having been always Loyal in the worst of times: For
though the Kings enemies had gained all other advantages; though they had all
the Garrisons, and Fleets, and Ammunitions, and Treasures, and Armies on their
side: yet they could never, by all their Victories, bring over the Reason of
Men to their Party.

While they were thus ord'ring their platform; there came forth a Treatise,
which very much hastened its contrivance: and that was a Proposal by Master
Cowley, of erecting a Philosophical College. The intent of it was, that in some
place near London, there should liberal Salaries be bestowed, on a competent
number of Learned Men, to whom should be committed the operations of Natural
Experiments. This Model was every way practicable: unless perhaps, in two
things, he did more consult the generosity of his own mind, than of other men's:
the one was the largeness of the Revenue, with which he would have his College
at first endowed: the other, that he imposed on his Operators, a Second task of
great pains, the Education of youth.

The last of these is indeed a matter of great weight: The Reformation of which
ought to be seriously examined by prudent Men. For it is an undeniable Truth,
which is commonly said; that there would be need of fewer Laws, and less force
to govern Men, if their Minds were rightly informed, and set strait, while they
were young, and pliable. But perhaps this labor is not so proper, for
Experimenters to undergo: For it would not only devour too much of their Time:
but it would go near, to make them a little more magisterial in Philosophy,
then became them; by being long accustomed to command the opinions, and direct
the manners, of their Scholars. And as to the other particular, the large
estate, which he required to the maintenance of his College: It is evident,
that it is so difficult a thing, to draw men in to be willing to divert an
ancient Revenue, which had long run in another stream, or to contribute out of
their own purses, to the supporting of any new Design, while it shows nothing
but promises, and hopes: that, in such cases, it were (it may be) more
advisable, to begin upon a small stock, and so to rise by degrees; then to
profess great things at first, and to exact too much benevolence, all in one
lump together. However, it was not the excellent Author's fault, that he
thought better of the Age, then it did deserve. His purpose in it was like
himself, full of honor, and goodness: most of the other particulars of his
draught, the Royal Society is now putting in practice.

I come now to the Second Period of my Narration: wherein I promised, to give
an account of what they did, till they were publicly owned, encouraged, and
confirmed by Royal Favor. And I trust, that I shall here produce many things,
which will prove their attempts to be worthy of all Men's encouragement: though
what was performed in this interval, may be rather styled the Temporary
Scaffold about the building, then the Frame it self. But in my entrance upon
this Part* being come to the top of the Hill, I begin to tremble, and to
apprehend the greatness of my Subject. For I perceive that I have led my
Readers Minds on, by so long, and so confident a Speech, to expect some
wonderful Model, which shall far exceed all the former, that I have
acknowledged to have been imperfect. Now, though this were really so, as I
believe it is; yet I question, how it will look, after it has been disfigured
by my unskilful hands. But the danger of this ought to have deterred me in the
beginning. It is now too late to look back; and I can only apply my self to
that good Nature, which a Great Man has observed to be so peculiar to our
Nation, that there is scarce an expression to signify it, in any other
Language. To this I must fly for succor, and most affectionately entreat my
Countrymen, that they would interpret my failings to be only errors of
obedience to some, whose commands, or desires, I could not resist: and that
they would take the measure of the Royal Society, not so much from my lame
description of it; as from the honor, and reputation, of many of those Men, of
whom it is composed.

I will here, in the first place, contract into few Words, Sect. V. A model of
their whole design.
the whole sum of their Resolutions; which I shall often have occasion, to
touch upon in parcels. Their purpose is, in short, to make faithful Records, of
all the Works of Nature, or Art, which can come within their reach: that so the
present Age, and posterity, may be able to put a mark on the Errors, which have
been strengthened by long prescription: to restore the Truths, that have lain
neglected: to push on those, which are already known, to more various uses: and
to make the way more passable, to what remains unreveal'd. This is the compass
of their Design. And to accomplish this, they have indeavor'd, to separate the
knowledge of Nature, from the colors of Rhetoric, the devices of Fancy, or
the delightful deceit of Fables. They have labored to enlarge it, from being
confined to the custody of a few; or from servitude to private interests. They
have striven to preserve it from being over-press'd by a confused heap of vain,
and useless particulars; or from being straightened and bounded too much up by
General Doctrines. They have tried, to put it into a condition of perpetual
increasing; by settling an inviolable correspondence between the hand, and the
brain. They have studi'd, to make it, not only an Enterprise of one season, or
of some lucky opportunity; but a business of time; a steady, a lasting, a
popular, an uninterrupted Work. They have attempted, to free it from the
Artifice, and Humors, and Passions of Sects; to render it an Instrument,
whereby Mankind may obtain a Dominion over Things, and not only over one
another Judgments. And lastly, they have begun to establish these
Reformations in Philosophy, not so much, by any solemnity of Laws, or
ostentation of Ceremonies, as by solid Practice, and examples: not, by a
glorious pomp of Words; but by the silent, effectual, and unanswerable
Arguments of real Productions.

This will more fully appear, by what I am to say on these four particulars,
which shall make up this part of my Relation, the Qualifications of their
Members: the manner of their Inquiry: their weekly Assemblies: and their way of
Registring. Sect. VI. The qualifications of the Members of the Royal Society.


As for what belongs to the Members themselves, that are to constitute the
Society: It is to be noted, that they have freely admitted Men of different
Religions, Countries, and Professions of Life. This they were obliged to do, or
else they would come far short of the the largeness of their own Declarations.
For they openly profess, not to lay the Foundation of an English, Scotch,
Irish, Popish, or Protestant Philosophy; but a Philosophy of Mankind.

That the Church of England ought not to be apprehensive, They admit Men of all
Religions.
of this free converse of various Judgments, I shall afterward manifest at
large. For the present, I shall franckly assert; that our Doctrine, and
Discipline, will be so far from receiving damage by it; that it were the best
way to make them universally embraced, if they were oftener brought to be
canvas'd amidst all sorts of dissenters. It is dishonorable, to pass a hard
Censure on the Religions of all other Countries: It concerns them, to look to
the reasonableness of their Faith; and it is sufficient for us, to be
established in the Truth of our own. But yet this comparison I may modestly
make; that there is no one Profession, amidst the several denominations of
Christians, that can be exposed to the search and scrutiny of its adversaries,
with so much safety as ours. So equal it is, above all others, to the general
Reason of Mankind: such honorable security it provides, both for the liberty of
Men's Minds, and for the peace of Government: that if some Men's conceptions were
put in practice, that all wise Men should have two Religions; the one, a
public, for their conformity with the people; the other, a private, to be kept
to their own Breasts: I am confident, that most considering Men, whatever their
first were, would make ours their second, if they were well acquainted with it.
Seeing therefore, our Church would be in so fair a probability of gaining very
much, by a frequent contention, and encounter, with other Sects: It cannot be
endangered by this Assembly; which proceeds no farther, then to an unprejudiced
mixture with them.

Of all Countries.
By their naturalizing Men of all Countries, they have laid the beginnings of
many great advantages for the future. For by this means, they will be able, to
settle a constant Intelligence, throughout all civil Nations; and make the
Royal Society the general Banck, and Free-port of the World: A policy, which
whether it would hold good, in the Trade of England, I know not: but sure it
will in the Philosophy. We are to overcome the mysteries of all the Works of
Nature; and not only to prosecute such as are confined to one Kingdom, or beat
upon one shore. We should not then refufe to list all the aids, that will come
in, how remote soever. If I could fetch my materials whence I pleased, to
fashion the Idea of a perfect Philosopher: he should not be all of one clime,
but have the different excellencies of several Countries. First, he should have
the Industry, Activity, and Inquisitive humor of the Dutch, French, Scotch, and
English, in laying the ground Work, the heap of Experiments: And then he should
have added the cold, and circumspect, and wary disposition of the Italians, and
Spaniards, in meditating upon them, before he fully brings them into
speculation. All this is scarce ever to be found in one single Man: seldom in
the same Countrymen: It must then be supplied, as well as it may, by a Public
Council; wherein the various dispositions of all these Nations, may be blended
together. To this purpose, the Royal Society has made no scruple, to receive
all inquisitive strangers of all Countries, into its number. And this they have
constantly done, with such peculiar respect, that they have not obliged them to
the charge of contributions: they have always taken care, that some of their
Members, should assist them in interpreting all that passed, in their public
Assemblies: and they have freely opened their Registers to them; thereby
inviting them, to communicate foreign Rarities, by imparting their own
discoveries. This has been often acknowledged, by many Learned Men, who have
traveled hither; who have been introduced to their meetings, and have admired
the decency, the gravity, the plainess, and the calmness of their debates. This
they have published to the world: and this has roused all our neighbors to fix
their eyes upon England. From hence they expect the great improvements of
knowledge will flow: and though, perhaps, they send their Youth into other
parts, to learn Fashion, and Breeding: yet their Men come hither for nobler
ends; to be instructed, in the masculine, and the solid Arts of Life: which is
a matter of as much greater Reputation, as it is more honorable, to teach
Philosophers, than Children.

By their admission of Men of all professions, Of all Professions.
these two Benefits arise: The one, that every Art, and every way of life
already established, may be secure of receiving no damage by their Counsels. A
thing which all new Inventions ought carefully to consult. It is in vain, to
declare against the profit of the most, in any change that we would make. We
must not always deal with the violent current of popular passions; as they do
with the furious Eager in the Severn: Where the safest way is, to set the head
of the Boat directly against its force. But here Men must follow the shore;
wind about leisurably; and insinuate their useful alterations, by soft, and
unperceivable degrees. From the neglect of this Prudence, we often see men of
great Wit, to have been overborn by the multitude of their opposers; and to
have found all their subtle projects too weak, for custom, and interest: While
being a little too much heated with a love of their own fancies; they have
raised to themselves more Enemies than they needed to have done; by defying at
once, too many things in use. But here, this danger is very well prevented. For
what suspicion can Divinity, Law, or Physic, or any other course of life have,
that they shall be impaired by these men's labors: when they themselves are as
capable of sitting amongst them as any others? Have they not the same security
that the whole Nation has for its lives and fortunes? of which this is esteemed
the Establishment, that men of all sorts, and qualities, give their voice in
every law that is made in Parliament. But the other benefit is, that by this
equal Balance of all Professions, there will no one particular of them
overweigh the other, or make the Oracle only speak their private sense: which
else it were impossible to avoid. It is natural to all Ranks of men, to have
some one Darling, upon which their care is chiefly fixed. If Mechanics alone
were to make a Philosophy, they would bring it all into their Shops; and force
it wholly to consist of Springs and Wheels, and Weights: if Physicians, they
would not depart far from their Art; scarce any thing would be considered,
besides the Body of Man, the Causes, Signs, and Cures of Diseases. So much is
to be found in Men of all conditions, of that which is called Pedantry in
Scholars: which is nothing else but an obstinate addiction, to the forms of
some private life, and not regarding general things enough. This freedom
therefore, which they use, in embracing all assistance, is most advantageous to
them: which is the more remarkable, in that they diligently search out, and
join to them, all extraordinary men, though but of ordinary Trades. And that
they are likely to continue this comprehensive temper hereafter, I will show by
one Instance: and it is the recommendation which the King himself was pleased
to make, of the judicious Author of the Observations on the Bills of Mortality:
In whose Election, it was so far from being a prejudice, that he was a
Shopkeeper of London; that His Majesty gave this particular charge to His
Society, that if they found any more such Tradesmen, they should be sure to
admit them all, without any more ado. From hence it may be concluded, what is
their inclination toward the manual Arts; by the careful regard which their
Founder, and Patron, has engaged them to have, for all sorts of Mechanic
Artists.

But, Sect. VII. It consists chiefly of Gentlemen.
though the Society entertains very many men of particular Professions; yet the
far greater Number are Gentlemen, free, and unconfined. By the help of this,
there was hopeful Provision made against two corruptions of Learning, which
have been long complained of, but never removed: The one, that Knowledge still
degenerates, to consult present profit too soon; the other, that Philosophers
have bin always Masters, and Scholars; some imposing, and all the other
submitting; and not as equal observers without dependence.

The first of these may be called, the marrying of Arts too soon; The
advantages of this.
and putting them to generation, before they come to be of Age; and has been
the cause of much inconvenience. It weakens their strength; It makes an unhappy
disproportion in their increase; while not the best, but the most gainful of
them flourish: But above all, it diminishes that very profit for which men
strive. It busies them about possessing some petty prize; while Nature it self,
with all its mighty Treasures, slips from them: and so they are served like
some foolish Guards; who, while they were earnest in picking up some small
Money, that the Prisoner dropped out of his Pocket, let the Prisoner himself
escape, from whom they might have got a great randsom. This is easily declam'd
against, but most difficult to be hindered. If any caution will serve, it must
be this; to commit the Work to the care of such men, who, by the freedom of
their education the plenty of their estates, and the usual generosity of Noble
Blood, may be well suppo'd to be most averse from such sordid considerations.

The second Error, which is hereby endeavour*d to be remedied, is, that the
Seats of Knowledge, have been for the most part heretofore, not Laboratories, as
they ought to be; but only Schools, where some have taught, and all the rest
subscribed. The consequences of this are very mischievous. For first, as many
Learners as there are, so many hands, and brains may still be reckoned upon, as
useless. It being only the Master's part, to examine, and observe; and the
Disciples, to submit with silence, to what they conclude. But besides this, the
very inequality of the Titles of Teachers, and Scholars, does very much
suppress, and tame men's Spirits, which though it should be proper for
Discipline and Education; yet is by no means consistent with a free
Philosophical Consultation. It is undoubtedly true; that scarce any man's mind,
is so capable of thinking strongly, in the presence of one, whom he fears and
reverences; as he is, when that restraint is taken off. And this is to be
found, not only in these weightier matters; but also (to give a lighter
instance) in the Arts of Discourse, and raillery themselves* For we have often
seen men of bold tempers, that have over-awed and governed the Wit of most
Companies; to have been disturbed, and dumb, and bashful as children, when some
other man has been near, who used to out-talk them. Such a kind of natural
sovereignty there is, in some men's minds over others: which must needs be far
greater, when it is advanced by long use and the venerable name of a Master. I
shall only mention one prejudice more, and that is this; That from this only
teaching, and learning, there does not only follow a continuance, but an
increase of the yoke upon our Reasons. For those who take their opinions from
others Rules, are commonly stricter Imposers upon their Scholars, than their
own Authors were on them, or than the first Inventors of things themselves are
upon others. Whatever the cause of this be; whether the first men are made
meek, and gentle, by their long search, and by better understanding all the
difficulties of Knowledge; while those that learn afterward, only hastily
catching things in small Systems, are soon satisfied, before they have broken
their pride, and so become more imperious: or, whether it arises from hence,
that the same meanness of Soul, which made them bound their thoughts by others
Precepts, makes them also insolent to their inferiors; as we always find
cowards the most cruel: or whatever other cause may be alleged, the observation
is certain, that the successors are usually more positive, and Tyrannical, than
the beginners of Sects.

If then there can be any cure devised for this; it must be no other, than to
form an Assembly at one time, whose privileges shall be the same; whose gain
shall be in common; whose Members were not brought up at the feet of each
other. But after all, even this cannot be free from prevarication in all future
Ages. So apt are some to distrust, and others to confide too much in
themselves: so much sweetness there is, in leading parties: so much pride, in
following a Faction: such various artifices there are, to ensnare men's
Passions, and soon after their Understandings. All these hazards, and many
more, are to be supposed; which it is impossible, for mortal Wit, wholly to
foresee, much less to avoid. But yet we have less ground of jealousy from this
Institution, than any other, not only, because they only deal in matters of
Fact, which are not so easily perverted; but also upon security of the
Inclinations of the greatest part of the Members of the Society it self. This,
I hope, most men will acknowledge, and I will take the permission, to say in
general of them, that in all past and present times, I am confident, there can
never be shown, so great a Number of Contemporaries, in so narrow a space of
the World, that loved truth so zealously; sought it so constantly; and upon
whose labors, mankind might so freely rely. This I speak, not out of Bravery
to Foreiners (before whose eyes, I believe this negligent Discourse will never
appear) but to the learned Men of this Nation, who are better Judges of what I
say. And this too, I dare affirm, in an Age, wherein I expect to be condemned
of falsehood, or partiality, for this Character, which I have given. For so it
happens, that we are now arrived at that excessive censuring humor, that he who
takes upon him to commend any thing, though never so worthy, will raise to
himself far more Enemies than Friends. And indeed this sowrness of Criticism,
which now bears all down before it, is very injurious to the honor of our
Country. For by despising men, for not being absolutely excellent; we keep
them from being so: while admonitions, joined with praises; and reproofs, with
directions; would quickly bring all things to a higher perfection. But the
rudeness of such Critics, I do not so much regard; as the objections of
soberer men, who have a real good will to the promotion of this design, and yet
may be a little dissatisfied in this place. For here especially they may doubt
of two things. The first, whether the Royal Society, being so numerous as it
is, will not in short time be diverted from its primitive purpose; seeing there
will be scarce enough men of Philosophical temper always found, to fill it up;
and then others will crowd in, who have not the same bent of mind; and so the
whole business will insensibly be made, rather a matter of noise and pomp, than
of real benefit? The second, Whether their number being so large, will not
afright private men, from imparting many profitable secrets to them; lest they
should thereby become common, and so they be deprived of the gain, which else
they might be sure of, if they kept them to themselves.

To the first, Sect. VIII. A defense of the largeness of their number.
I shall reply, That this scruple is of no force, in respect of the Age wherein
we live. For now the Genius of Experimenting is so much dispersed, that even in
this Nation, if there were one, or two more such Assemblies settled; there
could not be wanting able men enough, to carry them on. All places and corners
are now busy, and warm about this Work: and we find many Noble Rarities to be
every day given in, not only by the hands of Learned and professed
Philosophers; but from the Shops of Mechanics; from the Voyages of Merchants;
from the Ploughs of Husbandmen; from the Sports, the Fishponds, the Parks, the
Gardens of Gentlemen; the doubt therefore will only touch future Ages. And
even for them too, we may securely promise; that they will not, for a long time
be barren of a Race of Inquisitive minds, when the way is now so plainly traced
out before them; when they shall have tasted of these first Fruits, and have
been excited by this Example. There was scarce ever yet, any the meanest Sect,
or the most contemptible Opinion, that was utterly extinguished in its Cradle.
Whether they deserved to live, or not, they all had their course; some longer,
some shorter; according as they could combine with the Interests, or
affections, of the Countries where they began. What reason then have we to bode
ill alone to this Institution; which is now so earnestly embraced; and which,
the older it grows, cannot but still appear more inoffensive? If we only
required perfect Philosophers, to manage this employment, it were another case.
For then I grant it were improbable, that threescore, or an hundred such should
meet in one time. But here it is far otherwise. If we cannot have a sufficient
choice of those that are skilled in all Divine and human things (which was the
ancient definition of a Philosopher) it suffices, if many of them be plain,
diligent, and laborious observers: such, who, though they bring not much
knowledge, yet bring their hands, and their eyes uncorrupted: such as have not
their Brains infected by false Images; and can honestly assist in the
examining, and Registring what the others represent to their view. It seems
strange to me, that men should conspire, to believe all things more perplexed,
and difficult, than indeed they are. This may be shown in most other matters;
but in this particular in hand, it is most evident. Men did generally think,
that no man was sit to meddle in matters of this consequence, but he that had
bred himself up in a long course of Discipline for that purpose; that had the
habit, the gesture, the look of a Philosopher. Whereas experience on the
contrary tells us, that greater things are produced, by the free way, than the
formal. This mistake may well be compared, to the conceit we had of Soldiers,
in the beginning of the civil Wars. None was thought worthy of that name, but
he that could show his wounds, and talk aloud of his exploits in the Low
Countries. Whereas the whole business of fighting, was afterward chiefly
performed by untravell'd Gentlemen, raw Citizens, and Generals, that had scarce
ever before seen a Battle. But to say no more, it is so far from being a
blemish; that it is rather the excellency of this Institution, that men of
various Studies are introduced. For so there will be always many sincere
witnesses standing by, whom self-love will not persuade to report falsely, nor
heat of invention carry to swallow a deceit too soon; as having themselves no
hand in the making of the Experiment, but only in the Inspection. So cautious
ought men to be, in pronouncing even upon Matters of Fact. The whole care is
not to be trusted to single men: not to a Company all of one mind; not to
Philosophers; not to devout, and religious men alone: By all these we have been
already deluded; even by those whom I last named, who ought most of all to
abhor falsehood; of whom yet many have multiplied upon us, infinite Stories,
and false Miracles, without any regard to Conscience, or Truth.

To the second Objection I shall briefly answer; that if all the Authors, or
Possessors of extraordinary inventions, should conspire to conceal all, that
was in their power, from them; yet the Method, which they take, will quickly
make abundant reparation for that defect. If they cannot come at Nature in its
particular Streams, they will have it in the Fountain. If they could be shut
out from the Closets of Physicians, or the Workhouses of Mechanics; yet with
the same, or with better sorts of Instruments, on more materials, by more
hands, with a more rational light, they would not only restore again the old
Arts, but find out, perhaps, many more of far greater importance. But I need
not lay much tress upon that hope; when there is no question at all, but all,
or the greatest part of such Domestic Receipts, and Curiosities, will soon
flow into this public Treasure. How few secrets have there been, though never
so gainful, that have been long concealed from the whole World by their
Authors? Were not all the least Arts of life at first private? Were not
Watches, or Locks, or Guns, or Printing, or lately the Bow-dye, devised by
particular men, but soon made common? If neither chance, nor friendship, nor
Treachery of servants, have brought such things out; yet we see ostentation
alone, to be every day powerful enough to do it. This desire of glory, and to
be counted Authors; prevails on all, even on many of the dark and reserved
Chemists themselves: who are ever printing their greatest mysteries; though
indeed they seem to do it, with so much reluctance, and with a willingness to
hide still; which makes their style to resemble the smoke, in which they deal.
Well then, if this disposition be so universal; why should we think, that the
Inventors, will be only tender, and backward to the Royal Society? From which
they will not only reap the most solid honor; but will also receive the
strongest assurances, of still retaining the greatest part of the profit? But
if all this should fail; there still remains a refuge, which will put this
whole matter out of dispute: and that is, that the Royal Society will be able
by degrees, to purchase such extraordinary inventions, which are now close
locked up in Cabinets; and then to bring them into one common Stock, which
shall be upon all occasions exposed to all men's use. This is a most heroic
Invention: For by such concealments, there may come very much hurt to mankind.
If any certain remedy should be found out against an Epidemical disease; if it
were suffered to be engrossed by one man, there would be great swarms swept
away, which otherwise might be easily saved. I shall instance in the
Sweating-Sickness. The Medicine for it was almost infallible: But, before that
could be generally published, it had almost dispeopl'd whole Towns. If the same
disease should have returned, it might have been again as destructive, had not
the Lord Bacon taken care, to set down the particular course of Physic for it,
in his History of Henry the Seventh, and so put it beyond the possibility of
any private man's invading it. This ought to be imitated in all other sovereign
cures of the like nature, to avoid such dreadful casualties. The Artificers
should reap the common crop of their Arts: but the public should still have
Title to the miraculous productions. It should be so appointed, as it is in the
profits of men's Lands: where the Corn, and Grass, and Timber, and some courser
Metals belong to the owner: But the Royal Mines, in whose ground soever they
are discovered, are no man's propriety, but still fall to the Crown.

These therefore are the Qualities, which they have principally required, in
those, whom they admitted: still reserving to themselves a power of increasing,
or keeping to their number, as they saw occasion. By this means, they have
given assurance of an eternal quietness, and moderation, in their experimental
progress; because they allow themselves to differ in the weightiest matter,
even in the way of Salvation it self. By this they have taken care, that
nothing shall be so remote, as to escape their reach: because some of their
Members are still scattered abroad, in most of the habitable parts of the
Earth. By this, they have provided, that no profitable thing shall seem too
mean for their consideration, seeing they have some amongst them, whose life is
employed about little things, as well as great. By this they have broken down
the partition wall, and made a fair entrance, for all conditions of men to
engage in these Studies; which were heretofore affrighted from them, by a
groundless apprehension of their chargeableness, and difficulty. Thus they have
formed that Society, which intends a Philosophy, for the use of Cities, and not
for the retirements of Schools, to resemble the Cities themselves: which are
compounded of all sorts of men, of the Gown, of the Sword, of the Shop, of the
Field, of the Court, of the Sea; all mutually assisting each other.

Sect. IX. Their course of Inquiry.
Let us next consider what course of Inquiry they take, to make all their
Labors unite for the service of mankind: And here I shall insist on their
Expense, their Instruments, their Matter, and their Method.

Of the Stock, Their Expense.
upon which their Expense has been hitherto defraid, I can say nothing, that is
very magnificent: seeing they have relied upon no more than some small
Admission-money, and weekly Contributions amongst themselves. Such a Revenue as
this, can make no great sound, nor amount to any vast sum. But yet, I shall
say this for it, that it was the only way, which could have been begun, with a
security of success, in that condition of things. The public Faith of
Experimental Philosophy, was not then strong enough, to move Men and Women of
all conditions, to bring in their Bracelets and Jewels, toward the carrying of
it on. Such affections as those may be raised by a mis-guided zeal; but seldom,
or never, by calm and unpassionate Reason. It was therefore well ordained, that
the first Benevolence should come from the Experimenters themselves. If they
had speedily at first called for mighty Treasures; and said aloud, that their
Enterprise required the Exchequer of a Kingdom; they would only have been
contemned, as vain Projectors. So ready is mankind, to suspect all new
undertakings to be Cheats, and Chimaeraes; especialy, when they seem
chargeable: that it may be, many excellent things have been lost by that
jealousy. Of this we have a fatal Instance amongst our selves. For it was this
fear of being circumvented, that made one of our wisest Kings delay Columbus
too long, when he came with the promise of a new World: whereas a little more
confidence in his Art, and a small charge in furnishing out some few Ships,
would have yearly brought all the Silver of the West Indies to London, which
now arrives at Sevill.

This suspicion, which is so natural to men's breasts, could not any way harm
the Royal Societies establishment: seeing its first claims, and pretensions
were so modest. And yet I shall presume to assure the World; that what they
shall raise on these mean Foundations, will be more answerable to the largeness
of their intentions, than to the narrowness of their beginnings. This I speak
so boldly, not only because it is almost generally found true; that those
things, which have been small at first, have oftener grown greater, than those
which have begun upon a wider bottom, which have commonly stood at a stay: But
also in respect of the present prevailing Genius of the English Nation. It is
most usually found, that every People, has some one study or other in their
view, about which their minds are most intent, and their Purses readier to
open. This is sometimes a profusion in Habit, and Diet; sometimes Religious
Buildings; and sometimes the Civil Ornaments of their Cities, and Country. The
first of these will shortly vanish from amongst us, by the irresistible
correction of the King's own example: the next is of late years very sensibly
abated: and it is the last of the three toward which men's desires are most
propense. To evidence this; I think it may be calculated, that since the Kings
Return, there have been more Acts of Parliament, for the clearing and
beautifying of Streets, for the repayring of Highwayes, for the cutting of
Rivers, for the increase of Manufactures, for the setting on foot the Trade of
Fishing, and many other such Public Works, to adorn the State; than in diverse
Ages before. This General Temper being well weighed; it cannot be imagined,
that the Nation will withdraw its assistance from the Royal Society alone;
which does not intend to stop at some particular benefit, but goes to the root
of all noble Inventions, and proposes an infallible course to make England the
glory of the Western world.

This my Love, and my Hopes prompt me to say. But besides this, there is one
thing more, that persuades me, that the Royal Society will be Immortal. And
that is, that if their Stock should still continue narrow, yet even upon that,
they will be able to free themselves from all difficulties, and to make a
constant increase of it, by their managing. There is scarce any thing, has more
hindered the True Philosophy; than a vain opinion, that men have taken up, that
nothing could be done in it, to any purpose, but upon a vast charge, and by a
mighty Revenue. Men commonly think, that the pit, in which (according to
Democritus) Truth lies hid, is bottomless: and that it will devour, whatever is
thrown into it, without being the fuller. This false conception had got so much
ground, that as soon as a man began to put his hands to Experiments, he was
presently given over, as impoverish't and undone. And indeed the Enemies of
Real Knowledge, had some appearance of Reason to conclude this heretofore:
because they had seen the great Estates of some Chemists melted away, without
any thing left behind, to make recompense. But this imagination can now no
longer prevail. Men now understand, that Philosophy needs not so great a
prodigality to maintain it: that the most profitable Trials are not always the
most costly: that the best Inventions have not been found out by the richest,
but by the most prudent, and Industrious Observers: that the right Art of
Experimenting, when it is once set forward, will go near to sustain it self.
This I speak, not to stop men's future Bounty, by a Philosophical Boast, that
the Royal Society has enough already: But rather to encourage them to cast in
more help; by showing them, what return may be made from a little, by a wise
administration.

Sect. X. Their Instruments.
Of the variety, and excellence of the Instruments, which it lies in their power
to use; I will give no other proof, then the wonderful perfection to which all
Manual Arts have of late years arrived. Men now generally understand, to employ
those very Tools which the Ancients lent us, to infinite more Works, than
formerly: they have also of late devised a great multitude of all sorts, which
were before unknown: and besides, we may very well expect, that time will every
day bring forth more. For, according as the matter to work upon does abound,
the greater plenty of Instruments, must by consequence follow: such a connection
there is between Inventions, and the means of Inventing, that they mutually
increase each other.

I might be as large, as I pleased, in this particular; in running through some
part of all the Innumerable Arts of the Western world; and it were not
difficult to show, that the ordinary shops of Mechanics, are now as full of
rarities, as the Cabinets of the former noblest Mathematicians. But I will
leave that subject, which is so familiar to all; and choose rather, to fetch a
confirmation of this, even from those Countries, which (after the manner of the
Ancients) we call Barbarous. And in going thither for an example, I have a
farther end. In my foregoing discourse, I tried to make out the advantages of
the Modern Times, above the ancient; by following the progress of Learning,
down through their tracks, to which Scholars usually confine it; I will now
also strengthen that argument; by briefly comparing the skill, and the works of
the unlearned parts of the present world, with those that are past. The ancient
Barbarians then, those Nations I mean, who lay without the circle of those Arts
which we admire; the Gauls, the Britains, the Germans, the Scythians, have
scarce left any footsteps behind them, to show that they were rational men.
Most of them were savage in their practices; gross in their contrivances;
ignorant of all, that might make life either safe, or pleasant. Thus it was
with them, and this all History speaks with one voice: whereas the Barbarians
of our Times (if I may take the liberty still to use that word, which the pride
of Greece first brought into fashion) the Turks, the Moors, the East-Indians,
and even the Americans, though they too are utterly unacquainted with all our
Sciences; yet by the help of an Universal Light, which seems to overspread this
Age, are in several Handicrafts most ready, and dextrous: insomuch that in
some, they can scarce be imitated by the Europeans themselves. I shall leave it
to any man, to conjecture from hence, which of these two times has the
Prerogative; and how much better helps are probably to be found at this day, in
the most Civil Countries: when we now find so much artifice, amongst those our
Contemporaries, who only follow rude, and untaught Nature.

Of the extent of the matter, Sect. XI. Their matter.
about which they have been already conversant, and intend to be hereafter;
there can be no better measure taken, than by giving a general prospect of all
the objects of men's thoughts: which can be nothing else, but either God, or
Men, or Nature.

As for the First, they meddle no otherwise with Divine things, than only as
the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator, is displayed in the
admirable order, and workman-ship of the Creatures. It cannot be denied, but it
lies in the Natural Philosophers hands, best to advance that part of Divinity:
which, though it fills not the mind, with such tender, and powerful
contemplations, as that which shows us Man's Redemption by a Mediator; yet it
is by no means to be passed by unregarded: but is an excellent ground to
establish the other. This is a Religion, which is confirmed, by the unanimous
agreement of all sorts of Worships: and may serve in respect to Christianity,
as Solomon's Porch to the Temple; into the one the Heathens themselves did also
enter; but into the other, only God's peculiar People.

In men, may be considered the Faculties, and operations of their Souls; The
constitution of their Bodies, and the works of their Hands. Of these, the first
they omit: both because the knowledge and direction of them have been before
undertaken, by some Arts, on which they have no mind to entrench, as the
Politics, Morality, and Oratory: and also because the Reason, the
Understanding, the Tempers, the Will, the Passions of Men, are so hard to be
reduced to any certain observation of the senses; and afford so much room to
the observers to falsify or counterfeit: that if such discourses should be
once entertained; they would be in danger of falling into talking, instead of
working, which they carefully avoid. Such subjects therefore as these, they
have hitherto kept out. But yet, when they shall have made more progress, in
material things, they will be in a condition, of pronouncing more boldly on
them too. For, though Man's Soul, and Body are not only one natural Engine (as
some have thought) of whose motions of all sorts, there may be as certain an
account given, as of those of a Watch or Clock: yet by long studying of the
Spirits, of the Blood, of the Nourishment, of the parts, of the Diseases, of
the Advantages, of the accidents which belong to humane bodies (all which will
come within their Province) there, without question, be very near ghesses made,
even at the more exalted, and immediate Actions of the Soul; and that too,
without destroying its Spiritual and Immortal Being.

These two Subjects, God, and the Soul, being only forborne: In all the rest,
they wander, at their pleasure: In the frame of Men's bodies, the ways for
strong, healthful, and long life: In the Arts of Men's Hands, those that either
necessity, convenience, or delight have produced: In the works of Nature, their
helps, their varieties, redundancies, and defects: and in bringing all these to
the uses of humane Society.

In their Method of Inquiring, Sect. XII. Their Method of Inquiry.
I will observe, how they have behaved themselves, in things that might be
brought within their own Touch and Sight: and how in those, which are so
remote, and hard to be come by, that about them, they were forced to trust the
reports of others.

In the first kind: I shall lay it down, as their Fundamental Law, that
whenever they could possibly get to handle the subject, the Experiment was
still performed by some of the Members themselves. The want of this exactness,
has very much diminished the credit of former Naturalists. It might else have
seemed strange, that so many men of Wit, setting so many hands on work; being
so watchful to catch up all relations, from Woods, Fields, Mountains, Rivers,
Seas, and Lands; and scattering their Pensions so liberally; should yet be able
to collect so few Observations, that have been judicious or useful. But the
Reason is plain; for while they thought it enough, to be only Receivers of
others Intelligence; they have either employed Ignorant searchers, who knew not
how to digest or distinguish what they found: or frivolous, who always loved to
come home laden, though it were but with trifles: or (which is worst of all)
crafty, who having perceived the humors of those that paid them so well, would
always take care to bring in such collections as might seem to agree with the
Opinions and Principles of their Masters, however they did with Nature it self.

This Inconvenience, the Royal Society has escaped, by making the whole process
pass under its own eyes. And the Task was divided amongst them, by one of these
two ways. First, it was sometimes referred to some particular men, to make
choice of what Subject they pleased, and to follow their own humor in the
Trial; the expense being still allowed from the general Stock. By which
liberty, that they afforded, they had a very necessary regard to the power of
particular Inclinations: which in all sorts of Knowledge is so strong; that
there may be numberless Instances given of men, who in some things have been
altogether useless, and yet in others have had such a vigorous, and successful
faculty, as if they had been born, and formed for them alone.

Or else secondly, the Society it self made the distribution, and deputed whom
it thought fit for the prosecution of such, or such Experiments. And this they
did, either by allotting the same Work to several men, separated one from
another; or else by joining them into Committees (if we may use that word in a
Philosophical sense, and so in some measure purge it from the ill sound, which
it formerly had) By this union of eyes, and hands there do these advantages
arise. Thereby there will be a full comprehension of the object in all its
appearances; and so there will be a mutual communication of the light of one
Science to another: whereas single labors can be but as a prospect taken upon
one side. And also by this fixing of several men's thoughts upon one thing,
there will be an excellent cure for that defect, which is almost unavoidable in
great Inventors. It is the custom of such earnest, and powerful minds, to do
wonderful things in the beginning; but shortly after, to be overborn by the
multitude, and weight of their own thoughts; then to yield, and cool by little
and little; and at last grow weary, and even to loath that, upon which they
were at first the most eager. This is the wonted constitution of great Wits:
such tender things, are those exalted Actions of the mind; and so hard it is,
for those imaginations, that can run swift, and mighty Races, to be able to
travel a long, and a constant journey. The effects of this infirmity have been
so remarkable, that we have certainly lost very many Inventions, after they
have been in part fashioned, by the mere languishing, and negligence of their
Authors. For this, the best provision must be, to join many men together; for
it cannot be imagined, that they should be all so violent, and fiery: and so by
this mingling of Tempers, the Impetuous men, not having the whole burden on
them, may have leisure for intervals to recruit their first heat; and the more
judicious, who are not so soon possessed with such raptures, may carry on the
others strong conceptions, by soberer degrees, to a full accomplishment.

Sect XIII. Their way of Inquiry into remote matters.
This they have practiced in such things, whereof the matter is common; and
wherein they may repeat their labors as they please. But in foreign, and remote
affairs, their Intentions, and their Advantages do far exceed all others. For
these, they have begun to settle a correspondence through all Countries; and
have taken such order, that in short time, there will scarce a Ship come up the
Thames, that does not make some return of Experiments, as well as of
Merchandise.

This their care of an Universal Intelligence, is befriended by Nature its
self, in the situation of England: For, lying so, as it does, in the passage
between the Northern parts of the World, and the Southern; its Ports being open
to all Coasts, and its Ships spreading their Sails in all Seas; it is thereby
necessarily made, not only Mistress of the Ocean, but the most proper Seat,
for the advancement of Knowledge. From the positions of Countries, arise not
only their several shapes, manners, customs, colors, but also their different
Arts, and Studies. The Inland and Continent, we see do give Laws, to Discourse,
to Habits, to Behavior: but those that border upon the Seas, are most properly
seated, to bring home matter for new Sciences, and to make the same proportion
of Discoveries above others, in the Intellectual Globe, as they have done in
the Material.

Upon this advantage of our Island, there is so much stress to be laid, toward
the prosperity of this Design; that if we should search through all the World,
for a perpetual habitation, wherein the Universal Philosophy might settle it
self; there can none be found, which is comparable to London, of all the
former, or present Seats of Empire. Babylon, that was the Capital City of the
first Monarchy, was situated in a Champion Country, had a clear, and uncloudy
air; and was therefore fit enough to promote one part of Natural Knowledge, the
Observations of the Heavens: But it was a Mid-land Town, and regarded not the
Traffic of Foreiners; abounding with its own luxury, and riches. Memphis was
improper, upon the same account; for Egypt was a Land content with its own
plenty; admitting strangers, rather to instruct them, than to learn any thing
from them. Carthage stood not so well for a resort for Philosophers, as for
Pirates; as all the African shore continues at this day. As for Rome, its
Fortune was read by Virgil; when he said, that it only ought to excel in the
Arts of Ruling. Constantinople, though its present Masters were not Barbarous,
yet is too much shut up by the Straits of Hellespont. Vienna is now a Frontier
Town, and has no communication with the Ocean, but by a long compass about.
Amsterdam is a place of Trade, without the mixture of men of freer thoughts.
And, even Paris it self, though it is far to be preferred before all the others
for the resort of Learned and Inquisitive men to it, yet is less capable, for
the same reasons, for which Athens was, by being the Seat of Gallantry, the
Arts of speech, and education. But it is London alone, that enjoys most of the
others advantages, without their inconveniences. It is the head of a mighty
Empire, the greatest that ever commanded the Ocean: It is composed of
Gentlemen, as well as Traders: It has a large intercourse with all the Earth:
It is, as the Poets describe their House of Fame, a City, where all the noises
and business in the World do meet: and therefore this honor is justly due to
it, to be the constant place of residence for that Knowledge, which is to be
made up of the Reports, and Intelligence of all Countries.

To this I will add; That we have another help in our hands, which almost
forces this Crown on the head of the English Nation: and that is, the Noble,
and Inquisitive Genius of our Merchants. This cannot be better shown, than by
comparing them, with those of that one Country; which only stands in
competition with us for Trade. The Merchants of England live honorably in
foreign parts; those of Holland meanly, minding their gain alone: ours converse
freely, and learn from all; having in their behavior, very much of the
Gentility of the Families, from which so many of them are descended: The
others, when they are abroad, show, that they are only a Race of plain
Citizens, keeping themselves most within their own Cells, and Warehouses;
scarce regarding the acquaintance of any, but those, with whom they traffic.
This largeness of ours, and narrowness of their living, does, no doubt, conduce
very much to enrich them; and is, perhaps, one of the Reasons, that they can so
easily under-sel us: But withal, it makes ours the most capable, as theirs
unfit, to promote such an Enterprise, as this of which I am now speaking. For
indeed, the effects of their several ways of life, are as different: of the
Hollanders, I need say no more: But of the English Merchants I will affirm,
that in all sorts of Politeness, and skill in the World, and humane affairs,
they do not only excel them, but are equal to any other sort of men amongst us.

This I have spoken, not to lessen the reputation of that Industrious people:
But, that I might (if it were possible) inflame their minds to an emulation of
this Design. They have all things imaginable to stir them up: they have the
Examples of the greatest Wits of other Countries, who have left their own
homes, to retire thither, for the freedom of their Philosophical Studies: they
have one place (I mean the Hague) which may be soon made the very Copy of a
Town in the New Atlantis; which for its pleasantness, and for the concourse of
men of all conditions to it, may be counted above all others (except London)
the most advantagiously seated for this service.

These have been the privileges and practices of the Royal Society, in things
foreign, and Native. It would now be needless to set down all the steps of their
progress about them; how they observed all the varieties of Generations, and
corruptions, natural, and artificial; all the increasings, and lessenings;
agreements, and oppositions of things; how, having found out a cause, they have
applied it to many other effects: and the effects to different causes; how they
are wont to change the Instruments and places, and quantities of matter,
according to occasions: and all the other subtilties, and windings of Trial,
which are almost infinite to express. I shall only, in passing, touch on these
two things, which they have most carefully consulted.

The one is, not to prescribe to themselves, any certain Art of Experimenting,
within which to circumscribe their thoughts: But rather to keep themselves
free, and change their course, according to the different circumstances, that
occurr to them in their operations; and the several alterations of the Bodies,
on which they work. The true Experimenting has this one thing inseparable from
it, never to be a fixed and settled Art, and never to be limited by constant
Rules. This, perhaps, may be shown too in other Arts; as in that of Invention,
of which, though in Logic, and Rhetoric, so many bounds, and helps are given:
yet I believe very few have argued or discoursed by those Topics. But whether
that be unconfined, or no, it is certain, that Experimenting is; like that
which is called Decence in humane life; which, though it be that, by which all
our Actions are to be fashioned; and though many things may be plausibly said
upon it; yet it is never wholly to be reduced to standing Precepts; and may
almost as easily be obtained, as defined.

Their other care has been, to regard the least, and the plainest things, and
those that may appear at first the most inconsiderable; as well as the greatest
Curiosities. This was visibly neglected by the Ancients. The Histories of
Pliny, Aristotle, Solinus, Aelian, abounding more with pretty Tales, and fine
monstrous Stories; than sober, and fruitful Relations. If they could gather
together some extraordinary Qualities of Stones, or Minerals, some Rarities of
the Age, the food, the color, the shapes of Beasts, or some virtues of
Fountains, or Rivers: they thought, they had performed the chiefest part of
Natural Historians. But this course is subject to much corruption. It is not
the true following of Nature; For that still goes on in a steady Rode, nor is
it so extravagant, and so artificial in its contrivances, as our admiration,
proceeding from our ignorance, makes it. It is also a way that of all others,
is most subject to be deceived: For it will make men inclinable to bend the
Truth much awry, to raise a specious Observation out of it. It stops the severe
progress of Inquiry: Infecting the mind, and making it averse from the true
Natural Philosophy: It is like Romances, in respect of True History; which, by
multiplying varieties of extraordinary Events, and surprising circumstances,
makes that seem dull, and tastless. And, to say no more, the very delight which
it raises, is nothing so solid: but, as the satisfaction of Fancy, it affects
us a little, in the beginning, but soon wearies, and surfets: whereas a just
History of Nature, like the pleasure of Reason, would not be, perhaps, so quick
and violent, but of far longer continuance, in its contentment.

Their Matter, Sect. XIV. Their weekly Assemblies.
being thus collected, has been brought before their weekly meetings, to
undergo a just and a full examination. In them their principal endeavors have
been, that they might enjoy the benefits of a mixed Assembly, which are
largeness of Observation, and diversity of Judgments, without the mischiefs
that usually accompany it, such as confusion, unsteddiness, and the little
animosities of divided Parties. That they have avoided these dangers for the
time past; there can be no better proof, than their constant practice; wherein
they have perpetually preserved a singular sobriety of debating, slowness of
consenting, and moderation of dissenting. Nor have they been only free from
Faction, but from the very Causes, and beginnings of it. It was in vain for any
man amongst them to strive to prefer himself before another; or to seek for
any great glory from the subtilty of his Wit; seeing it was the inartificial
process of the Experiment, and not the Acuteness of any Commentary upon it,
which they have had in veneration. There was no room left, for any to attempt,
to heat their own, or others minds, beyond a due temper; where they were not
allowed to expatiate, or amplify, or connect specious arguments together. They
could not be much exasperated one against another in their disagreements,
because they acknowledge, that there may be several Methods of Nature, in
producing the same thing, and all equally good: whereas they that contend for
truth by talking, do commonly suppose that there is but one way of finding it
out. The differences which should chance to happen, might soon be composed;
because they could not be grounded on matters of speculation, or opinion, but
only of sense; which are never wont to administer so powerful occasions of
disturbance, and contention, as the other. In brief, they have escaped the
prejudices that use to arise from Authority, from unequality of Persons, from
insinuations, from friendships; But above all, they have guarded themselves
against themselves, lest the strength of their own thoughts should lead them
into error; lest their good Fortune in one Discovery, should presently confine
them only to one way of trial; lest their failings should discourage, or their
success abate their diligence. All these excellent Philosophical Qualities,
they have by long custom, made to become the peculiar Genius of this Society:
and to descend down to their successors, not only as circumstantial Laws,
which may be neglected, or altered in the course of time; but as the very life
of their constitution; to remain on their minds, as the laws of Nature do in
the hearts of Men; which are so near to us, that we can hardly distinguish,
whether they were taught us by degrees, or rooted in the very foundation of our
Being.

Sect. XV. The Ceremonies of their meetings.
It will not be here seasonable, to speak much, of the Ceremonies which they
have hitherto observed in these Meetings; because they are, almost, the same,
which have been since established by their Council, which we shall have a more
proper occasion to produce hereafter. Let this only be said in brief, to
satisfy the curious.

The Place where they hitherto assembled, is Gresham-College; where, by the
munificence of a Citizen, there have been Lectures for several Arts endowed so
liberally, that if it were beyond Sea, it might well pass for an University.
And indeed, by a rare happiness in the constitution (of which I know not where
to find the like example) the Professors have been from the beginning, and
chiefly, of late years, of the most Learned Men of the Nation; though the
choice has been wholly in the disposal of Citizens. Here the Royal Society has
one public Room to meet in, another for a repository to keep their
Instruments, Books, Rarities, Papers, and whatever else belongs to them: making
use besides, by permission, of several of the other Lodgings, as their
occasions do require. And, when I consider the place it self; me thinks it
bears some likeness to their Design; It is now a College, but was once the
Mansion House of one of the greatest Merchants, that ever was in England: And
such a Philosophy they would build; which should first wholly consist of
Action, and Intelligence, before it be brought into Teaching, and Contemplation.

There Time is every Wednesday, after the Lecture of the Astronomy Professor;
perhaps, in memory of the first occasions of their Rendezvouses.

Their Elections, performed by Ballotting; every member having a Vote; the
Candidates being named at one meeting, and put to the scrutiny at another.

Their Chief Officer, is the President; to whom it belongs to call, and
dissolve their meetings; to propose the Subject; to regulate the Proceedings;
to change the Inquiry from one thing to another; to admit the Members who are
elected.

Besides him, they had at first a Register, who was to take Notes of all that
passed; which were afterward to be reduced into their Iournals, and Register
Books. This Task was first performed by Dr. Croone. But they since thought it
more necessary, to appoint two Secretaries, who are to reply to all Addresses
from abroad, and at home; and to publish whatever shall be agreed upon by the
Society. These are at present, Dr. Wilkins, and Mr. Oldenbourgh, from whom I
have not usurped this first employment of that kind; for it is only my hand
that goes, the substance and direction came from one of them.

This is all that I have to say concerning their Ceremonial part. In most other
things, they bounded themselves to no standing Orders, there being nothing more
intended in such circumstances, than convenience and order. If any shall
imagine, they have not limited themselves to Forms enough, to keep up the
gravity, and solemnity of such an Enterprise, they are to consider, that so
much exactness and curiosity of observances, does not so well befit Inquirers,
as Sects of Philosophy, or places appointed for Education, or those who submit
themselves to the severity of some religious Order. The Work which the Society
proposes to it self, being not so fine, and easy, as that of teaching is; but
rather a painful digging, and toiling in Nature; It would be a great
encumbrance to them, to be straightned to many strict punctilioes; as much as
it would be to an Artificer, to be loaded with many clothes, while he is
laboring in his Shop.

But having made so much have through the Formal part of these their Meetings,
I shall not so soon dispatch the substantial; which consists in Directing,
Judging, Conjecturing, Improving, Discoursing upon Experiments.

Toward the first of these ends, Sect. XVI. Their directing Experiments.
it has been their usual course, when they themselves appointed the Trial, to
propose one week, some particular Experiments, to be prosecuted the next; and
to debate before hand, concerning all things that might conduce to the better
carrying them on. In this Praeliminary Collection, it has been the custom, for
any of the Society, to urge what came into their thoughts, or memories
concerning them; either from the observations of others, or from Books, or from
their own Experience, or even from common Fame it self. And in performing this,
they did not exercise any great rigor of choosing, and distinguishing between
Truths and Falsehoods: but a mass altogether as they came; the certain Works,
the Opinions, the Ghesses, the Inventions, with their different Degrees and
Accidents, the Probabilities, the Problems, the general Conceptions, the
miraculous Stories, the ordinary Productions, the changes incident to the same
Matter in several places, the Hindrances, the Benefits, of Airs, or Seasons, or
Instruments; and whatever they found to have been begun, to have failed, to
have succeeded, in the Matter which was then under their Disquisition.

This is a most necessary preparation, to any that resolve to make a perfect
search. For they cannot but go blindly, and lamely, and confusedly about the
business, unless they have first laid before them a full Account of it. I
confess the excellent Monsieur des Carts recommends to us another way in his
Philosophical Method; where he gives this Relation of his own progress; that
after he had run through the usual Studies of youth, and spent his first years
in an active life; when he retired to search into Truth, he at once rejected
all the Impressions, which he had before received, from what he had heard, and
read; and wholly gave himself over to a reflection on the naked Ideas of his own
mind. This he professed to do, that he might lay aside all his old
imaginations, and begin anew to write on a white and unblotted Soul. This,
perhaps, is more allowable in matters of Contemplation, and in a Gentleman,
whose chief aim was his own delight; and so it was in his own choice, whether
or no, he would go farther to seek it, than his own mind: But it can by no
means stand with a practical and universal Inquiry. It is impossible, but they,
who will only transscribe their own thoughts, and disdain to measure or
strengthen them by the assistance of others, should be in most of their
apprehensions too narrow, and obscure; by setting down things for general,
which are only peculiar to themselves. It cannot be avoided, but they will
commit many gross mistakes; and bestow much useless pains, by making themselves
wilfully ignorant of what is already known, and what concealed. It was tried
amongst the Ancients, to find out the pure, and Primitive Language of the
World, by breeding up a child so, that he might never hear any man speak. But
what was the event of that trial? Instead of obtaining that end, the child was
made absolutely dumb thereby. And the like success will that Philosopher find,
who shall expect, that, by the keeping his mind free from the Tincture of all
others Opinions, it will give him the original, and uninfected Truths of
things. All Knowledge is to be got the same way that a Language is, by Industry,
Use, and Observation. It must be received, before it can be drawn forth. It Is
true, the mind of Man is a Glass, which is able to represent to it self, all
the Works of Nature: But it can only show those Figures, which have been
brought before it: It is no Magical Glass, like that with which Astrologers use
to deceive the Ignorant; by making them believe, that therein they may behold
the Image of any Place, or Person in the World, though never so far removed
from it. I know it may be here suggested; that they, who busy themselves much
abroad, about learning the judgments of others, cannot be unprejudiced in what
they think. But it is not the knowing, but the peremptory addiction to others
Tenants, that sowers and perverts the Understanding. Nay, to go farther; that
man, who is thoroughly acquainted with all sorts of Opinions, is very much more
unlikely, to adhere obstinately to any one particular, than he whose head is
only filled with thoughts, that are all of one color.

It being now so requisite, to premise this general collection: It could not be
better made, than by the joint labors of the whole Society. It were an
intolerable burden, if it were wholly cast on the Experimenters themselves.
For, it is not only true, that those who have the best faculty of
Experimenting, are commonly most averse from reading Books; and so it is fit,
that this Defect should be supplied by others pains: But also it would too much
tire, and wast, or at least divert their spirits, before they came to the main
Work. Whereas the Task being shared amongst so great a number, will become not
much more than a business of delight. Well then, by this first Comment, and
Discourse upon the Experiment; he, that is to try it, being present; and having
so good an opportunity, of comparing so many other men's conceptions with his
own, and with the thing it self; must needs have his thoughts more enlarged,
his judgment confirmed, his eyes opened to discern, what most compendious helps
may be provided; what part of it is more or less useful; and upon what side it
may be best attempted: The Truths, which he learns this way, will be his
Pattern; the Errors will be his Seamarks, to teach to avoid the same dangers;
the very falsehoods themselves will serve to enlarge, though they do not inform
his Understanding. And, indeed, a thousand more advantages will hereby come
into the minds of the most Sagacious, and acute Inquirers, which they would
never have compassed, if they had been only lest to themselves. I remember, my
Lord Bacon some where says; That it is one of the greatest secrets of Nature,
that men's Passions are more capable, of being raised to higher degrees in
company, than in solitude: and that we sooner grieve, fear, rejoice, love,
admire, when we behold many others so moved, than when we are alone. This is
true; and the same may be as well affirmed, of most other actions of the mind.
In Assemblies, the Wits of most men are sharper, their Apprehensions readier,
their Thoughts fuller, than in their Closets. Of this there is an undoubted
proof in the Art of speaking. For, let the wittiest, and most eloquent men
think as largely as they can, on any subject in private; yet, when they come
into the public; and especially, when they have heard others speak before
them, their Argument appears quite another thing to them; their former
expressions seem too flat, and cold for their present thoughts; their minds
swell, and are enlightened, as if at that time they were possessed with the
Souls of the whole multitude, before whom they stand.

Those, Sect. XVII. Their judging of the matter of Fact.
to whom the conduct of the Experiment is committed, being dismissed with these
advantages, do (as it were) carry the eyes, and the imaginations of the whole
company into the Laboratory with them. And after they have performed the Trial,
they bring all the History of its process back again to the test. Then comes in
the second great Work of the Assembly; which is to judge, and resolve upon the
matter of Fact. In this part of their employment, they used to take an exact
view of the repetition of the whole course of the Experiment; here they
observed all the chances, and the Regularities of the proceeding; what Nature
does willingly, what constrained; what with its own power, what by the succors
of Art; what in a constant rode, and what with some kind of sport and
extravagance; industriously marking all the various shapes into which it turns
it self, when it is persued, and by how many secret passages it at last obtains
its end; never giving it over till the whole Company has been fully satisfied
of the certainty and constancy; or, on the otherside, of the absolute
impossibility of the effect. This critical, and reiterated scrutiny of those
things, which are the plain objects of their eyes; must needs put out of all
reasonable dispute, the reality of those operations, which the Society shall
positively determine to have succeeded. If any shall still think it a just
Philosophical liberty, to be jealous of resting on their credit: they are in
the right; and their dissentings will be most thankfully received, if they be
established on solid works, and not only on prejudices, or suspicions. To the
Royal Society it will be at any time almost as acceptable, to be confuted, as
to discover: seeing, by this means, they will accomplish their main Design:
others will be inflamed: many more will labor; and so the Truth will be
obtained between them: which may be as much promoted by the contentions of
hands, and eyes; as it is commonly injured by those of Tongues. However, that
men may not hence undervalue their authority, because they themselves are not
willing to impose, and to usurp a dominion over their reason; I will tell them,
that there is not any one thing, which is now approved and practiced in the
World, that is confirmed by stronger evidence, than this, which the Society
requires; except only the Holy Mysteries of our Religion. In almost all other
matters of Belief, of Opinion, or of Science; the assurance, whereby men are
guided, is nothing near so firm, as this. And I dare appeal to all sober men;
whether, seeing in all Countries, that are governed by Laws, they expect no
more, than the consent of two, or three witnesses, in matters of life, and
estate; they will not think, they are fairly dealt withal, in what concerns
their Knowledge, if they have the concurring Testimonies of threescore or an
hundred?

Sect. XVIII. Their conjecturing on the Causes.
The History, of the Trial performed, being thus secured, I will next declare,
what room they allowed for conjecturing upon the Causes; about which they also
took some pains, though in a far different way from the ancient Philosophers;
amongst whom, scarce any thing else was regarded, but such general
contemplations. This indeed, is the Fatal point, about which so many of the
greatest Wits of all Ages have miscarried; and commonly, the greater the Wit,
the more has been the danger: so many wary steps ought to be trodden in this
uncertain path: such a multitude of pleasing Errors, false Lights, disguised
Lies, deceitful Fancies must be escaped: so much care must be taken, to get
into the right way at first: so much, to continue in it; and at last, the
greatest caution still remaining to be used; lest when the treasure is in our
view, we undo all, by catching at it too soon, with too greedy, and rash a
hand. These, and many more are the difficulties, to be passed; which I have
here with less apprehension reckoned up, because the remedy is so nigh. To this
Work therefore the Society approaches, with as much circumspection and modesty,
as humane counsels are capable of: They have been cautious, to shun the
overweening dogmatizing on causes on the one hand: and not to fall into a
speculative Skepticism on the other: and whatever causes they have with just
deliberation found to hold good; they still make them increase their benefits,
by farther experimenting upon them; and will not permit them to rust or
corrupt, for want of use. If after all this* they shall not seem wholly to have
removed the mischiefs, that attend this hazardous matter; they ought rather to
be judged, by what they have done toward it above others, than by what they
have not provided against: seeing the thing it self is of that nature; that it
is impossible to place the minds of men beyond all condition of erring about it.

The first Danger that I shall observe in this kind, is an overhasty, and
praecipitant concluding upon the Causes, before the Effects have been enough
searched into: a finishing the roof, before the foundation has been well laid.
For this, I shall first allege this cure; that, though the Experiment was but
the private task of one or two, or some such small number; yet the
conjecturing, and debating on its consequences, was still the employment of
their full, and solemn Assemblies. I have already, upon several occasions,
preferred Companies before single endeavors in Philosophical matters; and yet
I am not ashamed here to repeat it again; especially, seeing in this place, it
is most apparent, to which of them the prerogative of freedom, and clearness of
judging, belongs. To this purpose I shall affirm, that there can never be
found, in the breast of any particular Philosopher, as much wariness, and
coldness of thinking, and rigorous examination; as is needful, to a solid
assent, and to a lasting conclusion, on the whole frame of Nature. How can it
be imagined, that any single mind can comprehend, and sustain long enough the
weight of so many different Opinions, and infinite Observations; when even the
best Mathematicians are soon tired, with a long train of the most delightful
Propositions, which were before made to their hands? Or, if there could be a
man of that vastness of Soul; yet, how can we be assured, that he will hold the
scale even? where have we ever had an example of so much streightness, and
impartiality of judgment; to persuade us, that the calmest Philosopher will not
be insensibly inclined, to prefer his own Doctrines, before those of a
stranger? We see all the world flatter themselves in their strength, beauty,
nay, even (as some have noted) in their very Statures; the lowest men scarce
believing, but that they are tall enough. Why then should they be singly
trusted in their votes about their own thoughts; where the comparison of Wit,
makes them more eagerly concerned? If we follow the Philosopher home into his
study; we shall quickly discover, by how many plausible degrees, the wisest men
are apt to deceive themselves, into a sudden confidence of the certainty of
their knowledge. We will suppose him, to begin his Inquiry, with all the
sincerity imaginable: resolving to pass by no small mistake, and to forgive to
himself no slight error in the account; with these fair purposes, he pitches on
some particular subject: This he turns, and tortures every way; till, after
much labor, he can make some ghesses at its Causes: upon this, his industry
increases: he applies the same matter to several other operations: he still
finds the effects answer his expectations: Now he begins to mould some general
Proposition upon it: he meets with more and more proofs to confirm his
judgment: thus he grows by little and little, warmer in his imaginations: the
delight of his success swells him: he triumphs and applauds himself, for having
found out some important Truth: But now his Trial begins to slacken: now
impatience and security creeps upon him: now he carelessly admits whole crowds
of Testimonies, that seem any way to confirm that Opinion, which he had before
established: now he stops his survay, which ought to have gone forward to many
more particulars; and so at last, this sincere, this invincible Observer, out
of weariness, or presumption, becomes the most negligent in the later part of
his work, in which he ought to have been the most exact. Such is the universal
inclination of mankind, to be misled by themselves: which I have mentioned,
not to beat down the credit of any particular Philosophers, whose
superstructures have not bin answerable to the strength of their first
assertions: but I have only complained of it in general; as we use to do of
Man's mortality, and being subject to diseases: the aggravating of which common
infirmities, can never be esteemed by any private man, as an effect of malice,
or ill nature.

But now, on the other side, this doubtfulness of thoughts, this fluctuation,
this slowness of concluding, which is so useful in this case, is so natural to
a multitude of Counselors; that it is frequently urged against them, as their
inseparable Imperfection. Every man has this Argument in his mouth, wherewith
to condemn a great and mixed number of advisers; that their deliberations are so
tedious, that commonly the seasons of Action are lost, before they can come to
any result. It Is true, this unweildiness, and want of dispatch, is most
destructive in matters of State, and Government; as Christendom lately felt:
But it has a quite contrary influence on Philosophy. It is not here the most
speedy, or the swiftest determination of thoughts, that will do the business;
here, many delays are required: here, he that can make a solid objection, or
ask a seasonable question, will do more good, than he, who shall boldly fix on
a hundred ill-grounded resolutions. Every rubb is here to be smoothed: every
scruple to be plained: every thing to be foreseen: the satisfaction of the
reason of all past, present, and future times to be designed: so that here,
that which is so much cried down in policy, a striving still to do better, can
never be too much regarded.

Nor is the Society only fore-arm'd against this great inconvenience, this
rashness of settling upon causes, by the multitude of Judges that are to be
satisfied: but also by their indifferent hearing of all conjectures, that may
be made from the Tenants of any Sect of Philosophy; and by touching every
effect that comes before them; upon all the varieties of opinions, that have
been either of late found out, or revived. By this equality of respect to all
parties, it has allowed a sufficient time, to ripen whatever it debated: By
this too, it has made it self the common Cherisher, and Vmpire of them all: and
has taken the right way of finding out, what is good in any one of them. A
course, which if the Ancients had more followed, their Sects would not so soon
have destroyed each other. It was a most perverse custom amongst their
Disciples, not to make any strict choice; to leave some, and embrace others of
their Masters Doctrines, but to swallow all at once. He that became a Stoic,
an Epicurean, a Peripatetick, in Logic, or Moral Philosophy, or Physics;
never stuck, presently to assent to whatever his Founder had said in all the
other Sciences: though there was no kind of connection between his Doctrines in
the one, and the other. Thus was the whole image of Philosophy formed in their
minds altogether: And what they received so carelessly, they defended the same
way; not in parcels, but in gross. Of this the Errors are apparent; for by so
partially believing all sorts of Tenants, they had no time to be fully
convinced: and so became rather formal Asserters of them, than judicious. And
by thus adhering to all; without making any distinction between the Truths, and
falsehoods; weaknesses, and strengths of their Sects; they denied to themselves
a far more calm, and safe knowledge; which might have been compounded out of
them all, by fetching something from one, and something from another.

This the Royal Society did well foresee: and therefore did not regard the
credit of Names, but Things: rejecting or approving nothing, because of the
title, which it bears: preserving to it self the liberty of refusing, or
liking, as it found: and so advancing its stock, by a sure and a double
increase; by adding new Discoveries, and retaining ancient Truths. A largeness,
and generosity, which certainly is an excellent Omen of its establishment. In
this, methinks, it excels any other Sect; as the Roman Commonwealth, did that
of Venice. The later began upon a small stock, and has been careful to preserve
it self unmingled, bestowing the freedom of its City very sparingly: And we
see, it has been still on the defensive; making no great progress in the World:
whereas the Romans, by a far more frank, and honorable counsel, admitted all,
that desired to be their confederates; gave the liberty of Roman Citizens to
whole Towns, and Countries; excluded none, but those that would obstinately
stand out: and so deservedly extended their Empire, as far as the bounds of
the civil World did reach.

The second mischief in this great matter of causes, is an eternal instability,
and aversion from assigning of any. This arises, from a violent, and imprudent
have to avoid the first. So easy is the passage from one extreme to another;
and so hard it is, to stop in that little point, wherein the right does
consist. The truth is, they are both almost equally pernicious: nothing sound
is to be expected from those, who will fix blindly on whatever they can lay hold
on: and nothing great from them, who will always wander; who will never leave
disputing, whether they dream; or wake; whether there is any motion; whether
they have any being, or no: the one can produce nothing, but unwholesome, and
rotten fruits: and the other, for fear of that, will endeavor to have no
Harvest, nor Autumn at all.

To this fault of Skeptical doubting, the Royal Society may perhaps be
suspected, to be a little too much inclined: because they always professed, to
be so backward from settling of Principles, or fixing upon Doctrines. But if we
fairly consider their intentions, we shall soon acquit them. Though they are
not yet very daring, in establishing conclusions; yet they lay no injunctions
upon their successors not to do the same, when they shall have got a sufficient
store for such a work. It is their study, that the way to attain a solid
speculation, should every day be more and more persued: which is to be done, by
a long forbearing of speculation at first, till the matters be ripe for it; and
not, by madly rushing upon it in the very beginning. Though they do not
contemplate much on the general agreements of things; yet they do on the
particular: from whence the others also will in time be deduced. They are
therefore as far from being Scepticks, as the greatest Dogmatists themselves.
The Scepticks deny all, both Doctrines, and Works. The Dogmatists determine on
Doctrines, without a sufficient respect to Works: and this Assembly, (though we
should grant, that they have wholly omitted Doctrines) yet they have been very
positive and affirmative in their Works. But more than this, It must also be
confessed, that sometimes after a full inspection* they have ventured to give
the advantage of probability to one Opinion, or Cause, above another: Nor have
they run any manner of hazard by thus concluding. For first, it is likely, they
did hit the right, after so long, so punctual, and so gradual an examination:
or if we suppose the worst, that they should sometimes judge amiss (as we cannot
but allow they may; seeing it will not be just to bestow infallibility on them
alone; while we deny it to all others) yet they have taken care, that their
weaker reasonings, and even their Errors, cannot be very prejudicial to
Posterity. The causes, upon which they have agreed, they did not presently
extend, beyond their due strength, to all other things, that seem to bear some
resemblance to what they tried. Whatever they have resolved upon; they have not
reported, as unalterable Demonstrations, but as present appearances: delivering
down to future Ages, with the good success of the Experiment, the manner of
their progress, the Instruments, and the several differences of the matter,
which they have applied: so that, with their mistake, they give them also the
means of finding it out. To this I shall add, that they have never affirmed any
thing, concerning the cause, till the trial was past: whereas, to do it before,
is a most venomous thing in the making of Sciences: for whoever has fixed on
his Cause, before he has experimented; can hardly avoid fitting his Experiment,
and his Observations, to his own Cause, which he had before imagined; rather
than the Cause to the truth of the Experiment it self. But, in a word, they
have hitherto made little other benefit of the causes, to which they have
consented; than that thereby they might have a firm footing, whereon new
operations may proceed. And for this Work, I mean a continuation, and variation
of the Inquiry; the tracing of a false Cause, does very often so much conduce;
that, in the progress, the right has been discovered by it. It is not to be
questioned, but many inventions of great moment, have been brought forth by
Authors, who began upon suppositions, which afterward they found to be untrue.
And it frequently happens to Philosophers, as it did to Columbus: who first
believed the clouds, that hovered about the Continent, to be the firm Land: But
his mistake was happy; for, by sailing toward them, he was led to what he
sought: so by prosecuting of mistaken Causes, with a resolution of not giving
over the persute; they have been guided to the truth it self.

The last Defect is, the rendering of Causes barren: that when they have been
found out, they have been suffered to lie idle; and have been only used, to
increase thoughts, and not works. This negligence is of all others the most
dangerous: It is a Shipwreck in the end of the voyage, and thence the more to
be pitied: It is a corruption, that both hinders additions, and eats out the
knowledge that has been already obtained: It is the fault of Philosophers, and
not of mere Inquirers; of those that have been successful, and not of the
unfortunate in their search: and therefore it is, as the miscarriages of those,
that are prosperous in humane actions; which are always observed to be more
destructive, and harder to be cured, than the failings of the afflicted, or
those that are still in persute.

To this the Royal Society has applied a double prevention; Sect XIX. Their way
of Improving.
both by endeavoring to strike out new Arts, as they go along; and also, by
still improving all to new experiments.

Of the possibility of their performing the first; and the Method, which is to
be taken about it; I shall shortly speak in another place. It is enough here,
to say; that by this, they have taken care, to satisfy the hopes of the
present times; which else might justly languish, and grow cold about this
enterprise: if they once saw, that nothing would be ripe in their days; but
that all was to come up hereafter, for the advantage of those, that are yet
unborn. They consulted the good of Future times; but have not neglected their
own; they have practiced both the parts of good Husbandry; planting Trees, and
sowing Corn. This later, for their own speedy benefit, and support; and the
other, for the profit, and ornament of after-Ages.

Nor have they suffered their diligence to be swallowed up, by the pleasures,
and enjoyments of present discoveries; but have still submitted their noblest
Inventions, to be made Instruments, and means, for the finding out of others.
This certainly is the most comprehensive, and unerring Method; at once to make
use of that assistance, they give, and to force them, to be farther helpful to
greater ends. There is nothing of all the works of Nature, so inconsiderable,
so remote, or so fully known; but, by being made to reflect on other things, it
will at once enligten them, and show it self the clearer. Such is the
dependence amongst all the orders of creatures; the inanimate, the sensitive,
the rational, the natural, the artificial: that the apprehension of one of
them, is a good step toward the understanding of the rest: And this is the
highest pitch of humane reason; to follow all the links of this chain, till all
their secrets are open to our minds; and their works advanced, or imitated by
our hands. This is truly to command the world; to rank all the varieties, and
degrees of things, so orderly one upon another; that standing on the top of
them, we may perfectly behold all that are below, and make them all serviceable
to the quiet, and peace, and plenty of Man's life. And to this happiness, there
can be nothing else added: but that we make a second advantage of this rising
ground, thereby to look the nearer into heaven: An ambition, which though it
was punished in the old World, by an universal Confusion; when it was managed
with impiety, and insolence: yet, when it is carried on by that humility and
innocence, which can never be separated from true knowledge; when it is
designed, not to brave the Creator of all things, but to admire him the more:
it must needs be the utmost perfection of humane Nature.

Thus they have directed, Sect. XX. Their manner of Discourse.
judged, conjectured upon, and improved Experiments. But lastly, in these, and
all other businesses, that have come under their care; there is one thing more,
about which the Society has been most sollicitous; and that is, the manner of
their Discourse: which, unless they had been very watchful to keep in due
temper, the whole spirit and vigor of their Design, had been soon eaten out,
by the luxury and redundance of speech. The ill effects of this superfluity of
talking, have already overwhelmed most other Arts and Professions; insomuch,
that when I consider the means of happy living, and the causes of their
corruption, I can hardly forbear recanting what I said before; and concluding,
that eloquence ought to be banished out of all civil Societies, as a thing
fatal to Peace and good Manners. To this opinion I should wholly incline; if I
did not find, that it is a Weapon, which may be as easily procured by bad men,
as good: and that, if these should only cast it away, and those retain it; the
naked Innocence of virtue, would be upon all occasions exposed to the armed
Malice of the wicked. This is the chief reason, that should now keep up the
Ornaments of speaking, in any request: since they are so much degenerated from
their original usefulness. They were at first, no doubt, an admirable
Instrument in the hands of Wise Men: when they were only employed to describe
Goodness, Honesty, Obedience; in larger, fairer, and more moving Images: to
represent Truth, clothed with Bodies; and to bring Knowledge back again to our
very senses, from whence it was at first derived to our understandings. But now
they are generally changed to worse uses: They make the Fancy disgust the best
things, if they come sound, and unadorned: they are in open defiance against
Reason; professing, not to hold much correspondence with that; but with its
Slaves, the Passions: they give the mind a motion too changeable, and
bewitching, to consist with right practice. Who can behold, without
indignation, how many mists and uncertainties, these specious Tropes and
Figures have brought on our Knowledge? How many rewards, which are due to more
profitable, and difficult Arts, have been still snatched away by the easy
vanity of fine speaking? For now I am warmed with this just Anger, I cannot
withold my self, from betraying the shallowness of all these seeming
Mysteries; upon which, we Writers, and Speakers, look so bigg. And, in few
words, I dare say; that of all the Studies of men, nothing may be sooner
obtained, than this vicious abundance of Phrase, this trick of Metaphors, this
volubility of Tongue, which makes so great a noise in the World. But I spend
words in vain; for the evil is now so inveterate, that it is hard to know whom
to blame, or where to begin to reform. We all value one another so much, upon
this beautiful deceit; and labor so long after it, in the years of our
education; that we cannot but ever after think kinder of it, than it deserves.
And indeed, in most other parts of Learning, I look on it to be a thing almost
utterly desperate in its cure: and I think, it may be placed amongst those
general mischiefs; such, as the dissension of Christian Princes, the want of
practice in Religion, and the like; which have been so long spoken against,
that men are become insensible about them; every one shifting off the fault
from himself to others; and so they are only made bare common places of
complaint. It will suffice my present purpose, to point out, what has been done
by the Royal Society, toward the correcting of its excesses in Natural
Philosophy; to which it is, of all others, a most professed enemy.

They have therefore been most rigorous in putting in execution, the only
Remedy, that can be found for this extravagance: and that has been, a constant
Resolution, to reject all the amplifications, digressions, and swellings of
style: to return back to the primitive purity, and shortness, when men
delivered so many things, almost in an equal number of words. They have exacted
from all their members, a close, naked, natural way of speaking; positive
expressions; clear senses; a native easiness: bringing all things as near the
Mathematical plainness, as they can: and preferring the language of Artizans,
Countrymen, and Merchants, before that, of Wits, or Scholars.

And here, there is one thing, not to be passed by; which will render this
established custom of the Society, well nigh everlasting: and that is, the
general constitution of the minds of the English. I have already often insisted
on some of the prerogatives of England; whereby it may justly lay claim, to be
the Head of a Philosophical league, above all other Countries in Europe: I have
urged its situation, its present Genius, and the disposition of its Merchants;
and many more such arguments to encourage us, still remain to be used: But of
all others, this, which I am now alleging, is of the most weighty, and
important consideration. If there can be a true character given of the
Universal Temper of any Nation under Heaven: then certainly this must be
ascribed to our Countrymen: that they have commonly an unaffected sincerity;
that they love to deliver their minds with a sound simplicity; that they have
the middle qualities, between the reserved subtle southern, and the rough
unhewn Northern people: that they are not extremely prone to speak: that they
are more concerned, what others will think of the strength, than of the
fineness of what they say: and that an universal modesty possesses them. These
Qualities are so conspicuous, and proper to our Soil; that we often hear them
objected to us, by some of our neighbor Satyrists, in more disgraceful
expressions. For they are wont to revile the English, with a want of
familiarity; with a melancholy dumpishness; with slowness, silence, and with
the unrefin'd sullenness of their behavior. But these are only the reproaches
of partiality, or ignorance: for they ought rather to be commended for an
honorable integrity; for a neglect of circumstances, and flourishes; for
regarding things of greater moment, more than less; for a scorn to deceive as
well as to be deceived: which are all the best indowments, that can enter into
a Philosophical Mind. So that even the position of our climate, the air, the
influence of the heaven, the composition of the English blood; as well as the
embraces of the Ocean, seem to join with the labors of the Royal Society, to
render our Country, a Land of Experimental knowledge. And it is a good sign,
that Nature will reveal more of its secrets to the English, than to others;
because it has already furnished them with a Genius so well proportioned, for
the receiving, and retaining its mysteries.

And now, Sect. II. Their way of Registring.
to come to a close of the second part of the Narration: The Society has
reduced its principal observations, into one common-stock; and laid them up in
public Registers, to be nakedly transmitted to the next Generation of Men;
and so from them, to their Successors. And as their purpose was, to heap up a
mixed Mass of Experiments, without digesting them into any perfect model: so to
this end, they confined themselves to no order of subjects; and whatever they
have recorded, they have done it, not as complete Schemes of opinions, but as
bare unfinished Histories.

In the order of their Inquisitions, they have been so free; that they have
sometimes committed themselves to be guided, according to the seasons of the
year: sometimes, according to what any foreiner, or English Artificer, being
present, has suggested: sometimes, according to any extraordinary accident in
the Nation, or any other casualty, which has happened in their way. By which
roving, and unsettled course, there being seldom any reference of one matter
to the next; they have prevented others, nay even their own hands, from
corrupting, or contracting the work: they have made the raising of Rules, and
Propositions, to be a far more difficult task, than it would have been, if
their Registers had been more Methodical. Nor ought this neglect of
consequence, and order, to be only thought to proceed from their carelessness;
but from a mature, and well grounded praemeditation. For it is certain, that a
too sudden striving to reduce the Sciences, in their beginnings, into Method,
and Shape, and Beauty; has very much retarded their increase. And it happens to
the Invention of Arts, as to children in their younger years: in whose Bodies,
the same applications, that serve to make them strait, slender, and comely; are
often found very mischievous, to their ease, their strength, and their growth.

By their fair, and equal, and submissive way of Registring nothing, but
Histories, and Relations; they have left room for others, that shall succeed,
to change, to augment, to approve, to contradict them, at their discretion. By
this, they have given posterity a far greater power of judging them; than ever
they took over those, that went before them. By this, they have made a firm
confederacy, between their own present labors, and the Industry of Future
Ages; which how beneficial it will prove hereafter, we cannot better guess,
than by recollecting, what wonders it would in all likelihood have produced
e're this; if it had been begun in the Times of the Greeks, or Romans, or
Scholemen; nay even in the very last resurrection of learning. What depth of
Nature, could by this time have been hid from our view? What Faculty of the
Soul would have been in the dark? What part of human infirmities, not provided
against? if our Predecessors, a thousand, nay even a hundred, years ago, had
begun to add by little, and little to the store: if they would have endeavored
to be Benefactors, and not Tyrants over our Reasons; if they would have
communicated to us, more of their Works, and less of their Wit.

This complaint, which I here take up, will appear the juster; if we consider,
that the first learned Times of the Ancients, and all those, that followed
after them, down to this day, would have received no prejudice at all; if their
Philosophers had chiefly bestowed their pains, in making Histories of Nature,
and not in forming of Sciences: perhaps indeed the names of some particular
men, who had the luck to compile those Systemes, and Epitomes which they gave
us, would have been less glorious, than they are. Though that too may be
doubted: and (if we may conclude any thing surely, upon a matter so changeable,
as Fame is) we have reason enough to believe, that these later Ages would have
honored Plato, Aristotle, Zeno, and Epicurus, as much, if not more, than now
they do; if they had only set things in a way of propagating Experiences down
to us; and not imposed their imaginations on us, as the only Truths. This may
be well enough supposed; seeing it is common to all mankind, still to esteem
dearer the memories of their Friends, than of those that pretend to be their
Masters.

But this matter of reputation, was only the private concernment of five, or
six. As for the Interest of those Times in general, I will venture to make
good; that in all effects of true knowledge, they might have been as happy,
without those Bodies of Arts, as they were with them; Logic, and the
Mathematics only excepted. To instance in their Physics: they were utterly
useless, in respect of the good of mankind: they themselves did almost confess
so much, by reserving all their Natural Philosophy, for the retirements of
their Wisemen. What help did it ever bring to the vulgar? What visible benefit
to any City, or Country in the World? Their Mechanics, and Artificers (for
whom the True Natural Philosophy should be principally intended) were so far
from being assisted by those abstruse Doctrines; that perhaps scarce any one of
those Professions, and Trades, has well understood Aristotle's Principles of
Bodies, from his own Time down to ours. Hence then we may conclude, that those
first Times, wherein these Arts were made, had been nothing dammag'd; if,
instead of raising so many Speculative Opinions, they had only minded the
laying of a solid groundwork, for a vast Pile of Experiments, to be
continually augmenting through all Ages.

And I will also add; that, if such a course had been at first set on foot,
Philosophy would by this means have been kept closer to material things; and
so, in probability, would not have undergone so many Eclipses, as it has done
ever since. If we reckon from its first setting forth in the East; we shall
find, that in so long a Tract of Time, there have not been above four, or five
hundred years, at several intervals, wherein it has been in any request in the
World. And if we look back on all the alterations, and subversions of States,
that have happened in Civil Nations, these three thousand years: we may still
behold, that the Sciences of men's brains, have been always subject to be far
more injured by such vicissitudes, than the Arts of their hands. What cause can
be assigned for this? Why was Learning the first thing, that was constantly
swept away, in all destructions of Empire, and foreign inundations? Why could
not that have weathered out the storm, as well as most sorts of Manufactures:
which, though they began as soon, or before the other, yet they have remained,
through all such changes, unaltered; except for the better? The Reason of this
is evident. It is, because Philosophy had been spun out, to so fine a thread,
that it could be known but only to those, who would throw away all their whole
Lives upon it. It was made too subtle, for the common, and gross conceptions
of men of business. It had before in a measure been banished, by the
Philosophers themselves, out of the World; and shut up in the shades of their
walks. And by this means, it was first looked upon, as most useless; and so
fit, soonest to be neglected. Whereas if at first it had been made to converse
more with the senses, and to assist familiarly in all occasions of human life;
it would, no doubt, have been thought needful to be preserved, in the most
Active, and ignorant Time. It would have escaped the fury of the Barbarous
people; as well as the Arts of Ploughing, Gard'ning, Cookery, making Iron and
Steel, Fishing, Sailing, and many more such necessary handicrafts have done.

But it is too late to lament this error of the Ancients; seeing it is not now
to be repaired. It is enough, that we gather from hence; that by bringing
Philosophy down again to men's sight, and practice, from whence it was flown
away so high: the Royal Society has put it into a condition of standing out,
against the Invasions of Time, or even Barbarism it self: that by establishing
it on a firmer foundation, than the airy Notions of men alone, upon all the
works of Nature; by turning it into one of the Arts of Life, of which men may
see there is daily need; they have provided, that it cannot hereafter be
extinguished, at the loss of a Library, at the overthrowing of a Language, or
at the death of some few Philosophers: but that men must lose their eyes, and
hands, and must leave off desiring to make their Lives convenient, or pleasant;
before they can be willing to destroy it.

Sect. XXI. The occasion of the Hindrance of the publishing this History.
Thus far I was come in my intended work, when my hand was stopped, and my mind
disturbed from writing, by the two greatest diasters, that ever befell our
Nation, the fatal Infection, which overspread the City of London in Sixty five;
and the dreadful firing of the City it self, in the year ensuing. These two
calamities may well be sufficient, to excuse the delay of publishing this Book:
when the one of them devoured as many Men, and the other as many Books, as the
cruellest incursion of the Goths, and Vandals, had ever done.

The Plague was indeed an irreparable damage to the whole Kingdom: but that
which chiefly added to the misery, was the time, wherein it happened. For what
could be a more deplorable accident, than that so many brave men should be cut
off by the Arrow, that flies in the dark, when our Country was engaged in a
foreign War, and when their Lives might have been honorably ventured on a
glorious Theater in its defense? And we had scarce recovered this first
misfortune, when we received a second, and a deeper wound; which cannot be
equaled in all History, if either we consider the obscurity of its beginning,
the irresistible violence of its progress, the horror of its appearance, or the
wideness of the ruin, it made, in one of the most renowned Cities of the World.

Yet when on the one side, I remember, what desolation these scourges of
mankind have left behind them; and on the other when I reflect on the
magnanimity, wherewith the English Nation did support the mischiefs: I find,
that I have not more reason to bewail the one, than to admire the other.

Upon our return after the abating of the Plague, what else could we expect,
but to see the streets unfrequented, the River forsaken, the fields deformed
with the Graves of the Dead, and the Terrors of Death still abiding on the
faces of the living? But instead of such dismal sights, there appeared almost
the same throngs in all public places, the same noise of business, the same
freedom of convers, and with the return of the King, the same cheerfulness
returning on the minds of the people as before.

Nor was their courage less, in sustaining the second calamity, which destroyed
their houses, and estates. This the greatest losers endured with such undaunted
firmness of mind, that their example may incline us to believe, that not only
the best Natural, but the best Moral Philosophy too, may be learned from the
shops of Mechanics. It was indeed an admirable thing to behold, with what
constancy, the meanest Artificers saw all the labors of their lives, and the
support of their families devoured in an instant. The affliction it is true, was
widely spread over the whole Nation: every place was filled with signs of pity,
and commiseration: But those who had suffered most, seemed the least affected
with the loss: no unmanly bewailings were heard in the few streets, that were
preserved: they beheld the Ashes of their Houses, and Gates, and Temples,
without the least expression of Pusillanimity. If Philosophers had done this,
it had well become their profession of Wisdom: if Gentlemen, the nobleness of
their breeding, and blood would have required it. But that such greatness of
heart should be found amongst the poor Artizans, and the obscure multitude, is
no doubt one of the most honorable events, that ever happened. Yet still there
is one circumstance behind, which may raise our wonder higher: and that is,
that amidst such horrible ruins, they still prosecuted the War with the same
vigor, and courage, against three of the most powerful States of all Europe.
What Records of Time, or Memory of past Ages, can show us a greater testimony
of an invincible and heroic Genius, than this, of which I now speak? that the
sound of the Heralds proclaiming new Wars, should be pleasant to the people,
when the sad voice of the Bell-man was scarce yet gone out of their ears? that
the increase of their Adversaries Confederates, and of their own calamities,
should be so far from affrighting them, that they rather seemed to receive from
thence a new vigor, and resolution? and that they should still be eager upon
Victories, and Triumphs, when they were thought almost quite exhausted, by so
great destructions?

Sect. XXII. The Third Part of the Narration.
From this observation my mind begins to take comfort, and to presage, that as
this terrible Disease, and Conflagration were not able to darken the honor of
our Princes Arms; so they will not hinder the many noble Arts, which the
English have begun under his Reign on the strength of these hopes, and
encouragements, I will now return to my former thoughts, and to the finishing
of my interrupted design. And I come with the more earnestness to perfect it,
because it seems to me, that from the sad effects of these disasters, there may
a new, and a powerful Argument be raised, to move us to double our labors,
about the Secrets of Nature.

A New City is to be built, on the most advantageous Seat of all Europe, for
Trade, and command. This therefore is the fittest Season for men to apply their
thoughts, to the improving of the materials of building, and to the inventing
of better models, for Houses, Roofs, Chimnies, Conduits, Wharfs, and Streets:
all which have been already under the consideration of the Royal Society: and
that too, before they had such a sad occasion of bringing their observations
into practice. The mortality of this Pestilence exceeded all others of later
Ages. But the remembrance of it should rather enliven than damp our Industry.
When mankind is overrun with such horrible invasions of Death, they should from
thence be universally alarmed, to use more diligence about preventing them for
the future.

It is true, that terrible evil has hitherto in all Countries, been generally
too strong, for the former remedies of Art. But why should we think that it
will continue so for ever? Why may we not believe, that in all the vast compass
of Natural virtues of things yet concealed, there is still reserved an
Antidote, that shall be equal to this poison? If in such cases we only accuse
the Anger of Providence, or the Cruelty of Nature: we lay the blame, where it
is not justly to be laid. It ought rather to be attributed to the negligence of
men themselves, that such difficult Cures are without the bounds of their
reasons power.

If all men had desponded at first, and sunk under the burden of their own
infirmities, almost every little wound, or pain of the least member, had been
as deadly, as the Plague at this time. It was by much Inquiry, and use, that
most of the mildest diseases became curable. And every first success of this
kind, should always strengthen our assurance of farther conquests, even over
this greatest Terror of mankind. Distrust, and despair of our own endeavors,
is as great a hindrance in the progress of the True Philosophy, as it is wont
to be in the rise of men's private fortunes. Whoever aims not at the greatest
things, will seldom proceed much farther, than the least. Whoever will make a
right, and a fortunate Courtship to Nature, he cannot enterprise, or attempt
too much: for She (as it is said of other Mistresses) is also a Mistress, that
soonest yields to the forward, and the Bold.

I have hitherto described the first Elements, on which the Royal Society
arose, and supported its beginnings: I have traced its progress from the first
private endeavors of some of its members, till it became united into a Regular
constitution: and from thence I have related their first conceptions, and
practices, toward the settling of an universal, constant, and impartial survey
of the whole Creation. There now remains to be added in this Third part of my
Narration, an Account of the Encouragements they have received from abroad, and
at home; and a Particular Enumeration of the Principal Subjects, about which
they have been emploi'd since they obtained the Royal Confirmation.

Sect XXIII. The Reputation, and correspondence of the R. S. abroad.
I will first begin with the esteem, which all the Civil world abroad has
conceived of their Enterprise. And I mention this with the more willingness,
because I believe, that our Nation ought justly to be reproved, for their
excess of Natural bashfulness, and for their want of care, to have their most
excellent things represented to Strangers with the best advantage. This silent,
and reserved humor has no doubt been very prejudicial to us, in the judgment,
that our Neighbors have often made, not only concerning the condition of our
Learning, but also of our Political affairs. I will therefore trespass a little
on this disposition of my Countrymen, and affirm, that as the English name does
manifestly get ground, by the bravery of their Arms, the Glory of their Naval
strength, and the spreading of their Commerce: so there has been a remarkable
addition to its renown, by the success, which all our Neighbors expect from
this Assembly.

It is evident, that this searching Spirit, and this affection to sensible
Knowledge, does prevail in most Countries round about us. It Is true, the
conveniences for such labors, are not equal in all places. Some want the
assistance of others hands; some the contribution of others purses: some the
benefit of excellent Instruments, some the Patronage of the Civil Magistrates:
But yet according to their several powers, they are every where intent on such
practical Studies. And the most considerable effects of such attempts
throughout Europe, have been still recommended to this Society, by their
Authors, to be examined, approved, or corrected.

The Country, In France.
that lies next to England in its situation is France: and that is also
nearest to it, in its zeal for the promotion of Experiments. In that Kingdom,
the Royal Society has maintained a perpetual intercourse, with the most eminent
men of Art of all conditions: and has obtained from them, all the help which
might justly be hoped for, from the vigor, and activity, and readiness of
mind, which is natural to that people. From their Physicians, Surgeons, and
Anatomists, it has received many faithful Relations of extraordinary Cures:
from their most judicious Travelers the Fruits of their Voyages: from their
most famous Mathematicians, diverse Problems, which have been solvd many
different ways: from their Chemists the effects of their Fires: and from
others of their best Observers, many rarities, and discourses, of their Fruits,
Silk, Wine, Bread, Plants, Salt and such Natural productions of their Soil.
And, to instance once for all, it has been affectionately invited to a mutual
correspondence by the French Academy of Paris: In which invitation, there is
one expression, that ought not to be passed over in silence: that they
acknowledge the English Nation, to have many advantages, for the propagating of
Real Philosophy, which are wanting to all others. This Confession is true. Yet
these advantages, unless they had been improved by this institution, had been
only as those, that we have for fishing, objections, and arguments of our sloth.

In Italy.
In Italy the Royal Society has an excellent privilege of receiving, and
imparting Experiments, by the help of one of their own Fellows, who has the
opportunity of being Resident there for them, as well as for the King. From
thence they have been earnestly invited to a mutual intelligence, by many of
their most Noble Wits, but chiefly by the Prince Leopoldo, Brother to the Great
Duke of Thuscany; who is the Patron of all the Inquisitive Philosophers of
Florence: from whom there is coming out under his Name an account of their
proceedings called Ducat Experiments. This application to the Royal Society I
have mentioned, because it comes from that Country, which is seldom wont to
have any great regard, to the Arts of these Nations, that lie on this side of
their mountains.

In Germany.
In Germany, and its neighboring Kingdoms, the Royal Society has met with
great veneration; as appears by several Testimonies, in their late Printed
Books, which have been submitted to its Censure: by many Curiosities of
Mechanic Instruments, that have been transmitted to it: and by the Addresses
which have been sent from their Philosophical Inquirers. For which kinds of
Enterprises the temper of the German Nation, is admirably fit, both in respect
of their peculiar dexterity in all sorts of manual Arts, and also in regard of
the plain, and unaffected sincerity of their manners: wherein they so much
resemble the English, that we seem to have derived from them the composition of
our minds, as well as to have descended from their Race.

In the Low Countries, In the Low Countries,
their Interest, and Reputation has been established, by the Friendship of some
of their chief Learned men, and principally of Hugenius. This Gentleman has
bestowed his pains, on many parts of the speculative, and practical
Mathematics, with wonderful successes. And particularly his applying the
Motion of Pendulums to Clocks, and Watches, was an excellent Invention. For
thereby there may be a means found out, of bringing the measures of Time, to an
exact Regulation: of which the benefits are infinite. In the prosecution of
such Discoveries, he has often required the aid of this Society; he has
received the light of their Trials, and a confirmation of his own, and has
freely admitted their alterations, or amendments. And this learned
correspondence with him, and many others, is still continued, even at this
present time, in the breach between our Countries: Their Great Founder, and
Patron still permitting them to maintain the Traffic of Sciences, when all
other Commerce is intercepted. Whence we may ghess, what may be expected from
the peaceful part of our Kings Reign, when his very Wars are managed, without
injury to the Arts of Civil Knowledge.

Visits of Forreiners.
But not to wander any farther in particulars, it may perhaps in general be
safely computed, that there has been as large a communication of Foreign Arts,
and Inventions, to the Royal Society, within this small compass of time, as
ever before did pass over the English Channel since the very first
transportation of Arts into our Island. And that this benefit will still
increase by the length of time is indubitable, from the Reception, which has
been given to the Scholars, Nobility, Ambassadors, and Foreign Princes, who of
late years have traveled hither, to behold a Country, which had been the Stage
of so famous a War, and so miraculous a Peace. All these have still visited the
Royal Society, as one of the first, and Noblest Fruits of our restoration. From
hence they have returned home, with a free engagement of their assistance: the
men of learning assuring it of a contribution of their Labors, and the
Statesmen, and Princes of their Authority, and endeavors, in satisfying all
Philosophical Quaeries, with which they have been plentifully furnished.

It would be a useless pomp to reckon up a Catalogue of their Names: especially
seeing they are already recorded with gratitude, in a more lasting Monument,
The Register of the Society. Only it will not, I think, be amiss, if I mention
the visit of one Prince, because it may afford us a profitable observation.
When the Duke of Brunswyck and Lunenbourgh was introduced into their weekly
Assembly, and had subscribed his name to their Statutes: there was according to
the Custom, one of the Fellows appointed, to interpret to him, what Experiments
were produced, and examined at that meeting. But his Highness told them, that
it was not necessary, they should put themselves to that trouble: for he well
understood our Language, having been drawn to the study of it, out of a desire
of reading our Philosophical Books. From whence there may this conclusion be
made, that if ever our Native Tongue shall get any ground in Europe, it must be
by augmenting its Experimental Treasure. Nor is it impossible, but as the
Feminine Arts of Pleasure, and Gallantry have spread some of our Neighboring
Languages, to such a vast extent: so the English Tongue may also in time be
more enlarged, by being the Instrument of conveying to the World, the Masculine
Arts of Knowledge.

I now come to relate, Sect XXIV. The encouragements the R. S. has received at
home.
what encouragements this design has received at home in its Native soil. And I
will assure my Reader, that the Original of the Royal Society has found a
general approbation within our selves, and that the most prudent men of all
Professions, and Interests, have shown by their respects to these hopeful
beginnings, that there is a Reverence due to the first trials, and intentions,
as well as to the last accomplishment of generous attempts.

Of our chief, From our Citizens.
and most wealthy Merchants, and Citizens, very many have assisted it with
their presence: and thereby have added the industrious, punctual, and active
Genius of men of Trafick, to the quiet, sedentary, and reserved temper of men
of Learning. They have contributed their labors: they have helped their
correspondence: they have employed their Factors abroad, to answer their
Inquiries; they have laid out in all Countries for observations: they have
bestowed many considerable gifts on their Treasury, and Repository. And chiefly
there is one Bounty to be here inserted, which for the singular benefit that
may be expected from it, deserves the applause and imitation of this, and
future times. It is the establishment made by Sir John Cutler, for the reading
on Mechanics, in the place where the Royal Society shall meet. This is the
first Lecture that has been founded of this kind, amidst all the vast
munificence of so many Benefactors to Learning, in this later Age. And yet this
was the most necessary of all others. For this has chiefly caused the slow
progress of manual Arts; that the Trades themselves have never served
apprentiships, as well as the Tradesmen: that they have never had any Masters
set over them, to direct and guide their works, or to vary, and enlarge their
operations.

From our Physicians.
Of our Physicians, many of the most judicious, have contributed their purses,
their hands, their judgments, their writings. This they have done, though they
have also in London, a College peculiar to their Profession; which ever since
its first foundation, for the space of a hundred and fifty years, has given the
world a succession of the most eminent Physicians of Europe. In that they
confine themselves to the advancement of Physic: But in this, they have also
with great zeal, and ability, promoted this universal inspection, into all
Natural knowledge. For without danger of flattery, I will declare of the
English Physicians, that no part of the world exceeds them, not only in the
skill of their own Art, but in general Learning: and of very many of that
profession I will affirm, that All Apollo is their own, as it was said by the
best Poet of this Age, of one of the most excellent of their number.

Of our Nobility, From our Nobility.
and Gentry, the most Noble and Illustrious have condescended, to labor here
with their hands, to impart their discoveries, to propose their doubts, to
assist, and defray the charge of their Trials. And this they have done with
such a universal agreement, that it is almost the only thing, wherein the
Nobility of all the three Kingdoms are united. In their Assemblies for making
Laws they are separated: in their customs, and manners of life they differ:
And in their humors too, they are thought not much of kin to each other. But
in the Royal Society the Scotch, the Irish, the English Gentry do meet, and
communicate, without any distinction of Countries, or affections. From hence no
doubt very much Political, as well as Philosophical benefit will arise. By this
means, there is a good foundation laid* for the removing of that aversion,
which the English are sometimes observed to express to the Natives of those
Kingdoms: which though perhaps it arises from the Knowledge of their own
advantages above the other, yet it is a great hindrance to the growth of the
British power. For as a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand; so three
Kingdoms divided from each other, in Tempers, Studies, and Inclinations, can
never be great, upon one common interest.

Of our Ministers of State at home, From our Statesmen.
and our Ambassadors abroad, there have been very few employed, who are not
Fellows of the Royal Society: and especially these later, have bestowed their
pains in foreign Courts, to collect Relations, and Secrets of Nature, as well as
of State: For which service their way of life is most convenient, by the
generality of their converse, the privileges, and freedom of their dispatches;
and the usual Resort of the most knowing, and inquisitive men to their company.

From our Soldiers.
Our Greatest Captains, and Commanders have enrolled their Names in this number,
and have regarded these Studies: which are not, as other parts of Learning, to
be called the Studies of the Gown, for they do as well become the profession of
a Soldier, or any other way of life. Nor have our most renowned Generals
neglected the opportunities of Philosophical Inquiries, even in the midst of
their greatest Enterprises, on which the fate of Kingdoms has depended. They
have been furnished with Instruments, and directions by the Royal Society, and
amidst the Tumult of Wars, and Government of Fleets, they have found leisure to
make some Trials of Experiments: which works as much excel that of Declaiming,
which some of the Roman Generals used in their Camps, as it is better to do,
than to talk well.

From our Churchmen.
Of our Churchmen the Greatest and the most Reverend, by their care, and
passion, and endeavors, in advancing this Institution, have taken off the
unjust scandal from Natural knowledge, that it is an Enemy to Divinity. By the
perpetual Patronage; and assistance, they have afforded the Royal Society, they
have confuted the false opinions of those men, who believe that Philosophers
must needs be irreligious: they have shown that in our veneration of Gods
almighty power, we ought to imitate the manner of our respect to Earthly Kings.
For as, the greater their Dominion is, the more observance is wont to be given
to their nearest Servants and Officers: so the greatness of the Divine Majesty
is best to be worshipped, by the due honoring, and observing of Nature, which
is his immediate Servant, and the universal Minister of his pleasure.

But I make have to that, Sect. XXV. From the Royal Family.
which ought to be esteemed the very life, and soul of this undertaking, the
protection, and favor of the King, and the Royal Family* When the Society
first addressed themselves to his Majesty, he was pleased to express much
satisfaction, that this enterprise was begun in his Reign: he then represented
to them, the gravity, and difficulty of their work and assured them of all the
kind influence of his Power, and Prerogative. Since that he has frequently
committed many things to their search: he has referred many foreign Rarities to
their inspection: he has recommended many domestic improvements to their care:
he has demanded the result of their trials, in many appearances of Nature: he
has been present, and assisted with his own hands, at the performing of many of
their Experiments, in his Gardens, his Parks, and on the River. And besides I
will not conceal, that he has sometimes reproved them for the slowness of their
proceedings: at which reproofs they have not so much cause to be afflicted,
that they are the reprehensions of a King, as to be comforted, that they are
the reprehensions of his love, and affection to their progress. For a Testimony
of which Royal benignity, and to free them from all hindrances, and occasions
of delay, he has given them the establishment of his Letters Patents, of which
I will here produce an Epitome.

CHarles the second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all unto whom these presents shall
come, Greeting. Having long resolved within our self to promote the welfare of
Arts and Sciences, as well as that of our Territories and Dominions, out of our
Princely affection to all kind of Learning, and more particular favor to
Philosophical Studies. Especially those which endeavor by solid Experiments
either to reform or improve Philosophy. To the intent therefore that these
kinds of study, which are no where yet fufficiently cultivated, may flourish in
our Dominions; and that the Learned world may acknowledge us to be, not only
the Defender of the Faith, but the Patron and Encourager of all sorts of useful
Knowledge.

Know ye, that we out of our special Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
have given and granted, and do by these presents give and grant for us, our
Heirs, and Successors, That there shall be for ever a Society, consisting of a
President, Council, and Fellows, which shall be called by the name of the
President, Council, and Fellows of the Royal Society of London, for and
improving of Natural knowledge, of which Society we do by these presents
declare our self to be Founder and Patron. And we do hereby make and constitute
the said Society by the name, etc. to be a Body corporate, to be continued
under the same name in a perpetual succession; And that they and their
successors (whose studies are to be employed for the promoting of the knowledge
of natural things, and useful Arts by Experiments. To the glory of God, and the
good of mankind) shall by the foresaid name of President, Council, etc. be
enabled and made capable in Law, to levy, hold, possess, and enjoy, Lands,
Tenements, etc. Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions, for perpetuity, or Terms
of Lives, or Years, or any other way: as also Goods, Chattels, and all other
things of what Nature or Kind soever. And also by the name aforesaid to Give,
Grant, Demise, or Assign the said Lands, Goods, etc. and to do all things
necessary thereabout. And the said Persons by the name aforesaid are enabled to
implead, be impleaded, sue, defend, etc. in any Courts, and before any Judges,
Officers, etc. whatsoever of the King, His Heirs and Successors, in all and
singular Actions Real and Personal: Pleas, Causes, etc. of what kind soever, as
any of His Subjects within his Kingdom of England, or Corporations, are by Law
capable and enabled to do.

And the said President, Council, and Fellows are empowered to have a Common
Seal for their use in their Affairs: and from time to time to break, change,
and make anew the same, as shall seem expedient unto them.

And his Majesty, in Testimony of his Royal Favor toward the said President,
Council, and Fellows, and of His especial esteem of them, does Grant a Coat of
Arms to them and their Successors, viz. On a Field Argent a Canton of the three
Lions of England: For a Crest, an Eagle proper on a Ducal Coronet supporting a
Shield charged with the Lions aforesaid; and for Supporters, two Talbots with
Coronets on their Necks. The said Arms to be born, etc. by the said Society
upon all occasions.

And that His Majesty's Royal Intention may take the better effect for the good
Government of the said Society from time to time: It is established, That the
Council aforesaid shall consist of 21. Persons; (whereof the President for the
time being always to be one.) And that all Persons, which within two Months
next ensuing the date of the said Charter shall be chosen by the said President
and Council; and in all times after the said two Months, by the President,
Council, and Fellows [and noted in a Register to be kept for that purpose]
shall be Fellows of the said Society, and so accounted, and called during life,
except by the Statutes of the said Society to be made any of them shall happen
to be amoved And by how much any Persons are more excelling in all kinds of
Learning, by how much the more ardently they desire to promote the Honor,
Business, and Emolument of the said Society, by how much the more eminent they
are for Integrity, Honesty, Piety, Loyalty, and Good Affection toward His
Majesty, His Crown and Dignity, by so much the more fit and worthy such Persons
are to be judged for reception into the Society.

And for the better execution of his Royal Grant, His Majesty has nominated,
etc. His Trusty and Well-beloved William Viscount Brouncker, Chancellor to His
dearest Consort Queen Catharine, to be the First and Modern President to
continue in the said Office from the date of the Patent to the Feast of Saint
Andrew next ensuing, and until another Person of the said Council be duly
chosen into the said Office. The said Lord Brouncker being sworn in all things
belonging thereto well and faithfully to execute the said Office before His
right well-beloved and right Trusty Cousin and Counselor, Edward, Earl of
Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England, in the words following.


I William Viscount Brouncker do promise to deal faithfully and honestly in all
things belonging to that Trust committed to me, as President of the Royal
Society of London, for improving Natural Knowledge. So help me God.

And His Majesty has nominated, etc. the Persons following, His Trusty and
Well beloved Sir Robert Moray Knight, one of His Privy Council in His Kingdom
of Scotland, Robert Boil Esquire, William Brereton Esquire, eldest Son to the
Lord Brereton, Sir Kenelme Digby Knight, Chancellor to His dearest Mother Queen
Mary, Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of His Iewelhouse, Sir Paul Neile
Knight, one of the Vshers of His Privy Chamber, Henry Slingsby Esquire, one of
the Gentlemen of His said Privy Chamber, Sir William Petty Knight, Timothy
Clark Doctor of Physic, and one of His Physicians, John Wilkins Doctor of
Divinity, George Ent Doctor of Physic, William Erskyne Esquire, one of His
Cupbearers, Jonathan Goddard Doctor of Physic, William Ball Esquire, Matthew
Wren Esquire, John Evelyn Esquire, Thomas Henshaw Esquire, Dudley Palmer of
Grayes-Inn Esquire, Abraham Hill of London Esquire, and Henry Oldenburg
Esquire, together with the President aforesaid, to be the first and Modern 21
of the Council and Fellows of the Royal Society aforesaid, to be continued in
the Offices of the Council aforesaid, from the date of the Patent to the Feast
of Saint Andrew next following, and from thence till other fit persons be
chosen into the said Offices. The said Persons to be sworn before the President
of the Society, for the time being, well and truly to execute the said Offices,
according to the form and effect of the aforesaid Oath to be administered to the
President by the Lord Chancellor as aforesaid. For the administering which Oath
to the said Persons, and all others hereafter from time to time to be chosen
into the said Council, full Power and Authority is Granted to the President for
the time being: And the said Persons duly sworn, and all other from time to
time duly chosen into the said Council and sworn, are to aid, advise and assist
in all affairs, businesses, and things concerning the better Regulation,
Government, and Direction of the Royal Society; and every Member thereof.

Furthermore, Liberty is granted to the said Society, lawfully to make and
hold meetings of themselves, for the searching out and discovery of Natural
Things, and Transaction of other businesses relating to the said Society, when
and as often as shall be requisite, in any College, Hall, or other Convenient
place in London, or within 10. Miles thereof.

And Power is Granted to the said Society, from time to time to nominate and
choose yearly, on Saint Andrews day, one of the Council aforesaid, for the time
being, to be President of the Society until Saint Andrews day next ensuing (if
he shall so long live, or not be removed for some just and reasonable Cause)
and from thence until another be chosen and put into the said Office: the said
President so elected, before admission to that Office, to be sworn before the
Council, according to the form before expressed, who are empowered to administer
the said Oath from time to time, as often as there shall be cause to choose a
President.

And in Case that the said President, during his Office, shall die, recede, or
be removed; then, and so often, it shall be Lawful for the Council of the Royal
Society, to meet together to choose one of their Number for President of the
said Society, and the Person so chosen and duly sworn, shall have and exercise
the Office of President for the remainder of the year, and until another be
duly chosen into the said Office.

And in case that any one or more of the Council aforesaid shall die, recede,
or be removed (which persons or any of them, for misdemeanour, or other
reasonable cause, are declared to be amovable by the President and the rest of
the Council) then and so often it shall be lawful for the President, Council,
and Fellows, to choose one or more of the Fellows of the Royal Society in the
room of him or them so deceasing, receding, or removed, to complete the
aforesaid number of 21. of the Council, which Person or Persons, so chosen, are
to continue in Office until Saint Andrews day then next ensuing, and until
others be duly chosen, the said Persons being sworn, faithfully to execute
their Offices, according to the true intention of the Patent.

And His Majesty does will and Grant unto the said President, Council, and
Fellows, full power and authority on Saint Andrews day yearly, to elect,
nominate, and change 10. of the Fellows of the Royal Society, to supply the
places and Offices of ten of the aforesaid number of 21. of the Council,
declaring it to be His Royal Will and Pleasure, that ten and no more of the
Council aforesaid be annually changed and removed by the President, Council,
and Fellows aforesaid.

And it is Granted on the behalf of the said Society that if it shall happen,
that the President to be sick, infirm, detained in His Majesty's Service, or
otherwise occupied, so as he cannot attend the necessary Affairs of the
Society, then and so often it shall be lawful for him to appoint one of the
Council for his Deputy, who shall supply his place from time to time, as often
as he shall happen to be absent during the whole time of the said Presidents
continuance in his Office, unless he shall in the mean time constitute some
other of the Council for his Deputy: And the Deputy so constituted is empowered
to do all and singular things which belong to the Office of the President of
the Royal Society, and in as ample manner and form as the said President may do
by virtue of His Majesty's Letters Patents, He the said Deputy being duly sworn
before the Council in form before specified, who are empowered to administer the
Oath as often as the case shall require.

It is further granted to the Society, to have one Treasurer, two Secretaries,
two or more Curators of Experiments, one or more Clerk or Clerks, and also two
Sergeants at Mace, who may from time to time attend on the President: all the
said Officers to be chosen by the President, Council and Fellows, and to be
sworn in form and effect before specified, well and faithfully to execute their
Offices, which Oath the Council are empowered to administer: And His Majesty
nominates and appoints His well-beloved Subjects, the aforesaid William Ball
Esquire, to be the first and Modern Treasurer; and the aforesaid John Wilkins
and Henry Oldenburg, to be the first and Modern Secretaries of the Royal
Society, to be continued in the said Offices to the Feast of Saint Andrew next
following the date of the Patent. And that from time to time, and ever
hereafter, on the said Feast of Saint Andrew (if it be not Lords day, and if it
be Lords day, on the next day after) the President, Council, and Fellows
aforesaid, are empowered to nominate and choose honest and discreet Men for
Treasurer and Secretaries, which are to be of the Number of the Council of the
Royal Society, which Persons Elected and sworn, in form before specified, are
to exercise and enjoy the said Offices until the Feast of Saint Andrew then
next following.

And if it shall happen, that the aforesaid Elections of the President,
Council, Treasurer, and Secretaries, or any of them, cannot be made or
perfected on the Feast of Saint Andrew aforesaid: it is granted to the
aforesaid President, Council, and Fellows, that they may lawfully nominate and
assign another day, as near to the said Feast of Saint Andrew as conveniently
may be, for making or perfecting the said Elections, and so from day to day
till the said Elections be perfected.

And in case that any of the aforesaid Officers of the Royal Society shall die,
recede, or be removed from their respective Offices, then and so often it shall
be lawful for the said President, Council, and Fellows, to choose one or more
into the Office or Offices vacant, to hold the same during the residue of that
year, and until others be duly chosen and sworn in their places.

Moreover, on the behalf of the Society, it is granted unto the President and
Council, that they may assemble and meet together in any College, Hall, or
other convenient place in London, or within ten miles thereof (due and lawful
summons of all the Members of the Council to extraordinary meetings being
always premised) and that they being so met together, have full power and
authority from time to time, to make, constitute, and establish such Laws,
Statutes, Orders, and Constitutions, which shall appear to them to be good,
useful, honest, and necessary, according to their judgments and discretions,
for the Government, Regulation and Directions of the Royal Society, and every
Member thereof: And to do all things concerning the Government, Estate, Goods,
Lands, Revenues, as also the Businesses and Affairs of the said Society: All
which Laws, Statutes, Orders, etc so made, His Majesty wills and commands, that
they be from time to time inviolably observed, according to the tenor and
effect of them: Provided that they be reasonable and not repugnant or contrary
to the Laws, Customs, etc. of his Kingdom of England.

And furthermore, full Power and Authority is given and granted unto the said
Society, from time to time to choose one or more Printers and Gravers, and by
writing sealed with the Common Seal of the Society, and signed by the President
for the time being, to grant them power to print such things, matters and
businesses concerning the said Society, as shall be committed to them by the
Council from time to time; The said Printers and Gravers being sworn before the
President and Council in form before specified, which President and Council are
empowered to give the said Oath.

And for the greater advantage and success of the Society in their
Philosophical Studies and Endeavors, full Power and Authority is granted unto
them, to require, take, and receive, from time to time, dead bodies of Persons
executed, and the same to anatomize, to all intents and purposes, and in as
ample manner and form as the College of Physicians, and Company of Chirurgions
of London (by what names soever the said two Corporations are or may be called)
have had and made use of, or may have and use the said Bodies.

And for the improvement of such Experiments, Arts, and Sciences as the Society
may be employed in, full Power and Authority is granted unto them from time to
time by Letters under the hand of the President in the presence of the Council,
to hold Correspondence and Intelligence with any Strangers, whether private
Persons, or Collegiate Societies or Corporations, without any Interruption or
Molestation whatsoever: Provided that this Indulgence or Grant be extended to
no further use than the particular Benefit and Interest of the Society, in
Matters Philosophical, Mathematical, and Mechanical.

Full Power and Authority is also granted on the behalf of the Society to the
Council, to erect and build one or more Colleges within London, or ten miles
thereof, of what form or quality soever, for Habitation, Assembling, or Meeting
of the President, Council and Fellows, about any affairs and businesses of the
Society.

And if any abuses or differences shall ever hereafter arise and happen about
the Government or Affairs of the Society, whence the Constitution, Progress,
and Improvement, or Businesses thereof may suffer or be hindered: In such cases
His Majesty Assigns and Authorizes His right Trusty and right Well-beloved
Cosen and Counselor, Edward Earl of Clarendon Lord High Chancellor of England,
by himself during his life, and after his decease the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
the Lord High Treasurer of England, the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, the Lord
Bishop of London, and the two principal Secretaries of State for the time
being, or any four or more of them, to compose and redress any such differences
or abuses.

And lastly, His Majesty straightly charges and commands all Justices, Mayors,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers, Ministers,
and Subjects whatsoever, from time to time to be aiding and assisting unto the
said President, Council, and Fellows of the Royal Society, in and about all
things, according to the true intention of His Letters Patents.


This is the Legal Ratification which the Royal Society has received. And in
this place I am to render their public thanks to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of England, to Sir Ieffery Palmer Atturny General,
and to Sir Heneage Finch Solicitor General: who by their cheerful concurrence,
and free promotion of this Confirmation, have wiped away the aspersion, that
has been scandalously cast on the Profession of the Law, that it is an Enemy to
Learning, and the Civil Arts. To show the falsehood of this reproach, I might
instance in many Judges and Counselors of all Ages, who have been the
ornaments of the Sciences, as well as of the Bar, and Courts of Justice. But it
is enough to declare, that my Lord Bacon was a Lawyer, and that these eminent
Officers of the Law, have completed this foundation of the Royal Society:
which was a work well becoming the largeness of his Wit to devise, and the
greatness of their Prudence to establish.

Sect. XXVI. Their Councils and Statutes.
According to the intention of these Letters Patents, their Council has ever
since been annually renewed: their President, their Treasurer, their
Secretaries chosen: The chief employments of the Council have been to manage
their Political affairs, to regulate disorders, to make addresses, and
applications in their behalf; to guard their Privileges, to disperse
correspondents, but Principally to form the Body of their Statutes, which I
will here insert.

An Abstract of the Statutes of the Royal Society.
WHatever Statute shall be made, or repealed, the making or repealing of it
shall be voted twice, and at two several meetings of the Council.

This Obligation shall be subscribed by every Fellow; or his election shall be
void.

WE who have hereto subscribed, do promise each for himself, that we will
endeavor to promote the good of the Royal Society of London, for the
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, and to pursue the ends, for which the same
was founded: that we will be present at the Meetings of the Society, as often
as conveniently we can: especially at the anniversary Elections, and upon
extraordinary occasions: and that we will observe the Statutes and Orders of
the said Society: Provided, that whenever any of us shall signify to the
President under his hand, that he desires to withdraw from the Society, he
shall be free from this Obligation for the future.

Every Fellow shall pay his admission money, and afterward contribution
toward the defraying of the charges of Observations and Experiments, etc.

The ordinary meetings of the Royal Society shall be held once a week, where
none shall be present, besides the Fellows, without the leave of the Society,
under the degree of a Baron in one of His Majesty's three Kingdoms, or of His
Majesty's Privy Council; or unless he be an eminent Forreigner, and these only
without the leave of the President.

The business of their weekly Meetings shall be, To order, take account,
consider, and discourse of Philosophical Experiments, and Observations: to
read, hear, and discourse upon Letters, Reports, and other Papers, containing
Philosophical matters, as also to view, and discourse upon the productions and
rarities of Nature, and Art: and to consider what to deduce from them, or how
they may be improved for use, or discovery.

The Experiments that be made at the charge of the Society. Two Curators at
least shall be appointed for the Inspection of those which cannot be performed
before the Society: by them the bare report of matter of Fact shall be stated
and returned.

The Election of Fellows shall be made by way of Ballet: and their Admission by
a solemn Declaration made by the President of their Election.

The Election of the Council and Officers shall be made once a year: Eleven of
the present Council shall be continued, by Lot, for the next year, and ten new
Ones chosen, in like manner. Out of this new Council shall be elected a
President, Treasurer, and two Secretaries, in the same way.

The President shall preside in all meetings, regulate all debates of the
Society, and Council; state, and put Questions; call for Reports, and Accounts
from Committees, Curators, and others; summon all extraordinary meetings upon
urgent occasions; and see to the execution of the Statutes. The Vice President
shall have the same power in the absence of the President.

The Treasurer, or his Deputy, shall receive and keep Accounts of all money due
to the Society, and disburse all money payable by the Society. He shall pay
small sums by order of the President under his hand, but those that exceed five
pounds, by order of the Council. All Bills of charges for Experiments shall
first be signed by the Curators. The Accounts of the Treasurer shall be Audited
four times a year, by a Committee of the Council, and once a year by a
Committee of the Society.

The Secretaries are to take Notes of the Orders, and material passages of the
Meetings; to take care of the Books, Papers, and Writings of the Society; to
order, and direct the Clerks in making Entries of all matters in the Register,
and Iournal-Books of the Society, or Council; to draw up such Letters as shall
be written in their Name, which shall be approved at one of their Meetings; to
give notice of the Candidates propounded in order to Election.

The Curators by Office shall have a sufficient allowance for their
encouragement, which shall increase proportionably with the revenue of the
Society, provided that it exceed not two hundred pounds a year. They shall be
well skilled in Philosophical, and Mathematical Learning, well versed in
Observations, Inquiries, and Experiments of Nature and Art. They shall take
care of the managing of all Experiments, and Observations appointed by the
Society, or Council, and report the same, and perform such other tasks, as the
Society, or Council shall appoint: such as the examining of Sciences, Arts, and
Inventions now in use, and the bringing in Histories of Natural and Artificial
things, etc. They shall be propounded at least a month before they are chosen.
They shall be examined by the Council before the election: To their Election
every Member of the Society shall be summoned: They shall at first be only
elected for a year of probation, (except they be of known merits) at the end of
the year, they shall be either elected for perpetuity, or for a longer time of
probation, or wholly rejected. The causes of ejecting a Curator shall be the
same with ejecting a Fellow, or for fraudulent dealing, and negligence in the
affairs of the Society, provided that he shall first receive three respective
admonitions. If any Curator shall be disabled by Age, Infirmity, or any
Casualty, in the service of the Society, some provision shall be made for him
during life, if his condition requires, according as the Council shall think
fit.

The Clerk shall constantly attend at all Meetings: he shall follow the
directions of the Secretaries, in Registring, and entering all matters that
shall be appointed: he shall not communicate any thing contained in their
Books, to any that is not a Fellow. He shall have a certain rate for what he
copies, and a yearly stipend for his attendance.

The Printer shall take care for the printing of such Books as shall be
committted to him by order of the Society, or Council; and therein he shall
observe their directions, as to the correction of the Edition, the number of
Copies, the form, or volume, etc.

The Operators of the Society, when they have any of their Work under their
hands, shall not undertake the work of any other persons, which may hinder the
business of the Society. They shall have Salaries for their attendance.

The Common Seal of the Society, shall be kept in a Chest with three Locks, and
three different Keys, by the President, Treasurer, and one of the Secretaries.
The Deeds of the Society, shall be passed in Council, and e ald by them and the
President.

The Books that concern the affairs of the Society, shall be the Charter Book,
Statute Book, Iournal Books, Letter Books, and Register Books, for the entering
of Philesophical Observations, Histories, Discourses, Experiments, Inventions.

The names of Benefactors shall be honorably mentioned in a Book provided for
that purpose.

In case of Death, or Recess of any Fellow, the Secretaries are to note it in
the Margent of the Register, over against their names.

The causes of Ejection shall be contemptuous disobedience to the Statutes and
Orders of the Society; defaming, or malicious damnifying the same. This shall
be declared by the President at one of the Meetings; and the Ejection recorded.

When these Statutes were presented to his Majesty, he was pleased to
superscribe himself, their Founder, and Patron, his Royal Highness, and his
Highness Prince Rupert, at the same time, declaring themselves Fellows.

Nor has the King only encouraged them, Sect. XXVII The Kings Example in
promoting Experiments.
by kindness of words, and by Acts of State: but he has also provoked them to
unwearied activity in their Experiments, by the most effectual means of his
Royal Example. There is scarce any one sort of work, whose advancement they
regard, but from his Majesty's own labors, they have received a pattern for
their endeavors about it. They design the multiplying, and beautifying of
Mechanic Arts: And the noise of Mechanic Instruments is heard in Whitehall it
self. They intend the perfection of Graving, Statuary, Limning, Coining, and
all the works of Smiths, in Iron, or Steel, or Silver: And the most excellent
Artists of these kinds, have provision made for their practice, even in the
Chambers, and Galleries of his Court. They purpose the trial of all manner of
operations by fire: And the King has under his own roof found place for
Chemical Operators, They resolve to restore, to enlarge, to examine Physic:
And the King has endowed the College of London with new Privileges, and has
planted a Physic Garden under his own eye. They have bestowed much
consideration, on the propagating of Fruits and Trees; And the King has made
Plantations enough, even almost to repair the ruins of a Civil War. They have
begun an exact Survey of the Heavens: and Saint Iameses Park may witness, that
Ptolomey and Alphonso were not the only Monarchs, who observed the motions, and
appearances of the Stars. They have studied the promoting of Architecture in
our Island: and the beauty of our late Buildings, and the reformation of his
own Houses, do sufficiently manifest his Skill and Inclination to that Art: of
which magnificence, we had seen more effects ere this, if he had not been
called off by this War, from houses of convenience, to those of strength. They
have principally consulted the advancement of Navigation: And the King has been
most ready to reward those, that shall discover the Meridian. They have
employed much time in examining the Fabric of Ships, the forms of their Sails,
the shapes of their Keels, the sorts of Timber, the planting of Firr, the
bettering of Pitch, and Tarr, and Tackling. And in all Maritime affairs of this
Nature, his Majesty is acknowledged to be the best Judge amongst Seamen, and
Shipwrights, as well as the most powerful amongst Princes.

. XXVIII. And the present Genius of our Nation.
By these, and many other instances it appears, that the King has not only given
succor to the Royal Society, in the prosecution of their labors; but has also
led them on in their way, and traced out to them the paths, in which they ought
to tread. And with this propitious inclination of his Majesty, and the highest
Degrees of men, the Genius of the Nation it self irresistibly conspires. If we
reflect on all the past times of Learning in our Island; we may still observe
some remarkable accidents, that retarded these studies, which were still ready
to break forth, in spite of all opposition.

Till the union of the two houses of York, and Lancaster, the whole force of
our Country was engaged in Domestic Wars, between the King, and the Nobility,
or in the furious contentions between the divided Families: unless sometimes
some magnanimous Prince, was able to turn their strength, to foreign
conquests. In King Henry the seventh, the two Roses were joined. His Government
was like his own temper, close, severe, jealous, avaricious, and withal
victorious, and prudent: but how unprepared his time was for new discoveries,
is evident by the slender account that he made of the proposition of Columbus.
The Reign of King Henry the eighth, was vigorous, haughty, magnificent,
expensive, learned. But then the alteration of Religion began, and that alone
was then sufficient to possess minds of men.

The Government of King Edward the sixth was contentious, by reason of the
factions of those who managed his childhood: and the shortness of his life
deprived us of the fruits, that might have been expected, from the prodigious
beginnings of the King himself. That of Queen Mary was weak, melancholy, bloody
against the Protestants, obscured by a foreign Marriage, and unfortunate by
the loss of Calais. That of Queen Elizabeth was long, triumphant, peaceable at
home, and glorious abroad. Then it was shown, to what height the English may
rise, when they are commanded by a Prince, who knows how to govern their
hearts, as well as hands. In her days the Reformation was settled, commerce was
established, and Navigation advanced. But though knowledge began abundantly to
spring forth, yet it was not then seasonable for Experiments to receive a
public encouragement: while the writings of antiquity, and the controversies
between us, and the Church of Rome, were not fully studied, and dispatched.

The Reign of King James was happy in all the benefits of Peace, and
plentifully furnished with men of profound Learning. But in imitation of the
King, they chiefly regarded the matters of Religion, and Disputation: so that
even my Lord Bacon, with all his authority in the State, could never raise any
College of Solomon, but in a Romance. That of King Charles the First, began
indeed to be ripe for such undertakings, by reason of the plenty, and felicity
of the first years of his Government, and the abilities of the King himself:
who was not only an inimitable Master, in reason and eloquence, but excelled in
very many practical Arts, beyond the usual custom of Kings, nay even beyond
the skill of the best Artists themselves. But he alas! was called away from the
studies of quiet, and peace, to a more dangerous, and a more honorable
reputation. The chief Triumphs that Heaven reserved for him, were to be
gathered from his suffering virtues, in them he was only exceeded, by his
Divine Example of our Savior: in imitation of whose Passion, those
afflictions, and those thorns which the rude Soldiers designed for his
disgrace, and torment, became his glory, and his Crown.

The late times of Civil War, and confusion, to make recompense for their
infinite calamities, brought this advantage with them, that they stirred up
men's minds from long ease, and a lazy rest, and made them active, industrious
and inquisitive: it being the usual benefit that follows upon Tempests, and
Thunders in the State, as well as in the Sky, that they purify, and clear the
Air, which they disturb. But now since the Kings return, the blindness of the
former Ages, and the miseries of this last, are vanished away: now men are
generally weary of the Relics of Antiquity, and satiated with Religious
Disputes: now not only the eyes of men, but their hands are open, and prepared
to labor: Now there is a universal desire, and appetite after knowledge, after
the peaceable, the fruitful, the nourishing Knowledge: and not after that of
ancient Sects, which only yielded hard indigestible arguments, or sharp
contentions instead of food: which when the minds of men required bread, gave
them only a stone, and for fish a serpent.

Whatever they have hitherto attempted, Sect. XXIX. The subjects about which
they have been emploi'd.
on these Principles, and encouragements, it has been carried on with a
vigorous spirit, and wonderful good Fortune, from their first constitution,
down to this day. Yet I overhear the whispers, and doubts of many, who demand,
what they have done all this while? and what they have produced, that is
answerable to these mighty hopes, which we endeavor, to make the world
conceive of their undertaking?

If those who require this Account, have themselves performed any worthy
things, in this space of time; it is fit, that we should give them
satisfaction. But they who have done nothing at all, have no reason to upbraid
the Royal Society, for not having done as much, as they fancy it might. To
those therefore who excite it to work, by their examples, as well as words and
reproofs, methinks it were a sufficient Answer, if I should only repeat the
particulars, I have already mentioned, wherein the King has set on foot a
Reformation, in the Ornaments, and Advantages of our Country. For though the
original praise of all this is to be ascribed to the Genius of the King
himself: yet it is but just, that some honor should thence descend to this
Assembly, whose purposes are conformable to his Majesty's performances of that
Nature: Seeing all the little scandals, that captious humors have taken
against the Royal Society, have not risen from their general proceedings; but
from a few pretended offenses, of some of their private Members: it is but
reason, that we should allege in their commendation, all the excellent
Designs, which are begun by the King, who has not only styled himself their
Founder, but acted as a particular Member of their Company.

To this I will also add, that in this time, they have passed through the first
difficulties of their Charter, and Model: and have overcome all oppositions,
which are wont to arise, against the beginnings of great things. This certainly
alone were enough to free them from all imputation of idleness, that they have
framed such an Assembly in six years, which was never yet brought about in six
thousand. Besides this the world is to consider, that if any that think, the
whole compass of their work might have come to a sudden issue: they seem
neither to understand the intentions of the Royal Society, nor the extent of
their task. It was never their aim, to make a violent dispatch. They know that
precipitancy in such matters, was the fault of the Ancients: And they have no
mind, to fall into the same error, which they endeavor to correct. They began
at first on so large a Bottom, that it is impossible, the whole Frame should be
suddenly completed. It Is true, they that have nothing else to do, but to
express, and adorn conclusions of Knowledge already made, may bring their Arts
to an end, as soon as they please. But they who follow the slow, and intricate
method of Nature, cannot have the seasons of their productions, so much in
their own power. If we would always exact from them, daily or weekly harvests;
we should wholly cut off the occasions of very many excellent Inventions, whose
subjects are remote, and come but seldom under their consideration. If we
should require them, immediately to reduce all their labors, to public, and
conspicuous use, by this dangerous speed, we should draw them off from many of
the best Foundations of Knowledge. Many of their noblest discoveries, and such
as will hereafter prove most serviceable, cannot instantly be made to turn to
profit. Many of their weightiest, and most precious Observations, are not
always fit to be exposed to open view: For it is with the greatest
Philosophers, as with the richest Merchants, whose Wares of greatest bulk and
price, lie commonly out of sight, in their Warehouses, and not in their Shops.

This being premised, I will however venture to lay down a brief draught of
their most remarkable particulars: which may be reduced to these following
heads: The Queries, and Directions, they have given abroad: the Proposals, and
Recommendations they have made: the Relations they have received: the
Experiments they have tried: the Observations they have taken: the Instruments
they have inventted: the Theories that have been proposed: the Discourses they
have written, or published: the Repository, and Library: and the Histories of
Nature, and Arts, and Works, they have collected.

Their manner of gathering, Sect. XXX. Their Queries, and Directions.
and dispersing Queries is this. First they require some of their particular
Fellows, to examine all Treatises, and Descriptions, of the Natural, and
Artificial productions of those Countries, in which they would be informed. At
the same time, they employ others to discourse with the Seamen, Travelers,
Tradesmen, and Merchants, who are likely to give them the best light. Out of
this united Intelligence from Men and Books, they compose a Body of Questions,
concerning all the observable things of those places. These Papers being
produced in their weekly Assemblies, are augmented, or contracted, as they see
occasion. And then the Fellows themselves are wont to undertake their
distribution into all Quarters, according as they have the convenience of
correspondence: of this kind I will here reckon up some of the Principal, whose
Particular heads are free to all, that shall desire Copies of them for their
Direction.

They have composed Queries, and Directions, what things are needful to be
observed, in order to the making of a Natural History in general: what are to
be taken notice of toward a perfect History of the Air, and Atmosphere, and
Weather: what is to be observed in the production, growth, advancing, or
transforming of Vegetables: what particulars are requisite, for collecting a
complete History of the Agriculture, which is used in several parts of this
Nation.

They have prescribed axact Inquiries, and given punctual Advice for the trial
of Experiments of rarefaction, refraction, and condensation: concerning the
cause, and manner of the Petrifaction of Wood: of the Loadstone: of the Parts
of Anatomy, that are yet imperfect: of Injections into the Blood of Animals;
and Transfusing the blood of one Animal into another: of Currents: of the
ebbing, and flowing of the Sea: of the kinds, and manner of the feeding of
Oysters: of the Wonders, and Curiosities observable in deep Mines.

They have Collected, and sent abroad Inquiries for the East Indies, for China,
for St. Helena, for Tenariff, or any high Mountain, for Ginny, for Barbary, and
Morocco, for Spain, and Portugal, for Turkey, for France, for Italy, for
Germany, for Hungary, for Transylvania, for Poland, and Sueden, for Iceland,
and Greenland. They have given Directions for Seamen in General, and for
observing the Eclipses of the Moon; for observing the Eclipses of the Sun by
Mercury, in several parts of the World, and for observing the Satellites of
Jupiter.

Of this their way of Inquiring, and giving Rules for direction, I will here
produce a few Instances: from whose exactness it may be ghess'd, how all the
rest are performed.

The HISTORY of the ANSWERS RETURNED BY Sir PHILIBERTO VERNATTI Resident in
Batavia in Iava Major, To certain Inquiries sent thither by Order of the Royal
Society, and recommended by Sir ROBERT MORAY.
Q. 1. Whether Diamonds and other Precious Stones grow again after three or
four years, in the same places where they have been dug out?

A. Never, or at least as the memory of man can attain to.

Q. 2. Whether the Quarries of Stone in India, near Fetipoca, not far from
Agra, may be cleft like Logs, and sawn like Planks, to ciel Chambers, and cover
Houses.

A. What they are about the Place mentioned, I have not as yet been well
informed; but in Persia not far from Cyrus where the best Wine grows, there
is a sort of hard Stone which may be cleft like Firrwood, as if it had a grain
in it: the same is at the Coast Cormandel about Sadraspatuam; where they make
but a mark in the Stone, set a wedge upon it, with a wooden hammer, as thick
and thin as they please; it is used commonly for pavement in houses, one foot
square, and so cheap, that such a stone finely polished costs not above six
pence.

Q. 3. Whether there be a Hill in Sumatra which burns continually, and a
Fountain which runs pure Balsom.

A. There is a Hill that burns in Sumatra near Endrapoer; but I cannot hear
of any such Fountain; and I believe that the like Hill is upon Iava Major
opposite to Batavia: for in a clear morning or evening, from the Road a man may
perfectly perceive a continual smoke rise from the top and vanish by little and
little. I have often felt Earthquakes here, but they do not continue long; in
the year 1656. or 57. (I do not remember well the time) Batavia was covered in
one afternoon, about two of the Clock, with a black dust, which being gathered
together, was so ponderous, that it exceeded the weight in Gold. I, at that
time, being very ill, did not take much notice of it, but some have gathered
it, and if I light upon it shall send you some. It is here thought, it came out
of the Hill: I never heard of any that had been upon this Hills top: Endrapeor
is counted a mighty unwholesome place, as likewise all others where Pepper
grows; as Iamby Banjar, Balingtoan, etc. though some impute it to the Hills
burning.

As for the Fountain it is unknown to us, except Oleum Terrae is meant by it,
which is to be had in Sumatra, but the best comes from Pegu.

Q. 4. What River is that in Java Major that turns Wood into Stone?

A. There is none such to our knowledge; yet I have seen a piece of Wood with a
Stone at the end of it; which was told me, that was turned into Stone by a
River in Pegu; but I took it but for a Foppery; for diverse Arbusta grow in
Rocks, which being appropriated curiously, may easily deceive a too hasty
believer.

Q. 5. Whether it be true, that upon the Coast of Achin in Sumatra, the Sea,
though it be calm, grows very high when no rain falls, but is smooth in rain,
though it blows hard.

A. Sometimes, but not always; the Reason is this, that Achin lies at the
very end and corner of Sumatra, as may be seen by the Map, open in the main
Ocean, so that the Sea comes rolling from the Cabo de bona Esperanca, and all
that way unto it, and it is natural to the Sea to have a continual motion, let
it be never so calm; which motion cannot be called a Wave, neither have I any
English for it at present, but in Dutch we call it, Deyninge van Dee Zee, and
the calmer it is, the higher; the natural motion of the Sea elevates very
slowly the water; so that I have seen Ships and Junks tossed by these Deynings
in a calm, (when there is scarce wind enough to drive a bubble) that a man can
scarce stand in them; some say this motion proceeds from boisterous winds at
Sea far distant. That rain beats down the swelling of these Deynings
(especially if it be vehement) proceeds naturally from its weight and
impetuosity. And it is observed, that about Achin the Mountains are high and
steep, from whose tops boisterous, called Travant, come suddenly (like a
Granado cast) falling into the Sea, are accompanied commonly with a great
shower of rain, and last not above a quarter, or at the most, half an hour,
which is too short a time to disturb the Sea, or to cause a contrary motion in
it, being sheltered by these Mountains.

Q. 6. Whether in the Island of Sambrero, which lies Northwards of Sumatra,
about eight degrees Northern latitude, there be found such a Vegetable as
Master James Lancaster relates to have seen, which grows up to a Tree, shrinks
down when one offers to pluck it up into the ground, and would quite shrink
unless held very hard? And whether the same, being forcibly plucked up, has a
worm for its root, diminishing more and more; according as the Tree grows in
greatness; and as soon as the Worm is wholly turned into the Tree, rooting in
the ground, and so growing great? And whether the same plucked up young turns,
by that time it is dry, into a hard Stone, much like to white Corral.

A. I cannot meet with any that ever have heard of such a Vegetable.

Q. 7. Whether those Creatures that are in these parts plump and in season at
the full Moon, are lean and out of season at the new, find the contrary at the
East Indies.

A. I find it so here, by Experience at Batavia, in Oysters and Crabs.

Q. 8. What ground there may be for that Relation, concerning Horns taking
root, and growing about Goa?

A. Inquiring about this, a Friend laughed, and told me it was a Jeer put upon
the Portuges, because the Women of Goa are counted much given to lechery.

Q. 9. Whether the Indians can so prepare that stupifying Herb Datura, that
they make it lie several days, months, years, according as they will have it,
in a man's body, without doing him any hurt, and at the end kill him, without
missing half an hours time?

A. The China men in this place, have formerly used Datura as a Fermentation,
to a sort of Drink much beloved by the Soldiers and Mariners, called
Suykerbier, which makes them raging mad, so that it is forbidden strictly under
the penalty of a great pain to make use of the same.

Q. 10. Whether those that be stupefied by the juice of this Herb Datura, are
recovered by moystning the soles of their feet in fair water?

A. No. For I have seen diverse Soldiers and Mariners fall into the Rivers and
Ditches, being stupefied by their drink aforesaid, who were rather worse after
they were taken out, than better.

Q. 11. Whether a Betel has such contrariety to the Durion, that a few leaves
thereof put to a whole shopful of Durions, will make them all rot suddenly? And
whether those who have surfeited on Durions, and thereby overheated themselves,
do by laying one leaf of Betel cold upon the heart, immediately cure the
Inflammations, and recover the Stomach? This Betel being thought to preserve
those Indians from Toothache, loose Gums, and Scurvey, and from stinking
breath; some of it is desired to be sent over with the fruit Areica, and the
other Ingredients, and manner of preparing it.

A. I have seen that Betel leaves in a short time will spoil a Durion, take
away his nature, and turn a fat creamy substance into water. Commonly those
that eat great quantities of Durions, eat a Betel afterward as a Correctorium;
but of laying a leaf upon the heart, I have never heard. As for the other
qualities of the Betel, I believe they are good, if not abused; as most of the
Indians do, who never are without it in their mouths, no not sleeping, which
corrodes their teeth, and makes them as black as Jet: It draws from the head
the Phlegmatic humors, which are voided by spitting; so we use it: but the
Indians swallow down their spittle, together with the juice of the Betel, and
the Areica. The manner of preparing it is easy, being nothing but the Nut leaf
and Calx viva, of which last each one adds as much as pleases his palate. There
is a sort of Fruit called Sivgboa, which is used with the Areica, instead of
Betel, and can be dried and transported as well as the Areica, and has the
same force, but a great deal more pleasant to the palate.

Q. 12. Whether the Papayas, that bears fruit like a Melon, do not grow, much
less bear fruit, unless male and female be together?

A They grow, as I have seen two in the English-house at Bantam, and bear
little fruit, which never comes to perfection; but if the male and female be
together, the one bears great Fruit, the other nothing but Flowers.

Q. 13 Whether the Arbor Triste sheds its Flowers at the rising of the Sun, and
shut them again at the setting of the Sun? And whether the distilled water
thereof ( called Aqua di Mogli by the Portugals) may not be transported to
England? And whether at the rising of the Sun the leaves of the Arbor Triste
drop off as well as the flowers?

A. There is two sorts of the Arbor Triste; one is called by the Portugals
Triste de Die, the other Triste de Nocte; the one sheds his Flowers at the
Rising, the other at the Setting of the Sun; but neither of them shed their
leaves. There is no body here that understands the distilling of waters; some
say this Aqua di Mogli is to be had at Malaca, for which I have writ, and shall
send it if procurable.

Q. 14. Whether the Arbor de Rays, or Tree of Root, propagate it self in a
whole Forest, by shooting up and letting fall roots from its branches into the
ground, that spring up again, and so on?

A. This is true. And we have diverse trees about Batavia, and the like adjacent
Islands, above fifty foot in the diameter.

Q. 15. What kind of fruit is that in Jucca, which grows immediately out of the
Trees body; and is said to breed the Plague if eaten immoderately?

A. It is a fruit much like to Durion, which grows in the same manner; has a
faint smell, and sweet waterish taste; for my part I do not affect them: The
Plague is a Disease unknown amongst the Indians; but this fruit, as most others
do, immoderately eaten, causes a Dirthea, which easily degenerates to a
Tenasmus, by us called Peirsing, a dangerous Sickness, and worse than the
Plague.

Q. 16. What Poison is it the King of Macassar in Colebees is said to have
particular to himself, which not only kills a man immediately, that has
received the slightest Wound by a Dart dipped therein, but also within half an
hours time, make the flesh, touched with it, so rotten, that it will fall like
Snivel from the Bones, and whose poisonous Steam will soon fly up to a Wound
made with an unpoysoned Dart, if the Blood be only in the slightest manner
touched with a Dart infected with the Poison? What certainty there is of this
Relation?

A. That there is such a Poison in this Kings possession is most certain; but
what it is, no Christian hitherto ever knew right. By the Government of Arnold
De Flamminge Van Outshorn diverse have been tortured; yea, killed.

Some say it is the Gall of a Venomous Fish, Others say it is a Tree which is
so Venomous, that those who are condemned to die, fetch the Poison, but not one
of an hundred escape death: the Roots of this Tree are held an Antidote against
the Poison; but our People, when we had War with Macassar, found no Antidote
like to their own or others Excrements; as soon as they felt themselves
wounded, instantly took a dose of this same, which presently provoked to vomit,
and so, by repulsion, (as I perceive) and sweat, freed the Noble parts from
further Infection. That a Wound should be infected by this Poison, though
inflicted by an impoysoned Weapon, is not strange to those who study Sympathy;
And set belief in that much renowned Sympathetical Powder of Sir Kenelme Digby.
Yet such Effects of the Macassars Arts are unknown to us.

Q. 17. Whether in Pegu and other places in the East Indies, they use a Poison
that kills by smelling, and yet the Poison smell is hardly perceived?

To this no Answer was returned.

Q. 18. Whether Camphire comes from Trees? What kind of Trees they are in
Borneo, that are said to yield much excellent Camphire, as that one pound
thereof is said to be worth an hundred of that of China and other places?

A. Camphire comes from Trees of an Excessive bulk, as you may see by the
Chests which comes from Iappan into Europe, made of the same wood of Burneo; it
comes likewise from Trees, which are said to stand in Sandy Ground. And drop
like a Gum.

But of late an Experiment is found in Ceylon, that the Root of a Cinnamon Tree
yields as good Camphire, as either Iappan, or China, of which I shall send you
a pattern, being now to be had at present here; as also an Oil extracted from
the same Roots, which reserves something of the Cinnamon smell: but may be the
fault of the Distiller

Q. 19. Whether some of that rare Wood, called Palo d' Aquila and Calamba, of
an Extraordinary value, even in the Country where it grows, as in Siam about
San and Patan, and in Cochinchina, may not be brought over; as also some of
those strange Nests of Cochinchina, made by Birds upon Rocks, of a certain
viscous froth of the Sea, which Nests grown dry and hard, are said to become
transparent; and when dissolved in Water; serves excellently to season all
their Meats?

A. If the Question be made, whether these things may be brought over by
permission of the Company? I answer: as first, that their Laws forbid the
transportation of all whatsoever, whether necessary to the conservation of
Health, or acquisition of Wealth, or Rarities, etc. but if the Querie be
concerning the nature and substance of the Wood and Nests: they are
transportable, and can subsist without decaying many years. Lignum Aquilae is
far inferior to Calamba, though not easy to be discerned: the pound of
Calamba is worth in Iappan thirty, and sometimes forty pounds Sterling; the
best comes from Cambodia, and seems to be the pith of the Tree Aquilae in
Iappan, it is used as Incence to perfume Cloth, and Chambers. It is held for a
great Cordial, and commonly used by that Nation, as also the Chinese: In
Defectione spirituum vitalium; as in Paralisi and Nervorum laxatione and
impotentia: They rub it with Aqua Cynamoni upon a Stone, till the substance of
the Wood is mixed, sicut pulpa, with the Water, and so drink it with Wine, or
what they please: The Birds-nests are a great Restorative to Nature, and much
used by the lecherous Chinaes.

Q. 20. Whether the Animal called Abados, or Rhinoceros, has teeth, claws,
flesh, blood, and skin* yea his very dung and water, as well as his horns,
Antidotal? And whether the horns of those beasts be better or worse, according
to the food they live upon.

A. Their horns, teeth, claws, and blood are esteemed Antidotes, and have the
same use in the Indian Pharmacopeia as the Therieca has in ours: the flesh I
have eaten is very sweet and short: some days before the Receipt of your
Letter, I had a young one no bigger than a Spaniel Dog, which followed me
wherever I went, drinking nothing but Buffulo milk, lived about three weeks,
then his teeth began to grow, and got a looseness, and died. It Is observed,
that Children (especially of European Parents) at the breaking out of their
teeth are dangerous sick, and commonly die of the scouring in these parts. His
skin I have caused to be dried, and so present it unto you, since fate permits
not to send him you living; such a young one was never seen before: The food I
believe is all one to this Animal, being that they are seldom seen but amongst
withered Branches, Thistles and Thorns; so that the horn is of equal virtue.

Q. 21. Whether the falsifying of the China Musk is not rather done by mixing
Oxen and Cows Livers dried and pulverized with some of the putrified and
concrete flesh and blood of the China Musk-cat, than by beating together the
bare flesh and blood of this Animal, etc.

Not answered.

Q. 22. Whether there be two sorts of Gumlack, one produced from a certain
winged Ant, the other the Exudation of a Tree: The first had in the Islands of
Suachan, the last in the Kingdom of Martaban?

A. We know of none but such as drop from Trees, and comes from diverse places
in Siam, Cambodia, Pegu, etc.

Q. 23. If the best Ambergreece be found in the Islands Socotora and Aniana,
near Java? To endeavor the getting of more certain knowledge; what it is,
being reported to be bred in the bottom of the Sea like to a thick mud?

A. The best that is in the World comes from the Island Mauritius; And is
commonly found after a Storm. The Hogs can smell it at a great distance; who
run like mad to it, and devour it commonly before the people come to it. It is
held to be a Zeequal viscosity, which being dried by the Sun, turns to such a
Consistence as is daily seen. Myavines father Isaac Vigny a Frenchman in
Oleron, has been a great Traveller in his time, and he told me, he sailed once
in his youth through so many of these Zeequalen, as would have loaded ten
thousand Ships; the like having been never seen; his Curiosity did drive him to
take up some of those, which being dried in the Sun, were perceived to be the
best Ambergreece in the World; I have seen one piece which he kept for a
Memento, and another piece he sold for 1300 l. Sterling. This being discovered,
they set sail to the same place where these Zeequelen appeared, and crusing
there, to and fro, for the space of six weeks, but could not perceive any more.
Where this place is situated, I do not know; but Monsieur Gentillot, a French
Captain in Holland, can tell you.

Q. 24. To enquire of the Diverse for Pearls staying long under water; whether
they do it by the assistance of anything they carry with them, or by long and
often use get a trick of holding their breath so long, at the Isle of Baharen
near Ormus?

A What they do at Baharen is unknown to me, but since we have had Tute Corein
in Ceylon, where very good Pearls grow, I hear the Diverse use no Artifice. The
manner is thus; at a set time of the year Merchants come from all parts, as
likewise Diverse with their Boats; each Boat has a certain quantity of square
Stones, upon which Stones the Diverse go down, and give a token to their
Companions, when they think it time to be haled up: each Stone pays tribute to
the Company. The Oyster or Shellfish is not immediately opened, but laid on
heaps, or in holes at the Seaside. When the Diving time is ended, the
Merchants come, and buy these heaps, according as they can agree, not knowing
whether they shall get any thing or no. So that this is a mere Lottery. This
Pearl-fishing is dangerous, being the Diverse commonly make their Will, and take
leave of their Friends, before they tread the Stone to go down.

Q. 25. Whether Cinnamon when first gathered has no taste at all, but acquires
its taste and strength by fifteen days sunning? And whether the Bark be
gathered every two years in the Isle of Ceylon?

A. The Cinnamon Tree as it grows, is so fragrant, that it may be smelt a
great way off before it be seen. And has even then, a most Excellent taste; so
that by Sunning it loses rather than acquires any taste or force; the Tree
being pill'd is cut down to the root; but the young Sprigs after a year or two
give the best and finest Cinnamon.

Q. 26. To learn, if it may be, what Art the Masterworkmen of Pegu, have to add
to the color of their Rubies?

A. Not answered.

Q. 27. To inquire after, and get, if possible, some of the Bones of the Fish
called Caballa, which are so powerful in stopping blood.

A. It Is done, and they shall follow with the Dutch Ships.

Q. 28. Whether at Hermita, a Town in Ethiopia, there are Tortoises, so big,
that Men may ride upon them?

A. It is reported, that there be extraordinary great ones there; I have seen
some Sea-Tortoises here, of four foot broad, in oval form, very low legged, but
of that strength, that a man may stand on one: The manner of catching them, is
to turn them with a Fork upon their backs.

Q. 29. Whether there be a Tree in Mexico, that yields Water, Wine, Vinegar,
Oil, Milk, Honey, Wax, Thread and Needles?

A. The Cokos Trees yields all this and more; the Nut, while it is green, has
very good Water in it, the Flower being cut, drops out great quantity of
liquor, called Sury, or Taywack, which drank fresh, has the force, and almost
the taste of Wine; grown sour, is very good Vinegar; and distilled, makes very
good Brandy, or Areck: The Nut grated, and mingled with water, tastes like
Milk: pressed, yields very good Oil; Bees swarm in these Trees, as well as in
other; Thread and Needles are made of the leaves and tough twigs. Nay, to add
something to this description; in Amboina, they make Bread of the body of the
Tree, the leaves serve to thatch houses, and likewise sails for their Boats.

Q. 30. Whether about Java, there be Oysters of that vast bigness, as to weigh
three hundred weight?

A. I have seen a Shellfish, but nothing like an Oyster, of such a bigness,
the Fish being salted, and kept in pickle, afterward boiled, tastes like
Brawn in England, and is of an horney substance.

Q. 31. Whether near Malacca, there be found in the Gall of certain Swine, a
Stone esteemed incomparably above Bezoar?

A. In that Country, but very seldom, there grows a Stone, in the Stomach of a
Porkapine, called Pedro Porco: of whose virtue there are large descriptions:
and the Hollanders are now so fond, that I have seen 400. Dollars of ^ given
for one no bigger than a Pigeons Egg; There is sophistication as well in that
as Bezoar, Musk, etc. and every day new falsehood, so that I cannot well set
down here any rules, but must be judged by experience. A false one I send you,
which does imitate very near virtue, the true one, but is a great deal bigger,
and of another color.

As for the Observations desired of the Islands Saint Helena, and Ascension,
they may be better made by the English East India men, which commonly touch at
both places; but the Hollander never, or very seldom.

Q. 32. Whether it be winter at the East Side of the Mountain Gates, which
comes from the North to Cape Comoryn, whilst it is summer on the West Side? and
Vice versa.

A. Not only there, but likewise on the Island of Zeylon.

Q. 33. In what Country Lignum Alloes is found, whether it be the Wood of a
Tree? or the Root of a Tree? How to know the best of the Kind?

A. Lignum Alloes, Lignum Paradisi, Calamba, are Synonyma, the same: And the
same Wood comes most from Cambodia, and Siam; but they say it it brought by the
people of Lawlan, a Country about Cambodia, whence Musk, and Benzoin, and most
Aromada come: it is easily distinguished from other Wood, by its strong scent
and richness of Balm in it, which appears in its blackness: it is of great
Value, and hard to be gotten here.

The rest of the Queries are not answered, because the time is short since I
received them, and especially, because I cannot meet with any one that can
satisfy me, and being unsatisfied my self, I cannot nor will obtrude any thing
upon you, which may hereafter prove fabulous; but shall still serve you with
truth.



A METHOD For making a History of the Weather. By Mr. HOOK.
FOr the better making a History of the Weather, I conceive it requisite to
observe, 1. The Strength and Quarter of the Winds, and to register the Changes
as often as they happen; both which may be very conveniently shown, by a small
addition to an ordinary Weather-clock. 2. The Degrees of Heat and Cold in the
Air; which will be best observed by a sealed Thermometer, graduated according
to the Degrees of Expansion, which bear a known proportion to the whole bulk of
Liquor, the beginning of which gradation, should be that dimension which the
Liquor has, when encompassed with Water, just beginning to freeze, and the
degrees of Expansion, either greater or less, should be set or marked above it
or below it. 3. The Degrees of Dryness and Moisture in the Air; which may be
most conveniently observed by a Hygroscope, made with the single beard of a
wild Oat perfectly ripe, set upright and headed with an Index, after the way
described by Emanuel Magnan; the conversions and degrees of which, may be
measured by divisions made on the rim of a Circle, in the Center of which, the
Index is turned round: The beginning or Standard of which Degree of Rotation,
should be that, to which the Index points, when the beard, being thoroughly wet,
or covered with Water, is quite unwreathed, and becomes straight. But because
of the smalness of this part of the Oat, the cod of a wild Vetch may be used
instead of it, which will be a much larger Index, and will be altogether as
sensible of the changes of the Air. 4. The degrees of Pressure in the Air:
which may be several ways observed, but best of all with an Instrument with
Quicksilver, contrived so, as either by means of water or an Index, it may
sensibly exhibit the minute variations of that Action. 5. The constitution and
face of the Sky or Heavens; and this is best done by the eye; here should be
observed, whether the Sky be clear or clouded; and if clouded, after what
manner; whether with high Exhalations or great white Clouds, or dark thick
ones. Whether those Clouds afford Fogs or Mists, or Sleet, or Rain, or Snow,
etc. Whether the under side of those Clouds be flat or waved and irregular, as
I have often seen before thunder. Which way they drive, whether all one way, or
some one way, some another; and whether any of these be the same with the Wind
that blows below; the Color and face of the Sky at the rising and setting of
the Sun and Moon; what Haloes or Rings may happen to encompass those
Luminaries, their bigness form and number. 6. What Effects are produced upon
other bodies: As what Aches and Distempers in the bodies of men: what Diseases
are most rife, as Colds, Fevours, Agues, etc. What putrefactions or other
changes are produced in other bodies; As the sweating of Marble, the burning
blew of a Candle, the blasting of Trees and Corn; the unusual sprouting,
growth, or decay of any Plants or Vegetables: the putrefaction of bodies not
usual; the plenty or scarcity of Insects; of several Fruits, Grains, Flowers,
Roots, Cattle, Fishes, Birds, any thing notable of that kind. What conveniences
or inconveniences may happen in the year, in any kind, as by floods, droughts,
violent showers, etc. What nights produce dews and hoar-frosts, and what not?
7. What Thunders and Lightnings happen, and what Effects they produce; as
souring Beer or Ale, turning Milk, killing Silkworms, etc? 8. Any thing
extraordinary in the Tides; as double Tides, later or earlier, greater or less
Tides than ordinary. Rising or drying of Springs; Comets or unusual
Apparitions, new Stars, Ignes fatui or shining Exhalations, or the like.


These should all or most of them be diligently observed and registered by some
one, that is always conversant in or near the same place.

Now that these and some other, hereafter to be mentioned, may be registered so
as to be most convenient for the making of comparisons, requisite for the
raising Axioms, whereby the Cause or Laws of Weather may be found out; It will
be desirable to order them so, that the Scheme of a whole Month, may at one
view be presented to the Eye: And this may conveniently be done on the pages of
a Book in folio, allowing fifteen days for one side, and fifteen for the
other. Let each of those pages be divided into nine Columes, and distinguished
by perpendicular lines; let each of the first six Columes be half an inch wide,
and the three last equally share the remaining of the side.

Let each Colume have the title of what it is to contain, in the first at
least, written at the top of it: As, let the first Colume toward the left
hand, contain the days of the Month, or place of the Sun, and the remarkable
hours of each day. The second, the Place, Latitude, Distance, Ages and Phaces
of the Moon. The third the Quarters and strength of Winds. The fourth the Heat
and Cold of the season. The fifth the Dryness and Moisture of it. The sixth the
Degrees of pressure. The seventh the faces and appearances of the Sky. The
eighth the Effects of the Weather upon other bodies, Thunders, Lightnings, or
any thing extraordinary. The ninth general Deductions, Corollaries or
Syllogisms, arising from the comparing the several Phenomenon together.

That the Columes may be large enough to contain what they are designed for, it
will be necessary, that the particulars be expressed with some Characters, as
brief and compendious as is possible. The two first by the Figures and
Characters of the Signs, commonly used in Almanacks. The Winds may be expressed
by the Letters, by which they are expressed in small Sea-Cards: and the degrees
of strength by 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. according as they are marked in the contrivance
of the Weathercock. The degrees of Heat and Cold may be expressed by the Numbers
appropriate to the Divisions of the Thermometer. The Dryness and Moisture, by
the Divisions in the rim of the Hydroscope. The pressure by Figures denoting
the height of the Mercurial Cylinder. But for the faces of the Sky, they are so
many, that many of them want proper names; and therefore it will be convenient
to agree upon some determinate ones, by which the most usual may be in brief
expressed. As let Clear signify a very clear Sky without any Clouds or
Exhalations: Checkered a clear Sky, with many great white round Clouds, such as
are very usual in Summer. Hazy, a Sky that looks whitish, by reason of the
thickness of the higher parts of the Air, by some Exhalation not formed into
Clouds. Thick, a Sky more whitened by a greater company of Vapors: these do
usually make the Luminaries look bearded or hairy, and are oftentimes the cause
of the appearance of Rings and Haloes about the Sun as well as the Moon.
Overcast, when the Vapors so whiten and thicken the Air, that the Sun cannot
break through; and of this there are very many degrees, which may be expressed by
a little, much, more, very much overcast, etc. Let Hairy signify a Sky that
has many small, thin and high Exhalations, which resemble locks of hair, or
flakes of Hemp or Flax: whose varieties may be expressed by straight or curv'd,
etc. according to the resemblance they bear. Let Watered signify a Sky that
has many high thin and small Clouds, looking almost like watered Tabby, called
in some places a Mackeril Sky. Let a Sky be called Waved, when those Clouds
appear much bigger and lower, but much after the same manner. Cloudy, when the
Sky has many thick dark Clouds. Lowering, when the Sky is not very much
overcast, but has also underneath many thick dark Clouds which threaten rain.
The signification of gloomy, foggy, misty, sleeting, driving, rainy, snowy,
reaches or racks variable, etc. are well known, they being very commonly used.
There may be also several faces of the Sky compounded of two or more of these,
which may be intelligibly enough expressed by two or more of these names. It is
likewise desirable, that the particulars of the eighth and ninth Columes may be
entered in as little room, and as few words as are sufficient to signify them
intelligibly and plainly.

It were to be wished that there were diverse in several parts of the World, but
especially in distant parts of this Kingdom, that would undertake this work,
and that such would agree upon a common way somewhat after this manner, that as
near as could be, the same method and words might be made use of. The benefit
of which way is easily enough conceivable.

As for the Method of using and digesting those so collected Observations; That
will be more advantageously considered when the Supellex is provided; A Workman
being then best able to fit and prepare his Tools, for his work, when he sees
what materials he has to work upon.

A SCHEME At one View representing to the Eye the Observations of the Weather
for a Month.
Days of the Month and place of the Sun. Remarkable house. Age and sign of the
Moon at Noon. The Quarters of the Wind and its strength. The Degrees of Heat
and Cold. The Degrees of Dryness and Moisture. The Degrees of Pressure. The
Faces or visible appearances of the Sky. The Notablest Effects. General
Deductions to be made after the side is fitted with Observations: As, 4 W. 2. 9
2 5 29 1/11 Clear blew, but yellowish in the N. E. Clowded toward the S.
Checkered blew. A great dew. From the last quart: of the Moon to the change the
weather was very temperate but cold for the season; the Wind pretty constant
between N. and W. 8 27 3 12 2 8 14 12 9.46. 3 16 Thunder, far to the South. A
very great Tide. 4 2 9 29 12.46 8 Perigeu^. 10 1/8 12 W.SW. 1 7 2 29 8 N.W. 3 9
2 8 29 1/16 A clear Sky all day, but a little checkered at 4. P. M. at Sunset
red and hazy. Not by much so big a Tide as yesterday. Thunder in the North. 15
4 28 4 29 6 24.51. N. 2 8 A little before the last great Wind, and till the
Wind rose at its highest, the Quicksilver continued descending till it came
very low; after which it began to reascend, etc. 13.40 10 1 7 2 10 29 10 N.
Moon. at 7.25 A. M. S. 1 10 1 10 28 Overcast and very lowering. etc. No dew upon
the ground, but very much upon Marble stones, etc. 16 14.37 10.8. etc. etc.
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.

DIRECTION For the Observations of the Eclipses of the MOON. By Mr. ROOKE.
EClipses of the Moon are observed for two principal Ends; One Astronomical,
that by comparing Observations with Calculations, the Theory of the Moons
motion may be perfected, and the Tables thereof reformed: The other
Geographical, that by comparing among themselves Observations of the same
Ecliptical Phases, made in diverse places, the difference of Meridians, or
Longitudes of those places may be discovered.

The Knowledge of the Eclipses Quantity and Duration, the Shadows, Curvity and
Inclination, etc. conduce only to the former of these Ends: The exact time of
the beginning, middle, and end of the Eclipses, as also in total ones, the
beginning and end of total darkness is useful for both of them.

But because these times considerably differ in Observations made by the bare
eye, from those with a Telescope, and because the beginning of Eclipses and the
end of Total darkness are scarce to be observed exactly, even with Glasses (one
not being able clearly to distinguish between the true shadow and Penumbra,
unless one have seen, for some time before, the line, separating them, pass
along upon the surface of the Moon). And lastly, because in small partial
Eclipses, the beginning and end (and in total ones of short continuance in the
shadow, the beginning and end of total darkness) are unfit for nice
Observations, by reason of the slow change of apparences, which the oblique
motion of the shadow then causes: For these Reasons I shall propound a Method
particularly designed for the accomplishment of the Geographical end in
observing Lunar Eclipses free (as far as is possible) from all the mentioned
inconveniences: For,

First, It shall not be practicable without a Telescope.

Secondly, The Observer shall always have Opportunity before his principal
Observation, to note the distinction between the true shadow and Penumbra.

Thirdly, It shall be applicable to those seasons of the Eclipse, when there is
the suddenest alteration in the apparences. To satisfy all which intents,

Let there be of the eminentest Spots, dispersed over all Quarters of the Moons
surface, a select number generally agreed on, to be constantly made use of to
this purpose, in all parts of the world: As for Example, those which Hevelius
calls Mons Sinai Etna Porphyrites Serrorum
Insula Besbicus Creta
Palus Maeotis Maraeotis
Lacus Niger Major.


Let in each Eclipse (not all, but for instance) three of these Spots, which
then lie nearest to the Ecliptic, be exactly observed, when they are first
touched by the true shadow, and again when they are just completely entered
into it; and (if you please) also in the decrease of the Eclipse, when they are
first fully clear from the true shadow: For the accurate determination of which
moments of time (that being in this business of main importance) let there be
taken Altitudes of remarkable fixed Stars, on this side the line, of such as
lie between the Equator and Tropic of Cancer; but beyond the line, of such as
are situated toward the other Tropic; and in all places, of such, as at the
time of Observation, are about four hours distant from the Meridian.

Mr. ROOK'S DISCOURSE Concerning the Observations of the Eclipses of the
Satellites of Jupiter.
LOngitudinis sive Differentiae Meridianorum scientia est vel Nautica, vel
Geographica.

Illa Navis aquae innatantis; Haec Vrbium, Insularum, Promontoriorum, etc.
Globo terrestri adhaerentium situm investigat.

In Navi, motu vario subinde translata; Observatio identidem est repetenda; at
loci terreni, fixam perpetuo sedem obtinentis, positionem semel determinasse
sufficit.

Maria, fluctibus ut plurimum agitata, subtilem Instrumentorum, praesertim
Telescopii longioris tractationem minime permittunt.

Longitudinis Scientia Nautica vix unquam de Caelo expectanda: Geographica vero
ab Eclipsibus Corporum coelestium praecipue petenda.

Eclipses sunt vel Veteribus notae, scil. Solis and Lunae Satellitum Iovis,
ante Tubi Optici usum incognitae.
(Missam fecimus Cl. Hugenii Lunulam Saturniam, Observatu difficiliorem.)

Illarum per multa retro saecula Observationes; ne duo quidem loca quantum
Meridianorum intercapidinem habeant, satis certo definitum esse Experimur:
harum vero per pauculos annos adhibenda diligenti animadversione; praecipuae
totius terrarum Orbis parts, quomodo ad se invicem sitae sint, accuratius
determinatum ir i non desperamus.

Causae, ob quas minus in hoc negotio praestitere Eclipses Luminarium, Sunt 1.
Communis, utrisque ipsarum Raritas Propria 2. Solari, Parallaxis Lunae. Propria
3. Lunari, Penumbra Terrae.


His ergo praeferimus Satellitum Iovialium defectus frequentissimos, sine ulla
Parallaxi, in quibus etiam penumbra Iovis prodesse magis, quam officere videtur.

Methodus Longitudinis, ex Eclipsibus vel aliis Phaenomenis Coelestibus,
indagandae auplex est: Vna, cum tempore ad Meridianum Tabularum proprium
supputato, tempus alibi observatum; Altera, tempora variis in locis observata,
inter se comparat.

Cum Arti Nauticae Prior illa unice interserviat quae motus coelestes
accuratius multo, quam nobis sperandum videtur, cognitos supponit; ob
Astronomiae imperfectionem, and observationum Marinarum hallucinationem
perpetuo fere necessarium: supra pronunciavimus Longitudinis Scientiam Nauticam
vix unquam de Coelo expectandam.

Methodus altera, Geographiae perficiendae idonea, cum non aliam ob causam
praevium Calculum adhibeat, nisi ut eo moniti plures, eidem Phaenomeno, in
dissitis locis, observando simul invigilent; Periodorum atque Epocharum (...)
minime desiderat.

Satellites Iovis numero sunt quatuor, varia apud Authors nomina sortiti; nos
ex diversis, quae a Jove obtinent intervallis, 1. Intimum, 2. Penintimum, 3.
Penextimum, 4. Extimum appellabimus.

Horum non nisi uniusmodi (...) Observandum proponimus; immersionem nempe in
Vmbram Iovis sive ipsum Eclipseces initium.

Solam hanc (...) seligimus, utpote in indivisibili fero constitutam: Licet
enim luminis languor atque diminutio moram aliquantulam trahere possit,
omnimodo tamen Extinctio and Evanescentia (de qua unice soliciti sumus) momento
quasi contingere deprehendetur.

Ante Satellites ad Occidentem Disci Iovialis respectu, in deliquia incidunt;
post Acronychia, ad Orientem.

Intimi and (nisi forte rarissime) penintimi Eclips^^^ tantum Occidentalium
initia nobis apparere possunt: duorum autem remotiorum multa etiam Orientalium
exordia conspicere licet.

Defectus, Medicaeorum observatu faciliores reddant. 1. Major Planetarum
claritas. 2. Motus ipsorum tardior. 3. Penumbra Iovis crassior. 4. Longius a
Ioviali Disco intervallum: at Observationum (...) condicit. 1. Motus Satellitum
velocior. 2. Penumbra Iovis angustior.

Haec omnia nobiscum meditati, subduct a been singulorum ratione, Satellitum
intimum and penextimum ad rem nostram prae coeteris accommodatos; atque adeo
cum satis frequentes sint ipsorum Eclipses, solos adhibendos esse judicamus.

Extimum omnino negligimus utpote minimum omnium and obscurissimum; praesertim
vero quod tanta non-nunquam sit Latitudine praedictus, ut Vmbra Iovis ipsum
Aphelium neutiquam attingat.

Penintimus autem nulla gaudet ex supra recensitis Praerogativa, quae alterutri
saltem eorrum, quos jam praetulimus, potiori jure non debeatur.

Maxima, Satellitum in Vmbra incidentium, a limbo Disci Iovialis distantia, una
aut altera, post priorem Solis and Iovis quadraturam, bebdomada contingit.

Estque ea Penextimi sesquidiametro Iovis fere aequatis: Intimi vero
semidiametro ejusdem non multo major sexta ante memoratam Quadraturam
Hebdomada; Penextimus Vmbram ingrediens Diametro Iovis a disco abest: Augenda
inde usque ad maximam distantia incremento (non uniformi sed) continue
decrescente.

Hinc iisdem reciproce passibus (decremento sc. sensim increscente) diminuitur
istiusmodi intervallum, ad bimestre usque tempus a dicta Quadratura elapsum,
quando iterum Diametro Ioviali aequatur.

Postea autem usque ad ipsa Acronychia, penextimus Vmbram subiturus, aequabili
fere gradu (singulis nempe hebdomadis quadrante Diametri) promotus ad limbum
Iovis accedit. Intimi, pro diverso Iovis ad solemn situ, distantia eadem plane
ratione variatur: ejus enim, quam ubique obtinet, Penextimus, trienti fere
perpetuo est aequalis.

Mense circiter post Iovem soli oppositum, Penextimus (Intimi post, immersiones
observari non posse supra innuimus) simul ac corporis Iovialis limbum
orientalem transierit, Occidentalem umbra continuo intrabit.

Inde augetur paulatim penextimi evanescentis distantia, donec una aut altera
ante posteriorem quadraturam hebdomada, maxima evadat; quando a disci Iovialis
margin semidiametro ejusdem removetur.

Postquam autem hucusque diminuta sensim velocitate, umbra Iovis ab ipsius
Disco recessit: hinc, motu continue accelerato, ad eundem redit.

Per bimestre ante and post Iovis cum sole conjunctionem spatium in locis
Longitudine multum differentibus, eadem Eclipsis apparere nequit: adeoque tunc
temporis observationes instituere non est operae pretium.

Quae cum ita sint, tempus quadrimestre, a sextili priori usque ad ipsa fere
Acronychia numerandum, utrique Satelliti Observando erit unice opportunum:
Penextimi autem soli, insuper trimestre, ab altero post oppositionem mense ad
sextilem posteriorem.

Intra tempora jam definita, octoginta circiter utriusque simul Satellitis
fient Eclipses; Penextimi sc. fere triginta, intimi autem quinquaginta.

H^^s cum (non ubivis terrarum sed) aliae aliis in locis sint conspiciendae, in
sex Classes digeremus.

1. In Europa and Africa Eclipses observandas comprehendet. 2. In Asia.
Eclipses observandas comprehendet. 3. In America. Eclipses observandas
comprehendet. 4. In Europa Africa and Asia. Eclipses observandas comprehendet.
5. In Europa, Africa and America. Eclipses observandas comprehendet. 6. In Asia
Orient. and America Occident. Eclipses observandas comprehendet.
Non opus est forte, ut moneamus in Insulis Oceani Aethiopici observandam esse
Classem 4 am. Oceani Atlantici observandam esse Classem 5 am. Oceani Pacifici
observandam esse Classem 6 am.


Calculus Eclipsium a nobis exhibendus in ipso fortasse loco ad quem
instituitur, plus hora integra nonnunquam a vero observabit, ob variam se. in
Satellitum motu (...) ab Excentricitate (ut verisimile est) and propriarum
ipsis Orbitarum ad Iovis Orbitam inclinatione oriundam.

Alibi autem terrarum multo minus calculo fidendum, propter incertam insuper in
plerisque locis Meridianorum Differentiam; quae tamen, ut fiat, Reductio
temporis, aliqua utcunque adhibenda est.

Longam itaque futuram sepiuscute Eclipsium harum expectationem praemonemus,
assiduamque interim attentionem, nec (ob (...) admodum (...)) unquam fere
interruptam, esse continuandum: primam enim, quam visu assequi possumus,
luminis diminutionem, brevissima (praesertim in intimo) interposita morula mox
insequitur perfecta ejus extinctio.

Molestum autem in observando taedium, summa (...) abunde compensabit, idemque
plurimum minuit sociorum mutuas operas tradentium, ubi suppetit praesentia.

Ad momenta temporis accuratissime notanda (quod in hujusmodi Observationibus
est Palmarium) perutile erit Horologium Oscillatorium, ab ingeniosissimo and
candidissimo Hugenio feliciter excogitatum.

Appendix.
LOngitudinis Sientiam Nauticam vix unquam de Coelo expectandam supra
asseruimus: siqua tamen ejusmodi aliquando futura est; non aliud Fundamentum,
quam Lunarium motuum praecisam cognitionem, habitura videtur. Horum autem
restitutionem a Parallaxi inchoandam solertissime monuit Keplerus. Parallaxeus
vero indagandae, and a Lunae latitudine (cui semper fere complicatur)
distinguendae optima (si non sola) Methodus est; quae, in regionibus long
dissitis and sub eodem Meridiano positis, altitudinum. Lunae Meridianarum, per
singulas orbitae parts, simul observatarum series innititur: inde enim,
Polorum elevatione solum praecognita, sertissima innotescit Globi Lunaris a
Terrestri distantia. Proponimus itaque nos Africae Promontorium Cap. Bonae
Spei, vel in Oceano Atlantico Sanctae Helenae Insulam, cum locis in Europa iis
respondentibus, Satellitum open, docuimus, determinandis, in quibus istiusmodi
observationes commodissime instituantur.

Upon the Reading of these last Directions, Mr. Rook the Author of them being
dead, I cannot forbear saying something of that excellent Man, which his
incomparable Modesty would not have permitted me to write, if he had been
living. He was indeed a man of a profound judgment, a vast comprehension,
prodigious memory, solid experience. His skill in the Mathematics was
reverenced, by all the lovers of those studies: and his perfection in many
other sorts of Learning, deserves no less admiration. But above all, his
Knowledge had a right influence, on the temper of his mind, which had all the
humility, goodness, calmness, strength, and sincerity of a sound, and
unaffected Philosopher. This is spoken not of one, who lived long ago, in
praising of whom, it were easy to feign, and to exceed the Truth, where no
man's memory could confute me: But of one, who is lately dead, who has many of
his acquaintance still living, that are able to confirm this testimony, and to
join with me, in delivering down his name to posterity, with this just
character of his Virtues. He died in the year sixty two, shortly after the
establishment of the Royal Society, whose Institution he had zealously
promoted. And it was a deplorable accident in his Death, that he deceased the
very night, which he had for some years expected, wherein to finish his
accurate Observations on the Satellites of Jupiter: however this Treasure will
not be lost, for the Society has referred it to some of the best Astronomers of
Europe, to bring his beginnings to conclusion.

Sect. XXXI Their Proposals and Recommendations.
To many of these Queries they have already received good returns, and
satisfaction: and more such Accounts are daily expected from all coasts.
Besides these, there have been several great and profitable Attempts, relating
to the good of mankind, or the English Nation, propounded to them, by many
public Bodies, and private persons: which they have again recommended, to be
examined apart, by diverse of their own number, and by other men of ability and
integrity, who have accepted of their Recommendations of this kind, the
Principal, that I find recorded in their Registers, are these.

They have propounded the composing a Catalogue of all Trades, Works, and
Manufactures, wherein men are emploi'd, in order to the collecting each of
their Histories: by taking notice of all the Physical Receipts, or Secrets, the
Instruments, Tools, and Engines, the Manual operations or sleights, the cheats,
and ill practices, the goodness, baseness, and different value of Materials,
and whatever else belongs to the operations of all Trades.

They have recommended the making a Catalogue, of all the kinds of natural
things to be found in England. This is already in a very good forwardness. And
for its better completing, many Expedients for the preserving, drying, and
embalming of all living Creatures have been prosecuted.

They have suggested the making a perfect Survey, Map, and Tables of all the
fixed Stars within the Zodiac, both visible to the naked eye, and discoverable
by a six foot Telescope, with a large aperture; toward the observing the
apparent places of the Planets, with a Telescope both by Sea and Land. This has
been approved, and begun, several of the Fellows having their portions of the
Heavens allotted to them.

They have recommended the advancing of the Manufacture of Tapistry: the
improving of Silk making: the propagating of Saffron: the melting of Lead-Oar
with Pit-coal: the making Iron with Sea-coal: the using of the Dust of Black
Lead instead of Oil in Clocks: the making Trials on English Earths, to see if
they will not yield so fine a substance as China, for the perfecting of the
Potters Art.

They have propounded, and undertaken the comparing of several Soyls, and
Clays, for the better making of Bricks, and Tiles: the way of turning Water
into Earth: the observing of the growth of Pibbles in Waters: the making exact
Experiments in the large Florentine Loadstone: the consideration of the
Bononian Stone: the examining of the nature of Petrifying Springs: the using an
Vmbrella Anchor, to stay a Ship in a storm: the way of finding the Longitude of
places by the Moon: the observation of the Tides about Lundy, the Southwest of
Ireland, the Bermoodas, and diverse parts of Scotland; and in other Seas and
Rivers where the ebbing and flowing is found to be irregular.

They have started, and begun to practice the propagation of Potatoes; the
planting of Verjuyce Grapes in England; the Chemical examination of French, and
English Wines; the gradual observation of the growth of Plants, from the first
spot of life; the increasing of Timber, and the planting of Fruit Trees; which
they have done by spreading the Plants into many parts of the Nation, and by
publishing a large Account of the best ways of their cultivavation.

They have propounded, and attempted with great effect, the making Experiments
with Tobacco oil; the Anatomizing of all amphibious Creatures, and examining
their Lungs; the observing the manner of the Circulation of the blood in
Fishes; the ways of transporting Fish from one place to another for Breed; the
collecting Observations on the Plague; the examining of all the several ways
to breed Bees; the altering the taste of the Flesh of Animals, by altering
their food; the probability of making Wine out of Sugarcanes: Which last I
will set down as one Example.

A PROPOSAL For making WINE. By Dr. GODDARD.
IT is recommended to the care of some skilful Planters in the Barbados, to
try whether good Wine may not be made out of the Juice of Sugarcanes. That
which may induce them, to believe this work to be possible, is this
Observation, that the Juice of Wine, when it is dried, does always granulate
into Sugar, as appears in Raisins, or dried Grapes: and also that in those
vessels wherein cute, or unfermented Wine is put, the sides are wont to be
covered over with a crust of Sugar. Hence it may be gathered, that there is so
great a likeness of the liquor of the Cane, to that of the Vine, that it may
probably be brought to serve for the same uses. If this attempt shall succeed,
the advantages of it will be very considerable. For the English being the chief
Masters of the Sugar Trade, and that falling very much in its price of late
years, while all other outlandish productions are risen in their value: it
would be a great benefit to this Kingdom, as well as to our Western
Plantations, if part of our Sugar, which is now in a manner a mere Drug, might
be turned into Wine, which is a Foreign Commodity, and grows every day dearer:
especially seeing this might be done, by only bruising, and pressing the Canes,
which would be a far less labor and charge, than the way, by which Sugar is
now made.

These are some of the most advantageous proposals, they have scattered, and
encouraged in all places, where their Interest prevails. In these they have
recommended to many distinct, and separate Trials, those designs, which some
private men had begun, but could not accomplish, by reason of their charge: or
those which they themselves have devised, and conceived capable of success: or
even those of which men have hitherto seemed to despair. Of these, some are
already brought to a hopeful issue: some are put in use, and thrive by the
practice of the public: and some are discovered to be feasible, which were
only before thought imaginary, and fantastical. This is one of the greatest
powers of the true, and unwearied Experimenter, that he often rescues things,
from the jaws of those dreadful Monsters, Improbability, and Impossibility.
These indeed are two frightful words to weaker minds, but by Diligent and
Wisemen, they are generally found to be only the excuses of Idleness, and
Ignorance. For the most part they lie not in the things themselves, but in men's
false opinions concerning them they are raised by opinions, but are soon
abolished by works. Many things, that were at first improbable to the minds of
men, are not so to their eyes: many that seemed unpracticable to their
thoughts, are quite otherwise to their hands: many that are too difficult for
their naked hands, may be soon performed by the same hands, if they are
strengthened by Instruments, and guided by Method: many that are unmanageable
by a few hands, and a few Instruments, are easy to the joint force of a
multitude: many that fail in one Age, may succeed by the renewed endeavors of
another. It is not therefore the conceit or fancy of men alone, that is of
sufficient authority to condemn the most unlikely things for Impossible: unless
they have been often attempted in vain, by many Eyes, many Hands, many
Instruments, and many Ages.

This is the assistance, XXXII. The Relations of things of Nature and Art, they
have received.
and information, they have given to others, to provoke them to inquire, and to
order, and regulate their Inquisitions. To these I will add the Relations of
the effects of Nature, and Art, which have been communicated to them. These are
infinite in number. And though many of them have not a sufficient confirmation,
to raise Theories, or Histories on their Infallibility: yet they bring with
them a good assurance of likelihood, by the integrity of the Relators; and
withal they furnish a judicious Reader, with admirable hints to direct his
Observations. For I will once more affirm, that as the minds of men do often
mistake falsehoods for Truths, though they are never so circumspect: so they are
often drawn by uncertain, and sometimes erroneous reports, to stumble on
truths, and realities; of this vast heap of Relations, which is every where
scattered in their Entry Books, I will only take notice of these occasional
Accounts.

Relations of two new kinds of Stars, observed in the year sixty six, the one
in Andromeda, the other in Cygnus, in the same place, where they appeared sixty
years since, and have ever since disappeared: of several Observations of
Celestial Bodies made in Spain: of Observations of several of the Planets made
at Rome, and in other parts, by extraordinary Glasses: of the comparative
goodness of Glasses used in other Countries: of several Eclipses observed in
diverse parts of the World.

Relations of Parelii, and other such appearances seen in France: of the
effects of Thunder and Lightning: of Hurricanes, and Spouts: of the bigness,
figure, and effects of Hailstones: of Fish, and Frogs said to be rained: of the
raining of Dust out of the Air, and of the distance it has been carried by
great Fires, and Earthquakes: of changes of Weather, and a way of predicting
them: of the vermination of the Air: of the supposed raining of Wheat in
Glocestershire, which being sown was found to be nothing but Ivy-Berries.

Relations of a Spring in Lancashire, that will presently catch fire on the
approach of a Flame: of Burning-glasses performing extraordinary effects: of
Burning glasses made with Ice: of Fireballs for Fuel: of a more convenient way
of using Wax-candles: of the kindling of certain Stones, by their being
moistened with Water: of using ordinary Fuel to the best advantage.

Relations of the times of the rising, and disappearing of Springs: of
Artificial Springs: of the Natures of several of our English Springs, and of
other Oleaginous, and Bituminous Springs: of the fitness, and unfitness of some
waters for the making of Beer, or Ale: of brewing Beer with Ginger instead of
Hops: of Tides and Currents: of Petrifying Springs: of the Water blasts of
Tivoly: of Floating Islands of Ice: of the shining of Dew in a Common of
Lancashire, and elsewhere: of Diverse, and Diving, their habit, their long
holding their breath, and of other notable things observed by them.

Relations of the Effects of Earthquakes, and the moving, and sinking of
Earths: of deep Mines, and deep Wells: of the several layers of Earth in a Well
at Amsterdam: of the shining Cliffs in Scotland: of the layers of Earth
observed in diverse Clifts: of Screw-Stones, Lignum Fossile, Blocks buried in
Exeter River, Trees found under ground in Cheshire, Lincolnshire, and
elsewhere: of a Coal-Mine wrought half a mile from the shore, under the Sea: of
the fatal effects of damps on Miners, and the ways of recovering them.

Relations of the extraordinary strength of some small Loadstones, taking up
above 150. times their own weight: of several English Loadstones: of the
variation of the Loadstone observed in two East India voyages, and other
places: of the growing of Pebbles enclosed in a glass of water: of several
excellent English clays: of Gold found in little lumps in a Mine in England: of
the moving sands in Norfolk.

Relations about refining Lead, and Tin-Oar: of hardening Steel so as to cut
Porphyry with it, and softning it so much, as to make it easy to be wrought
on: of impregnating Lead-Oar with Metal, after it has been once freed: of
Petrified Teeth, and a Petrifi'd humane foetus: of several ways of splitting
Rocks: of living Muscles found in the midst of Rocks at Legorn: of the way of
making Quicksilver: of things observable at the bottom of the Sea: of a soft
Metal, which hardens after it has taken off the Impression, and the way of
reducing such impressions into as small a proportion as is desired.

Relations about Agriculture: of ordering of Vines: of the setting and planting
of Trees several ways: of Elms growing from chips, of new Trees sprung from
rotten roots: of several kinds of Trees, growing one out of another; and in the
place of others: of the best ways of pruning: of making a kind of Silk with
Virginia Grass: of a kind of Grass making stronger Ropes than the common Hemp:
of a new way of ordering Mulberry Trees in Virginia: of a Locust Tree Bow
standing bent six months, without loosing its Spring: of a way of improving the
planting of Tobacco.

Relations of the usefulness of changing seed yearly: of the steeping, liming,
sowing it several ways: of freeing it from Worms: preserving it long (as
eighty years) of freeing it from smut; of the causes, and first signs of smut:
of the Instrument and way of chopping Straw, for the feeding of Horses: of
Plants growing in mere Water: of others growing in mere Air: of several Indian
Woods: of the growing of the divided parts of Beans: of the growing of chopp'd
stalks of Potatoes: of ordering Melons: of keeping their Seed, and producing
extraordinary good ones without transplanting.

Relations of the growth, breeding, feeding, and ordering of Oysters: of a
Sturgeon kept alive in Saint Iameses-Park: of the moveable Teeth of Pikes: of
young Eeles cut alive out of the old ones Belly: of the transporting
Fish-spawn* and Carps alive from one place to another: of the strange increase
of Carps so transported: of Snake-stones and other Antidotes: of Frogs,
Frog-spawn, Toads, Newts, Vipers, Snakes, Rattle-Snakes.

Relations of several kinds of Poisons, as that of Maccasser, and Florence: of
Crawfishes: of the Generation, growth, life, and transformation of Ants: of
Cheese worms leaping like Fleas: of living Worms found in the Entrails of
Fishes: of Insects found in the sheathing of Ships: of the generation of
Insects, out of dead Cantharides: of Insects bred in men's Teeth, Gums, Flesh,
Skin: of great quantities of Flies living in Winter, though frozen: of the
ways of ordering Silkworms in France, Italy, Virginia: and of their not being
hurt in Virginia by Thunder.

Relations of Swallows living after they have been frozen under water: of
Barnacles and Soland Geese: of a new way of hatching Pigeons: of the way of
hatching Chickens in Egypt: of Eggs proving fruitful, after they had been
frozen: of recovering a tired Horse with Sheeps blood.

Relations of several Monsters with their Anatomies: of the measure of a
Giant-child: of Stones found in several parts of the Body: of an unusual way of
cutting the Stone out of the Bladder: of a Woman's voiding the Bones of a Child
out of her side eighteen years after her having been with child: of grafting
Teeth, and making the Teeth of one Man grow in the mouth of another.

Relations of several Chirurgical operations: of renewing the beating of the
heart, by blowing into the Receptaculum chyli: of the Art of perfectly
restoring Nerves, transversly cut, practiced in France: of a Mummy found in the
Ruins of Saint Paul's* after it had lain buried above 200. years: of breaking
the Nerve to the Diaphragm, and of its effects: of cutting a Stetoma out of a
Woman's Breast: of making the blood Florid with Volatile, and Coagulating with
Acid Salts.

Relations of sympathetick Cures, and Trials: of the effects of Tobacco-oyl for
casting into Convulsion fits: of Moors killing themselves by holding their
Breaths: of walking on the Water by the help of a Girdle filled with Wind: of
Pendulum Clocks: of several rare Guns, and Experiments with them: of new
Quadrants and Astronomical Instruments: of Experiments of refraction made by
the French Academy: of a way to make use of Eggs in painting, instead of Oil:
of the Island Hirta in Scotland: of the Whispering place at Gloucester: of the
Pike of Tenariff.

A RELATION OF THE PICO TENERIFFE. Received from some considerable Merchants
and Men worthy of Credit, who went to the top of it.
HAving furnished our selves with a Guide, Servants, and Horses to carry our
Wine and Provisions, we set out from Oratava, a Port Town in the Island of
Tenariffe, situated on the North of it at two miles distant from the main Sea.
We traveled from twelve at night till eight in the morning, by which time we
got to the top of the first Mountain toward the Pico de Terraira; here, under
a very great and conspicuous Pine tree, we brake our fast, dined and refresht
our selves, till two in the afternoon; then we proceeded through much Sandy
way, over many lofty Mountains, but naked and bare, and not covered with any
Pine trees, as our first nights passage was: this exposed us to excessive heat,
till we arrived at the foot of the Pico; where we found many huge Stones, which
seemed to have been fallen down from some upper part.

About six a clock this evening, we began to ascend up the Pico, but being now
a mile advanced, and the way no more passable for our Horses, we quitted and
left them with our Servants: In this miles ascent some of our company grew very
faint and sick, disordered by fluxes, vomitings, and Aguish distempers, our
Horses hair standing up right like Bristles: but calling for some of our Wine,
which was carried in small Barrels on a Horse, we found it so wonderfully cold,
that we could not drink it till we had kindled a fire to warm it, although yet
the temper of the Air was very calm and moderate. But when the Sun was set, it
began to blow with that violence, and grew so cold, that taking up our lodging
under certain great Stones in the Rocks, we were constreined to keep great
fires before the mouths of them all night.

About four in the morning we began to mount again, and being come about a mile
up, one of the Company failed, and was able to proceed no further. Here began
the black Rocks. The rest of us pursued our Journey till we came to the
Sugar Loaf, where we begin to travel again in a white sand, being fore-shod
with shoes whose single soles are made a finger broader than the upper
leather, to encounter this difficult and unstable passage; being ascended as
far as the black Rocks, which are all flat, and lie like a pavement, we climbed
within a mile of the very top of the Pico, and at last we gained the Summit,
where we found no such smoke as appeared a little below, but a continual
breathing of a hot and sulphurous Vapor, which made our faces extremely sore.

In this passage we found no considerable alteration of Air, and very little
Wind; but being at the top, it was so impetuous, that we had much ado to stand
against it, whilst we drank the Kings health, and fired each of us a piece.
Here we also brake fast, but found our Strong-water had quite lost its force,
and was become almost insipid, whilst our Wine was rather more spirituous and
brisque than it was before.

The top on which we stood, being not above a yard broad, is the brink of a Pit
called the Caldera, which we judged to be about a Musket Shot over, and near
fourscore yards deep, in shape like a Cone, within hollow like a Kettle or
Cauldron, and all over covered with small loose Stones mixed with Sulphur and
Sand, from amongst which issue diverse Spiracles of smoke and heat, when stirred
with any thing puffs and makes a noise, and so offensive, that we were almost
stifled with the sudden Emanation of Vapors upon the removing of one of these
Stones, which are so hot as they are not easily to be handled. We descended not
above four or five yards into the Caldera, in regard of its fliding from our
feet and the difficulty. But some have adventured to the bottom. Other
observable materials we discovered none, besides a clear sort of Sulphur, which
looks like Salt upon the Stones.

From this famous Pico, we could ken the Grand Canaria, fourteen leagues
distant, Palma eighteen, and Gomera seven leagues, which interval of Sea seemed
to us not much larger than the River of Thames about London: We discerned also
the Herro, being distant above twenty leagues, and so to the outmost limits of
the Sea much farther.

So soon as the Sun appeared, the shadow of the Pico seemed to cover, not only
the whole Island, and the Grand Canaries, but the Sea to the very Horison,
where the top of the Sugar Loaf or Pico visibly appeared to turn up and cast
its shade into the Air it self, at which we were much surprised: But the Sun
was not far ascended, when the Clouds began to rise so fast, as intercepted our
prospect both of the Sea, and the whole Island, excepting only the tops of the
subjacent Mountains, which seemed to pierce them through: Whether these Clouds
do ever surmount the Pico we cannot say, but to such as are far beneath, they
sometimes seem to hang above it, or rather wrap themselves about it, as
constantly when the North-west Wind blows; this they call the Cappe, and is a
certain prognostic of ensuing Storms.

One of our company, who made this journey again two years after, arriving at
the top of the Pico before day, and creeping under a great Stone to shroud
himself from the cold Air (after a little space) found himself all wet, and
perceived it to come from a perpetual trickling of water from the Rocks above
him. Many excellent and very exuberant Springs we found issuing from the tops
of most of the other Mountains, gushing out in great Spouts, almost as far as
the huge Pine tree which we mentioned.

Having stayed some time upon the top, we all descended by the Sandy way till
we came to the foot of the Sugar Loaf, which being steep, even to almost a
perpendicular, we soon passed. And here we met a Cave of about ten yards deep,
and fifteen broad, being in shape like an Oven or Cupola, having a hole at the
top which is near eight yards over; by this we descended by a Rope, which our
Servants held at the top, whilst the other end being fastened about our middles,
we swing our selves, till being over a Bank of Snow, we slide down and light
upon it. We were forced to swing thus in the descent, because in the middle of
the bottom of this Cave, opposite to the overture at the top, is a round Pit of
water, resembling a Well, the surface whereof is about a yard lower than the
Snow, but as wide as the mouth at top, and is about six fathom deep. We suppose
this Water not a Spring, but dissolved Snow blown in, or Water trickling
through the Rocks.

About the sides of the Grot, for some height, there is Ice and Icicles hanging
down to the Snow. But being quickly weary of this excessive cold place, and
drawn up again, we continued our descent from the Mountains by the same
passages we went up the day before, and so about five in the evening arrived at
Oratava, from whence we set forth, our Faces so red and sore, that to cool
them, we were forced to wash and bathe them in Whites of Eggs, etc.

The whole height of the Pico in perpendicular is vulgarly esteemed to be two
miles and a half. No Trees, Herbs, or Shrubs in all the passage but Pines, and
amongst the whiter Sands a kind of Broom, being a bushy Plant; and at the side
where we lay all night, a kind of Cordon, which has Stems of eight foot high,
the Trunk near half a foot thick; every Stem growing in four squares, and
emerging from the ground like Tuffets of Rushes; upon the edges of these Stems
grow very small red Buttons or Berries, which being squeezed produced a
poisonous Milk, which lighting upon any part of a Horse, or other Beast,
fetches off the hair from the skin immediately; of the dead part of this we
made our fires all night. This Plant is also universally spread over the
Island, and is perhaps a kind of Euphorbium.

Of the Island Tenariffe it self, this account was given by a Judicious and
Inquisitive Man, who lived twenty years in it as a Physician and Merchant. His
opinion is, that the whole Island being a ground mightily impregnated with
Brimstone, did in former times take fire, and blow up all or near upon all at
the same time, and that many Mountains of huge Stones calcined and burnt, which
appear every where about the Island, especially in the Southwest parts of it,
were raised and heaved up out of the Bowels of the Earth, at the time of that
general conflagration; and that the greatest quantity of this Sulphur lying
about the Center of the Island, raised up the Pico to that height at which it
is now seen. And he says, that any one upon the place that shall carefully
note the situation, and manner of these calcined Rocks how they lie, will
easily be of that mind: For he says, that they lie for three or four miles
almost round the bottom of the Pico, and in such order one above another almost
to the very Sugar Loaf (as it is called) as if the whole ground swelling and
rising up together by the Ascension of the Brimstone, the Torrents and Rivers
of it did with a sudden Eruption roll and tumble them down from the rest of the
Rocks, especially (as was said before) to the South-west; For on that side,
from the very top of the Pico almost to the Sea shore, lie huge heaps of these
burnt Rocks one under another. And there remain to this time the very Tracts of
the Rivers of Brimstone, as they ran over all this quarter of the Island, which
has so wasted the ground beyond recovery, that nothing can be made to grow
there but Broom: But on the North side of the Pico, few or none of these Stones
appear. And he concluded hence, that the Volcanio discharged it self chiefly to
the South-west. He adds further, that Mines of several Metals were broken and
blown up at the same time. These calcined Rocks resembling some of them
Iron-Ore, some Silver, and others Copper, Particularly at a certain place in
these South-west parts called the Azuleios, being very high Mountains, where
never any English man but himself (that ever he heard of) was. There are vast
quantities of a loose bluish Earth intermixed with blew Stones, which have on
them yellow rust as that of Copper and Vitriol: And likewise many little
Springs of Vitriolate waters, where he supposes was a Copper Mine. And he was
told by a Bell-founder of Oratava, that out of two Horse loads of this Earth,
he got as much Gold as made two large Rings. And a Portuguez told him, who had
been in the West Indies, that his opinion was, there were as good Mines of Gold
and Silver there as the best in the Indies. There are likewise hereabout
Nitrous Waters and Stones covered with a deep Saffron colored rust, and
tasting of Iron. And further he mentions a Friend of his, who out of two lumps
of Earth or Ore, brought from the top of this side the Mountain, made two
Silver-spoons. All this he confirms from the late instance of the Palm Island
eighteen leagues from Tenariffa, where a Volcanio was fired about twelve years
since, the violence whereof made an Earthquake in this Island so great, that he
and others ran out of their houses, fearing they would have fallen upon their
heads. They heard the noise of the Torrents of flaming Brimstone like Thunder,
and saw the fire as plain by night, for about six weeks together, as a Candle
in the room: And so much of the Sand and Ashes, brought from thence by the Wind
with Clouds, fell on his Hat, as filled a Sand box for his Inkhorn.

In some part of this Island there grows a crooked Shrub which they call
Legnan, which they bring for England as a sweet Wood: There are likewise
Abricots, Peaches, etc. in Standard, which bear twice a year, Pear Trees also
which are as pregnant: Almonds of a tender shell; Palms, Plantains, Oranges and
Lemmons, especially the Pregnadas which have small ones in their bellies, from
whence they are so denominated. Also they have Sugar Canes, and a little
Cotton. Colloquintida, etc. The Roses blow at Christmas. There are good
Carnations, and very large; but Tulips will not grow or thrive there: Sampier
clothes the Rocks in abundance, and a kind of Clover the Ground. Another Grass
growing near the Sea, which is of a broader leaf, so luscious and rank, as it
will kill a Horse that eats of it, but no other Cattle. Eighty ears of Wheat
have been found to spring from one root, but it grows not very high. The Corn
of this is transparent and bright like to the purest yellow Amber, and one
bushel has produced one hundred and thirty in a seasonable year.

The Canary birds (which they bring to us in England) breed in the Barancos or
Gills, which the Water has fretted away in the Mountains, being places very
cold. There are also Quails, Partridges, larger than ours and exceeding
beautiful, great Wood-pigeons, Turtles at Spring, Crows, and sometimes from the
Coast of Barbary appears the Falcon. Bees are carried into the Mountains, where
they prosper exceedingly.

They have wild Goats on the Mountains, which climb to the very top of the Pico
sometimes: Also Hogs and multitudes of Conies.

Of Fish they have the Cherna, a very large and excellent fish, better tasted
than any we have in England; the Mero, Dolphin, Shark, Lobsters without the
great claws, Mussles, Periwinkles, and the Clacas, which is absolutely the very
best Shellfish in the world, they grow in the Rocks five or six under one
great shell, through the top holes whereof they peep out with their Nebs, from
whence (the shells being broken a little more open with a stone) they draw them
forth. There is likewise another Fish like an Eel, which has six or seven
tails of a span in length united to one head and body, which is also as short.
Besides these, they have Turtles and Cabridos which are better than our Trouts.

The Island is full of Springs of pure Water tasting like Milk. And in Lalaguna
(where the Water is not altogether so Limpid and Clear) they percolate it
through a kind of spungy Stone cut in form of a Basin.

The Vines which afford those excellent Wines, grow all about the Island within
a mile of the Sea, such as are planted farther up are nothing esteemed, neither
will they thrive in any of the other Islands, for the Guanchios or ancient
Inhabitants he gives this full Account.

September the third, about twelve years since, he took his Journey from Guimar
(a Town inhabited for the most part by such as derive themselves from the old
Cuanchios) in the company of some of them, to view their Caves and the Bodies
buried in them. This was a favor they seldom or never permit to any (having
in great veneration the Bodies of their Ancestors, and likewise being most
extremely against any molestation of the Dead) but he had done several
Eleemosinary Cures amongst them (for they are generally very poor, yet the
poorest thinks himself too good to marry with the best Spaniard) which indeared
him to them exceedingly, otherways it is death for any Stranger to visit these
Caves or Bodies.

These Bodies are sowed up in Goat Skins with thongs of the same, with very
great curiosity, particularly in the incomparable exactness and evenness of the
seams, and the Skins are made very close and fit to the body: Most of these
Bodies are entire, the eyes closed, hair on the head, ears, nose, teeth, lips,
beard, all perfect, only discolored and a little shriveld, likewise the
Pudenda of both Sexes; He saw about three or four hundred in several Caves,
some of them are standing, others lie on beds of Wood, so hardened by an art
they had (which the Spaniards call Curar, to cure a piece of wood) as no Iron
can pierce or hurt it He says, that one day being hunting a Ferret (which is
much in use there) having a bell about his neck, ran after a Coney into a hole,
where they lost the sound of the bell; the owner being afraid he should loose
his Ferret, seeking about the Rock and Shrubs, found the mouth of a Cave, and
entering in, was so afrighted, that he cried out. It was at the sight of one of
these Bodies, very tall and large, lying with his head on a great Stone, his
feet supported with a little wall of stone, the body resting on a bed of Wood
(as before was mentioned.) The fellow being now a little out of his fright
entered it, and cut off a great piece of the skin that lay on the breast of
this body, which, the Doctor says, was more flexible and pliant than ever he
felt any Kids-leather-glove, and yet so far from being rotten, that the man
used it for his Flail many years after.

These bodies are very light, as if made up of straw, and in some broken Limbs
he observed the Nerves and Tendons, and also some strings of the Veins and
Arteries very distinctly.

His great care was to enquire of these people what they had amongst them of
Tradition concerning the embalming and preservation of these Bodies: from some
of the eldest of them (above a hundred and ten years of age) he received this
Account, That they had of old one particular Tribe of men that had this Art
amongst themselves only, and kept it as a thing sacred, and not to be
communicated to the Vulgar: These mixed not with the rest of the Inhabitants,
nor married out of their own Tribe, and were also their Priests and Ministers
of Religion: That upon the Conquest of the Spaniards they were most of them
destroyed, and the Art lost with them, only they held some Traditions yet of a
few Ingredients, that were made use of in this business. They took Butter of
Goats Milk (some said Hogs Grease was mingled with it) which they kept in the
Skins for this purpose, in this they boiled certain Herbs; first a sort of wild
Lavender, which grows there in great quantities on the Rocks: Secondly, an Herb
called Lara, of a very gummy and glutinous Consistence, which now grows there
under the tops of the Mountains only: Thirdly, a kind of Cyclamen or Sow-bread:
Fourthly, wild Sage, growing plentifully in this Island: These with others
bruised and boiled in the Butter, rendered it a perfect Balsame. This prepared,
they first unbowelled the Corpse (and in the poorer sort, to save charges, they
took out the Brain behind, and these poor were also sewed up in Skins with the
hair on, whereas the richer sort were (as was said before) put up in Skins so
finely and exactly dressed, as they remain most rarely pliant and gentle to
this day.) After the Body was thus ordered, they had in readiness a Lixivium
made of the Bark of Pine trees, with which they washed the Body, drying it in
the Sun in Summer, and in Stoves in Winter, this repeating very often.
Afterward they began their Unction with the Balsame, both without and within,
drying it again as before. This they continued till the Balsame had penetrated
into the whole habit, and the Muscles in all parts appeared through the
contracted Skin, and the Body became exceeding light: Then they sewed them up
in the Goat Skins, as was mentioned already. He was told by these Ancient
People, that they have above twenty Caves of their Kings and great Persons,
with their whole Families, yet unknown to any but themselves, and which they
will never discover. Lastly, he says, that Bodies are found in the Caves of
the Grand Canaria in sacks, and quite consumed, not as these in Teneriffa. Thus
far of the Bodies and embalming.

Anciently when they had no knowledge of Iron, they made their Lances of Wood
hardened as before, some of which the Doctor has seen. He has also seen
Earthen-pots so hard, that they cannot be broken; of these some are found in
the Caves and old Bavances, and used by the poorer people that find them to
boil meat in. Likewise they did Curor Stone it self, that is to say, a kind of
Slate called now Tobona, which they first formed to an edge or point as they
had occasion to use it, either as Knives or Lancets to let blood withal.

Their Food is Barley roasted, and then ground with little Mills, which they
made of Stone, and mixed with Milk and Honey: This they still feed on, and carry
it on their backs in Goat Skins.

To this day they drink no Wine, nor care for Flesh. They are generally very
lean, tall, active and full of courage.

He himself has seen them leap from Rock to Rock, from a very prodigious
height, till they came to the bottom, sometimes making ten fathom deep at one
leap.

"The manner is thus:

First they Tertiate their Lance (which is about the bigness of a half Pike)
that is, they poise it in their hand, then they aim the point of it at any
piece of a Rock, upon which they intend to light (sometimes not half a foot
broad.) At their going off they clap their feet close to the Lance, and so
carry their bodies in the Air. The point of the Lance first comes to the place,
which breaks the force of their fall; then they slide gently down by the
Staff, and pitch with their feet upon the very place they first designed, and
from Rock to Rock till they come to the bottom. Their Novices sometimes break
their necks in learning.

He added several Stories to this effect of their great activity in leaping
down Rocks and Cliffs. And how twenty eight of them made an escape from the
battlements of an extraordinary high Castle in the Island, when the Governor
thought he had made sure of them.

He told also (and the same was seriously confirmed by a Spaniard, and another
Canary Merchant then in the company) That they whistle so loud as to be heard
five miles off. And that to be in the same Room with them when they whistle,
were enough to endanger breaking the Tympanum of the ear, and added, that he
(being in Company of one that whistled his loudest) could not hear perfectly
for fifteen days after, the noise was so great.

He affirms also, That they throw Stones with a force almost as great as that
of a Bullet, and now use Stones in all their fights as they did anciently.

When my Reader shall behold this large number of Relations; perhaps he will
think, that too many of them seem to be incredulous stories, and that if the
Royal Society shall much busy themselves, about such wonderful, and uncertain
events, they will fall into that mistake, of which I have already accused some
of the Ancients, of framing Romances, instead of solid Histories of Nature. But
here, though I shall first confirm what I said before, that it is an
unprofitable, and unsound way of Natural Philosophy, to regard nothing else,
but the prodigious, and extraordinary causes, and effects: yet I will also add,
that it is not an unfit employment for the most judicious Experimenter to
examine, and record the most unusual and monstrous forces, and motions of
matter: It is certain that many things, which now seem miraculous, would not be
so, if once we come to be fully acquainted with their compositions, and
operations. And it is also as true, that there are many Qualities, and Figures,
and powers of things, that break the common Laws, and transgress the standing
Rules of Nature. It is not therefore an extravagance, to observe such
productions, and are indeed admirable in themselves, if at the same time we do
not strive to make those appear to be admirable, that are groundless, and
false. In this there is a near resemblance between Natural and civil History.
In the Civil, that way of Romance is to be exploded, which heightens all the
characters, and actions of men, beyond all shadow of probability: yet this does
not hinder, but the great, and eminent virtues of extraordinary men of all
Ages, may be related, and proposed to our example. The same is to be affirmed
of Natural History. To make that only to consist of strange, and delightful
Tales, is to render it nothing else but vain, and ridiculous Knight-Errantry.
Yet we may avoid that extreme, and still leave room, to consider the singular,
and irregular effects, and to imitate the unexpected, and monstrous excesses,
which Nature does sometimes practice in her works. The first may be only
compared to the Fables of Amadis, and the Seven Champions: the other to the
real Histories of Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio, or Caesar: in which though many
of their Actions may at first surprise us; yet there is nothing that exceeds
the Truth of Life, and that may not serve for our instruction, or imitation.

If this way of general receiving all credible accounts of Natural, XXXIII. The
Experiments they have tried,
and Artificial productions, shall seem exposed to overmuch hazard, and
uncertainty: that danger is removed by the Royal Societies reducing such
matters of here-say and information, into real, and impartial Trials, performed
by their own hands: Of the exactness, variation, and accurate repetition of
their Experiments, I have already discoursed: I will now go on to lay down in
short compass those parts of the visible World, about which they have chiefly
bestowed their pains.

The first kind that I shall mention, Of Fire.
is of Experiments about Fire, and Flame, of these many were made in order to
the examination of a Theory propounded to them, that there is no such thing, as
an Elementary Fire of the Peripatetics; nor Fiery Atoms of the Epicureans: but
that Fire is only the Act of the dissolution of heated Sulphurous Bodies, by
the Air as a Menstruum, much after the same manner, as Aqua Fortis, or other
sharp Menstruums do work on dissoluble Bodies, as Iron, Tin, Copper: that heat,
and light are two inseparable effects of this dissolution, as heat, and
ebullition are of those dissolutions of Tin, and Copper: that Flame is a
dissolution of Smoke, which consists of combustible particles, carried upward
by the heat of rarified Air: and that Ashes are a part of the Body not
dissoluble by the Air.

Of this sort, they have made Experiments, to find the lasting of the burning
of a Candle, Lamp, or Coals, in a Cubic foot of common, rarified, and condensed
Air: to exhibit the sudden extinction of Candles, Lamps, and lighted Coals,
when they are put into satiated Air: to show the speedy extinction of kindled
Charcoals, by blowing on them with bellows, that Air which had before been
satiated with burning: to show that the greatest and most lasting heat, without
a supply of fresh Air, is unable to burn Wood, Sulphur, and most other
combustible matters: to find the comparative heat of all kinds of Fires, and
Flames of several Materials, as of Sulphur, Camphire, Spirit of Wine, Oil,
Wood, Coal, Seacoal, Iron: to find at what degree of heat, Lead, Tin, Silver,
Brass, Copper, Gold will melt.

Experiments of the Transparency, and Refractedness of Flames: of discerning
the strength of several kinds of Gunpowder, Pulvis Fulminans, Aurum Fulminans:
of Gunpowder in the exhausting Engine: of bending Springs by the help of
Gunpowder: of melting Copper immediately, by the help of a Fluxpowder: of the
Recoyling of Guns.

Experiments of Candles, and Coals, extinguished by the damps of a deep Well:
of the burning of Lamps under water: of burning Spirit of Wine, and Camphire
together, and the diversity of their Flames: of reducing Copper to a very
combustible substance: of heating the Air, by blowing it through a red-hot
earthen Pipe, so as to burn Wood: of the brightness of the Flame of Niter, and
Sulphur: of the burning and flaming of Tin-filings by the help of Niter: of
kindling Bodies, in common, rarified, and condensed Air, by the help of a
Burning-glass: of the comparative heat cast by a Burning-glass, in the morning,
and at noon: of burning with a Lens made of Ice: of calcining Antimony in the
Sun with loss: to find whether Aurum Fulminans or Putris Fulminans do flame
upon Explosion: of hatching Eggs with a Lamp Furnace.

Their second sort of Experiments is of those that have been made in order to
find out the nature, Of Air*
properties, and uses of Air. Such as these.

Experiments for determining the height of the Atmosphere, for finding the
pressure of the Atmosphere: on the tops of Mountains, on the surface of the
earth, and at the bottoms of very deep Pits, and Mines, by the help of
Quicksilver, and other contrivances: for finding the pressure of the
Atmosphere, both in the same place, and places very far removed.

Experiments to determine the possible bounds of expansion, and condensation of
the Air, by heat and cold, by exhausting and compressing: to determine the
strength of Air under the several degrees of rarefaction, and condensation: of
the force of condensed Air in Wind-Guns: to state the comparative gravity of
the Air to other fluid, and solid Bodies: to discover the refractive power of
the Air, under the several Degrees of rarefaction, and condensation: to
manifest the inflective veins of the Air: to produce a kind of opacity of the
Air: of the falling of Smoke in rarified Air: to make small Glass-bubbles swim
in Air very much condensed: of Glass-balls rising in a heavy, or condensed Air,
and falling in a lighter and more rarified.

Experiments of the Propagation of Sounds through common, rarified, and
condensed Air: of the congruity, or incongruity of Air, and its capacity to
penetrate some Bodies, and not others: of generating Air by corrosive
Menstruums out of fermenting Liquors, out of Water, and other Liquors, by heat,
and by exhaustion: of the returning of such Air into the Water again: of the
vanishing of Air into Water exhausted of Air: of the maintaining, and
increasing a Fire by such Airs: of the fitness, and unfitness of such Air for
respiration: of the use of Air in breathing.

Experiments of keeping Creatures many hours alive, by blowing into the Lungs
with Bellows, after that all the Thorax, and Abdomen were opened and cut away,
and all the Intrails save Heart, and Lungs removed: of reviving Chickens, after
they have been strangled, by blowing into their Lungs: to try how long a man
can live, by expiring, and inspiring again the same Air: to try whether the Air
so respired, might not by several means be purified, or renewed: to prove that
it is not the heat, nor the cold of this respired Air, that choaks.

Experiments of the respiring of Animals, in Air much rarified, and the fatal
effects: of the long continuance of several Animals very well in Air, as much
condensed, as it will be under water, at two hundred fathoms deep, that is
about eight times: of the quantity of fresh Air requisite for the life of a
respiring Animal, for a certain space of time: of making Air unfit for
respiration, by satiating it, by suffering Candles, or Coals to burn in it,
till they extinguish themselves.

Experiments of including living Animals, and kindled Coals, and Candles, in a
large Glass, to observe which of them will be first extinguished: of a man's
living half an hour, without any inconvenience, in a Leaden Bell, at diverse
fathoms under water: of the Quantity of Air respir'd at once by a Man: of the
strength a Man has to raise Weights by his breath.

Experiments of the swelling of an Arm put into the rarifying Engine, by taking
off the pressure of the Ambient Air: of the swelling of Vipers, and Frogs, upon
taking off the pressure of the Ambient Air: of the life, and free motion of
Fishes in Water, under the pressure of Air eight times condensed: of Insects
not being able to move in exhausted Air: of the resistance of Air to bodies
moved through it: of the not growing of Seeds for want of Air: of the growing
of Plants hung in the Air, and of the decrease of their weight: of the living
of a Cameleon, Snakes, Toads, and diverse Insects, in a free Air, without food:
of conveying Air under Water to any depth: of condensing Air by Water, and by
the expansion of freezing Water: of the swelling of Lungs in the rarifying
Engine: of the velocity, and strength of several Winds.

The third kind are those, Of Water.
which have been made, about the substance, and properties of Water: Such are,

Experiments about the Comparative Gravity of Salt Water, and fresh, and of
several Medicinal Springs found in this Nation: of the differing weight of the
Seawater, in several Climats, and at several Seasons: of the weight of
Distill'd-water, Snow-water, Maydew, Rainwater, Spring Water: of augmenting
the weight of Liquor, by dissolving Salts: of the greater thickness of such
Water, at the bottom, than at the top: of weighing, ascending, and descending
Bodies in Water: of the pressure of the Water at several depths under its
surface.

Experiments of the heat and cold of the Water, at several depths of the Sea:
of propagating sounds through the Water: of sounding the depth of the Sea
without a line: of fetching up Water from the Bottom of the Sea: of fetching up
Earth, Sand, Plants, from the bottom of the Sea.

Experiments of the resistance of Water to Bodies moved on its surface, of
several Figures, and by several degrees of force: of the resistance of Water to
Bodies moved through its substance ascending, and discending: of the expansion,
and condensation of Water by heat and cold: of the condensation of Water by
several ways of pressure: of converting Water into a vapourous Air, lasting
sometimes in that form: the Torricellian Experiment tried with Water in a
Glasscane thirty six and forty foot high, in a leaden Tube, also with a Glass
at the top: the same tried with Oil, and other Liquors.

Experiments of the rising of Water in small Tubes, and many others about its
congruity: of filtration, or of the rising of Water, to a great height in Sand,
etc. of the swimming of Fishes: of Waters being able to penetrate through those
Pores, where Air will not: of opening bellows at a depth under water, and
blowing up Bladders, to find the pressure of the Water: of Water not subsiding
in a high Glass-cane, upon removing the ambient pressure, after it had been
well exhausted of the Air-bubbles that lurked in it: of forcing Water out of a
Vessel by its own vapors.

Experiments of the different weight, and refraction of warm Water, and cold:
of the passing of Water through the coats of a Man's stomach: of the living of
Fish in Water, the Air being exhausted: of closing up a Fish in a Glass of
water: of the dying of Fishes in Water, upon taking off the pressure of the
Air, in the rarifying Engine: of Hydrostaticks, and making a Body sink by
pouring more water upon it: of raising Water above its Standard by sucking: of
the subsiding of Water in the stem, upon putting the Bolt-head into warm water:
of the shrinking of Water upon cooling.

The fourth kind are about Mines, Of Metals and Stones.
Metals, Oars, Stones, etc. Such as,

Experiments of Coppelling made at the Tower: of dissolving many Salts in one
Liquor: of the Oculus Mundi: of Rusma: of the Tenacity of several Metals
examined by weights: of the rarefaction and condensation of Glass: of the
volatizing Salt of Tartar, with burnt Allom, with Vinegar, and Spirit of Wine:
on the Bononian Stone: on Diamonds, of their shining by rubbing: on Copper-oar:
of the distillation of Coal: of refining several kinds of Lead-oar: of
extracting a much greater quantity of Silver out of that Oar, than is commonly
done: of several ways of reducing Letharges into Lead: of changing Gold into
Silver.

Experiments Magnetical, of the best form of capping Loadstones: of the best
forms of Needles, of several lengths and bignesses: of various ways of
touching Needles on the Loadstone of making the same Pole of the Loadstone,
both attract, and chase the same end of the Needle without touching it: to find
the variation of the Loadstone here at London.

Experiments with the dipping Needle: of the extraordinary strength in
proportion to its bulk of a small Loadstone: to measure the strength of the
Magnetical attractive power, at several distances from the Stone: to examine
the force of the attractive power, through several Mediums, as Water, Air,
Wood, Lead, and Stone: to divert the attractive power, by interposing Iron: to
find the directive virtue of the Loadstone under water.

Experiments to manifest by the help of Steel-dust, the lines of the Directive
virtue of the Loadstone to be oval, in a contrary Position to what Des Carts
Theory makes them: to manifest those lines of Direction by the help of Needles:
to discover those lines of Direction, when the influence of many Loadstones is
compounded: to find what those lines are incompassing a Sphaerical Loadstone,
what about a Square, and what about a regular Figure: to bore through the Axis
of a Loadstone: and fill it up with a Cylindrical Steel: Experiments on
Loadstones having many Poles, and yet the Stones seeming uniform.

Of Vegetables.
The fifth kind is of the growth of Vegetables in several kinds of Water; as
River-water, Rainwater, Distill'd-water, May-dew: of hindering the growth of
Seed Corn in the Earth, by extracting the Air: and furthering their growth, by
admitting it: of steeping Seeds of several kinds: of inverting the Positions of
Roots, and Plants set in the ground, to find whether there are values in the
Pores of the Wood, that only open one way: of the decrease of the weight of
Plants growing in Air: of Lignum Fossile: of the growing of some branches of
Rosemary, by only sprinkling the leaves with water: of Camphire wood: of Wood
brought from the Canaries: of a stinking Wood brought out of the East Indies:
of the reunion of the Bark of Trees after it had been separated from the Body.

The sixth are Experiments Medicinal, Medicinal and Anatomical.
and Anatomical; as of cutting out the Spleen of a Dog: of the effects of
Vipers biting Dogs: of a Camaeleon, and its dissection: of preserving Animals
in Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, and other Liquors: of injecting various
Liquors, and other Substances, into the veins of several creatures.

Experiments of destroying Mites by several Fumes: of the equivocal Generation
of Insects: of feeding a Carp in the Air: of making Insects with Cheese, and
Sack: of killing Water-Newts, Toads, and Sloworms with several Salts: of
killing Frogs, by touching their skin, with Vinegar, Pitch, or Mercury: of a
Spiders not being enchanted by a Circle of Unicorns horn, or Irish Earth, laid
round about it.

Experiments with a Poisoned Indian Dagger on several Animals: with the
Maccasser Poison: with Florentine Poison, and several Antidotes against it: of
making Flesh grow on, after it has been once cut off: of the grafting a Spur on
the head of a Cock, and its growing: of the living of Creatures by Factitious
Air: of the reviving of Animals strangled, by blowing into their Lungs: of
Flesh not breeding Worms, when secured from Fly-blowings: of the suffocation of
Animals upon piercing the Thorax: of hatching Silkworms Eggs in rarified Air:
of transfusing the blood of one Animal into another.

Of sensible Qualities.
The seventh sort are about those which are called sensible Qualities: as of
freezing: of cold, and heat: of freezing Water freed from Air: of the time, and
manner of the contraction in freezing lukewarm Water: of the temperature of
several places, by sealed Thermometers; as of several Countries; of the bottoms
of deep Mines, Wells, Vaults, on the tops of Hills, at the bottom of the Sea.

Experiments of the contraction of Oil of Vitriol, and diverse other Oils by
freezing: of freezing bitter Tinctures: of freezing several tinged Liquors, and
driving all the tincture inward to the Center: of showing Ice to be capable of
various degrees of cold, greater than is requisite to keep it Ice: of producing
cold by the dissolution of several Salts: of freezing Water without blebs: of a
membranous substance separable from the blood by freezing: of a Thermometer in
rarified and condensed Air: of very easy freezing of Oil of Anniseeds: of
making a Standard of Cold by freezing distill'd-water.

Of other Qualities.
The eighth are of Rarity, Density, Gravity, Pressure, Leuity, Fluidity,
Firmness, Congruity etc., as of the Nature of Gravity: of the cohaesion of two
Flat Marbles: of compressing the Air with Mercury to find its spring: of the
weights of Bodies, solid and fluid: of rarefaction, and condensation by the
help of Mercury: of the tenacity of several Bodies: of the turning of two very
fluid Liquors into one solid mass, by mingling them together.

Experiments for examining, whether the gravity of Bodies alter, according as
they are carried a good way above, or below the surface of the Earth: of the
standing of Mercury well exhausted, many inches, nay many feet, above its usual
standing: of a Wheel-Baro-Meter: of the expansion, and contraction of Glass,
and Metals by heat and cold: of Spirit of Wine, and several tinged Liquors by
the help of a Glass Tube: the examination of Monsieur Paschals Experiment, by
many others.

The ninth are Experiments of Light, Of light, sound, etc.
Sound, Colors, Taste, Smell: as of two transparent Liquors producing an
opacous one: of Ecchos and reflected sounds: of Musical sounds, and Harmonies:
of Colors, of the greater refraction of Water, than of Ice: of Refraction in a
new Engine; of the Refraction of Glass of various shapes under Water: of
destroying the shining of Fish by Oil of Vitriol: of making a great light by
rubbing two Chrystals hard one against the other: of making a deaf, and dumb
man to speak.

The tenth are Experiments of Motion: Of Motion.
as of Glass drops several ways ordered, and broken: of the velocity of the
descent of several Bodies of diverse fashions through several Liquors: of
determining the velocity of Bodies falling through the Air; tried by many
ways: of the swift motion of sounds: of the irregular motion of the Oil of
Turpentine on Spirit of Wine; of the strength of falling Bodies, according to
the several Heights, from which they fall: of proportioning the shapes of
Bodies, so as to make them fall together in the same time through differing
Mediums.

Experiments of the swiftness of a Bullet shot with extraordinary Powder: of
the best Figure of the weight of a Pendulum for Motion: of the Motion of
Pendulous Bodies of various figures: to determine the length of Pendulums: to
find the velocity of the vibrations of a sounding string: to find the velocity
of motion, propagated by a very long extended Wire: for explaining the
inflection of a straight motion into a circular, by a supervening attractive
power toward the Center, in order to the explaining of the motion of the
Planets.

Experiments of the circular and complicated motion of Pendulums, to explain
the Hypothesis of the Moons moving about the Earth: of comparing the Motions of
a circular Pendulum, with the motion of a straight one: of the propagation of
motion from one Body to another: of the reflection of motion: of the vibrating
motion of Quicksilver in a crooked Pipe: imitating the motion of a Pendulum:
of communicating of the strength of Powder for the bending of Springs; and
thereby for making artificial Muscles, to command what strength we desire.

Chemical and Mechanical.
The eleventh are Experiments Chemical, Mechanical, Optical: as of reducing the
Flesh of Animals into a Liquor like blood, by dissolving it in a certain
Menstruum: of a greater facility of raising Water in Pipes of a larger Bore: of
brewing Beer with Bread, Barley, Oats, Wheat, and without malting: of
precipitating Tartar out of Wine by several expedients: of a Chemical
extraction of a volatile Spirit, and Salt out of Spunges: of examining Aurum
fulminans after explosion: of the dissolution of Manna in Water, and of a
chrystallizing it again out of it, by evaporation.

Experiments of volatizing Salt of Tartar many ways: of examining the
mucilaginous matter called Star-shoot: of examining our English Telescopes, and
Microscopes, and comparing them with such as have been made at Rome: of making
a volatile Salt with Oil of Turpentine, and Sea Salt: of the Quantity of Spirits
in Cider: of the strength of several Springs: of examining a Pump made with
Bellows: of dying Silk with several Iamaica Woods: of finding the strength of
Wood of several kinds, for bearing: of finding the flexibility of various
Woods, and determining the utmost extent of their yielding, and bending.

Experiments about the gravity of Bodies made on the top of Saint Paul's
Steeple, Westminster-Abby, and several other high places; and in a Well of
seventy Fathoms depth: examined about the Virgula Divina, wherein the common
Assertions were found false: of the various refractions of several Liquors, in
a new refractive Engine: of common Oil of Tobacco, made by distillation in a
Glass retort: of making the Object-glass of a Microscope, to bear as large an
Aperture as is desired.

Of this their way of Experimenting I will here produce these Examples.

EXPERIMENTS Of the Weight of Bodies increased in the FIRE: Made at the Tower,
and the Account brought in by my Lord BROVNCKER.
1. Copper and Lead.

d. gr. THe Coppel weighed 10. 8. 7/32 Lead 4. 9. Copper 0. 6. Into the fire
all three 14. 23 7/32 Out of the fire 15. 4 ^/32 Gained 0. 5 ^/32

Besides what the Copel lost in weight, supposed to be about three grains.

2. Copper and Lead.

d. gr. Coppel 10. 2 Lead 4. 9. Copper 0. 6. Into the fire all three 14. 17 Out
of the fire 15. 1 ^^/32 Gained 0. 7 ^^/32

3. Lead alone.

d. gr. Copel 10. 3 29/32 Lead 4. 9. Into the fire both 14. 12 29/32 Out of the
fire 14. 23 ^9/32 Gained 0. 10 ^^/32

4. Lead alone.

d. gr. Copel 10. 10 Lead 4. 9. Into the fire both 14. 19 Out of the fire 15. 1
5/64 Gained 0. 5 ^^/64

5. Copel alone.

d. gr. Into the fire 10. 5. Out of the fire 10. 1 ^/8 Lost 0. 3

6. Copel alone.

d. gr. Into the fire 10. wanting 7 Out of the fire 10. wanting 9. Lost 0. 1

EXPERIMENTS Of a Stone called OCVLVS MVNDI Made by Dr. GODDARD.
A Small Stone of the kind, called by some Authors Oculus Mundi, being dry and
cloudy, weighed 5 gr. 200/256 The same being put under Water, for a night and
somewhat more, became transparent, and, the superficies being wiped dry,
weighed 6 gr. ^/256 The difference between these two weights 0. 50/256 The same
Stone kept out of Water one day and becoming cloudy again, weighed 5. 225/256
which was more than the first weight 0. 16/256 The same being kept dry two
days longer, weighed 5. 202/256 which was less than at first 0. 7/256 Being
kept dry something longer, it did not grow sensibly lighter. Being put under
Water for a night, and becoming again transparent, and wiped dry, the weight
was 6. 3/256 the same with the first, after putting in Water, and more than the
last weight, after keeping of it dry 0. 57/256 Another Stone of the same kind,
being variegated with milky, white and gray, like some sort of Agates, while it
lay under Water, was always environed with little bubbles, such as appear in
water before boiling, next the sides of the vessel. There were also some of the
like bubbles on the surface of the water just over it; as if either some
Exhalations come out of it, or that it did excite some fermentation in the
parts of the water contiguous to it. There was little sensible difference of
Transparency in this Stone, before the putting under Water, and after: To be
sure the milky white parts continued as before, but more different in weight,
than in the former. For whereas, before the putting into the water, the weight
was- 18 gr. ^^/118 after it had lain in about twenty four hours the weight was
20 gr. 27/123; so the difference was 1 gr 5^/1^8 The same Stone was infused in
the water scalding hot, and so continued for a while after it was cold, but got
no more weight, than upon infusing in the cold; neither was there any sensible
difference in the weight both times.
An Account of a Dog dissected. By Mr. HOOK.
IN prosecution of some Inquiries into the Nature of Respiration in several
Animals; A Dog was dissected, and by means of a pair of bellows, and a certain
Pipe thrust into the Windpipe of the Creature, the heart continued beating for
a very long while after all the Thorax and Belly had been opened, nay after the
Diaphragme had been in great part cut away, and the Pericardium removed from
the heart. And from several tyrals made, it seemed very probable, that this
motion might have been continued, as long almost as there was any blood left
within the vessels of the Dog: for the motion of the Heart seemed very little
changed after above an hours times from the first displaying the Thorax; though
we found, that upon removing the Bellows, the Lungs would presently grow
flactid, and the Heart begin to have convulsive motions; but upon removing the
motion of the Bellows, the Heart recovered its former motion, and the
Convulsions ceased. Though I made a Ligature upon all the great Vesels that
went into the lower parts of its Body, I could not find any alteration in the
pulse of the Heart; the circulation, it seems, being performed some other way.
I could not perceive any thing distinctly, whether the Air did unite and mix
with the Blood; nor did in the least perceive the Heart to swell upon the
extension of the Lungs: nor did the Lungs seem to swell upon the contraction of
the Heart.



EXPERIMENTS Of the Recoiling of GUNS By the Lord BROVNCKER.
WHen I was commanded by this Society, Fig. 1.
to make some Experiments of the Recoiling of Guns: In order to the discovery
of the cause thereof, I caused this Engine that lies here before you to be
prepared, and with it (assisted by some of the most eminent of this Society) I
had diverse shots made in the Court of this College, near the length thereof
from the mark, with a full charge (about a fourpenny weight) of Powder; But
without any other success, then that there was nothing Regular in that way,
which was by laying it upon a heavy table, unto which it was sometimes fastened
with Screws at all the four places R, L, V, B, sometimes only at R or L, having
wheels affixed at L and V or R and B, that it might the more easily recoil.

This uncertainty I did then conceive might arise from one or more of these
three causes, viz.

1. The violent trembling motion of the Gun, whence the Bullet might casually
receive some lateral impulse from the nose of the piece at the parting from it.
2. The yielding of the Table which was sensible. 3. The difficulty of aiming
well by the Sight and Button so far from the Mark.
Therefore to avoid all these, the Experiments I caused to be made before you
in the Gallery of this College, you may be pleased to remember were performed,
first, taking only eight grains of Powder for the charge. Secondly, laying the
Engine upon the floor, and thirdly, aiming by a thread at M, a mark about an
Inch and from the mouth of the Gun (the edge of a knife being put for the mark
the better to discern the line that was shot in) and they thus succeeded.

When the piece was fastened to the floor both at R and L, the Bullet then did
so fully hit the mark, that it was divided by it into two parts, whose
difference in weight was less than ten grains (about the thirty third part of
the whole Bullet) although the lesser part was a little hollow, and that from
which the neck of Lead was a little too close pared off: But when hindered from
Recoiling only at R, the Bullet mist the mark toward L or A, for the whole
Bullet, less than two grains excepted, went on that side: And in like manner
when hindered from Recoiling at L, the Bullet mist the mark toward R or B, the
whole Bullet, less than two grains excepted, passing the knife on that side
thereof.

I had the honor to make other Experiments with the same Engine, lately at
White Hall before his Majesty and his Highness Royal within the Tilt-yard
Gallery, where there is the hearth of a Chimney raised a little above the
floor, about the distance of thirteen feet from the opposite wall, against
which I caused a Plank to be placed, and the Engine to be laid first against
the middle of the Hearth, that it might not recoil at all, and that part of the
board to be marked against which 'twas levelled, known by a line stretched from
the Breech of the Piece unto the Board, directly over the sight and button, and
the fire being given (the charge being but eight grains of Powder as before)
the Bullet did fully hit the mark. Secondly, the Piece (charged and levelled in
the same manner) was laid at the end of the Hearth next the Park, so that very
little of the corner R rested against it, and then the Bullet missed the mark
about an inch and a quarter toward the Park or A. The like being done at the
other end of the Hearth, the Bullet then missed the mark as much the other way;
and afterward with double that charge something more, as before I had found it
less with a smaller charge.

Since this (at first designing only to experiment the several distances that
the bullet is carried wide of the mark with different charges of Powder) I made
these Experiments following.

In the first Colume whereof you have the corner stopped from recoiling.

In the second the grains of Powder with which the Piece was charged.

In the third the distance the Bullet was shot wide from the mark in inches,
tenths, and parts of tenths.

In the fourth the side on which the Bullet was carried.

In the last the distance of the mark from the muzzle of the Gun in feet.

B 16 0. N 9 L 48 0.5 L 9 R 39 0.3 L 9 R 48 0.0 N 9 L 16 1.7 R 9 L 56 0.8 L 9 R
39 0.2 L 9 R 48 0.1 L 9 R 16 1.5 L 9 L 96 1.2 L 9 R 40 0.2 L 9 L 48 0.0 R 9 R
12 1.5 L 9 L 96 1.5 L 9 R 40 0.0 N 9 L 4 16 R 9 L 12 1.7 R 9 L 40 0.5 L 9 R 40
0.2 L 9 L 4 1.5 R 9 L 8 1.6 R 9 R 96 0.9 R 9 R 96 0.6 R 9 R 4 1.6 L 9 R 8 1.1 L
9 B 8 0.2 R 9 L 96 1.0 L 9 R 8 1.8 L 9 R 4 1.0 L 9 R 96 0.6 R 9 L 96 1.0 L 9 L
8 1.8 R 9 L 4 1.1 R 9 L 96 0.9 L 9 R 96 0.7 R 9 L 12 2.0 R 9 L 24 1.1 R 9 L 40
0.1 L 9 R 96 1.0 R 9 R 12 2.1 L 9 L 32 0.6 R 9 L 38 0.1 R 9 R 40 0.8 L 9 R 16
1.7 L 9 L 40 0.1 R 9 L 39 0.0 L 9 L 40 0.5 R 9 L 16 1.8 R 9 L 48 0.4 L 9 R 39
0.1 L 9 L 48 0.1 R 9 L 20 1.5 R 9 R 20 1.0 L 9 R 12 0.6 L 2 R 48 0.0 L 2 L 20
0.2 R R 20 1.4 L 9 R 12 0.9 L 4 L 12 1.7 R 9 L 24 0.21/^; R R 64 0.7 R 9 R 12
1.2 L 6 L 12 0.2 R L 28 0.1 R L 64 0.9 L 9 R 12 1.5 L 8 L 12 0.6 R 2 L 32 0.1 R
L 96 1.1 L 9 R 12 1.9 L 9 L 12 1.0 R 4 L 36 0.1 R R 96 0.7 R 9 B 12 0.1 L 9 L
12 1.1 R 6 L 40 0.1 R R 96 0.8 R 9 R 12 0.3 L L 48 0.0 R L 44 0.0 R L 96 1.3 L
9 L 12 0.3 R L 48 0.1 L 2 L 48 0.0 R L 96 1.3 L 9 L 96 0.0 R L 48 0.2 L 4 L 52
0.0 R R 12 0.3 L 6 R 96 0.0 L L 48 0.5 L 6 L 56 0.0 R R 12 1.3 L 9 R 96 0.2 R 2
L 4 0.1 R L 60 0.0 R L 12 0.6 R 2 L 96 0.2 L L 4 0.1 R L 64 0.0 R L 12 1.0 R 4
L 48 0.1 R L 8 0.3 R L 96 0.0 R L 12 1.2 R 6 L 48 0.0 N 2 L 12 0.3 R L 96 1.1 L
9 L 12 1.4 R 8 R 48 0.1 L L 16 0.2 R

Whence you may be pleased to observe:

First, That the recoil of the Piece being hindered only at R or L, whatsoever
be the charge of the Powder, the Bullet still misses the mark, placed at the
mouth of the Gun, on the same side that the recoil is made.

Secondly, That about twelve grains of Powder shoots widest from the mark at
all distances above mentioned, on the same side that the Recoil is made.

Thirdly, That above forty eight grains of Powder shoots wide from the mark,
placed at nine foot from the muzzle of the Piece, on the contrary side to that
on which the recoil is made.

The cause of the first I cannot doubt to be the recoil of the Piece (from the
force of the Powder) before the Bullet be parted from it.

The second is, as I conceive, because with less than twelve grains the Piece
cease to recoil before the Bullet be parted from it. And with more than
twelve grains the Bullet is parted from the Piece before it has recoiled so
far: A greater power not moving a greater weight swifter (horizontally) in the
same proportion that it does the lesser.

And for the third I have this to offer, viz Because the mouth of the Gun is
moving sidewards whilst the Bullet is going out; Therefore the mouth of the
Piece must be contiguous (at least) unto the Bullet on the contrary side to
that on which the Piece recoils, some time after the separation made on the
other side, and therefore the last impulse of the Bullet from the force of the
Powder is on that side the Piece recoils, wherefore the Bullet must necessarily
cross the Axis of the Piece, and that with a greater or lesser Angle, according
to the force of the Powder, and when this Angle therefore is greater than the
Angle of recoil, then must the Axis of that Cylinder in which the Bullet moves
cross the Axis of the mark, beyond which interjection the mark being placed,
the Bullet must be carried necessarily wide of the mark on the contrary side to
the recoil of the Piece.



fek=flp=phm= the Angle of Recoile phn the Angle of Reflection made at the
parting of the Bullet from the Piece. When phnandgt;phm (mh being always
parallel to fg) then must hn entersect fg if continued.

Some other Experiments I have also made with another Piece (about the same
length, but of a bore near two tenths of an inch less) and ordered in the same
manner, and do find, that with a small charge the Bullet is shot (thence too)
wide of the mark on the same side on which the Recoil is made, and with a full
charge wide the contrary side.

I caused besides two Pistol barrels of about five inches long to be placed
upon Carriages with four Wheels, Fig. 3.
and loaded with lead, that they might not overturn when discharged, and both
of equal weight, and an Iron Cylinder of the length of both their bores, and of
the same diameter with a piece of Lead of weight equal to it. So that the piece
of Lead affixed to either of these Guns (which of them I should please to
charge) might equally poise the other with the Iron Cylinder. And thus
indifferently charging either with eight grains more or less of Powder, and
putting the Iron Cylinder home into both, the piece of Lead being affixed to
that which held the Powder, and then both so set upon the floor and the Powder
fired, I could not thereby discover, that the charged Piece, or the other,
either of them, did certainly recoil more or less than the other, they rather
seemed still to be equal.

These few Experiments I have made since, the Barrel being first cut at the
muzzle, parallel to a vertical plain passing the line CD.

B 48 0.8 L R 48 1.2 L B 48 0.9 L L 48 0.2 L B 16 0.1 R L 48 0.3 L B ^8 0.2 R B
^8 0.^ N

Besides these, there is another that I shall mention, and that is the
Experiment it self, or the Double-Bottom'd-Ship, invented by Sir William Petty:
of this I will venture to add a few words, and I think I may do it, without
transgressing that Rule I had fixed to my self, of not enlarging on the praise
of particular Names, or Designs. For since the Experiment it self is lost, I
hope I may securely speak of its advantages: seeing men are wont out of common
humanity to allow the commendations of dead Men, I trust I may commend a
wrecked Ship, without any fear of the envy that may thence arise to the Author.
In brief therefore I will say this of it, that it was the most considerable
Experiment, that has been made in this Age of Experiments: if either we regard
the great charge of the work, or the wonderful change it was likely to make in
Navigation, or the great success, to which this first Attempt was arrived.
Though it was at first confronted with the doubts, and Objections of most
Seamen of our Nation, yet it soon confuted them by Experience. It appeared very
much to excel all other forms of Ships, in sailing, in carriage, in security,
and many other such benefits. Its first Voyage it performed with admirable
swiftness. And though it miscarried after its return, yet it was destroyed by a
common fate, and by such a dreadful tempest, as overwhelmed a great Fleet the
same night: so that the Ancient Fabrics of Ships have no reason to triumph
over that new Model, when of the threescore and ten sail that were in the same
Storm, there was not one escaped to bring the News.

In a word, though this Invention succeeded not, while it was only supported by
private Purses: it will undoubtedly produce great effects, if ever it shall be
retreiv'd upon the public Stock of a Nation: which will be able to sustain the
first hazards, and losses that must be allowed to happen in the beginnings of
all extraordinary Trials.

To their Experiments I will subjoin their Observations,. XXXIV. Their
Observations.
which differ but in name from the other, the same fidelity, and truth being
regarded in collecting them both.

Observations of the fixed Stars for the perfecting of Astronomy, by the help
of Telescopes: of the Comets in 1665, and 1666. which were made both in London,
and elsewhere; and particularly of the first Comet, for above a month after, it
disappeared to the naked eye, and became Stationary, and Retrograde.

Observations about Saturn, of the proportion, and position of its Ring, of the
Motion and Orbit of its Lunale, of the shadow of the Ring on the Body, and of
the Body on the Ring; and of its Phases, etc. of Jupiters Belts, and of its
spots, and verticity about its Axis, of its eclipsing its Satellites, and being
eclipsed by them; of the Orbs, Inclinations, Motions, etc. of the Satellites,
together with Tables, and Ephemerides of their motions.

Observations of the Spots about the Body of Mars, and of its whirling motion
about its Center: of several Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon, and some of them as
were not taken notice of, by Astronomers, or Tables commonly used: of the Spots
in the Moon, and of the several appearances in the Phases of it: of the Moon at
the same time, by Correspondents in several parts of the World, toward the
finding her Parallax, and distance.

Observations of the Eliptical and waved Figures of the Planetary Bodies, near
the Horizon from the refraction of the Hemisphere: of the effects of Lightning:
of the various pressure of the Atmosphere, by a Wheel-barometer for several
years, and of its usefulness for predicting the changes of Weather.

Observations on frozen Beer: on the Figures of Snow frozen Water, Urine
congealed: on the suspension of Mercury at a great height: on Mines, and
Minerals: on the Concretions of Wood, Plants, Shells, and several Animal
Substances: on the effects of Earthquakes, Fiery Eruptions, and Inundations: on
Lakes, Mountains, Damps, subterraneous Fires: on Tides, Currents, and the Depth
of the Sea.

Observations of the liming of Ground, for improvement of the Bodies of Sheep,
but spoiling their Wool: of several ways for preventing smutty Corn: of the
importance of changing Seed-corn: of the alteration of the Horns of Sheep, and
other Cattle, by the change of Pasture: of the Pores and Valies in Wood: the
Anatomy of Trees: of the sensitive, and humble Plant.

Observations on the Bills of Mortality: on the leaves of Sage: on small living
Flies in the Powder of Cantharides: of Insects bred in Dew: of Virginian
Silk-Bottoms: of the Parts, and Anatomy of Fishes: of the Teeth of Lupus
Marinus, that they are the same thing with the Toad-stones set in Rings: of the
Respiration of Fishes: of Bernacles: of the calcined Powder of Toads: of an
Outlandish Deer-skin, and hair: of the Parts of Vipers: of Stones taken out of
the Heart of a Man: of young Vipers, that they do not eat holes through their
old ones Bellies, as is commonly affirmed.

For Examples of this Head, I will only refer my Reader to those which Mr.
Grant has published on the Bills of Mortality; wherein the Author has shown,
that the meanest and most trivial matters may be so cultivated, as to bear
excellent Fruit, when they come under the management of an accurate, and
prudent Observer: For from those Papers, which went about so many years,
through every Tradesmans hands, without any manner of profit, except only to
the Clerks that collected them, he has deduced many true Conclusions,
concerning the gravest, and most weighty Parts of Civil Government, and humane
Nature.

As I am now passing away from their Experiments.. XXXV. An Objection answered
concerning the uncertainty of Experiments.
and Observations, which have been their proper, and principal work: there
comes before me an Objection, which is the more to be regarded, because it is
raised by the Experimenters themselves. For it is their common complaint, that
there is a great nicety, and contingency, in the making of many Experiments:
that their success is very often various, and inconstant, not only in the hands
of different, but even of the same Triers. From hence they suggest their fears,
that this continuance of Experimenters, of which we talk so much, will not
prove so advantageous, though they shall be all equally cautious in observing,
and faithful in recording their Discoveries: because it is probable, that the
Trials of Future Ages will not agree with those of the present, but frequently
thwart, and contradict them.

The Objection is strong, and material; and I am so far from diminishing the
weight of it, that I am rather willing to add more to it. I confess many
Experiments are obnoxious to failing; either by reason of some circumstances,
which are scarce discernable, till the work be over: or from the diversity of
Materials, whereof some may be genuine, some sophisticated, some simple, some
mixed, some fresh, some may have lost their virtue. And this is chiefly
remarkable, in Chemical Operations, wherein if the dissolvents be ill prepared,
if the Spirits be too much, or too little purified, if there be the least
alteration, in the degree of Fire, the quantity of Matter, or by the negligence
of those that attend it, the whole course will be overthrown, or changed from
its first purpose.

But what is now to be concluded from hence? shall this instability, and
Casualty of Experiments, deter us from laboring in them at all? or should it
not rather excite us to be more curious and watchful in their process? It is to
be allowed that such undertakings are wonderfully hazardous and difficult; why
else does the Royal Society endeavor to preserve them from degenerating, by so
many forewarnings, and rules, and a Method so severe? It is granted, that their
event is often uncertain, and not answerable to our expectations. But that only
ought to admonish us, of the indispensable necessity of a jealous, and exact
Inquiry. If the uncertainty proceeded from a constant irregularity of Nature,
we had reason then to despair: but seeing it for the most part arises only from
some defect or change in our progress, we should thence learn, first to correct
our own miscarriages, before we cease to hope for the success.

Let then the Experiment be often renewed. If the same kinds, and proportions
of Ingredients be used, and the same circumstances be punctually observed, the
effect without all question will be the same. If some little variation of any
of these, has made any alteration, a judicious, and well practiced Trier will
soon be able to discern the cause of it; and to rectify it, upon the next
repetition. If the difference of time, or place, or matter, or Instruments,
will not suffer the product to be just the same in all points: yet something
else will result, that may prove perhaps as beneficial. If we cannot always
arrive at the main end of our Labors, some less unsought Curiosities will
arise. If we cannot obtain that which shall be useful for practice, there may
something appear that may instruct.

It is strange that we are not able to inculcate into the minds of many men,
the necessity of that distinction of my Lord Bacons, that there ought to be
Experiments of Light, as well as of Fruit. It is their usual word, What solid
good will come from thence? They are indeed to be commended for being so severe
Exactors of goodness. And it were to be wished, that they would not only
exercise this vigor, about Experiments, but on their own lives* and actions:
that they would still question with themselves, in all that they do; what solid
good will come from thence? But they are to know, that in so large, and so
various an Art as this of Experiments, there are many degrees of usefulness:
some may serve for real, and plain benefit, without much delight: some for
teaching without apparent profit: some for light now, and for use hereafter;
some only for ornament, and curiosity. If they will persist in contemning all
Experiments; except those which bring with them immediate gain, and a present
harvest: they may as well cavil at the Providence of God, that he has not made
all the seasons of the year, to be times of mowing, reaping, and vintage.

XXXVI. The Instruments they have invented.
Of the variety, and excellence of the Instruments, with which this Age abounds,
for their help in Philosophical matters, I have already discoursed in the
former Part. I will now go on to mention those new ones, which they themselves,
or some of their Members, have either invented, or advanced, for the ease,
strength, and direction of their senses, in the motions of Nature, and Art: of
this kind are these that follow.

An Instrument for finding a second of Time by the Sun: another for finding the
Celestial Refractions.

Three several Quadrants made after three new contrivances, which though they
are not above eighteen Inches in Diameter, and so are manageable in any Window,
or Turret, are yet far more exact, than the best, that have been hitherto used,
for Astronomical Observations, or taking Angles at Land.

A new Instrument for taking Angles by reflection; by which means the Eye at
the same time sees the two Objects, both as touching in the same point, though
distant almost to a Semicircle: which is of great use for making exact
Observations at Sea.

A new kind of Back-staff for taking the Suns altitude by the Shadow, and
Horizon: which is so contrived, that though the shadow be at three foot
distance, or as much more as is desired, yet there shall not be the least
Penumbra: and the Shadow may be easily distinguished to the fourth part of a
minute.

A Hoop of all the fixed Stars in the Zodiac, for the speedy finding the
Position of the Ecliptic, and for knowing the extent of the Constellations.

A Copernican Sphere, representing the whirling Motion of the Sun, and the
Motion of the several Planets.

A great many new ways of making Instruments, for keeping time very exactly,
both with Pendulums, and without them: whereby the intervals of time may be
measured both on the Land, and Sea.

A universal Standard, or measure of Magnitudes, by the help of a Pendulum,
never before attempted.

A new kind of Pendulum Clock, wherein the Pendulum moves circularly, going
with the most simple, and natural motion, moving very equally, and making no
kind of noise.

A Pendulum Clock showing the aequation of Time.

Three new ways of Pendulums for Clocks, and several ways of applying the
motion of the Watchwork to them.

Several new kinds of Pendulum Watches for the Pocket, wherein the motion is
regulated, by Springs, or Weights, or Loadstones, or Flies moving very exactly
regular.

Several sorts of Instruments for compressing, and rarefying the Air: A
Wheel-Barometer, and other Instruments for finding the pressure of the Air, and
serving to predict the changes of the Weather.

A new kind of Scales, for examining the gravity of Bodies in all places: to
see whether the attraction of the Earth, be not greater in some parts of the
Earth, than in others, and whether it do not decrease, at farther distances
from the surface of the Earth; either upwards into the Air, or downwards under
the Earth.

A very exact pair of Scales, for trying a great number of Magnetical
Experiments.

Several very accurate Beams, for trying many Statical Experiments, and for
finding the most exact gravity of several kinds of Bodies.

A great number of Magnetical Instruments, for making Experiments about
Loadstones.

Several new kinds of Levels for finding the true Horizon, where, by one of not
above a foot length, the Horizontal line may be found, without the error of
many seconds.

A new kind of Augar for boring the ground, and fetching up whatever it meets
with in the right order.

A new Instrument for fetching up any Substance from the bottom of the Sea,
whether Sand, Shells, Clay, Stones, Minerals, Metals.

A new Bucket for examining and fetching up whatever Water is to be found at
the bottom of the Sea, or at any dept, and for bringing it up without mixing
with the other Water of the Sea, through which it passes.

Two new ways of sounding the depth of the Sea without a Line, for examining
the greatest dept of the Ocean, in those parts of it, that are most remote from
the Land.

Several Instruments for finding the velocity of swimming Bodies of several
Figures, and moved with diverse strengths, and for trying what Figures are least
apt to be overturned, in order to the making a true Theory, of the Forms of
Ships, and Boats for all uses.

An Instrument of great height, with Glass-windows on the sides, to be filled
with Water, for examining the velocity of Bodies of several Substances, Figures
and Magnitudes, by their descent.

An Instrument for measuring, and dividing the time of their Descent, to the
accurateness of two, or three thirds of time, serving also for examining the
swiftness of Bodies descending through the Air, and of Bodies shot by a Gun, or
Bow.

A Bell for diving under water to a great depth, wherein a man has continued at
a considerable depth under water, for half an hour, without the least
inconvenience.

Another Instrument for a Diver, wherein he may continue long under water, and
may walk to and fro, and make use of his strength, and limbs, almost as freely
as in the Air.

A new sort of Spectacles, whereby a Diver may see any thing distinctly under
Water.

A new way of conveighing the Air under Water, to any Depth, for the use of
Diverse.

An Instrument for measuring the swiftness, and strength of the Wind.

An Instrument for the raising a continual stream of Water, by turning round a
moveable valve, within the hollow of a close Cylindrical Barrel.

Several kinds of Thermometers for discovering the heat, and cold of the Air,
or any other Liquors: a Thermometer for examining all the degrees of heat in
Flames, and Fires, made of several Substances; as also the degrees of heat
requisite to melt Soder, Lead, Tin, Silver, Brass, Iron, Copper, Gold.

A Standard for Cold several ways.

An Instrument for planting of Corn.

Four several sorts of Hygroscopes made with several Substances, for
discovering the drowth, and moisture of the Air.

Several kinds of ways to examine the goodness, and badness of Waters.

Several Engines for finding, and determining the force of Gunpowder, by
Weights, Springs, Sliding, etc.

An Instrument for receiving, and preserving the force of Gunpowder, so as to
make it applicable, for the performing of any motion desired.

Several Instruments for examining the recoiling, true carriage, and diverse
other proprieties of Guns.

Several kinds of Otocousticons, or Instruments to improve the sense of hearing.

Several Models of Chariots, and other Instruments, for Progressive Motion.

A Chariot-way-wiser, measuring exactly the length of the way of the Chariot,
or Coach to which it is applied.

An Instrument for making Screws with great dispatch.

A way of preserving the most exact impression of a Seal, Medal, Sculpture; and
that in a Metal harder than Silver.

An Instrument for grinding Optick-glasses: a double Telescope: several
excellent Telescopes of diverse lengths, of six, twelve, twenty eight, thirty
six, sixty foot long, with a convenient Apparatus for the managing of them: and
several contrivances in them for measuring the Diameters, and parts of the
Planets, and for finding the true position, and distance of the small fixed
Stars, and Satellites.

Toward the exactness of all manner of these Optick-glasses, the English have
got a great advantage of late years, by the Art of making Glass, finer, and
more serviceable for Microscopes, and Telescopes, than that of Venice. This
Invention was brought into our Country, and practiced here, by the care, and
expense of the Duke of Buckingham; whom the Author of these Papers ought to
mention with all honor; both for his Skill and Zeal in advancing such
Experimental Studies of which I am writing: and also because it has been by the
favor of so great a Patron, that I have enjoyed the leisure, and convenience
of composing this History.

As soon as they were reduced into a Fixed Assembly,. XXXVII Their Repository
and Library.
one of the Principal Intentions they proposed to accomplish, was a General
Collection of all the Effects of Arts, and the Common, or Monstrous Works of
Nature. This they at first began by the casual Presents, which either
Strangers, or any of their own Members bestowed upon them. And in short time it
has increased so fast, by a contribution from all Parts, and chiefly by the
bounty of Mr. Colwal, that they have already drawn together into one Room, the
greatest part of all the several kinds of things, that are scattered throughout
the Universe. The Keeping, and Ranging of these into order, is committed to Mr.
Hook, who had also the honor of being made the first Curator of the Royal
Society by election. This Repository he has begun to reduce under its several
heads, according to the exact Method of the Ranks of all the Species of Nature,
which has been composed by Doctor Wilkins, and will shortly be published in his
Universal Language: A Work wherein this excellent Man has undertaken a Design,
that very well fits the temper of his own Mind; for it well became him to teach
a Communion of Speech amongst all Philosophers; whose chief study it has
always been, to promote a general agreement, and correspondence amongst all
Virtuous and Wise men.

This Book had sooner seen the light, if part of it had not perished in the
Fire. Of its use and accurate composition there is no man can doubt, that has
ever heard the name of the Author: of whom, if I had not at first restrained my
self from particular commendations, I might have said very much in his praise,
which deserves to be known to all the World, and to be the first Experiment of
his own Universal Language.

Their Library.
Having well succeeded in this their purpose of collecting diverse patterns of
all Natural, and Artificial things: they have also (amongst others) appointed a
Committee, whose chief employment shall be to read over whatever Books have
been written on such subjects. By this means they hope speedily to observe, and
digest into Manuscript volumes, all that has been hitherto tried, or propounded
in such studies. This is the only help that an Experimenter can receive from
Books: which he may still use, as his Guides, though not as his Masters. For
this end they have begun a Library consisting only of such Authors, as may be
serviceable to their Design. To this there has been lately made a great
Addition, by the Munificent Gift of Mr. Henry Howard of Norfolk, who has
bestowed on the Society the whole Arundelian Library, containing several
hundreds of choice Manuscripts, besides some thousands of other Books of all
kinds. And because many of them belonged to other Professions, this Noble
Benefactor has given them with a free permission of changing them for others,
that shall be more proper for their Work: Whereby they will shortly be able to
show a complete Collection of all that has been published in the Ancient, or
Modern Tongues, which either regards the productions of Nature, or the effects
of all Manual Arts.

Nor is this the only bounty which this Illustrious Person has conferred on the
Royal Society; since by the firing of London, the first place of their meeting
has been restored to its original use, and made an Exchange, he has afforded
them a retreat in his own house, where they assemble at this present: By which
favor he has added a new honor to the ancient Nobility of his Race: one of
his Ancestors had before adorned that place with many of the best Monuments of
Antiquity: And now by entertaining these new discoveries under his Roof, his
Family deserves the double praise of having cherished both the old, and new
Learning; so that now methinks in Arundel house, there is a perfect
representation, what the Real Philosophy ought to be: As there we behold new
Inventions to flourish amongst the Marbles, and Images of the Dead: so the
present Arts, that are now rising, should not aim at the destruction of those
that are past, but be content to thrive in their company.

It will not I hope be expected, Sect. XXXVIII. Their Discourses and Theories.
that I should present my Reader an Index of all the several Writings, which
have at any time been published by the Members of the Royal Society I shall
omit those, which either were printed before the beginning of this Institution,
or which treat of matters, that have no relation to their Design. Only I will
say in general, that there is scarce any Art, or Argument, which has ever been
the subject of humane Wit, of which I might not produce Instances, that some
Fellows of this Society have given good proofs of their labors in it: of those
Discourses, which have been since composed by some of their Body, or read
before their weekly Assemblies, and directly concern the advancement of their
Work, these are the principal.

Several Hypotheses explaining the diverse Phases and Motions, and other
Phenomenon of the Comets.

Several Hypotheses of Saturn, and its Satelles.

An Hypothesis of the cause of the Rugosity of the Moons surface.

An Hypothesis of the motion of the Moon, and of the Sea depending upon it.

An Hypothesis of the Motion of the Planets, and of Circular Motion in general.

Several Hypotheses for the Aequation of Time.

A Discourse about the possibility of the Retardation of Celestial Motions,
and of their going slower, and slower, the longer they last.

A Discourse of making the several Vibrations of a Pendulum aequal, by making
the weight of it move in a Cycloid instead of a Circle.

Several Discourses, and Hypotheses about the length of a Pendulum, for moving
once in a second of Time.

A Discourse of the most convenient length of a Pendulum, for making a Standard
for a universal Measure.

Several Astronomical Discourses of Mr. Horrex retriv'd, and digested for the
Press.

Vleg Beg translated, about the places of the fixed Stars, and several other
Astronomical Observations.

A Discourse about the possibility of the change of the attractive power of the
Earth, and consequently of the variation of the vibrative motion of Pendulums.

A Discourse about short inclining Pendulums, and of other Pendulums
counterpois'd above the Center of Motion, and of others lying Horizontal in the
manner of a Beam.

An Hypothesis about Fire, and Flame.

An Hypothesis, and discourse of the gravity, pressure, and spring of the Air.

A Discourse of an Air Register.

Several Discourses Mathematical, and Philosophical, upon the Experiment of
raising great weights by the Breath.

A Discourse and Demonstration against a proposed Method of doubling the Cube,
and of finding two mean Proportionals.

Several Discourses about Thermometers, Hygroscopes, Baroscopes, and other
Weather-wisers.

An Hypothesis and Discourse of the Inflection and inflective veins of the Air,
and of the fitness, and unfitness of the Air for Celestial Observations.

An Hypothesis of the Form, and Spring of the Air.

A Discourse of the different parts of the same Water, and of the difference of
Waters.

A Discourse and Hypothesis of Filtration, and of the Congruity, and
Incongruity of Bodies.

A Discourse of the possible height of the Air, and of its proportionable
rarefaction upwards.

An Hypothetical Discourse about the suspension of the Clouds, and their
pressure.

An Hypothesis, and Discourse of Earthquakes.

A Discourse of Petrifactions, and an Hypothesis for explaining the several
varieties of such Bodies.

Several Discourses about the Loadstone, and an Hypothesis for salving its
appearances.

A Discourse about the Pores of Stones.

A Discourse about Eggs.

A Discourse concerning the Glass-drops.

A Discourse and Hypothesis of annealing, and tempering Steel.

Discourses about Cider, and Coffee.

A Discourse of the original of Forms.

An Hypothesis of Light.

A Discourse and Hypothesis of the Nature and Proprieties of Colors.

A Discourse about improving Wood for Dying, and for fixing Colors.

A Discourse about the improvement of Music.

A Discourse of the differing Heat of Summer, and Winter:

A Discourse, and Hypothesis about Fluidity.

Discourses upon several Mercurial Experiments.

Discourses of Hydrostaticks.

Discourses about the force of falling Bodies.

A Treatise of the motion of the Muscles.

A Discourse of the usefulness of Experimental Philosophy.

A Treatise of the vanity of Dogmatizing.

The Skeptical Chemist.

Essays about Saltpeter.

The Parallel of the Ancient, and Modern Architecture.

Microscopical Observations.

Micrographia, or a Discourse of things discovered by a Microscope.

Three Books of Feavors, of the Brain, and of the Scurvy, which I will allege
as the great Instances of this head: Wherein the Famous Author has with
accurate diligence made prodigious improvements in all the parts of Physic,
and shown that the largeness of his Knowledge in it, is equal to the happy
success of his practice.

In this Collection of their Discourses, and Treatises, my Reader beholding so
many to pass under the name of Hypotheses, may perhaps imagine that this
consists not so well with their Method, and with the main purpose of their
Studies, which I have often repeated to be chiefly bent upon the Operative,
rather than the Theoretical Philosophy. But I hope he will be satisfied, if he
shall remember, that I have already removed this doubt, by affirming, that
whatever Principles, and Speculations they now raise from things, they do not
rely upon them as the absolute end, but only use them as a means of farther
Knowledge. This way the most speculative Notions, and Theorems that can be
drawn from matter, may conduce to much profit. The light of Science, and
Doctrines of causes, may serve exceeding well to promote our Experimenting; but
they would rather obscure, than illuminate the mind, if we should only make
them the perpetual Objects of our Contemplation: as we see the light of the
Sun, is most beneficial to direct our footsteps in walking, and our hands in
working, which would certainly make us blind, if we should only continue fixed,
and gazing on its Beams.

The Histories they have gathered are either of Nature,. XXXIX. The Histories
they have collected.
Arts, or Works. These they have begun to collect by the plainest Method, and
from the plainest Information. They have fetched their Intelligence from the
constant and unerring use of experienced Men of the most unaffected, and most
unartificial kinds of life. They have already performed much in this way, and
more they can promise the world to accomplish in a very short space of Time.

There are already brought in to them the History of Comets in general, and
especially of the two last: The History of English Mines, and Oars: and
particularly two several Histories of Tinneries and Tin-working.

The Histories of Iron-making: of Lignum Fossile: of Saffron: of Alkermes: of
Verdigreace: of whiting of Wax: of Cold: of Colors: of Fluidity, and firmness.

The Histories of Refining: of making Copperas: of making Alum: of Saltpeter:
of making Latten: of Lead: of making Salt out of Seawater: of refining Gold:
of making Potashes: of making Ceruse: of making Brass: of Painting, and
Limning: of Calcography: of Enamelling: of Varnishing: of Dying.

The Histories of making Cloth: of Worsted-Combers: of Fullers: of Tanners, and
Leather-making: of Glovers, and Leather-dressing: of Parchment, and
Vellum-making, and the way of making transparent Parchment: of Paper-making: of
Hatters: of making Marble-paper: of the Rowling-Press.

The Histories of making Bread: of Malt: of brewing Beer and Ale in several
places: of Whale-fishing: of the Weather for several years: of Wind-mills, and
other Mills in Holland: of Masonry: of Pitch and Tar: of Maiz: of Vintners: of
Shot: of making Gunpowder: and of making some, that is twenty times as strong
as the common Pistol-powder.

The two last of these were communicated to the Royal Society by the favor of
Prince Rupert; whom I take the boldness to mention here, for his excellent
Knowledge, and use in all manner of Mechanical Operations. But his name will be
recorded in all the Histories of this time, for greater works, for many
glorious Enterprises by Sea and Land, and for the Immortal Benefits whereby he
has obliged the English Nation.

The Instances that I shall give of this their manner of collecting Histories,
shall be, of Works, that of Saltpeter, of Arts, that of Dying, of Nature, that
of Oysters: which last may perhaps seem a subject too mean to be particularly
alleged; but to me it appears worthy to be produced. For though the British
Oysters have been famous in the World, ever since this Island was discovered,
yet the skill how to order them aright, has been so little considered amongst
our selves, that we see at this day, it is confined to some few narrow Creeks
of one single County.

THE HISTORY Of the Making of SALTPETER By Mr. HENSHAW.
WHether the Nitre of the Ancients be of the same species with the Salt which
is commonly known by the name of Salt peter, is variously disputed by very
learned Authors amongst the modern Physicians: on the negative side are
Mathiolus and Bellonius; the latter of which had the advantage, by the
opportunity of his travels in Egypt, to have often seen and handled them both,
and is so positive as to pronounce, that in all Christendom there is not one
grain of Nitre to be found, unless it be brought from other parts, although at
the time of his being in Grand Caire (which was about the year 1550.) it was so
common there (as he says) that ten pounds of it would not cost a Mordin. Among
those that hold the affirmative, the most eminent are Cardan and Longius; and
it should seem the general vote of Learned men has been most favorable to
that Opinion, by reason that in all Latin Relations and Prescriptions, the
word Nitrum or Halinitrum is most commonly used for Saltpeter.

I have often enquired amongst our London Drugsters for Egyptian Nitre, and if
I had been so fortunate as to have found any, I doubt not but I should have
been able to have put an end to that Question by a Demonstration; that is, by
turning the greatest part of it into Saltpeter. However, the Observations I
have made in my own private Experiments, and in the practice of Saltpeter men
and Refiners of Saltpeter, seem to give me sufficient ground to suspect, that
the confidence of those, who hold them to be several Salts, proceeds chiefly
from their being unacquainted with the various (...) of Saltpeter in the
making and refining of it: and also their comparing double refined Saltpeter
(of which Gunpowder is made) with that description of Nitrum and Aprhonitrum in
the tenth chapter of the one and thirtieth Book of Plinies Natural History (the
only tolerable account of that Salt that has been handed to us from Antiquity)
where he tells us, That Aphronitrum was Color pene purpureo, and Egyptian
Nitre Fuscum and Lapidosum, adding afterward, Sunt ibi Nitrariae in quibus
rufum exit a color terrae, which is sufficient to have hinted to any one but
moderately versed in the modern way of ordering Saltpeter, that the Ancients
were not at all skilled in refining their Nitre from the Earth and common Salt
that is usually mingled with it, nor from that foul yellow Oil, which, it
seems, did accompany their Nitre, as well as it does our Saltpeter, in great
abundance; for Pliny takes notice of it, when he mentions the removing the
Nitre (after it is grained) out of the Nitrariae, saying, Hic quoque natura
olei intervenit, ad scabiem animalium utilis: And indeed this greasy Oil
(which the Workmen call Mother of Saltpeter, and perhaps is but the crude and
unripe part of it) does by nature so wonderfully adhere to every part else of
the Peter (it may be ordained for the nutriment and augmentation of it) that
the separation of it is the sole cause of the great charge and labor that is
required to the refining of Peter: otherwise the Peter will be yellow, or
brown, or some other dark color. And Scaliger in his 104. Exercit. sect. 15.
says, Sublustris purpurae quasi splendour quidam in salis-petrae-terris
sepenumero est a nobis observatus; and he that shall boil a Lixivium past
through a Salt-peter-earth, up to a consistence, without filtring it through
ashes, or giving the Salt leave to Chrystallize, may perhaps find something not
unlike the Nitre of the Ancients.

To make this doubt yet clearer, it will require your patience to observe a few
short remains out of the same Pliny, concerning the production of Nitre; says
he, Exiguum Nitri fit apud Medos, candescentibus siccitate convallibus quod
vocant Halmirhaga: minus etiam in Thracia juxta Philippos sordidum Terra quod
appellant Agrium.

This agrees very exactly with what I have been informed of by a Refiner of
Saltpeter, that near Sophia, Santa-Cruz, and several other places in Barbary,
he has seen Saltpeter shoot out of the ground (as thick and white as a hoar
frost) on many barren and desert Lands; only he adds, that this happens not
till the beginning of the rains in August, or September; and that it is the
falling of the freshwater that causes the Saltpeter to shoot out into little
Chrystals; and that the people of the Country do no more but take it off the
ground as clean as they can, and sell it to Merchant-Strangers. This is, says
he, the Barbary Peter, which the Refiners buy commonly at twenty shillings per
Cent.

Much after the same manner (by the relation of an India Merchant) is that
great quantity of Peter produced, which of late years has been brought into
England, and other parts of Christendom, from about Pegu in East India, saving
that the Natives do refine it once, before they sell it to the Merchants: But
being not so skilful, to discharge it from the common Salt, which attends
Peter, our Workmen do refine it again, before it be fit for Gunpowder.

The next remarque out of Pliny is, Aquae vero Nitrosae pluribus in locis
reperiuntur, sed sine viribus Densandi (he means by the heat of the Sun in
those places) Optimum Copiosumque in Clytis Macedoniae quod vocant Chalastricum
candidum purumque proximum sali. Lacus est Nitrosus, exiliente e medio dulci
fonticulo, ibi fit Nitrum circa Canis ortum, novenis diebus, totidemque cessat,
and rursus innatat and deinde cessat, iis autem diebus quibus gignitur si fuere
imbres salsius Nitrum faciunt, Aquilones deterius quia Validius commovent
limum. In Egypto autem conficitur multo abundantius sed deterius, nam suscum
lapidosumque est, fit pene eodem modo quo Sal: nisi quod Salinis mare
infundunt, Nilum autem Nitrariis.

How such great plenty of Nitre should be found in the Waters above mentioned
will be no difficulty to conjecture, if we consider that Lakes are the
receptacles of Land floods, and that great Rains may easily bring it to the
Lake in Macedonia, from the higher parts in the Country about it. And for the
River Nile, there must needs be less scruple concerning it, if we call to mind
that once in a year, it sweeps with an impetuous overflow the burnt and barren
Deserts of Africa under the Torrid Zone; where, by the relation of Travelers,
those Sands are visibly full of Nitre, and those few Springs and Wells that are
to be found there, are by that reason so bitter, that the Mores and their
Camels are forced to make a hard shift with them in their long journeys.

But when he comes to describe the Aphronitrum, he comes more home, both to the
name and nature of our Saltpeter, in these words, Proxima aetas Medicorum
tradidit, Aphronitrum in Asia Colligi in speluncis and molibus distillans, dein
sole siccant. And Scaliger speaking of Saltpeter, says, Est quaedam Nitri
species inhaerens Rupibus, in quibus insolatur, ac propterea Salpetra dicitur.
And I my self, for my own satisfaction in the point, have drawn very good Rock
peter out of those Stiriae, which are usually found hanging like Icycles in
Arched-cellars and Vaults; and have been told, that a Physician in Shropshire
did perform great Cures by virtue of Sal-prunellae, which he made only of
Flower of Brimstone and those Stiriae.

But to steer more directly upon our immediate subject, Saltpeter; though it
be likely, that the Air is every where full of a volatile kind of Nitre, which
is frequently to be seen coagulated into fine white Salt, like Flower of Wheat
(but by the very taste may be easily known to be Peter) sticking to the sides
of Plastred-walls, and in Brick-walls to the Mortar between the Bricks, (in dry
weather, or where the wall is defended from the rain) for Lime does strongly
attract it; though Dew and Rain do conveigh much of it to the Earth, and the
Clouds seem to be spread out before the face of the Sun, either to imbibe some
part of his influence, or to have a Salt generated in them, for to advance the
fertility of the Earth, and certainly they return not without a blessing; for I
have more than once extracted Salt peter out of Rain and Dew, but from the
latter more plentifully, and yet even there, is Saltpeter accompanied with a
greazy purple Oil, in great plenty: Though (as I have found upon trial) that
most standing waters, and even deep Wells have some small quantity of
Saltpeter in them; though the face of the Earth, if it were not impregnated
with this Salt, could not produce Vegetables; for Salt (as the Lord Bacon
says) is the first Rudiment of Life; and Nitre is as it were the life of
Vegetables: Yet to be more sure of it, I made Experiment likewise there too,
and found some little of it in fallows, and the Earth which Moles cast up in
the Spring: Though I say the Air and Water want it not, yet is it not there to
be had in any proportion, answerable to the charge in getting it: And though
the Earth must necessarily have great quantities thereof, generated or infused
into it; yet in these temperate Countries of Europe, it is no sooner dilated by
Rainwater, or the Moisture of the Earth, but it is immediately applied to the
production or nutriment of some Plant, Insect, Stone, or Mineral; so that the
Artist will find as little of it here to serve his turn, as in the other two
Elements.

The only place therefore, where Saltpeter is to be found in these Northern
Countries, is in Stables, Pigeon-houses, Cellars, Barns, Warehouses, or indeed
any place, which is covered from the Rain, which would dissolve it, and (as I
have said) make it vegetate; as also from the Sun, which does rarifie it, and
cause it to be exhaled into the Air; (For the same reason Husbandmen also might
make double or treble the profit they usually do of their Muck, if they would
lay it up under a Hovel, or some covered place, until they carry it out upon
their Land.) And I have been told by an experienced Workman, that no place
yields Peter so plentifully, as the Earth in Churches, were it not an impiety
to disturb the Ashes of our Ancestors, in that sacred Depository.

Provided always, that the Earth be of good mould, and the better the mould
is, the more Peter is produced, for in Clay or sandy Earth, little or none is
to be found: The freer ingress the Air has into a place, is still of more
advantage, so that the Sun be excluded: And let the Earth be never so good, if
it be laid on a brick or boarded floor, it will not be so rich in Peter, as if
it have free communication with the Exhalations of the lower parts of the
Earth.

In any place thus qualified, you cannot miss of good quantities of Peter, if
it have not been drawn out in some years before; which a Workman will quickly
find, after he has dug the first spadeful of Earth, by laying a little of
it on the end of his tongue, and if it taste bitter, he is sure of good store of
mineral, (as they love to call it) that is, Saltpeter; if the Ground be good,
it continues rich, to six or eight foot deep, and sometimes, but not often, to
ten.

After the Saltpeter is extracted, if the Earth be laid wet into the same
place again, it will be twenty years ere any considerable quantity grow there
of it; but if the Earth be well dried, it will come in twelve or fourteen: and
if they mingle, with the dried Earth store of Pigeons-dung, and mellow
Horse-dung, and then temper it with Urine (as was usual before we were supplied
with Peter from India) it will be fit to dig again in five or six years. He
that shall cast Water upon a Ground fit to dig for Peter, will only sink the
Mineral deeper into the Earth; but he that throws Soap-suds on it, will quite
destroy the Peter, (as the Workmen have a Tradition) and it very well deserves
a further Enquiry.

That Saltpeter, and the way of drawing it out of the Earth, now in use, was a
modern Invention, is generally concluded by all Authors; but whether we owe it
to chance, or the sagacity of some great Wit, is as unknown, as the time when
it was first discovered.

It seems to have many years preceeded the Invention of Gunpowder, which by the
Germans is ascribed to Constantine Autlitzer, or Berthold Schwertz a Monk of
Friburgh, and was, in all probability, not long discovered, when the Inventor
(as Polydore Virgil tells us) taught the use of Guns, to the Venetians, at the
Battle of Fossa Claudia, when they obtained that notable Victory over the
Genoueses, Anno 1380. For there is mention made, both of Saltpeter and Aqua
fortis, in the Writings of Geber, a Spanish More, and an Alchymist; but at what
time he lived is unknown, though it be certain, some hundreds of years before
Raimund Lully; who about the year 1333. published some of his Books, wherein he
treats of Saltpeter and Aqua fortis. It is no ill conjecture of Maierus, that
the foresaid Monk, being a skilful Alchymist, had a design to draw a higher
Spirit from Peter than the common Aqua fortis, and that he might better open
the body of Peter, he ground it with Sulphur and Charcoal, by which Composure
he soon became the Inventour of Gunpowder.

The manner of making SALTPETER.
IN the first place you must be provided of eight or ten Tubs, so large, that
they may be able to contain about ten Barrows full of Earth, each of them.
These Tubs must be all open at the top; but in the bottom of every one of them,
you must make a hole near to that side you intend to place outermost, which
hole you must fit very well with a Tap and Spigot on the outside downward. On
the inside of the Tub, near the tap-hole, you must carefully place a large wad
of straw, and upon that a short piece of board, which is all to keep the earth
from stopping up the tap-hole. When you have placed your Tubs on their stands,
at such a distance one from the other, that you may come with ease between
them, then fill them up with such Peter-earth as you have chosen for your work,
leaving only void about a spans breadth between the Earth and the edge of the
Tub; then lay on the top of the Earth in each Tub, as near as you can to the
middle, a rundle of Wicker, like the bottom of a Basket, and about a foot in
diameter, and by it stick into the earth a good strong Cudgel, which must be
thrust pretty near the bottom; the Wicker is to keep the Water, when it is
poured on, from hollowing and disordering the Earth, and the Cudgel is to be
stirred about, to give the Water ingress to the Earth upon occasion: Then pour
on your Earth common cold Water, till it stand a hands breadth over the Earth:
When it has stood eight or ten hours loosen the Spigots, and let the Water
rather dribble, than run into half Tubs, which must be set under the taps: This
Lixivium the Workmen call their Raw-liquor; and note that if it come not clear
at the first drawing, you must pour it on again, and after some little time
draw it off, till it come clear, and of the color of Urine.

If you are curious to know how rich your Liquor is before boiling, you may
take a Glass-vial, containing a quart, fill it with the common Water you use,
then weigh it exactly; next fill the same Glass with your Liquor, and find the
difference of weight, which compared with the quantity of all your Liquors,
will give you a very near ghess, how much Saltpeter you are like to make by
that boiling.

Then pour on again, on the same Earth, more common Water, that it may bring
away what is remaining in the Earth of the former Liquor. This second Liquor is
of no other use, but to be poured on new Earth, instead of common Water,
because it contains some quantity of Saltpeter in it.

When this is done, turn out the useless insipid Earth out of the Tubs, which
you must fill with new Earth, and continue this Operation, till you have in the
same manner lixiviated all the Earth: Then fill your Copper with your Liquor,
which Copper, for one of the Profession, must be about two hundred weight, and
set strongly in a Furnace of brick-work; besides, on one side of your Furnace,
you are to place a Tub full of your Liquor, which at a tap below may dribble as
fast into the Copper, as the force of the Fire does wast your Liquor, which
Invention is only to save charges in Fuel. When you have boiled it up to that
height, that a little of it, flirted off the finger on a live Charcoal, will
flash like Gunpowder (which for the most part falls out to be after two days
and a nights boiling) at what time, upon trial, a hundred weight of the Liquor
contains about five and thirty pound weight of Peter. But the Workmen seldom
make use of any further indication, than by finding the Liquor hang like oil on
the sides of the Brasen-scummer, when it is dipped into it, which is a sign it
is fit to be passed through the Ashes, which is done in this manner.

You must prepare two Tubs fitted after the manner of the first, where you put
your Earth, saving that at the bottom of these Tubs, you must lay Reeds or
Straw a foot high, over them place loose boards, pretty near one another, over
them, a little more Straw (which is to keep the Ashes from the top, and to give
the Liquor room to drein the better from them:) Then fill up your Tubs with any
sort of Wood-ashes to half a foot of the top; Then pour on the foresaid Liquor,
as it comes scalding hot out of the Copper, on the Ashes contained in the first
Tub; then after a while draw it off at the top; and so continue putting on and
drawing off, first at one Tub of Ashes, then at the other, till your Liquor
grow clear, and lose the thick turbid color it had when it went on.

When all the Liquour has in this manner past through the Ashes of both Tubs,
that by this means all its greasy oil is left behind in the Ashes, you must
keep it for the second boiling in a vessel by it self: in the mean time pour
upon your Ashes a suffient quantity of common Water very hot, once or twice, to
bring away what is remaining of the Liquor in the Ashes.

When you begin the second boiling, put first into the Copper the Water that
went last through your Ashes, and as that wastes, let your strong Liquor drop
into the Copper, out of the Tub above described, standing on the side of the
Furnace, till the Liquor in the Copper be ready to shoot or chrystallise.

Note that toward the end of your boiling, there will arise great store of Scum
and Froth, which must be carefully taken off with a great brass Scummer, made
like a Ladle, full of little holes, and usually about that time it lets fall
some common Salt to the bottom, which you must take up with the said Scummer,
and lay it aside for another use.

To know when the Liquor is ready to shoot into Peter, you need but drop a
little of it on a knife, or any other cold thing that has a smooth
superficies, and if it coagulate, like a drop of tallow, and do not fall off
the knife when it is turned downward, which also may be judged by its hanging
like oil to the sides of the Scummer. When the Liquor is brought to this pass,
every hundred weight of it contains about threescore and ten pound weight of
Peter.

When you find your Liquor thus ready to shoot, you must with great Iron Ladles
lade it out of the Copper into a high narrow Tub for that purpose, which the
Workmen call their settling Tub; and when the Liquor is grown so cool, that you
can endure your finger in it, you shall find the common or cubick Salt begin to
gravulate and stick to the sides of the Tub, then at the tap, placed about half
a foot from the bottom, draw off your Liquor into deep wooden Trays, or
Brass-pans, and the cooler the place is where you let them stand to shoot in,
the better and more plentifully will the Saltpeter, be produced; but it will
be of no good color till it be refined, but will be part white, part yellow,
and some part of it blackish.

The Salt which sticks to the sides and bottom of the settling Tub is (as I
have said) of the nature of common Salt; and there is scarce any Peter to be
found but is accompanied with it, though no doubt some of this is drawn out of
the Ashes by the second Liquors: If it be foul they refine it by it self, and
about London sell it at good rates to those that salt Neats Tongues, Bacon, and
Collar-Beef, for besides a savory taste, it gives a pleasing red color to most
Flesh that is salted with it. Pliny says Nitrum obsonia alba and deteriora
reddit Olera viridiora, whether Saltpeter does so, I have not yet tried.

When the Liquor has stood two days and two nights in the Pans, that part of
the Liquor which is not coagulated but swims upon the Peter, must be carefully
poured off, and being mingled with new Liquors must again pass the Ashes before
it be boiled, else it will grow so greasy it will never generate any Salt.

To Refine SALTPETER.
AFter you have made your Copper very clean, put in as much Water as you think
will dissolve that quantity of Peter you purpose to Refine, when the Water is
very hot cast in the Peter by little and little, stirring it about with a
Ladle, that it may the sooner dissolve, then increase the Fire till your Liquor
begin to boil: In the mean time feel with the Scummer, whether there be at the
bottom any Salt undissolv'd and take it out, for it is Common-Salt, and does
not so soon dissolve as the Peter; then as the Water boyls scim of the Froth
that swims at the top of it as fast as it rises; when it has boiled to the
height that a drop of it will coagulate on a Plate, (as has been said above in
the making of Saltpeter,) then cast in by degrees either a Pint of the
strongest Wine-Vinegar, or else four Ounces of Allom beaten to powder (some
choose burnt Allom,) and you shall observe a black Scum to rise on the top of
the Liquor, which when you have allowed some time to thicken, you may easily
take off with the Scummer; repeat this so often till no more Scum arises. Some
do use to throw in a Shovel full of Quicklime, and say it makes Peter the
whiter, and Rock the better; you must take great care all this while the Fire
be not too strong, for while this is doing, the Liquor will be apt to boil
over, and will not easily be appeased without your great loss.

When this is done, lade out the Liquor into a settling Tub, and cover it over
with a Cloth, that it cool not too soon, and within an hour or two a thick
yellow Faeces will fall to the bottom of the Tub, then quickly draw of the
Liquor while it is hot, into the shooting Trays or Pans, and do as you did in
making Peter, saving that you must cover the Trays with a Cloth, for then the
Liquor will begin to shoot at the bottom, which will make the Peter-Rock into
much fairer Chrystals, than otherwise it would: When no more Peter will shoot
(which is commonly after two days,) pour off the Liquor that swims at the top,
and put the Peter into a Tub with a hole at the bottom for to drain, and when
it is dry, it is fit for use.

The Figure of the Chrystals is Sexangular, and if it has rightly shot, is
fistulous and hollow like a Pipe.

Before I proceed to tell you, how this darling of Nature (the very Basis and
Generation of Nutriment) is converted into Gunpowder (the most fatal
Instrument of Death that ever Mankind was trusted withal) I will crave leave to
acquaint you with a few Speculations I have of this Salt, which if I could
clearly make out, would lead us into the knowledge of many noble Secrets in
Nature; as also to a great improvement in the Art of making Saltpeter.

First then you are to observe, that though Peter go always in Gunpowder, yet
if you fulminate it in a Crucible, and burn of the volatile part with Powder of
Coal, Brimstone, Antimony or Meal, there will remain a Salt, and yet so fixed
(very unlike Common-Salt) that it will endure the force of almost the strongest
Fire you can give it; which being dissolved into Water and Spirit of Nitre
dropped into it, till it give over hissing (which is the same with the Volatile
part that was separated from it in the fulmination) it will be again reduced to
Chrystals of Peter, as it was at first, which noble Experiment the World has
already been taught by an honorable Member of this Society; with a train of
such important Observations, as never before were raised from one Experiment.

That which I aim at then is, that if the Spirit of the Volatile Salt of Soot,
or of the Urine, Blood, Horns, Hoofs, Hair, Excrements, or indeed any part of
Animals, (for all abound with such a Volatile Salt fixed, and Oil as Peter
does) could by the same way or any like it, be reduced to Peter or some Nitrous
Salt not much differing from it: It would excellently make out a Theory that I
am much delighted with, till I am convinced in it; which is, that the Salt
which is found in Vegetables and Animals, is but the Nitre which is so
universally diffused through all the Elements, (and must therefore make a chief
Ingredient in their Nutritriment, and by consequence of their Generation) a
little altered from its first Complexion: And that the reason why Animals that
feed on Vegetables are obliged by Nature, to longer meals than those that feed
on other Animals; is, because Animals are fuller of that Salt than Vegetables:
And indeed such Animals are but Caterers of it for Man; and others whom Natures
bounty gratifies with a more lusty and delicious Diet.

I confess I have been the more confirmed in this fancy, since I have often
seen a Friend of mine, with a Natural and Facile (...), convert the greater
part of Peter, into a Salt so like the Volatile Salt of Urine, that they are
Scarce to be distinguished by smell or taste, and yet he adds nothing to it that
can possibly be suspected to participate of that Nature: But indeed all
Volatile Salts are so alike, that it is not easy to distinguish them in any
respect.

THE HISTORY Of Making GUNPOWDER.
THE materials of Gunpowder are, Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Coal; the Peter
and Brimstone must be both refined if you mean to make good Powder, and the
Coal must be Withy and Alder equal parts; for Withy alone is counted too soft,
and some do commend Hazle alone to be as good as the other two.

The whole Secret of the Art consists in the proportion of the Materials, the
exact mixture of them, that in every the least part of Powder may be found all
the Materials in their just proportion; then the Corning or making of it into
Grains; and lastly the Drying and Dusting of it.

The Proportion is very differently set down by several Authors; Baptista Porta
tells us the ordinary Powder is made of Four parts of Peter, one of Sulphur,
and one of Withy Coal: But the best Powder of 6, or 8. of Peter, and one a
piece of the other, which agrees pretty well with Bonfadini a late Italian
Writer, in his Book of the Art of Shooting flying, where to make the best
Gunpowder he prescribes Seven parts of Peter, one of Brimstone, and of Hazle
Coal an ounce less in every pound: Cardan says; Constat ex tribus Halinitri
partibus, duabus Saligni Carbonis atque una Sulphuris, Convenitque magnis
Machinis: Sed Mediocribus Halinitri parts december, Saligni carbonis tres,
Sulphuris duas, parvis vero Halinitri parts december; Carbonis ligni nucis
Avellonae sine nodis, tum Sulphuris partem unam singularem: Langius appoints
three of Peter, two of Withy Coal, and one of Brimstone: The English Author of
Fireworks says, that the proportions in England to make good, indifferent,
and ordinary Powder is, 5.4. and 3. parts of Peter, to two of Coal and one of
Brimstone. Our English Workmen are generally so curious of their secret, that
I could not obtain the proportion of them without a promise of Secrecy: But
when all is done their secret is not so much the way to make the best Powder,
as the best way to get most money by it; by substracting from the Peter, and
making up weight with the Coal; when indeed there is so great a Latitude, that
provided the Materials be perfectly mixed, you make good Powder with any of the
proportions above mentioned; but the more Peter you allow it, it will still be
the better, till you come to observe Eight parts.

The next thing after the proportion, is the mixture, about which most of the
workmens time and pains is bestowed: For first in a Horse-mill with two stones
(like that with which they grind their Materials at the Glass-house) moving
upon a Marble bottom, which is edged with boards set sloaping, that what slips
from under the stones may slide back again.

They grind the Brimstone and Coal each of them apart by themselves as fine as
possibly they can; then they sift each of them apart by themselves: The
Brimstone is sifted through Tiffany in a Bolting-mill, such as the Bakers use
for wheat flour: The Coal is sifted through Lockram, in a bag made like a shirt
sleeve; for the convenience of the Workman it is done in a close Bin, with
only two holes for him to put his arms in and shake the bag about. Whatsoever
of each material is not small enough to sift through, is brought again to the
Mill to be new ground.

As for the Peter, that must in the Copper be dissolved in as much water as
will just take it up, and then the water must be boiled away till the Peter
comes to the thickness of hasty-pudding. The reason of this operation is,
because when the Peter is thus soft, the other materials will the easilier
incorporate with it, and in the next place it will not wear the wooden pestles
so much when it comes to the Mill, as when it is hard and dry.

When the Materials are in this readiness, they are weighed (only the Peter is
weighed before it is put to dissolve in the Copper) and by proportion are
carried to the mingling Trough, which is made of boards, like a great Chest
without a cover, being about eight foot long, four broad, and three foot high.
The Coal is laid in first, the Brimstone next, and the Peter at top of all;
Then two men with shovels stir and mingle them together for an hour, and then
it is ready for the Mill.

The Powder-mills are seldom made to move with any thing but water: The great
water-wheel is made like that of an ordinary water-wheel, either over-shot or
under-shot, according to the quantity of water they have: to the axis of this
wheel, a little way within the Mill, is fastened a lesser wheel called the
Spar-wheel, with strong Cogs, which in their motion round take hold of the
round slaves of another wheel of about the same diameter, set a little way
above it, and fastened to the end of a beam of 15 or 16 foot long, laid parallel
to the Horizon, with an iron gudgeon at the other end of it, to facilitate its
motion round: This beam is called the round beam; out of it come a certain
number of arms of about nine inches long* and three inches broad, which in
their going round meet with other lesser arms (called Tapes) coming out of the
Pestles (for so they call certain small quarters of Timber placed perpendicular
to the Horizon, about nine foot long and four inches broad; they are set in a
slight frame to keep them steady); by these small arms the Pestles are lifted
up about two foot and a half, and then let fall into a strong wooden Trough set
under them, wherein the powder is put to be pounded.

Every Mill has two Troughs, and about sixteen Pestles: every Pestle has
fastened to the lower end of it a round piece of Lignum Vitae, of about five
inches long and three and a half diameter; and into the bottom of the Trough,
just where the Pestle is to fall, is let in another piece of Lignum Vitae, of
the fashion and bigness of an ordinary Bowl, split according to its longest
diameter: The Pestles are not lifted up all together, but alternatively, to
make the Powder turn the better in the working; and for the same reason round
Troughs are counted better than square.

To make excellent Powder it ought to be wrought thus thirty hours; but of late
they will not afford it above eighteen or twenty hours: once in eight hours
they use to moisten the Powder with a little fair water; others who are more
curious, put water something thickened with quicklime; others use White Wind
Vinegar; others Aqua-vitae: But if it be not moistened with something once in
eight hours, the Powder will grow dry, and in half an hour after it will take
fire. As soon as the Powder grows dry, you may find it, though at a distance,
by the noise of the Mill; for then the Pestles will rebound from the bottom of
the Trough and make a double stroke. The only danger to the Mill is not from
the Trough; for many times the iron Gudgeons grow hot for want of greasing, and
then the dust that flies about will be apt to fire, and so the Mill blows up.

From the Mill the Powder is brought to the Corning-house, of a middle temper
between moist and dry. The way of corning it is with two hair Sieves joined
together, the upper Sieve enclosing some part of the hoop of the lower Sieve:
The upper Sieve has holes of the size you will have the Powder grained at; the
holes of the lower Sieve are much lesser: The upper Sieve they call their
corning Sieve, the lower their wet Duster: They lay the Powder upon the upper
Sieve some two inches thick; upon that a piece of heavy wood made like a
Trencher, of about eight inches diameter and two and a half in thickness,
called a Runner, which when the Sieve is moved, by its weight and motion forces
the Powder through the upper Sieve, and that corns it. Then the lower Sieve
receives the Powder, and lets the dust go through into a Bin, over which the
Sieve is shaken, called the Dusting-Bin.

When the Powder is thus corned, it is laid about an inch and half thick on the
drying Sieves, which are made of course Canvase fastened to slight frames of
Deal about an ell long and some twenty inches broad; and thus it is carried
into Stoves to dry.

The Stove is commonly a little Room about eighteen or twenty foot square, with
ranges of small Firr poles about two foot one above another, to lay the drying
Sieves upon, but only on that side the fire is made. Besides a glass window to
give light, there must be a small lover hole at the top of the Room, to let out
the steam, else the Powder will not only be the longer a drying, but often by
the return of the steam on the Sieves, the top of the Powder will be so crusted
that the lower part will not dry. The Rome is heated by an Iron of about a yard
high and half a yard broad, cast in the form of an Arch equal to a
Semy-quadrant, and placed in the back of a Chimney, the fore part whereof is
like a Furnace; and to avoid danger, opens into another little Room apart
called the Stoke-hole.

The Powder is brought into the Stove before it be heated, and is not taken out
again till the Stove be cold; and about eight hours is required to the drying
of it. In hot Countries the Sun is the best Stove, and a great deal of danger
and charges that way avoided.

After the Powder is dried, it is brought again to the Corning-house, where it
is again sifted over the dusting Bin in other double Sieves, but without any
Runners. These Sieves have both of them smaller holes than the former: The
upper Sieve is called the Separater, and serves to divide the great corns from
the lesser; the great corns are put by themselves, and serve for Cannon Powder:
The lower Sieve is called the dry Duster, and retains the small corns (which
serve for Musket and Pistol) and lets fall the dust into the bin, which is to
be mingled with fresh Materials, and again wrought over in the Mill.

So that good Powder differs from bad (besides the well working and mingling of
the Materials) in having more Peter and less Coal; and lastly, in the well
dusting of it.

The last work is to put the Powder into Barrels; every Barrel is to contain
five score weight of Powder, and then it is ready for sale.

AN APPARATUS TO THE HISTORY Of the Common Practices of DYING. By Sir WILLIAM
PETTY.
IT were not incongruous to begin the History with a Retrospect into the very
nature of Light it self (as to inquire whether the same be a Motion or else a
Body;) nor to premise some Theorems about the Sun, Flame, Glowworms, the eyes
of some Animals, shining Woods, Scales of some Fishes, the dashing of the Sea,
strokes upon the eyes, the Bolonian Slate (called by some the Magnet of Light)
and of other light and lucid bodies.

It were also not improper to consider the very essentials of Color and
Transparencies (as that the most transparent bodies, if shaped into many
angles, present the eye with very many colors;) That bodies having but one
single superficies, have none at all, but are suscipient of every color laid
before them; That great depths of Air make a Blew, and great depths of Water a
Greenish color; That great depths or thicknesses of colored Liquors do all
look Blackish (red Wine in a large Conical Glass being of all reddish colors
between black at the top and white at the bottom.

That most Vegetables, at one time or other, are greenish; and that as many
things passing the Sun are blackned, so many others much whitened by the same:
Other things are whitened by acid Fumes, as red Roses and raw Silks by the
smoke of Brimstone.

Many Metals, as Steel and Silver, become of various colors and Tarnish by
the air, and by several degrees of heat.

We might consider the wonderful variety of colors appearing in Flowers,
Feathers; and drawn from Metals, their Calces and Vitrifications; and of the
colors rising out of transparent Liquors artificially mixed.

But these things, relating to the abstracted nature of colors, being too hard
for me, I wholly decline; rather passing to name (and but to name) some of the
several sorts of Colorations now commonly used in Humane affairs, and as vulgar
Trades in these Nations; which are these: viz.

1. There is a whitening of Wax, and several sort of Linen and Cotton Clothes,
by the Sun, Air, and by reciprocal effusions of Water. 2. Coloring of Wood and
Leather by Lime, Salt, and Liquors, as in Staves, Canes, and Marble Leathers.
3. Coloring of Paper, viz. Marbled Paper, by distempering the colors with
Ox-gall, and applying them upon a stiff gummed Liquor. 4. Coloring, or rather
Discoloring the colors of Silks, Tiffanies, etc. by Brimstone. 5. Coloring
of several Iron and Copper work, into Black, with Oil. 6. Coloring of Leather
into Gold-colour, or rather Silver leaves into Gold by Varnishes, and in other
cases by Urine and Sulphur. 7. Dying of Marble and Alabaster with heat and
colored Oils. 8. Coloring Silver into Brass with Brimstone or Urine. 9.
Coloring the Barrels and Locks of Guns into Blew and Purple with the temper of
Small-coal heat. 10. Coloring of Glass (made of Sands, Flints, etc.) as also
of Crystals and Earthen Ware, with the rusts and solutions of Metals. 11. The
coloring of live Hair, as in Poland, Horse and Man's Hair; as also the
coloring of Furrs. 12. "Enameling and Anealing. 13. Applying Colors as in the
Printing of Books and Pictures, and as in making of playing Cards; being each
of them performed in a several way. 14. Guilding and Tinning with Mercury,
Block-Tin, Sal-Armoniack. 15. Coloring Metals, as Copper with Calamy into
Brass, and with Zink or Spelter into Gold, or into Silver with Arsenick: And of
Iron into Copper with Hungarian Vitriol. 16. Making Painters Colors by
preparing of Earth, Chalk, and Slates; as in Vmber, Oker, Cullen-earth, etc. as
also out of the Calces of Lead, as Ceruse and Minium; by Sublimates of Mercury
and Brimstone, as in Vermilion; by tinging of white Earths variously, as in
Verdeter, and some of the Lakes; by concrete Juyces or Faeculae, as in
Gambrugium, Indico, Pinks, Sap-green, and Lakes: As also by Rusts, as in
Verdegrease, etc, 17. The applying of these colors by the adhesion of Ox-gall,
as in the Marbled Paper aforesaid; or by Gum water, as in Limning; or by clammy
drying Oils, (such as are the Oils of Linseed, Nuts, Spike, Turpentine, etc.)
18. "Watering of Tabbies. 19. The last I shall name is the coloring of Wool,
Linen, Cotton, Silk, Hair, Feathers, Horn, Leather, and the Threads and Webs
of them with Woods, Roots, Herbs, Seeds, Leaves, Salts, Limes, Lixiviums,
Waters, Heats, Fermentations, Macerations, and other great variety of Handling:
An account of all which is that History of Dying we intend. All that we have
hitherto said being but a kind of remote and scarce pertinent Introduction
thereunto.
I begin this History by enumerating all the several Materials and Ingredients
which I understand to be or to have been used in any of the last aforementioned
Colorations, which I shall represent in various Methods, viz. out of the
Mineral Family. They use Iron and Steel, or what is made or comes from them, in
all true Blacks (called Spanish Blacks) though not in Flanders Blacks; viz.
they use Copperas, Steel-filings, and Slip, which is the stuff found in the
Troughs of Grind-stones, whereon Edge-tools have been ground. They also use
Pewter for Bow-dye, Scarlet, viz. they dissolve Bars of Pewter in the Aqua
fortis they use; and make also their Dying-kettles or Furnace of this Metal.

Litharge is used by some, though acknowledged by few, for what necessary
reason I cannot learn, other than to add weight unto Dyed Silk; Litharge being
a calx of Lead, one of the heaviest and most coloring Metals.

I apprehend Antimony much used to the same purpose, though we know there be a
very tingent Sulphur in that Mineral, which affords variety of Color by the
precipitations and other operations upon it.

Arsenick is used in Crimson, upon pretense of giving Luster, although those
who pretend not to be wanting in giving Luster to their Silks, do utterly
disown the use of Arsenick.

Verdegrease is used by Linen Dyers in their Yellow and Greenish Colors,
although of it self it strike not deeper color than of pale Straws.

Of Mineral-Salts used in Dying; the chief is Alum; the very true use thereof
seems to me obscure enough, notwithstanding all the Narrations I could get from
Dyers about it: For I doubt, 1. Whether it be used to make Common-water a fit
Menstruum, wherewith to extract the Tingent particles of several hard
Materials; for I find Alum to be used with such Materials as spend easy
enough, as Brasill, Logwood, etc. And withal, that the Stuffs to be dyed are
first boiled in Allum-liquors, and the Alum afterward (as they say) cleared
from the said Stuff again, before any Color at all be applied. 2. Whether it
be used to scour the Sordes, which may interpose between the Coloranda, and the
Dying Stuff; and so hinder the due adhesion of the one unto the other: The
boiling of several things first in Alum seeming to tend this way. But I find
this work to be done in Cloth and Rugs, by a due scouring of the same in the
Fulling-mills with Earth, and in Silk with Soaps, by which they boil out the
Gums and other Sordes, hindering or vitiating the intended Colors. 3. Whether
Alum does intenerate the Hairs of Wool, and Hair-stuff, as Grograins, etc.
Whereby they may the better, receive and imbibe their Colors? Unto which
opinion I was led by the Dyers; saying, that after their Stuffs were well
boiled in Alum, that they then cleared them of the Alum again: But we find
the most open Bodied-Cottons and Silks, to have Alum used upon them; as well
as the harder Hairs. Nor is Alum used in many Colors, viz. In no Woad or
Indico Blews; and yet the Stuffs Dyed Blew, are without any previous
inteneration quickly tinged; and that with a slight and short immersion thereof
into the Blew fat. 4. Whether it contribute to the Color it self, as Copperas
does to Gals, in order to make a black; or as Juice of Lemmons does to
Cocheneel in the Incarnadives; or as Aquafortis impregnated with Pewter, does
in the Bow-Scarlet, changing it from a red Rose-Crimson to flame Color. This
use is certainly not to be denied to Alum in some cases; but we see in other
cases, that the same Colors may be Dyed without Alum, as well as with it,
though neither so bright and lively, nor so lasting. 5. Wherefore Fifthly, I
conclude (as the most probable opinion) that the use of Alum is to be a
Vinculum between the Cloth and the Color, as clammy-Oyls and Gum-waters are in
Painting and Limming; Alum being such a thing, whose particles and Aculei
dissolved with hot Liquors will stick to the Stuffs, and pitch themselves into
their Pores; and such also, as on which the particles of the Dying Drugs will
also catch hold, as we see the particles of Copperas and other Crystallizing
materials, do of Boughs and Twigs in the Vessel, where such Crystallization is
made. A second use I imagine of Alum in Dying, to be the extracting or drying
up of some such particles, as could not consist with the Color to be
superinduced, for we see Alum is used in the dressing of Alutas or white
Leather, the which it dries, as the Salt of Hen-dung does in Ox-hides, and as
common Salt does in preservation of Flesh-meats; for we know, a Sheep-skin
newly flayed could not be Colored as Brasils are, unless it were first dressed
into Leather with Alum, etc. which is necessary to the Color, even although
the Alum be, as it is, cleared out of the Leather again, before the said
Colouration, with Bran, yelks of Eggs, etc. Wherefore as Alum, as it were by
accident, makes a wet raw skin to take a bright Color by extracting some
impedimental particles out of it; so does it also out of other materials,
though perhaps less discernably.


Another use I suppose of Alum, which is to brighten a Color: For as we see
the finest and most Glassie materials to make the most orient Colors, as
Feathers, Flowers, etc. So certainly if by boiling Cloth in Alum, it become
incrustated with particles, as it were of Glass, the tinging of them yields
more brightness, than the tinging of a Scabrous matter, (such as unallumed
Cloth is) can do. Analogous hereunto I take the use of Bran, and Bran-liquors
in Dying to be; for Bran yielding a most fine flower (as we see in the making
of white-Starch;) I conceive that this flower entering into the pores of the
Stuff, levigates their Superficies and and so makes the Color laid on it, the
more beautiful, just as we see, that all woods, which are to be gilded are
first smoothned over with white Colors, before the Gold be laid on.

And indeed all other Woods are filled, not only as to their greater holes and
Asperities, with Putty; but also their smaller Scabrities are cured by priming
Colors, before the Ultimate Color intended be laid thereon.

The next Mineral Salt is Saltpeter, not used by ancient Dyers, and but by few
of the modern. And that not, till the wonderful use of Aquafortis (whereof
Saltpeter is an ingredient) was observed in the Bow-Scarlet: Nor is it used
now, but to brighten Colors by back-boyling them; for which use Argol is more
commonly used. Lime is much used in the working of blew-fats, being of
Limestone calcined and called Calke, of which more hereafter.

Of the Animal family are used about Dying, Cochineel (if the same be any part
of an Animal) Urine of laboring men, kept till it be stale and stinking;
Honey, Yelks of Eggs, and Ox-gall. The three latter so rarely; and as the
conceits of particular Workmen, and for Collateral uses (as to increase
weight, promote fermentation, and to scour, etc.) That I shall say very little
more of them in this place, only saying of Urine that it is used to scour, and
help the fermenting and heating of Woad; it is used also in the blew-fats
instead of Lime: It discharges the yellow (of which and blew, most Greens are
compounded) and therefore is always used to spend Weld withal. Lastly, the
stale Urine, or old mudd of pissing places, will color a well scoured small
piece of Silver, into a Golden color, and it is with this (and not at all with
the Bath-water) wherewith the Boys at Bath color single pence; although the
generality believe otherwise. Lastly it seems to me, that Urine agrees much in
its Nature with Tartarous Lixivia; not only because Urine is a Lie made of
Vegetables in the body of Animals; nor because in the Receptacles of Urine,
Tartarous stones are bred like as in Vessels of Wine; nor because Urine
discharges and abrades Colors as the Lixivia of Tartar, or the deliquated
Salts of Tartar do; but because Tartar and Sulphur-Lixivia do color the
superficies of Silver, as we affirmed of Urine; and the difference I make
between Urine and Tartarous Lixivia is only this, that though the Salts of both
of them seem by their effects in Dying, in a manner the same; yet that Urine is
made and consists of Salt and Sulphur both.

Before we enter upon the Vegetable materials for Dying, we may interpose this
Advertisement, That there are two sorts of Water used by Dyers, viz.
River-water and Well-water: By the latter I mean in this place the Pump water
in great Cities and Towns, which is a harsh Water wherewith one can scarce wash
ones hands, much less scour them clean; nor will Soap dissolve in it, but
remains in rolls and lumps: moreover the Flesh boiled in it becomes hard and
reddish. The Springs rising out of large covered spaces (such as are great
Cities) yield this Water, as having been percolated through more ground than
other Water, and consequently been divested of its fatty earthy particles, and
more impregnated with saline substances in all the way it has passed. The
Dyers use this Water in Reds, and in other colors wanting restringency, and in
the Dying of Materials of the slacker Contextures, as in Callico, Fustian, and
the several species of Cotton-works. This Water is naught for Blews, and makes
Yellows and Greens look rusty.

River-water is far more fat and oily, sweeter, bears Soap; that is, Soap
dissolves more easily in it, rising into froth and bubbles, so as the Water
thickens by it. This Water is used in most cases by Dyers, and must be had in
great quantities for washing and rinsing their Clothes after Dying.

Water is called by Dyers White Liquor; but there is another sort of Liquor
called Liquor absolutely, and that is their Bran-liquor, which is one part of
Bran and five of River-water, boiled together an hour, and put into leaden
Cisterns to settle. This Liquor when it turns sour is not good, which sourness
will be within three or four days in the Summer time. Besides the uses
aforementioned of this Liquor, I conceive it contributes something to the holding
of the Color; for we know Starch, which is nothing but the flower of Bran,
will make a clinging Paste, the which will conglutinate some things, though not
every thing; viz. Paper, though neither Wood nor Metals. Now Bran-liquors are
used to mealy dying Stuffs, such as Mather is, being the Powder or fecula of a
Root; So as the flower of the Bran being joined with the Mather, and made
clammy and glutinous by boiling, I doubt not but both sticking upon the villi
of the Stuff Dyed, the Mather sticks the better by reason of the starchy
pastiness of the Bran-flower joined with it.

Gums have been used by Dyers about Silk, viz. Gum Arabic, Gum Dragant,
Mastick, and Sanguis Draconis. These Gums tend little to the tincture of the
said Silk, no more than Gum does in ordinary writing Ink, which only gives it a
consistence to stay just where the Pen delivers it, without running abroad
uncertainly: So Gum may give the Silk a glassiness, that is, may make it seem
finer, as also stiffer; so as to make one believe the said stiffness proceeded
from the quantity of Silk close woven: And lastly to increase weight; for if an
ounce of Gum, worth a penny, can be incorporated into a pound of Silk, the said
penny in the Gum produces three shillings, the price of an ounce of Silk.
Wherefore we shall speak of the use of each of the said four Gums, rather when
we treat of Sising and Stiffening, than now, in a Discourse of Dying, where
also we may speak of Honey and Molasses.

We refer also the Descriptions of Fullers-earth, Soaps, Linseed-oyl, and
Ox-galls, unto the head of Scouring, rather than to this of Dying.

Wines and Aqua-vitae have been used by some particular Artists; but the use of
them being neither constant nor certain, I omit further mention of them. The
like I say of Wheaten-flower and Leaven.

Of Cummin-seed, Fenugreek-seed, Senna, and Agarick, I have as yet no
satisfactory account.

Having spoken thus far of some of the Dying stuffs, before I engage upon the
main, and speak more fully of those which have been but slightly touched upon
already, I shall more Synoptically here insert a Catalogue of all Dying
Materials, as well such as I have already treated upon, as such as I intend
hereafter to describe.

The three peculiar Ingredients for Black are Copperas, filings of Steel, and
Slip.

The Restringent binding Materials are Alder, Bark, Pomegranate Pills, Wallnut
rinds and roots, Oaken Sapling Bark, and Saw-dust of the same; Crab-tree Bark,
Galls, and Sumach.

The Salts are Alum, Argol, Saltpeter, Sal Armoniack, Potashes, and
Stone-lime; unto which Urine may be enumerated as a liquid Salt.

The Liquors are Well-water, River-water, Wine, Aqua-vitae, Vinegar, juice of
Lemmon, and Aquafortis: There is Honey used, and Molasses.

Ingredients of another Classis are Bran, Wheaten-flower, Yelks of Eggs,
Leaven, Cummin-seed, Fenugreek-seed, Agarick, and Senna.

Gums are Gum Arabic, Dragant, Mastick, and Sanguis Draconis.

The Smecticks or Abstersives are Fullers-earth, Soap, Linseed-oyl, and
Ox-gall.

The other Metals and Minerals are Pewter, Verdegrease, Antimony, Litharge, and
Arsenick.

But the Colorantia colorata are of three sorts, viz. Blew, Yellow, and Red; of
which Logwood, old Fustick, and Mather, are the Polychresta in the present and
common practices, being one of each sort. The Blews are Woad, Indico, and
Logwood: The Yellows are Weld, Wood-wax, and old Fustick, as also Turmerick now
seldom used: The Reds are Red-wood, Brazel, Mather, Cochineel, Safflowrs,
Kermes-berries, and Sanders; the latter of which is seldom used, and the Kermes
not often. Unto these Arnotto and young Fustick, making Orange colors, may be
added, as often used in these times.

"In Cloth Dying wood-soot is of good use.

Having presented this Catalogue, I come now to give or enlarge the Description
and Application of some of the chief of them, beginning with Copperas.

Copperas is the common thing used to dye Blacks withal, and it is the salt of
the Pyrites stone, wherewith old Iron (having been dissolved in it) is
incorporated. The filings of Steel, and such small particles of Edge-tools as
are worn away upon the Grindstone, commonly called Slipp, is used to the same
purpose in dying of Silks (as was said before) which I conceive to be rather to
increase the weight than for any other necessity; the particles of Copperas
being not so heavy and crass as these are: for else why should not these
later-named Materials be as well used about Cloth, and other cheaper Stuffs?

We observe, That green Oaken-boards by affriction of a Saw become black; and
that a green sour Apple, cut with a knife, becomes likewise black; and that the
white grease wherewith Coach-wheels are anointed becomes likewise black, by
reason of the iron boxes wherewith the Nave is lined, besides the ustulation or
affriction between the Nave and the Axel-tree. Moreover we observe, That an
Oaken stick, by a violent affriction upon other wood in a Turning-Lath, makes
the same black.

From all which we may observe, That the whole business of Blacking lies in the
Iron, as if the salt of the Pyrites-stone in Copperas served only to extract
the same; and withal it seems to lie in a kind of sindging and ustulation, such
as rapid affrictions do cause: For Alum seems to be of the same nature with
Vitriol; and yet in no case that I know of is, it is used for black colors:
And the black color upon earthen Ware is made with scalings of Iron vitrified.
Note, That wherever Copperas is used, either Galls, Sumach,
Oak-Sapling-barks, Alder-bark, Wallnut-rinds, Crabtree-bark, or green Oak
saw-dust, must be used with it; All which things Physicians call Austere and
Stiptick.

Red-wood must be chopped into small pieces, then ground in a Mill between two
heavy stons, as corn is. It is used also in Dying of Cloth and Rugs, and those
of the Courser sort: The color is extracted with much and long boiling, and
that with Galls. The color it makes is a kind of Brick-colour-Red; it holds
much better than Brasil. The Cloth it dies is to be boiled with it: Wherefore
only such matters as are not prejudiced by much boiling are dyed herewith.

Brasil is chopped and ground like as the Red-wood: It dies a Pink-colour or
Carnation, imitating the color of Cochineil the nearest: It is used with Alum
for the ordinary color it dies; and with addition of Potashes, when it is
used for Purples.

Brasil steept in Water gives it the color of Clarret-wine, into which a drop
or two of Juice of Lemmons or Vinegar being put, turns it into the color of
Canary-Sack; in which particular it agrees with Cochineil. This Color soon
staineth, as may appear by the easy change which so small a quantity of acid
liquor makes upon it. A drop of Spirit of Vitriol turns the infusion of
Brasil into a purplish violet-colour, even although it has been made yellow
before, by the addition of Juice of Lemmons or Vinegar; and is the same effect
which Potashes also produce, as we said before.

Mather is a Root cultivated much in Flanders: There be of it two sorts;
Pipe-Mather, which is the coursest; and Bale-Mather, otherwise called
Crap-Mather: This Mather used to the best advantage, dies on Cloth a color
the nearest to our Bow-dye, or the new Scarlet; the like whereof Safflowr does
in Silk; insomuch as the colors called Bastard-Scarlets are dyed with it. This
color indures much boiling, and is used both with Alum and Argol; it holds
well. The brightest colors dyed with this material are made by over-dying the
same, and then by discharging part of it by back-boyling it in Argol.

Mather is used with Bran-liquor, instead of White-liquor or ordinary Water.

Cochineel is of several sorts, viz. Silvester and Mestequa: This also is used
with Bran-liquor in Pewter-Furnaces, and with Aquafortis, in order to the
Scarlet-dye. It is the color whereof the like quantity effects most in
Dying; and Colors dyed with it, are said to be dyed in Grain. Rags dyed in the
dregs of this color is called Turnsole, and it is used to color Wines;
Cochineel being counted so far from an unwholesom thing, that it is esteemed a
Cordial. Any acid Liquor takes off the intense Redness of this color, turning
it toward an Orange, Flame, or Scarlet-colour: With this color also the
Spanish Leather and Flocks are dyed which Ladies use. The extract or fecula
hereof makes the finest Lake.

Arnotto Dies of it self an Orang-colour, is used with Potashes upon Silk,
Linen, and Cottons, but not upon Cloth, as being not apt to penetrate into a
thick substance.

Weld, called in Latin Luteola; when it is ripe (that is to say, in the flower)
it Dies (with the help of Potashes) a deep Lemon color, like unto
Ranunculus, or Broom flower; and either by the smalness of proportion put into
the Liquor, or else by the slighter tincture, it Dies all Colors between
White and the Yellow aforesaid.

In the use of this material, Dyers use a cross, driven down into their Furnace
with a screw to keep it down, so as the Cloth may have liberty in the
supernatant Liquor, to be turned upon the Winch and kept out with the staves:
This weed is much cultivated in Kent, for the use of the London-Dyers, it
holds sufficiently well but against Urine and Tartarous Liquors. Painters
Pinke is made of it.

Wood wax, or Genista Tinctoria (commonly called Grasing-weed by the Dyers,)
produces the same effect with Luteola, being used in greater quantities: It is
seldom made use of as to Silk, Linen, or Cottons, but only as to
course-Cloths: It is also set with Potashes or Urine, called by the Dyers
Siggefustick; of it there be two sorts, the young and the old: Fustick is chopped
and ground, as the other Woods abovementioned are.

The young Fustick Dies a kind of Reddish-Orang-colour; the old, a Hair-colour
with several degrees of yellowness between: It is used with slacked Lime. The
Colors Dyed with old Fustick hold extremely; and are not to be discharged,
will spend with Salts or without, and will work hot or cold.

Soot of Wood. Soot contains in it self both a Color and Salt; wherefore
there is nothing added to it to extract its Color, nor to make it strike upon
the Stuff to be Dyed; the natural Color which it Dies of it self, is the
Color of Honey; but is the foundation of many other Colors upon Wool and
Cloth; for to other things it is not used. Woad is made of a Weed, sown upon
strong new-broken Land, perfectly cleared from all stones and weeds, cut
several times by the top leaves, then ground, or rather chopped with a peculiar
Mill for that purpose; which being done several times, it is made up in Balls
and dried in the Sun; the dryer the year is, the better the Woad.

When it is made up in Balls, it is broken again and laid in heaps, where if it
heat to fast, it is sprinkled with ordinary water: but if it heat too slowly,
then they throw on it a quantity of Lime, or Urine. But of the perfect
cultivating and curing of Woad, we shall speak elsewhere.

English Woad is counted the strongest, it is commonly tried by staining of
white Paper with it, or a white Limed wall, and if the Color be a French-green
it is good.

Woad in use, is used with Potashes commonly called Ware, which if it be
double refined, is called hard Ware (which is much the same with Kelp) or
Sea-weeds, calcined and burnt into the hardness of a stone, by reiterated
Calcinations.

Lime, or Calke which is strong Lime, is used to accelerate the fermentation of
the Woad, which by the help of the same Potashes and warm liquors kept always
so, in three or four days will come to work like a Kive of Beer, and will have
a blew or rather greenish froth or flowery upon it, answering to the Yest of the
Kive. Now the over quantity of Ware, fretting too much upon the Woad, is
obtunded or dulled by throwing in Bran sometimes loose, sometimes in Baggs.

The making and using Woad, is one of the most mysterious, nice, and hazardous
operations in Dying: It is one of the most lasting Colors that is Dyed: An
intense Woad-Colour is almost black, that is to say, of a Damson-colour; this
Color is the foundation of so many others in its degree, that the Dyers have a
certain Scale, or number of Stalls, whereby to compute the lightness and
deepness of this Color.

Indico is made of a Weed of the same Nature with Woad, but more strong; and
whereas Woad is the whole substance of the Herb, Indico is only a mealy
concrete juice or faecula dried in the Sun, sometimes made up in flat Cakes,
sometimes into round-balls, there be several sorts of Indico.

Logwood is chopped and ground like other of the Woods abovementioned, it makes
a Purplishblew; may be used without Alum: It has been esteemed a most false
and fading Color; but now being used with Galls, is far less complained of.

General Observations upon DYING.
FIrst, that all the materials (which of themselves do give Color) are either
Red, Yellow, or Blew, so that out of them, and the primitive fundamental
Color, White; all that great variety which we see in Dyed Stuffs does arise.

2. That few of the Coloring materials (as Cochineil, Soot, Wood wax, Woad,)
are in their outward and first appearance of the same Color, which by the
slieghtest distempers and solutions in the weakest Menstrua, the Dye upon
Cloth, Silk, etc.

3. That many of the Coloring materials will not yield their Colors without
much grinding, steeping, boiling, fermenting, or corrosion by powerful
Menstrua; as Red-wood, Weld, Woad, Arnotto, etc.

4. That many of the said Coulouring materials will of themselves give no
Coloring at all, as Copperas, or Galls, or with much disadvantage, unless the
Cloth or other Stuff to be Dyed, be as it were, first covered or incrustated
with some other matter, though Colour-less, aforehand, as Mather, Weld, Brasil
with Alum.

5. That some of the said Coloring materials, by the help of other Colour-less
Ingredients, do strike different Colors from what they would alone, and of
themselves; as Cochineil, Brasil, etc.

6. That some Colors, as Mather, Indico, and Woad, by reiterated tinctures,
will at last become black.

7. That although Green be the most frequent and common of natural Colors, yet
there is no simple ingredient, which is now used alone, to Dye Green with upon
any Material; Sap green (being the condensated juice of the Rhamnous Berry)
being the nearest; the which is used by Country people.

8. There is no Black thing in use which dies black; though both the coal and
soot of most things burnt or scorched be of that color; and the blacker, by
how much the matter before it was burnt was whiter, as in the famous instance
of Ivory-black.

9. The Tincture of some Dying Stuffs will fade even with lying, or with the
Air, or will stain even with Water; but very much with Wine, Vinegar, Urine,
etc.

10. Some of the Dyers Materials are used to bind and strengthen a Color, some
to brighten it, some to give luster to the stuff, some to discharge and take
off the color either in whole or in part, and some out of fraud, to make the
Material Dyed (if costly) to be heavyer.

11. That some Dying Ingredients or Drugs, by the courseness of their bodies,
make the thread of the dyed Stuff seem courser; and some by shrinking them,
smaller, and some by levigating their Asperities, finer.

12. Many of the same colors are dyed upon several Stuffs with several
Materials; as Red-wood used in Cloth, not in Silks; Arnotto in Silks, not in
Cloth; and may be dyed at several prizes.

13. That Scowring and Washing of Stuffs to be dyed, is to be done with special
Materials; as sometimes with Ox-galls, sometimes with Fullers earth, sometimes
with Soap: This latter being pernicious in some cases, where Potashes will
stain or alter the color.

14. Where great quantities of Stuffs are to be dyed together, or where they
are to be done with great speed, and where the pieces are very long, broad,
thick, or otherwise, they are to be differently handled, both in respect to the
Vessels and Ingredients.

15. In some Colors and Stuffs the Tingent Liquor must be boiling; in other
cases blood-warm; in some it may be cold.

16. Some Tingent Liquors are fitted for use by long keeping; and in some the
virtue wears away by the same.

17. Some Colors or Stuffs are best dyed by reiterated Dippings ever into the
same Liquor at several distances of time; and some by continuing longer, and
others lesser whiles therein.

18. In some cases the matter of the Vessel wherein the Liquors are heated, and
the Tinctures prepared, must be regarded; as the Kettles must be Pewter for
Bow-dye.

19. There is little reckoning made how much Liquor is used in proportion to
the dying Drugs; the Liquor being rather adjusted to the bulk of the Stuff, as
the Vessels are to the breadth of the same: The quantity of dying Drugs being
proportioned to the color higher or lower, and to the Stuffs both; as likewise
the Salts are to dying Drugs.

Concerning the weight which Colors give to Silk (for in them it is most taken
notice of, as being sold by weight, and being a Commodity of great price:) It
is observed, That one pound of raw Silk loses four ounces by washing out the
Gums and natural Sordes.

That the same scowred Silk may be raised to above thirty ounces from the
remaining twelve, if it be dyed black with some Materials.

The reason why Black color may be most heavy dyed, being because all
gravitating Drugs may be dyed black, being all of colors lighter than it:
whereas perhaps there are few or no Materials wherewith to increase the weight
of Silk, which will consist with fair light colors; such as will having been
used, as white Arsenick to Incarnadives. Of a thing truly useful in Dying,
especially of Blacks, nothing increases weight so much as Galls, by reason
whereof Black Silks are restored to as much weight as they lost by washing out
their Gum: Nor is it counted extraordinary, that Blacks should gain about four
or six ounces in the Dying upon each pound.

Next to Galls old Fustick increases the weight about 1 in 12.

Mather about one ounce.

Weld half an ounce.

The Blew-fat, in deep Blews of the fifth stall, gives no considerable weight.

Neither does Logwood, Cochineel, nor Arnotto: Nor does Copperas it self, where
Galls are not.

I conceive much light would be given to the Philosophy of Dying, by careful
Experiments of the weight added by each Drug or Salt in Dying of every color.

Slipp adds much to the weight, and gives a deeper Black than Copperas it
self; which is a good excuse for the Dyers that use it.

I have hitherto but mentioned the several Colorations used in Humane Affairs,
Enumerated the several Materials used in one of them, namely, Dying; and
imperfectly described the several uses and applications of them in Dying. I
have also set down some general Observations relating to that whole Trade. It
remains now that we describe the several Vessels, Tools, and Utensils used in
the same. And particularly to show how any Color assigned may be superinduced
upon any kind of Material, as Wool, Linen, Hair, Feathers, Cotton or Silk: And
with what Advantages or Disadvantages of Lasting, Brightness, Cheapness, and
Variety, etc. each may be performed. But this being infinite, and almost
unteachable by words, as being incomparably more difficult, than how to imitate
and compose any Color assigned, out of the few, usually furnishing a
Painters-palat; I leave the whole to the further consideration of this Learned
Society.

THE HISTORY Of the Generation and Ordering of GREEN-OYSTERS, Commonly called
Colchester-Oysters.
IN the Month of May the Oysters cast their Spaun (which the Dredgers call
their Spat;) it is like to a drop of Candle, and about the bigness of a
halfpenny.

The Spat cleaves to Stones, old Oyster-shells, pieces of Wood, and such like
things, at the bottom of the Sea, which they call Cultch.

It Is probably conjectured, that the Spat in twenty four hours begins to have a
Shell.

In the Month of May the Dredgers (by the Law of the Admiralty Court) have
liberty to catch all manner of Oysters, of what size soever.

When they have taken them, with a knife they gently raise the small brood from
the Cultch, and then they throw the Cultch in again, to preserve the ground for
the future, unless they be so newly Spat that they cannot be safely severed
from the Cultch, in that case they are permitted to take the stone or shell,
etc. that the Spat is upon, one Shell having many times 20 Spats.

After the Month of May it is Felony to carry away the Cultch, and punishable
to take any other Oysters, unless it be those of size (that is to say) about
the bigness of an half Crown piece, or when the two shells being shut, a fair
shilling will rattle between them.

The places where these Oysters are chiefly caught, are called the
Pont-Burnham, Malden, and Colne-Waters; the latter taking its name from the
River of Colne, which passes by Colne-Chester, gives the name to that Town,
and runs into a Creek of the Sea at a place called the Hythe, being the Suburbs
of the Town.

This Brood and other Oysters they carry to Creeks of the Sea at Brickel-Sea,
Mersey, Langno, Fringrego, Wivenbo, Tolesbury, and Salt-coase, and there throw
them into the Channel, which they call their Beds or Layers, where they grow
and fatten, and in two or three years the smallest Brood will be Oysters of the
size aforesaid.

Those Oysters which they would have green, they put into Pits about three foot
deep, in the Salt-Marshes, which are overflowed only at Springtides, to which
they have Sluices, and let out the Salt Water until it is about a foot and half
deep.

These Pits from some quality in the Soil cooperating with the heat of the Sun,
will become green, and communicate their color to the Oysters that are put
into them in four or five days, though they commonly let them continue there
six Weeks, or two Months, in which time they will be of a dark green.

To prove that the Sun operates in the greening, Tolesbury Pits will green only
in Summer; but that the Earth has the greater power, Brickel-sea Pits green
both Winter and Summer: and for a further proof, a Pit within a foot of a
greening Pit will not green; and those that did green very well, will in time
lose their quality.

The Oysters when the Tide comes in lie with their hollow shell downwards, and
when it goes out they turn on the other side; they remove not from their place
unless in cold weather, to cover themselves in the Ouse.

The reason of the scarcity of Oysters, and consequently of their dearness, is,
because they are of late years bought up by the Dutch.

There are great penalties by the Admiralty-Court, laid upon those that fish
out of those grounds which the Court appoints, or that destroy the Cultch, or
that take any Oysters that are not of size, or that do not tread under their
feet, or throw upon the shore, a Fish which they call a Five-finger,
resembling, a Spur-rowel, because that Fish gets into the Oysters when they
gape, and sucks them out.

The reason why such a penalty is set upon any that shall destroy the Cultch,
is because they find that if that be taken away the Ouse will increase, and
then Muscles and Cockles will breed there, and destroy the Oysters, they having
not whereon to stick their Spat.

The Oysters are sick after they have Spat; but in June and July they begin to
mend, and in August they are perfectly well: The Male- Oyster is black-sick,
having a black substance in the Fin; the Female white-sick (as they term it)
having a milky substance in the Fin. They are salt in the Pits, salter in the
Layers, but saltest at Sea.

In Composing Histories after this manner, they resolve to proceed, till they
have not only obtained an Account of all the Great, and most substantial
Trades; but also of all the less Works, and Private Productions, which are
confined to some particular Soyls, or Corporations, or Families. As this Stock
shall increase, they purpose to make it of General use; either by continual
Printing the most remarkable of them, or by freely exposing them to the view of
all, that desire such Informations; provided, that at the same time they
receive some, they will also Communicate others: And they have assured grounds
of confidence, that when this attempt shall be completed, it will be found to
bring innumerable benefits to all practical Arts: When all the secrets of
Manufactures shall be so discovered, their Materials described, their
Instruments figured, their Products represented: It will soon be determined,
how far they themselves may be promoted, and what new consequences may thence
be deduced. Hereby we shall see whether all the parts of the most obvious
Crafts have been brought to perfection; and whether they may not assist each
other, more than has been hitherto endeavored: Hereby we shall discern the
compass, the power, the changes, the degrees, the ages of them all; and
speedily understand, whether their effects have been large enough, and the
ways of producing them sufficiently compendious. In short, by this help the
worst Artificers will be well instructed, by considering the Methods, and Tools
of the best: And the greatest Inventors will be exceedingly inlighten'd;
because they will have in their view the labors of many men, many places, and
many times, wherewith to compare their own. This is the surest, and most
effectual means, to enlarge the Invention: whose Nature is such, that it is apt
to increase, not only by men's beholding the Works of greater, but of equal, nay
of less Wits than themselves.

In the whole progress of this Narration, Sect. XL. The Conclusion of this Part.
I have been cautious to forbear Commending the labors of any Private Fellows
of the Society. For this, I need not make any Apology to them; seeing it would
have been an inconsiderable Honor, to be praised by so mean a Writer: But now
I must break this Law, in the particular case of Dr. Christopher Wren: For
doing so, I will not allege the excuse of my Friendship to him; though that
perhaps were sufficicient; and it might well be allowed me to take this
occasion of Publishing it: But I only do it on the mere consideration of
Justice: For in turning over the Registers of the Society, I perceived that
many excellent things, whose first Invention ought to be ascribed to him, were
casually omitted: This moves me to do him right by himself, and to give this
separate Account of his endeavors, in promoting the Design of the Royal
Society, in the small time wherein he has had the opportunity of attending it.

The first instance I shall mention, to which he may lay peculiar claim, is the
Doctrine of Motion, which is the most considerable of all others, for
establishing the first Principles of Philosophy, by Geometrical Demonstrations.
This Des Carts had before begun, having taken up some Experiments of this
kind, upon Conjecture, and made them the first Foundation of his whole Systeme
of Nature: But some of his Conclusions seeming very questionable, because they
were only derived from the gross Trials of Balls meeting one another at Tennis,
and Billiards: Dr. Wren produced before the Society, an Instrument to represent
the effects of all sorts of Impulses, made between two hard globous Bodies,
either of equal, or of different bigness, and swiftness, following or meeting
each other, or the one moving, the other at rest. From these varieties arose
many unexpected effects; of all which he demonstrated the true Theories, after
they had been confirmed by many hundreds of Experiments in that Instrument.
These he proposed as the Principles of all Demonstrations in Natural
Philosophy: Nor can it seem strange, that these Elements should be of such
Universal use; if we consider that Generation, Corruption, Alteration, and all
the Vicissitudes of Nature, are nothing else but the effects arising from the
meeting of little Bodies, of differing Figures, Magnitudes, and Velocities.

The Second Work which he has advanced, is the History of Seasons: which will
be of admirable benefit to Mankind, if it shall be constantly pursued, and
derived down to Posterity. His proposal therefore was, to comprehend a Diary of
Wind, Weather, and other conditions of the Air, as to Heat, Cold, and Weight;
and also a General Description of the Year, whether contagious or healthful to
Men or Beasts; with an Account of Epidemical Diseases, of Blasts, Mill-dews,
and other accidents, belonging to Grain, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, and Insects. And
because the difficulty of a constant Observation of the Air, by Night, and Day
seemed invincible, he therefore devised a Clock to be annexed to a
Weathercock, which moved a rundle, covered with Paper, upon which the Clock
moved a black-lead-Pensil; so that the Observer by the Traces of the Pencil on
the Paper, might certainly conclude, what Winds had blown in his absence, for
twelve hours space: After a like manner he contrived a Thermometer to be its
own Register: And because the usual Thermometers were not found to give a true
measure of the extention of the Air, by reason that the accidental gravity of
the liquor, as it lay higher or lower in the Glass, weighed unequally on the
Air, and gave it a farther contraction or extension, over and above that which
was produced by heat and cold; therefore he invented a Circular Thermometer, in
which the liquor occasions no fallacy, but remains always in one height moving
the whole Instrument, like a Wheel on its Axis.

He has contrived an Instrument to measure the quantities of Rain that falls:
This as soon as it is full, will pour out it self, and at the years end
discover how much Rain has fallen on such a space of Land, or other hard
superficies, in order to the Theory of Vapors, Rivers, Seas, etc.

He has devised many subtle ways for the easier finding the gravity of the
Atmosphere, the degrees of drought and moisture, and many of its other
accidents. Amongst these Instruments there are Balances which are useful to
other purposes, that show the weight of the Air by their spontaneous
inclination.

Amongst the new Discoveries of the Pendulum, these are to be attributed to
him, that the Pendulum in its motion from rest to rest; that is, in one descent
and ascent, moves unequally in equal times, according to a line of sines: That
it would continue to more either in Circular, or Eliptical Motions; and such
Vibrations would have the same Periods with those that are reciprocal; and that
by a complication of several Pendulums depending one upon another, there might
be represented motions like the Planetary Helical Motions, or more intricate:
And yet that these Pendulums would discover without confusion (as the Planets
do) three or four several Motions, acting upon one Body with differing Periods;
and that there may be produced a Natural Standard for Measure from the Pendulum
for vulgar use.

He has invented many ways to make Astronomical Observations more acurate and
easy: He has fitted and hung Quadrants, Sextants, and Radii, more commodiously
than formerly: He has made two Telescopes, to open with a joint like a Sector,
by which Observers may infallibly take a distance to half minutes, and find no
difference in the same Observation reiterated several times; nor can any
warping or luxation of the Instrument hinder the truth of it.

He has added many sorts of Retes, Screws, and other devises to Telescopes, for
taking small distances and apparent diamets to Seconds. He has made apertures
to take in more or less light, as the Observer pleases, by opening and shutting
like the pupil of the eye, the better to fit Glasses to Crepusculine
Observations: He has added much to the Theory of Dioptrics; much to the
Manufacture it self of grinding good Glasses. He has attempted, and not without
success, the making of Glasses of other forms than Spherical. He has exactly
measured and delineated the Spheres of the humors in the Eye, whose proportions
one to another were only ghess'd at before. This accurate discussion produced
the reason, why we see things erected, and that Reflection conduces as much to
Vision as Refraction.

He discoursed to them a Natural and easy Theory of Refraction, which exactly
answered every Experiment. He fully demonstrated all Dioptrics in a few
Propositions, showing not only (as in Keplers Dioptrics) the common properties
of Glasses, but the proportions by which the individual Rays cut the Axis, and
each other; upon which the Charges (as they are usually called) of Telescopes,
or the proportion of the Eye-glasses and Apertures are demonstrably discovered.

He has made constant Observations on Saturn; and a Theory of that Planet,
truly answering all Observations, before the printed Discourse of Hugonius on
that subject appeared.

He has essayed to make a true Selenography by measure; the world having
nothing yet but pictures, rather than Surveighs or Maps of the Moon. He has
stated the Theory of the Moons Libration, as far as his Observations could
carry him. He has composed a Lunar Globe, representing not only the spots, and
various degrees of whiteness upon the surface, but the hills, eminencies, and
cavities molded in solid work. The Globe thus fashioned into a true model of
the Moon, as you turn it to the light represents all the Menstrual phases, with
the variety of appearances that happen from the shadows of the Mountains and
Valleys He has made Maps of the Pleiades, and other Telescopical Stars; and
proposed Methods to determine the great doubt of the Earths motion or rest, by
the small Stars about the Pole to be seen in large Telescopes.

In order to Navigation he has carefully pursued many Magnetical Experiments;
of which this is one of the noblest and most fruitful of Speculation. A large
Terella is placed in the midst of a Plane Board, with a hole into which the
Terella is half immersed, till it be like a Globe, with the Poles in the
Horizon. Then is the Plane dusted over with steel-filings equally from a Sieve:
The Dust by the Magnetical virtue is immediately figured into Furrows, that bend
like a sort of Helix, proceeding as it were out of one Pole, and returning into
the other: And the whole Plane is thus figured like the Circles of a
Planisphere.

It being a Question amongst the Problems of Navigation, very well worth
resolving, to what Mechanical powrs the Sailing (against the wind especially)
was reducible; he showed it to be a Wedge: And he demonstrated how a transient
Force upon an oblique Plane, would cause the motion of the Plane against the
first Mover. And he made an Instrument, that Mechanically produced the same
effect, and showed the reason of Sailing to all Winds.

The Geometrical Mechanics of Rowing, he showed to be a Vectis on a moving or
cedent Fulcrum. For this end he made Instruments, to find what the expansion of
Body was toward the hindrance of Motion in a Liquid Medium; and what degree of
impediment was produced, by what degree of expansion: with other things that
are the necessary Elements for laying down the Geometry of Sailing, Swimming,
Rowing, Fl^ing, and the Fabrics of Ships.

He has invented a very curious and exceeding speedy way of Etching. He has
started several things toward the emendation of Water works. He has made
Instruments of Respiration, and for straining the breath from fuliginous
vapors, to try whether the same breath so purified will serve again.

He was the first Inventor of drawing Pictures by Microscopical Glasses. He has
found out perpetual, at least long-lived Lamps, and Registers of Furnaces, and
the like, for keeping a perpetual temper, in order to various uses; as hatching
of Eggs, Insects, production of Plants, Chemical Praeparations, imitating
Nature in producing Fossils and Minerals, keeping the motion of Watches equal,
in order to Longitudes and Astronomical uses, and infinite other advantages.

He was the first Author of the Noble Anatomical Experiment of Injecting
Liquors into the Veins of Animals. An Experiment now vulgarly known; but long
since exhibited to the Meetings at Oxford, and thence carried by some Germans,
and published abroad. By this Operation diverse Creatures were immediately
purged, vomited, intoxicated, killed, or revived, according to the quality of
the Liquor injected: Hence arose many new Experiments, and chiefly that of
Transfusing Blood, which the Society has prosecuted in sundry Instances, that
will probably end in extraordinary Success.

This is a short account of the Principal Discoveries which Dr. Wren has
presented or suggested to this Assembly. I know very well, that some of them he
did only start and design; and that they have been since carried on to
perfection, by the Industry of other hands. I purpose not to rob them of their
share in the honor: Yet it is but reasonable, that the original Invention
should be ascribed to the true Author, rather than the Finishers. Nor do I fear
that this will be thought too much, which I have said concerning him: For there
is a peculiar reverence due to so much excellence covered with so much modesty.
And it is not Flattery but honesty, to give him his just praise; who is so far
from usurping the fame of other men, that he endeavors with all care to
conceal his own.

I have now performed my Promise, and drawn out of the Papers of the Society,
an Epitome of the chief Works they have conceived in their minds, or reduced
into Practice. If any shall yet think they have not usefully employed their
time, I shall be apt to suspect, that they understand not what is meant by a
diligent and profitable laboring about Nature. There are indeed some men who
will still condemn them for being idle; unless they immediately profess to have
found out the Squaring of the Circle, or the Philosophers Stone, or some other
such mighty Nothings. But if these are not satisfied with what the Society has
done, they are only to blame the extravagance of their own Expectations. I
confess I cannot boast of such pompous Discoveries: They promise no Wonders,
nor endeavor after them: Their Progress has been equal, and firm, by Natural
degrees, and through small things, as well as great: They go leisurably on; but
their slowness is not caused by their idleness, but care. They have contrived
in their thoughts, and courageously begun an Attempt, which all Ages had
despaired of. It is therefore fit that they alone, and not others, who refuse
to partake of their burden, should be Judges by what steps, and what pace, they
ought to proceed.

Such men are then to be entreated not to interrupt their Labors with
impertinent rebukes; they are to remember, that the Subject of their Studies is
as large as the Universe: and that in so vast an Enterprise, many intervals and
disappointments must be recon'd upon. Though they do not behold that the
Society has already filled the world with perfect Sciences; yet they are to be
informed, that the nature of their Work required that they should first begin
with immethodical Collections and indigested Experiments, before they go on to
finish and compose them into Arts. In which Method they may well be justified,
seeing they have the Almighty Creator himself for an Example: For he at first
produced a confused and scattered Light; and reserved it to be the work of
another day, to gather and fashion it into beautiful Bodies.

The End of the Second Part.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY. The THIRD PART.
THough it be certain, Sect. I. The Subject and Division of this Third Part.
that the promoting of Experiments according to this Idaea, cannot injure the
Virtue, or Wisdom of Men's minds, or their former Arts, and Mechanical
Practices; or their established ways of life: Yet the perfect innocence of
this design, has not been able to free it from the Cavil of the Idle, and the
Malicious; nor from the jealousies of Private Interests. These groundless
prejudices of the particular Professions, and Ranks of Men, I am now in the
Last place to remove; and to show that there is no Foundation for them: To
suspect the Change, which can be made by this Institution; or the new things it
it likely to produce.

That it will probably be the Original of many new things, I am so far from
denying, that I cheerfully acknowledge it. Nor am I frighted at that, which is
wont to be objected in this Case, the hazard of alteration, and Novelty. For if
all things that are new be destructive, all the several means, and degrees, by
which Mankind has risen to this perfection of Arts, were to be condemned. If to
be the Author of new things, be a crime; how will the first Civilizers of Men,
and makers of Laws, and Founders of Governments escape? Whatever now delights
us in the Works of Nature, that excells the rudeness of the first Creation, is
New. Whatever we see in Cities, or Houses, above the first wildness of Fields,
and meaness of Cottages, and nakedness of Men, had its time, when this
imputation of Novelty, might as well have bin laid to its charge. It is not
therefore an offense, to profess the introduction of New things, unless that
which is introduced prove pernicious in itself; or cannot be brought in,
without the extirpation of others, that are better.

And that Experimental Knowledge, will not expose us to these dangers, I am
next to declare, in a Universal Apology for its intentions, and effects. This
was the Third Portion, which I at first reserved, for the Conclusion of my
Discourse. Yet casting my eyes back, I find, that I have already on several
occasions prevented my self; and said many things as I came along, which would
have bin more proper for this place. But I desire that my Reader would
interpret this to have proceeded from the Nature of my Subject, of which it is
hard to Write a plain History, without falling sometimes unawares into its
Praise. And now I will proceed to a fuller, and more solemn Defense: In which,
I will try to prove, that the increase of Experiments will be so far from
hurting, that it will be many ways advantageous, above other Studies, to the
wonted Courses of Education; to the Principles, and instructions of the minds
of Men in general; to the Christian Religion, to the Church of England; to all
Manual Trades; to Physic; to the Nobility, and Gentry; and the Universal
Interest of the whole Kingdom.

In all which Particulars, I hope I shall represent this Model, to be
inoffensive to all the various ways of Living, already in use: and thereby I
shall secure all the Ancient Proprietors in their Rights: A work as necessary
to be done, in raising a new Philosophy as we see it is in building a new
London.

The First prejudice I am to wipe away, Sect. II. Experiments will not injure
Education.
concerns the usual ways of Education. For it is an obvious doubt; whether so
great a change in Works, and Opinions, may not have some fatal consequence, on
all the former Methods of Teaching, which have bin long settled, and approved by
much Custom. And here many Good Men of severe, and ancient manners, may seem to
have reason, when they urge against us; that the Courses of Trayning up of
Youth, ought to be still the same; that if they be subverted, or multiplied,
much confusion will follow; and that this our Universal Inquiry into things
hitherto unquestioned, can never be made, without disturbing such established
Rules of Discipline, and Instruction.

For a General Answer to this, it might suffice to declare, that in this
Institution, Men are not engaged in these Studies, till the Course of Education
be fully completed: that the Art of Experiments, is not thrust into the hands
of Boys, or set up to be performed by Beginners in the School; but in an
Assembly of Men of Ripe years: who while they begin a new Method of Knowledge,
which shall consist of Works, and is therefore most proper for Men: they still
leave to Learners, and Children, the old talkative Arts which best fit the
younger Age. From hence it must follow, that all the various manners of
Education, will remain undisturbed; because the practices of them, and the
labors of this, are not appointed to meet in the same Age, or Persons. But if
this will not satisfy our Adversaries, let us proceed to consider the different
Parts of Education: and then we shall be able to make the surer Conjectures,
what manner of Influence, new Experiments will have upon it.

Education Consists in diverse Rules, and Practices, whereby men are furnished
for all the several Courses of Life, to which they may apply themselves. Of
these praeparatory Arts, some concern the Body, some the Mind. Those of the
Body have no relation to my present Argument: Of those of the Mind, some intend
the purity, and Ornament of Speech: Some the Knowledge of the Actions of
former, and present Times: Some the Government, and Virtu of our Lives: Some
the Method of reasoning: Some the skill in the motions and measures of the
Hevens, and the Earth, and all this great Frame of Visible things.

Grammar. and Rhetoric.
First then I will make no scruple to acquit Experimental Philosophy, from
having any ill effects, on the usual Arts, whereby we are taught the Purity,
and Elegance of Languages. Whatever discoveries shall appear to us afresh, out
of the hidden things of Nature, the same words, and the same ways of
Expression will remain. Or if perhaps by this means, any change shall be made
herein; it can be only for the better; by supplying men's Tongues, with very
many new things, to be named, and adorned, and described in their discourse.

Nor can there be any more jealousy concerning the Moral, Moral Philosophy.
and Political Rules of ordering men's lives. But they may still have the same
influence, and authority, and may be proposed to our imitation, by the same
praecepts, and arguments, of persuasion.

It is also as manifest, History.
that the Art of teaching the Actions of former Ages; can from hence receive no
damage, or alteration. This cannot be otherwise; seeing the Subjects of
Natural, and Civil History do not cross each other; nor does the New Philosophy
of Nature more interfere, with the Historys of Men, and Government, than the
Old, of which this doubt was never raised.

Thus far then we are secure. These great, and fundamental Parts of Education,
the Instruments of men's Expressing, and Ruling their own minds, and searching
into the Actions of others, will be unaltered, whatever new changes of Opinions
may arise about Natural Things. Let us next go on to consider the Arts of
Demonstration, and Argumentation, in which consists one of the most weighty
Parts of youthful Studies.

First for all the Mathematical Sciences, The Mathematics.
they will still remain the same, and still continue to be learned, and taught,
in the same Systemes, and Methods as before. Nothing that can now be discovered
will subvert, but rather Confirm what is already well built on those immovable
principles. As they came down to us without detriment, through all the corrupt
Times of Learning; so they will certainly now continue incorrupt, at this
present, when Learning is restored. Seeing they could not be destroyed in the
Ignorant Ages, they will be in no fear, at this time, by this Institution,
which designs not only to enlarge them, but to promote the same rigid way of
Conclusion in all other Natural things, which only the Mathematics have
hitherto maintaind.

Metaphyscis and Logic.
Now then, this whole controversy is reduced to the alteration, which the Logic,
and physics of the Ancients, may receive by this change. As for their
Metaphysics, they scarce deserve to have a place allowed them in this
consideration.

Nor does that prevail with me, which the Lovers of that Cloudy Knowledge are
wont to boast, that it is an excellent instrument to refine, and make subtle
the minds of men. For there may be a greater Excess in the subtilty of men's
wits, than in their thickness: as we see those threads, which are of too fine a
spinning, are found to be more useless, than those which are homespun, and
gross.

Logic is the Art of Conceiving, Arguing, and Method. And notwithstanding all
the progress which may happen in Natural Knowledge, all the several parts of
Reasoning, which it teaches in all manner of business, will continue the same.
The operations, and powers of the mind will still be the same: they will still
be subject to the same errors: they will still use the same degrees of Arguing
from particular things, to propositions, and conclusions; and therefore they
will still require the same means, and exercises for direction. It is not the
complaint of the promoters of Experiments, that men have bin wanting to
themselves, in regulating, disposing, or judging of their own thoughts. Nay
they rather condemn them, for being wholly imployd about the productions of
their own minds, and neglecting all the works of Nature, that are without them.
It cannot therefore be suspected that these Inquisitive Men, should busy
themselves, about altering the Art of Discourse, wherein they judge that mankind
has bin already rather too Curious, than negligent.

The Last part that I shall mention, Natural Philosophy.
of the Learning that is taught, is the Systeme of Natural Philosophy. And it
is in this alone, that I can allow, there will be any alteration made, by this
reformation of Knowledge. But yet the change will be so advantageous, that I
have no reason to dissemble it. I grant indeed that the greatest part of the
former Body of Physics, may hereby chance to fall to the ground. But to what
sum will the damage amount? What can we lose, but only some few definitions,
and idle questions, and empty disputations? Of which I may say as one did of
Metaphors, Poterimus vivere sine illis. Perhaps there will be no more use of
Twenty, or Thirty obscure Terms, such as Matter, and Form, Privation,
Entelichia, and the like. But to supply their want, and infinite variety of
Inventions, Motions, and Operations, will succeed in the place of words. The
Beautiful Bosom of Nature will be Exposed to our view: we shall enter into its
Garden, and taste of its Fruits, and satisfy our selves with its plenty: instead
of Idle talking, and wandering, under its fruitless shadows; as the Peripatetics
did in their first institution, and their Successors have done ever since.

Sect. III. Experiments not dangerous to the Universities.
Thus for I have briefly examined the influence of new Experiments, or all the
chief Parts of Education. And after all the Innovation, of which they can be
suspected, we find nothing will be endangered, but only the physics of
Antiquity: wherein we also behold, that many things of greater concernment,
will arise, to supply the place of what shall be cut away. By this discourse, I
hope, I have said enough, to manifest the innocence of this Design in respect
of all the present Schools of Learning; and especially our own Universities.
And it was but just, that we should have this tenderness, for the Interest of
those magnificent Seats of humane Knowledge, and divine; to which the Natural
Philosophy of our Nation, cannot be injurious without horrible ingratitude;
seeing in them it has been principally cherished, and revived. From thence the
greatest part of our Modern Inventions have deduced their Original. It is true
such Experimental Studies are largely dispersed at this time: But they first
came forth thence, as the Colonies of old did from Rome: and therefore as those
did, they should rather intend the strength, than the destruction of their
Mother-Cities.

I confess there have not bin wanting some forward Assertors of new Philosophy,
who have not used any kind of Moderation toward them: But have presently
concluded, that nothing can be well-done in new Discoveries, unless all the
Ancient Arts be first rejected, and their Nurseries abolished. But the rashness
of these men's proceedings, has rather prejudiced, than advanced, what they make
show to promote. They have come as furiously to the purging of Philosophy, as
our Modern Zealots did to the reformation of Religion. And the one Party is as
justly to be condemned, as the other. Nothing will suffice either of them, but
an utter Destruction, Root and Branch, of whatever has the face of Antiquity.
But as the Universities have withstood the fierceness of the ones zeal without
knowledge; so there is no doubt, but they will also prevail against the
violence of the others pretenses to knowledge without prudence.

But now after I have shown that all the received forms of Education will be
safe, Sect. IV. The advantage of an Experimental Education.
I shall make no scruple to add my conjecture, that it could be no hindrance to
the minds of men, if besides those courses of Studies which are now followed,
there were also trial made of some other more practical ways, to prepare their
minds for the world, and the businesses of human life. It is not enough to urge
against this, that the multiplicity of Methods would hinder and confound the
Spirits of young men; for it is apparent that nothing more suppresses the
Genius of Learners, than the formality, and the confinement of the Precepts, by
which they are instructed. To this purpose I will venture to propose to the
consideration of wise men, whether this way of Teaching by Practice and
Experiments, would not at least be as beneficial, as the other by Universal
Rules? Whether it were not as profitable to apply the eyes, and the hands of
Children, to see, and to touch all the several kinds of sensible things, as to
oblige them to learn, and remember the difficult Doctrines of general Arts? In
a word, Whether a Mechanical Education would not excel the Methodical?

This certainly is no new device: For it was that which Plato intended; when he
enjoined his Scholars to begin with Geometry; whereby, without question, he
designed, that his Disciples should first handle Material Things, and grow
familiar to visible Objects, before they entered on the retired Speculations of
other more abstracted Sciences.

According to this counsel of the Father of Philosophers, it would not be
amiss, if before young Scholars be far engaged in the beaten tracks of the
Schools, the Mysteries of Manual Arts, the names of their Instruments, the
secrets of their Operations, the effects of Natural causes, the several kinds
of Beasts, of Birds, of Fishes, of Plants, of Stones, of Minerals, of Earths,
of Waters, and all their common Virtues and Qualities, were proposed to be the
subjects of their first thoughts and observations. It may be here suggested,
That the vast number of such particulars will soon overwhelm their tender
minds, before they are well established by time, and use. But on the contrary
it is evident, that the Memories of Youth are fitter to retain such sensible
images, than those of a fuller age. It is Memory that has most vigor in
Children, and Judgment in Men: which if rightly considered, will confirm what I
said, that perhaps we take a praeposterous course in Education, by teaching
General Rules, before Particular Things: and that therein we have not a
sufficient Regard, to the different advantages of Youth and Manhood. We load
the minds of Children with Doctrines, and Praecepts, to apprehend which they
are most unfit, by reason of the weakness of their understandings; whereas they
might with more profit be exercised in the consideration of visible and
sensible things; of whose impressions they are most capable, because of the
strength of their Memories, and the perfection of their Senses.

The first years of men being thus freed from any apprehensions of mischief by
new Experiments: Sect. V. The use of Experiments to a practical Life.
I will now proceed more boldly to bring them in amidst the Throngs, and Crowds
of human business; and to declare to all Professions, and practical Lives, that
they can receive no ill impressions from them, but that they will be the most
beneficial and proper Studies, for their praeparation and direction. And to
this purpose, I will treat of their usefulness, both in respect of men's public
practice, and the private government of their own minds.

As to the first, Experiments free from the faults of other sorts of Learning.
it has bin an old complaint, that has bin long managed by men of business,
against many sorts of Knowledge, that our thoughts are thereby infected with
such conceptions, as make them more unfit for action, than they would have bin,
if they were wholly left to the force of their own Nature. The common
Accusations against Learning are such as these; That it inclines men to be
unsettled, and contentious; That it takes up more of their time, than men of
business ought to bestow; That it makes them Romantic, and subject to frame
more perfect images of things, than the things themselves will bear; That it
renders them overweening, unchangeable, and obstinat; That thereby men become
averse from a practical course, and unable to bear the difficulties of action;
That it emploies them about things, which are no where in use in the world;
and, That it draws them to neglect and contemn their own present times, by
doting on the past. But now I will maintain, that in every one of these dangers
Experimental Knowledge is less to be suspected than any other; That in most of
them (if not all) it is absolutely innocent; nay, That it contains the best
remedies for the distempers which some other sorts of Learning are thought to
bring with them.

Sect. VI. The first objection against Learning, That it makes men too
disputative.
The first Objection against Knowledge, of which I shall take notice in the
active part of life is this, That it makes men too plentiful in their thoughts;
too inventive, and cavilling in their Arguments; and so rather teaches them to
be witty in objecting, than ready in resolving, and diligent in performing. I
confess the Ancient Philosophy will hardly be able to vindicate it self from
this charge: For its chief purpose is to enlarge the fancy, and to fill the
head with the matter and artifice of discourse. But this cannot any way touch
the Art of Experiments. That consists not in Topics of reasoning, but of
working: That indeed is full of doubting and inquiry, and will scarce be
brought to settle its assent: But it is such a doubting as proceeds on Trials,
and not on Arguments. That does neither practice nor cherish this humor of
disputing, which Breaks the force of things by the subtilty of words; as Seneca
was said to do by his style: It weakens men's arms, and slackens all the sinews
of action: For so it commonly happens, that such earnest disputers evaporate
all the strength of their minds in arguing, questioning, and debating; and tire
themselves out before they come to the Practice.

Sect. VII. The second, That it takes up too much time.
The next accusation is, That so many intricate paths, and spacious windings of
Learning, will require more time than can be spared by men of active and busy
lives. The belief of this has always made a wide divorce between men of
knowledge and action; while both have thought, that they must either be wholly
Scholars, or wholly men of business; and that an excellence in both these
courses can never be obtained by human wit. It Is true indeed, there is no
Knowledge or Science that can be acquitted from being too large, if their
Professors have not the discretion to know how far to proceed, and what
moderation is to be used in every Study. There is in the least Art enough
matter, about which if men shall resolve to trouble their brains all their
lives, one question and difficulty will perpetually beget another, and so (as
one of the Ancients says) Ipsa tractatio, and question quotidie ex se gignet
aliquid, quod cum desidiosa delectatione vestiges.

To this danger perhaps Experiments may seem most exposed, by reason of the
infinite multitude of particulars, and innumerable variations of inquiries, that
may be made. But the Royal Society has prevented this mischief, by the number
and succession of those that shall undertake the work. They require not the
whole time of any of their Members, except only of their Curators: From the
rest they expect no more but what their business, nay even their very
recreations can spare. It is the continuance and perpetuity of such
Philosophical labors, to which they principally trust; which will both allow a
sufficient relaxation to all the particular laborers, and will also give good
assurance of the happy issue of their work at the last: For though that be
true, which the Great Physician laments, That Art is long, and Life is short;
yet many Lives of studious and industrious men in one Age, and the succession
of many Lives of such men in all future Ages, will undoubtedly prove as long as
Art it self.

Sect. VIII. The third objection, That it makes our minds Romantic.
They farther object against Learning, That it makes our minds too lofty and
Romantic, and inclines them to form more perfect imaginations of the matters we
are to practice, than the matters themselves will bear. I cannot deny, but a
mere contemplative man is obnoxious to this error: He converses chiefly in his
Closet, with the heads and notions of things, and so discerns not their bottoms
near and distinctly enough: And thence he is subject to overlook the little
circumstances, on which all human actions depend. He is still reducing all
things to standing Doctrines; and therefore must needs be liable to neglect the
opportunities, to set upon business too soon, or too late; to put those things
together in his mind, which have no agreement in Nature. But this above all is
his greatest danger, that thinking it still becomes him to go out of the
ordinary way, and to refine and heighten the conceptions of the vulgar, he will
be ready to disdain all the Natural and easy ways of Practice, and to believe
that nothing ought to be done, though never so common, but by some device of
Art, and trick of unusual wisdom.

From these inconveniences the Experimenter is secure: He invents not what he
does out of himself; but gathers it from the footsteps and progress of Nature.
He looks on every thing standing equal to it, and not as from a higher ground:
He labors about the plain and undigested objects of his senses, without
considering them as they are joined into common Notions. He has an opportunity
of understanding the most natural ways by which all things are produced. He
clearly beholds all the secret accidents and turnings, advantages and failings
of Nature. He indevors rather to know, than to admire; and looks upon
admiration, not as the end, but the imperfection of our knowledge.

The next hindrance of Action, Sect. IX. The fourth objection, That it makes
men presumptuous and obstinate.
is an obstinacy of resolution, and a want of Dexterity, to change our
apprehensions of things according to occasions. This is the more destructive,
because it carries with it the most solemn appearance of Wisdom. There is
scarce any thing that renders a man so useless, as a pervers sticking to the
same things in all times, because he has sometimes found them to have bin in
season. But now in this, there is scarce any comparison to be made, between him
who is only a thinking man; and a man of experience. The first does commonly
establish his constant Rules, by which he will be guided: The later makes none
of his opinions irrevocable. The one if he mistakes, receives his errors from
his Understanding; the other only from his Senses; and so he may correct, and
alter them with more ease. The one fixes his opinions as soon; the other doubts
as long as he can. The one chiefly strives to be unmovable in his mind: The
other to enlarge, and amend his knowledge: And from hence the one is inclined
to be praesumptuous, the other modest in his judgment.

The next pretense, Sect. X. The fifth objection, That its pleasure draws men
off from business.
on which men of Learning are wont to be vilified, is, that they use to be so
much affected, with the pleasant musings of their own thoughts, as to abhor the
roughness, and toil of business. This accusation I confess, is not altogether
groundless. The solitary imaginations of Speculative Men are of all other the
most easy: there a man meets with little stubborness of matter: he may choose
his subject where he likes; he may fashion and turn it as he pleases: whereas
when he comes abroad into the world, he must endure more contradiction: more
difficulties are to be overcome; and he cannot always follow his own Genius: so
that it is not to be wondered, that so many great Wits have despised the labor
of a practical course; and have rather chosen to shut themselves up from the
nois and preferments of the World, to convers in the shadow with the pleasant
productions of their own fancies.

And this perhaps is the reason why the most extraordinary men of Arts in all
Ages, are generally observed to be the greatest Humorists: They are so full of
the sweetness of their own conceptions, that they become morose, when they are
drawn from them, they cannot easily make their minds ductil and pliable to
others tempers, and so they appear untractable, and unskilful in conversation.

From this I shall also free the Experimental Philosopher. The satisfaction
that he finds, is not imaginary, but real: It is drawn from things that are not
out of the world, but in it: It does not carry him farther off, but brings him
nearer to Practice. It Is true, that Knowledge which is only founded on thoughts
and words, has seldom any other end, but the breeding and increasing of more
thoughts and words: But that which is built on Works (as his will be) will
naturally desire to discover, to augment, to apply, to communicate it self by
more Works.

Nor can it be thought, that his mind will be made to languish by this pleasure
of observation, and to have any aversion from the difficulty and tediousness of
human affairs; seeing his way of observation itself is so laborious. It is a
good Precept, which is wont to be given, in respect of all sorts of Exercises,
that they should be at least as hard and toilsom, as that Art which we strive
to gain by them. And by this rule Experiments are an excellent preparation
toward any habit or faculty of life whatsoever. For what thing, which can be
effected by mortal Industry, can seem impossible to him who has been engaged in
these Studies, which require such an indefatigable watchfulness? What can
overcome his diligence, who has bin able to sustain with patience the escapes;
the delays, the labyrinths of Nature? whom the repetition of so many labors,
so many failings, with which he meets, and so long attendance could not tire?

Another Principal mischief to be avoided, Sect. XI. The sixth objection, That
it makes men regard the times past, and neglect the present.
is the conformity of our Actions to times past, and not the present. This
extravagance is generally imputed to studious men; and they cannot be wholly
acquitted from it. For while they continue heaping up in their Memories the
customs of past Ages, they fall insensibly to imitate them, without any manner
of care how suitable they are to Times and Things. The grounds of this mistake
will be worth our discovering, because in men's opinions it does so much
prejudice to the learned part of the World. In the ancient Authors which they
turn over, they find descriptions of Virtues more perfect than indeed they
were: the Governments are represented better, and the ways of life pleasanter
than they deserved. Upon this, these Bookish wise men strait compare what they
read with what they see: and here beholding nothing so heroically transcendent,
because they are able to mark all the spots, as well as beauties of every
thing, that is so close to their sight, they presently begin to despise their
own times, to exalt the past, to contemn the virtues and aggravate the vices of
their Country; not indeavoring to amend them, but by such examples as are now
unpracticable, by reason of the alteration of Men and Manners.

For this defect, Experiments are a sovereign cure: They give us a perfect
sight of what is before us; they bring us home to our selves; they make us live
in England, and not in Athens or Sparta; at this present time, and not three
thousand years ago: though they permit us to reflect on what has bin done in
former Ages; yet they make us chiefly to regard and contemplat the things that
are in our view. This certainly is conformable to the Design of Nature it self;
which though it has framed our bodies in that manner, that we may easily upon
occasion turn about to look behind us; yet it has placed the Eyes, the chief
instruments of observation, not in our Backs, but in our Foreheads.

Sect. XI. The seventh objection, That it hinders use.
The last failing which is wont to be imputed to Learned men, is want of use,
and fear of practice, and a conversing with things in their Studies, which they
meet with no where else. It may now perhaps be thought, that an Experimenter is
as inclinable to these weaknesses, as he that only contemplates; because they
both keep out of the way, in the shadow; the one in his Library, arguing,
objecting, defending, concluding with himself: the other in his Work-hous, with
such Tools and Materials, whereof many perhaps are not publicly in use. Let us
then consider which of them is most to be blamed for conversing with matters
unlike those that we meet with in Civil affairs? and which most abounds with
fears and doubts, and mistaken idaeas of things?

It cannot be denied, but the men of Reading do very much busy themselves about
such conceptions, which are no where to be found out of their own Chambers. The
sense, the custom, the practice, the judgment of the world, is quite a
different thing from what they imagine it to be in private. And therefore it is
no wonder, if when they come abroad into business, the sight of Men, the Tumult
and nois of Cities, and the very brightness of Day it self affright them: Like
that Rhetorician, who having bin used to declaim in the shade of a School, when
he came to plead a true cause in the open Air, desired the Judges to remove
their Seat under some roof, because the light offended him.

But now on the other side, the men of Works and Experiments perhaps do not
always handle the very same Subjects that are acted on the stage of the World;
yet they are such as have a very great resemblance to them. It is matter, a
visible and sensible matter, which is the object of their labors: And the same
is also used by men of practical lives. This likeness of their Employments will
soon make the one excel in the other. For it is far easier for him who has been
conversant in one sort of works to apply himself to any other; than for him who
has only thought much, to turn a man of Practice: as he that can paint the face
of a Man or a Lion, will much sooner come to draw any other Creature; than he
who has all the Rules of Limning in his head, but never yet used his hand to
lay on a Color.

And as for the terrors and misapprehensions which commonly confound weaker
minds, and make men's hearts to fail and boggle at Trifles; there is so little
hope of having them removed by Speculation alone, that it is evident they were
first produced by the most contemplative men amongst the Ancients; and chiefly
prevailed of late years, when that way of Learning florish'd. The Poets began
of old to impose the deceit. They to make all things look more venerable than
they were, devised a thousand false Chimaeras; on every Field, River, Grove,
and Cave, they bestowed a Fantasm of their own making: With these they amazed
the world; these they clothed with what shapes they pleased; by these they
pretended, that all Wars, and Counsails, and Actions of men were administered.
And in the modern Ages these Fantastical Forms were revived, and possessed
Christendom, in the very height of the Scholemens time: An infinite number of
Fairies haunted every house; all Churches were filled with Apparitions; men
began to be frighted from their Cradles, which fright continued to their
Graves, and their Names also were made the causes of scaring others. All which
abuses if those acute Philosophers did not promote, yet they were never able to
overcome; nay, even not so much as King Oberon and his invisible Army.

But from the time in which the Real Philosophy has appeared, there is scarce
any whisper remaining of such horrors: Every man is unshaken at those Tales, at
which his Ancestors trembled: The course of things goes quietly along, in its
own true channel of Natural Causes and Effects. For this we are beholden to
Experiments; which though they have not yet completed the discovery of the true
world, yet they have already vanquished those wild inhabitants of the false
worlds, that used to astonish the minds of men. A Blessing for which we ought
to be thankful, if we remember, that it is one of the greatest Curses that God
pronounces on the wicked, That they shall fear where no fear is.

From what I have said, may be gathered, That Experimental Philosophy will
prevent men's spending the strength of their thoughts about Disputes, by turning
them to Works: That it may well be attended by the united Labors of many,
without wholly devouring the time of those that labor: That it will cure our
minds of Romantic swelling, by showing all things familiarly to them, just as
large as they are: That it will free them from perversity, by not permitting
them to be too peremptory in their Conclusions: That it accustoms our hands to
things which have a near resemblance to the business of life; and, That it
draws away the shadows which either enlarge or darken human affairs. And indeed
of the usual titles by which men of business are wont to be distinguished, the
Crafty, the Formal, and the Prudent; The Crafty may answer to the Empyric in
Philosophy; that is, he is such a one who has a great collection of particular
Experiences, but knows not how to use them but to base and low ends. The Formal
man may be compared to the mere Speculative Philosopher: For he vainly reduces
every thing to grave and solemn general Rules, without discretion, or mature
deliberation. And lastly, the Prudent man is like him who proceeds on a
constant and solid course of Experiments. The one in Civil life neither wholly
rejects the Wisdom of Ancient or Modern times: The other in Philosophy has the
same reverence for former Ages, and regard for the present. The one does not
rest upon empty prudence, but designs it for action: the other does the same
with his discoveries: upon a just, severe, and deliberate examination of
things, they both rays their Observations, which they do not suffer to lie
idle, but use them to direct the actions, and supply the wants of human life.

Sect. XIII. Experiments useful for the cure of men's minds
Besides what I have said of the help, which Experiments will bring to our
public duties, and civil actions: I promised to add something, concerning the
assistance, that they are able to give, toward the management of the private
motions, and passions of our minds: Of this I need say the less, because there
is amongst the Philosophers, a particular Science appointed for this purpose,
to prescribe rules for calming our affections, and conquering our vices.
However I will not wholly pass it over in silence. But I will try in few words
to make appear, that the Real Philosophy will supply our thoughts with
excellent Medicines, against their own Extravagances, and will serve in some
sort, for the same ends, which the Moral professes to accomplish.

If we shall cast an eye on all the Tempests, which arise within our Breasts,
and consider the causes, and remedies of all the violent desires, malicious
envies, intemperate joys, and irregular griefs, by which the lives of most men
become miserable, or guilty: we shall find, that they are chiefly produced by
Idleness, and may be most naturally cured by diversion. Whatever Art shall be
able to busy the minds of men, with a constant course of innocent Works, or to
fill them with as vigorous, and pleasant Images, as those ill impressions, by
which they are deluded; it will certainly have a surer effect in the composing,
and purifying of their thoughts, than all the rigid praecepts of the Stoical,
or the empty distinctions of the Peripatetic Moralists.

Now then it is required in that study, which shall attempt, according to the
force of Nature, to cure the diseases of the mind, that it keep it from
idleness by full, and earnest employments, and that it possess it with
innocent, various, lasting, and even sensible delights.

How active, and industrious the Art of Experiments ought to be, may be
concluded from the whole tenor of my discourse: wherein I have often proved,
that it can never be finished by the perpetual labors of any one man, nay
scarce by the successive force of the greatest Assembly.

That therefore being taken for granted, that it will afford eternal
employments: It is also as true that its labors will contain the most
affecting, and the most diverting Delights: and that thence it has power enough
to free the minds of men from their vanities, and intemperance, by that very
way which the greatest Epicure has no reason to reject, by opposing pleasure
against pleasure.

And I dare challenge all the corrupt Arts of our Senses, or the devices of
voluptuous wits, to provide fuller, more changeable, or nearer objects, for the
contentment of men's minds. It were indeed to be wished, that severe virtu
itself, attended only by its own Authority, were powerful enough to establish
its dominion. But it cannot be so. The corruptions, and infirmities of human
Nature stand in need of all manner of allurements, to draw us to good, and
quiet manners. I will therefore propose for this end this course of Study, which
will not affright us with rigid praecepts, or sou'r looks, or peevish commands,
but consists of sensible pleasure, and besides will be most lasting in its
satisfaction, and innocent in its remembrance.

What raptures can the most voluptuous men fancy to which these are not equal?
Can they relish nothing but the pleasures of their senses? They may here enjoy
them without guilt or remors. Are they affrighted at the difficulties of
Knowledge? Here they may meet with a Study, that as well fits the most
negligent minds, as the most industrious. This consists of so many Works, and
those so obvious, and facil, that the most laborious will never find cause to
be idle, and the most idle may still have something to do with the greatest
ease. In this they need not weary themselves by searching for matter. Whatever
they feel, or see, will afford them Observations. In this there is no tedious
praeparation required to fit them for such endeavors. As soon as they have the
use of their hands, and eyes, and common sense, they they are sufficiently
furnished to undertake them: Though we cannot comprehend the Arts of men
without many praevious Studies, yet such is the indulgence of Nature, that it
has from the beginning, out of its own store, sufficiently provided every man,
with all things, that are needful for the understanding of itself.

Thus neither the sensual mind, has any occasion to contemn Experiments as
unpleasant, nor the idle as burdensome, or intolerable, nor the virtuous as
unworthy of his labors. And the same influence they may have, on all other
moral imperfections of human Nature. What room can there be for low, and little
things in a mind so usefully and successfully employed? What ambitious disquiets
can torment that man, who has so much glory before him, for which there are
only required the delightful Works of his hands? What dark, or melancholy
passions can overshadow his heart, whose senses are always full of so many
various productions, of which the least progress, and success, will affect him
with an innocent joy? What anger, envy, hatred, or revenge can long torment his
breast, whom not only the greatest, and noblest objects, but every sand, every
pible, every grass, every earth, every fly can divert? To whom the return of
every season, every month, every day, do suggest a circle of most pleasant
operations? If the Ancients prescribed it as a sufficient Remedy, against such
violent Passions, only to repeat the Alphabet over: whereby there was leisure
given to the mind, to recover itself from any sudden fury: then how much more
effectual Medicines, against the same distempers, may be fetched from the whole
Alphabet of Nature, which represents itself to our Consideration, in so many
infinite Volumes!

I will now proceed to the weightiest, Sect. XIV. Experiments not dangerous to
the Christian Religion.
and most solemn part of my whole undertaking; to make a defense of the Royal
Society, and this new Experimental Learning, in respect of the Christian Faith.
I am not ignorant, in what a slippery place I now stand; and what a tender
matter I am entered upon. I know that it is almost impossible without offense,
to speak of things of this Nature, in which all Mankind, each Country, and now
almost every Family, do so widely disagree among themselves. I cannot expect
that what I shall say will escape misinterpretation, though it be spoken with
the greatest simplicity, and submission, while I behold that most men do rather
value themselves, and others, on the little differences of Religion, than the
main substance itself; and while the will of God is so variously distracted,
that what appears to be Piety to some Christians, is abhorred as the greatest
superstition, and heresy by others.

However to smooth my way as much as I can, and to prepare all our several
Spiritual Interests, to read this part with some tolerable moderation; I do
here in the beginning most sincerely declare, that if this design should in the
least diminish the Reverence, that is due to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, it
were so far from deserving protection, that it ought to be abhorred by all the
Politic, and Prudent; as well as by the devout Part of Christendom. And this I
profess, I think they were bound to do, not only from a just dread of the
Being, the Worship, the Omnipotence, the Love of God, all which are to be held
in the highest veneration: but also out of a regard to the peace, and
prosperity of men. In matters that concern our opinions of another World, the
least alterations are of wonderful hazard: how mischievous then would that
enterprise be, whose effects would abolish the command of Conscience, the
belief of a future life; or any of those Hevenly Doctrines, by which not only
the eternal condition of men is secured, but their natural Reason, and their
Temporal safety advanced? Whoever shall impiously attempt to subvert the
Authority of the Divine Power, on false pretenses to better Knowledge, he will
unsettle the strongest foundations of our hopes: he will make a terrible
confusion in all the offices, and opinions of men: he will destroy the most
prevailing Argument to virtu: he will remove all human Actions, from their
firmest center: he will even deprive himself, of the praerogative of his
Immortal Soul; and will have the same success, that the Ancient Fables make
those to have had, who contended with their Gods, of whom they report, that
many were immediately turned into Beasts.

With these apprehensions I come to examine the Objections, which I am now to
satisfy: and having calmly compared the Arguments of some devout men against
Knowledge, and chiefly that of Experiments; I must pronounce them both, to be
altogether inoffensive. I did before affirm, that the Royal Society is
abundantly cautious, not to intermeddle in Spiritual things: But that being
only a general plea, and the question not lying so much on what they do at
present, as upon the probable effects of their Enterprise; I will bring it to
the test through the chief Parts of Christianity; and show that it will be
found as much avers from Atheism, in its issue and consequences, as it was in
its original purpose.

The public Declaration of the Christian Religion, is to propose to mankind, an
infallible way to Salvation. Toward the performance of this happy end, besides
the Principles of Natural Religion, which consists in the acknowledgment and
Worship of a Deity: It has offered us the merits of a glorious Savior: By him,
and his Apostles Ministry, it has given us sufficient Examples, and Doctrines
to acquaint us with divine things, and carry us to Heven. In every one of
these, the Experiments of Natural things, do neither darken our eyes, nor
deceive our minds, nor deprave our hearts.

Sect. XV. Experiments will not destroy the Doctrine of the Godhead.
First there can be no just reason assigned, why an Experimenter should be prone
to deny the essence, and properties of God, the universal Sovereignty of his
Dominion, and his Providence over the Creation. He has before him the very same
argument, to confirm his judgment in all these; with which he himself is wont
to be abundantly satisfied, when he meets with it in any of his Philosophical
Inquiries. In every thing that he tryes, he believes, that this is enough for
him to rest on, if he finds, that not only his own, but the universal
Observations of men of all times and places, without any mutual conspiracy have
consented in the same conclusion. How can he then refrain from embracing this
common Truth, which is witnessed by the unanimous approbation of all Countries,
the agreement of Nations, and the secret acknowledgment of every man's breast?

It Is true his employment is about material things. But this is so far from
drawing him to oppose invisible Beings, that it rather puts his thoughts into
an excellent good capacity to believe them. In every work of Nature that he
handles, he knows that there is not only a gross substance, which presents
itself to all men's eyes; but an infinite subtilty of parts, which come not into
the sharpest sense. So that what the Scripture relates of the Purity of God, of
the Spirituality of his Nature, and that of Angels, and the Souls of men,
cannot seem incredible to him, when he perceives the numberless particles that
move in every man's Blood, and the prodigious streams that continually flow
unseen from every Body: Having found that his own senses have been so far
assisted by the Instruments of Art, he may sooner admit, that his mind ought to
be raised higher, by a Hevenly light, in those things wherein his senses do
fall short. If (as the Apostle says) the invisible things of God are manifested
by the visible; then how much stronger Arguments has he for his belief, in the
eternal power, and Godhead, from the vast number of Creatures, that are
invisible to others, but are exposed to his view by the help of his Experiments?

Thus he is praepar'd to admit a Deity, Sect. XVI. Experiments not injurious to
the worship of God.
and to embrace the consequences of that concession. He is also from his
Experiments as well furnished with Arguments to adore it: he has always before
his eyes the beauty, contrivance, and order of Gods Works: From hence, he will
learn to serve him with all reverence, who in all that he has made, consulted
Ornament, as well as Use.

From hence he will best understand the infinite distance between himself, and
his Creator, when he finds that all things were produced by him: whereas he by
all his study, can scarce imitate the least effects, nor hasten, or retard the
common course of Nature. This will teach him to Worship that Wisdom, by which
all things are so easily sustained, when he has looked more familiarly into
them, and beheld the chances, and alterations, to which they are exposed. Hence
he will be led to admire the wonderful contrivance of the Creation; and so to
apply, and direct his praises aright: which no doubt, when they are offered up
to Heven, from the mouth of one, who has well studied what he commends, will be
more suitable to the Divine Nature, than the blind applauses of the ignorant.
This was the first service, that Adam performed to his Creator, when he obeyed
him in mustring, and naming, and looking into the Nature of all the Creatures.
This had bin the only Religion, if men had continued innocent in Paradise, and
had not wanted a Redemption. Of this the Scripture itself makes so much use,
that if any devout man shall reject all Natural Philosophy, he may blot
Genesis, and Job, and the Psalms, and some other Books, out of the Canon of the
Bible. God never yet left himself without witness in the World: And it is
observable, that he has commonly chosen the dark and ignorant Ages, wherein to
work Miracles; but seldom or never the times when Natural Knowledge prevailed:
For he knew there was not so much need to make use of extraordinary signs, when
men were diligent in the works of his hands, and attentive on the impressions
of his footsteps in his Creatures.

It is almost a proverbial speech, That the most Learned Ages are still the
most Atheistical, and the ignorant most devout. Whoever devised this
distinction at first, the true Piety is little beholden to him for it: For
instead of obeying the Jewish Law, which forbids us to offer up to God a
Sacrifice that has a Blemish, he has bestowed the most excellent of all the
Race of men on the Devil; and has only assigned to Religion those Men and those
Times, which have the greatest Blemish of human Nature, even a defect in their
Knowledge and Understanding.

If there can be found any color for this observation, That the light of
Reason should produce a spiritual darkness; it can only then hold good, when
the knowledge of men, and not that of Nature abounds. Whether the first be
true, or no, let the Politicians consider: But of the second, this is a
sufficient conviction, that in most Countries God has been worshipped in a form
proportionable to that kind of Natural Philosophy in which they excelled. In
Persia, where the skill of the hevenly Motions first began, they had their
Temples on the Top of Hills, and open to the Air. In Egypt they had the best
opportunities of studying the Nature of living Creatures; by reason of that
variety which their River and their Land produced. And their Religious
Mysteries were contained in Hieroglyphics, which were most of them borrowed
from Beasts. And why should Natural Philosophy be now condemned, for contempt
of all Divinity, when of old it did rather incline them to Superstition, which
is the other extreme? It is true indeed, by that knowledge which they had of
many Creatures, they were drawn to adore them; but that was only because it was
imperfect: If they had understood them thoroughly, they had never done it: So
true is that saying of my Lord Bacon, That by a little knowledge of Nature men
become Atheists; but a great deal returns them back again to a sound and
Religious mind. In brief, if we rightly apprehend the matter, it will be found,
that it is not only sottishness, but profaneness, for men to cry out against the
understanding of Nature: For that being nothing else but the instrument of God,
whereby he gives being and action to things; the knowledge of it deserves so
little to be esteemed impious, that it ought rather to be reckoned as Divine.

But the chief part of our Religion, Sect. XVII. Experiments not praejudicial
to the doctrine of the Gospel.
on which the certainty of all the rest depends, is the Evangelical Doctrine of
Salvation by Jesus Christ. In this there is nothing, from which he that
converses much with Nature, can be thought to be more avers than others; nay,
to which he may not be concluded to be more inclinable, on this very account;
seeing it has all bin proved to him his own way. Had not the appearance of
Christ bin strengthened by undeniable signs of almighty Power, no age nor place
had bin obliged to believe his Message. And these Miracles with which he
asserted the Truths that he taught (if I might be allowed this boldness in a
matter so sacred) I would even venture to call Divine Experiments of his
Godhead.

What then can there be in all this Doctrine, at which a Real and impartial
Inquirer into Natural Things, should be offended? Does he demand a Testimony
from Heven? he has it: He reads effects produced, that did exceed all mortal
skill and force: And of this he himself is a better judge than others: For to
understand aright what is supernatural, it is a good step first to know what is
according to Nature.

Does he require that this should be testified, not by men of Craft or
Speculation; but rather by men of Honesty, Trades, and Business? The Apostles
were such. Will he not consent to any man's Opinions, unless he sees the
operations of his hands agree with them? Christ himself requires no more of any
of his Followers: For he commanded his Disciples not to believe him, but the
Works that he did. Does he think that it is the most honorable Labor to study
the benefit of Mankind? to help their infirmities? to supply their wants? to
ease their burdens? He here may behold the whole Doctrine of Future Happiness,
introduced by the same means; by feeding the Hungry, by curing the Lame, and by
opening the eyes of the Blind: All which may be called Philosophical Works,
performed by an Almighty hand.

What then can hinder him from loving and admiring this Savior, whose Design
is so conformable to his own, but his Ability so much greater? What jealousy
can he have of an imposture in this Messiah? Who though his Doctrine was so
pure and venerable, though his Life was so blameless, though he had the power
of Heaven and Earth in his hands, though he knew the thoughts of men, and might
have touched and moved them as he pleased; did yet not rely on his Doctrine, on
his Life, on the irresistible assistance of Angels, or on his own Divinity
alone; but stooped to convince men by their Senses, and by the very same course
by which they receive all their Natural Knowledge.

The last Doctrinal part of our Religion,. XVIII. Experiments will not
overthrow the Doctrine of the Primitive Church.
I shall mention, consists of those Doctrines which have been long since
deduced by consequences from the Scripture, and are now settled in the Body of
that Divinity, which was delivered down to us by the Primitive Church, and
which the generality of Christendom embraces. It may here be suggested, that
the sensible knowledge of things may in time abolish most of these, by
insinuating into men's minds, that they cannot stand before the impartiality of
Philosophical Inquisitions, But this surmise has no manner of foundation. These
Superstructures are of two sorts: either those of which a man may have a clear
apprehension in his thoughts, upon a rational account, and which are
intelligible to any ordinary Reader; or else such as exceed the common measures
of our Reason and Senses. There will be no fear that an Experimenter should
reject the first, seeing they may be conceived by the meanest capacity, and
have that stamp upon them, which he for the most part esteems the character of
Truth, that they are vulgar. But now toward the consenting to the last, there
is nothing better than to believe them in gross: And for this he is as well
prepared as any other Philosopher. If we suppose him sufficiently convinced of
the authority of the Deliverer (as I have already shown he may be) he cannot be
suspected for disavowing his word, though never so mystical; or for resisting
the voice of him, whose Arm he has found to be Omnipotent. This submission of
his judgment he may make, notwithstanding the severity of his Inquiries: And
the most subtle Speculative man in the world can do no more. After all his
acute Arguings in Divinity, he can never render any one point, which is the
proper object of Faith, to be plain, and equal, and expressible to our Reason.
What good can he then do? seeing he is not able to make it any way fitter for
our Faith, by all his Transcendental Notions, than it was before, on the bare
account of the wondrous Works of the Author.

This is the place in which the Peripatetic Philosophy has long triumphed: But
I cannot imagine on what right. The spiritual and supernatural part of
Christianity no Philosophy can reach: And in the plain things there is no need
of any at all: So that it is excluded on both accounts. In some Doctrines it is
useless, by reason of their sublimity; in others, because of their commoness.
How small assistance it brings, may be seen in those very points, in which its
Empire seems most to be placed, in Gods Decrees, his Immateriality, his
Eternity, and the holy Mystery of the Trinity: In all which we are only brought
into a more learned darkness by it; and in which unfathomable Depths a plain
Believing is at last acknowledged by all to be our only Refuge. The truth is,
notwithstanding the great stir they have made about Religion, if we had only
followed their light, we had still worshipped the Creator and Redeemer of the
World, under the same title by which their Praedecessors did formerly at
Athens, as the Unknown God.

This I have urged so far, because I am confident that the reducing of
Christianity to one particular Sect of Philosophy, and confining it to that, is
one of the most destructive Engines that ever was managed against it. Of this
the Church of Rome for her share has already found the ill effects: And the
danger is apparent: For by this means the benefit of Religion will become very
narrow, seeing where Reason takes place it will only convince them who are of
the same opinions in Philosophy with those that convert them. And also (that
which is worse) if ever by any fate of Times, or change of Governments, or
succession of new Arts, that Sect shall chance to be quite broken, the Doctrine
of Christ, relying upon it, were inevitably ruined, unless God were pleased to
support it a supernatural way, or to restore it again by new Miracles. Religion
ought not to be the subject of Disputations: It should not stand in need of any
devices of reason: It should in this be like the Temporal Laws of all
Countries, toward the obeying of which there is no need of syllogisms or
distinctions; nothing else is necessary but a bare promulgation, a common
apprehension, and sense enough to understand the Grammatical meaning of
ordinary words. Nor ought Philosophers to regret this divorce: seeing they have
almost destroyed themselves, by keeping Christianity so long under their guard:
By fetching Religion out of the Church, and carrying it Captive into the
Schools, they have made it suffer banishment from its proper place; and they
have withal thereby very much corrupted the substance of their own Knowledge:
They have done as the Philistims by seizing on the Ark: who by the same action,
deprived the People of God of their Religion, and also brought a Plague amongst
themselves.

Sect. XIX. Experiments will not hinder the Practice of Religion.
Thus far I trust it will be confessed, that Experiments are unblameable. But
yet there is much more behind, of which many pious men are wont to express
their jealousy. For though they shall be brought to allow, that all these
Doctrines, which I have named, may seem to remain safe amidst the studies of
Natural things: yet they still whisper, that they may chance by degrees, to
make the sincerity of devotion appear ridiculous, and to bring the strictness
of holy life out of fashion: and that so they will silently, and by
piece-meals, demolish Religion, which they dare not openly encounter. I will
therefore next endeavor the removal of these scruples, though I sufficiently
understand, that it is a very difficult Work, to confute such popular, and
plausible errors, which have the pretense of the cause of God to confirm them.

The chief substance of Real, and Sober Piety, is contained in the devout
observation of all those ways, whereby God has bin pleased to manifest his
Will; and in a right separation of our minds from the lusts, and desires of the
World. The most remarkable means, whereby he has made known his pleasure, are
those, which have been fixed, and revealed in his Word; or else the
extraordinary signs of his Authority, and Command.

Concerning our acknowledgment of his revealed Will in the Scripture, I have
already spoken. And our obedience to the later consists chiefly of two kinds:
an humble submission to Divine Prophecies, and a careful observance of all
remarkable Providence. In both which Experimental Philosophy may well be
justified. It may perhaps correct some excesses, which are incident to them:
But it declares no enmity against the things themselves.

The sum of the whole Doctrine of Prophecies is this, that the Great Creator of
the World has the Praerogative of foreseeing, appointing, and praedicting all
future Events: that he has often in former Ages made use of this power, by the
Visions, and raptures of holy men inspired from above: that his infinite Wisdom
has still the like ability to do the same: that whenever such praedictions are
accompanied, with undeniable Testimonies of their being sent from Heven, they
ought to be praefer'd before all human Laws.

The true Foundation of Divine Prodigies, is much of the same Nature with the
other. It relyes on these suppositions, that all the Creatures are subject to
Gods Word, by which they were made: that he can alter their Courses, exalt, or
destroy their Natures, and move them to different ends from their own,
according to his pleasure: that this he has often done heretofore: that still
his Arm it not weakened, nor the same omnipotence diminished: that still he may
change the wonted Law of the Creation, and dispose of the Beings, and motions
of all things, without control: and that when this is done, it is with a
peculiar design of punishing, or rewarding, or forewarning mankind.

To the belief and assertion of these Doctrines, we are obliged by the very end
of Religion itself. But yet their counterfeit colors have seduced many virtuous
minds into manifold mischiefs.

The mistakes about Prophecies may arise, either from our abusing of the old,
or a vain setting up of new. We err in the first, when we translate ancient
Prophecies from those times, and Countries, which they did properly regard, to
others, which they do not concern. And we offend in the second, when we admit
of New Prophetical Spirits in this Age, without the uncontrollable tokens of
Hevenly Authority.

We are guilty of false interpretations of Providence, and Wonders; when we
either make those to be Miracles that are none; or when we put a false sense on
those that are real, when we make general events to have a private aspect, or
particular accidents to have some universal signification. Though both these
may seem at first to have the strictest appearance of Religion, yet they are
the greatest usurpations on the secrets of the Almighty, and unpardonable
praesumptions on his high Praerogatives of Punishment, and reward.

Sect. XX. Experiments will not destroy the Doctrine of Prophecies, and
Prodigies.
And now if a moderating of these extravagances must be esteemed profaneness, I
profess, I cannot absolve the Experimental Philosopher. It must be granted,
that he will be very scrupulous, in believing all manner of Commentaries on
Prophetical Visions, in giving liberty to new praedictions, and in assigning
the causes, and marking out the paths of God's Judgments, amongst his Creatures.

He cannot suddenly conclude all extraordinary events to be the immediate Finger
of God, because he familiarly beholds the inward workings of things: and thence
perceives that many effects, which use to affright the Ignorant, are brought
forth by the common Instruments of Nature. He cannot be suddenly inclined, to
pass censure on men's eternal condition, from any Temporal Judgments that may
befall them; because his long convers with all matters, times, and places, has
taught him, the truth of what the Scripture says, that all things happen alike
to all. He cannot blindly consent to all imaginations of devout men, about
future Contingencies: seeing he is so rigid, in examining all particular matters
of Fact: He cannot be forward to assent to Spiritual Raptures, and Revelations:
because he is truly acquainted with the Tempers of men's Bodies, the Composition
of their Blood, and the power of Fancy: and so better understands the
difference, between Diseases, and Inspirations.

But in all this, he commits nothing, that is Irreligious. It Is true, to deny
that God has heretofore warned the World of what was to come, is to contradict
the very Godhead itself: But to reject the sense, which any private man shall
fasten to it, is not to disdain the Word of God, but the opinions of men like
our selves. To declare against the possibility, that new Prophets may be sent
from Heven is to insinuat that the same infinite Wisdom which once showed itself
that way, is now at an end. But to slight all pretenders, that come without the
help of Miracles, is not a contempt of the Spirit, but a just circumspection,
that the Reason of men be not over-reached. To deny that God directs the course
of human things, is stupidity: But to hearken to every Prodigy, that men frame
against their Enemies, or for themselves, is not to reverence the Power of God,
but to make that serve the Passions, and interests, and revenges of men.

It is a dangerous mistake, into which many Good men fall; that we neglect the
Dominion of God over the World, if we do not discover in every Turn of human
Actions many supernatural Providence, and miraculous Events. Whereas it is
enough for the honor of his Government, that he guids the whole Creation, in
its wonted course of Causes, and Effects: as it makes as much for the reputation
of a Prince's wisdom, that he can rule his subjects peaceably, by his known,
and standing Laws, as that he is often forced to make use of extraordinary
justice to punish, or reward.

Let us then imagine our Philosopher, to have all slowness of belief, and rigor
of Trial, which by some is miscalled a blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart. Let us suppose that he is most unwilling to grant that any thing exceeds
the force of Nature, but where a full evidence convinces him. Let it be
allowed, that he is always alarmed, and ready on his guard, at the noise of
any Miraculous Event; lest his judgment should be surpised by the disguises of
Faith. But does he by this diminish the Authority of Ancient Miracles? or does
he not rather confirm them the more, by confining their number, and taking care
that every falsehood should not mingle with them? Can he by this undermine
Christianity, which does not now stand in need of such extraordinary
Testimonies from Heven? or do not they rather endanger it, who still venture
all its Truths on so hazardous a chance? Who require a continuance of Signs,
and Wonders, as if the works of our Savior and his Apostles had not bin
sufficient: who ought to be esteemed the most carnally minded? the Enthusiast,
that pollutes his Religion, with his own passions? or the Experimenter, that
will not use it to flatter, and obey his own desires, but to subdue them? who
is to be thought the greatest enemy of the Gospel? He that loads men's Faiths,
by so many improbable things, as will go near to make the reality itself
suspected? or he that only admits a few Arguments, to confirm the Evangelical
Doctrines, but then chooses those, that are unquestionable? It cannot be an
ungodly purpose to strive to abolish all Holy Cheats: which are of fatal
consequence, both to the Deceivers, and those that are deceived: to the
Deceivers, because they must needs be Hypocrites, having the artifice in their
keeping: to the deceived, because if their eyes shall be ever opened, and they
chance to find, that they have been deluded in any one thing, they will be apt
not only to reject that, but even to despise the very Truths themselves, which
they had before bin taught by those deluders.

It were indeed to be confessed, that this severity of Censure on Religious
things, were to be condemned in Experimenters, if while they deny any wonders,
that are falsely attributed to the True God, they should approve those of Idols
or false Deities. But that is not objected against them. They make no
comparison between his power, and the works of any others, but only between the
several ways of his own manifesting himself. Thus if they lessen one heap yet
they still increas the other: In the main they diminish nothing of his right.
If they take from the Prodigies, they add to the ordinary Works of the same
Author. And those ordinary Works themselves, they do almost raise to the height
of Wonders, by the exact Discovery, which they make of their excellencies:
while the Enthusiast goes near to bring down the price of the True, and
Primitive Miracles, by such a vast, and such a negligent augmenting of their
number.

Sect. XXI. On his account Experiments are fit for the present Temper of our
Nation.
By this I hope it appears, that this Inquiring, this scrupulous, this
incredulous Temper is not the disgrace, but the honor of Experiments. And
therefore I will declare them to be the most seasonable study, for the present
Temper of our Nation. This wild amuzing men's minds, with Prodigies, and
conceits of Providence, has been one of the most considerable causes of those
spiritual distractions, of which our Country has long bin the Theater. This is
a vanity, to which the English seem to have bin always subject above others.
There is scarce any Modern Historian, that relates our Foreign Wars, but he has
this Objection against the disposition of our Countrymen, that they used to
order their affairs of the greatest importance, according to some obscure
Omens, or praedictions, that passed about amongst them, on little or no
foundations. And at this time, especially this last year, this gloomy, and
ill-boding humor has prevailed. So that it is now the fittest season for
Experiments to arise, to teach us a Wisdom, which springs from the depths of
Knowledge, to shake off the shadows, and to scatter the mists, which fill the
minds of men with a vain consternation. This is a work well-becoming the most
Christian Profession. For the most apparent effect, which attended the passion
of Christ, was the putting of an eternal silence, on all the false oracles, and
dissembled inspirations of Ancient Times.

There have bin it is true, some peculiar occasions, wherein God was pleased to
convince the World from Heven, in a visible manner. But if we consider the
Arguments that used to move him to it, we may conclude, that such wonderful
signs are not often now to be expected.

He has either done it, in Times of gross ignorance, or in the beginning of a
new way of Religion, or for the peculiar punishment of some praevailing
wickedness: Upon the account of the two first, we have no reason to expect
Wonders in this Age: because all sorts of Knowledge do so much abound; and
because we have a Religion already established, against which the Gates of Hell
shall never praevail.

The Third Time has bin, when God has taken to himself, the Exemplary
Punishment of some heinous Sin. From this indeed our Age is no more exempted,
than it is free from those vices, that are wont to provoke the Divine
Vengeance. This then we confess, that even at this present, God may declare
himself, against the Iniquities of men, by the supernatural Tokens of his
displeasure. But yet the Interpretation of such punishments ought to be
handled, with the greatest tenderness. For as it is said of the last, and
General Judgment, that no man knows the time, when it shall happen; so we may
also affirm of these particular Judgments: that there is no man, who
understands the Circumstances, or occasions of their infliction, but they are
one of the deepest parts of God's unsearchable Counsails.

Whenever therefore a hevy calamity falls from Heven on our Nation, a universal
Repentance is required; but all particular applications of private men, except
to their own hearts, is to be forborne. Every man must bewail his own
Transgressions, which have increased the Public misery. But he must not be too
hasty, in assigning the Causes of Plagues, or Fires, or inundations to the sins
of other men. Whoever thinks that way to repent, by condemning the miscarriages
of those parties, that differ from his own, and by reproving them, as the
Authors of such mischiefs, he is grossly mistaken: For that is not to repent,
but to make a Satyr: That is not an Act of humiliation, but the greatest
Spiritual Pride.

It is indeed a disgrace to the Reason, and honor of mankind, that every
fantastical Humorist should presume to interpret all the secret Ordinances of
Heven; and to expound the Times, and Seasons, and Fates of Empires, though he
be never so ignorant of the very common Works of Nature, that lie under his
Feet. There can be nothing more injurious than this, to men's public, or private
peace. This withdraws our obedience, from the true Image of God the rightful
Sovereign, and makes us depend on the vain Images of his power, which are
framed by our own imaginations. This weakens the constancy of human actions.
This affects men with fears, doubts, irresolutions, and terrors. It is usually
observed, that such presaging, and Prophetical Times, do commonly fore-run
great destructions, and revolutions of human affairs. And that it should be so
is natural enough, though the presages, and prodigies themselves did signify no
such events. For this melancholy, this frightful, this Astrological humor
disarms men's hearts, it breaks their courage; it confounds their Councils, it
makes them help to bring such calamities on themselves: First they fancy, that
such ill accidents must come to pass: And so they render themselves fit
subjects to be wrought upon, and very often become the instruments, to bring
those effects about, which they fondly imagined were inevitably threatened them
from Heven.

The last accusation concerns that which is necessary to a holy life, Sect.
XXII. Experiments not prejudicial to Mortification.
the mortifying of our Earthly desires. And here the men of a retired, and
severe devotion are the loudest: For they tell us, that we cannot conquer, and
despise the World while we study it so much; that we cannot have sufficient
leisure to reflect on another life, while we are so taken up about the
Curiosities of this: that we cannot be strict enough in correcting the
irregularities of our own thoughts, while we give them so much liberty to
wander, and so pleasant a Rode wherein to travail; and that it is in vain to
strive after the Purity, and Holiness of our minds, while we suffer them to
spend so much time, on the labors of our Senses. This Objection appears at
first sight somewhat terrible: But I come the more boldly to answer it, because
there are involved in the same indictment, all the most innocent Arts, and
civil Actions of men, which must either stand, or fall with Experiments in this
Trial.

First then I will allege, that if this sort of study, should be acknowledged
not to be proper, for the promoting of the severer offices of Christianity, yet
it would sufficiently recompense for that, by the assistance, it may bring to
some other kinds of Christian Virtues: If it shall not fill our minds, with the
most mortifying Images, which may rise from the terrors of Gods Justice, yet it
will make amends for that, by inclining us to adore his Goodness. If it fits us
not so well for the secrecy of a Closet: It makes us serviceable to the World.
If it shall not seem to contribute toward Godly sorrow, or Contrition: It will
give us more opportunities of Charity, Affability, Friendship, and Generosity,
which are all of them divine Graces, as well as Faith, and Repentance.

It is a great error to think that Religion does only consist in one sort of
Duties. It is as various as the Dispositions, the Qualities, the Conditions of
men: With some, the severe, the strict, the retired are best: with others, the
bountiful, the affable, the cheerful, the friendly: Of both which kinds I will
not say whether is to be preferred: But this is true, that while the first are
chiefly limited to the regulating of our own Hearts, the influence of the last
extends much farther; to spread the fame of the Gospel in the World; to make it
appear lovely in the eyes of all beholders; and to allure them to submit to the
honorableness, the gentleness, the easiness of its yoke. And this methinks is
evident in our Saviors life: For whenever he intended to convert any to his
Faith, he did it by some visible good Work, in the sight of the Multitude. But
he never gained any Disciple by the conflicts, which he was pleased to undergo
in his own mind; for he performed his Fast, and his Agony alone, in the
Wilderness, and the Garden.

In the next place I will affirm, That it is improbable that even the hardest
and most rigorous parts of Mortification itself should be injured by these
Studies more than others; seeing many duties of which it is composed, do bear
some resemblance to the qualifications that are requisite in Experimental
Philosophers. The spiritual Repentance is a careful survay of our former
Errors, and a resolution of amendment. The spiritual Humility is an observation
of our Defects, and a lowly sense of our own weakness. And the Experimenter for
his part must have some Qualities that answer to these: He must judge aright of
himself; he must misdoubt the best of his own thoughts; he must be sensible of
his own ignorance, if ever he will attempt to purge and renew his Reason: So
that if that be true, which is commonly observed, that men are wont to prove
such kinds of Christians as they were men before; and that Conversion does not
destroy, but only exalt our Tempers; it may well be concluded, that the
doubtful, the scrupulous, the diligent Observer of Nature, is nearer to make a
modest, a severe, a meek, an humble Christian, than the man of Speculative
Science, who has better thoughts of himself and his own Knowledge.

But I need not take so great a compass in this vindication, when it may be
fairly maintained, that the true and unfain'd Mortification is not at all
inconsistent with men's consulting of their happiness in this world, or being
emploi'd about earthly affairs. The honest pursuit of the conveniences,
decences, and ornaments of a mortal condition, by just and regular ways, is by
no means contradictory to the most real and severe duties of a Christian. It is
true indeed, the irregular prosecution of such things is an offense to
Religion: But so it is also to right Reason, and Nature itself.

It is a wrong conception of the state of Grace, if men believe, that when they
enter upon it, they must presently cast away all the thoughts and desires of
humanity. If this were so, to sanctify our Natures were not to renew, but to
destroy them. When we are commanded to put off the old man, we are not enjoined
to renounce our Faculties of Reason. When we are bidden not to think our own
thoughts, it is not intended that we should forbear all Natural Actions and
Inclinations. Such Scriptures as these are to be understood in a moderate
sense: By such expressions the irregularity of the Lust, and not the Natural
Desire is condemned: The Piety and Innocence of our Lives, and not the utter
change of our Estate, is recommended. Seeing the Law of Reason intends the
happiness and security of mankind in this life; and the Christian Religion
pursues the same ends, both in this and a future life; they are so far from
being opposite one to another, that Religion may properly be styled the best
and the noblest part, the perfection and the crown of the Law of Nature.

I will therefore first demand, Whether it be not lawful for the strictest
Christian to provide for the necessities of this life? This Request is modest
enough: For if they deny it, they will reduce mankind into a condition which is
literally wors than that of the Beasts that perish; seeing to them it is natural
to seek out for all the ways of their own preservation. I will go on to ask
them, Whether it be a breach of the Law of Christianity to labor for the
advantages of Living, which are enjoyed by others? If this be refused me, we
shall not deprive it of that honor which now justly belongs to it, that there
is little civility at present amongst men without the Pale of the Christian
Church.

But in few words, let them tell me, Whether it be indispensably necessary for
us to be always thinking of hevenly things? If so, how far short were the very
Apostles of this character of Sanctity, which these men would prescribe us?
What Traffic, what Commerce, what Government, what secular Employment could be
allowed? Where should we at last make an end of refining? What would become of
all the men of Trade themselves, of whom this Age has shown so many pretenders
to the purest Religion?

Let it only therefore be granted, that we are Men, and not Angels: Let it be
confessed, that there may be an excess, as well as defect, in men's opinions of
holiness: And then I will make no scruple to say, that the Philosopher defiles
not his mind when he labors in the works of Nature; that the Diversion they
give him, will stand with the greatest constancy, and the delight of pursuing
them, with the truth and reality of Religion. But to say no more, How can it be
imagined to be a sinful and carnal thing, to consider the objects of our
Senses; when God, the most spiritual Being, did make them all? Since they first
were conceived in his unspotted mind, why may they not innocently enter into
ours? For if there be any pollution which necessarily flows from thinking of
them, it might as well be concluded to stick on the Author, as on the Souls of
them that only observe them.

And now having insisted so long on the parts of the Christian Religion in
general, Sect. XXIII. Experiments not dangerous to the Church of England.
it will be less needful that I should be large in vindicating this Design from
the imputation of being praejudicial to the Church of England: For This has the
same Interest with That, and differs in nothing from its Primitive Pattern, but
only in the addition of some circumstances, which make it fit for this Age and
this Place: And therefore they will both be strengthened by the same benefits,
and weakened by the same mischiefs.

What I have then to add concerning our Church, shall be comprised in these
particulars: That it can never be praejudic'd by the light of Reason, nor by
the improvements of Knowledge, nor by the advancement of the Works of men's
hands.

For the proof of the First, it will be sufficient to consider its True Design,
what Opinions it principally incounters, and by what Arguments it ought to
defend itself.

The true and certain interest of our Church is to derive its Doctrine from the
plain and unquestioned parts of the Word of God, and to keep itself in a due
submission to the Civil Magistrate. The Extremes which it opposes, are implicit
Faith, and Enthusiasm: And it is a great mistake, if men think it cannot be
maintained against these, but by the mutual Arguments of its Enemies; that it
cannot withstand the Separatists, but by the Authority of the Church of Rome;
nor dissent from the Church of Rome, but on the Tenants of the Separatists. The
grounds on which it proceeds are different from Both: And they are no other but
the Rights of the Civil Power, the imitation of the First incorrupt Churches,
and the Scripture expounded by Reason: From whence may be concluded, that we
cannot make War against Reason, without undermining our own strength, seeing it
is the constant weapon we ought to employ.

From this I will farther urge, That the Church of England will not only be
safe amidst the consequences of a Rational Age, but amidst all the improvements
of Knowledge, and the subversion of old Opinions about Nature, and introduction
of new ways of Reasoning thereon. This will be evident, when we behold the
agreement that is between the present Design of the Royal Society, and that of
our Church in its beginning. They both may lay equal claim to the word
Reformation; the one having compassed it in Religion, the other purposing it in
Philosophy. They both have taken a like course to bring this about; each of them
passing by the corrupt Copies, and referring themselves to the perfect
Originals for their instruction; the one to the Scripture, the other to the
large Volume of the Creatures. They are both unjustly accused by their enemies
of the same crimes, of having forsaken the Ancient Traditions, and ventured on
Novelties. They both suppose alike, that their Ancestors might err; and yet
retain a sufficient reverence for them. They both follow the great Praecept of
the Apostle, of Trying all things. Such is the Harmony between their Interests
and Tempers. It cannot therefore be suspected, that the Church of England, that
arose on the same Method, though in different works; that Heroically passed
through the same difficulties, that relies on the same Sovereign's Authority,
should look with jealous eyes on this Attempt, which makes no change in the
principles of men's consciences, but chiefly aims at the increas of Inventions
about the works of their hands.

This was the last Particular in this Subject which I undertook to make good,
That our Church can never be impaired by the growth of the useful Arts of Life.
But now I come nearer to it, I find that I may safely omit it: For the thing
itself is so manifest, that there can be no ground of raising a Question about
it. If our Church should be an Enemy to Commerce, Intelligence, Discovery,
Navigation, or any sort of Mechanics; how could it be fit for the present
Genius of this Nation? What greater advantage could its adversaries have
against it? How should we be able to reconcile these two titles, which so
justly belong to our King, of Defender of the Faith, and Patron of Experimental
Knowledge.

But in this I am not only incorag'd to promise, that our Church will be out of
all danger; but to recommend this Enterprise to it, as that which will become
its other excellencies, and is most worthy of its protection. And I shall most
humbly represent to its consideration, that this is not only an honorable Work,
but even a necessary Duty, to which it is obliged by Natural Affection. The
present Inquiring Temper of this Age was at first produced by the liberty of
judging, and searching, and reasoning, which was used in the first Reformation.
Though I cannot carry the Institution of the Royal Society many years back, yet
the seeds of it were sown in King Edward the Sixth's, and Queen Elizabeth's
Reign: And ever since that time Experimental Learning has still retaind some
vital heat, though it wanted the opportunities of ripening itself, which now it
injoys. The Church of England therefore may justly be styled the Mother of this
sort of Knowledge; and so the care of its nourishment and prosperity peculiarly
lies upon it.

And indeed this is an honor which seems reserved for it alone. From all the
several sorts of Enthusiasts, I fear, there cannot much help be expected
toward such Works, till they shall have left off to abhor them under the Title
of vain Philosophy.

The Reformed Churches of other Countries, though they have given us many men,
who have been eminent in this way, yet are not in a condition to promote it by
themselves: For either they have not the incoragement of the Magistrate; or
those that have, are cut so short in their Revenue, that they have scarce
enough to support the Decence of their own Public Worship.

The Church of Rome has indeed of late looked more favorably upon it. They will
now condemn no man for asserting the Antipodes: The severity with which they
handled Galileo, seems now very much abated: They now permit their Jesuits to
bestow some labors about Natural Observations, for which they have great
advantages by their Travails; and their Clergy may justly claim some share in
this honor, as long as the Immortal Names of Mersennus and Gassendus shall live.

But still it is a question, Whether that Church does not rather connive at,
than really intend its progress. They have indeed seized on some parts of New
Philosophy; but perhaps it is only with the same policy that we often see great
Monarchs use, in retaining some out-Province of their Empire; who, though they
find that the benefit does not countervail the charge of keeping it, yet will
not wholly quit their Interest in it, lest their Neighbors should get
possession, and fortify it against them. Thus it is likely they have cherished
some Experiments, not out of zeal to the continuance of such Studies, but that
the Protestants might not carry away all the glory, and thence withal get new
strength to oppose them.

This undertaking therefore is wholly cast on the Church of England, which can
have no jealousy of its effects, to which Ignorance is not a support, but an
Enemy; which aims not at the captivity, but the freedom of men's minds; which is
lately returned to a prosperous condition, and having suffered with the Crown
in its misfortunes, does now partake of the happy Fruits of its Restoration.

Nor will Experimental Philosophy be unthankful for the assistance it shall
receive: For it will enable us to provide before hand, against any alterations
in Religious affairs, which this Age may produce. If we compare the changes to
which Religion has bin always subject, with the present face of things, we may
safely conclude, that whatever vicissitude shall happen about it in our time,
it will probably neither be to the advantage of implicit Faith, nor of
Enthusiasm, but of Reason. The fierceness of violent Inspirations is in good
measure departed: the remains of it will be soon chased out of the World, by
the remembrance of the terrible footsteps it has every where left behind it.
And though the Church of Rome still preserves its pomp, yet the Real Authority
of that too is apparently decaying. It first got by degrees into Temporal
Power, by the means of its Spiritual; but now it only upholds some shadow of
the Spiritual, by the strength of the Temporal Dominion it has obtained.

This is the present state of Christendom. It is now impossible to spread the
same clouds over the World again: The universal Disposition of this Age is bent
upon a rational Religion: And therefore I renew my affectionat request, That
the Church of England would provide to have the chief share in its first
adventure; That it would persist, as it has begun, to incorage Experiments,
which will be to our Church as the British Oak is to our Empire, an ornament
and defense to the soil wherein it is planted.

Thus I have finished what I intended concerning Religion; wherein I desire it
might not be thought that I have defended every particular Sercher into Nature.
That could not be justly expected from me: For there is no man that makes an
Apology for any General way, who will take upon him to make good all the
actions of all private men who profess it. It is enough for my purpose, if it
shall be granted, that however some Experimenters may be inclinable to
irreligion; yet this rather proceeds from their own Genius, than from any
corruption that could be contracted from these Studies; and that if the same
men had professed Physic, or Law, or even Divinity itself, they would have bin
in like manner disaffected toward hevenly things.

I cannot deny, but that some Philosophers, by their carelessness of a Future
Estate, have brought a discredit on Knowledge itself: But what condition of men
is free from such accusations? or why must we strait believe that their Impiety
proceeds from their Philosophy? It is easy for men to fall into gross errors,
and to mistake the wrong causes for the True, in the judgment which they make
of others opinions and inclinations: When they behold them addicted to such or
such Vices, and to have withal some good Qualities, in which they themselves do
not excel, they presently are apt to imagine the bad to arise from the good, and
so condemn both together; whereas perhaps it sprung from some other hidden
cause, of which they took no notice.

But let it be a true Observation, That many Modern Naturalists have bin
negligent in the Worship of God: yet perhaps they have bin driven on this
profaneness by the late extravagant excesses of Enthusiasm. The infinite
pretenses to Inspiration, and immediate Communion with God, that have abounded
in this Age, have carried several men of wit so far, as to reject the whole
matter; who would not have bin so exorbitant, if the others had kept within
more moderat Bounds. This is Natural enough to be supposed; for so it has
commonly happened, that the greatest degrees of all contrary Opinions have met
in the same Age, and have still heighthen'd and increased each other.

From hence it may be gathered, That the way to reduce a real and sober sense
of Religion, is not by indeavoring to cast a veil of Darkness again over the
minds of men; but chiefly by allaying the violence of spiritual madness: and
that the one extreme will decreas proportionably to the lessening of the other.

It is apparent to all, That the influence which Christianity once obtained on
men's minds, is prodigiously decayed. The Generality of Christendom is now
well-nigh arrived at that Fatal condition, which did immediately precede the
destruction of the worships of the Ancient World; when the Face of Religion in
their public Assemblies, was quite different from that apprehension which men
had concerning it in private: In public they observed its Rules with much
solemnity, but in private regarded it not at all. It is difficult to declare by
what means and degrees we are come to this dangerous point: But this is
certain, that the spiritual vices of this Age have well-nigh contributed as
much toward it, as the Carnal: And for these, the most efficacious Remedy that
man of himself can use, is not so much the sublime part of Divinity* as its
intelligible, and natural, and practicable Doctrines. The Medicines for
Religious distempers must be changeable according to the Diseases: And in this
we may imitate Christ himself in his Method of healing men's Bodies: Some Cures
he performed by his Voice, some by Prayer, but some by the Touch of his hands,
and even by his Spittle mingled with Earth. In a gross and a sensual Age, the
deepest Mysteries of our Religion may be proper, to purify the stupidity of
men's spirits: But there must be an application of quite different and more
sensible prescriptions, in a subtle, refined, or Enthusiastical time.

Such is the present humor of the World; and such must be the course of its
cure. Men must now be told, that as Religion is a hevenly thing, so it is not
utterly avers from making use of the Rules of human Prudence, They must be
informed, that the True Holiness is a severity over our selves, and not others:
They must be instructed, that it is not the best service that can be done to
Christianity, to place its chief Praecepts so much out of the way, as to make
them unfit for men of business. They must remember, that the chief of the
Apostles became all things to all men, that he might gain some. But above all,
there must be caution given, that men do not strive to make themselves and
their own opinions adored, while they only seem zealous for the honor of God.
This is a fault which is very incident to men of devotion: For when they have
once formed in themselves a Perfect Model of the Will of God, and have long
confirmed their minds by continual thinking upon it, they are apt to contemn
all others that agree not with them in some particulars. Upon this, they have
strait the reprochful Term of Atheist to cast upon them; which though it be a
Title that ought only to be employed against the bold and insolent defyers of
Heven in their words and actions, yet it is too frequently used to express the
malice of any eager and censorious spirit, that has the confidence to object it.

This, and all other the like Principles of uncharitableness, are to be opposed
by asserting the duties of the Law of Nature, by the use of past, and present
Times, by the Analogy of human things, by Moral Virtu, by the offices of
society, by the contemplation of Gods visible Works, and such easy and rational
Arguments. Next to the succor of divine Power, this is the most probable way to
preserve the Christian Faith amongst us: If God has not in his wrath resolved
to transplant it into some other quarter of the Earth, which has not so much
neglected his Goodness. This indeed were a revolution, which cannot be thought
on without horror. The subversion of all Europe would attend it. The departure
of the Christian Profession would be accompanied with as frightful effects, as
those which followed on the Death of its Founder: When the Hevens were
darkened, the Temple shook, the Veil was Rent, the Earth trembled, and the
Philosopher had reason to cry out, that either Nature was dissolving, or the
God of Nature dying.

Sect. XXIV. Experiments advantageous to Manual Arts.
I will now enter on the next member of my Division, to consider the purpose of
the Royal Society, and the probable effects of Experiments, in respect of all
the Manual Trades, which have been heretofore found out, and adorned. And I
will dispatch this Argument in the resolution of these Four Questions.

Whether the Mechanic Arts are still improveable by human Industry?

Whether it be likely, that they may be advanced by any others, besides the
Mechanic Artists themselves?

Whether there be any ground of hope from Experiments, toward this Work?

And whether if such Arts shall hereby happen to multiply, they will not ruin
those Trades, that are already settled?

If in these particulars I shall Answer my Readers doubts, I trust it will be
granted me, that it is not a vain or impossible Design, to endeavor the increas
of Mechanic contrivances: that the enterprise is proper for a mixed Assembly:
that the course, which they observe toward it will be effectual: and that the
increas of such Operations will be inoffensive to others of the same kind, that
have been formerly discovered.

Before I examine these several heads apart, perhaps it will not be an
impertinent labor, to take one general survey of the Principal Degrees, and
occasions, by which the several Manufactures have risen, which beautify the
face of the Earth, and have brought forth so much pleasure, and plenty amongst
men.

The First of all human Race, when they were dispersed into several Lands, were
at first sustained by the Fruits of the Earth, which fell to their share. These
at first they cherished, and used, not by any Rules of Art, but by that Natural
sagacity which teaches all men, to endeavor their own praeservation. For the
peaceable enjoyment of these, they combined into Families, and little Leagues,
which were the beginnings of Civil Government. But finding that all places did
not bring forth all things, for Clothing, Food, and Defense; they either
violently seized on what their Neighbors possessed, or else they fairly agreed
on a mutual exchange of the productions of their soyls. This Trafic was at
first made in kind: And the Fruits that were thus bartered, were either spent,
or planted in other Grounds. By this means mankind was maintained: and several
Earths were furnished by Labor, with what Nature bestowed not upon them. For
this Commutation of their Fruits, and of the rude effects of their first
industry, they began to devise the conveniences of Carriage by Land, and
Water: And to make it still easier, and larger; they agreed on some common
things, to be the universal standard of value, and price: whence arose the use
of Money.

This was the first Original of Trade, which from a narrow commerce between the
Hills, the Valleys, the Woods, the Plains, and the Rivers, that bordered one
upon another, is since extended to the whole compass of the Earth. For in course
of Time, the small Clans, and Natural Commonwealths, were devoured by the
strength of the greater; or else some of the wiser men reduced the Rude
multitude into one place, and persuaded them to live quietly under Laws. From
thence Mankind began to have the face of Civility, which arose at first, by
that which is the best means of preserving it now, by the greatness, and
enlargement of Dominion.

Then first, all the differences of Living, and the advantages of Strength, and
Empire did show themselves. Then some took on them to Rule, some to assist, or
counsel those that Ruled, and some were forced to be subject to their Power.
Thus the Riches, and Dominion, that were at first in common, were unequally
divided: The Great, the Wise, or the Strong obtained a Principal share; and
either persuaded, or constrained all the rest to serve them with their Bodies.
Thence sprung all the Arts of convenience, and pleasure, while the one part of
men would not be content to live according to the first plainess of Nature: and
the other were compelled to work with their hands, for the ease, and pleasure
of their Masters lives, and the support of their own. From these beginnings the
Inventions of peace, and war, the delights of Cities, and Palaces, the
delicacies of Food, the Curiosities of Clothing, the varieties of recreations
took their rise. And these have still continued to increase, either by some
casual discoveries, or by Luxury, or else as men have been driven by some new
necessities, to pass on farther to attempt new ways of maintaining themselves.

This is the most Natural Method of the foundation, Sect. XXV. The Manual Arts
are still improveable.
and progress of Manual Arts. And they may still be advanced to a higher
perfection, than they have yet obtained, either by the discovery of new matter,
to employ men's hands; or by a new Transplantation of the same matter, or by
handling the old subjects of Manufactures after a new way, in the same places.

And First, we have reason to expect, that there may still arise new matter, to
be managed by human Art, and diligence: And that from the parts of the Earth,
that are yet unknown: or from the new discovered America: or from our own Seas,
and Lands, that have bin long searched into, and Inhabited.

If ever any more Countries which are now hidden from us, First by new matter
from new Lands.
shall be revealed, it is not to be questioned, but there will be also opened
to our observation, very many kinds of living Creatures, of Minerals, of
Plants, nay of Handicrafts, with which we have been hitherto unacquainted. This
may well be expected if we remember, that there was never yet any Land,
discovered, which has not given us diverse new sorts of Animals, and Fruits, of
different Features, and shapes, and virtues from our own, or has not supplied
us with some new artificial Engine, and Contrivance.

And that our Discoveries may still be enlarged to farther Countries, it is a
good proof, that so many spacious shores, and Mountains, and Promontories,
appear to our Southern, and Northern Sailors; of which we have yet no account,
but only such as could be taken by a remote prospect at Sea. From whence, and
from the Figure of the Earth, it may be concluded, that almost as much space of
Ground remains still in the dark, as was fully known in the Times of the
Assyrian, or Persian Monarchy. So that without assuming the vain prophetic
Spirit, which I lately condemned, we may foretell, that the Discovery of
another new World is still behind.

To accomplish this, there is only wanting the Invention of Longitude, which
cannot now be far off, seeing it is generally allowed to be feasible, seeing so
many rewards are ready to be heaped on the Inventors; and (I will also add)
seeing the Royal Society has taken it, into its peculiar care. This if it shall
be once accomplished, will make well-nigh as much alteration in the World, as
the invention of the Needle did before. And then our Posterity may outgo us, as
much as we can travail farther than the Ancients; whose Demy-Gods, and Heroes
did esteem it one of their chief exploits, to make a Journey as far as the
Pillars of Hercules. Whoever shall think this to be a desperate business, they
can only use the same Arguments, wherewith Columbus was at first made
ridiculous: if he had bin discorag'd by the Raillery of his adversaries, by the
judgment of most Astronomers of his time, and even by the entreaties of his own
Companions, but three days before he had a fight of Land, we had lost the
knowledge of half the World at once.

And as for the new-discover'd America: Sect. XXVI. Mechanics improveable by
new matter from America.
It Is true that has not bin altogether useless to the Mechanic Arts. But still
we may ghess, that much more of its bounty is to come, if we consider, that it
has not yet bin shown above Two hundred years: which is scarce enough time, to
travail it over, describe, and measure it, much less to pierce into all its
secrets. Besides this, a good part of this space was spent in the Conquest, and
settling the Spanish Government, which is a season improper for Philosophical
discoveries. To this may be added, that the chief design of the Spaniards
thither, has bin the transportation of Bullion: which being so profitable, they
may well be thought to have overseen many other of its Native Riches. But above
all let us reflect on the temper of the Spaniards themselves. They suffer no
strangers to arrive there: they permit not the Natives, to know more than
becomes their slaves. And how unfit the Spanish humor is, to improve
Manufactures, in a Country so distant as the West Indies; we may learn by their
practice in Spain itself: where they commonly disdain to exercise any Manual
Crafts, and permit the profit of them, to be carried away by strangers.

From all this, we may make this Conclusion, that if ever that vast Tract of
Ground shall come to be more familiar to Europe, either by a free Trade, or by
Conquest, or by any other Revolution in its Civil affairs: America will appear
quite a new thing to us; and may furnish us with an abundance of Rarities both
Natural, and Artificial; of which we have bin almost as much deprived by its
present Masters, as if it had still remained a Part of the unknown World.

. XXVII. By new matter from the World.
But Lastly to come nearer home, we have no ground to despair, but very much
more matter, which has bin yet unhandled, may still be brought to light, even
in the most civil, and most Peopled Countries: whose Lands have bin thoroughly
measured, by the hands of the most exact Surveyors; whose underground Riches
have bin accurately pried into; whose Cities, Islands, Rivers, and Provinces,
have bin described by the labors of Geographers. It is not to be doubted, but
still there may be an infinite number of Creatures, over our heads, round about
us, and under our Feet, in the large space of the Air, in the Caverns of the
Earth, in the Bowels of Mountains, in the bottoms of Seas, and in the shades of
Forests: which have hitherto escaped all mortal Senses. In this the Microscope
alone is enough to silence all opposers. Before that was invented, the chief
help that was given to the eyes by Glasses, was only to strengthen the dim
sight of old Age: But now by the means of that excellent Instrument, we have a
far greater number of different kinds of things revealed to us, than were
contained in the visible Univers before: And even this is not yet brought to
perfection. The chief labors that are published in this way, have bin the
Observations of some Fellows of the Royal Society. Nor have they as yet applied
it to all subjects, nor tried it in all materials, and Figures of Glass.

To the eyes therefore there may still be given a vast addition of Objects: And
proportionably to all all the other senses. This Mr. Hook has undertaken to
make out, that Tasting, Touching, Smelling, and Hearing, are as improveable as
the Sight: And from his excellent performances in the one, we may well rely on
his promise in all the rest.

The next Increas of Manual Arts,. XXVIII. Mechanics Improvable by
Transplantations.
which is probable to succeed, may happen by the farther Transplanting, and
Communicating of the several Natural Commodities of all Nations, to other Airs,
and other Soils, and other ways of Cultivation. That this is not yet finished
is evident, in that there is no Land so well furnished, as to produce all the
various sorts of things, which its ground and Temperature is capable to
receive: and also because many of the most fertile Countries contain large
spaces, that are utterly barren.

This Work then may be farther advanced, by three kinds of endeavors.

The First by Transplanting out of one Land into another, of the same
situation in respect of the Hevens. This may be tried by conveying the Eastern
Spices, and other useful Vegetables, into our Western Plantations. Nor can it
be imagined, why they should thrive in one Indies, and not in the other; why
the the Soil should not be as good where the Sunsets, as where it rises: Seeing
there are parts of both, which lie under the same influence of that, and the
other Celestial Bodies, to whose kindly heat and Neighborhood, the Oriental
Nations are supposed to owe their advantages. This also may be attempted in our
Northern Climats: As for instance, the Flax of which we stand so much in need,
may prosper in Ireland, in many vast Tracts of Ground, now only possessed by
wild Beasts, or Tories almost as wild.

The second Advancement of this Work may be accomplished by carrying and
transplanting living creatures and Vegetables from one Climat to another. This
will be very beneficial, though it will be performed with a various success.
Sometimes the Soil and the Air being changed, will give a new force to the new
Guests; as the Arabian Horse, by mingling with our Breed, produces a more
serviceable Race than either of them single. And sometimes the alteration will
be for the wors; as the Vine of France brought into England, and the Horses and
Dogs of England into France; both which are found to degenerat exceedingly:
Their Soil, and their Sun, it seems, being fitter to produce things of pleasure
and delight; and our Air and our Earth being more proper to beget valor and
strength.

The third way of communication to be tried, is by removing the Plants and the
productions of the same Country from one part of it into another; and by
practicing every where all the sorts of Husbandry, which are used in some
places with success. That this is not enough perfected even in England, is
manifest to every one that beholds the Kentish Orchards, and the Herefordshire
Hedges; which seem to upbraid the laziness of other Countries, whose Highways
are only fenced with Thorns and Briars, or at the best with Hasel; while theirs
are beautified with Apples, Pears, and Cherries.

Now then, in every one of these Transplantations, the chief Progress that has
hitherto bin made, has bin rather for the collection of Curiosities to adorn
Cabinets and Gardens, than for the solidity of Philosophical Discoveries: Yet
there may be a prodigious advantage made in them all, both for the one end and
the other. And in this it will be found, as in many other things, that if men
only intend a little curiosity and delight, they will reap not much more by
their pains: But if they regard real use, not only the profit, but a greater
delight will also follow thereon.

And for our incoragement, whatever attempts of this Nature have succeeded,
they have redounded to the great advantage of the Undertakers. The Orange of
China being of late brought into Portugal, has drawn a great Revenew every year
from London alone. The Vine of the Rhene taking root in the Canaries, has
produced a far more delicious juice, and has made the Rocks and the Sunburned
Ashes of those Islands, one of the richest spots of Ground in the World. And I
will also instance in that which is now in a good forwardness: Virginia has
already given Silk for the clothing of our King; and it may happen hereafter to
give Clothes to a great part of Europe, and a vast Treasure to our Kings: If
the Silkworms shall thrive there (of which there seems to be no doubt) the
profit will be inexpressible. We may guess at it, by considering what numbers
of Caravans, and how many great Cities in Persia, are maintained by that
Manufacture alone, and what mighty Customs it yearly brings into the Sophi's
Revenew.

But if both these helps should chance to fail; Sect. XXIX. Mechanics
improveable by the old matter of Arts.
if nothing new should ever come into our hands; and if there could be no
farther alteration made by Transplanting; yet we may still take comfort, and
rely on the old matter itself, on which all our present Arts have bin devised.
This certainly will take away all distrust in this business: For it may be
observed, that the greatest part of all our New Inventions have not bin raised
from Subjects before untouched (though they also have given us very many) but
from the most studied and most familiar things, that have bin always in men's
hands and eyes. For this I shall only instance in Printing, in the Circulation
of the Blood, in Mr. Boyl's Engine for the sucking out of Air, in the making of
Guns, in the Microscopical Glasses, and in the Pendulum Clocks of Hugenius.
What might we have believed to be perfect, if not the Art of men's Communicating
their thoughts one to another? What was nearer to them than their Blood, by
which their Life subsists? And what more ready to be found out than its Motion?
In what Subject had the wit of Artificers bin more shown, than in the variety
of Clocks and Watches? What thing was more in men's view than Glass, through
which in the East-Countries the very Light itself is admitted, whereby we
discern all things else? What more natural to us than the Air we breath? with
which we form every word to express other things? What was more studied than
the Art of Fighting? What little Stratagem, or Fortification, or Weapon, could
one have thought to have bin concealed from the Greeks and Romans, who were so
curious in the Discipline of War? And yet in all these the most obvious things,
the greatest changes have bin made by late Discoveries; which cannot but
convince us, that many more are still to come from things that are as common,
if we shall not be wanting to our selves.

Sect. XXX. Mechanics Improvable by the spreding of civility.
And this we have good reason to trust will be effected, if this Mechanic
Genius, which now prevails in these parts of Christendom, shall happen to
spread wider amongst our selves, and other Civil Nations; or if by some good
Fate it shall pass farther on to other Countries that were yet never fully
civilized. We now behold much of the Northern Coasts of Europe and Asia, and
almost all Afric, to continue in the rude state of Nature: I wish I had not an
instance nearer home, and that I did not find some parts of our own Monarchy in
as bad a condition. But why may we not suppose, that all these may in course of
Time be brought to lay aside the untamed wildness of their present manners? Why
should we use them so cruelly as to believe, that the goodness of their Creator
has not also appointed them their season of polite and happy life, as well as
us? Is this more unlikely to happen, than the change that has been made in the
World these last seventeen hundred years? This has bin so remarkable, that if
Aristotle, and Plato, and Demosthenes, should now arise in Greece again, they
would stand amazed at the horrible divastation of that which was the Mother of
Arts. And if Caesar and Tacitus should return to life, they would scarce
believe this Britain, and Gaul, and Germany, to be the same which they
described: they would now behold them covered over with Cities and Palaces,
which were then overrun with Forests and Thickets: they would see all manner
of Arts flourishing in these Countries, where the chief Art, that was practiced
in their time, was that barbarous one of painting their Bodies, to make them
look more terrible in Battle.

This then being imagined, that there may some lucky Tide of Civility flow into
those Lands, which are yet salvage, there will a double improvement thence
arise, both in respect of our selves and them: For even the present skilful
parts of mankind, will be thereby made more skilful; and the other will not
only increase those Arts which we shall bestow upon them, but will also venture
on new serches themselves.

If any shall doubt of the first of these Advantages, let them consider, that
the spreading of Knowledge wider, does beget a higher and a cleerer Genius in
those that enjoyed it before.

But the chief Benefit will arise from the New Converts: For they will not only
receive from us our old Arts, but in their first vigor will proceed to new
ones that were not thought of before. This is reasonable enough to be granted:
For seeing they come fresh and unwearied, and the thoughts of men being most
violent in the first opening of their Fancies; it is probable they will soon
pass over those difficulties about which these people that have bin long Civil,
are already tired. To this purpose I might give as many Examples as there have
bin different periods of Civilizing; that those Nations which have bin taught,
have proved wiser and more dextrous than their Teachers. The Greeks took their
first hints from the East; but out-did them in Music, in Statuary, in Graving,
in Limning, in Navigation, in Horsmanship, in Husbandry, as much as the
Egyptians or Assyrians exceeded their unskilful Ancestors in Architecture,
Astronomy, or Geometry. The Germans, the French, the Britains, the Spaniards,
the modern Italians, had their light from the Romans; but surpassed them in
most of their own Arts, and well-nigh doubled the ancient stock of Trades
delivered to their keeping.

Sect. XXXI. Mechanics are improveable by others besides Tradesmen.
So then, the whole Prize is not yet taken out of our hands: The Mechamic
Invention is not quite worn away; nor will be, as long as new Subjects may be
discovered, as long as our old materials may be altered or improved, and as
long as there remains any corner of the World without Civility. Let us next
observe, whether men of different ways of life are capable of performing any
thing toward it, besides the Artificers themselves. This will quickly appear
undeniable, if we will be convinced by Instances: For it is evident, that
diverse sorts of Manufactures have been given us by men who were not bred up in
Trades that resembled those which they discovered. I shall mention Three; that
of Printing, Powder, and the Bow-Dye. The Admirable Art of Composing Letters
was so far from being started by a man of Learning, that it was the Device of a
Soldier: And Powder (to make recompense) was invented by a Monck, whose course
of life was most avers from handling the Materials of War. The ancient Tyrian
Purple was brought to light by a Fisher; and if ever it shall be recovered, it
is likely to be done by some such accident. The Scarlat of the Moderns is a
very beautiful Color; and it was the production of a Chemist, and not of a Dyer.

And indeed the Instances of this kind are so numerous, that I dare in general
affirm, That those men who are not peculiarly conversant about any one sort of
Arts, may often find out their Rarities and Curiosities sooner, than those who
have their minds confined wholly to them. If we weigh the Reasons why this is
probable, it will not be found so much a Paradox, as perhaps it seems at the
first Reading. The Tradesmen themselves, having had their hands directed from
their Youth in the same Methods of Working, cannot when they pleas so easily
alter their custom, and turn themselves into new Rodes of Practice. Besides
this, they chiefly labor for present livelihood, and therefore cannot defer
their Expectations so long, as is commonly requisite for the ripening of any new
Contrivance. But especially having long handled their Instruments in the same
fashion, and regarded their Materials, with the same thoughts, they are not apt
to be surpised much with them, nor to have any extraordinary Fancies, or
Raptures about them.

These are the usual defects of the Artificers themselves: Whereas the men of
freer lives, have all the contrary advantages. They do not approach those
Trades, as their dull, and unavoidable, and perpetual employments, but as their
Diversions. They come to try those operations, in which they are not very
exact, and so will be more frequently subject to commit errors in their
proceeding: which very faults, and wanderings will often guide them into new
light, and new Conceptions. And lastly there is also some privilege to be
allowed to the generosity of their spirits, which have not bin subdued, and
clogged by any constant toil, as the others. Invention is an Heroic thing, and
placed above the reach of a low, and vulgar Genius. It requires an active, a
bold, a nimble, a restless mind: a thousand difficulties must be contemned,
with which a mean heart would be broken: many attempts must be made to no
purpose: much Treasure must sometimes be scattered without any return: much
violence, and vigor of thoughts must attend it: some irregularities, and
excesses must be granted it, that would hardly be pardoned by the severe Rules
of Prudence. All which may persuade us, that a large, and an unbounded mind is
likely to be the Author of greater Productions, than the calm, obscure, and
fettered endeavors of the Mechanics themselves: and that as in the Generation
of Children, those are usually observed to be most sprightly, that are the
stolen Fruits of an unlawful Bed; so in the Generations of the Brains, those
are often the most vigorous, and witty, which men beget on other Arts, and not
on their own.

This came seasonably in,. XXXII. Mechanics best Improvable by Experiments.
to stop the undeserved clamors, which perhaps in this humorous Age, some
Tradesmen may raise against the Royal Society, for entering within the compass
of their Territories. Wherefore I proceed to my Third Particular, which I have
aimed at in the Two former, that the surest increas remaining to be made in
Manual Arts, is to be performed by the conduct of Experimental Philosophy. This
will appear undeniable when we shall have found, that all other causes of such
Inventions are defective: and that for this very reason, because the Trials of
Art, have bin so little united with the plain labors of men's hands.

I have already given this account of the former Arts that we use, that the
greatest Part of them has bin produced, either by Luxury, or chance, or
necessity: all which must be confessed to be mean, and ignoble causes of the
Rational Mechanics.

The First of these has bin, that vanity, and intemperance of life, which the
delights of Peace, and greatness of Empire have always introduced. This has
bin the original of very many extravagant Inventions of Pleasure: to whose
Promotion, it is not requisite that we should give any help, seeing they are
already too excessive. And indeed, if we consider the vast number of the Arts
of Luxury, compared to the sound, and the substantial ones of use: we shall
find that the wit of men has bin as much defective in the one, as redundant in
the other. It has been the constant error of men's labors in all Ages, that they
have still directed them to improve those of pleasure, more than those of
profit. How many, and how extravagant have bin the Ornaments about Coaches? And
how few Inventions, about new frames for Coaches, or about Carts, and Ploughs?
What prodigious expense has bin thrown away, about the fashions of Clothes? But
how little endeavors have there bin, to invent new materials for Clothing, or
to perfect those we have? The Furniture, and magnificence of Houses, is risen
to a wonderful beauty within our memory: but few or none have thoroughly studied
the well ordring of Timber, the hardening of Stone, the improvement of Mortar,
and the making of better Bricks. The like may be shown in all the rest: wherein
the solid Inventions are wont to be overwhelmed by gawdiness, and superfluity;
which vanity has been caused by this, that the Artists have chiefly bin guided,
by the fancies of the rich, or the young, or of vain humorists, and not by the
Rules, and judgments of men of Knowledge.

The Second occasion that has given help to the increas of Mechanics has bin
Chance: For in all Ages by some casual accidents, those things have bin
revealed, which either men did not think of, or else sought for in vain. But of
this the Benevolence is irregular, and most uncertain: This indeed can scarce
by styled the work of a man. The Heart deserves as much prays of Invention, for
lighting on the herb, that cures it; as the man who blindly stumbles on any
profitable Work, without foresight, or consideration.

The last that I shall allege is necessity. This has given rise to many great
Enterprises: and like the cruel Stepmother of Hercules, has driven men upon
Heroic Actions, not out of any tender affection, but hard usage. Nor has it
only bin an excellent Mistress to particular men, but even to whole States and
Kingdoms. For which reason some have preferred a Barren Soil, for the Seat of
an Imperial City, before a Fruitful: because thereby the inhabitants being
compelled to take pains, and to live industriously, will be secure from the
dangerous enchantments of plenty, and ease; which are fatal to the beginnings
of all Commonwealths. Yet the defects of this severe Author of great Works, are
very many. It often indeed ingages men in brave attempts, but seldom carries
them on to finish what they begin: It labors at first for want of Bread; and
that being obtained it commonly gives over: It rather sharpens than enlarges
men's Wits: It sooner puts them upon small shifts, than great designs: It seldom
rises to high, or magnanimous things: For the same necessity which makes men
inventive, does commonly depress, and fetter their Inventions.

And now these Principal causes of Mechanic discoveries being found for the
greatest part to be either corrupt, or weak: It is but just, that Reason itself
should interpose, and have some place allowed it in those Arts, which ought to
be the chief works of Reason. It is a shame to the dignity of human Nature
itself, that either men's lusts should tempt them, or their necessities drive
them, or blind fortune should lead them in the dark, into those things in which
consists the chief Praerogative of their condition. What greater Privilege have
men to boast of than this; that they have the power of using, directing,
changing, or advancing all the rest of the Creatures? This is the Dominion
which God has given us over the Works of his hands. And if we will either
answer the expectations of Heven, or deserve so high an honor, we ought rather
to manage this Dominion by diligence, and Counsel, than by Chance, or Luxury,
or Compulsion.

It is impossible for us to administer this power aright, unless we prefer the
light of men of Knowledge, to be a constant overseer, and director, of the
industry, and Works of those that labor. The Benefits are vast, that will
appear upon this conjunction. By this means the Inventions of chance will be
spread into all their various uses, and multiplied into many new advantages: By
this the Productions of necessity, will be amplify'd, and completed: By this
those of Luxury, and Wantoness may be reduced to some solid ends: By this may
be raised almost as certain a Method to invent new Mechanics, as now any
particular Mechanics can practice, to produce their own Operations: By this the
weak minds of the Artists themselves will be strengthened, their low
conceptions advanced, and the obscurity of their shops inlighten'd: By this
their thoughts will be directed to better Instruments, and Materials: By this
their Poverty will be assisted, and they will be enabled to attempt more costly
Trials: By this that will be amended, which has bin hitherto the misfortune of
such Inventions, that they have commonly fallen into men's hands, who understand
not their Natures, uses, or improvements: By this the conceptions of men of
Knowledge, which are wont to soar too high, will be made to descend into the
material World: And the phlegmatic imaginations of men of Trade, which use to
grovell too much on the ground, will be exalted.

It was said of Civil Government by Plato, that then the World will be best
ruled, when either Philosophers shall be chosen Kings, or Kings shall have
Philosophical minds. And I will affirm the like of Philosophy. It will then
attain to perfection, when either the Mechanic Laborers shall have
Philosophical heads; or the Philosophers shall have Mechanical hands: For the
proof of this I need only propose one instance, with which I am furnished by
Antiquity; and it is of Archimedes: by this example alone, we may at once
chastise the sloth of all Ages since his time, and confute the present
contemners of Mechanic Knowledge. This Great man was one of the first who
applied his skill, in the Mathematics, and Phisics, to the practices and
motions of Manual Trades. And in these his success was so prodigious, that the
true contrivances of his hands did exceed all the Fabulous strength, which
either the Ancient stories, or modern Romances have bestowed on their Heroes.
The weights he moved were so vast, and the Engines he framed had such dreadful
effects, that his force could neither be resisted, by Seas, or Mountains, or
Fleets, or Armies, which are the greatest powers of Nature, and Men. He alone
sustained the burden of his falling Country: He alone kept the Romans at a Bay,
to whom the whole World was to yield. And perhaps he had come off victorious at
last, if he had not contended with the Fatal valor of Marcellus: amongst all
whose exploits, these are recorded as the Two greatest, that he first showed
that Hannibal might be subdued; and that he vanquished Syracuse, though it was
defended by Archimedes.

. XXXIII. The invention of new Mechanics will not injure the old.
Thus far I hope the way is clear as I go: I have some confidence that I have
sufficiently proved, that the Invention of Trades may still proceed farther,
and that by the help of men of free lives, and by this course of Experiments.
But yet the main difficulty continues unremov'd. This arises from the
suspicions of the Tradesmen themselves: They are generally infected with the
narrowness that is natural to Corporations, which are wont to resist all new
comers, as professed Enemies to their Privileges: And by these interessed men
it may be objected, That the growth of new Inventions and new Artificers, will
infallibly reduce all the old ones to poverty and decay.

But to take off their fears in this particular, they are to be informed, That
there are two sorts of Experiments which the Royal Society attempts in
Mechanical matters. The first will be employed about the revising, changing,
and correcting of the old Mechanics themselves: The second, about inventing of
New. In the first of these they can have no ground of jealousy; seeing they are
not intended to bring others over their heads, but only to beautify and fasten
those which they already enjoy. And even this is a work so necessary to be
done, that if there were not a continual reparation made in them, they would
soon languish, and insensibly consume away into Barbarism: For the Arts of men's
hands are subject to the same infirmity with Empire, the best Art of their
minds, of which it is truly observed, that whenever it comes to stand still,
and ceases to advance, it will soon go back and decreas.

Hence it appears, that one part of Experiments, and that a very considerable
part, is free from their Cavils. Let us then go on to the other kinds, which
purpose the striking out of new Mechanics: Of these I will also assert the
Innocence, in respect of their predecessors. In few words, the Old Arts are so
far from being endangered by the New, that they themselves will receive a
proportionable increas, as the New shall arise. The warmth and vigor which
attends new Discoveries, is seldom wont to confine itself to its own Sphere,
but is commonly extended farther to the ornament of its Neighbors. This is
apparent in the degrees by which all Nations use to attain to a higher
civility. The ordinary method wherein this happens, is the introduction of some
one or two New Arts: For they appearing with great activity in the beginning,
do not only establish themselves; but also by stirring and inflaming men's
minds, by disgracing the laziness of other Artizans, and provoking them to an
aemulation, they are wont to bring an Universal light and Beauty on those
Inventions into whose company they are brought.

It is said of the Moral Virtues, that they have such a mutual dependence, that
no man can attain to perfection in any one of them, without some degree of the
other. And this also is certain in the Mechanic Arts: The connection between
them is so close, that they generally use to increas in the same measure. There
is no Time, nor great City, which perfectly excells in any one of them, but it
is thereby made more capable of admitting the rest, or of advancing them higher
if they were admitted before.

It is true indeed, the increas of Tradesmen is an injury to others, that are
bred up in particular Trades, where there is no greater Employment than they
can master: But there can never be an overcharge of Trades themselves. That
Country is still the richest and most powerful, which entertains most
Manufactures. The hands of men employed are true Riches: The saving of those
hands by inventions of Art, and applying them to other Works, will increase
those Riches. Where this is done, there will never a sufficient matter for
profit be wanting: For if there be not vent for their productions at home, we
shall have it abroad. But where the ways of Life are few, the fountains of
Profit will be possessed by few; and so all the rest must live in Idleness on
which inevitably insues Beggary: Whence it is manifest, that Poverty is caused
by the fewness of Trades, and not by the multitude.

Nor is it enough to overthrow this, to tell us, that by this addition of
Laborers all things will become dearer, because more must be maintained: For
the high rate of things is an Argument of the flourishing, and the cheapness of
the scarcity of Money, and ill peopling of all Countries. The first is a sign
of many Inhabitants, which are true Greatness: The second is only a fit subject
for Poets to describe, and to compare to their Golden Age: For where all things
are without price or valu, they will be without Arts, or Empire, or Strength.

I will explain all this by a Familiar and Domestic Instance. It is probable
that there are in England a hundred times more Trades than the Saxons or the
Danes found here in their Invasions; and withal the particular Traders live now
more plentifully, and the whole Nation is wonderfully stronger than before.
This also may be seen in every particular City: The greater it is* the more
kinds of Artificers it contains; whose neighborhood and number is so far from
being an hindrance to each others gain, that still the Tradesmen of most
populous Towns are welthier than those who profess the same Crafts in Country
Mercats.

In England it has of late bin a universal Murmur, that Trade decays; but the
contrary is evident, from the perpetual advancement of the Customs: Whence then
arises the complaint? From hence, that Traders have multiplied above the
proportionable increas of Trades: By this means all the old ways of gain are
over-stock'd, which would soon be prevented by a constant addition of new.

The want of a right apprehending this, has always made the English avers from
admitting of new Inventions, and shorter ways of labor, and from naturallizing
New-people: Both which are the fatal mistakes that have made the Hollanders
exceed us in Riches and Trafic: They receive all Projects, and all People, and
have few or no Poor: We have kept them out and suppressed them, for the sake of
the Poor, whom we thereby do certainly make the poorer.

And here there is suggested to me a just occasion of lamenting the ill
Treatment which has bin most commonly given to Inventors; not only here in
England, but in all Ages and Countries. Nor do they only meet with rough usage
from those that envy their honor; but even from the Artificers themselves, for
whose sakes they labor: while those that add some small matter to things begun,
are usually enriched thereby; the Discoverers themselves have seldom found any
any other entertainment than contempt and impoverishment. The effects of their
Industry are wont to be decry'd while they live: The fruits of their Studies
are frequently alienated from their Children: The little Tradesmen conspire
against them, and endeavor to stop the Springs from whence they themselves
receive nourishment: The common titles with which they are wont to be defamed,
are those of Cheats and Projectors. I cannot deny, but many such do often
mingle themselves in the noble Throng of Great Inquirers: As of old there were
some that imitated Philosophers only in Beard and austerity; so I grant at this
time there may false Experimenters and Inventors arise, who will strive to make
themselves admired by the loud talking of Mathematical Engines, and Glasses,
and Tools; and by sounding in every place such goodly words as Chemistry, and
Agriculture, and Mechanics. But though the folly of such Pretenders cannot be
avoided, we must not therefore reject the sober and the judicious Observers. It
is better sometimes to endure vanities, than out of too much niceness to lose
any real Invention. We ought to do with Philosophical Works, as Ministers of
State with Intelligence. It is the wisest course to give incoragement to all;
left by showing our selves too scrupulous of being imposed on by falsehoods, we
chance to be deprived of the knowledge of some important Truths.

The next Particular which I resolved to handle, is the advantage of
Experiments in respect of Physic. On this I intended to dilate in many words,
both because of the great weight of the Subject, which concerns the very
welfare and health of our lives, and also because it would afford me abundant
matter for discourse: For certainly it were easy to prove, that there may still
a vast progress be made in the True Art of Medicine, if either we consider the
imperfection of the Method of the Ancient Physicians; or if we observe the
nature of Diseases, which alter, and multiply upon us every Age; or if we
reflect on the Cures themselves, and how little the Invention of new ones has
hitherto bin regarded.

But as I was entering on this Subject, I perceived that I might safely omit it,
seeing it is already better performed by Mr. Boil, in his Book of the Usefulness
of Experimental Philosophy. I will therefore withdraw my Pen from this matter,
which this Noble Gentleman has managed in the best and most powerful way, by
using not only the force of Reason, but the conviction of particular Instances.

And now with so good an omen as this Gentleman's Example,. XXXIV. Experiments a
proper Study for the Gentlemen of our Nation.
who has not disdained to adorn the honor of his Family with the Studies of
Nature; I will go on to recommend them to the Gentry and Nobility of our
Nation. And I am the more incorag'd to make this Address, because I behold,
that what I would advise is already in good measure accomplished; so that I
shall not only have an occasion to exhort them to proceed, but to commend them
also, for their present zeal toward these endeavors.

In this indeed I have much reason to applaud the generous Breeding which has
been given to the Experimental Knowledge of this Age and Country, above the
base and contemptible Education of the Opinions of all former Sects: For now
Philosophy being admitted into our Exchange, our Church, our Palaces, and our
Court, has begun to keep the best Company, to refine its fashion and
appearance, and to become the Employment of the Rich, and the Great, instead of
being the Subject of their scorn: Whereas it was of old for the most part only
the Study of the sullen, and the poor, who thought it the gravest part of
Science to contemn the use of mankind, and to differ in habit and manners from
all others, whom they slighted as madmen and fools. From this arrogant
sordidness of such Principles, there could not be expected any Magnificent
Works, but only ill-natured and contentious Doctrines. Whatever the Poets say
of the Moral Wisdom, that it thrives best in Poverty; it is certain the Natural
cannot: for in such mean and narrow conditions men perhaps may learn to despise
the World, but never to know it.

Now then, I will proceed not so much to exhort, as to confirm the Gentlemen of
our Nation, in the prosecution of this Art, to which their Purses and their
generous Labors are most necessary. And for their incoragement in this way, I
will briefly lay before them the Priveleges they have for such Inquiries, above
all the Gentry of our neighbor Nations, and above all the Nobility of former
Ages in this Kingdom.

One Principal help that they enjoy, for the promoting of these Studies of
Peace, is the present constitution of the Interest of our Government. The chief
design of the Ancient English was the glory of spreading their Victories on the
Continent: But this was a magnanimous mistake: For by their very Conquests, if
they had maintained them, this Island had bin ruined, and had only become a
Province to a greater Empire. But now it is rightly understood, that the
English Greatness will never be supported or increased in this Age, by any
other Wars but those at Sea: and for these the Service of the Multitude is
fitter than of Gentlemen This we have beheld practiced these last twenty years,
wherein our Naval Strength has more than trebled it self: For though some few
Gentlemen have still mingled themselves in those gallant actions; yet the gross
of our Fleets have consisted of common men, and of Mariners, who are bred up in
the rude toils of such a life.

As this Observation may raise us to the greater admiration of their Valor, that
such Magnanimity should be found amongst the meanest of the people; so it
should also suggest to our Gentlemen, who by this means are at liberty from the
employments of greatest danger, that they ought to undertake these, which will
give them as great, though a securer honor. Nor will it be a disgrace to them,
that the fighting for their Country is cast on men of lower ranks, if in the
mean time they shall strive to inlighten and adorn, while the other defend it:
For the same is ordained by Nature itself in the order and offices of her
works: The Hevenly Bodies appear to move quietly above, to give light, and to
cherish the World with a gentle influence; while the Instruments of War and
offense are taken out of the Bowels of the Earth.

For the improvement of these Arts of peaceable Fame, they have indeed another
Privilege, which can scarce be equaled by any Kingdom in Europe: and that is
the convenience and benefit of being scattered in the Country. And in truth,
the usual course of life of the English Gentlemen is so well placed between the
troublesome nois of pompous Magnificence, and the baseness of avaricious
Sordidness; that the true happiness of living according to the rules and
pleasures of incorrupt Nature, is more in their power than any others. To them,
in this way of life, there can nothing offer itself, which may not be turned to
a Philosophical Use. Their Country Seats being removed from the Tumults of
Cities, give them the best opportunity, and freedom of Observations. Their
Hospitality, and familiar way of conversing with their Neighborhood, will
always supply them with Intelligence. The leisure which their retirements
afford them is so great, that either they must spend their thoughts about such
attempts, or in more chargeable and less innocent divertisements. If they will
consider the Hevens, and the motions of the Stars, they have there a quieter
Hemisphere, and a clearer Air for that purpose. If they will observe the
generations, breedings, diseases, and Cures of living Creatures: their Stables,
their Stalls, their Kennels, their Parks, their Ponds, will give them eternal
matter of inquiry. If they would satisfy their minds with the advancing of
Fruits, the beautifying, the ripening, the bettering of Plants; their Pastures,
their Orchards, their Groves, their Gardens their Nurseries, will furnish them
with perpetual contemplations. They may not only make their business but their
very sports most serviceable to Experimental Knowledge. For that if it be
rightly educated, will stand in need of such recreations, as much as the
Gentlemen themselves: from their hunting, hawking, fishing, and fowling, that
is able to receive as much solid profit, as they delight.

On both these accounts, the English Gentry has the advantage of those of
France, Spain, Italy, or Germany: who are generally either shut up in Towns,
and dream away their lives in the diversions of Cities: or else are engaged to
follow their Princes Wills to foreign Wars.

Nor do they only excel other Nations in such opportunities, but our own
Nobility of all former Times. First they are now far more numerous, and so more
may be spared from the civil business of their Country. Besides this, they are
now bred up, and live in a quite different fashion. The course of their
Ancestors lives was grave, and reserved: They conversed with few, but their own
Servants: and seldom traveled farther than their own Lands: This way served
well enough to keep up their State, and their Port: But not to help their
understandings. For the formalities of life do often counterfeit Wisdom, but
never beget it. Whereas now they are engaged in freer rodes of Education: now
the vast distance between them, and other orders of men is no more observed:
now their conversation is large, and general: now the World is become more
active, and industrious: now more of them have seen the use, and manners of
men, and more apply themselves to Trafic, and business than ever.

This alteration has bin caused in our memory, either by so many Families
being advanced to the highest degrees of Nobility, for their excelling in the
Arts of the Gown: or by their frequent intermarriages with Citizens: or by the
travails of the King, and the Royal Family: or else by the Civil War itself;
which is always wont to be the cruellest Tyrant, or the best Reformer: either
utterly to lay wast, or to civilize, and beautify, and ripen the Arts of all
Countries. And still we have reason to expect, that this change will proceed
farther, for the better: if our Gentlemen shall more condescend to engage in
commerce, and to regard the Philosophy of Nature.

The First of these since the King's return, has bin carried on with great
vigor, by the Foundation of the Royal Company: to which as to the Twin-Sister
of the Royal Society, we have reason as we go along, to wish all Prosperity. In
both these Institutions begun together, our King has imitated the two most
famous Works of the wisest of ancient Kings: who at the same time sent to Ophir
for Gold, and composed a Natural History, from the Cedar to the Shrub.

Nor ought our Gentry to be avers from the promoting of Trade, out of any
little jealousy, that thereby they shall debase themselves, and corrupt their
Blood. For they are to know, that Trafic, and Commerce have given mankind a
higher degree than any title of Nobility, even that of Civility, and Humanity
itself. And at this time especially above all others, they have no reason to
despise Trade as below them, when it has so great an Influence on the very
Government of the World. In former ages indeed this was not so remarkable. The
Seats of Empire, and Trade were seldom, or never the same. Tire, and Sydon, and
Cades, and Marseiles had more Trafic, but less command than Rome, or Athens, or
Sparta, or Macedon. But now it is quite otherwise. It is now most certain that
in those Coasts, whither the greatest Trade shall constantly flow, the greatest
Riches, and Power will be established. The cause of this difference between the
ancient times, and our own, is hard to be discovered: perhaps it is this, that
formerly the greatest part of the World lived rudely, on their own Natural
Productions: but now so many Nations being Civilized, and living splendidly,
there is a far greater consumption of all foreign Commodities; and so the gain
of Trade is become great enough to overbalance all other strength: Whether this
be the reason, or no, it matters not: But the observation is true. And this we
see is sufficiently known to all our Neighbors, who are earnestly bent upon the
advancing of Commerce, as the best means, not only to enrich particular
Merchants, but to enlarge their Empire.

The next thing to be recommended to the Gentlemen of England, has a near
kindred with the other: and that is the Philosophy of Nature, and Arts. For the
want of such an easy course of studies, so many of them have miscarried in their
first years, and have ever after abhorred all manner of sober Works. What else
do signify the universal complaints of those who direct the Education of great
men's Children? Why do they find them so hard to be fixed to any manner of
Knowledge? Their Teachers indeed are wont to impute it to the delicacy of their
breeding, and to their Mothers fondness. But the chief cause of the mischief
lies deeper. They fill their heads with difficult, and unintelligible Notions,
which neither afford them pleasure in learning, nor profit in remembering them:
they chiefly instruct them in such Arts, which are made for the beaten tracks
of professions, and not for Gentlemen. Whereas their minds should be charmed by
the allurements, of sweeter and more plausible Studies: And for this purpose
Experiments are the fittest. Their Objects they may feel and behold: Their
productions are most popular: Their Method is intelligible, and equal to their
capacities: so that in them they may soon become their own Teachers.

Nor are they to contemn them for their plainess, and the homely matters, about
which they are often employed. If they shall think scorn to foul their fingers
about them on this account, let them cast their eyes back on the Original
Nobility of all Countries. And if that be true, that every thing is preserved
and restored by the same means which did beget it at first: they may then be
taught, that their present Honor cannot be maintained by intemperate pleasures,
or the gaudy shows of pomp; but by true Labors, and Industrious Virtu: Let them
reflect on those great men who first made the name of Nobility venerable. And
they shall find that amidst the Government of Nations, the dispatch of Armies,
and nois of Victories, some of them disdained not to work with a Spade, to dig
the Earth, and to cultivate with Triumphing hands, the Vine, and the Olive.
These indeed were times, of which it were well if we had more footsteps, than
in ancient Authors. Then the minds of men were innocent, and strong, and
bountiful as the Earth in which they labored. Then the vices of human Nature
were not their Pride, but their Scorn. Then Virtu was itself, neither
adulterated by the false Idols of Goodness; nor puffed up by the empty forms of
Greatness: as since it has bin in some Countries of Europe, which are arrived
at that corruption of manners, that perhaps some severe Moralists will think it
had bin more needful for me to persuade the men of this Age, to continue Men,
than to turn Philosophers.

But in this History I will forbear all farther complaints, which are scarce
acceptable to the humor of this time, even in our Divine, and Moral works, in
which they are necessary. I therefore return to that which I undertook, to the
agreeableness of this design to all conditions, and degrees of our Nobility. If
they require such Studies as are proportionable to the greatness of their
Titles: they have here those things to consider, from whence even they
themselves fetch the distinctions of their Gentility. The Minerals, the Plants,
the Stones, the Planets, the Animals, they bear in their Arms, are the chief
Instruments of Heraldry, by which those Houses are exalted above those of the
vulgar. And it is a shame for them to boast of the bearing of those Creatures
they do not understand. If they value the Antiquity of Families, and long race
of Pedigrees: What can be more worthy their consideration, than all the diverse
lineages of Nature? These have more proof of their ancient descent that any of
them can show. For they have all continued down in a right line, from Cause to
Effect; from the Creation to this day. If they shall confine themselves to the
Country, they have this for there cheap diversion. If they return to the City,
this will afford them in every Shop occasions to inform their judgments, and
not to devour their Estates. If they go forth to public service, to the leading
of Armies, or Navies, they have this for their perpetual Counsailor, and very
often for their preserver. There are so many Natural, and Mechanical things, to
be accurately observed by the greatest Captains, as the advantages of different
Arms, and ammunitions, the passages of Rivers, the streights of Mountains, the
course of Tides, the signs of Weather, the Air, the Sun, the Wind, and the like:
that though I will not determine the Knowledge of Nature, to be absolutely
necessary to the great office of a General; yet I may venture to affirm that it
will often prove a wonderful assistance and ornament, to the course of Glory
which he pursues.

All Histories are full of Examples of the great accidents, which have happened
by the ignorance of chief Commanders in Natural Motions, and effects; of these
I will only instance in Three: The First is of Caesar himself, who had
Conquered more Countries than most Travailers have seen, and gained more
Battles than others have read of; yet he had like to have put a period to all
his Victories, by the want of an exact skill in one of the commonest Works of
Nature. This he himself relates in his second passage into Britain; when his
Army was so dismayed at the ebbing of the Sea from their Fleet, believing it to
be a Stratagem of their Enemies, that scarce the courage and conduct of Caesar,
could hinder them from being terrified to their own overthrow, which had bin a
fatal misfortune to the Britains, as well as Romans; because from his victorious
Arms, we first received the dawn of Civil Arts. The next instance of this kind
is the mischance which befell the Christian Army in Egypt, in the time of the
Holy Wars. Their strength was great and irresistible, if they had only
understood that which every Egyptian could have taught them the course, and the
Time of the overflowing of the Nile. For the want of that slender knowledge,
the bravest men of all Christendom, were led up to the neck in the River, and
were forced to yield to their Enemies conditions without striking a stroke.
This was occasioned by the stupidity of the Cardinal, who commanded them; if he
had bin less skillful in the Scholemen, and more in Nature, that dreadful
disaster had never happened. My Third Example of this kind is to be found in
the Roman History: The Roman Army was just ready to join Battle, with one of
their Enemies: the sign was given for their onset: their force was equal: a
terrible combat had like to have insu'd: when on the sudden the Sun was
Eclyps'd: of this the Romans were warned the day before. But this surpised the
other with so great affright, that they were immediately vanquished. So that
not the bravest Men, nor the greatest Army, nor the best provisions of War got
the Victory: but that Party which had the best Natural Philosopher on its side.

To this address which I have made to our Nobility, XXXV. Experiments will be
beneficial to our wits and Writers.
and Gentry, I will add as an appendix another benefit of Experiments, which
perhaps it will scarce become me to name amidst so many matters of greater
weight: and that is, that their discoveries will be very serviceable to the
Wits, and Writers of this, and all future Ages. But this I am provoked to
mention by the consideration of the present Genius of the English Nation;
wherein the study of Wit, and humor of Writing prevails so much, that there are
very few conditions, or degrees, or Ages of Men who are free from its
infection. I will therefore declare to all those whom this Spirit has
possessed, that their is in the Works of Nature an inexhaustible Treasure of
Fancy, and Invention, which will be revealed proportionably to the increas of
their Knowledge.

To this purpose I must premise, that it is required in the best, and most
delightful Wit; that it be founded on such images which are generally known,
and are able to bring a strong, and a sensible impression on the mind. The
several subjects from which it has bin raised in all Times, are the Fables, and
Religions of the Ancients, the Civil Histories of all Countries, the Customs of
Nations, the Bible, the Sciences, and Manners of Men, the several Arts of their
hands, and the works of Nature. In all these, where there may be a resemblance
of one thing to another, as there may be in all, there is a sufficient
Foundation for Wit. This in all its kinds has its increases, heigths, and
decays, as well as all other human things: Let us then examine what Parts of it
are already exhausted, and what remain new, and untouched, and are still likely
to be farther advanced.

The Wit of the Fables and Religions of the Ancient World is well-nigh
consumed: They have already served the Poets long enough; and it is now high
time to dismiss them; especially seeing they have this peculiar imperfection,
that they were only Fictions at first: whereas Truth is never so well expressed
or amplify'd, as by those Ornaments which are True and Real in themselves.

The Wit which is raised from Civil Histories, and the Customs of Countries, is
solid and lasting: The Similitudes it affords are substantial, and equal to the
minds of men, being drawn from themselves and their own actions. Of this the
wittiest Nations have always made the greatest use; their writings being
adorned with a Wit that was free of their own Cities, consisting of Examples,
and Apothegms, and Proverbs, derived from their Ancestors. This I allege,
because this kind is scarce yet begun in the English Language; though our own
Civil History abounds as much as any other, with great Examples and memorable
Events, which may serve for the ornament of Comparison.

The Manners and Tempers, and Extravagances of men are a standing and eternal
foundation of Wit: This if it be gathered from particular Observations, is
called Humor: And the more particular they are, they are still the pleasanter.
In this kind I may well affirm that our Nation excells all others, as our
Dramatic Poetry may witness.

The Wit that may be borrowed from the Bible is magnificent, and as all the
other Treasures of Knowledge it contains, inexhaustible. This may be used and
allowed without any danger of profaneness. The Ancient Hethens did the same:
They made their Divine Ceremonies the chief Subjects of their Fancies: By that
means their Religions had a more awful impression, became more popular, and
lasted longer in force than else they would have done. And why may not
Christianity admit the same thing, if it be practiced with sobriety and
reverence? What irreligion can there be in applying some Scripture-expressions
to Natural things? Why are not the one rather exalted and purified, than the
other defiled by such applications? The very Enthusiasts themselves, who are
wont to start at such Wit as Atheistical, are more guilty of its excesses than
any other sort of men: For whatever they allege out of the Historical,
Prophetical, or Evangelical Writings, and apply it to themselves, their
Enemies, or their Country, though they call it the mind of God, yet it is
nothing else but Scripture-comparison and Similitude.

The Sciences of men's brains are none of the best Materials for this kind of
Wit. Very few have happily succeeded in Logical, Metaphysical, Grammatical, nay
even scarce in Mathematical Comparisons; and the reason is, because they are
most of them conversant about things removed from the Senses, and so cannot
surprise the fancy with very obvious, or quick, or sensible delights.

The Wit that is founded on the Arts of men's hands is masculine and durable: It
consists of Images that are generally observed, and such visible things which
are familiar to men's minds. This therefore I will reckon as the first sort,
which is still improvable by the advancement of Experiments.

And to this I will add the Works of Nature, which are one of the best and most
fruitful Soils for the growth of Wit. It is apparent, that the defect of the
Ancients in Natural Knowledge did also streighten their Fancies: Those few
things which they knew, they used so much, and applied so often, that they even
almost wore them away by their using. The sweetness of Flowers, and Fruits, and
Herbs, they had quite devoured: They had tired out the Sun, and Moon, and Stars
with their Similitudes, more than they fancy them to be wearied by their daily
journeys round the Hevens.

It is now therefore seasonable for Natural Knowledge to come forth, and to
give us the understanding of new Virtues and Qualities of things; which may
relieve their fellow creatures, that have long born the burden alone, and have
long bin vexed by the imaginations of Poets. This charitable assistance
Experiments will soon bestow. The Comparisons which these may afford will be
intelligible to all, because they proceed from things that enter into all men's
Senses. These will make the most vigorous impressions on men's Fancies, because
they do even touch their Eyes, and are nearest to their Nature. Of these the
variety will be infinite; for the particulars are so, from whence they may be
deduced: These may be always new and unsullied, seeing there is such a vast
number of Natural and Mechanical things, not yet fully known or improved, and
by consequence not yet sufficiently applied.

The use of Experiments to this purpose is evident, by the wonderful advantage
that my Lord Bacon received from them. This excellent Writer was abundantly
recompensed for his Noble Labors in that Philosophy, by a vast Treasure of
admirable Imaginations which it afforded him, wherewith to express and adorn
his thoughts about other matters. But I will not confine this Observation to
one single Author, though he was one of the first and most artificial Managers
of this way of Wit. I will venture to declare in general of the English Tongue,
That as it contains a greater stock of Natural and Mechanical Discoveries, so
it is also more enriched with beautiful Conceptions, and inimitable
Similitudes, gathered from the Arts of men's hands, and the Works of Nature,
than ever any other Language could produce.

And now I hope what I have here said will prevail something with the Wits and
Railleurs of this Age, to reconcile their Opinions and Discourses to these
Studies: For now they may behold that their Interest is united with that of the
Royal Society; and that if they shall decry the promoting of Experiments, they
will deprive themselves of the most fertile Subject of Fancy: And indeed it has
bin with respect to these terrible men, that I have made this long digression.
I acknowledge that we ought to have a great dread of their power: I confess I
believe that New Philosophy need not (as Caesar) fear the pale, or the
melancholy, as much as the humorous, and the merry: For they perhaps by making
it ridiculous, because it is new, and because they themselves are unwilling to
take pains about it, may do it more injury than all the Arguments of our severe
and frowning and dogmatical Adversaries.

But to gain their good will, I must acquaint them, That the Family of the
Railleurs is derived from the same Original with the Philosophers. The Founder
of Philosophy is confessed by all to be Socrates; and he also was the famous
Author of all Irony. They ought therefore to be tender in this matter, wherein
the honor of their Common Parent is concerned: it becomes them to remember,
that it is the fault, and not the excellence of Wit, to defile its own Nest,
and not to spare its own Friends and Relations, for the sake of a jest.

The truth is, The Extremes of Raillery are more offensive than those of
Stupidity: It is a work of such a tender and subtle spirit, that it cannot be
decently performed by all pretenders to it: Nor does it always agree well with
the Temper of our Nation; which as it has a greater courage than to suffer
derision, so it has a firmer virtu than to be wholly taken up about deriding of
others. Such men are therefore to know, That all things are capable of abuse
from the same Topics by which they may be commended; they are to consider,
That Laughter is the easiest and the slendrest fruit of Wit; they are to
understand, That it proceeds from the observation of the deformity of things;
but that there is a nobler and more masculine pleasure, which is raised from
beholding their Order and Beauty: From thence they may conclude, how great the
difference is between them, and the real Philosophers: For while Nature has
only formed them to be pleased with its irregularities and monsters, it has
given the other the delight of knowing and studying its most beautiful Works.

In plain terms, a universal abuse of every thing, though it may tickle the
fancy never so much, is inhuman madness; as one of the Ancients well expresses
it, who calls such mirth humanis Bacchari rebus. If all things were made the
subjects of such humor, all worthy designs would soon be laughed out of the
World; and for our present sport, our Posterity would become barbarous. All
good Enterprises ought to find assistance when they are begun, applaus when
they succeed, and even pity and prais if they fail. The true Raillery should be
a defense for Good and Virtuous Works, and should only intend the derision of
extravagant, and the disgrace of vile and dishonorable things. This kind of
Wit ought to have the nature of Salt, to which it is usually compared; which
preserves and keeps sweet the good and the sound parts of all Bodies, and only
frets, dries up, and destroys those humors which putrify and corrupt.

This pleasant but unprofitable sort of men being thus dismissed with this fair
admonition; XXXVIII Experiments advantageous to the Interest of our Nation.
It now follows in the last place, that I examine the Universal Interest of the
English Nation, and consider what effect the Works of the Royal Society are
like to have upon it, by what means their Labors may serve to encreas our
advantages, and correct our imperfections. In the entrance of this Subject
there are so many things presented to my thoughts, which are worthy to be
declared to my Countrymen, that I rather think it ought to be largely managed
by itself, than to be huddled up in the end of this Treatise: And certainly
there is scarce any matter that more deserves to be handled by the best of our
English Wits, than the Interest of their Country. I do therefore take the
freedom to recommend it to their hands; and to beseech them to raise their
thoughts from slighter businesses, from unmanly flatteries, or vanities of
Love, or useless Burlesque, to this grave and this Noble Argument; and to
remember, that if Themistocles was in the right, when he praefer'd the making
of a small City great, before the playing on a Fiddle, then certainly it is the
bravest employment for a worthy mind, to endeavor to make a great Kingdom
greater.

There are very many things in the Natural Genius of the English, which qualify
them above any other for a Governing Nation. The situation of our Country is
most advantageous for Command: Its native productions are most serviceable for
strength and Empire: The disposition of the people is bold in dangers, severe
in Discipline, valiant in Arms, virtuous in Life, relenting to the afflicted,
and merciful in Conquest. The unfortunat Divisions by which our Force has bin
of late distracted, are but of one or two Ages growth; the Vices to which we
are subject are not natural to our Soil, but imported hither from foreign
Countries: The English Generosity, Fidelity, Magnanimity, Modesty, Integrity,
they ow to themselves; their Luxury, their Debauchery, their Divisions, their
Spiritual Schisms, they have received from abroad.

And now what can be a greater work than the management of all these matters?
Here the Writer might have occasion of doing right to the honor of his Country,
and yet reproving its faults with a just censure: He might explain the
weaknesses and advantages of our Kingdom: He might remove the one, and confirm
the other: He might compare the Actions of our Ancestors with the Manners of
this Time, and show by what degrees this dissolution of goodness crept in: He
might with a generous and tender hand, apply himself to the cure of our
Religious Distempers: He might with irresistible Arguments attempt to amend
what is amiss, restore the good, and by the power of Domestic Examples reduce
us back to the ancient sincerity of dealing, and innocence of Life, and union
of Interests.

The desire of seeing this work performed, sits so much on my mind, that I
cannot but once more represent it to the consideration of the many eloquent and
judicious Authors, with whom our Nation is now more abundantly furnished than
ever. But if neither the necessity nor usefulness of the Subject, nor the
benefit of their Native Land, will prevail with them to set upon it; it is my
purpose to excite them by another way, which will indeed be hazardous to my own
reputation, yet perhaps may take effect. I will try the same stratagem which I
have often seen unskilful Singers use, to make those who have excellent voices
show their Art: For as they by ill singing some excellent Tune are wont to
provoke the others to sing, when no persuasions could move them; so do I intend
at my first leisure, by ill handling of this Noble Subject, to stir up men of
greater abilities to employ their skill and their judgment about it.

Having thus taken this task on my self, it will not be needful here to insist
long upon it before hand: I will only in few words declare, That it is the True
concernment of England to secure itself from the Dominion of Strangers, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal; to advance its Industry in peaceful Arts; to
increas its people; to improve its own Manufactures; to introduce the foreign,
of which our soil is capable; to make use of the two Kingdoms that are joined
with it under the same Monarch, for those productions which grow not at home;
to obtain a union of mind, both in Civil and Spiritual Matters; and to preserve
the ancient form of Government.

Of all these I will only touch upon those parts of our Interest which have
reference to the design of the Royal Society.

The first thing that ought to be improved in the English Nation, is their
Industry. This, it is true, has of late years bin marvellously advanced: as may
be shown, by the enlarging of Trafic, the spreading of many Fruits, the
plantations of Trees, and the great improvement of Manual Arts. But it is
evident, that it may still admit of farther warmth, and activity: as we may
conclude, by the want of employment for younger Brothers, and many other
conditions of men; and by the number of our poor, whom Idleness, and not
infirmities do impoverish. The way to compass this, is not alone by Acts of
Parliament, and good Laws: whose force will soon be evaded by present Craft,
and interpretation, or else will be antiquated by time. This perhaps our
Country has found above all others: If our Laborers had bin as diligent, as our
Lawgivers, we had proved the most laborious Nation under Heven. But the true
Method of increasing Industry, is by that course which the Royal Society has
begun in Philosophy, by Works, and endeavors, and not by the praescriptions of
words, or Paper Commands.

There is nothing whose promoting is so easy as diligence, when it is once set
on foot. This does not only propagat works but workers: Though at first it may
begin on necessity, yet it will afterward proceed upon pleasure: So that the
farther it goes, the swifter it advances because willing works are sooner
performed than those to which we are compelled. This I will demonstrate by an
instance which I have already alleged, and it is of the Hollanders: For we may
fetch examples of virtu from our own Countrymen, but of Industry from them. At
first they were as lazy as the worst of ours: their hands were unused to labor:
their manner of life was much like that of the Ancient Britains: their Coasts
lay desolat to the Sea, without Bancks, or Towns, or Ships, or harbors: and
when the Roman Emperor gathered Cockles there, perhaps there was little else
worth gathering. But when by the number of their people they were forced to
look abroad, to Trade, to Fish, to labor in Mechanics; they soon found the
sweetness as well as the toil of their diligence: their successes and riches
still added new heat to their minds; and thus they have continued improving,
till they have not only disgraced but terrified their Neighbors, by their
Industry. Nor will it suffice to tell us, that they ow this activity to the
form of their Government. That supposition may presently be confuted by the
Example of France, the most absolute Monarchy of Christendom. There it is
apparent by the prodigious toyls of their people, both upon the Earth, and in
their Shops, that diligence may thrive in a Kingdom, as well as a Commonwealth.

And if ever the English will attain to the Mastery of Commerce, not only in
discourse, but reality: they must begin it by their labors, as well as by their
swords: they must do it by awakening their minds, by rouzing themselves from
this Lethargy, by action, by trials, by working: Unless this be done, they will
in vain be Victorious: At the end of their Wars they will cool again, and lose
all the fruits of their Valor. The Arts of peace, and their Improvements, must
proceed in equal steps with the success of their Arms: The works of our
Citizens, our Plough-men, our Gardners, our Wood-men, our Fishers, our diggers
in Mines, must be equally advanced with the Triumphs of our Fleets: or else
their blood will be shed in vain: they will soon return to the same poverty,
and want of Trade, which they strove to avoid. For as Tully professes, neminem
video eloquentem factum esse victoria: So I will affirm, that we shall never be
made Industrious by Victory alone.

The Second thing to be corrected in the English humor, is an inclination to
every Novelty, and vanity of foreign Countries, and a contempt of the good
things of our own. This fondness is the usual fault of young Travailers, but it
has also ill effects on men of full Age. For this they are wont to allege the
excuse of good Breeding. But if we could not study, or understand our own
Country without the imputation of ill manners, good Breeding were the most
pernicious thing in the World. For there was never yet any Nation great, which
only admired the Customs of other people, and wholly made them the Pattern of
their imitation. This wandering, and affected humor Experiments will lessen,
above all other studies. They will employ our thoughts, about our Native
conveniences: they will make us intend our minds, on what is contained within
our own Seas: and by considering, and handling them more, will also make them
more worthy of our consideration.

The Third imperfection is on the other extreme, and that is a narrowness of
mind, and a pusillanimous confining our thoughts to our selves, without
regarding any thing that is foreign, or believing that any of their Arts, or
Customs may be preferred before our own. This indeed is a perverseness, of which
the English are not wholly to be acquitted: it being proper to Islands, and to
such Countries that are divided from the rest of the World. This will be cured
by the effectual Demonstrations that the Society will give, of the benefit of a
universal Correspondence, and Communication. And this according to their
Method, will be done without falling into the other vice of affecting foreign
habits, and manners, and gestures. In these the English need not be beholding
to others: but in their Fruits, in their Manufactures, in their Engines, in
their works in Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, we may follow their
practice, and emulate their Curiosities, without affectation.

There is one instance which will show how our respect to outlandish things is
to be regulated. To depend on the French for every little fashion of Clothes,
and to equal their Nobility in their way of life, is neither for our honor, nor
profit. For the difference between their Gentry and ours, and their Commonalty
and ours is so great; that the same manners will not be decent in us, which
become them well enough. But to learn from them their skill in Horsemanship,
and Arms, their Building, their Cultivation of Fruits, the Parsimony, and
Industry of their Tradesmen, is commendable: for in these things we are
defective, and they excel. It is therefore the admiration of foreign
extravagances, and not the imitation of their excellencies that is to be
condemned. If we will rather obstinately be content with our own store, than
borrow what is good from abroad: we flatter our selves with the same foolish
imaginations, that all Countries had while they were barbarous. To them their
Acorns, and their Cottages were at first the utmost ends of their ambition.
They knew no more, nor aspired to any farther addition: But as soon as a new
light sprung forth amongst them, they despised themselves and their former
condition; and then they first began to understand their wants, when they
perceived how they might be supplied. As long as we find, that all parts of our
Country, are not Ingenious, Inventive, and Industrious alike: we cannot
praesume, that we have already got beyond all possibility of amendment by
others patterns. As long as we behold any City, or Province, or Family, or
Street of our Neighbors, exceed the worst of ours, I will not say the best in
easiness of life, or pleasantness, and smoothness of manners: we have no reason
to arrogat too much to our selves; but we rather should conceive it to be a
less disgrace to tread in their footsteps, than to want their perfections. As
long as there remains any room for our most civil People to grow more Civil,
the Introduction of Foreign Inventions is not only pardonable, but necessary:
For such is the nature of Civility, that as it increases, it still requires
more Arts, though it contents itself with less Forms of living.

The Fourth mischief by which the greatness of the English is suppressed, is a
want of union of Interests, and Affections. This is originally caused by a
Natural reservedness, to which our Temper is inclined: but it has bin
heightened by our Civil differences, and Religious distractions. For the
sweetning of such dissentions, it is not best at first to meet, and convers
about affairs of state, or spiritual controversies. For those did first
occasion our animosities, and the more they are rubbed, the rawer they will
prove. But the most effectual remedy to be used is, first to assemble about
some calm, and indifferent things, especially Experiments. In them there can be
no cause of mutual Exasperations: In them they may agree, or dissent without
faction, or fierceness: and so from enduring each others company, they may rise
to a bearing of each others opnions; from thence to an exchange of good
Offices; from thence to real Friendship: Till at last by such a Gentle, and
easy Method, our several Interests and Sects may come to suffer one another,
with the same peaceableness as men of different Trades live one by another in
the same Street.

Nor is it the least commendation the Royal Society deserves, that designing a
union of men's Hands and Reasons, it has proceeded so far in uniting their
Affections: For there we behold an unusual sight to the English Nation, that
men of disagreeing parties, and ways of life, have forgotten to hate, and have
met in the unanimous advancement of the same Works. There the Soldier, the
Tradesman, the Merchant, the Scholar, the Gentleman, the Courtier, the Divine,
the Presbyterian, the Papist, the Independent, and those of Orthodox Judgment,
have laid aside their names of distinction, and calmly conspired in a mutual
agreement of labors and desires: A Blessing which seems even to have exceeded
that Evangelical Promise, That the Lion and the Lamb shall ly down together:
For here they do not only endure each others presence without violence or fear;
but they work and think in company, and confer their help to each other
Inventions.

The last part of the General Interest of our Nation, XXXIX. Experimental
Knowledge will not hinder Obedience.
in which I will survey the influence of Experiments, is Obedience to the Civil
Government: And we ought to be very watchful that they prove not offensive to
the Supreme Power: For seeing the King has honored them with His Royal
Patronage, it is but just that the Praerogatives of His Crown should be no
losers by their increas. It is indeed a common accusation, which is wont to be
made against all manner of Knowledge, by those who have it not, That it renders
men mutinous, arrogant, and incapable of Superiors: But if this be admitted, we
shall aspers human Nature and Government with the greatest calumny. This weer
to affirm, That men can not exercise their Reason without being factious and
unruly; and that Civil Government will be insupportable to all but ignorant men
and fools: which is so far from being true, that it were easy to prove that
those Nations which are void of all Arts and Knowledge, cannot be properly said
to pay a right Obedience to their Sovereigns; but that the subjection under
which they live, rather deserves to be styled the stupidity and slavery of
Beasts, than a just and a manly submission.

But to limit this Question to the particular kind of Knowledge which is now
under debate, it is certain that the skill of Nature ought so little to be
suspected for making men pervers and ungovernable, that it is the best
praeservative against disobedience. One of the principal Causes of this is a
misguided Conscience, and opposing the pretended Dictates of God against the
Commands of the Sovereign. This I have already shown, that these labors will
moderat and reform, by abolishing or restraining the fury of Enthusiasm.
Another is idle poverty, which drives men into fulleness, melancholy,
discontent, and at last into resistance of lawful Authority. To this
Experiments will afford a certain cure; they will take away all pretense of
idleness, by a constant course of pleasant endeavors; they will employ men about
profitable Works, as well as delightful; by the pleasure of their Discoveries
they will wear off the roughness, and sweeten the humorous peevishness of mind,
whereby many are sowr'd into Rebellion.

But the most fruitful Parent of Sedition is Pride, and a lofty conceit of men's
own wisdom; whereby they presently imagine themselves sufficient to direct and
censure all the actions of their Governors. And here that is true in Civil
affairs, which I have already quoted out of my Lord Bacon concerning Divine: A
little Knowledge is subject to make men headstrong, insolent, and untractable;
but a great deal has a quite contrary effect, inclining them to be submissive
to their Betters, and obedient to the Sovereign Power.

The Science that is acquired by Disputation, teaches men to cavil well, and to
find fault with accurate subtilty; it gives them a fearless confidence of their
own judgments; it leads them from contending in sport, to oppositions in
earnest; it makes them believe that every thing is to be handled for, and
against, in the State, as well as in the Schools. But the unfeigned and
laborious Philosophy gives no countenance to the vain dotages of private
Politicians: that bends its Disciples to regard the benefit of mankind, and not
the disquiet: that by the moderation it prescribes to our thoughts about
Natural Things, will also take away all sharpness and violence about Civil: The
Work of that is so vast, that it cannot be performed without the assistance of
the Prince: It will not therefore undermine his Authority whose aid it
implores: that prescribes a better way to bestow our time, than in contending
about little differences, in which both the Conquerors and the Conquered have
always reason to repent of their success: That shows us the difficulty of
ord'ring the very motions of senseless and irrational things; and therefore how
much harder it is to rule the restless minds of men: That teaches men humility,
and acquaints them with their own errors; and so removes all overweening
haughtiness of mind, and swelling imaginations, that they are better able to
manage Kingdoms than those who possess them. This without question is the chief
root of all the uneasiness of Subjects to their Princes. The World would be
better governed, if so many did not praesume that they are fit to sustain the
cares of Government. Transgression of the Law is Idolatry: The reason of men's
contemning all Jurisdiction and Power, proceeds from their Idolizing their own
Wit: They make their own Prudence omnipotent; they suppose themselves
infallible; they set up their own Opinions, and worship them. But this vain
Idolatry will inevitably fall before Experimental Knowledge; which as it is an
enemy to all manner of falls superstitions, so especially to that of men's
adoring themselves, and their own Fancies.

Sect XL. The Conclusion, being a general Recommendation of this Design.
I have now at last brought my Reader, by a tedious compass, to the end of our
Journey: And here I desire him to look back, and to make a reflection on the
matters of which I have treated. In the first part of my Discourse I have
alleged the Causes by which these Studies were suppressed in all former Ages;
which have bin Interest of Sects, the violence of Disputations, the plausible
Arts of Speech, the Religious Controversies, the Dogmatical Opinions, the
poverty of the Undertakers, and the want of a continual race of Experimenters.
In the Second I have showed by what steps the Royal Society arose, what it has
proposed to attempt, what course it has taken to make its Observations universal
and perpetual; what assistance has bin afforded it to that purpose, and about
what particulars it has bin conversant. In the Third I have tried to free it
from the false scandals of Ignorance, and the praejudices of several ways of
life, and to prove that its effects will more immediately refer to our own
Country.

My Reader now beholds an Assembly settled of many eminent men of all Qualities:
who have engaged to bestow their labors, on a design so public, and so free
from all suspicion of mean, or private Interest. What foundation they have
within themselves, for defraying the expense of their Trials, and Intelligence,
may be ghess'd by their Number, which at this present, amounts very near to Two
Hundred; as appears by this following Catalogue, which I have ranged
Alphabetically.

The King's Majesty Founder, and Patron. His Royal Highness the Duke of York.
His Highness Prince Rupert. His Highness Ferdinand Albert, Duke of Brunswick,
and Lunenbourgh.
The Duke of Albermarle, the Earl of Alesbury, the Earl of Argill, the Lord
Ashley, the Lord Annesley, Mr. Ashmole, Sr. Robert Atkins, Mr. Austin, Mons.
Auzout, Mr. Awbrey.

The Duke of Buckingham, the Lord George Berkeley, the Lord Brereton, Mr.
Bagnal, Mr. Bains, Mr. William Balle, Mr. Isaac Barrow, Dr. George Bate, Dr.
Bathurst, Dr. Beal, Mons. Beaufort de Fresars, Sr. John Birkinhead, Mr. Blunt,
Mr. Boil, Mr. Brook, Dr. Bruce, Mons. Bullialdus, Mr. Burnet, Sr. Edward Byshe.

The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of
England, the Earl of Carlisle, the Earl of Craford, and Lindsay, the Lord
Cavendish, the Lord Clifford, Mr. Carkess, Mr. Carteret, Dr. Charleton, Sr.
Winstone Churchill, Sr. John Clayton, Sr. Clifford Clifton, Mr. George Cock,
Sr. Richard Corbet, Dr. Cotton, Dr. Cox, Mr. Thomas Cox, Mr. Daniel Cox, Mr.
Creed, Mr. Crispe, Sr. John Cutler.

The Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Devonshire, the Earl of Dorset, Mons.
Vital de Damas, Sr. George Ent, Mr. Ellise, Mr. John Evelyn, Sr. Francis Fane,
Mons. le Febvre, Sr. John Finch, Mr. Henry Ford, Sr. Bernhard Gascoigne, Mr.
Joseph Glanvile, Dr. Glisson, Mr William Godolphin, Mr. Grant.

The Lord Hatton, Mr. Haak, Mr. William Hammond, Mr. William Harrington, Sr.
Edward Harley, Sr. Robert Harley, Mr. Harley, Dr. Henshaw, Mons. Hevelius, Mr.
Abraham Hill, Mr. Hoar, Dr. Holder, Mr. Hook, Mr. Charles Howard, Mons. Huygens.

Mr. Richard Jones, the Earl of Kincardin, Sr. Andrew King, Mr. Edmund King,
the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Bishop of London, Mr. Lake, Sr. Ellis Leighton,
Mr. James Long, Sr. John Lowther, Mr. Lowther, Mons. Hugues de Lyonne.

The Earl of Manchester, Mons. Nicolas Mercator, Dr. More, Dr. Jasper Needham,
Dr. Needham, Mr. Thomas Neile, Mr. William Neile, Mr. Nelthorp, Mr. Newburgh,
Sr. Thomas Not, the Earl of Peterburgh, Mr. Packer, Mr. Samuel Parker, Sr.
Robert Paston, Dr. John Pearson, Dr. Pell, Sr. William Persall, Sr. Peter Pett,
Mr. Peter Pett, Mons. Petit, Sr. William Portman, Mr. Francis Potter, Mr.
Povey, Dr. Power, Sr. Richard Powle, Mr. Pepys.

The Lord Roberts Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Bishop of Rochester, Mr. Rolt, Mr.
Rycaut, the Earl of Sandwich, the Lord Viscount Stafford, the Lord Stermont,
Mr. Schroter, Sr. James Shaen, Mr. Skippon, Sr. Nicholas Slaney, Mr. Henry
Slingsby, Mr. Smethwick. Mr. Edward Smith, Dr. George Smith, Mons. Sorbiere,
Sr. Robert Southwell, Mr. Alexander Stanhop, Mr. Thomas Stanley.

The Earl of Tweedale, Sr. Gilbert Talbot, Sr. John Talbot, Dr. Terne, Mr.
Thomas Thyn, Dr. Thruston, Sr. Samuel Tuke, Sr. Theodore de Vaux, Mr.
Vermuyden, Mons. Isaac Vossius.

The Lord Bishop of Winchester, Mr. Waller, Dr. Wallis, Mr. Waterhouse, Dr.
Whistler, Mr. Joseph Williamson, Dr. Willis, Mr. Francis Willughby, Mr. Wind,
Mr. Winthorp, Mr. Woodford, Mr. Matthew Wren, Dr. Thomas Wren, Sr. Cyril Wyche,
Sr. Peter Wyche, Mr. Wild, the Lord Archbishop of York, the Lord Yester.

The present Council are these that follow,

William Lord Viscount Brouncker President: which Office has bin annually
renewed to him by Election, out of the true judgment, which the Society has
made of his great Abilities in all Natural, and especially Mathematical
Knowledge.

Mr. William Aerskin, Dr. Peter Ball, Dr. Timothy Clerk, Mr. Daniel Colwall,
Dr. Croon, the Lord Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Jonathan Goddard, Mr. Henry Howard of
Norfolk, Mr. Henshaw, Mr. Hoskins, Sr. Robert Moray, Sr. Anthony Morgan, Dr.
Merret, the Earl of Northampton, Sr. Paul Neile, Mr. Oldenburgh, Sr. William
Petty, Doctor Pope, Dr. Wilkins, Dr. Christopher Wren.

In this number perhaps there may some be found, whose employments will not
give them leave to promote these Studies, with their own Hands. But it being
their part to Contribute jointly toward the Charge, and to pass judgment on
what others shall try: they will appear to be well-nigh as useful, as those
that Labor, to the main end of this Enterprise.

Whatever Revenew they shall raise, by this or any other means, they intend
thereby to make an Establishment for their Curators. To this Office they have
already admitted some of their Fellows, whom they will employ according to
their Studies and sufficience: Some shall be sent to travail abroad to search
for Discoveries: some shall constantly remain in London, and represent their
Observations to the weekly Assemblies.

The places of their Residence they have appointed to be two: One a College,
which they design to build in London, to serve for their Meetings, their
Laboratories, their Repository, their Library, and the Lodgings for their
Curators: The other the College at Chelsey, which the King has bestowed on
them; where they have a large Enclosure, to serve for all Experiments of
Gardning and Agriculture: and by the neighborhood of the River they have
excellent opportunity of making all Trials that belong to the Water.

And now as I have spoken of a Society that prefers Works before Words, so it
becomes their History to endeavor after real fruits and effects. I will
therefore conclude by recommending again this Undertaking to the English
Nation; to the bravest People, the most generous Design; to the most zealous
lovers of Liberty* the surest way to randsome the minds of all mankind from
Slavery.

The Privileges that our Kings Dominions enjoy for this end, appear to be
equaled by no other Country. The men that we have now living to employ, are
excellently furnished with all manner of abilities: Their Method is already
settled, and placed out of the reach of calumny or contradiction.

The work it self indeed is vast, and almost incomprehensible, when it is
considered in gross: But they have made it feasible and easy, by distributing
the burden. They have shown to the World this great secret, That Philosophy
ought not only to be attended by a select company of refined Spirits. As they
desire that its productions should be vulgar, so they also declare, that they
may be promoted by vulgar hands. They exact no extraordinary praeparations of
Learning: to have sound Senses and Truth, is with them a sufficient
Qualification. Here is enough business for Minds of all sizes: And so boundless
is the variety of these Studies, that here is also enough delight to recompense
the Labors of them all, from the most ordinary capacities, to the highest and
most searching Wits.

Here first they may take a plain view of all particular things, their kinds,
their order, their figure, their place, their motion: And even this naked
prospect cannot but fill their thoughts with much satisfaction, seeing it was
the first pleasure which the Scripture relates God himself to have taken at the
Creation; and that not only once, but at the end of every days work, when he
saw all that he had made, and approved it to be good. From this they may
proceed to survey the difference of their Composition, their Effects, the
Instruments of their Beings and Lives, the Subtilty and Structure, the decay
and supply of their parts; wherein how large is the space of their delight,
seeing the very shape of a Mite and the sting of a Be appears so prodigious.
From hence they may go to apply things together, to make them work one upon
another, to imitate their productions, to help their defects, and with the
Noblest duty to assist Nature, our common mother, in her Operations: From hence
to all the works of men's hands, the diverse Artifices of several Ages, the
various Materials, the Improvement of Trades, the advancement of Manufactures:
In which last alone there is to be found so great content, that many Mighty
Princes of the former and present Times, amidst the pleasures of Government,
which are no doubt the highest in the World, have striven to excel in some
Manual Art.

In this spacious field their Observations may wander, And in this whatever
they shall meet with, they may call their own. Here they will not only enjoy
the cold contentment of Learning, but that which is far greater, of
Discovering. Many things that have bin hitherto hidden, will arise and expose
themselves to their view: Many Methods of advancing what we have already, will
come in their way: Nay, even many of the lost Rarities of Antiquity will be
hereby restored. Of these a great quantity has bin overwhelmed in the ruins of
Time: And they will sooner be retreiv'd by our laboring anew, in the material
Subjects whence they first arose, than by our plodding everlastingly on the
ancient Writings. Their Inventions may be soonest regained the same way by
which their Medals and Coins have bin found; of which the greatest part has bin
recovered, not by those who sought for them on purpose in old rubbish, but by
digging up Foundations to raise new Buildings, and by plowing the Ground to sow
new Seed.

This is the Work we propose to be incorag'd, which at once regards the
discovering of new Secrets, and the purifying and repairing all the profitable
things of Antiquity. The Supply that is needful to finish it, will neither
impoverish Families, nor exhaust a mighty income. So near is Mankind to its
happiness, that so great an Attempt may be plentifully endowed by a small part
of what is spent on any one single Lust, or extravagant Vanity of the Time. So
moderat is the Society in their desires of assistance, that as much Charity as
is bestowed in England in one year, for the relief of particular Poverty and
Diseases, were enough for ever to sustain a Design, which endeavors to give aid
against all the infirmities and wants of human Nature.

If now this Enterprise shall chance to fail for want of Patronage and Revenew,
the World will not only be frustrated of their present expectations, but will
have just ground to despair of any future Labors, toward the increas of the
Practical Philosophy. If our Posterity shall find, that an Institution so
vigorously begun, and so strengthened by many signal advantages, could not
support itself: They will have reason in all times to conclude, That the long
barreness of Knowledge was not caused by the corrupt method which was taken,
but by the nature of the Thing itself. This will be the last great endeavor
that will be made in this way, if this shall prove ineffectual: and so we shall
not only be guilty of our own Ignorance, but of the Errors of all those that
come after us.

But if (as I rather believe and praesage) our Nation shall lay hold of this
opportunity, to deserve the applause of Mankind, the force of this Example will
be irresistibly praevalent in all Countries round about us; the State of
Christendom will soon obtain a new face; while this Halcyon Knowledge is
breeding, all Tempests will cease: the oppositions and contentious wranglings
of Science falsely so called, will soon vanish away: the peaceable calmness of
men's Judgments, will have admirable influence on their Manners; the sincerity
of their Understandings will appear in their Actions; their Opinions will be
less violent and dogmatical, but more certain; they will only be Gods one to
another, and not Wolves; the value of their Arts will be esteemed by the great
things they perform, and not by those they speak: While the old Philosophy
could only at the best pretend to the Portion of Nepthali, to give goodly
words, the New will have the Blessings of Joseph the younger and the beloved
Son; It shall be like a fruitful Bough, even a fruitful Bough by a Well, whose
Branches run over the wall: It shall have the blessings of Heven above, the
blessings of the deep that lies under, the blessings of the breasts and of the
womb: While the Old could only bestow on us some barren Terms and Notions, the
New shall impart to us the uses of all the Creatures, and shall enrich us with
all the Benefits of Fruitfulness and Plenty.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 17. for Buidings read Buildings. p. 4. l. 32. for Now, New. p.
12. l. 26. for strongster, stronger. p. 27. l. 29. for which, while. p. 42. l.
32. for Acamedy, Academy. p. 75. l. 13. for Invention, Intention. p. 83. l. 8.
after there put in may. p. 126. l. 27. for Ducat, Ducal. p. 154. l. 13. for
that, shall. p. 156. for axact, exact. p. 242. l. 19. for valies, values. p.
313. l. 32. for more, move. p. 314. l. 20. for Diamets, Diameters. p. 327. l.
23. for and, an. p. 388. l. 16. for the East, these.


