A SHORT TREATISE CONCERNING THE ^awfullnesse of every man's exercising his gift
as God shall call him thereunto.

By John Spencer.



LONDON, Printed for John Spencer, and are to be sold by T. Bates in the
Oldbaily. 1641.

A SHORT TREATISE CONCERNING THE LAWFVLLNESSE OF EVERY MAN'S exercising his
gift, as God shall call him thereunto,
THe gifts of the Spirit are in every one for the good of the whole body, and
that there is no private gifts, nor private Christians that we read of in
Scripture to prove at large out of the word of God which shall be that which
shall guide all our actions by, that what gift soever the Spirit gives: It is
for the good of the whole body, and so according to it is place in the body, the
measure of grace received he is to use it for the help of his fellow members,
to the edifying of the body: I may bring for the further clearing of this
truth, the judgments of many worthy Divines, Calvin speaking of the communion
of Saints has these words; The Saints which are gathered together into the
fellowship of Christ with this condition, that what ever benefit God bestows
upon them, they should continually communicate one to another. Vrsinas on
Communion of Saints has these words: That all receiving one, who believes are
in common pertakers of Christ and all his graces, as being his membes, and then
that every one ought readily and chearefully to bestow their gifts and graces
which they had to the common commodity and safe of all. Master Perkins on the
Creed from our Union with Christ, and our union and communion one with another
says; That a Christian though he be the freest man upon earth, yet he is a
servant to all men, and especially to the Church of God, to do service to the
members of it by love for the good of all. And this good is procured when we
convey the gifts of God bestowed on us to our brethren, which is done these
five ways. First by example, serondly by admonition, thirdly by exhortation,
fourthly by consolation, fifthly by prayer, all which he opens and presses
to this purpose. Master Bolton in his general directions for a comfortable
walking with God, is full and large for this, but to prove it by several
Scriptures, in Rommans. 1^* 6. having then gifts according to the grace that is
givento us whether Prophecy let us prophecy, let us according to the
proportion of faith, the first of Cor. 12. and the 9. But the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every one to profit with all. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. and he
gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Teachers,
and some Pastors for the edifyin of the body of Christ; Ephesians 5. and the
11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify on another even as ye
do, Heb. 3. 13. but exhot one another daily while it is called to day, least
any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, 1 Cor. 14. 31. For
ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all be comforted, in
the first of Peter the 4. and the 10. As every one has received the gift, even
so minister the same one to another as faithful stewards of the manifold
graces of God: thus you have all these places to prove the lawfulness of all
to exercise the gifts as God shall give them opertunitie with convenience, and
also the Judgments of many worthy Divines: now we shall show you the reason of
it why every one ought to communicate of what God has bestowed on them for the
good of the whole body, the first reason is because God himself has commanded
it. The second reason is, because it was the very end of Gods bestowing these
gifts upon us, for the edifying of the body of Christ. The third reason is from
our near union and communion one with another. The fourth reason is from our
breathrens right to it, they have all right to our gifts and abilities. The
fifth reason is this, it is the way to enlarge our own gifts and abilities.
The sixth reason is, Gods glory and the Saints example. The seven reason is
because of our enemies wiles, and satan's malice, all calling for it at our
hands. Now to answer certain objections that are brought in against the
universalitie of this truth.

The first objection is this, that none ought to preach but those in office,
none else may properly be said to Preach.

To this I answer, that when the dispersed Christians were scattered in that
persecution it is said that they went about preaching and the hand of the Lord
was with them, and great multitudes believed and turned to the Lord, Acts 11.
19, 20, 21. But some object and say, that this is not such preaching as is
mentioned in Romans 10. 14, 15. but it is manifest and clear that they strive
about words and to no purpose at all; for there was that very Preaching, and
that very sending as is there mentioned in that tenth to the Romans and the 15.
for that preaching of the dispersed Christians was made necessary for the
working of faith, else the text says not right, in saying they believed: But
some farther object and say, that these were all Church Officers, and so might
Preach where ever they came.

To this I answer, that it could not be so, for we never read in all the whole
book of God, that all the members of a Church was offiicers, but this is
aparent, that all the members were scattered only Apostles, as you may see it
in the 8. of the Acts the first. I shall gi^e you another instance in the
fourth of John and the 39. It is said that many of the Samaritans believed at
the report of the woman; if it be so, then one of these must needs befall
those that ho^d none ought to Preach but those that are Church Officers, and
this woman was a Church Officer, and so a Harold and an Imbassador, and so sent
and so Preached, or else that the spirit was mistaken that sed they believed.

Another instance we have of one that was no Church officer and yet a Preacher
and a publisher of the Gospel, in the eighth of Luke and the 38, 39. the man
out of whom the devils were cast out; Christ sent him away, and bid him go
and declare what great things he had done to him, and the text says, that he
went and preached in the Cities. It is manifest that this man was n^
Church Officer and yet a preacher of the Gospel. Again, what think you of
Moses desire, when he desired that all the Lords people were Prophets, either
Moses say you jeared or else he wished that all good people were
Church Officers which could not be, Numb. 11. 29. What think you of Saul in
the first of Sam. 6. 10. And when they came thither to the hill, a company of
the Prophets met him, and the spirit of God came upon him and he prophesied: so
also the 19 of Sam. and the 20. and Saul sent messengers to take David, and
when they saw the company of the Prophets prophesing and Samuel standing as
appointed over them; the spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and
they prophesied all, see in the 24 verse, and he stripped off his clothes also
and prophesied, now none of these were Church Officers.

But they further object, and say; that these had an extraordinary spirit
given them, and therefore might. To this I answer, that none had this
extraordinary spirit, but those that pened the Scriptures or that was able to
work Miracles. But these, It is aparent in the Acts. and in these places, had
not such a Spirit as worked Miracles, or that pened Scriptures, And yet
prophesied.

Again to this I answer, that such a Spirit as that they had, Is promised to
the people of God, in our days, in the second of the Acts. and the 18. And one
my servants and one my handmaids, I will power out in those days of my spirit,
and they shall prophecy, but to this promise: some answer, that it was made
good in the Apostles times; and we must not look for the making good of this
promise in our days. To this I answer that in the Apostles times, they were
called the last times; but if then they were the last days much more now. And
so may look for the fulfilling of this promise, and we ought also to pray for
the making good of it.

The second object is this, for none unless he be skild in arts and tongues,
Is fit for the work of the menistrie, to this I answer that the scriptures
does plainly affirm, that the true understanding of scripture, comes not by
humane learning, by arts and tongues, but by the spirit of God, in the first
Cor. 2. 12. 13. Now we have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us
of God: which things we speak not with the words, which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches us, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual.

Secondly I answer, that the natural man cannot find out these things, be he
never so well qualified, with all humane wisdom and learning. In the first of
Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually deserned, in the first Chap. and the 20. ver. where is the
wise, where is the Scribe, where is the disputer of this world has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world.

Thirdly I answer that the want of furniture in skill and arts and tongues,
Shall not hinder any from this knowledge, when the Lord is pleased, in the holy
means appointed to send forth his spirit, with such illuminations, and
infusions into the soul, in the first of Cor. 2. 10. or the spirit searches
all things, ye the deep things of God in the 15, verse. But he that is
spiritual, Judges all things,

Fourthly I answer, that God counts it his glory sometimes to hide this thing
from the wise and prudent; and to reveal them unto babes, and sucklings. Such
that are distitude of humane learning in arts and tongues, which must needs be
the meaning of that plase in the 11. of Matt. 25.

Fifthly I answer, that there is not only grounds, and principles of saving
truths, given to such that are distitude of humane learning, and the like, but
to understand a Proverb and the interpretations of words, of the wise: and
there dark saying Proverbs, 1. 6. 7. Psalm. 25. 12.

Lastly I answer, that the Apostles desiring that others might understand
these things: prays to God for them, not that God would give them skill in
arts and tongues, though it might be desired, in those that want it. But that
God would give them the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of
his son Ephesians. 1. 17.

Thus you have the second object answered, as God has enabled me.

The third object is this, that none ought to exercise these gifts in such a
public way but those that have a call to it.

To this I answer that all the call mentioned of in holy scriptures, was the
peoples great necessity, and their great willingness to hear them and receive
them. And the aprobation of godly ministers, and all this I have had for my
call, but if none might Preach the Gospel, unless he had the consent of all.
None should preach amongst us, that is for the 3. object.

The fourth object is this, that it may happily be lawful in a man's family,
but not in a Church, I speak in the worlds language their reason is, because
one is public, and the other private. And God has given a private spirit, and
this is to private men to exercise privately with. He has also given a
public spirit, and this is for public persons, which they call themselves,
for a public use.

To this I answer, that there is no members, of the body of Jesus Christ. But
is of the same nature of the whole, a public member of a public body, and the
spirit proceeding, from the head to every member is one, and the same spirit,
and his gifts of like nature; public gifts of a public spirit, for the good
of the whole body. And so in its place, according to its measure to be used,
what ever gift it be; that so though the members be many, yet the body is but
on, every on member of the head, and all members one of another, and though the
members have several officies, yet every member in the body has some officie,
and useful gift, and that not for its own profit alone: or the profit of two
or three members next it, but for the good of the whole body, God having so
placed the members in the body, that the chiefest cannot say to the meanest, I
have no need of you, nor the meanest cannot also say to the chiefest, I am not
to care for you, but every member to have the same care one of another, though
this care be manifested diversely, according to the several officies they have
in the body; and the several gifts given it for discharge of the same, for
though in respect of the Polity of Congregated bodies, the more part are out
of officie, yet as we are all one body in Christ, and members on of another,
their is never a member out of office, and that for the service of the whole:
there are now more private Christians, then private members of Christ, neither
in any other sense, can they properly be called private Christians, then they
may also be called private members of Christ. Seeing that in the whole book of
God, we find no such phrase as private Christian, or private spirit. Thus have
I labored, as the Lord has helped me to discover the lawfulness of my
practice, both public and private: I have labored to answer all the
objections, that I ever had against it unless it be this that though it be
lawful, yet not at this time, an(...)at for this reason, because happily it
might hinder the work of reformation.

To this I answer, that in the work of reformation, it is necessary that all
errors should be brought to light, and that all truths should be discovered;
this I finding out of Gods word to be an error that is held commonly amongst
us, that rather then any man should be a publisher of the Gospel of Christ,
unless he were skild in arts and tongues, and sent forth by our Prelates,
thousands of our meeting houses should be shut up, and the people starved for
want of food, though God has abundantly provided for them: I thought no time
so fit to publish this truth by my practice as now at this time when God has
given us such glorious hopes of a glorious reformation, and when so many of
those that pitties poor souls to see them lie in ignorance and blindness,
and have power in their hands to redress it. Therefore I thought no time so
seasonable as this time, and thus have you all the objections that are brought
against me answered.

That which occasioned me to put these few lines forth to the view of the
world, has been by the importunity of many that bear good will to Sion, and
to this truth: also the evil aspertion^ that are cast upon me for this my
practice; I have hard anoyse, but I have seen as yet nothing out of the word
of God that might dissuade me, but rather persuade me; and to encourage me in
the way to go on by none that object against it; to this day could I never
procure any fair reasoning of any person whatsoever; though I have exceedingly
sought it to hear their grounds what they have had against it: could it be
made aparent out of Gods word, that it were unlawful for me to go on in this
way, or that there were no need of the discovery of Christ in the world, or
that the people did not earnestly desire it, I should cease with Joy and
rejoicing of heart; but so long as there can be nothing found in Gods word
against it, and seeing the great necessities of the people and their great
willingness calls for it; I shall be willing to suffer what God shall please
to inflict upon me for the same: yet I am persuaded though I be trodden under
foot, yet this truth shall flourish and spread it self forth in the world to
the amasement of all that do oppose it: and thus according to what light the
Lord has bestowed on me out of his free love in his Son, I have for the
satisfaction of some, published these few lines to the world.

FINIS.
John Spenser.


